
----- PAGE 1 -----
LRA Cw "he
AMERICAN

J a
ae et |

aT

ALMA R. HUTCHENS

The pocket guide to
125 medicinal plants
and their uses

white pia etch fan

----- PAGE 2 -----
RECOMMENDED BOOKS x

click image(s) to read/ download [Bgggiag

Sean Nalewanyj's

BODY TRANSFORMATION EAT sz FAT
BLUEPRINT

BIG

Natural Testicles

he

Increase Testicle Size
Boost Testosterone
Double Ejaculation Volume

bignaturaltesticles.com

JASON FERRUGGIA’S

MUSCLE GAINING ®

90D a

Skinny-todacked Transformation Plan \

SASON Ae
MAKE WOMEN
EB’ WANT YOU

----- PAGE 3 -----
ABOUT THE BOOK

This authoritative guide—based on the author’s classic reference work, Indian Herbalogy of North
America—is a portable illustrated companion for the professional and amateur herbalist alike. It
provides detailed descriptions of 125 of the most useful medicinal plants commonly found in North
America, along with directions for a range of uses, remedies for common ailments, and notes on the
herbal traditions of other lands. Entries include staples of folk medicine such as echinacea and
slippery elm as well as common kitchen herbs—such as parsley, thyme, and pepper—whose tonic
and healing properties are less widely known.

ALMA R. HUTCHENS, a close associate of the late herbalist N. G. Tretchikoff, has been a student
and practitioner of herbal medicine for many years.

----- PAGE 4 -----
Sign up to learn more about our books and receive special offers from Shambhala Publications.

Sign Up

Or visit us online to sign up at shambhala.com/eshambhala.

----- PAGE 5 -----
A
HANDBOOK
OF
NATIVE

AMERICAN
HERBS

ALMAR.HUTCHENS

:

SHAMBHALA * Boston & London + 2012

----- PAGE 6 -----
Shambhala Publications, Inc.
Horticultural Hall

300 Massachusetts Avenue
Boston, Massachusetts 02115
www.shambhala.com

© 1992 by Alma R. Hutchens

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Hutchens, Alma R.
A handbook of native American herbs/Alma R. Hutchens.—Ist ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
eISBN 978-0-8348-2422-5
ISBN 0-87773-699-5 (acid-free paper)
1. Indians of North America—Ethnobotany—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Herbs—North America—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3.
Ethnobotany—North America—Handbooks, manuals, etc. _ I. Title.
E98.B7H87 1992 92-50122
615'.321'097—de20 CIP

----- PAGE 7 -----
CONTENTS

Editor ’s Foreword

Ale Hoof
Alfalfa

Aloe
Angelica
Arnica
Arsesmart
Balsam Fir
Barberry
Bayberry
Bearberry
Beech
Beechdrops
Beth Root
Bilberry
Birch
Bitterroot
Bittersweet
Blackberry
Black Cohosh
Black Root
Black Walnut
Bloodroot
Blue Cohosh
Blue Flag
Blue Vervain
Burdock
Capsicum
Castor Bean
Catnip
Celandine
Centaury
Chaga
Chamomile
Cherry

----- PAGE 8 -----
Chestnut
Chickweed
Cleavers
Coltsfoot
Comfrey
Couch Grass
Crampbark
Creosote Bush
Damiana
Dandelion
Echinacea
Elder
Elecampane
Eucalyptus
Feverfew
Five Finger Grass
Fringe Tree
Ginger, Wild
Ginseng
Goldenseal
Goldthread
Hellebore
Hops
Horehound
Horseradish
Horsetail
Hydrangea
Hyssop
Juniper
Lady’s Slipper
Licorice
Life Root
Linden
Lobelia
Lungwort
Mandrake
Milkweed
Mint
Motherwort
Mugwort

----- PAGE 9 -----
Mullein

Nettle

Oak

Oats

Parsley
Plantain

Poke

Prickly Ash
Raspberry

Red Clover
Sage

Sanicle
Sarsaparilla
Sassafras
Senega

Senna

Skullcap
Slippery Elm
Solomon’s Seal
Spikenard

St. John’s Wort
Strawberry
Sumac

Sundew
Sunflower
Swamp Beggar’s Tick
Sweet Flag
Sweet Gum
Tamarack
Tansy

Thuja

Thyme

Turkey Corn
Valerian

Violet

Virginia Snakeroot
Watercress
Water Pepper
White Pine
White Pond Lily

----- PAGE 10 -----
Wild Carrot
Wild Yam
Willow, Black
Wintergreen
Witch Hazel
Wormseed
Wormwood
Yarrow
Yellow Dock
Yellow Parilla
Yerba Santa

Definitions
Index
E-mail Sign-Up

----- PAGE 11 -----
EDITOR’S FOREWORD

“Each book has its own fate and destiny,” Alma Hutchens observed in the preface to her classic, Indian
Herbalogy of North America. The prescience of that statement will be evident to those who have watched
Mrs. Hutchens’s work unfold in the thirty years since she began her research under the tutelage of her
mentor, the noted herbalist N. G. Tretchikoff. Indian Herbalogy, first published in the 1960s, came at a
time of burgeoning interest in folk medicine and natural healing methods, and it met the need for a detailed
reference book for North American herbalists. It has since become known as a standard work on the
subject in many countries and has gone through seventeen printings as of 1992.

As the years have gone by and interest in herbs and their uses has increased, the need for a “portable”
version of Indian Herbalogy has been felt. It is with this need in mind that Mrs. Hutchens has compiled
this Handbook of Native American Herbs. In it are found descriptions of 125 of the most useful medicinal
plants commonly found on the North American continent. Included are dosages, directions for use,
remedies for some common ailments, homeopathic methods, and lore from the folk medicine of other
countries—particularly Russia, China, India, and Pakistan—where the arts of herbal healing have
traditionally flourished.

The fate and destiny of Alma Hutchens’s work in herbology has proven to be its enduring influence in
the field. A Handbook of Native American Herbs represents the latest phase in that unique destiny.

----- PAGE 12 -----
ALE HOOF or GROUND IVY

Glechoma hederacea

COMMON NAMES: Cat’s foot, gill go by ground, gill creep by ground, turn hoof, hay maids. Various names
come from the many localities in which it grows.

FEATURES: The plant is common to North America and Europe. Found in shady places, waste grounds,
dry ditches, in almost every part of the land. The green, round leaves endure every season except when
the temperature falls below the freezing point.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, tonic, pectoral.

Uses: A singular herb for all inward wounds, ulcerated lungs, or other parts indicating the same
condition. Either by itself or boiled with other herbs and drinks.

In a short time it will ease all gripping pains, gas, and choleric conditions of the stomach and spleen.
Useful in yellow jaundice, as it opens the stoppage of the gall bladder and liver, and in melancholy, by
relieving obstructions of the spleen; expels poisons and also the plague; encourages a release of urine and
relieves women’s complaints.

A decoction of ale hoof and a good wine taken over a period of time will ease sciatica, hip gout, or
arthritic hands and knees. A decoction with honey and a little burnt alum is excellent as a gargle for sore
mouth or throat and to wash genital sores and ulcers. An infusion of the leaves is very beneficial in lead
colic. Painters who make use of it are seldom, if ever, troubled with this malady. The fresh juice snuffed
up the nose often takes care of most deep-rooted, long-established headaches.

This is one of the most wonderful of all herbs. The mineral content includes iron, copper, iodine,
phosphorus, and potassium. The ancient herbalists praised it greatly, saying it would cure insanity and
melancholia by opening the stopping of the spleen. It also regulates the heartbeat by making the blood
more fluid. An excellent assistant to aid glandular health and prevent premature aging.

Dose: | teaspoonful to 1 cup boiling water; powder, 2 dram to | dram.

----- PAGE 13 -----
EXTERNALLY: The fresh leaf bruised and bound around a new wound will hasten an early recovery. Ale
hoof juice, honey, and marigold (Calendula) boiled together will clean fistulas and ulcers, control the
spreading or eating away of cancers and ulcers, and relieve itching scabs, weals, and other skin irritations
in any part of the body. The juice dropped into the ear has been used for treatment of ringing in the ears
and cleansing in cases of impaired hearing due to infection.

----- PAGE 14 -----
ALFALFA

Medicago sativa

COMMON NAMEs: Lucern, buffalo herb.

FEATURES: Alfalfa is native to Asia and did not reach North America until around 1850 or 1860. This
deep-growing plant is seen from Maine to Virginia and westward to the Pacific coast in the United States.

The Native Americans adapted alfalfa quickly for human use as well as for animals. In England and
South Africa it is called buffalo herb.

This is a perennial, herbaceous plant, with two stems. Leaflets: three-toothed above. Flowers: violet.
Calyx: five-toothed. Corolla: papilionaceous, six lines long. Stamens: nine united and one free. Pod:
spirally coiled and without spines. The small, violet-purple or bluish flowers bloom from June until
August. In some regions it is cut every month as cultivated food for both man and animal.

The organic salt of alfalfa is among the richest known, the depth and spread of its roots enabling it to
absorb its valuable nutrition as far as 125 feet below the earth’s surface.

Uses: Alfalfa was discovered by the Arabs and is one of the first known herbs. They called it the Father
of all Foods. It is only in recent years that we moderns are rediscovering its valuable nutritive properties,
which include organic minerals of calcium, magnesium, phosphorus, and potassium, plus all the known
vitamins, including vitamin K and the recently discovered vitamin B, and vitamin P.

It is helpful for every condition of the body, whether it be maintaining or regaining health, as the
contents are balanced for complete absorption. It may be used by itself or blended with other herbal teas
with or between meals.

Claudia V. James (1963) mentions that South African stock farmers have used it in feed to improve the
beauty of ostrich feathers and that cows gave richer milk, chickens laid more often, with the food content
of a better quality. A turkey farm in California has better stock after including alfalfa as part of the diet.

----- PAGE 15 -----
ALOE

Aloe socotrina

COMMON NAMES: Bombay aloe, turkey aloe, moka aloe, Zanzibar aloe.

FEATURES: Aloe, a genus of nearly two hundred species of mostly South African succulent plants. The
properties of this plant were known to the ancient Greeks, and it has been gathered on Socotra for more
than two thousand years.

Aloe thrives in warm regions and grows wild in Florida. It is much like succulent cactus in texture. The
leaves are usually elongated, of a deep brown or olive color, frequently pointed, blunt, or spiny-toothed,
sometimes blotched or mottled. The stem is commonly short, with a basal rosette of leaves. Taste:
peculiar and bitter. Powder: a bright yellow. The red or yellow tubular flowers are found on a stalk in
simple or branched clusters.

These properties change somewhat in the different varieties, some species being treelike with forked
branches. Aloe bainesii grows to heights of 65 feet, being 15 feet wide at the base. Other species of aloe
are often cultivated in gardens of succulents, including the miniature ones grown in homes; they require
strong light and careful watering. The “American aloe” is not an aloe, but Agave americana.

MEDICINAL PART: The insipid juice of the leaves, which is a greenish, translucent, salvelike substance.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, purgative, emmenagogue, anthelmintic.

Uses: Aloe is one of the most sovereign agents we have among the herbal medicines, being cleansing to
the morbid matter of the stomach, liver, spleen, kidney, and bladder. Does not gripe and is very healing
and soothing to all the tissue, blood, and lymph fluids it obliges.

Aloe should never be used in pregnancy, or by itself when one is suffering from hemorrhoids, as in
hemorrhoids it arouses and irritates the lower bowel. Much used in suppressed menstruation, dyspepsia,
skin lesions, disease of the liver, headaches, etc.

Dose: In constipation, in powder form, 2-2 grains, depending on age and condition; for obstructed or
suppressed menstruation, 5-10 grains twice daily; to expel thread-worms, dissolve the aloe in warm
water and use as an injection. The same mixture can be taken internally for several days.

EXTERNALLY: Powdered aloe made into a strong decoction and rubbed over the nipples will help wean a
nursing child, due to the disagreeable taste.

----- PAGE 16 -----
Aloe shows the same cleansing power for external application. Fresh wounds, as well as old ones, are
quickly closed when a piece of white linen or cotton saturated in aloe water is applied.

If ulcers progress to a running stage sprinkle aloe powder thick enough to cover the open wound and
secure with clean gauze, repeating daily. The powder will absorb the morbid, fluid matter, at the same
time encouraging healthy new replacement tissue.

The fresh juice, or solution made from dried leaves, is soothing to tender sunburns, insect bites,
overexposure to X ray, or other emollient needs.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Abdomen (plethora of), anus (affections of), bronchitis, colic, constipation,
cough, diarrhea, dysentery, gleet, gonorrhea, hemorrhoids, hysteria, lumbago, excessive masturbation,
phthisis, proctitis, prolapsed uterus, sacrum (pain in), tenesmus.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Aloe vera is cultivated in Russia in many houses as a decorative and medicinal
plant. The Soviet government cultivated Aloe vera for commercial and industrial purposes in the Black
Sea coastal area. Uses: Medical science gives prominent place for this herb and others of the same
family. The famous academician B. R. Fillatow makes an extract of aloe for treatment of eye conditions
and injections for run-down organisms.

Extract of the leaves, sabur, is common in hospitals, and in all dispensaries is used as a laxative. The
influence stimulates the gallbladder by increasing its secretions. Externally: In radio and X-ray treatment
given on the skin it is important to remember that aloe leaves prepared with castor oil or eucalpytus oil
are healing and a moisturizer in prevention against further complications.

CAUTION: Do not give in cases of degeneration of the liver and gallbladder, during menstruation or
pregnancy, or for piles. As a rule it is safe to use aloe as it is established by folk medicine, but in all
complicated cases the advice of medical or trained practitioners in this field should be sought.

----- PAGE 17 -----
ANGELICA

Angelica atropurpurea

COMMON NAMES: Masterwort, purple angelica, alexanders, archangel.

FEATURES: Angelica, a genus of herbs of the family Ammiaceae. Several species are native to North
America. The name angelica, however, is popularly applied to various other members of the same family.

Angelica atropurpurea is perennial and grows in fields and damp places, developing greenish white
flowers from May to August. It is also cultivated in gardens from Canada to Carolina.

The plant has a peculiar but not unpleasant odor, a sweet taste, afterward pungent; but on drying it loses
much of these qualities. The cake decoration known as candied angelica is the dried stalks preserved with
sugar.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, herb, seed.

SOLVENT: Boiling water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Aromatic, stimulant, carminative, diaphoretic, expectorant, diuretic, emmenagogue.
Usss: The tea taken hot will quickly break up a cold. For general tonic, 1-3 cups a day. Angelica should
always be remembered in epidemics, as it is said to resist poisons by defending and comforting the heart,
blood, and spirits.

It is used in flatulent colic and heartburn. The condition of suppressed liver and spleen, causing various
digestive malfunctions, will yield to this medicinal herb whose longstanding results have gained it the
heavenly name archangel. Is also serviceable in diseases of the urinary organs.

Dose: 1 ounce of the seed or herb (less if powder is used) to | pint of boiling water, taken in '4-cup
amounts frequently during the day, or 1 cup after each meal.

EXTERNALLY: A tea made of angelica and dropped on old ulcers will cleanse and heal them. The dry
powdered root may also be used for this purpose.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russian literature and pharmacopoeia, angelica occupies prominent attention,

prescribed in the form of tablets, extract, powder, all suitably compounded with other herbal ingredients.
Latest research and clinical experiments confirm long-established use of this herb in folk medicine. Uses:

----- PAGE 18 -----
Since ancient times Russian people have used angelica roots, leaves, and seeds in tea form for nervous
exhaustion, epilepsy, hysteria, as a sedative, an appetizer, for poor digestion, stomach and gas bloating,
indigestion, heartburn, atony of the intestines, and as a diaphoretic and expectorant. Extracted angelica oil
used as a pleasant aromatic and tonic. Industrial: Veterinary use, as diuretic and diaphoretic. The fresh
young leaves, twigs, and flowers are artfully used in the food industry for jams, candy, garnish for salad
decoration, and baked confections. Especially, angelica oil (some dry leaves and bark) is used as an
aromatic in the wine industry for many varieties of wine, vodka, and liquors. The flowering plant is
excellent for a good crop of honey, and for this purpose alone cultivation of Angelica archangelica is
encouraged.

----- PAGE 19 -----
ARNICA

Arnica montana

COMMON NAMES: Leopard’s bane, arnica.

FEATURES: Arnica is of the thistle family, found growing in the northern mountain states of the United
States and Canada.

A perennial herb, with a slender, blackish rhizome 1—2 inches long, from which are given off numerous
filiform roots. The stem, 10—12 inches high, is erect, pubescent, rough, striated, either simple or with one
pair of opposite branches. The leaves, 14-3 inches long, are few, entire, sessile, opposite, obovate; the
radical ones crowded at the base, the upper smaller than the rest. The heads, 2—2% inches wide, are large
and solitary at the summit of the stem and lateral branches. The involucre is cylindrical, dull green, with
purplish points and hairy. The disc flowers are yellow and numerous, with tumular corolla with five
spreading teeth. The ray flowers are about fifteen in number, yellow in color. It flowers in July and
August.

Arnica is a treasure indeed and has been sought diligently by people living in accessible localities. The
root of Arnica montana, the mountain tobacco, yields a small quantity of oil and resinous substance.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Rhizome, flowers.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant.

Usrs: The utmost care should be taken when given internally, as large amounts are poisonous. In
emergencies causing mental or physical shock, pain and swelling after a troublesome dental extraction,
sprains of joints, fractured bones, headaches (even concussions), good results follow the internal
administration of arnica. Persons recover much more rapidly than under morphine.

Administer no more than 5 drops of tincture (children less) every 3-4 hours, and continue as long as the
symptoms seem to require for the above mentioned.

Spirits of arnica can be made by putting the flowers in brandy or medicinal (internal uses) alcohol. In
about three days the tincture may be used: 5 drops every 3-4 hours.

----- PAGE 20 -----
Dose: For infusion put 2 teaspoonfuls of the flowers in 1 cup of boiling water, simmer for 10 minutes,
cool. To be taken in 5-drop amounts, children less according to age.

EXTERNALLY: The liquid solution is also used on any unbroken surface to stop pain, such as in
compresses over rheumatic joints, bruises, painful swollen feet, etc. If bleeding is present a solution of
one part arnica to ten parts calendula (marigold) is unsurpassed for all lesions or open wounds.

Arnica salve is made by heating 1 ounce of the flowers with 1 ounce of cold-pressed arnica oil for a
few hours. This is useful for chapped lips and inflamed nostrils, bruises, joint pain, skin rash, and acne.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plants, tincture of root for abscess, alienation,
apoplexy, back (pain in), baldness, bedsores, black eye, boils, brain (affections of), breath (fetid),
bronchitis, bruises, carbuncles, chest (the affections of), chorea, corns, cramp, diabetes, diarrhea,
dysentery, ecchymosis, excoriations, exhaustion, eyes (affections of), feet (sore), meningitis, miscarriage,
nipples (sore), nose (affections of), paralysis, pleurodynia, purpura, rheumatism, splenalgia, sprain,
stings, suppuration, taste (disorders of), thirst, traumatic fever, tumors, voice (affections of), whooping
cough, wounds.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: At one time Russia had to import arnica from central Europe (Germany, Hungary,
etc.) for domestic use. This arnica (Arnica chamissonic) was previously thought to be superior to North
American arnica.

Of late, Russian researchers scientifically observed both species, comparing their medicinal value and
cultivation. The North American variety was the same as, if not better in many respects than, the European
arnica. Uses: Arnica montana has been used since the days of old in Russian folk medicine. Russian
people know of astonishing additional internal uses. To stop bleeding, boils, inflammation of the genital
organs, heart weakness, stimulation of the central nervous system, to promote bile, reduce cholesterol.
Externally: Wounds, bruises (black eye), skin conditions, and many others, the same as above mentioned.
Commercial: From Russian literature we learn of their commercial plantations and find a very detailed
description of their practice. Arnica is perennial. Once you sow seed, you may harvest for a good many
years with little care except at flowering season, which requires some labor to collect. Each acre requires
about 5—6 pounds of seed. Total harvest cannot be estimated, as it depends on soil conditions, climate,
and time for collecting. Due to international demand the price is always increasing. The use of arnica is
limited by the shortage of supply. American herbal agriculture, and herbalists, can extend the benefits of
Native American and Russian experience from the garden to the patient.

----- PAGE 21 -----
ARSESMART
Polygonum hydropiper

COMMON NAMES: The hot arsesmart (polygonum hydropiper) is called water pepper. The mild arsesmart
(persicaria maculata) is called dead arssmare or peachwort because the leaves are just like the leaves of
a peach tree; also called plumbago.

FEATURES: A well-known plant in America, growing in lowlands and about brooks that in most parts are
dry in the summer. It flowers in the late summer or early autumn, and the seeds are ripe in August.

The arsesmart plants are very much alike, and both have a hot sensation if the broken leaf is touched to
the tongue. If seen together the mild water pepper has far broader leaves. Most herbalists use them
together.

The leaves contain essential oil, oxymethyl-anthraquinones; also polygonic acid, which has irritant
properties, a glycoside that promotes the coagulation of blood, and a polygonone-containing ethereal oil
that lowers blood pressure. The herb contains formic acid, acetic acid, and baldrianic acid, much tannin,
and a small amount of an essential oil. The fresh plant contains an acrid juice that causes irritation and
smarting when brought into contact with the nostrils or eyes. The bruised leaves as well as the seeds will
raise blisters if employed as a poultice, as in the case of mustard poultice.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diuretic, diaphoretic.

Uses: Effectual for putrid ulcers in man and beast (internally and externally), having a cooling and drying
quality. Swollen injuries, bruises, joint felons, or congealed blood will dissolve if the juice or the bruised
herb is applied. The cold tea will kill worms and cleanse putrefaction. Dilute tincture dropped in the ears
will kill worms therein. The root or seeds bruised and held on an aching tooth will relieve the pain.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the herb cut small or granulated to 1 cup of boiling water; drink cold 1 cup during
the day, a mouthful at a time. Of the tincture, 30—60 drops.

----- PAGE 22 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Amenorrhea, antrum (pain in), blepharitis, colic (flatulent), cough, diarrhea,
dysentery, dysmenia, dysuria, eczema, epilepsy, gonorrhea, gravel, hemorrhoids, heart (affections of),
hysteria, laryngitis, spleen (affections of), strangury, ulcers.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Arsesmart (water pepper) is not cultivated commercially but the state encourages
its preservation in its natural habitat. In all Russian medical and herbal literature, including general and
medical encyclopedias, attention is given to several kinds of Polygonum, and one of them, Polygonum
hydropiper (water pepper—vodianoy peretz), is appraised for many things. Medical research and
clinical experiments show that Polygonum contains many minerals and oil, but especially rutin and
vitamins C and K. Uses: Folk medicine gives a good account of its use to stop bleeding, and sometimes
as a diuretic. As a dye that cannot be duplicated artificially for rich and beautiful yellow, golden yellow,
and golden green colors.

----- PAGE 23 -----
BALSAM FIR

Abies balsamea

COMMON NAME: Christmas tree.

FEATURES: There are nine species of fir in the United States, constituting the genus Abies of the pine
family (Pinaceae).

The common name fir is probably applied only to the forty or so species of pyramidal or cylindrical
evergreen trees found mostly in the mountainous regions of Europe, Asia north to the Himalayas, and
eastern North America, where it extends from Virginia and West Virginia in the United States to Labrador
and Newfoundland in Canada. It may be 40—60 feet or more tall, but appears dwarfed near mountaintops.

Members of this genus are characterized by erect cones tht mature in one season but drop their scales
when ripe (unlike other members of this family). The stems of the cones remain attached to the tree, and
fir cones are never found on the ground. The male and female flowers are located on different parts of the
same tree, occurring on branchlets of the previous year’s growth. The female cones are usually high; the
male flowers hang on the lower part of the tree. Both are purplish in color when young. The variable
leaves are sessile, are attached singly.

It is a popular Christmas tree due to its persistent leaves. Turpentine and resin are the popular products
from balsam fir.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, twigs.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, expectorant.

Uses: Very much like balm of Gilead in its action. The bark and twigs are filled with a season’s
storehouse of materia medica, produced only by the elements of nature.

As inall herbal practice we use the plant in its original state. The ancient recognition of balsam fir as a
treatment for rheumatism, kidney conditions, gleet, inflammation of the bladder, urinary difficulties,
typhoid fever, capillary bronchitis, etc., may give year-round meaning to its presence in your home other
than as a seasonal, Christmas adornment.

Dose: From Dr. J. H. Greer: Balsam fir, | ounce; glycerin, 4 ounces; honey, 4 ounces. Mix thoroughly, 1
teaspoonful four times a day. The bark and twigs may be added to other herbal teas for the above uses.

EXTERNALLY: The resin is healing to external wounds. Used as a liniment for rheumatic pain. The twigs,
bark, and leaves are a refreshing and beneficial addition to steam cabinets for sore muscles and sluggish
skin action.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Oil of turpentine for albuminuria, amblyopia, asthma, backache, bladder
(irritable), bronchial neuralgia, bronchitis, chordee, chorea, ciliary neuralgia, cystitis, dropsy, dysentery,
dysmenorrhea, enteric fever, epilepsy, erysipelas bullosa, erythema, fibroma, gallstone colic, glands
(inguinal swelling of), gleet, gonorrhea, hematuria, hemorrhoids, hernia (strangulated), herpes labialis
pudendi, hydrophobia, hypochondriasis, insanity, intestines (ulceration of), iritis, jaundice, kidneys
(congestion of), lumbago, neuralgia (supraorbital), ovaries (pain in, dropsy of), pityriasis, strangury,
stricture, tetanus, tympanites, uremia, urine (suppression of), worms (retention of).

----- PAGE 24 -----
BARBERRY

Berberis vulgaris

COMMON NAMES: Barberry, pipperidge bush, berry.

FEATURES: One hundred and seventy-five species of shrubs make up this large family of Berberidaceae,
many of which are used in ornamental planting and for hedges. The plant is native to the temperate
climates and grows wild in the New England states and on the mountains of Pennsylvania and Virginia.

The flowers grow in small yellow clusters in April and May, are succeeded by red, dark blue, or black
fruit that in some species is used for making jellies of beautiful color and distinct taste; also used like
raisins when dry.

Barberry is an erect deciduous shrub, 3—8 feet high. The leaves are obovate, oval form, terminated by
soft bristle, about 2 inches long and one-third as wide. The yellow root was an important dye for baskets,
buckskins, and fabric among the Native Americans. The Spanish-Americans used the yellow root to make
neck crosses (crucifixes). The active principle is berberine.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, bark, berries.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antiseptic, laxative, stimulant, tonic.

Usrs: Native Americans knew by experience the use of barberry for ulcers, sores, consumption,
heartburn, and rheumatism. Root tea was prepared as a blood tonic and cough medicine and for kidney
ailments.

Barberry is indicated in the chronic ills of the stomach and the early stages of tuberculosis, general
debility, liver and spleen derangements. The agent is excellent to cleanse the body of choleric humors and
free it from such diseases as cholera and its associated malicious oddities such as scabs, itch, tetters,
ringworm, yellow jaundice, bile, etc. It is also frequently prescribed in catarrhal conditions of the
bronchial tubes. Barberry has a history of being an “old woman’s medicine” because of its general use in
infusion as a stomach and liver agent. As a tonic it will help convalescent patients recuperate.

Barberry bark is the most active and is an intensely bitter stimulant. The berries can be eaten, and the
juice is an agreeably acrid refrigerant, useful in fevers and will generally stop the bloody flux and
diarrhea that often accompany typhus fevers.

Barberry can be effectively combined with goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis), burdock (Actium lappa
and Actium minus), yellow dock (Rumex crispus), fringe tree (Chionanthus virginica) and wild cherry
(Prunus serotina).

----- PAGE 25 -----
Dose: 4 ounce to | pint of boiling water, steeped 10 minutes, 14 cups a day before meals, made fresh
daily. Of the tincture, %—1 fluidram.

EXTERNALLY: Liquid from chewed root was placed on injuries and on wounds, while cuts and bruises
were washed with a root decoction. A preparation of the bark or berries will be of service as a gargle for
sore mouth and chronic ophthalmia.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the bark of the root for biliary colic, bilious attack, bladder
affections, calculus, duodenum (catarrh of), dysmenorrhea, fevers, fistula, gallstones, gravel, herpes,
irritation, jaundice, joint affections, knee (pain in), leukorrhea, liver disorder, lumbago, ophthalmia,
oxaluria, polypus, renal colic, rheumatism, sacrum (pain in), side pain, spermatic cords (neuralgia of),
spleen (affections of), tumors, urine (disorders of), vaganismus.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Since 1950 the official pharmacopoeia has recognized two species of barberry
—Berberis amerenis (amur barberry) and Berberis vulgaris (common barberry). In extract form for
female genital organs, pain and inflammation of gallbladder, and to increase bile. Also helpful to reduce
high blood pressure. Folk medicine: Since olden days Russian people have used the same two, now
recognized officially, for inflammation, excess of menstruation, and to stop bleeding in general and
gallbladder conditions.

----- PAGE 26 -----
BAYBERRY

Myrica cerifera

COMMON NAMES: American bayberries, candle berry, wax berry, wax myrtle, tallow shrub, American
vegetable wax.

FEATURES: From the Myricacea family we have bayberry, popular as an ornamental shrub because of the
attractive fruit masses that persist all winter. The stiff shrub or small slender tree can grow to 40 feet tall
but is usually low and spreading, forming dense thickets. Native in sandy swamps, marshes, and wet
woodlands from southern New Jersey to Florida and the West Indies, west to Arkansas and Texas.

The bark is brownish gray and smooth; leaves narrow at the base, oblong or lanceolate, 1—4 inches
long, much reduced toward the tip of the branch, often sparingly toothed, dark green and shiny above,
paler and sometimes hairy beneath. The flowers appear in early spring, March and April, before or with
the new leaves. The fruits are borne against the stems. The green berries are covered, when mature, with
microscopic rounded particles of pale blue, lavender, or grayish white aromatic wax that is used in
making candles that burn with a pleasing fragrance.

The root bark should be gathered in the fall. Cleanse it thoroughly, and while fresh separate the bark
with a hammer. Dry the bark completely and keep in a dry place; when dry enough to pulverize do so and
store ina dark glass or sealed pottery container.

The berry wax, which possesses mild astringent properties, can be obtained by boiling the berries. The
wax will come to the surface and can be removed when cool and hard. The fragrant wax makes a
delightful scented candle.

MEDICINAL PART: Root bark.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, stimulant, tonic.

Uses: Bayberry is considered one of the most useful in the medical herbal practice. It has had popular
respect for generations.

Myrica has the most effective influence in diseased mucous accumulation of the alimentary canal,
which in this morbid soil is an incubator for bronchopulmonic diseases, sore throat or scarlet fever,
dysentery, and symptoms such as chronic catarrhal diarrhea, cholera, goiter, scrofula, toxic seepage from
the stomach and intestinal tract, gastritis, leukorrhea, typhoid, etc. Myrica is both a general and special
stimulant to the mucous membranes without causing a rise in temperature; it is at the same time an aid for
digestion and nutrition and is blood building.

It is indispensable for female weakness and where better contraction is indicated in the uterus. This
applies in cases of uterine hemorrhage whether due to miscarriage or other causes. The uterus can be

----- PAGE 27 -----
packed with cotton saturated with a tea solution that will assist excessive menstruation and hemorrhage
from associated functions. In all hemorrhages, from the stomach, lungs, uterus, or bowels, bayberry should
be remembered. In case of coldness of the extremities, chills and influenza, a compound of the following
will encourage circulation and promote perspiration.

Bayberry bark (Myrica cerifera), 1 ounce
Wild ginger (Asarum canadense), '/4 ounce
Cayenne (Capsicum), '/2 ounce

One teaspoonful of the powdered compound to | pint of boiling water (sweetened with honey), taken in
mouthful amounts throughout the day. Be sure to stay indoors and away from drafts, as you may perspire,
and a draft or cold conditions at this time will only prolong treatment.

The Greek physician Galen mentions the berries as wonderfully helping all colds and rheumatic
distillations from the brain to the eyes, lungs, and other parts. Dr. P. O. Brown tells us “the wax possesses
mild astringent with narcotic properties.”

Dose: | teaspoonful to | cup of boiling water. Of the tincture, 4-1 fluidram.

EXTERNALLY: For nasal stoppage or inflammation, sniff, holding one side of the nose and then the other.
Gargle the solution for sore throat and spongy bleeding gums. Skin ulcers and all kinds of sores, boils,
carbuncles will all benefit greatly if bathed often with the freshly prepared solution.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh bark of root for catarrh, conjunctivitis, heart (affections of),
jaundice, leukorrhea, liver (affections of), pharynx (affections), Achilles tendon (pain in), throat (sore),
urticaria.

----- PAGE 28 -----
BEARBERRY

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi

COMMON NAMEs: Upland cranberry, arberry, mountain cranberry, mountain box, uva-ursi.

FEATURES: Found in dry, sterile, sandy soil and gravelly ridges of North America south to Mexico in
3000-9000-foot altitudes.

The perennial evergreen shrub is recognized by large mats of low-growing ground cover. The urn-
shaped flowers are white and sometimes tinged with red, flowering from June to September, followed by
red lustrous berries of the winter season. The green leaves should be picked and dried in the autumn.

The name is also applied to other plants, such as //ex decidua, a shrub of the southern United States.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, diuretic, tonic.

Uses: The leaves were mixed with tobacco leaves by Native Americans and called kinnikinnick. More
important was their use of it as medicine to treat inflammations of the urinary tract, especially cystitis.

Bearberry is among the herbs useful in diabetes for excessive sugar. Particularly useful in chronic
diarrhea, dysentery, profuse menstruation, piles, spleen, liver, and the pancreas. Outstanding curative
influence for diseases of the urinary organs, more especially in chronic affections of the kidneys, mucous
discharges from the bladder, and all derangements of the water passages. Old cases of leukorrhea and
chronic urethritis will be relieved by its use, a valuable assistant in the cure of gonorrhea of long
standing, whites, ulceration of the cervix uterus (neck of the womb), pain in the vesicle region, etc. Can
be used internally and also as a douche.

Cover and steep | heaped tespoonful in 1 pint of boiling water for 30 minutes, cool, strain, and use
warm as a douche for the above mentioned. If too strong, dilute as required.

Dose: Can be taken internally as follows. Soak the leaves in sufficient alcohol or brandy to cover, for one
week or more. Place | teaspoonful of the soaked leaves in 1 cup of cold, or boiling, water, drink 2—3
cups a day. Quantity of the tincture to be given in the same manner, 10—25 drops in water three or more
times a day, according to symptoms. The tea can be made without the brandy or alcohol, if desired,
preparing as you would ordinary tea. Effective if mixed with tincture of quaking aspen (Populus
tremuloides), 2-15 drops; tincture of bearberry (Arctostaphylos), 10-20 drops.

When used in the treatment of diabetes, Vaccinium myrtillus (bilberry) should be combined with it.
Tincture of bilberry leaves (Vaccinium myrtillus) 20-40 drops, tincture of bearberry (Arctostaphylos)
10—20 drops in water three or more times a day.

----- PAGE 29 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Cystitis, dysuria, hematuria, urinary affections.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The pharmacopoeia uses uva-ursi (bearberry) extracts, or combines it with other
herbals as antiseptics or in diuretic conditions. Folk medicine: The tea of wva-ursi is used especially for
female complaints, kidney and bladder disorders. Veterinary: Successfully useful as indicated above.

----- PAGE 30 -----
BEECH

Fagus sylvatica

COMMON NAMES: European beech, beechnut tree.

FEATURES: The European or common beech (Fagus sylvatica) and the American beech (F. grandiflora)
are closely similar.

They are handsome forest trees of the family Fagaceae. Both species thrive in light, limey loams; they
do not grow in damp locations. (Blue or water beech, better known as American hornbean, Carpinus
caroliniana, is not a member of this genus.) F’ sylvatica has gray bark and shining leaves that persist
during most of the winter.

The tree scarcely bears fruit before the fiftieth year. When about 250 years old and matured to the fruit-
bearing age, both species yield pleasant edible, three-angled nuts in September, usually in pairs in prickly
involucres, nourishing and enjoyable to both human and animal. The beech tree is used in ornamental
planting for its symmetrical form.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, leaves.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, astringent, antiseptic.

Usrs: Beech is a medicinal tree of internal and external value. The bark and leaves contain effective
substance for action of the stomach, ulcers, liver, kidney, bladder, and the weakening inflammation of
dysentery. Beech is among the herbal tree medications for improving conditions of diabetes. The leaves
are soothing to the nerves and stomach and are astringent. As a tonic, used to clean and tone the entire
system and improve appetite.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the crushed leaves or ‘4 teaspoonful of the granulated bark to 1 cup of boiling
water, 3-4 cups daily.

EXTERNALLY: Culpeper: “The water found in the hollow places of decaying beeches will cure both man
and beast of any scurf, scap, or running tetter if they wash there with.”

The leaf tea is antiseptic, cleansing, cooling, and healing to old sores, feverish swellings, or skin
diseases. Bathe often with the fresh tea or apply the boiled leaves. Can be applied directly or made into
an ointment by boiling in coconut or other suitable oil.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Trituration of the nuts for epilepsy, headache, hydrophobia, vertigo.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russia beech tree is called buk (pronounced “book’). Medically the Russians
use creosote, distilled from beech tar, as antiseptic, cleansing, disinfectant. The odor is very aggressive,
and when given internally for catarrh of the lungs, throat, etc., it is combined with more acceptable tasting
herbs. Also used widely for industrial and commercial purposes.

----- PAGE 31 -----
BEECHDROPS

Epifagus americanus, Orobanche virginiana

COMMON NAME: Cancer root.

FEATURES: A parasite of the family Orobanchaceae (broomrape family). The name cancer root is applied
to several of the root parasites but more specifically to the beech-drops or cancer drops of the beech tree
roots.

The low wiry plant has pale brown, dull red, or light brown stems usually marked with fine brown
purple lines. The stem has leaf scales but no leaves. The root is scaly and tuberous. Altogether the taste is
disagreeably astringent. The August and September flowers are white in the upper corolla, about 1
centimeter long, striped with brown-purple, and sterile; the less conspicuous lower flowers bear seeds.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Tops, stems, root.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent.

Uses: This plant has been used by folk medicine and homeopaths for cancer, hence the name is commonly

known as cancer root. It has other attributes, especially for asthma, and is valuable in the treatment of

obstinate ulcers of the mouth or stomach, and diarrhea.

Dose: Mainly a folk medicine, the amount to be taken is not mentioned in herbal practice in English or

Russian literature. Unless given by persons of experience, it is best prescribed by the medical profession.
Further research is needed both in North America and abroad. The long-established homeopathic

practice makes use of its properties in the form of extracts and tinctures.

EXTERNALLY: Of use for all dermatitis inflammations, broken or unbroken skin conditions.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plant in full flower for diarrhea, gonorrhea, headaches,

palpitations.

----- PAGE 32 -----
BETH ROOT

Trillium pendulum, Trillium erectum

COMMON NAMES: Birth root, wake-robin, Indian balm, American ground lily.

FEATURES: Trillium is a genus of the family Liliaceae, common to temperate North America and eastern
Asia. This flowering herb has twenty-five to thirty perennial species that thrive in the acid mold of rich,
moist woods.

The root has the faint fragrance of turpentine and a peculiar aromatic and sweetish astringent taste when
first chewed, but becomes bitter and acid, causing salivation. Its shape is remindful of the popular ginseng
root. The simple stems range for 3 to 30 inches high, rising from the apex of a blunt tuberlike rhizome —
1% inches thick. The leaves are 2-15 inches long and are net-veined and somewhat mottled. The three-
petaled flowers with three sepals are identified in May and June. Varying in color according to species,
they range from white to pink and sometimes rose-maroon, red-brown, purple, green, yellow-green, or
bright yellow. The fruit is a pink or red three- or six-angled berry.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTs: Diluted alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, tonic, antiseptic, alterative, pectoral.

Uses: The Native Americans used beth root as an aid to lessen pain and difficulty at the time of delivery,
hence the synonym, birth root. Taken internally, beth root has a soothing tonic effect. The properties of
Trillium are due to its active principle; it is used for all forms of hemorrhages, such as bleeding from the
nose, mouth, stomach, bowels, and bladder.

In female disorders it is especially valuable as a general astringent to the uterine organs and should be
used in fluor albus, menorrhagia (profuse menstruation). It is considered almost a specific for female
weakness and leukorrhea, or whites.

Dose: Useful in pulmonary conditions, beth root with the accompanying herb slippery elm (Ulmus rubra)
and a small portion of lobelia seed (Lobelia inflata), in powder form 10-20 grains.

One teaspoonful of the powdered root boiled in | pint of milk is an expedient help in diarrhea and
dysentery. For the above mentioned, | teaspoonful of the powdered root to | cup of boiling water, 2—3
cups a day, or more often in wineglassful amounts as case requires.

EXTERNALLY: The root made into a poultice is very useful in tumors, indolent and offensive ulcers, stings
of insects, and to restrain gangrene. The leaves boiled in lard make a good external application in ulcers
and tumors.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the fresh root for bladder (catarrh of), climacteric, diabetes,
dysentery, fainting (with flooding), fibroma (hemorrhages from), hemorrhages (postpartum, antepartum),
menorrhagia, metrorrhagia, writer’s cramp.

----- PAGE 33 -----
BILBERRY

Vaccinium myrtillus

COMMON NAMES: Huckleberry, whortleberry, hurrleberry.

FEATURES: Bilberry, any of the several species of shrubs belonging to the heath family Ericaceae, genus
Vaccinium. Some members are found in the cooler areas of both Eurasia and North America. One of the
principal species is V myrtillus, known simply as bilberry, which is found in acid soil in forests, heaths,
rocky barrens, bog, and tundra.

The blueberrylike bilberry is an edible fruit growing in twos or threes at the base of the leaves instead
of in clusters terminating the branches as in true blueberries. The seeds resemble currants in appearance,
with a dark blue or black color. The leaves are obovate, about 1 inch long, upper surface dark green and
shiny. Depending on location, May through July is the flowering season for the reddish pink, white, or
purplish blossoms.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, berries.
SOLVENTs: Dilute alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, refrigerant, astringent.

Uses: The fresh berries are enjoyed by most as a cooling, healthful dessert. For medication out of season,
the dried berries have proven beneficial to cool feverish liver, and for stomach conditions; they are
arresting in vomiting and a useful agent for dropsy and gravel.

To make your own private stock, place 2—3 handfuls of bilberry in a bottle and pour a good brandy
over them. Secure with a tight-fitting cap or cork. The longer the tincture stays the more powerful a
medicine will this berry spirit be.

Violent, continuous diarrhea accompanied by great pain, sometimes with loss of blood, is stopped by
taking 1 tablespoonful of bilberry brandy in 4 pint of water; may be repeated in 8-10 hours. For diarrhea,
dysentery, and derangements of the bowels, a decoction of the leaf tea will bring relief. Also as a gargle
for sore throat, and feminine hygiene for leukorrhea.

At one time bilberries were used in the treatment of scurvy in Norway and other northern countries.

Dose: Of the leaves, 1 teaspoonful to 1 cup of boiling water. In The Herbalist, by J. E. Meyer: “A
mixture of equal parts of Bilberry leaves, Thyme, and Strawberry leaves makes an excellent tea.” Of the

----- PAGE 34 -----
tincture, 10-30 drops, varying according to severity of the case and age.
EXTERNALLY: The tea decoction is used for sores, wounds, and ulcers: apply the freshly made tea freely.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Chernica (bilberry) in Russian folk medicine is used mainly as an astringent for
gastric colitis and other stomach conditions. It may be of interest to know that in Russia bilberry has a
well-established reputation as being similar to insulin for sugar diabetes. Used as fresh or dried berries
and leaves as tea, decoction, syrup, and for poultice. Clinically: Research and clinical experiments
confirm value as first recognized by folk medicine for practical home use. Extracts and tinctures are given
clinically alone or combined with other suitable herbs when a tonic and astringent are required. Dose, 1—
2 teaspoonfuls to | cup of boiling water, taken warm in %2-cup amounts four times a day on an empty
stomach. Industrial: A home and industrial leather dye of brown and yellow colors. Combined with other
chemicals to produce violet, red, green, and blue for wool, cotton, and linen material.

----- PAGE 35 -----
BIRCH
Betula alba

COMMON NAMES: White birch, cherry birch, sweet birch, mountain mahogany, spice birch.

FEATURES: Nearly forty species in the Betulaceae family of trees and shrubs are given the common name
of birch.

This is an ancient tree; in fossil form it goes back to the upper Cretaceous, and remains abundant and
widespread in the northern hemisphere in both the Old World and the New. In North America it ranges
from the Arctic Circle to Florida and Texas; usually found in woods; domestically in landscape decor
throughout the United States.

Birch, an eye-catching tree, reaches heights of 45—50 feet. It may be white, yellow, brown, or almost
black; frequently the trunk is smooth in young trees, later becoming marked with horizontal lines. The
alternate leaves are characteristically simple, bright green, and toothed. The flowers develop in wormlike
catkins of two types. The staminate appear near the ends of the branches in late summer or autumn and
elongate the following spring into pendulous structures, exposing the brownish bracts. The minute flowers
are located in the axils of these. Seen in the temperate zones in April and May. The ovaries mature into
minute winged nutlets that are scattered in autumn or may be seen flecked on the winter snow.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, leaves.
SoLvents: Alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Aromatic, stimulant, diaphoretic.

Uses: As a food and medicine; Native Americans tapped the birch for its sap as a beverage and syrup.
Oil of wintergreen is distilled from the inner bark and twigs.

The common birch has a purpose in our family of medicinal trees. When we see them used for
landscaping we may like to remember, with pleasure, their additional, healing properties.

Traditionally the birch is appropriate in treatment of diarrhea, dysentery, cholera, and all maladies of
the alimentary tract. The natural properties are cleansing to the blood, and it is used specifically for
rheumatism, dropsy, gout, stones in the kidneys and bladder, and to expel worms.

Dose: A teaspoonful of the leaves or bark or both infused in | cup of boiling water for 15 minutes, 3—5
cups daily; mixes well with other herbal teas.

----- PAGE 36 -----
EXTERNALLY: Drink the tea freely when troubled with boils or skin eruptions. The oil of birch is applied
to the skin for eczema and cutaneous diseases; the tea is effective when gargled for canker and mouth
sores.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Belaya berezci, birch, is inseparable from the Russian people, as it is their most
poetic tree. The birch is known to every Russian through history, literature, poetry, songs, art, and fairy
tales. They consider it the most attractive and beautiful of all trees in the world. Besides having emotional
and spiritual popularity, the association of birch with folk medicine goes back to the oldest tale of
Russian history. Folk medicine: For centuries folk medicine has used birch in many preparations for
therapeutic results, long before clinical recognition and approval in 1834. One of the serious conditions
being cardiac dropsy. Birch buds: Gathered and preserved with vodka (nastoika) for out-of-season use
as an invaluable home medication. This is used for colds, pain, rheumatic conditions, stomach ulcers and
pain, vitality, blood purifying, appetizer, avitaminosis, liver and gallbladder, to dissolve stones of kidney
and bladder, and for many other individual complaints. Birch charcoal: Used as an absorbent in cases of
poisoning, gas bloating, and indigestion. Birch sap: In the spring is prepared as tea and is considered a
vitamin treat as a tonic for anemia, gout, scurvy, rheumatism, etc. Externally: Extract of leaves, buds, and
bark is applied to ulcers, wounds, boils, eczema, and all skin conditions of broken and unbroken surfaces;
rheumatic pain, swelling, albuminuria.

Russian history and life are unthinkable without the steam bath or banya. Once a week this is the
accepted routine. These stouthearted people prepare the room by placing leaves over hot rocks. This
expels the cleansing vapors of moist heat as hot and as long as the person’s health will stand, and
Russians excel in physical endurance. When perspiration is established, if the leaves were not placed
over the rocks, a beresovy venic, birch broom is used to vigorously thrash the body. They know any
trouble will be taken care of, whatever it is, if the person can stand the heat and the thrashing. In our
condition we can do something similar, but not as severe. Boil 2-5 pounds of leaves with enough water to
cover for 1—2 hours in a pillowcase or cotton cloth; place this in the bathtub along with enough hot water
to reach the waist when seated. Drench the shoulders, neck, back, face, and arms for as long as you feel
comfortable, using the bag of leaves like a sponge. In this case your heart will be your doctor; if you feel
weak, or relaxed to the point of falling asleep, get out. This type of herbal bath done once or twice a week
for thirty times consecutively will prove most beneficial for internal and external complaints, as the
proper function for both will be improved.

----- PAGE 37 -----
BITTERROOT

Apocynum androsaemifolium

COMMON NAMES: Dogbane, milkweed, westernwall.

FEATURES: Indigenous to North America, growing in many of the states and Canada, depending on the
species, of which there are sixty in North America.

The large milky root is quite bitter (the bitter outside slips off when boiling, as for food), though
edible, starchy but nutritious, and was an important food among Native Americans. Bitterroot is
perennial, almot stemless, with a rosette of oblong fleshy leaves. The flower appears in the center, is rose
or white colored, and generally remains open only in the sunshine from May to August.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SoLvents: Alcohol, though more especially water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Emetic, diaphoretic, tonic, laxative, expectorant.

UsEs: Bitterroot is a celebrated remedy among Native Americans for the treatment of venereal diseases
and is regarded as almost infallible. Has been recommended in the treatment of Bright’s disease. It is also
highly praised for rheumatic gout of the joints and has been known to relieve cardiac dropsy when
everything else has failed. Parkinson quotes it as a “sovereign remedy against all poisons and against the
bites of mad dogs”; hence it derives it’s name dogbane.

Bitterroot will help to rid the system of other impurities, including worms, and is influential in treating
diabetes.

Bitterroot is a very bitter stimulating tonic, acting chiefly on the liver, emptying the gall ducts, securing
a free discharge of bile, and thereby causing activity of the bowels. For jaundice, gallstones, and chronic
sluggish conditions of the liver bitterroot is unequaled. It should not be employed in irritable conditions
of the stomach.

When used as an alternative to act on the liver, or for dyspepsia, a dose would be 10 grains twice a day
(5—6 drops of the extract). This remedy has been employed by some practitioners for nervous headache,
for which it is said to be one of the most prompt and effective remedies in use. Large doses cause
vomiting but tendency to gripe can be eliminated by adding peppermint (Mentha piperita), calamus
(sweet flag), fennel (Foeniculum officinale), or other carminatives. Take 2—5 grains thrice daily as a

----- PAGE 38 -----
general tonic.

EXTERNALLY: In the spring the milk of bitterroot will remove unsightly warts (if the circulation is active
within the system) if applied fresh two or three times daily. Be sure to apply only on the raised area. You
will notice a burning and, perhaps, swelling; this is to be expected. If the area forms a scab, let it drop off
of its own accord; underneath will be a smooth, unelevated surface. (Do not regard moles as warts.)

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture from the root for diarrhea, dropsy, nausea, neuralgia of the face,
vomiting, wandering rheumatism, worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: American bitterroot does not grow wild in Russia. After extensive research on
medical purpose and cultivation, they commercially cultivate kendir konoplevy (bitterroot) in the
European part of Russia and West Siberia. In all herbal and agronomical publications they encourage and
promote the use of the rhizome and root for medical aid. Dr. A. Nelubin in his Pharmacography (Medical
Botanics) first described American bitterroot in 1850. This credit aroused interest and was clinically
proved in many cases of heart disease and dropsy. Until approximately 1930 it was imported from the
United States but since this time plantations have been cultivated that yield an estimated 500-700 pounds
of dried material for each acre. Clinically: No side effects can be found from the proper administration of
bitterroot. Clinically used in many cases of heart deficiencies, high blood pressure, cardiac sclerosis, and
blood circulation disturbance of second and third degree. It is prescribed in ampules only.

----- PAGE 39 -----
BITTERSWEET

Solanum dulcamara

COMMON NAMES: Bittersweet, nightshade, violet bloom, felonwort, mortal, fever twig.

FEATURES: Naturalized in the United States from native Europe and Asia. The zigzag, sprawling, slender
vine climbs along trees, hedges, thickets, and fences, especially in moist places, seldom exceeding 7 or 8
feet in length.

In June and July the purplish or blue flowers can be seen arranged in cymes that are succeeded in the
autumn by attractive bright red juicy berries that hang on the vine for several months. The attraction is for
decoration only, they should not be eaten. The leaves are acute and generally smooth, of a dull green
color. When fresh the leaf stems have an unpleasant odor, which is lost by drying. The root is long and
almost orange-colored. Twigs and root bark should be collected after the foliage has fallen. Taste is first
bitter, then sweet.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, bark, twigs.
SoLVENTs: Diluted alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, diaphoretic, discutient, diuretic, deobstruent, narcotic, resolvent.

Uses: Known to the original people of North America, folk medicine, and herbalists for skin conditions
in which the symptom is obvious, but the source of the real culprit is usually largely in the glandular
system and bloodstream.

It is serviceable in cutaneous diseases and syphilitic conditions, as it excites the venereal functions,
and is in fact capable of wide application and use in leprosy, teeter and all skin diseases, eczema,
scrofula, etc. For rheumatic and cachectic affections, ill-conditioned ulcers, glandular swellings, and in
obstructed menstruation it also serves a good purpose.

Dr. O. P. Brown (1875): “The Complete Herbalist regard this plant as important as any in the Herbal
Kingdom, and too little justice is done to it by those under whose care the sick are intrusted.” Recent
information from Rodale Health Bulletin, September 1966: Dr. Kupchan said, “We’re using Folk
Medicine and Herbalism as source of leads. One of the plants we’re studying, Solanum dulcamara, also
called ‘Bitter sweet’ or Woody nightshade, was recommended by Galen in a.D. 150 as a treatment for
Tumours, Cancer and Warts.” He added, “A substance from red milkweed or ‘Cancerillo’ used for
centuries by Central American Indians to treat Cancer inhibits the growth of lab-cultured human cancer

----- PAGE 40 -----
tissue.” When asked whether the cure for cancer would come from the greenhouse rather than the
laboratory, Dr. Kupchan answered, “There probably won’t be a single cancer cure, but cancer cures for
the different types of cancer.” He told reporters that the possibility of cancer treatment from plants should
not be overlooked, particularly since “the synthetic medicinal chemists have almost exhausted the
possibilities for anti-cancer drugs.” Most herbalists combine bittersweet with other herbal agents as
individual case requires.

CAUTION: Large doses produce vomiting, faintness, vertigo, convulsive muscular movements, dryness
and constrictions of the throat, thirst, diarrhea, weakened heart action, paralysis.

Dose: Boil 1 teaspoonful of cut or powdered Solanum in | pint of water for a few minutes, cover and
steep for % hour, | teaspoonful in | cup of boiling water as required. Of the tincture alone, 10—20 drops
in water three or four times a day.

EXTERNALLY: One pound of the cut bark of bittersweet slowly heated in 1 pound of lard for 8 hours
makes an excellent ointment to scatter painful tumors and is one of the best preparations available for
application to ulcers, irritated skin conditions, piles, burns, scalds, etc., involving pain and social
embarrassment.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Not to be confused with deadly nightshade (belladonna) or with climbing
bittersweet (Celastrus). Tincture prepared from fresh green stems and leaves, gathered just before
flowering.

Uses: Adenitis, angina faucium, aphonia, bladder (affections of), blepharophthalmia, catarrh, cholera,
crusta lactea, diarrhea, dropsy, dysentery, emaciation, exostosis, hemorrhage, hemorrhoids, hayfever,
meningitis, myalgia, myelitis, nettlerash, neuralgia, ophthalmia, paralysis, pemphigus, rheumatism,
scarlatina, scrofula, stammering, stiff neck, tibia (pains in), tongue (affections of), tonsillitis, tumors,
typhoid, urine (difficulty in passing, incontinence of), warts, whooping cough.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Several kinds of the bittersweet family known as paslen kisoladky (Solanum
dulcamara, Solanum lacitum) are used for medical and industrial purposes. Uses: Home medicine for
many families favors palsenovaya nastoika (herbs with vodka) for heart disease, a few drops at a time.
One to two cups of the tea taken a mouthful at a time has proven successful for skin and hair diseases and
very effective for worms. Clinically: In use of disturbances of the liver, spleen, gallbladder, catarrh,
asthma, and chronic skin disease.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Solanum nigrum (garden nightshade) and their native Solanum
xanthocarpum, which in Indian is kantakari, kateli, katai—and the English name, Indian solanum—grow
throughout India and Pakistan. They find the whole plant useful as expectorant, bitter stomachic, aperient,
diuretic, astringent, anthelmintic, alterative, anodyne, febrifuge. The root used for fever, cough, asthma,
flatulence, costiveness, dropsy, heart disease, chest pain, gonorrhea, dysuria, stones in the bladder, liver
and spleen enlargement. Given in decoctions of 2-2 ounces, or its juice in doses of 2-2 drams; also as a
confection.

----- PAGE 41 -----
BLACKBERRY

Rubus villosus

COMMON NAMES: Dewberry, bramble berry, gout berry.

FEATURES: There are numerous species of Rubus (blackberry); two types are recognized—the trailing
blackberries or dewberries and the erect blackberries. However, both in the wild and under cultivation
there are many intermediate forms. This particular variety is native to the northern United States and
Canada, other areas being central and western Europe.

The blackberry has a root that lives for many years and a top that grows one year and fruits the next
with juicy, black, delicious berries. The berries adhere to the core when ripe rather than separating from
the receptacle as does the ripe raspberry. This trailing vine dies back to the ground when out of season.
Spring finds new, prickly tips forming rootlets in sandy or dry soil. The flowers are white.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, leaves, berries.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, tonic.

Uses: As a remedial agent blackberries are classed as astringents and are far more serviceable
medicinally than most of our generation is aware of. The berries were used as food and medicince by
Native Americans, and today we know by their experience, and by scientific proof, that the plant is
exceedingly valuable in chronic diarrhea, dysentery, cholera, and summer complaints of children and is
often the only thing that gets results.

A decoction of the root or leaves or both (the root being more astringent than the leaves) may be used
freely, four to five times a day.

Being pleasing to the taste, this agent is useful in excessive menstruation and very effective in fevers
and hot distempers of the body, head, eyes, and other parts.

The berries have cordial properties and can be made into aspics, brandy, jam, jelly, and also vinegar.
Dose: | teaspoonful of the root or leaves to 1 cup of boiling water, steeped 15 minutes; 3-4 cups a day
depending on age and condition. Of the tincture 2-1 dram, three or four times a day.

EXTERNALLY: The leaves, bruised and applied outwardly, will act as an astringent to hemorrhoids. For

sore mouth and inflamed throat, gargle the tea of the roots and leaves often; they can be used green or
dried.

----- PAGE 42 -----
BLACK COHOSH

Cimicifuga racemosa

COMMON NAMES: Bugbane, rattleroot, squawroot, snakeroot, black snakeroot.

FEATURES: The plant is a genus of the crowfoot family, comprising about twenty species, native to North
America, Asia, and Europe.

The best-known American species, because of its medicinal properties, is the bugbane (Cimicifuga
racemosa). Cimicifuga, from the Latin “to drive away,” so named because certain species are used to
drive away bugs and other insects. Can also be used as an antidote for the venom of serpents. Black
cohosh can be seen in upland woods and hillsides. A perennial herb with a large knotty root, having a few
short roots. The stem is simple, smooth, and furrowed, 3—9 feet high, with irregular leaves. The small
white flowers are numerous in wandlike racemes, flowering from May to August. The root contains a
resin known as cimicifugin (macrotin), starch, gum, tannic acid, etc.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.

SOLVENT: Boiling water enhances the properties of the root but dissolves only partially; alcohol
dissolves wholly.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, diuretic, diaphoretic, expectorant, antispasmodic, sedative (arterial and
nervous), cardiac stimulant (safer than Digitalis), emmenagogue.

Usrs: Native American women knew of black cohosh for relieving pain during menstrual period and used
its properties extensively during childbirth.

Dr. Young introduced Cimicifuga racemosa to the medical world in 1831. It was adapted as a cardiac
tonic in fatty heart, chorea, acute and chronic bronchitis, rheumatism, neuralgia, hysteria, phthisis,
dyspepsia, amenorrhea, dysmenorrhea, and seminal emission. It is also admirable treatment for scarlet
fever, measles, and smallpox. Regarded by some physicians as one of the best agents in use for whooping
cough.

2 tablespoonfuls of tincture of black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa)
2 tablespoonfuls of tincture of bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis)
2 tablespoonfuls of tincture of lobelia (Lobelia inflata)

2 tablespoonfuls of syrup of squill (sea onion)

Dose: 15-30 drops every three or four hours

The above tinctures have been successfully employed in Saint Vitus’ dance and in asthma, delirium

----- PAGE 43 -----
tremens, consumption, acute rheumatism, scrofula, and leukorrhea. Large doses cause vertigo, tremors,
reduced pulse, vomiting, prostration.

CAUTION: Should not be used by pregnant women.

Dose: The tincture should be made from the fresh root, or that which has recently been dried; 2 ounces to
4 pint of alcohol (96 proof) taken 5—15 drops four times a day. As a tea 1 teaspoonful of the cut root to 1
cup of boiling water three times a day, or 15-30 drops of the tincture added to 1 cup of water, sweetened
with honey.

EXTERNALLY: The bruised root was used by the Native Americans as an antidote for snakebites, applied
to the wound; and the juice, in very small amounts, was taken internally.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Cimicifuga dahurica, not poetic in name, but known by all aborigines of the Far
East and Mongolia as klopogon daursky or bug chaser daurian. Lately Russians recognize the medical
value of native American black cohosh. Clinically: The extract or tincture, straight or in combination with
other herbs has of late been discovered and clinically approved for cardial asthma, high blood pressure,
anemia of the intestines, and as a tonic for the central nervous system. They vividly stress that even in
large doses it does not induce intoxication. Folk medicine: Used as a tea decoction and poultice for high
blood pressure, headache, tonic, sedative, hysteria, neuralgia, asthma, and migraine, in female disorders,
painful menstruation, and to ease labor pain.

----- PAGE 44 -----
BLACK ROOT

Veronicastrum virgin icum

COMMON NAMES: Culver’s physic, tall speedwell, leptandra, Culver’s root.

FEATURES: Black root is indigenous to North America and is from the figwort family.

The soil in which the plant is grown significantly affects its virtues. It can be seen in new soil, moist
woods, swamps, etc. Limestone soil improves the medicinal value, assuring the user of its attributed
influence. Taste: very bitter acrid. Autumn of the second year is the proper time for gathering. The dried
root is the most accepted procedure (fresh root being too irritable), but it has to be used with extreme
care.

The plant obtains heights of 2-5 feet with simple, straight, smooth, herbaceous stems. Leaves are short
and finely serrated, whorled in fours to sevens. The flowers are white, nearly sessile, and very numerous.
Calyx: four-parted corolla, small and nearly white. Stamens: two. The fruit is a many-seeded capsule.

MEDICINAL PART: Dried root.
SOLVENTS: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Emetocathartic, cholagogue, alterative, tonic, antiseptic.

Uses: Black root is a long-established Native American remedy. As white man’s medicine it was
introduced as a medicinal agent by Dr. Culver and is admirably called Culver’s physic.

The leading significance of black root is as it acts on the intestines in chronic constipation when there
is insufficiency of biliary flow, and it is very much used in chronic hepatic diseases. It operates mildly
and without depressing the system, as is so common to other purgative medicines.

In fevers it removes the morbid matter from the bowels without weakening their tone or leaving behind
that poisonous sting so often remaining after the use of calomel. It is used very effectively in the care of
pleurisy and also in some forms of dyspepsia. As a cathartic in dysentery it is one of the best medicines
known when given in moderate doses. In such cases combine with a little rhubarb root (Rheum
palmatum) and give the decoction in doses of 3-4 tablespoons, repeating every three hours until
passively relaxed.

Formula for Liver Disorders

1 ounce of black root (Veronicastrum virginicum)
2 ounces of goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)

2 ounces of senna (Cassia marilandica)

2 pints of distilled or boiled water.

Boil until reduced to 1 pint. Take 2 tablespoons three or four times a day, increasing the quantity if it fails
to operate gently or decreasing if it operates too much. Bowel action should not be more than perceptible.

In this you have a herbal medicine superior to most of the popular preparations and one that has been
used for generations.

Dose: Leptandrin is the extract made from the root; it should be used in lesser amounts, from 4 to 1 grain,
adjusting according to age and case. Dose of the powder, as a cathartic, 20-40 grains.

----- PAGE 45 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of resinoid leptandrin, tincture of second-year fresh root, trituration of
dried root for ascites, bilious attack, bilious fever, constipation, diarrhea, dysentery, dyspepsia, headache,
jaundice, liver (affections of), remittent fever (infantile), yellow fever.

----- PAGE 46 -----
BLACK WALNUT

Juglans nigra

FEATURES: Six species of the walnut, genus Juglans, are native to the United States. Black walnut is
among them, widely distributed in the eastern states and extending to adjacent Canada. These deciduous
hardwoods have rough furrowed bark, alternate pinnately compounded leaves with a distinctive odor
when bruised, and greenish flowers, the male in drooping catkins.

Black walnut is one of the best-known, largest, and most valuable native hardwoods. Though not
plentiful, the tree grows rapidly in mixed forests on rich, moist, well-drained soil such as is found in
valleys. It sometimes exceeds 100 feet in height, with trunks 3 feet in diameter. Planted for roadside
shade, shelter belts, and as ornamentals.

The wood is figured beautifully and used as paneling, for cabinet making, and in salad bowls.

The nut is a popular food for candy, ice cream, and cake flavoring. The husk does not split open like
that of the hickory nut; it is covered with a green pulp coating, while on the tree, that turns black when on
the ground and in storage. This outside pulp is used for dyeing and tanning. If you have ever gathered or
hulled black walnuts you will recall the lingering walnut stains.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, leaves, rind, green nut.
SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Vermifuge, tonic.

Uses: Materially, scrofula has had harmonious results with 1 cup of the leaves boiled in | quart of water,
made fresh daily and used often, with honey. This should be continued for several months. The dry leaves
may be used when the green cannot be had. A strong tincture of the leaves and nuts is highly extolled as a
remedy in the treatment of bilious and cramp colic.

Dose: |—2 teaspoonfuls every twenty or thirty minutes until relieved. Also a decoction as a vermifuge is
effective. The rind of the green fruit removes ringworm and tetter, and is given in diphtheria. The distilled
fresh walnuts in spirit alcohol will calm hysteria, cerebal, and pregnant vomiting.

The black walnut is one of the foods rich in manganese, important for nerves, brain, and cartilage.
Nutritionally, the Missouri black walnut is of high manganese content. All nut fruits should be fresh, as
rancid oil is detrimental.

One teaspoonful of the inner bark or leaves and rind, cut small or granulated, to 1 cup of boiling water.
Drink 1—4 cups a day often, a large mouthful at a time.

----- PAGE 47 -----
HOMOEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of leaves and of rind of green fruits for acne, anus (burning in),
auxiliary glands (suppuration of), chancre, ecthyma, eyes (pain over), favus, flatulence, headache, herpes,
herpes progenitalis, levitation (sensation of), menorrhagia, purpura, ringworm, scurvy, spleen (pain in),
syphilis.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Black walnut is known in Russia by the common name of Greek nut (Juglans
regia), which grows in Caucasia and the middle Asian area. Uses: Long before vitamins were discovered
folk medicine knew by experience and results that botanical treatment was reliable. In Russia they
prepared a walnut jam in such a way that 90 percent of the vitamins were still intact. This pleasing food
as body repairing material is now known to contain a rich supply of vitamin C, carotene, and many
important minerals. As a tea (external and internal) in home medical use for scrofula, ulcers, wounds,
gargle, and rickets. Externally: Since the seventeenth century Russian military hospitals have used this
well-established folk medicine for cleansing and quick-healing medication of wounds and ulcers. Now
clinically it is used for many kinds of skin diseases, especially tuberculosis.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: By the local Indian name akhort or aks hot, the black walnut would
be a stranger to North Americans. Some of the uses are familiar, with advantageous additions. Bark:
Astringent, anthelmintic, detergent, lactifuge. Successfully used as a bark decoction in skin diseases.
Leaves: Astringent, alterative, tonic, detergent. A decoction of the leaves is specific in scrofula, sores,
herpes, eczema, syphilis, and intestinal worms. Green hull: (separated from the nut) Anthelmintic,
antisyphilitic. Kernel: Given in heartburn, colic, dysentery, and considered an aphrodisiac. Immature nut
rich in vitamin C. Walnut oil: Mild laxative cholagogue, anthelmintic. Especially effective for tapeworm
and as a dressing for leprous skin disease.

----- PAGE 48 -----
BLOODROOT

Sanguinaria canadensis

COMMON NAMES: Red puccoon, Indian plant, tetterwort, sanguinaria.

FEATURES: Indigenous to eastern North America, bloodroot, a monotypic genus of the Papaveraceae
family.

The small herb is often difficult to find in its woodland home, where sheltered places and leaf mold are
ideal for its survival. The thick, palmately lobed leaf is lapped around the bud, which swiftly outgrows its
protector, loses its two fugacious sepals, and opens into a star-shaped flower, one to each stem, with
several fleshy white petals and a mass of golden stamens in the center.

The flower closes at night or on shady days and is among the early spring flowers. Often cultivated in
gardens. The leaves continue to grow during the summer, becoming nearly 7 inches long. The seeds are
contained in spindle-shaped capsules.

The whole plant is very brittle and succulent and when broken, especially at its thick, fleshy root, an
acrid red juice bleeds from the divided sections. The root is about the size of a man’s little finger. The
taste is bitter and harsh. The whole plant is medicinal, the root being the part chiefly used. Age and
moisture impair the properties.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENT: Alcohol, water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Systemic emetic, stimulating expectorant, sialagogue, alterative, tonic, diuretic,
febrifuge.

Usss: Used by the aborigines for all blood conditions and as a stain for their skin and dye for decoration.
The action of bloodroot varies according to administration. In small doses it stimulates the digestive
organs, acting as a stimulant and tonic; in large doses it is an arterial sedative. The properties are useful
in chronic bronchitis, laryngitis, croup, asthma, whooping cough, and any complaints of the respiratory
organs. The tincture has been used with success in dyspepsia and dropsy of the chest and in cases of
gastrointestinal catarrh or enlarged, morbid, or jaundiced liver conditions. Bloodroot excites the action of
this large glandular organ whose correct function is so necessary to the complete physical and mental
makeup of our everyday life.

CAUTION: Use only as directed. Large doses are toxic.

Dose: | level teaspoonful of grated root steeped in | pint of boiling water for 2 hour. Cool, strain, take a
teaspoonful three to six times a day. Powder as an emetic, 10-20 grains; powder as a stimulant and
expectorant, 3-5 grains; powder used as an alterative, 2-2 grains. Of the tincture, 20-60 drops.

EXTERNALLY: For leukorrhea and hemorrhoids, injections of strong tea is excellent. As an external
remedy the powdered root or tincture acts energetically in cases of fungoid tumors, ringworm, tetter,
warts, etc., at the same time to be taken internally as mentioned. Nasal polypus is often treated by using a
snuff of powdered bloodroot.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: The resin, leaves, seeds, capsules, powdered root, and expressed juice and
tincture of fresh root for alcoholism, aphonia, asthma, breast (tumor of), bronchitis, cancer, catarrh, chest

----- PAGE 49 -----
(pain in), cold, croup, deafness, diphtheria, dysmenorrhea, dyspepsia, ear (polypus of), flushes,
climacteric, gleet, granular lids, hemoptysis, headache, influenza, keratitis, liver cough, menstruation
(breasts painful during), nails (ulceration of), neuralgia, edema of glottis, ophthalmia, pharyngitis, phthisis
Florida, physometra, pneumonia (acute), polypus, pregnancy (affections during), pyrosis, quinsy,
rheumatism, rhus poisoning, shoulder (rheumatism of), smell (illusions of, loss of), stomach (necrosis of),
syphilis, tinnitus, tumors, vomiting, whitlow, whooping cough.

----- PAGE 50 -----
BLUE COHOSH
Caulophyllum thalictroides

COMMON NAMES: Pappoose root, squawroot, blue ginseng, yellow ginseng.

FEATURES: This handsome perennial grows in all parts of the United States near running streams and in
low moist rich grounds. The plant is 1-3 feet high, purple when young, with leaves 1—3 inches long.

May or June finds the yellowish green flowers in bloom, which ripen to seeds in August, these being
used for a decoction that closely resembles coffee. Its active principle is caulophyllin.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, rhizome.
SOLVENT: Water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Antispasmodic, diuretic, emmenagogue, demulcent, sedative, oxytocic, spasmodic,
dysmenorrhea, diaphoretic, parturient.

Uses: The established native American uses were for cramps during difficult menstruation periods,
promoting the flow and administering relief. It is especially valuable and has been found in many cases to
almost entirely relieve the patient of pain in childbirth and promote prompt delivery. For efficacy, a tea of
blue cohosh should be used for the last three or four weeks of pregnancy. A decoction is also useful for
colic (thus the common name of pappoose root), cramps, hysterics, and rheumatism.

In their book Vitalogy (1925) Drs. Wood and Ruddock found blue cohosh “especially valuable in
epileptic fits and ulcerations of the mouth and throat.” Among other therapeutic properties, blue cohosh
contains the following vital minerals: potassium, magnesium, calcium, iron, silicon, and phosphorus,
which helps to alkalize the blood and urine.

Dose: Steep 1 ounce of the root in | pint of boilding water; dose, 2 tablespoonfuls every 3 hours. For
nervous and sluggish cough it will act as an expectorant, for spasms it may be given more freely.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture or trituration of root for abortion, after pains, amenorrhea, barrenness,
bearingdown pains, chloasma, cholera morbus, dysmenorrhea, false conception, feet (affections of),
gonorrhea, hands (affections of), intramammary pain, labor (abnormal, false pains of), leukorrhea,
menstruation (disorders of), ovarian neuralgia, pityriasis, pregnancy (disorders of), rheumatic gout,
rheumatism, uterine spasm, uterine atony.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: On the Russian Amur River and Sakhalin Island the same family, called
Caulophyllum robustum, or in Russian, steblelist moshny, is found growing wild. Blue cohosh has many
good medical properties, including antibacterial properties for tuberculosis. Taspin (acetan) is used in
proportions of 1—1,000,000. This is a strong irritant and limited strictly to clinical use for female disorder
and as a tonic for blood circulation. Further experimental research required.

----- PAGE 51 -----
BLUE FLAG

Tris versicolor

COMMON NAMES: Iris, flag lily, liver lily, water flag, snake lily, flower de-luce.

FeaTurREs: This lily-like flower is recognized by most of us for beauty alone. About eight hundred
species belonging to more than fifty genera have been described from temperate and tropical climates,
mostly from South Africa and tropical America.

The common wild iris or flag Uris pseudacorus) is also found in the eastern United States and is
common in Europe. Several wild species are found in the United States. They are characterized by two
rows of leaves, the outer of which fit over and protect the inner. The flowers are various shades of blue
and purplish-blue, with yellowish markings at the base of the sepals, flowering from May through July. In
some areas the iris is cultivated for ornamental purposes and perfume, and some species have been used
as food in countries where they are native.

Beauty is not the only quality possessed by the iris. The underlying tissue of the root and rhizome
provides corrective influence on the human tissue. The root and rhizome should be sliced transversely,
dried and placed in a covered dark container in a dark place. This will preserve the oleoresin, which is
called irisin, its active principle.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, rhizome.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, cathartic, sialagogue, vermifuge, diuretic, resolvent.

Uses: From the booklet Early Uses of California Plants, by Edward K. Balls: “It is said that long ago
the Yokia squaws of Mendocino Country wrapped their babies in the soft green leaves of J. douglasiana
while on the hot dry hillsides collecting Manzanita berries. This wrapping retarded perspiration and
saved the babies from extreme thirst.”

Blue flag has a special influence on the lymphatic glands, and active, pure lymphatic circulation is
necessary to longevity. Recognized for endrocrine physiological active fluid in thyroid imbalance,
scrofula, and is regarded by some practitioners as one of the most effective herbal medicines in treatment
of secondary syphilis.

Traditionally a valuable substance in treatment of all diseases of the blood and chronic hepatic, kidney,

----- PAGE 52 -----
and spleen affections. Has been known to relieve all symptoms of chronic hip disease. It should be
combined with mandrake (Podophyllum peltatum), poke (Phytolacca decandra), black cohosh
(Cimicifuga racemosa), ginseng (Panax quinquefolius), sarsaparilla (Aralia nudicaulis), yellow dock
(Rumex crispus), etc. If it causes salivation do not be apprehensive as it is distinguished from mercurial
salivation by absence of stench, sponginess of the gums, and loosening of the teeth.

In Nature s Healing Agents, Dr. Clymer says it’s one of the very few remedies that has any influence in
correcting milk-colored, clay-colored stools in adults.

Dose: Tincture alone, 10—25 drops in water three times a day. One teaspoonful of the powdered root to 1
pint of boiling water, drink cold, 2—3 tablespoonfuls six times a day, Iridin, 1 grain.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root, collected in early spring or autumn; trituration of
resinoid, irisin for anus (fissure of), bilious attack, constipation, crusta lactea, diabetes, diarrhea,
dysentery, dysmenorrhea, dyspepsia, eczema, fistula, gastrodynia, intermittent headache, impetigo, liver
(affectins of), migraine, neuralgia, nocturnal emissions, pancreas (affections of), parotid glands
(affections of), pregnancy (morning sickness of), psoriasis, rectum (burning in), rheumatism, salivation,
sciatica, vomiting, whitlow, herpes zoster.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Kasatik is the Russian name given to the iris with all their fondness and tender
love, of which the true meaning is difficult to convey by translation. Cultivation has been strongly
encouraged. Agro-technology skillfully developed agricultural methods for medicinal, commercial, and
industrial business. It is used for internal and external medicine, cosmetics, perfume, aromatic and flavor
in confectionery; widely used in wine industry; praised highly by gardeners and florists for floral decor.
Clinically: Recognized for bronchitis and teething babies. Folk Medicine: Used medically in Russia for
many serious cases of dropsy when the heart is involved, inflammation of the lungs, angina, calming to
reduce involuntary emission. Root and rhizome used by folk medicine as tea, decoctions, and poultice.
Externally: Successfully used in infected wounds, ulcers, fistula, and to take away freckles.

----- PAGE 53 -----
BLUE VERVAIN

Verbena bastata

COMMON NAMES: Wild hyssop, simpler’s joy, Indian hyssop.

FEATURES: Native to temperate and tropical America, the Mediterranean region, and the Near East;
introduced elsewhere in the Old World.

This complex perennial has 352 known specific and sub-specific natural and artificial hybrids.
Numerous species have been employed medicinally in various localities. The herb reaches heights of 3 or
4 feet, usually has a four-square stalk, has branching limbs, whitish flowers, followed by long slim tassels
of seeds.

Growing usually in dry, hard soils along roadsides and fields. For medicinal purpose vervain should
be collected when in flower, from June to September.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, leaves, stems.
SOLVENT: Water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Diaphoretic, expectorant, emetic, antiperiodic, nervine, tonic, sudorific,
antispasmodic.

Uses: Vervain expels worms and is a capable agent for all diseases of the spleen and liver. If given in
intermittent fever in a warm infusion of powder, the results are considerable. In all cases of cold, and
obstinate menstruation, it is a most complete and advantageous sudorific.

When the circulation of the blood is weak and languid, it will increase and restore it to proper
operation. The infusion, taken cold, is a good tonic in cases of constitutional debility and during
convalescence from acute diseases. It has been found to be valuable in scrofula, visceral obstructions,
stones, gravel, etc., but its virtues are even greater in its effects upon epilepsy, or falling sickness, and
fits.

Dr. O. P. Brown in The Complete Herbalist (1875): “I found after close investigation and elaborate
experiment that prepared in a certain way and compounded with Bone-set (Eupatroium perfoliatum),
Water pepper (Polygonum punctatum), Chamomile blossoms (Anthemis nobilis) in best whiskey has no
equal for the cure of fits, or falling sickness, or anything like fits; also for indigestion, dyspepsia and
Liver complaints of every degree. A more valuable plant is not found within the whole range of the

----- PAGE 54 -----
Herbal Pharmacopoeia.”
It is also an antidote to poke (Phytolacca americana).

Dose: 2 teaspoonfuls of the herb to 1 pint of boiling water. Drink cold 2 or 3 teaspoonfuls six times a
day. Of the tincture, 10-20 minims.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of entire fresh plant for ague (chronic), epilepsy, rhus poisoning.

----- PAGE 55 -----
BURDOCK
Archum lappa

COMMON NAMEs: Lappa, Lappa minor, thorny burr, beggar’s buttons, clothburr.

FEATURES: Naturalized in North America from Asia and Europe, this plant grows 2-5 feet; can be found
along roadsides and in all vacant lots. Hunters will find burdock burrs adhering to their clothes and their
game dogs. The stems are stout with wide spreading branches carrying alternately elongated heart-shaped
leaves. The purple flowers bloom in July and August, after which they dry out and the base becomes the
troublesome burr. The root, which should be dug in the autumn or early spring, is thick, brownish gray
externally, with white pith-like tissue inside. The root and seeds are slimy and have a sweetish taste, the
leaves and stems being bitter. Common burdock is sometimes planted in Japan, where it has been
improved by cultivation, for its enlarged parsniplike roots, which are eaten as a boiled vegetable.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, seed, leaves, stems, the whole herb.
SoLVENTs: Diluted alcohol, boiling water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diaphoretic, diuretic, alterative.

Uses: Herbalists all over the world use burdock. Such an effective blood purifying plant has earned the
unpretentious claims made for it. The root and seed of Arctium lappa make a soothing demulcent, tonic,
alterative; it slowly but steadily cleanses skin, soothes the kidneys, and relieves the lymphatics;
eliminates boils, carbuncles, canker sores, styes, felons, etc. Soothing to the mucous membrane throughout
the entire system, and is also used for gout, rheumatism, scrofula, syphilis, sciatica, gonorrhea, and kidney
diseases. It is best combined with more stimulating agents.

Tincture of burdock root (Arctium lappa), 10-20 drops

Tincture of goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis), 8-12 drops

Tincture of buchu (Barosma betulina), 10-15 drops

The above can be made into a herbal tea preparation, reducing the formula by one-fourth and using
ounces instead of drops. The leaves shredded fine in aged wine will help if bitten by a mad dog.
EXTERNALLY: The leaves will be found very useful in fever by bruising and applying to the forehead or to
the soles. For burns shred the bruised leaves fine and fold into a stiffly beaten egg white; it will relieve

----- PAGE 56 -----
the pain and hasten healing.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root for acne, bunion, Dupuytren’s contracture, eczema
serpeginosa, eruptions, glands (affections of), gonorrhea, gout, impotence, leukorrhea, phosphaturia,
rheumatism, ringworm, scrofula, sterility, ulcers, uterus (prolapsus of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: As in North America, herbs have several common names. Burdock is very popular
scientifically and as a home medicine; it is known as repeinik or lopuh, very close to the official Latin
name of /appa. Burdock roots contain 27—45 percent inulin, up to 12 percent protein, and oils and other
trace minerals. Therefore it is easy to understand why they consider food as medicine and medicine as
food. It is best to collect the roots of one- or two-year-old plants in the autumn. Folk medicine: The use
of burdock in Russia can be traced back many generations as both a table herb and a medicinal herb.
Especially valued as a diaphoretic for dropsy, gout, and rheumatism. Clinically: Used in the form of
extracts, ointments, tinctures, and oils for the same purposes that folk medicine has used it for generations.
Food: If you happen to see persons digging a hole in Russia it could very well be they are preparing a pit
for fish or game to be wrapped in burdock leaves (they do not use any added seasoning). A fire is made in
the pit, and when the ground is hot enough they take away the ash and charcoal, place the carefully
wrapped morsel in the bottom, and cover with the surrounding sides, which have reached a very high
temperature. In a short time they have a delicacy that barbecuing cannot equal. As a kitchen preparation
the roots are roasted and used for coffee; the fresh root is used in soup instead of potatoes, in pancakes,
and is fried as cutlets. Cut very fine and boiled with apple cider vinegar and yellow dock with sour
cream, they make a tasty and nutritious jam. Externally: From the bygone days burdock oil, called
repeinoe masio, has a reputation as a hair tonic to strengthen and encourage the growth of new hair. This
can occur if the hair follicles are just dormant and not completely destroyed. It usually takes six to eight
months for a noticeable change. Many conditions of eczema-type skin diseases are relieved after several
applications of burdock externally and taking it internally. Persistent black- (comedo) and whiteheads
(milia) are treated with a facial steam bath. Also as a poultice for boils.

----- PAGE 57 -----
CAPSICUM

Capsicum minimum, C. frutescens

COMMON NAMES: Cayenne, red pepper, bird pepper, African pepper.

FEATURES: This plant is indigenous to Asia, Africa, and the parts of the United States beyond the southern
line of Tennessee. The African bird pepper is the purest and the best known medically. It is a small,
oblong, scarlet, membranous pod, divided internally into two or three cells containing numerous flat,
white, reniform seeds. It has no odor; its taste is hot and acrid.

SOLVENTS: 98 percent alcohol, considerable extent vinegar, boiling water.
MEDICINAL PART: Fruit
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, tonic, carminative, diaphoretic, rubefacient, condiment.

Usss: The stimulating effect of capsicum is the source of its internal effectiveness. Capsicum taken with
burdock, goldenseal, ginger, slippery elm, etc., will soon diffuse itself throughout the whole system,
equalizing the circulation in all diseases caused by obstruction of circulation. Unlike most of the
stimulants of allopathy, it is not narcotic.

It acts mainly on the circulation, having immediate effect on the heart and then extending to the
capillaries, toning the circulation without increasing the pulse.

Remember that it is an agent that is seldom used alone, as by itself it is soon extinguished. Cayenne is
useful in coughs, torpor of the kidneys, pneumonia, pleurisy, typhoid fever, and for cramps and pains in
the stomach and bowels causing perstaltic action of the parts previously contracted. Dr. R. Swinburne
Clymer has called it “the only natural stimulant worthwhile considering in diarrhea and dysentery with
bloody mucus stools and offensive breath.” Bleeding of the lungs is easily checked by the use of cayenne
and a vapour bath. By this method, circulation is promoted through the body, diminishing pressure on the
lungs and thus affording an opportunity for a coagulum to form around ruptured vessels. The unpleasant
feeling of indigestion or heartburn felt by some people after taking cayenne capsules or tablets will
disappear if followed by a cup of hot herb tea. Cayenne is usually not the cause of the unpleasantness. The
constitution, with all of its constructive ability, struggles against disease and occasions the unpleasant
feelings, and it is by this power of reaction that disease is overcome. Capsicum is not a cure-all and we
do not recommend its continual use (except for cooking) beyond the obtainable results.

EXTERNALLY: As a liniment for sprains, bruises, rheumatism, and neuralgia:

----- PAGE 58 -----
Tincture of capsicum, 2 fluidounce

Fluid extract of lobelia (Lobelia inflata), 2 fluidounce
Oil of wormwood (Artemisia obsinthiura), | fluidram
Oil of rosemary, | fluidram

Oil of spearment, | fluidram

According to the analysis in Back to Eden, by J. Kloss, capsicum contains the following: albumin,
pectin, a peculiar gum, starch, carbonate of lime, sesquioxide of iron, phosphate of potash, alum,
magnesia, and a reddish kind of oil.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the dried pods for amaurosis, asthma, brain (irritation of), delirium
tremens, cough, diarrhea, diphtheria, dysentery, ear affections, glandular swellings, hemorrhoids,
headache, heartburn, hernia, homesickness, intermittents, lungs (affections of), measles, mouth (ulcers in),
neuralgia, nose (affections of), obesity, esophagus (stricture of), paralysis, pleuro-pneumonia, pregnancy
(disorders of), rectum (diseases of), rheumatic gout, rheumatism, sciatica, scrofula, seasickness,
stomatitis, throat (sore), tongue (paralysis of), trachea (tickling in), urine (disorders of), whopping cough,
yellow fever.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Krasny peretz, kayansky peretz (red pepper) is common home medicine in many
families. Besides its use as a hot seasoning it is always handy as nastoika in vodka (one or two pods ina
bottle of vodka). Those tolerant of the kick of vodka spiked with the hot peretz drink it by the
wineglassful. Uses: Diaphoretic for colds, appetizer, rheumatism, and stomach disorders. Externally:
Nastoika is used as a poultice and liniment with other compounds. Clinically: There is a warning that
dose should not exceed 1-2 grains at a time, as it can produce a burning sensation in the stomach, and
other disorders, with an undesirable effect on the heart. The oil is clinically used; powder almost always
in composition with other herbals.

----- PAGE 59 -----
CASTOR BEAN

Ricinus communis

COMMON NAMES: Castor oil, palma christe (from supposed shape of leaves resembling Christ’s hand).

FEATURES: The variety is variable as to continent and conditions. In the United States the hollow stems
are tall, with purplish bloom above, bearing bluish green leaves that are one or two feet broad; flowers in
July; capsule expelling the variously tinted, shining bean. The plant is decorative and is regarded as a
mosquito repellent if planted in presumable direction of entry. Native to India, but cultivated extensively
in the United States.

MEDICINAL PARTs: The bean; the fixed oil, expressed from the seeds. The first settlers make a traditional
laxative from it; Europeans and Native Americans found it useful.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Cathartic, purgative.

Usrs: Expect purging 4 to 6 hours after 1 tablespoonful, for adults, or 1 teaspoonful, for children, has
been taken, followed by a sedative effect on the intestines. The mildness of action is acceptable for young
children and childbearing women in cases of constipation, colic, diarrhea due to slow digestion, and
tapeworms and lumbricoid worms.

Not recommended for dyspeptics, where contraindicated, as it is oppressive to the digestive powers. If
the taste is disagreeable, flavor with equal parts of oil and either heavy sarsaparilla, peppermint, or
cinnamon syrup, and mix thoroughly. To relieve the lower bowel an injection of 4 tablespoonfuls is
thoroughly mixed with a mucilage of slippery elm bark.

CAUTION: It is important to note that according to M. L. Fernald, the large and handsome seeds are
dangerously poisonous to eat.

EXTERNALLY: For aid in ringworm, itch, and cutaneous complaints if applied assiduously. The leaves are
said to be galactagogic when applied to the breast. Canary Island women have used the leaves to increase
their secretion of milk for centuries.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Albuminuria, aphthae, cholera, cholera infantum, diarrhea, duodenum (catarrh
of), dysentery, eruptions, gangrene, gastroenteritis, jaundice, lactation, peritonitis.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Castor oil has many uses in Russia and is know as kastorka. Used industrially for
lubricating oil in commercial equipment and airplanes, as it does not freeze in the severe Russian climate.

----- PAGE 60 -----
They use the stems in the textile industry, and oil for paints and cosmetics. Agro-technology has given
deserved attention to commercial cultivation. Depending on climate and soil they harvest 500—2,500
pounds of beans per acre. Folk medicine: As a laxative, and for gynecology, ulcers, eye treatment, and
hair-restoring preparations.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Castor Oil is used as a laxative in many varieties. One locally
named and easy-to-remember variety is called “Erand.” Uses: In general practice for constipation,
enteritis, peritonitis, dysentery, spasmodic diseases of the bowels, inflammatory disorders of the
urogential organs, gonorrhea, stricture of urethra, milk fever, amenorrhea, asthma, dropsy. The juice of the
leaves is a strong emetic and is very serviceable in cases of narcotic poisoning. Decoction of the leaves:
purgative, lactagogue, emmenagogue. The root bark: strong purgative. The seed contains the alkaloid
ricinine; also ricin, a potent vegetable toxin. This stays in the oil cake after the oil is extracted. The castor
oil plant is given in combination with carbonate of potash; if not available the kernels without the embryo
are boiled in milk and water and given for lumbago, rheumatism, and sciatica. Caution: When the patient
cannot strain at stool as in colitis, prolapsus, and weakened structural tissue, the oil is given in very small
doses. Can be used as an enema with soapsuds and water. Externally: Poultice of the leaves for boils and
swellings, also applied over the breasts of nursing mothers as a lactagogue, and over inflamed breasts
during lactation to soften the mammary glands. To relieve flatulence or to promote menstruation, cover the
abdomen with the boiled leaf poultice, and stay warm. The oil is locally applied in conjunctivitis.

----- PAGE 61 -----
CATNIP

Nepeta cataria

COMMON NAMES: Catnip, nep, catmint, cat’s wort.

FEATURES: This naturalized perennial herb is found in all parts of the United States. The square, erect,
branching stems are covered with fine whitish hairs; leaves 1—2’4 inches long with heart-shaped or
oblong pointed apex, the top side green with grayish green and whitish hairs underneath. Flowering in
June to September, with whitish corolla, purple-dotted, sectioned lips, and lobes making up the
conformation of the bloom. Faintly minty aroma, with bitter taste.

SoLVENTs: Diluted alcohol, boiling water.
MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Carminative, stimulant, tonic, diaphoretic, emmenagogue, antispasmodic,
aphrodisiac (cats).

Uses: When most of us think of catnip, we unfortunately associate it only with the cat family. Its uses are
many, and mild in the proper amounts, for both infants and adults. When troubled with flatulence and
digestive pains, the American physio-medical practice recommends “blood warm bowel injection of the
infusion for babies with intestinal flatulence.” All herbalists find catnip useful for feverish colds. It will
produce perspiration without increasing temperature, and induces sleep. It has proved efficacious in
nervous headache and for allaying hysteria, insanity, and other forms of nervous diseases of an acute
character, without any withdrawal effect when it is discontinued.

Equal parts of catnip and saffron are excellent in scarlet fever, smallpox, colds, etc. The fresh
expressed juice of the green herb taken in tablespoonful amounts three times a day will encourage
suppressed menstruation.

Due to its transient action, catnip is more serviceable in tea form. Always steep the herb in a closed
container, never boil.

Dose: | ounce catnip to | pint of boiling water. Adults, 2—3 tablespoonfuls; children, 2—3 teaspoonfuls,

----- PAGE 62 -----
frequently, for the above mentioned. When taken in very large doses when warm, it frequently causes

emesis.

EXTERNALLY: Culpeper states the green herb bruised and applied to the rectum for 2—3 hours eases the
pain of hemorrhoids. The juice made into an ointment is effective for the same purpose. There is an old
saying that if the root be chewed it will make the most quiet person fierce and quarrelsome.

----- PAGE 63 -----
CELANDINE

Chelidonium majus

COMMON NAMES: Garden celandine, greater celandine, tetterwort, chelidonium.
CAUTION: Large doses are poisonous.

FEATURES: Celandine is a pale green, evergreen perennial with stems 1—2 feet in height; leaves round and
smooth, 1-2 inches long; the flowers are bright yellow, umbellate, on long, often hairy, stocks.

Indigenous to Europe and naturalized in the United States. It grows wild along fences, roadsides, and in
waste places, etc., flowering from May to October. When the plant is cut or wounded a noticeable,
unpleasant yellow sap flows out; it is of offensive odor, nauseous, and bitter tasting with a biting
sensation when put to the mouth.

The fresh reddish brown root is the part most used; drying diminishes its activity.

Celandine is often considered the same as lesser celandine, which is pilewort; they are different
medicinally and botanically.

SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.
MEDICINAL PARTS: Herb, root.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, cathartic, diuretic, diaphoretic, expectorant, purgative, vulnerary.

Uses: It is used internally in decoctions or tinctures for hepatic affections or liver complaints, and has a
special influence on the spleen. It is often used in dropsy and skin complaints.

Culpeper knew of its virtues long ago, and we quote: “The herb or root boiled in white wine and drunk,
a few aniseeds being boiled therewith, openeth obstructions of the liver and gall, helpeth the yellow
jaundice.”

Celandine has had much recognition. The herbalist of ancient times cleansed the eyes of film and
cloudiness that darkened the sight with the juice of this plant diluted with breast milk. Of the powdered
root, 4-1 dram; of the fresh juice, 20-40 drops (in some bland liquid); of the extract, 5—10 drops.

EXTERNALLY: Application for progressive spreading ulcers, malignant running sores, and other spreading
skin conditions such as tetters, ringworm, or cancers effects speedy recovery if used daily. The fresh juice

----- PAGE 64 -----
rubbed on warts will take them away. If persons of sensitive skin notice itching, equalize the area with
diluted vinegar and water.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Antrum of Highmore (inflammation of), cancer, chest (affections of), chorea,
constipation, cough, diarrhea, dyspepsia, gallstones, gonorrhea, hemoptysis, hemorrhoids, headache,
influenza, jaundice, lachrymal fistula, laryngismus, liver (affections of), nephritis, neuralgia, nosebleed,
pleurodynia, pneumonia, rheumatism, scald-head, stiff neck, taste (altered), tumors, warts, whooping
cough, yawning.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Chistotel bolshoy (large clean body)—Chelidonium majus. Clinically the fresh
extract and compound complex is used in many cases of spasmodic condition involving the liver, and
closely associated with gallbladder, kidney, and bladder. For domestic use the above administration
should be in the hands of medical practitioners or carefully trained persons. Chelidonium is poisonous
and cannot be eaten by animals. Folk medicine: The effects of Chelidonium seem to be universal in the
treatment of liver, gallbladder, kidney, and bladder. The time-honored properties of this herb prompt use
for malignant swellings and stomach conditions, used in the form of tea. Externally: The fresh leaves and
stems have a milky juice that quickly turns orange-red when exposed to air. This iodine-colored fluid can
burn the skin, causing blisters that are very painful. Experimental treatments have shown excellent results
for stopping malignant swellings, and it is effective in tuberculosis, especially skin tuberculosis. For
small cuts, ulcers, and warts a special liniment or fresh juice can be used if very careful.

----- PAGE 65 -----
CENTAURY

Centaurium erytraea

COMMON NAMES: Rose pink, bitter bloom, bitter clover.

FEATURES: This plant is common to most parts of the United States. There are many species and colors;
the English distinguish between them by using the red centaury in diseases of the blood, the yellow in
choleric diseases, and the white in those of phlegm and water. Variety is not limited only to color; the
centaury family will grow in many soil conditions—moist meadows, among high grass, on the prairies,
and in damp ditch soil. It flowers from June to September and is best gathered at this time. The flowers
close at night, and the American variety is considered preferable to the European.

SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, febrifuge, diaphoretic.

Uses: Excellent old American remedy, bitter tonic, preventive in all periodic febrile diseases, dyspepsia,
and convalescence from fevers; it strengthens the stomach and promotes digestion. An aid to rheumatic
and all joint pains. The following in a warm infusion is a domestic remedy for expelling worms and to
restore the menstrual secretions: of the powder, %2—1 dram; of the extract, 2—6 grains.

The loose dried herb, 1 teaspoonful to 1 cup of boiling water. Although bitter, this effective herb is a
good accompaniment to all herbal teas and preparations. For taste, combine with other herbs such as
anise, cardamom, peppermint, ginger, fennel, etc.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Used as tincture of root in cases as follows: coryza, diarrhea, inflammation of
the eyes, fever, homesickness, influenza intermittents, vanishing of sight.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Russian centaury, Centaurium erytraea, called “a thousand golden leaves” and
many other beautiful names. Official medicine very often prescribes centaury alone, but also with other
herbal preparations. Folk medicine: Centaury tea and a home extract, usually prepared with vodka, is
given in cases of high blood pressure and liver and gallbladder malfunctions. The bitter tonic is antiseptic
in stomach sickness, working with nature without destroying the necessary secretions that stimulate
desirable digestion and appetite. The parasitic tapeworm cannot maintain its circlet of hooks and suckers,

----- PAGE 66 -----
which enable it to gain livelihood in the mucous membrane of the intestines of its host, when centaury is
taken persistently.

----- PAGE 67 -----
CHAGA

Inonotus obliquus

COMMON NAMES: Chaga, birch mushroom.

FEATURES: In North America and Canada the birch is well known for its beauty alone. Its medical
purpose is served by a mushroom, or fungus-type growth, found in the older trees (also grows on beech
and other trees). This growth is rough, dry, porous, crusty, with deeply cut and crooked separations having
the appearance on the outside of dull charred wood. The surface is almost black in color. When this
projection is sawed off the tree it is as if the tree were having cosmetic surgery or the removal of an out-
ofcontrol wart. The matured and most desired chaga is 30-40 centimeters wide, 10—15 centimeters thick,
and may be 4-5 feet long, weighing 4-5 pounds. There are three layers: (1) the outside, rough with some
old bark and possibly twigs, must be cleaned; (2) the side, very close to the tree trunk, must be cut off;
and (3) the middle part, granulated and not spoiled, which is the part to use. It can be collected at any time
of the year.

Always keep chaga in a dry and dark place (dark covered jar) as dampness and strong light dissipate
its power.

MEDICINAL PART: Inside granulated parts of the three layers.
SOLVENTS: Boiled (not boiling) water, alcohol, vodka.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, blood purifying, anodyne, restorative.

Usss: It is well known that the Native Americans knew all plants and how they were best used—for food,
medicine, or if they be poisonous. In Anglo-American literature we know that treatments of many
sicknesses were kept as tribal knowledge. We know they used the properties of many fungi, but from our
research work we cannot find a definite record of chaga being identified; we are poorly informed.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The existence of chaga and its uses are mentioned in Russian literature and in such
sources as monographs, medical books, encyclopedias, and popular herbal books.

Folk medicine of European Russia and Siberia gives nearly unlimited credit to chaga, which for
generations has been thought of as magical. Chaga has a long list of uses by persons of experience and
faith in herbal folk medicine. It was used for all stomach complaints—gastritis, stomach pain, ulcers—
and for cancer, tuberculosis of the bones, and glandular organs where operations were not possible due to

----- PAGE 68 -----
the network of blood vessels.

While folk medicine may be unrestrained in its commendation of chaga, science is reserved and
cautious. From year to year scientific medical literature carefully gives it more credence. The apparent
value of this plant has warranted commitments to further research and to laboratory and clinical tests.

Since 1955 the Medical Academy of Science in Moscow has promoted chaga for clinical and domestic
medicine, encouraged it commercially, and collected it for medical use. In an atlas of medical plants
published in Moscow (Tzitzin 1963), chaga is carefully recommended but definitely approved for
administration as a tea, extract, or nastoika (chaga in vodka) for malignancies. It is recommended in
cases where the patient cannot undergo surgery or radiotherapy. Chaga is recognized as a very old folk
medicine for stomach gastritis and ulcers, and especially for cancer, tuberculosis, or conditions of
malignancy unfavorable to surgery.

It should be understood that not all advanced forms of cancer can be controlled, but chaga will reduce
pain, give comfort, and stop or slow growths. Some early and less-advanced cases of cancer are arrested,
and spreading may be prevented. In swelling of the lower bowel, chaga decoctions are prepared for
colonics in addition to oral medication.

Diet is very definitely restricted to milk products and vegetables—no meat, conserves, sausages, or
strong spices (Saratov University 1932). Chaga is blood purifying and regenerates deteriorated organs
and glands, Medical Encyclopedia (Moscow 1965). Time must be given for chaga to work.
Recommended treatment is for three to five months at seven-to-ten-day intervals. Domestic use: The bark
and middle portion, which have been carefully separated and cleaned, must be crushed or shredded, then
soaked in warm water (not over 50° Fahrenheit). When preparing chaga think of it as yeast, water too hot
will kill the living fungus. For 1 part of crushed chaga pour over 5 parts of boiled (not boiling) water, let
stand covered 48 hours, strain, pour in more boiled (not boiling) water, perhaps twice as much, then drink
three cups a day thirty minutes before each meal.

----- PAGE 69 -----
CHAMOMILE

Chamaemelum nobile

COMMON NAMES: German chamomile, garden chamomile, ground apple, pinheads.

FEATURES: The favored chamomile comes from southern Europe and is officially known as Anthemis
nobilis (Roman chamomile), possessing medicinal qualities superior to ours.

This yellow or whitish, small, daisylike perennial, with its strong fibrous root and pale green, thread-
shaped leaflets, has a very bitter taste, with the strong aromatic smell of the apple. It is interesting to note
that the name chamomile is derived from the Greek, meaning “ground apple.”

MEDICINAL PARTS: Flowers, herb.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Stomachic, antispasmodic, tonic stimulant (volatile oil), carminative, diaphoretic,
nervine, emmenagogue, sedative.

Uses: Chamomile is one of the widely known herbs. Perhaps its livelihood is established through its
early use in childhood ailments such as colds, infantile convulsions, stomach pains, colic, earache,
restlessness, measles, etc. If children were treated with chamomile today, we might have fewer of the
accumulative diseases that trouble us in later years.

When given warm, chamomile will favor perspiration and soften the skin. The cold infusion acts as a
tonic and is more suitable for stomach difficulties, and as a drink during convalescence from febrile
disease, dyspepsia, all causes of weak or irritable stomach, intermittent and typhoid fever. Take 2—3
tablespoonfuls, or cupfuls, adjusted according to age, two or three times a day.

Syrup made of the juice of chamomile, using the white flowers (fresh or dried) with a good white wine,
is a tonic for jaundice and dropsy. Old-fashioned but worth remembering for hysterical and nervous
affections in women, will promote menstrual flow, relieve dysmenorrhic spasms, and promote the menses
when delay is due to exposure to colds; for uterine spasms or nervous tension, bilious headache, and aid
to digestion. A specific for uterus pains of mother at nursing time.

EXTERNALLY: The flower of chamomile, beaten and made into oil, will comfort pain of liver and spleen;
at the same time drink the tea of the fresh or dried herb. Culpeper states: “A stone that hath been taken out
of the body of man, being wrapped in Chamomile, will in time dissolve, and ina little too.”

----- PAGE 70 -----
The flowers combined with crushed poppy head make a good poultice for allaying pains when other
means have failed. As a lotion it is also excellent for external application in toothache, earache,
neuralgia, etc.

A poultice of chamomile will often prevent gangrene and remove it when present. For sprains and
bruises, the herb bruised and moistened with vinegar is excellent. It may be made up with soapwort
(Saponaria) into shampoo, especially for keeping fair hair light and alive.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Acidity, anger, asthma (from anger), blepharospasm, catarrh, coffee (effects
of), colic, convulsions, cough, cramp, croup, dentition, diarrhea, dysmenorrhea, dyspepsia, earache, eyes
(blepharitis, ophthalmia), eructations erysipelas, excitement, excoriation, fainting fits, fevers, flatulence,
flatulent colic, gout, gum rash, headache, hernia, hysterical joint, influenza, jaundice, lienteria, labor
(disorders of, after-pains), mastitis, menstruation (disordered), miliary eruption, milk fever, miscarriage,
mumps, neuralgia, parotitis, perichondritis, peritonitis, pregnancy (disorders of), red-gum, rheumatism,
salivation (nocturnal), sciatica, screaming, sensitiveness, spasms, speech (affections of), toothache,
ulcers, uterus (disease of), waking (screaming on), whooping cough.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russia chamomile has the tender-sounding name of romashka. The demand is so
great that supplements are imported from Europe. Details on how to plant, cultivate, and prepare for
shipment have been determined. They estimate that one acre can yield 500—1,000 pounds of dried
romashka. The North American market depends on imports from Europe, and for the last decade the
demand has exceeded the supply. Chamomile damasky, or Persian chamomile, is highly praised. Uses:
No family can do without this simple aromatic home medicine. It is used as a tea from the cradle to the
grave for colds, stomach trouble, anemia, gargle, sedative, nervine, calming, colitis, eczema, and
antiseptic for all inflammations. Clinically: Widely used as oil extract in compositions.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: The rhythmic babunah or babuni-kephul is India’s local name.
Indian chamomile grows wild, and they consider the herb second-best to the European imported flower.
Uses: India’s knowledge finds extensive use for the popular miniature, daisylike flower. As a
carminative, stimulant, emmenagogue, diaphoretic, attenuation, discutient. Special interest is given to
chamomile for uterine reflex disturbance of women. Also for dyspepsia, flatulent colic, fever,
menstruation disorder, hysteria, and conditional debility. Popular as a children’s remedy for nervine and
sedative, tonic, stomach disorders, earache, neuralgia pain, convulsion, and teething. A weak infusion is a
tonic and febrifuge. Strong warm infusion as an emetic and for periodic headaches. Dose of the flower
oil, 1-3 drops for flatulence and colic. Externally: The oil is especially helpful applied to rheumatic
joint pain.

----- PAGE 71 -----
CHERRY

Prunus virginiana

COMMON NAMES: Wild black cherry, chokecherry.

FEATURES: This large fruit tree is native to North America and is found in Canada, Florida, Minnesota,
Nebraska, Kansas, Louisiana, Texas.

The outside bark is blackish and rugged. The young branches are smooth, red or purplish; flowers
appear after the leaves in May and June, followed by the delicious cherry in August. The bark has a
distinct aromatic odor resembling bitter almond when macerated in water; the taste is astringent and
agreeably bitter. The young, thin bark is the best; very large or small branches should be rejected. Stem
bark is collected in the autumn and carefully dried; sloughing dead tissue, if present, should be removed.
Will keep well in tightly closed container ina dark place.

SOLVENT: Hot or cold water.
MEDICINAL PART: Young thin bark.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Mild tonic, soothing astringent, sedative, pectoral.

Uses: Wild cherry bark is extensively used in cough medicines as a vehicle base. This agent is useful in
many other classes of disease. For diarrhea of children it is excellent in the form of syrup and may be
pleasantly combined with neutralizing cordial; indigestion caused by lack of stomach tone will be greatly
relieved. Will relieve cough, bronchitis, scrofula, heart palpitation (should not be used in dry cough),
dyspepsia, hectic fever, debility of protracted and enfeebled cases of congestion in the throat and chest. It
contains a small amount of hydrocyanic acid. The cherry contains malic acid and is high in life-giving
properties.

Dose: 15 drops in water. Cherry bark will dissolve kidney and bladder stones but should be combined
with other herbs and administered carefully and over a period of several months; when taken too fast the
stones will be expelled without being softened.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Cold infusion or tincture of inner bark; solution of concentrated resinous
extract, prunin for acidity, anorexia, dyspepsia, heart (weakness of, hypertrophy of, irritable), pyrosis.

----- PAGE 72 -----
CHESTNUT

Castanea dentata

COMMON NAMES: American chestnut, Spanish chestnut, sweet chestnut.

FEATURES: The stately chestnut tree grows in North America, western Asia, and southern Europe. The
species is usually self-sterile, requiring more than one tree for the production of chestnuts. The flowers
consist of long catkins that may contain the female, or fruit-bearing, organs at their base, or may be purely
male.

If the female flowers are fertilized they develop spiny burrs containing 1—5 one-seeded nuts. The
leaves are dark green above, light beneath; slightly broken, folded, or matted together; with a light odor
and an astringent taste. The chestnut is low in protein, high in carbohydrates and starch; contains minerals
such as phosphate of potash, magnesia, some sodium, and iron.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, inner bark.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Mild sedative, astringent, tonic.

Uses: Culpeper said the inner skin that contains the nut “is of so binding a quality that a scruple of it being
taken by a man or ten grains by a child, soon stops any flux whatsoever.”

The green or dried leaves can be used, and it is considered a specific for whooping cough or nagging
distressing coughs, controlling the paroxysm; and in frequent hiccups and other irritable and excitable
conditions of the respiratory organs. Fevers, ague respond to the soothing of the mucous surfaces and the
nervous system; acts as an antispasmodic. Lobelia inflata (lobelia), and Caulophyllum thalictroides
(blue cohosh) are most successfully combined for the above mentioned.

Dose: | ounce to | pint of boiling water, infused for 15 minutes. A wineglassful three times a day,
children half that amount. The fluid extract is convenient: dose 10 drops three times a day; 5 drops for
children.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of leaves gathered in summer for diarrhea, whooping cough.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Konsky cashtan (horse chestnut) does not grow wild but has long been cultivated
in European Russia, middle Asia, and Caucasia. Folk medicine: It is valued and used for arthritis,
rheumatism, female bleeding, hemorrhoids, and chronic inflammation of the intestines. Clinically:
Extracts used for bleeding hemorrhoids, varicose veins, arteriosclerosis.

CAUTION: In recent years, Castanea dentata has been extensively damaged by an imported blight. Do not
use the now more commonly found horse chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum), which has a bitter and
mildly poisonous fruit.

----- PAGE 73 -----
CHICKWEED

Stellaria media

COMMON NAMES: Stitchwort, scarwort, satin flower, adder’s mouth, starweed.

FEATURES: There are about twenty-five species native and naturalized on the American continent. The
Native Americans used native chickweed for many years but also adopted naturalized species. It is
common in Europe and America, growing in fields and around dwellings, in moist shady places. The stem
is weak and straggling, freely branched; there is a line of white hairs along one side only, changing
direction at each pair of leaves. The very small white flowers bloom from the beginning of spring until
autumn. Taste slightly salty. The seeds are eaten by poultry and birds.

SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
MEDICINAL PART: Whole herb.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Demulcent, emollient, pectoral, refrigerant.

Usrs: Many areas of internal inflammation are soothed and healed by this so-called troublesome garden
weed. The uses are many, from salad greens to preparations of poultices, fomentations, and salves from
fresh, dried, or powdered herb.

This herb is used for liver ailments (internally and externally), bronchitis, pleurisy, coughs, colds,
hoarseness, rheumatism, inflammation or weakness of the bowels and stomach, lungs, bronchial tubes,
scurvy, kidney trouble, to ease hemorrhoids; to release the small vessels that transmit blood from the liver
into the hepatic veins, making them more pliable. This so-called common plant could be included among
the all-purpose herbals.

Dose: | ounce of chickweed to 1% pints of water, simmered down to | pint. A wineglassful every 2-3
hours. Use externally as a poultice for inflamed surfaces, boils, and skin eruptions.

EXTERNALLY: Effective for all swellings, redness of face, weals, scabs, boils, burns, inflamed or sore
eyes (apply on cotton pads over closed eyes), erysipelas, tumors, hemorrhoids, cancer-swollen testes,
ulcerated throat and mouth. For broken or unbroken skin conditions, chickweed is an effective medicine.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Gout, liver (inflammation of), rheumatism, psoriasis.

----- PAGE 74 -----
CLEAVERS

Galium aparine

COMMON NAMES: Goose grass, catchstraw, bedstraw.

FEATURES: Common to Europe and the United States, growing in cultivated grounds, moist thickets, and
along river banks; flowering from June to September; stems rough and weak but very lengthy, with little
prickly hooks and many side branches, always in pairs; leaves small, 6-9 on the round stem, topped with
very small white flowers with petals arranged like a Maltese cross. Medicinally the green herb may be
used as well as the dry. The root is a permanent red dye.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENT: Water (do not boil).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, tonic, refrigerant, alterative, aperient.

Uses: Notably one of our best-known herbs for obstructions of the urinary organs, especially when
combined with broom, uva-ursi, buchu, and marshmallow. It is particularly useful for stones or gravel
and seems to soften and reduce the calculus so it can be eliminated without impeding the bowels.

For children or adults suffering from scalding urine it is invaluable, and the refrigerant qualities are
soothing in cases of scarlet fever, measles, and all acute diseases. In Vitalogy (1925) Drs. Wood and
Ruddock say: “The cold infusion will remove freckles when it is drunk two or three times a day, for two
or three months and the parts frequently washed with it, and has recently been used with decided success
in treating children for bed wetting, it should be drunk three times a day.”

Claudia V. James (1963) gives us another use: “The juice mixed with oatmeal to the consistency of a
poultice and applied over an indolent tumour three times a day, keepng the bowels open and taking a
teaspoonful of the juice every morning, will often drive the tumour away in a few days. It is one of the
best known herbs for reducing.”

For weight loss, 4 cup of the fresh or dried herb in 4 pint of boiling water, one-third of the amount

----- PAGE 75 -----
taken three times a day.

EXTERNALLY: Cleavers may be used in all acute diseases and deep perplexing psoriasis, eczema, cancer,
scrofula, ulcers, and all skin trouble. An infusion is prepared by macerating 1’ ounces of the herb in 1
pint of warm water for 2 hours.

Dose: 2-4 ounces given three or four times a day cold; may be sweetened with honey or brown sugar. Of
the tincture, 20-40 drops in water three or four times a day.

----- PAGE 76 -----
COLTSFOOT
Tussilago far fara

SY
ATES

COMMON NAMES: Coughwort, horse hoof, bull’s foot, foal’s foot, ginger root.

FEATURES: Naturalized in the United States from Europe, Siberia, and East Indies. Although found
growing in many areas, from the seashores to elevations of nearly 8,000 feet, coltsfoot prefers certain
clay soils. This low succulent perennial has smooth green leaves, with a white and cottony underside, that
appear in March. They do not appear until the large daisy-type, bright yellow flower has withered; they
are 5—8 inches long and like a colt’s foot in shape.

The stem is covered with a loose cottony down. The whole plant is used, more especially the leaves,
and they should be collected when they have almost reached maturity. Collect the root after the fullness of
the leaves, the flowers as soon as they open. When dried, all three have a faintly herbaceous, bitter taste.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENTs: Water, diluted alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Emollient, demulcent, expectorant, slight tonic, pectoral.

Uses: For congestion of the pulmonary system, especially if inclined to consumption. For these symptoms
horehound, ground ivy, marshmallow, and elder flower have been successfully combined with coltsfoot,
making up half of the compound. However, the juice of coltsfoot by itself is effective in troublesome
coughs. The botanical name Tussilago means “cough dispeller”; this includes coughs, asthma, whooping
cough—in short, a chest and lung expectorant.

Dose: Steep | teaspoonful of the leaves in 1 cup of boiling water for 2 hour; drink ‘4 cupful at bedtime,
hot or cold, or a mouthful three times a day, or administer according to case, up to 2 cupfuls daily. Of the
tincture, 1—2 fluidrams.

EXTERNALLY: The leaves, bruised or steeped in hot water, may be applied to the chest for relieving fever,
feebleness, and easing the heart, also for open wounds to draw out the injurious matter. Use as a poultice
in scrofulous tumors. For sore feet, external bruises, fevered swelling, and skin irritations, apply fresh
and often.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the whole plant for corpulence, plethora.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Mat i matcheha (mother and stepmother) is Russia’s name for coltsfoot. Folk
medicine: The leaves and flowers are first-aid home treatment for colds, acute and chronic lung

----- PAGE 77 -----
infections.

----- PAGE 78 -----
COMFREY
Symphytum officinale

COMMON NAMES: Gum plant, healing herb, knit bone, nipbone.

FEATURES: The genus includes some twenty-five species of herbs native to Europe, Asia Minor, Siberia,
and Iran. The common comfey is naturalized in much of North America. Comfrey is a perennial with a
stout spreading root, brownish black and wrinkled; the stem about 3 feet high; and large, coarsely hairy,
egg- or lance-shaped leaves with wavy edges.

The purplish-blue, yellow, white, or red tubular flowers, less than 1 inch long, are borne in coiled
clusters. They have five stamens; the fruit consists of four shiny brown to black nutlets that can be seen in
August. It flowers in May and June and grows by riversides and in most moist places. The root contains a
large amount of mucilage and is rich in easily assimilated organic calcium.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, leaves.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Demulcent, astringent.

Use: Native Americans discovered the medical value of comfrey and used it with many other naturalized
plants. When internal functions are weakened or injured to the degree of showing bloody discharge,
whether in sputum, urine, or bowels, comfey will prevent serious complications by healing the tissue and
easing the pain of the involved areas of bones, tendons, ruptured lungs, and other delicate cells.

Comfrey has long been accepted as being of great value as a soothing demulcent, a general stimulant to
the mucous membrane of the respiratory organs, and to help increase expectoration, thus aiding the
bronchial tubes.

A syrup made of equal parts of comfey and elecampane roots is a most valuable agent for coughs,
consumption, and all affections of the lungs. In Nature's Healing Agents S. Clymer (1963) tells us of:
“numerous uncontradicted reports of lung cancer cured where all other means have failed and in which
the sole treatment consisted of infusion made from the whole green plant and, even in some instances, of
infusion made from the powder of entire plant.”

For the purpose of cleansing the entire system of impurities and establishing a normal condition,

----- PAGE 79 -----
comfrey is useful in arthritis, gallstones, stomach conditions, asthma, ulcerated tonsils, in some cases of
various forms of cancer, ulceration of the kidney, scrofula, anemia, dysentery, diarrhea, leukorrhea, and
female debility.

Dose: The entire fresh or powdered plant, | teaspoonful to 1 cup of boiling water, steeped for 4 hour,
taken four times daily, 1 cup a day. Of the tincture, 5—20 drops four times daily, by prescription.

EXTERNALLY: A poultice of the fresh or dried leaves or powder for ruptures, sore breasts, fresh wounds,
ulcers, swellings, burns, or bruises.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh rootstock collected before flowering and in autumn. Tincture
of fresh plant. Homoeopaths highly praised Symphytum and used it in many cases, for abscess, backache
(from sexual excess), bone (cancer of, injuries of), breast (sore), eye (pains in, injuries of), fractures,
glands (enlarged), gunshot wounds, hernia, menses (arrested), peritoneum (sensitive, painful), psoas
abscess, sexual excess (effect of), sprains, wounds.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russia comfrey, known as okopnik, is used less than it is abroad. In medicine
they consider an excess to be poisonous. However, they do admit that scientific and clinical analysis is
not complete. Folk medicine: Has a wide and varied reputation. They use the fresh or dried roots and
rhizomes in decoctions and teas as an astringent. In cases of internal and external bleeding, broken bones,
female complaints, ulcers, wounds, and many of the above mentioned.

----- PAGE 80 -----
COUCH GRASS

Agropyron repens

COMMON NAMES: Quack grass, dog grass, quick grass, durfa grass, twitch grass.

FEATURES: Known to farmers in Europe and North America as a pest. The spikes resemble wheat or rye
when in bloom, reaching heights of 1—3 feet; the pale yellow, smooth rootstock is long and trailing, with
each joint sending forth a shoot that becomes a new plant. It should be gathered in the spring and carefully
cleaned and dried. Culpeper says an acre of couch grass is worth ten acres of carrots.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Rootstock, rhizome.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, aperient, demulcent.

Uses: Couch grass is recommended by Dr. Samuel Thompson for lessening the frequency and pain in
cases of excessive irritation of the bladder from any cause. It is a botanical for general catarrhal
treatment. The troublesome plant has been used by famous herbalists for gout, enlarged prostate gland
(with chronic gonorrhea), purulent cystitis, incipient nephritis. Some physicians trust its timely use in
dissolving small calculi. This being so, it is an herb to remember for all rheumatic and jaundice sufferers.
The accepted administration is in an infusion of 1 ounce of couch grass to 1 pint of boiling water, steeped
20 minutes and given in wineglassful doses every 2 hours. Or a decoction of the root made by boiling 1
ounce of the herb in | pint of water until reduced to % pint, 10-20 drops in water two or more times a
day.
Dr. Clymer gives the following from Nature s Healing Agents. In chronic gonorrhea:

Tincture of couch grass (agropyron repens), 5-20 drops
Tincture of motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca), 9-15 drops
Tincture of sandalwood (Santalum album), 10—20 drops
Tincture of buchu (Barosma betulina), 10-20 drops
Doss: In water, three or more times a day.

----- PAGE 81 -----
For enlarged prostate (nonoperative):

Tincture of couch grass (Agropyron repens), 5—15 drops
Tincture of fringe tree (Chionanthus virginicus), 3—7 drops
Tincture of saw palmetto (Sabal serrulata), 5—20 drops
Doss: In water, three or more times a day.

In rheumatism complicated with prostatic involvement:

Tincture of couch grass (Agropyron repens), 5—20 drops

Tincture of motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca), 9-15 drops

Tincture of scurvy grass (Cocblearia officinalis), 7-15 drops

Tincture of black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa), 1-15 drops

Dose: In water three or four times a day. Black cohosh should be used with caution.

Dose: Tincture of couch grass alone, 10—20 drops in water, two or more times a day. Specifically, one of
the most important symptoms for the prescribing of Agropyron is a burning sensation and constant desire
to urinate.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Bladder (irritation of), dysuria, urine (incontinence of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Familiar couch grass can be seen all over the country. Pirey polzutchy (couch
grass) by Russian translation means “fire of field.” Even in Latin they call it agros (“a field”) and pyr
(“fire”), hence Agropyron. To most, couch grass has a reputation as a troublesome, persistent weed.

Professor N. B. Tzitzin, member of the Russian Academy of Science, may be a blessing to mankind for
his awareness of this hearty plant. First he noticed how the plant could survive in any soil or weather
conditions and how it had a fantastic capacity to multiply. One plant can produce over thirty thousand
plants in one season, either by rhizomes or by seeds.

If one single plant settles in a cultivated field it overcomes the field in a very short time, and the more
you cut it the more it grows. Observing this great capacity for survival, Professor Tzitzin decided to take
advantage of this characteristic for the betterment of mankind. He gave new life to wheat (Zritioum) by
crossing it with couch grass. This much-improved hybrid adapts to any soil, resists disease and fungus
parasites, and resists frost, drought and wet periods. It is perennial and very durable, giving much-
improved, larger, and nutritious grain. Folk medicine: The tea is used in every part of the country for
serious cases of uncontrollable urination, to restore poor eyesight, tubercular lungs, chest pain, fever,
jaundice, rheumatism, lumbago, syphilis, and as a female corrective agent. Clinically: Couch grass is rich
in vitamin C, carotene, polysaccharide, inulin, glucose, and other nutritional elements. Used in extract
form and considered the best for blood purifying, kidney and bladder, stomach stimulant, and liver and
spleen. The thick extract is also used as a binder for medicinal tablets.

----- PAGE 82 -----
CRAMPBARK

Viburnum opulus

COMMON NAMES: High cranberry, snowball tree, guelder rose, squaw bush.

FEATURES: Indigenous to the northern part of the United States and Canada; a handsome shrub growing in
lowlands, rich woods, and borders of fields, presenting a showy appearance when flowering in June. The
flowers are succeeded by red, very acid berries resembling low cranberries and sometimes substituted
for them. They remain on the bush after the leaves have fallen and throughout the winter. The bark has no
smell but has a peculiar bitterish and astringent taste that leaves a clean feeling in the mouth. Viburnine is
the active principle found in the dried bark of the stem. The berries are a rich source of vitamins C and K.

MEDICINAL PART: Bark.
SOLVENTs: Water, diluted alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antispasmodic, nervine, tonic, astringent, diuretic.
Uses: Known to American practitioners for the conditions the name implies, crampbark gives relief from
cramps and spasms from involuntary muscular contractions such as in asthma and hysteria, if taken during
pregnancy, prevents the attack entirely if used daily for the last two or three months of gestation.

Steep 1 teaspoonful of the cut bark in 1 cup of boiling water for % hour; drink 1 or 2 cupfuls, cold, a
day. Of the tincture, % fluidram. For spasmodic compounds, add to 2 quarts of good sherry wine:

2 ounces crampbark (Viburnum opulus)

1 ounce skullcap (Scutellaria)

1 ounce skunk cabbage (Symplocarpus foetidus)
2 ounce cloves (Eugenia caryophyllus)

2 drams capsicum

Combine ingredients in powder form, or coarsely bruised. Let stand in covered container at least 24
hours, shaking daily.

CAUTION: The berries of the plant are poisonous.
Dose: Half a wineglassful, two or three times a day.

----- PAGE 83 -----
EXTERNALLY: Seasonal but worth remembering. The low cranberry (and probably the high cranberry will
have the same results) is known to be direct medication for dangerous erysipelas. If applied early this
malady yields at once. Also for malignant ulcers and scarlet fever when applied to the throat. Pound the
berries and spread them in a fold of old cotton cloth and apply over the entire diseased surface; the
inflammation will speedily subside. Its usefulness is universally acknowledged.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh bark, collected in October or November, for after-pains,
cough (of pregnancy), cramps, dysmenorrhea (spasmodic, neuralgia, membranous), ears (painful),
epididymitis, headache, hysteria, labor pains (false), lumbago, menstruation (painful), miscarriage,
ovaries (pain in), paralysis, uterus (cramps in, bearing down in).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: If you attend a Russian concert or listen to one on the radio you will hear a
beautiful heartfelt song that is touching to people in all corners of the globe. It will be Kalina or
Kalinushka, about the beautiful bush known to Native Americans as crampbark. Russians like kalina so
much they plant it in parks as well as for home garden decoration and medicinal use. They feel that its
beauty is only one of its merits, as its deeper significance is as a shrub for health. Ukraine, White Russia,
and Siberia supply the country commercially, but it is grown throughout the land. Folk medicine: In White
Russia, especially, it has a very impressive list of uses. Berries are rich in vitamins, especially C and K,
and minerals. They are used alone, fresh or dried, with honey for high blood pressure, heart conditions
(recommended with the seeds); cough, cold, tubercular lungs, shortness of breath; kidney, bladder, and
stomach conditions; bleeding stomach ulcers. A decoction of the flowers for coughs, cold, fever,
sclerosis, lung tuberculosis, stomach sickness (including stomach cancer). Externally: Children and
adults are bathed with a strong decoction of the flowers for tubercular skin, eczema, and various other
skin conditions. For scrofula a decoction of both berries and flowers in 1-10 parts, used as a tea.
Clinically: Prescribed in doses of 20-30 drops, two to three times a day, in cases of female bleeding,
hysteria, cramps, etc. Industrial: Supplied by commercial farms to the food industry, which uses an
extract and the berries for candy, fillers, pastry, marmalade, and aromatics. Pharmacy uses the bark; folk
medicine uses every part of kalina.

----- PAGE 84 -----
CREOSOTE BUSH

Larrea divaricata

COMMON NAMES: Chaparral, chaparro, creosote bush, greasewood, gobonadora, dwarf evergreen oak.

FEATURES: Chaparral is a Native American term referring to over one hundred different botanical plant
types growing in alkali soil in small, narrow strips to areas over one hundred square miles in the
southwestern part of the United States. Beginning at La Jolla, California, extends eastward through
California across Nevada, Arizona, and New Mexico.

The dark green stems and leaves (if drought season, pale or yellowish green) of creosote bush (Larrea
divaricata), one of the many chaparral species, create a 4-8 foot miniature desert-forest. Distinguished
from the usual gray-green color of the other desert species. The strong-scented leaves are opposite and
are divided into two leaflets. The bright yellow, five-petaled flowers, 2 or more inches across, appear in
spring and winter. The fruit is rounded, up to about 4 inch long, and is covered with white hairs.

The leaves and stems of creosote bush contain a generous supply of gums and resins, protein, partially
characterized esters, acids, alcohol, a small amount of mixture of sterols, sucrose, and a very small
amount of volatile oils. No alkaloids were detected and it is nontoxic.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, stems.
SOLVENT: Hot water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antiseptic, diuretic, expectorant, tonic.

Users: In 1848 the U.S.-Mexican boundary commission is reported to have brought creosote bush to the
attention of the medical profession as treatment for internal conditions of rheumatism; mixed with
sarsaparilla for venereal nodes and chancre. Generations earlier the Native Americans of the
southwestern areas were using the plant for various symptoms. More recently, in October 1967, after
three previously surgically removed growths, an eighty-five-year-old man refused medical treatment on
the fourth, recurrent, growth, documented as malignant melanoma, in favor of “chaparral tea,” an old
Native American remedy. Of this tea he drank 2—3 cups a day. In September 1968 he was reexamined and
it was found that the growth had decreased from the size of a large lemon to that of a dime. No other
medication was used than the chaparral tea. In eleven months he had gained a needed 25 pounds, with
accompanying improvement in general health, as previous to the chaparral treatment he was pale, weak,
and lethargic.

The above case seems to suggest the rediscovery of the desert plant through publications of health
magazines advocating natural medicines.

Personal and professional cases appearing in the magazines have added to its modern list of uses: acne
and skin conditions of warts and blotches, arthritis, cancer, chronic backache, increase of hair growth,
improvement of eyesight, increase of bowel elimination (though not laxative), kidney infection, leukemia,
prostate gland trouble, skin cancer, sinus, stomach cancer, throat, bronchial and pulmonary conditions,
weight reducing.

CLINICALLY: Probable mechanism of anticancer action is thought to be the most active ingredient,
nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA), which has the qualities to convert fermentation processes thought to
be out of balance.

----- PAGE 85 -----
Ina few words, medical science believes creosote bush supports the system via the respiratory process
by inhibiting unwanted rapid growth.

The magazine articles suggested a dose ranging from one tablet with each meal to as many as ten tablets
every hour. Other instructions came from the following Native American use.

Dose: Place | tablespoonful of creosote bush leaves and small twigs into a glass screw-top jar. Pour 1
pint of boiling water over this, cover, and let stand overnight. Do not refrigerate, do not remove surface
sediment. Drink a quarter of the liquid % hour before each meal and at bedtime.

To those for whom the strong taste of creosote is unpleasant as a tea, tablets are available. When using

the loose tea in the above amounts, approximately 40 percent of the active ingredient is utilized with total
daily intake around 200-250 milligrams. Herbalists combine other herbs with creosote bush as case
requires.
EXTERNALLY: Papago, Pima, and Maricopa tribes of the southwestern states boiled the leaves and
branches for bruises and rheumatism. In some areas salt was added to the boiled herb for the above. The
dry heated leaves and branches were applied as a poultice for chest and other body pain. Young branches
were sharpened, placed in the fire until hot, then inserted into tooth cavities to relieve pain.

VETERINARY: After the resins have been obtained for Commercial use as a preservative, the leaf residue
is fed to livestock. It contains as much protein as alfalfa.

“Tn springtime if an old cow can pull through until the creosote bush puts out tender shoots she will get
fat, shed off her old rough winter coat, and be glossy and pretty in four weeks, and she will bring her calf
and be able to nurse it into a fine animal. This drama of life I have witnessed year after year for the past
50 or more.”—Ralph W. Davis, N.D.

----- PAGE 86 -----
DAMIANA

Turnera diffusa var. aphrodisiaca

FEATURES: Indigenous to Texas and found in Baja California, South America, and the West Indies. The
small yellow-flowered shrub has long, broad, obovate, light green leaves, with few hairs on the rib;
frequently with reddish twigs. The plant has an aromatic odor and contains a volatile oil (0.51 percent)
with a warm, bitter, camphorlike taste, two resins, a bitter principle (damianin), tannin, sugar, and
albuminoids.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.

SOLVENT: Diluted alcohol.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Aphrodisiac, tonic, stimulant, laxative.

Uses: Damiana has strong claims as a great sexual rejuvenator in lethargy of the sexual organs, whether
the result of abuse or senility. The use, or administration, should be with care, as the claims are justified
by many who know of its influence. For those who may use it, please remember that when the system is
run down, overworked, subject to nervous tensions, etc., damiana often stimulates beyond the limit of
safety and health; stimulation beyond our natural energy level may have ill effect on the heart.

Dr. W. H. Myers of Philadelphia writes concerning damiana: “I have given it quite an extensive trial in
my practice, and as a result I find that in cases of partial or other sexual debility, its success is universal. I
pronounce it the most effective and only remedy that in my hands had a successful result in all cases.”
There are some objections to its effect on the digestive system, but combination with phosphorus and nux
vomica partially obviates this tendency. The required strength will not be known immediately; usually one
portion once a day for ten days. Also given in nervous diseases.

Dose: Fluid extract, 15—30 drops once a day. Solid extract, 3-6 grains. Also used in pill form.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh part for amenorrhea, dysmenorrhea, fatigue impotence,
leukorrhea, migraine, prostate (affections of), spermatorrhea, sterility, urine (incontinence of).

----- PAGE 87 -----
DANDELION

Taraxacum officinale

COMMON NAMEs: Blow ball, cankerwort, lion’s tooth, wild endive, etc.

FEATURES: This plant is a native of Greece but can now be found in most parts of the world almost year-
round. Zaraxacum is a genus of less than one hundred species of biennial or perennial herbs belonging to
the sunflower family (Compositae).

Dandelions are characterized by shiny green rosettes of leaves, nearly entirely or variously tooth-edged
ina slightly backward direction. The flower stem is longer than the leaves, 5—6 inches in height, bearing a
single yellow flower. The root and stem yield a milky fluid when cut. The root is the official part and
should be collected when the plant is in flower.

The spring leaves are used in salads and possess some slight narcotic properties. Can be found outside
of most doors throughout the United States, in bloom from April to November. Dry some of your once-
thought-of-as-worthless dandelion roots for winter use, they will aid you in many ways.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, tonic, stomachic, aperient, deobstruent. Native Americans realized the
great value of dandelion and used it as food and medicine.

Uses: The common dandelion had intelligent use as a medicinal plant long before science opened our
eyes to some of the contents of the shiny green leaves: they contain 7,000 units of vitamin A per ounce and
are an excellent source of vitamins B, C, and G. As a comparison, vitamin A content in lettuce is 1,200
units per ounce and in carrots 1,275 per ounce. A wise and easy addition to our diet.

The root is a constituent of many prescriptions for dropsical and urinary complaints and is indicated for
impostumes and inward ulcers in the urinary passage, atonic dyspepsia, and rheumatism. It is of an
opening and cleansing quality and therefore very effective for obstructions of the liver, gallbladder, and
spleen and the diseases that arise from the biliary organs. It is a splendid agent for skin diseases, scurvy,
scrofula, and eczema; has a beneficial effect on the female organs. Herbalists use dandelion more

----- PAGE 88 -----
generally than any other herb, as it combines well with other herbal preparations for the liver and is mild,
wholesome, and safe. Its prolonged use can only be beneficial in all rheumatic complaints. The natural
nutritive salt in dandelion is twenty-eight parts sodium; this type of organic sodium purifies the blood and
destroys the acids therein.

J. Kloss tells us in Back to Eden: “Anemia is caused by the deficiency of nutritive salts in the blood,
and really has nothing to do with the quality of the good blood.” Dandelion root cut up and dried is used
for coffee by health-minded people. From a health point of view, it is more desirable to drink than coffee
or tea. For this purpose it is frequently combined with roasted acorns and roasted rye in equal parts, or
according to taste. As a vegetable for salads it has no equal, being rich in many minerals. It is a medicinal
vegetable plant.

It is recorded that in Germany the roots were used as a sedative as early as the sixteenth century.
Arabian knowledge is much the same as that of other nations. The French use the fresh young leaves for
salads. To remove the bitter taste they soak the leaves in salt water for 30 minutes and use as a spicy
addition to mixed vegetables, at the same time getting natural protein, iron, calcium, phosphorus, and
inulin, which are all part of our human chemistry.

Dose: Of the tincture, 5—40 drops. For infusions, fill a cup with the green leaves, add boiling water, steep
% hour or longer. Drink when cold, three or four times a day. Or add 1 teaspoon of the cut or powdered
root to | cup of boiling water and steep 2 hour. Drink when cold three times a day.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole plant just before the perfection of the flower for ague,
bilious attacks, debility, diabetes, gallstones, headaches (gastric), jaundice, liver (affections of),
neuralgia, nightsweats, rheumatism, tongue (mapped), typhoid fever.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Dandelion is known as oduvanchik or pushki in Russia. In ancient times
Taraxacum was used for yellow spots (liver spots) of the skin, and freckles. Uses: In Russia the root is
the most popular, prepared as an extract with vodka, as a tea, or coffee. Ancient home medicine calls it
“life elixir,’ and it has acceptance for blood purifying, liver treatment, jaundice, gallbladder, skin
conditions, digestive disturbance, and as an expectorant and sedative. Clinically: In the form of extracts,
tinctures, powders; loose and in tablets, for the long-established conditions above.

----- PAGE 89 -----
ECHINACEA

Echinacea angustifolia

COMMON NAMES: Purple coneflower, black Sampson.

FEATURES: Native to the prairie regions of America west of Ohio. This native herbaceous perennial
belongs to the aster family. The plant grows 2-3 feet high, with single, stout, bristly, hairy stems. Leaves
are thick, rough, hairy, broadly landscaped, 3-8 inches long, narrowed at the end, and strongly three-
nerved. The single, large flower head appears from July to October, the color varying from whitish rose
to pale purple. Taste is sweetish, then tingling, as in aconite, but without its persistent benumbing effect
when administered wrongly. Faint odor, aromatic, and should not be used after it has lost its characteristic
odor and taste. Contains inulin-bearing parenchyma tissue.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Dried rhizome, root.
SOLVENT: Alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diaphoretic, sialagogue, alterative.

Uses: Useful in all diseases caused by impurities in the blood. Thompsomian and physio-medical
practitioners and naturopaths have always maintained that Echinacea is a natural herbal antitoxin.
Orthodox physicians have not generally been willing to accept it as such, though many do. Controversy
being permitted, falsehood will appear more false, and truth more true.

“Echinacea is a corrector of the deprivations of the body fluids,” was Dr. Niederkorn’s opinion, and
this whether the morbific changes of the body fluids are internal or caused by external introductions.

Echinacea has an honored place for septic infections, septicemia in its various forms, blood poisoning,
adynamic fever, typhoid fever, cellular abscesses, salpingitis, carbuncles, cancerous cachexia, and in
fevers or conditions where there is a bluish discoloration of the mucous membranes; for any condition that
points to sepsis, internal or external.

The Sioux tribe used fresh scraped root for hydrophobia, snakebite, septicemia.

----- PAGE 90 -----
Dose: Steep | teaspoonful of the granulated root in 1 cup of boiling water for ’2 hour, strain, take 1
tablespoonful three to six times a day. Of the tincture, 5—10 minims.

EXTERNALLY: Steep as above and apply, or bathe parts concerned.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plant for appendicitis, bites of rabid animals, blood
poisoning, carbuncles, diphtheria, enteric fever, gangrene, poisoned wounds, pyoemia, rhus poisoning,
scarlatina, septicemia, snakebite, struma, syphilis, typhoid, ulcers, vaccination (effects of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Echinacea is not native to Russia. Careful study, research, and experiment have
given many opportunities for cultivation in Ukraine, Caucasia, and other places. They use the Latin name
Echinacea for identification, pronounced with a Russian accent. Uses: According to experiments it is not
toxic in large amounts, but has been known to cause salivation. They use it as an antiseptic, internally and
externally. Internally it is healing by reducing pain; improves the quality of blood to resist infection or
further spread of disease. Externally: Antiseptic and healing for skin conditions of carbuncles, boils,
wounds, ulcers, burns, and bedsores.

----- PAGE 91 -----
ELDER

Sambucus canadensis

COMMON NAMEs: Sambucus, American elder, sweet elder.

FEATURES: An indigenous shrub growing in all parts of the United States and Canada, in low, damp
grounds, thickets, and waste places. Elders are frequently cultivated for their ornamental foliage. They
grow 5-12 feet high, blooming in June and July, with star-shaped, fragrant flowers ‘4 inch across,
grouped in flat flower clusters about 8 inches across. Purple-black berries containing three or four round
seeds mature in September and October. The fruit is often made into jellies, pies, and wine. The
branching stems are covered with a rough, pitted gray bark; large central stems are smooth. The odor is
faintly sweet, aromatic. Taste: slightly bitter. The European elder, though larger than the American, is in
general characteristics and properties similar.

MEDICINAL PARTS: The roots, inner bark, leaves, berries, and flowers are all recognized as natural
medical treatment.

SOLVENT: Water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Emetic, hydragogue, cathartic. Flowers: diaphoretic, diuretic, alterative, emollient,
discutient, gentle stimulant.

Uses: No education is required regarding which part may be used. From the tree top to root’s end it
harbors medical properties. Often all that is needed is the virtue of necessity as a teacher. The flowers,
berries, leaves, inner bark, and roots have elicited gratitude from many in conditions of headache due to
colds, palsy, rheumatism, scrofula, syphilis, jaundice, kidney problems, and epilepsy.

Dr. Brown (1875) gives us the following: “The inner bark of Elder is hydragogue, emetic and cathartic.
Has been successfully used in epilepsy by taking it from branches 1 or 2 years old, scraping off the grey
outer bark, and steeping 2 ounces of it in 5 ounces of boiling water for 48 hours. Strain and give a
wineglassful every 15 minutes when the fit is threatening, have the patient fast. Resume it every 6 to 8
days.” The tea of the flowers is quieting to twitching and inflammation of the eyes, taken internally. The
tea simmered for 10 minutes longer and cotton soaked in the solution provides an eye application over
closed lids. The berries are rich in organic iron and are therefore an excellent addition to the autumn

----- PAGE 92 -----
menu, especially if anemic. Combine elderberry and blackberry juice, 1 ounce three times a day.

The inner green bark is cathartic; an infusion of it in wine, or the expressed juice, in doses from % to 1
fluidounce will purge moderately. A large dose produces vomiting. In small doses it produces an
efficacious deobstruent, promoting all the fluid secretion, and is much used in dropsy to expel the water
from the engorged organism. It is scarcely excelled by any other medication. Can be used for children’s
diseases, such as liver derangements, erysipelas, etc., decreasing the amount according to age.

EXTERNALLY: The elder may be called the herbalist’s cosmetic tree, as every part will aid in complexion
beauty, removing spots, allaying irritation, removing freckles, and preserving and softening the skin if
applied faithfully, internally and externally.

For various swellings, tumors, joints, etc., simmer any or all parts of the elder; apply as a poultice, or
bathe when skin is broken. Also excellent mixed with coconut oil for a discutient ointment, used for burns
and scalds. Any part is useful to keep in dried form for out-of-season use.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh leaf and flower for albuminuria, angina pectoris, asthma,
larynx (dry), lumbago.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The decorative and medicinal yellow, red, and black elder grows in many parts of
Russia and has been used as home medicine from the time of early Russian history. However, they
consider the North American white elder superior. In the Middle Ages it was considered a holy tree,
capable of restoring good health, keeping good health, and, it is reasonable to say, as an aid to longevity.
Uses: The roots, bark, twigs, leaves, and berries are used alone or in combinations for every type of
infection or inflammation.

Flowers: contain oil, rutin, vitamins, and minerals extensively for treatment of dropsy, rheumatism,
appendix inflammation, bladder and kidney infections, intestinal conditions, eyes, and external skin
trouble.

Berries: Diuretic, astringent, diaphoretic, much used as a gargle.

Leaves: The young spring leaves boiled in honey are excellent in chronic constipation; boiled in milk
for inflammation of burns of the skin, and piles. Clinical: Used for conditions of above, in extracts,
tinctures, and powders. Food: Home and hospital foods are made from the flowers and berries, including
vitamin- and mineral-rich jam and marmalade used in many dietetic preparations. Elderberry wine, with
its pleasant aroma and taste, is familiar in the wine industry. Externally: Leaves, flowers, bark, and twigs
are excellent as a hot poultice, mixed equally with chamomile (Chamaemelum nobile), for soreness,
inflammations, joint stiffness, etc.

In a seventeenth-century botanic book there is a story about a king and a small hunting party: Most of
the day had passed away when the party realized they were lost in the thick timber brush. Wandering in
various directions they happily found a lonely farmhouse of prosperous condition. As they approached
closer they saw an old gentleman, who had been crying, sitting on the porch. When the king asked why, he
explained he had slipped and fallen while carrying his grandfather from one room to another, and his
father had been angry for such misbehavior and had beaten him.

The king listened suspiciously and then entered the house. To his surprise he observed elders of
advanced generations peacefully talking and going about their daily routine. After talking, and observing
the family, he inquired how they kept in such good health to advanced years. They told the king that for as
long as they could remember they had eaten only simple food, salt, home-prepared bread, milk, and
cheese, with emphasis on elderberries.

As in name, legend, and story, grateful people of all continents and in all times admire and appreciate
the virtues of herbs. The same herbs in different countries, and used, of course, by different people, have
come to the same purposes, whether useful or dangerous. Many such simple things will not be accepted by
stories or experience alone. It seems that only when herbs are tested scientifically and given allopathic

----- PAGE 93 -----
approval will attitudes be changed.

----- PAGE 94 -----
ELECAMPANE

Inula helenium

COMMON NAMEs: Elf dock, scabwort, velvet dock, aunee.

FEATURES: Native of Europe and north Asia, and now naturalized over much of eastern North America.
This stout perennial herb of the sunflower family (Compositae) thrives in moist, sandy, mountainous
areas. The stems are vigorous, 3—4 feet high, downy above, and branched. The leaves are large, ovate and
toothed, the upper ones clasping the stem, the lower ones stalked. The flower heads are golden yellow,
large, solitary, with narrow rays, blooming in July and August. The root is slightly gray, hard, horny, and
cylindrical, and should be dug in the autumn of the second year and split into longitudinal, oblique pieces
having one or more roots. The whole plant is similar in appearance to the horseradish.

The main component of the root is a carbohydrate, inulin, which in the autumn may comprise as much as
45 percent of its weight; its taste is bitter and acrid and the odor reminiscent of camphor.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SoLvents: Alcohol, water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diaphoretic, diuretic, expectorant, emmenagogue, tonic.

Uses: Elecampane is a constitutional treatment for general catarrhal conditions such as chronic pulmonary
affections that have symptoms of cough, shortness of breath, wheezing in the lungs; a specific for
whooping cough in children, diseases of the breast, malignant fevers, hepatic torpor, dyspepsia, and the
feeling of stitches in the side caused by the spleen. The large amount of natural inulin contained in this
well-known root strengthens, cleanses, and tones the pulmonary and gastric membranes, encouraging a
more harmonious metabolism by assisting the pancreas; it is valued in incipient tuberculosis.

Culpeper also used elecampane for intestinal worms, retention of water, to lessen tooth decay, and for
firming the gums. A personal opinion, but one which we believe to be true, is that inulin decreases
excessive sugar in the blood—and sugar causes tooth decay.

Dose: Of the powder, from | scruple to 1 dram; the decoction, 1 ounce to | pint of boiling water taken in
wineglassful doses. Mixes well with other herbs.

----- PAGE 95 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root dug in autumn of the second year for backache, cough,
cramp, dysmenorrhea, erysipelas, leukorrhea, rectum (pain in), sciatica, toothache.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: There are many names for this gracious flower, but in 1804 inulin was discovered
to be a large part of the plant’s makeup. Since then /nu/a is the official name. In Russia they call it de-via-
sil, or deviat sil, which means nine powers. Also di-vasil, which means fair or magic power. This is how
the Russian people apprize elecampane as a medicine. At one time elecampane in Russia was almost
forgotten, but lately interest has been renewed and the government now encourages the collection and
growth of this flower. In ancient Greece and Rome elecampane had prominent recognition in medical
botanics, and in the Middle Ages it had the same strong reputation. Europe and Britain cultivate this
flower for medical purposes. In the Far East and isolated Tibet elecampane is extensively used, by their
own independent experience. Uses: In Russia today elecampane grows in many gardens. They preserve
the fresh root in vodka and keep this for winter use when in need of restoring health after sickness, or for
stomach trouble. Other preparations consist of tea, or powder for colds, chest colds, inflammations,
female trouble, skin conditions, especially itching, wounds, catarrh, indigestion, kidney and bladder
trouble, weak pancreas; in all a general blood builder. Bodily influence: Diaphoretic, diuretic, antiseptic,
blood builder. Clinically: Directly or in combination as drops, powder, or tablets. Externally: Poultice
or a strong tea is made and used for itching, skin rash, and wounds. Foodstuff: In confectionery to give
better aroma, color, and nutrition.

----- PAGE 96 -----
EUCALYPTUS
Eucalyptus globulus

COMMON NAME: Blue gum tree.

FEATURES: Approximately six hundred species belong to the family Myrtaceae. Although the majority are
trees, some forms, like the Australian mallees, are shrublike. They are largely confined to Australia;
however about ninety species grow in California, and a few can be seen in Florida. They are widely
planted for ornamental purposes.

The violet-brown trunk bark peels off in long thin strips, exposing the smooth underlayer. The simple
leaves are without teeth, smooth, and frequently have a waxy sheen. Depending on species, white, yellow,
or red flowers adorn the eucalyptus and attract honeybees, from which a distinctive eucalyptus honey is
enjoyed. The sepals are small or absent, and the petals stick together to form a cap that falls when the
flower opens. Looks much like an acorn cap.

The tallest known living specimen is 322 feet, found in 1956 in the Styx Valley, Tasmania.

As children we remember coming home with the tree’s gum on hands and clothing after having played
around a large eucalyptus.

The peppermint-lemon fragrance is most agreeable.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Oil, leaves, bark.
SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, tonic, antiseptic, antispasmodic.

Uses: A reliable medical journal of Europe gives credit to the power of the eucalyptus tree for destroying
miasmatic influence in fever-stricken districts, entirely abating the pestilent fever in areas where the trees
grow.

Among the diseases in which it is employed are croup, diphtheria, bronchitis, asthma, piles, neuralgia,
malarial diseases, catarrh, subacute or chronic inflammation of the genitourinary organs, ulcers, and
sores. It has been proven an effective remedy in some cases of rheumatism. For some the mode of using it
in asthma is to smoke the dried leaves.

----- PAGE 97 -----
In Britain the oil is the preparation best known and most widely used. It may be inhaled for asthma,
diphtheria, sore throat, etc.

For hemorrhoids the area is washed with a decoction of the leaves. As an agent for suspicious
leukorrhea and discharges, 1-2 drams in 14 pints of tepid water, injecting it slowly. For toning weakened
and prolapsed uterus, buchu leaves and bark is also effective combined with the above for strengthening,
quick healing, and diminishing offensive odors. Its efficiency depends chiefly upon its antiseptic
properties, which are extremely potent, though quite safe.

Dose: 15—30 drops of the fluid extract three times a day; 3-10 grains of the solid extract three times a
day. The leaves crushed and steeped can be used in tea form.

EXTERNALLY: As a local antiseptic, stimulant, and corrective when applied to ulcers and wounds, | ounce
of the extract to 1 pint of lukewarm water.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh leaves, essential oil eucalyptol, for aneurysm, acritis, asthma,
bladder (affections of), bronchitis, diarrhea, dysentery, dyspepsia, dysuria, fistulas, gonorrhea, gout,
intermittent fever, kidney (diseases of), quinine cachexia, rheumatism, spleen (affections of), strychnine
poisoning, syphilis, tumors, typhoid, urethra (stricture of), urethral carbuncle, varicose ulcers, worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Two species of eucalyptus are cultivated for medical and decorative purposes,
Eucalyptus globulus, and Eucalyptus cinera. Dr. Ramel introduced eucalyptus to Europe in 1856, and
southern France soon followed with cultivation of this medicinal tree. Dr. Muller has written a valuable
monograph about Australian eucalyptus that has stimulated interest in this valuable plant. About eighty
years ago Russia started to cultivate eucalyptus for decorative purposes; later its interest was of a deeper
meaning. Today the Black Sea area has active plantations. About 15,000—18,000 seedlings are obtained
from | kilogram of seeds, which are then transplanted. The young trees yield leaves for oil extract, or are
cut and used as a tea. Uses: The tea, decoctions, oil, or nastoika with Russian vodka are on hand for all
conditions of respiratory malfunctions: colds, bronchitis, chest tightness, catarrh, etc. Externally: Skin
conditions of carbuncles, boils, wounds, ulcers.

----- PAGE 98 -----
FEVERFEW

Chrysanthemum parthenium

COMMON NAMES: Feather few, febrifuge plant, featherfoil, pyrethrum.

FEATURES: The plant is native to Europe but common in the United States. Found occasionally in a wild
state, but generally cultivated in gardens. The tapering root, with dark brown, furrowed bark, contains a
large percentage of inulin. The yellowish, porous wood has a distinct odor and a sweetish taste, very
pungent, acrid, tingling, with a sialagogue effect. The flower resembles chamomile with its yellow disk
and white petals, one to a stalk; flowering in June and July. The center stem grows to about 2 feet high
with serrated-edge alternate leaves; very short hairs.

Bees are said to dislike this plant very much, and a handful of the flower heads carried in their vicinity
will cause them to keep their distance.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SoLveEnts: Alcohol, boiling water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Aperient, carminative, tonic, emmenagogue, vermifuge, stimulant.

Usrs: The warming infusion of feverfew upon the circulation influences the skin, nervous system, and the
genitourinary organs and relieves the head of dizziness, brain and nerve pressure, and tensions of
overexcitement.

Culpeper recommends it as “‘a special remedy against opium when taken too liberally.”

This garden herb provides relieving assistance of hyperemic conditions of the mucous membrane in
conditions of colic, flatulence, general indigestion, colds, suppressed urine, expelling worms, hysteria,
and in some febrile diseases. It is largely used in female correction of scanty or delayed monthly periods.
Drs. Wood and Ruddock, in their book Vitalogy, say that it is “an admirable remedy for St. Vitus dance.”
Dr. Clymer, dealing with nature’s healing agents, administers the following for fevers:

Tincture of feverfew (Chrysanthemum parthenium), 10-30 drops
Tincture of coneflower (Echinacea angustifolia), 10-20 drops
Tincture of cayenne pepper (Capiscum), 10-20 drops

Taken every 2-3 hours, depending on symptoms. The cold infusion or extract makes a valuable tonic.
The warm infusion is nervine and very useful for hysteria and promoting perspiration in fevers.

Dose of feverfew alone: 10-30 drops in water every 2-3 hours, or as indicated by condition. Can be
used as tea, 1 teaspoonful to | cup of boiling water steeped for 2 hour; 2 cups a day in small mouthful
doses.

EXTERNALLY: The leaves boiled for hot compresses for pain of congestion or inflammation of the lungs,
stomach, and abdomen is beneficial.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant for convulsions, delirium, dysentery, fevers, loquacity,
rheumatism.

----- PAGE 99 -----
FIVE FINGER GRASS

Potentilla erecta

COMMON NAMES: Five leaves grass, rough-fruited cinquefoil, silvery cinquefoil.

FEATURES: Five finger is common to the United States, growing by roadsides, on meadow banks and in
waste ground. The herb grows like the strawberry, rooting at joints; the leaflets have five parts, scattered
hairs, veins prominent below. The bright yellow flowers bloom from June to September, extending on
long stalks from the stem. The root has a bitterish, styptic taste.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTS: Water, milk, vinegar.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, tonic.

Uses: The long-established, hidden talent of cinquefoil has many uses. Culpeper states: “Let no man
despise it because it is plain and easy, the ways of God are all such.” He gives us a preparation for
epilepsy, or as it used to be called, falling sickness: “The juice here of drunk, about 4 ounces at a time for
certain days together cureth the quinsey, and yellow jaundice; and taken for 30 days together, cureth the
falling sickness.”

It is a specific in all inflammations and fevers of infections, or mixed with other herbs to cool and
temper the blood and humors in the body. The root boiled in milk is effective for male and female
complaints to the extent of hemorrhage. The juice or decoction taken with a little honey clears hoarseness
of the throat and cough of the lungs, makes an excellent gargle for spongy, bleeding gums and ulcerated
mouth and throat.

EXTERNALLY: The root boiled in vinegar and applied to all kernels and hard swellings growing in any
part of the flesh will soften them, and is quietening to shingles and all sorts of running and foul scabs,
sores, itch, and bruises. At the same time, drink the tea of five fingers.

Dose: 20 grains in white wine, milk, or water in wineglassful amounts.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Kalgan, lapchatka, kurinye lapke (chicken foot) and many other names are given
to this small but potentially useful plant. Used in Russia for medicinal and industrial purposes. Folk

----- PAGE 100 -----
medicine: Use the rhizome, which is collected late in the spring, before the leaves are overgrown, or in
late autumn. The decoction is a very strong astringent for inflammation of the mouth or stomach, colitis,
loose bowels, dyspepsia to stop bleeding of the stomach, or female disorders. Mostly used in folk
medicine (Saratov University, 1965). In some parts of Russia this home medicine is given as a tonic for
heart conditions, pains in the chest, inflammation (internal and external), amenorrhea, coughs (Bello-Russ.
Academy of Science, 1965). Dose: 1 tablespoonful of the crushed rhizome to 1 cup of boiling water;
drink 3—5 tablespoonfuls a day, 1-1’ tablespoonfuls before each meal. Industrial: Used to process
leather; also in the textile industry for red dye.

----- PAGE 101 -----
A Foolproof, Science-Based
Diet that's 100% Guaranteed
to Melt Away 8 to 16 Pounds
(4 to 8 kgs) of Stubborn Body
Fat in Just 14 Days!

THE [

) 2WEEK

DIET

RECOMMENDED BOOKS
click image(s) to read / download

x % ¥

he
—

Acne No More™

The Secrets To Curing
Your Holistically

A Unique Step By Step Holistic Acne
System Guaranteed To Eliminate
Your Acne From The Inside Out

Giving You Lasting Clear Skin

----- PAGE 102 -----
FRINGE TREE

Chionanthus virginicus

COMMON NAMES: Old man’s beard, snowdrop tree, white fringe, poison ash.

FEATURES: The species is native in the eastern United States from Pennsylvania to the Gulf of Mexico. A
shrub or small tree of the Oleaceae, or olive, family. The plants are 10-30 feet high, possess oval,
smooth, entire leaves, and bear snow-white flowers that hang down like a fringe, hence the common name
and synonyms. Fruit: fleshy, purple, ovoid drupe. They form an attractive feature in garden shrubbery,
growing well on river banks and on elevated places, presenting clusters of snow-white flowers in May
and June. Root about '% inch thick, dull brown with irregular concave scales on outer surface, inside
smooth, yellowish brown. The inner layer shows projecting bundles of stone cells. Very bitter taste.

MEDICINAL PART: Root bark.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, hepatic, diuretic, tonic.

Uses: Generally useful in stomach and liver disorders and in poor digestive functions by slightly
influencing all the organs engaged in digestion and blood making. A specific in spleen malfunction, and
for congestion of the liver when failure to excrete the residue from food results in constipation (one of the
reasons for gallstone, jaundice, and stomach inefficiency). In some the involuntary muscles of the heart
will also be impaired by the inactivity of the above mentioned.

In pregnancy, with indications of yellow skin, white of the eyes of a yellow color, bilious colic,
heartburn, etc., 5-10 drops in water before meals is indicated. Useful in malignant tumors of the stomach
or bowels, and in uterine tumors, also in most chronic conditions of the liver and spleen. Combine:

Tincture of goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis), 7-10 drops
Tincture of fringe tree (Chionanthus virginicus), 3—7 drops
Dose: 10-20 drops in water before meals and at bedtime has proven effective.

In bilious colic it is best to first evacuate the stomach by giving an emetic dose of lobelia and then to
administer the above. The powdered root bark is used professionally; however, the cut root bark can be
infused in hot water for % hour and taken in small amounts throughout the day. Anemone pulsatilla is also
used in conjunction with fringe tree.

EXTERNALLY: The skin will respond to the application of an infusion of 1 ounce to | pint of water, when
other attempts have failed. Also as an injection.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the bark (which is the part employed and which contains saponin)
for constipation, debility, emaciation with liver disorder, gallstone colic, headache, jaundice, liver
(disease of, hypertrophy of), malaria, neurasthenia, nursing women (complaints of).

----- PAGE 103 -----
GINGER, WILD

Asarum canadense

COMMON NAMES: Canada snake root, Indian ginger, Vermont snake root.

FEATURES: Ginger, being of many species, differs in appearance according to habitat; Africa, India,
Pakistan, China, Jamaica, Japan, etc., have their own special native herb.

Native ginger is a beautiful little plant found growing in rich woods during April and May from Maine
to Michigan and southward. The root of the plant is round and fleshy, with dividing stem supporting a
heart-shaped, soft, woolly, and handsomely veined leaf, deep green above and light below, there being
two to a plant. The flower occurs one to a plant, small and of a brownish purple color, growing only a
few inches high and sometimes becoming covered by the dead leaves that carpet the woods. Odor:
gingerlike, or recalling serpentaria. Taste: pungent, bitter.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, carminative, tonic, diaphoretic, diuretic.

Uses: As a carminative it is useful in all painful spasms of the bowels and stomach, also to promote
perspiration, in all cases of colds, female obstructions, whooping cough, and fevers. Practitioners of the
American Physic Medical School hold that this root exerts a direct influence on the uterus and prescribe it
as a parturient when nervous fatigue is observed. It can be made into a tea and administered in small
doses, frequently repeated, as large doses are apt to nauseate the stomach.

Dose: As a cordial made with a tincture and syrup of molasses it is most agreeable; 1 teaspoonful of the
granulated root to 1 pint of boiling water, 2 tablespoonfuls at a time, as often as required. Of the tincture,
2-5 minims. Powder may be taken dry, 20-30 grains.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of root and whole fresh plant (Asarum europum) for alcoholism, anus
(prolapse of), catarrh, cholerine, diarrhea, dysmenorrhea, eyes (affections of, operations of), fidgets,
headache, hysteria, levitation (sensation of), typhus.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Kopiten (ginger) grows wild in West Siberia and European Russia, and the Far
East. There is a special time for collecting the different sections of the well-known plant. Leaves in the
early spring, rhizomes when the flower begins to form, roots in the fall. Folk medicine: The different
parts of the plant have important specific uses, or perhaps combinations for certain ailments. In
Bellorussia (White Russia) the properties of the rhizome are used as an expectorant, for jaundice and
dropsy, to promote milk for the nursing mother, for heart trouble, lung tuberculosis, nerve excitement,

----- PAGE 104 -----
migraine headache, and laxative. The rhizome as nastoika (with vodka) for scrofula (Cholousky 1882,
Antonov 1888), heart palpitation, weakness and lack of stamina of children (Werenko 1896), poisoning
with mushrooms, stomachic (Federevski 1897), migraine headache, alcoholism, scrofula (Nikolaeva
1964). The leaves are used for malaria. Clinically: Of late, use as tea from leaves for heart trouble, and
decoction of rhizome as expectorant for vomiting.

----- PAGE 105 -----
GINSENG

Panax quinquefolius

COMMON NAMES: Five finger root, American ginseng, sang, ninsin, panax, pannag, red berry.

FeATuRES; Indigenous to China, North America, East Asia, American ginseng grows naturally on the
slopes of ravines and other shady but well-drained places in hardwood forests, in varying abundance,
from eastern Canada to Maine and Minnesota and southward into the mountain regions of Georgia and
Carolina. In its wild state it grows 8-20 inches high, bearing three large leaflets at the top and two
smaller ones beneath.

Yellowish green clusters of flowers are produced in midsummer, followed by as many bright crimson
berries, which can be seen until the frost. They are edible and taste much like the ginseng root. The
berries contain 1-3 flattish wrinkled seeds the size of a small pea. The root is thick, spindle-shaped, 2-4
inches long, and 4-1 inch or more in thickness. The older specimens usually have branched protrusions
somewhat resembling a human form. It usually takes at least six years for the root to reach marketable
size. Can be cultivated from cracked or partly germinated seed. Ginseng is very shy and must be protected
from the sun. The roots should be dug in the autumn when they are not so full of sap.

MEDICINAL PART: Dried root.
SOLVENT: Water
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, demulcent, stomachic, nervine, aphrodisiac.

Uses: In Ezekiel 27:17 we find ginseng was known to Judah in the marketplace of Israel. Trading was
done in wheat, honey, oil, balm, and “pannag,” or the all-healing ginseng. Certainly it has been known and
respected for centuries. Father Jartoux, in 1679, after he noticed Native Americans from the Ozarks and
Blue Ridge country employing ginseng as a medication, started exporting it to England. From there the
East India Company sent it around the Cape of Good Hope and on to the Orient.

Ginseng, combined with the juice of a good ripe pineapple, is superior as a treatment for indigestion. It
stimulates the healthy secretion of pepsin, thereby ensuring good digestion and forestalling the habit of
taking pepsin or other after-dinner pills to relieve the fullness and distress so common to the Americans.
Ginseng has the known ability to penetrate the delicate tissue our blood fails to oblige, thus arousing the
malfunction of the lymphatic glands.

----- PAGE 106 -----
It is a powerful antispasmodic and recommends itself in other spasmodic and reflex nervous diseases,
such as whooping cough and asthma. For many people ginseng has had beneficial results in the home for
general strengthening and appetite, as well as to relieve eructations from the stomach, neuralgia,
rheumatism, gout, irritation of bronchi or lungs from cold, gastroenteric indigestion, weak heart, spinal
and nervous affection.

Historically, ginseng has been periodically recognized and discounted in many continents when
laboratory technicians could not verify its apparent physiological and psychological accomplishments.
For the latest information on ginseng you must go abroad. Until about 1964 Anglo-American literature did
not pay much attention to the long-held belief in the useful properties of ginseng.

Dose: To make a tea, take 3 ounces of powder (ginseng 6—7 years old), add 1 ounce of honey and 60
drops of wintergreen, and blend. Use | teaspoonful to 1 cup of boiling water, let it stay a little short of the
boiling point for 10 minutes, drink as hot as you can before each meal. To make tea from the dried leaves,
steep as you would for ordinary teas. Excellent for nervous indigestion.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Trituration and tincture of the root for apendicitis, debility, headache, lumbago,
rheumatism, sciatica, sexual excitement.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: China has always been a good market for ginseng, the highest prices being paid for
old roots. Years ago a Chinese emperor sent a present of the best selected roots to a Russian czar. Being
unaware of its properties, and suspicious, the Russian official understandably thought it best to have it
analyzed to see why so much importance was given to this manlike root. The Military Academy of
Medicine was elected for this purpose, as the international diplomat was a military figure. The top staff,
heads of wisdom, could not find any health-giving properties after long and careful research. So at this
time ginseng was thought of as a Chinaman’s prejudice and was rejected because of insufficient evidence
for further scientific research.

This did not dampen the original enthusiasm of the Chinese, as they still went to the Russian Far East to
collect and buy Russian and Manchurian ginseng, which they considered the best. The price did not
restrict their demands, as they would pay ten to twenty times more than gold, or the traditional oriental
silver. Time and experience have led to developing plantations of ginseng in Korea, China, Manchuria,
and Japan.

The first recorded use of ginseng in Russia occurred in 1675, by Boyarin N. G. Sapfary; three hundred
years later we consider the Russians to be in the forefront of world research. Twenty-five years ago,
teams were sent to neighboring countries to study established plantations. The highly protected secret of
this culture is not given charitably. Today all information from observation and study leads us to Russia’s
own army of ginseng specialists in all parts of Russia, but particularly in the Far East. All work and
research is directed and coordinated by the Committee for Ginseng Research, which oversees
universities, institutes, laboratories, agro-technological methods, fieldwork, plantations, publications, etc.

There are plantations of ginseng in the Russian Far East, Moscow region, Byelorussia (White Russia),
and Caucasia (Bello-Russ. Acad, 1965). In the past, Russian ginseng was always collected from the wild,
but today the cultivated plant is exported, being gathered in August.

Lengthy study and research of Chinese folk medicine’s use of ginseng not only confirms fundamental
impressions but has opened new horizons to its proven value (Vishaya Scholla, Moscow, 1963).

In North America we think of ginseng as the slow-growing herb, as it takes five to seven years before
the root is considered usable. To find a plant fifty years old is considered sensational, as collectors
usually find the plants before they reach this age. The age is told by the rings around the root. Though the
older roots in North America are uncommon, theoretically, the older the root the smaller should be the
dose.

In the Far East there are plants that have reached the age of one hundred, two hundred and even four

----- PAGE 107 -----
hundred years. Some Hong Kong roots sell for five hundred dollars per ounce. A five-to-ten-year-old root
will weigh only a few ounces, but a two-hundred-to-three-hundred-year-old one will weigh nearly a
pound. The young ginseng is used in large amounts, | teaspoonful to each cup. The old ginseng requires
careful use, starting with 1 drop a day and adding extra drops day by day. If one drop too much is taken,
bleeding in the bowels or lungs can result, as the old root is very strong.

In Russia they recommend to all people over forty to have six weeks (forty-two days) of consecutive
daily intake of ginseng twice a year. This will regenerate the glands and invigorate the blood, thus
bringing the properties of ginseng to the endocrine system. This activates metabolism, improves blood
circulation, and positively activates the kidney, bladder, liver, etc. In general, an overall tonic.

Ginseng increases vitality by carefully improving the condition. The activating process improves the
mental, physical, and spiritual efficiencies of the brain, so inducing better feeling, sleep, appetite, and
well-being. Ginseng has a long list of accomplishments when other means have failed.

It is used not only as a physical restorative but acts psychologically as well; for tiredness of heart and
blood circulation, sugar diabetes, depressions, neurasthenia, neurosis, psychasthenia.

In Russia ginseng is used, of course, as nastoika (with vodka) and as tea and powder. Clinically, in the
form of extracts, pills, tablets, capsules.

----- PAGE 108 -----
GOLDENSEAL

Hydrastis canadensis

—"

COMMON NAMES: Yellow puccoon, ground raspberry, tumeric root, yellow root, orange root.

FEATURES: A perennial herb native to the moist woods and damp meadows of eastern North America.

The rough, wrinkled yellow root contains several alkaloids; odor is distinct, with a bitter taste. When
fresh it is juicy and is used by Native Americans to color their clothing, etc. The plant sends up a simple
hairy stem 8-20 inches tall with 3—5-lobed, dark green leaves that in the summer may become 4-10
inches broad. The May and June flower a solitary, small, white or rose colored, appearing in early spring
followed by a crimson head or small berries resembling raspberry, and consists of many two-seeded
drupes. The wild plant is scarce today and is cultivated for medicinal purposes.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SoLvENT: Alcohol, diluted alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, alterative, laxative.

Usrs: The Cherokees introduced goldenseal as an agent for treating ulcers and arrow wounds. Since then
it has gained a reputation as one of the most powerful agents in the entire herb kingdom.

It is recognized as useful in congested conditions, sustaining the circulation of blood in the veins; this
attribute is valuable in heart affections where the extremities are usually cold and lips bluish. To
strengthen the weakened condition, it is best to combine | part each of capsicum and skullcap to 4 parts
goldenseal.

For debilitated conditions of mucous membrane of the stomach, goldenseal pulls rank. Can be used ina
wide range of illnesses ranging from the common cold to complicated advancements, grippe, ulcerated
stomach, dyspepsia, enlarged tonsils, diphtheria, chronic catarrh of the intestines, skin eruptions, scarlet
fever, and smallpox.

Combine 4 parts goldenseal to 1 part myrrh gum for a strong decoction that is valuable in gleet, chronic
gonorrhea, leukorrhea, incipient stricture, spermatorrhea, and inflammation and ulceration of the internal
coat of the bladder. The latter may be treated by goldenseal alone. It must be injected into the bladder and

----- PAGE 109 -----
held there as long as the patient can conveniently retain it. To be repeated three or four times a day
immediately after emptying the bladder. Should be injected by experienced persons.

It is a specific in passive hemorrhages from the pelvic tissue: 2 parts goldenseal to 1 part geranium or
cranesbill, simmer covered for 20 minutes. Goldenseal combined with skullcap and hops is a very fine
tonic for spinal nerves, including spinal meningitis. As a mouth medication for pyorrhea or sore gums,
make a solution and gently brush or massage teeth and gums. Goldenseal can be given alone in weak
proportions, but is most effective combined with other suitable medications.

CAUTION: Should not be used by pregnant women.

Dose: Of the powder, 10-30 grains; of the tincture, 1-2 fluidrams. Roots: place | teaspoonful of the
powdered root into 1 pint of boiling water, let stand until cold, drink 1—2 tablespoons three to six times a
day.

EXTERNALLY: It is used as a lotion in treatment of skin eruptions and eye affections, and as a general
cleansing application. Tired, irritated eyes will be relieved by saturating cotton with a weak solution and
applying to closed eyes.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root for alcoholism, asthma, cancer, catarrh, chancroids,
constipation, corus, dyspepsia, eczema impetiginous, ears (affections of), faintness, fistula, gastric
catarrh, gonorrhea, hemorrhoids, jaundice, leukorrhea, lip (cancer of), liver (affections of), lumbago,
lupus, menorrhagia, metrorrhagia, mouth (sore), nails (affections of), nipples (sore), noises in the head,
nursing women (sore mouth of), ozena, placenta (adherent), postnasal catarrh, rectum (affections of),
sciatica, seborrhea, stomach (affections of), syphilis, taste (disordered), throat deafness, throat (sore),
tongue (affections of), typhus, ulcers, uterus (affections of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Goldenseal does not grow in Russia or any other known place except North
America. However, the value of this wonder plant is known to them medicinally. They use the Latin name
with Russian dialect—hydrastis kanadsky. Their studies and experiments suggest the possible cultivation
in Russia. Clinically: Not a home medicine in Russia. Only the extract is used, prescribed clinically in
hospitals. At the present time it is limited to female conditions of excess bleeding, disturbance, and pain
of monthly periods, etc. (Atlas, Moscow, 1965).

----- PAGE 110 -----
GOLDTHREAD

Coptis groenlandica

COMMON NAMES: Mouth root, yellow root, canker root, vegetable gold.

FEATURES: Goldthread is found growing in dark swamps and mossy woods in northern parts of the United
States, Canada, Iceland, Siberia, and India.

The plant has a small, creeping perennial root of many fibers and a bright yellow color, faint odor, and
bitter taste without astringency. The leaves are evergreen, on long, slender 1-foot-long stalks, growing
three together. The white and yellow starlike flowers grow ona separate stem, rising to the same height as
the leaves. They flower early in the spring to July, followed by oblong capsules containing many small
black seeds. Autumn is the proper season for collecting this creation from above.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, dilute alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic.

Uses: Exactingly helpful as a mouthwash for canker sores, gargle for sore throat, and for ulcers of both
stomach and throat. It may be beneficially used in all cases where a bitter tonic is required, such as
dyspepsia and chronic inflammation of the stomach. It is a good herb to give to children occasionally as a
tonic; it invigorates the stomach and is a preventive of pinworms. It may be given alone or in combination
with other suitable medicines; it promotes digestion, improves the appetite, and acts as a general
stimulant to the system. In convalescence it is highly beneficial. Made into a decoction, goldthread
(Coptis groenlandica) and goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) will often release the driving desire for
alcoholic beverages.

Dose: The tincture, made by adding 1 ounce of the powdered root to 1 pint of diluted alcohol, is
preferable to the powder. The dose is 20 drops to | teaspoonful, three times a day. As a tea, steep 1
teaspoonful of the granulated root in 1 cup of boiling water for 2 hour, strain, take 1 tablespoonful three
to six times a day.

----- PAGE 111 -----
HELLEBORE

Veratrum viride

COMMON NAMES: Hellebore, Indian poke, itch weed, green hellebore.

Features: American hellebore is native to North America and Canada, growing perennially in swamps,
low grounds, and moist meadows.

The thick and fleshy rhizome sends off a multitude of large whitish roots. The stem is 3—5 feet high,
lower leaves 6 inches to | foot long, decreasing in size alternately up the stem. June and July find the
numerous yellowish green flowers in bloom. The roots should be gathered in autumn, and as it rapidly
loses its virtues, it should be gathered annually and kept in a well-closed container. Has a very strong,
unpleasant odor when fresh, diminishing when dry.

MEDICINAL PART: Rhizome.
SOLVENT: Alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Sedative, emetic, diaphoretic, sternutatory.

Usss: It is unsurpassed as an expectorant. As an arterial sedative it stands unparalleled. In small doses it
creates and promotes appetite beyond any agent known to medicine. As a diaphoretic it is one of the most
certain of the whole materia medica, often exciting great coolness and coldness of the surface, sometimes
rendering the skin moist and soft and in other cases producing free and abundant perspiration. In suitable
doses it can be relied upon to bring the pulse down from 150 beats per minute to forty or even thirty.

Protoveratrine, being the most active ingredient, slows the pulse by its powerful stimulating influence
on the vagus nerve, while nervine, constituting more than half of the total alkaloids, plays an important
part in lowering arterial tension by depressing powerfully the heart and vasomotor center. In fevers, in
some diseases of the heart, acute and inflammatory rheumatism, and in many other conditions that involve
an excited state of the circulation, it is of exceeding great value. Dr. Brown informs us: “As a deobstruent
or alterative it far surpasses iodine, and therefore used with great advantage in the treatment of cancer,
scrofula, and consumption.”

It is nervine and never narcotic, which property renders it of great value in all painful diseases, or such

----- PAGE 112 -----
as are accompanied by spasmodic action, convulsions, morbid irritability, and irritative mobility, as in
cholera, epilepsy, pneumonia (should never be given in the latter stages of pneumonia, as it lowers blood
pressure and is relaxant to muscles already in a weakened condition), puerperal fever, neuralgia, etc.,
producing these effects without stupefying the system or producing torpor, as opium is known to do.

As an emetic it is slow but certain and efficient, rousing the liver to action like other emetics, without
being cathartic. It is peculiarly adapted as an emetic in whooping cough, croup, asthma, scarlet fever, and
in all cases where there is much febrile or inflammatory action.

CAUTION: Poisonous in doses larger than those indicated below.

Dose: Veratrum is usually given in the form of a tincture, the formula being: dried root 8-16 ounces,
diluted (83.5 percent alcohol), macerated for two weeks, then expressed and filtered.

To an adult male 8 drops are given, which should be repeated every 3 hours, increasing the dose 1—2
drops each time until nausea or vomiting, or reduction of the pulse to sixty-five or seventy, ensues, then
reducing to half in all cases. Females and young people between fourteen and eighteen should commence
with 6 drops and increase as above. For children from two to five years, begin with 2 drops and increase
by | drop only. Below two years of age, | drop is sufficient. If taken in so large a dose as to produce
vomiting or too much depression, a full dose of morphine or opium, in a little brandy or ginger, is a
complete antidote.

In pneumonia, typhoid fever, and many other diseases, it must be continued for three to seven days after
the symptoms have subsided. Administration of this medicine should be closely watched, and when the
pulse begins to recede, or if nausea or vomiting occurs, it is a signal of alarm and the administration
should be stopped. In typhoid fever, while using Veratrum, quinia is absolutely inadmissible.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root, gathered in autumn, for amaurosis, amenorrhea,
apoplexy, asthma, bunions, cecum (inflammation of), chilblains, chorea, congestion, convulsions,
diplopia, diaphragmitis, dysmenorrhea, erysipelas, headache (nervous, sick), heart (affections of), hiccup,
hyperpyrexia, influenza, malarial fever, measles, meningitic menses (suppressed), myalgia, esophagus
(spasm of), orchitis, pneumonia, proctalgia, puerperal convulsions, puerperal mania, sleep (dreamful),
spine (congestion of), spleen (congested), sunstroke, typhoid fever, uterus (congestion of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Chemeritza lobelia is among the several kinds of hellebore growing in Russia.
American hellebore is valued highly and cultivation is possible. Folk medicine: Decoctions or nastoika
(vodka and hellebore) and preparations of ointments are used in painful rheumatic conditions, especially
in sciatica. A word of caution should be observed as it is poisonous in wrong amounts. Clinically: Used
very carefully and only under prescription. Veterinary: The agent is strong and effective if mixed with
agrimony (Agrimonia eupatoria) for parasites and pests. It is toxic, and personal protection should be
taken when preparing or spraying solution; a wet mask is advised.

----- PAGE 113 -----
HOPS

Humulus lupulus

FEATURES: The hop plant is a long-lived dioecious perennial propagated commercially from rhizome
sections, or ‘root cuttings’. The hop is one of the few crop plant species in which male and female
flowers are borne on different plants. Introduced and cultivated in the United States for its cones and
strobiles, which are used medicinally and in the manufacture of beer, ale, and porter.

Lupulin grains are preferred to the hops itself and are procured by beating or rubbing the strobiles and
then sifting out the grains, which form about one-seventh part of the hops. Lupulin is a globose, kidney-
shaped grain, golden yellow and somewhat transparent. This substance is the bitter principle of hops and
is used in aqueous solutions, also called lupulin.

The stem is rough, very long, and will twist around any adjacent support. Leaves in pairs, stalked,
serrated, cordate. Three- or five-lobed flowers or strobiles consisting of membranous scales are
yellowish green, round, reticulate, veined, nearly % inch long. Odor is peculiar and somewhat agreeable.
Taste: slightly astringent and exceedingly bitter.

MEDICINAL PARTS: The strobiles or cones.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, dilute alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, diuretic, nervine, anodyne, hypnotic, anthelmintic, sedative, febrifuge.

Uses: This old-time plant is an excellent agent for many conditions. The fluid extract of 10 drops is often
used in cough syrups where there is nervousness, and in heart palpitation.

The decoction of the hops cleanses the blood, making it useful in venereal diseases and all kinds of
skin abnormalities, such as itch, ringworm, spreading sores, tetters, and discolorations. It will tone the
liver, assist a sluggish gallbladder, and increase the flow of urine. Principally used for sedative or
hypnotic action, producing sleep, removing restlessness, and alleviating pain, especially so if combined
with chamomile flowers. Use both internally and externally.

The lupulin tincture is used in delirium tremens, nervous exhaustion, anxiety, worms; does not disorder
the stomach or cause constipation. Also useful in after-pains and to mitigate the pain attending gonorrhea.

A pillow made of the dried hops, sprinkled with alcohol to bring out the active principle, is used for
insomnia and generally induces sleep.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the flowers, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water. Drink cold 1
cupful during the day, a large mouthful at a time. Of the tincture, 5-20 minims.

EXTERNALLY: An ointment made by boiling 2 parts of stramonium (jimsonweed) and 1 part of hops, in
lard, is an excellent application in skin irritation and itching skin.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Seeded spikes for trituration. Tincture of cupuline for dyspepsia, dysuria,
gonorrhea.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Hmel is the Russian name for hops, which is an expression for people that are
slightly drunk. This plant grows wild in many parts of the Russian territory and is cultivated for industrial
breweries. Folk medicine: The medical properties have long been appreciated as diuretic, sedative, and
calming. Used for inflammation of the bladder, tuberculosis, and as a hair tonic. The root decoction for
jaundice and dandruff. Dose: 1—20 minims, or decoction of 2 tablespoonfuls to 1 pint of water, a mouthful

----- PAGE 114 -----
three times a day; as a tea, 4 cup three times a day. Clinically: Used as extracts and compound tablets for
the purposes already mentioned.

----- PAGE 115 -----
HOREHOUND

Marrubium vulgare

COMMON NAMEs: Horehound, white horehound.

FEATURES: The most Common of the species of plants in the mint family (Labiatae). Horehound is native
to Europe but has escaped to waste places in temperate zones of North America, especially from Maine
southward to Texas and westward to California and Oregon. It grows on dry, sandy fields, waste grounds,
and roadsides. The most common horehound is Marrubium vulgare, originating from the Hebrew marrob,
meaning a bitter juice.

The entire plant is clothed in white, downy hairs, giving it a hoary appearance. Its stems are stout, four-
angled, and mainly erect, with opposite, ovate, rugose, crenately toothed and softly white hairy leaves.
The white flowers are small, strongly two-lipped, and densely crowded in the uppermost axils of the
stems. The whole herb is medicinal. The flowers appear in June to September and should be gathered
before opening. The plant yields a bitter juice of distinct odor and aromatically agreeable taste. The
extract is used by the candy houses for an old-time prescription as a cough candy. Can be used fresh or
dry.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, diluted alcohol.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, tonic, bitter stomachic, expectorant, resolvent, anthelmintic (large doses),
diuretic, diaphoretic, laxative.

Uses: Perhaps the most popular of herbal pectoral remedies for congestion of coughs, colds, and
pulmonary affections associated with unwanted phlegm from the chest. The warm infusion will produce
perspiration and flow of urine, and is used with great benefit in jaundice, asthma, hoarseness,
amenorrhea, and hysteria.

Taken in large doses it is laxative and will expel worms. The cold infusion is an excellent tonic for
some forms of dyspepsia. Some herbalists have found it of use for mercurial salivation. Culpeper used
horehound in various other ways: “To repel the afterbirth, as an antidote to poisons and for the bites of
venomous serpents.” Others used it for running sores. The hot infusion of tincture is more effective when

----- PAGE 116 -----
combined with other agents for the purpose intended.

Tincture of skullcap (Scutellaria lateriflora), 2-15 drops
Tincture of pleurisy root (Asclepias tuberosa), 20-45 drops
Tincture of horehound (Marrubium vulgare), 5-40 drops

In warm water every 2—3 hours, according to symptoms. Tincture alone, 20-30 minims, as indicated by
age and condition, every 2—3 hours. For children with coughs or croup, steep 1 heaped tablespoonful in 1
pint of boiling water for 20 minutes, strain, add honey. Should be drunk freely.

----- PAGE 117 -----
HORSERADISH

Armoracia lapathifolia

FEATURES: Originally horseradish came to North America from eastern Europe. It has naturalized in the
United States and Canada and throughout most of the world.

The perennial root sends up numerous smooth, erect branch stems, growing 2-3 feet high. The large
leaves are lanceolate, waved, scalloped on the edges, and stand up on 1-foot-long stalks. The flowers are
numerous and white, followed by seed pods divided into two cells, each containing 4 to 6 seeds. The hot,
biting root is tapering, conical at the top, fleshy, whitish externally. The fresh root is much more powerful
than the dried.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diaphoretic, diuretic, digestive.

Usss: Effective for promoting stomach secretions and is used as a digestive agent. It has been used by
herbalists of the past as a most worthy diuretic. Dr. Coffin used a preparation of 1 ounce fresh horseradish
root, sliced; % ounce mustard seed, bruised; | pint boiling water. Let it stand in a covered vessel for 4
hours, then strain. Dose: 3 tablespoonfuls three times a day. This preparation is especially useful for
retention of water in abnormal amounts. Dr. Coffin also states that the above formula is “especially useful
for dropsy occurring after fevers and intermittents.” Another cause of this fearful disease is the retention
of sulphur in our system, which interferes with the absorption and secretion of the endocrine glands and
central nervous system. Drs. Wood and Ruddock, in their book Vitalogy, give us more assurance of
horseradish as an agent in dropsy abnormalities. “A warm infusion of the fresh root in cider, drunk in
sufficient quantity to produce perspiration and repeated every night, has cured dropsy in two or three
weeks.”

Horseradish also has merit in rheumatism, neuralgia, paralysis, and in weak digestive organs,
particularly the function of the pancreas. A syrup made of grated horseradish, honey, and water will
control ordinary cases of hoarseness; | teaspoonful every 1—2 hours.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the root to 1 cup of boiling water. Drink cold or hot, 1—2 cupfuls a day, a large
mouthful at a time; of the tincture, “%—1 fluidram.

----- PAGE 118 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the root for albuminuria, aphonia, asthma, cataract, colic, cornea
(spots on), eruptions, eyes (affections of), gonorrhea, gravel, headache, leukorrhea, lungs (edema of),
rheumatism, scurvy, strangury, toothache, ulcers, urinary disorders.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Hren (horseradish) is a bitter spice found growing in most gardens for home use as
a food accompaniment and as folk medicine. This is a rich source of vitamin C and is given in cases of
scrofula, as a stomachic, and as a diuretic. The juice of the root mixed with honey aids a sluggish liver.
The whole root boiled in beer with juniper berries is used for dropsy. PRECAUTION: the beer should be
from the old-time, naturally aged process, not artificial, fast-cured beer (Bello-Russ. Academy of
Science, 1965).

----- PAGE 119 -----
HORSETAIL

Equisetum arvense

COMMON NAMES: Shave grass, bottlebrush, pewterwort.

FEATURES: Equisetum arvense is among the many species of horsetail. A perennial plant rising from
creeping rootstocks, the numerous stems are furrowed, many-jointed; fructification in terminal conelike
spikes. The spikes are the first to appear in the spring (can be prepared like asparagus), but they die after
a few weeks and are followed by a clump of stems, the outer layer of which contains a quantity of silica.
The plant grows in sand and gravel, along roadsides and railway tracks, and in wet places.

Native Americans and Mexicans used the stems for scouring pots; can also be used for polishing
hardwood, ivory, and brass (hence the common name pewterwort).

MEDICINAL PART: The entire plant.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, astringent.

Users: Native Americans and early settlers used the stems as a stimulating diuretic in kidney and dropsical
disorders. Horsetail is very much used today by herbalists for eye and skin treatment because of the
considerable amount of silica. Homeopathic tablets of silica are used for catarrhal conditions with
offensive, puslike discharges of ear, nose, and throat; grandular discharge; skin disorders; and offensive
perspiration, especially of the feet. It is also found beneficial in dropsy, gravel, and all kinds of kidney
affections. It strengthens the heart and lungs and is an excellent tonic when the whole system is enfeebled.
For discomfort and difficulty in discharging urine, it is not to be replaced. A specific in bleeding of all
kinds, taken internally, but should be discontinued when cessation takes place.
Internally in all indicated conditions the following is used:

Tincture of shave grass (Equisetum arvense), 5—20 drops
Tincture of couch grass (Agropyron repens), 20-40 drops
Tincture of corn silk (Mays stigma), 10-20 drops

----- PAGE 120 -----
In water three or more times a day as required by condition. As a herbal tea by itself, or combined with
the above, steep | teaspoonful in 1 cup of boiling water for 45 minutes, in covered container. Cool, take a
mouthful four times a day.

EXTERNALLY: As a compress or sponge bath for old injuries, putrid wounds, gangrenous ulcers, or
external bleeding. Simmer covered for 2 hour, cool, and administer; make fresh daily.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant chopped and pounded to a pulp for cystitis, dropsy,
enuresis, general paralysis, gleet, gonorrhea, gravel, hematuria, urine (retention of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Hvosh pokvoy (horsetail) is given medical recognition; many others are similar
but not valued as the same. Folk medicine: Use horsetail as a tea, nastoika (with vodka), and as a
powder, in many cases. Known as a diuretic in heart conditions due to dropsy (excess of water) and
deficiency of blood circulation. Is of use in kidney stones, but should not be used when the kidneys are
inflamed. When bleeding from the stomach or intestinal tract, horsetail is effective; also useful in
excessive female bleeding. Folk medicine has also found the properties valuable for blood purifying and
liver conditions. Experimentally, an important agent to cleanse the system of lead poisoning and as a
diuretic (Medical Literature, Moscow, 1962). Clinically: In use as an extract, tincture, tablets, and
powder. Externally: A powder for bleeding wounds and ulcers; also for veterinary use of the same
conditions.

----- PAGE 121 -----
HYDRANGEA

Hydrangea arborescens

COMMON NAMES: Wild hydrangea, seven barks (due to the seven separate layers of different-colored
bark).

FEATURES: Indigenous to North America and native to woodlands of rich, moist soil and some shade.
There are twenty-three species of Hydrangea related to the well-known cultivated hydrangea, widely
distributed in eastern Asia and North Central, and South America. The flowers are mostly white, often
tinged with pink or purple, and in a few are entirely colored depending on the acidity or alkalinity of the
soil. Because the flowers appear from July through September (later in milder climates), the plants are
highly valued for garden beauty and readily grown from cuttings or layering.

MEDICINAL PARTs: Dried root. (J. Kloss used the leaves as tonic, diuretic, sialagogue.)
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Cathartic, diuretic, nephritic (relieving kidney disorders).

Uses: An old and admirable remedy for gravel, and is best known for relieving the excruciating pain
experienced when the gravelly formations pass through the ureters from the kidneys to the bladder. Also
recognized for inflamed tissue of the kidney and urinary organs. Will relieve backache caused by kidney
trouble, chronic rheumatism, parallelism scurvy, and dropsy.

Dose: A syrup or decoction of the root may be taken in teaspoonful doses several times a day.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh leaves and young shoots, fluid extract for bladder (catarrh of,
stone in), diabetes, gravel, prostatic affections, urine (incontinence of).

----- PAGE 122 -----
HYSSOP
Hyssopus officinalis

FEATURES: Native to southern Europe, sparsely naturalized in the United States. The common hyssop
(Hyssopus officinalis), of the mint family, is a perennial shrubby plant with square stems, woody at the
base, with rodlike branches reaching 2 feet in height. The leaves stand in pairs without petioles. They
have an agreeable aromatic odor; hot, spicy, and somewhat bitter taste. The flowers are bluish purple,
growing chiefly on one side of short verticillate spikes, flowering in July.

Hyssop is spoken of in the Bible (Psalms 51:7) in connection with cleansing and purifying the body.
There seems to be some controversy as to the particular plant. The Hebrew name ezeb has been translated
“hyssop,” and this is said to have grown out of the walls. It is quite possible the name is applied to
several plants of similar properties.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Tops, leaves.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, aromatic, carminative, tonic, expectorant.

Usrs: Generally used in quinsy and other sore throats as a gargle, with sage. Valuable in asthma, colds,
grippe and all chest affections, and shortness of breath. Excellent as a blood regulator, both increasing the
circulation of the blood and reducing blood pressure. Is a fine tonic for the mucous tissue of both
respiratory and gastrointestinal tract in all weakened conditions. Serviceable in combination with
hygienic herbs for scrofula, gravel, various stomach complaints, jaundice, dropsy, spleen malfunction.
Has been used in herbal preparations for epilepsy.

Culpeper says: “Mixed with honey will kill worms of the belly.” The hot vapors of the decoction will
ease inflammation and singing noise of the ear if a funnel relays the vapors of simmering hyssop to this
area.

Dose: | ounce to | pint infusion is given in wineglassful doses throughout the day according to age.

EXTERNALLY: The fresh leaves are valuable to relieve the pain and discoloration of bruises. Healing to
fresh wounds and old ulcers.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Take the first letter, 4, from hyssop and it will be a Russian name, yssop. It is not

----- PAGE 123 -----
considered a wild growing plant in Russia, but cultivation is profitable for medical, industrial, and
commercial uses. Folk medicine: Used as expectorant and stimulant for asthma and chronic bronchitis.
Externally: For healing wounds and ulcers. Commercial: From the second year after planting hyssop it
can be harvested for the next ten years, with each yield growing stronger and more plentiful. Every year
cutting of the dry herb and flowers can yield 1,500—3,000 pounds for each acre. Industrial: For medicinal
purposes hyssop is collected before flowering. For industrial oil extract, at the beginning of the flowering
season. Hyssop is used for its strong aromatic touch in the wine, food, confectionery, and cosmetic
industries. Bees like hyssop nectar; from one acre they can easily, even ina short Russian summer, collect
pollen for 60 pounds of honey. Hungary has special industrial plantations for hyssop oil extract.

----- PAGE 124 -----
JUNIPER

Juniperus communis

COMMON NAMES: Juniper bush, juniper berries.

FEATURES: An ornamental evergreen of the pine family with trees and shrubs of about forty species. The
common juniper (Juniper cornmunis) is a smaller species, usually less than 25 feet tall, and many of its
numerous varieties are less than 10 feet. This shrub is common on dry, sterile hills from Canada south to
New Jersey, west to Nebraska, and in the Rocky Mountains of New Mexico.

The leaves open in whorls of three, are glaucous and concave above, keeled underneath. Flowers in
May, with fleshy fruit of dark purplish color, ripening in the second year after the flower. Every part of the
shrub is medicinal, and the French peasantry prepare a sort of tar, which they call huile de cade, from the
interior reddish wood of the trunk and branches. This is our popular juniper tar.

MEDICINAL PART: Ripe, dry berries.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, stimulant, carminative.

Usss: If we may speak of the conditions of internal accumulative filth we would suggest juniper berries
as an agent used for fumigating the system to ward off contagion. Sebastian Kneipp, in My Water Cure
(1897), says this about the berries: “Those who are nursing patients with serious illness as Scarlet fever,
small pox, typhus, cholera, etc. and are exposed to contagion by raising, carrying, or serving the patient,
or by speaking with him, should always chew a few juniper-berries (6-10 a day). They give a pleasant
taste in the mouth and are of good service to the digestion, they burn up as it were, the harmful miasms,
exhalations, when these seek to enter through the mouth or nostrils.”

Persons with a weak stomach should chew five softened berries a few days in succession, increasing
the amount one a day until fifteen berries a day are taken. Then decrease the amount by one berry a day for
five more days. Obstinate stomach troubles have been relieved by releasing pressures that cause stomach
tissue weakness, indigestion—in general, poor assimilation. For sluggish conditions of the kidneys,
juniper berries will be found most serviceable; they increase the flow of urine but should not be used

----- PAGE 125 -----
alone in sensitive conditions. Small doses reduce irritation, while large doses may increase it, so it is
best to combine with peach leaves (Amygdalus persica), a little marshmallow root (Althaea officinalis),
uva-ursi (Arctostaphylos), parsley (petroselinum crispum), alfalfa (Medicago sativa), etc.

A useful agent for many ailments: expels wind and strengthens the stomach, for coughs and shortness of
breath, consumption, rupture, cramps, convulsions, gout, sciatica, dropsy, and ague. It will strengthen the
nerves and is an agent used for epilepsy; some causes are aggravated due to stomach, intestinal, and nerve
vibratory interference. Kills worms in children and adults. Dr. Coffin tells us: “If Juniper boughs are
burnt to ashes and the ashes put into water, a medicine will be obtained that has cured the dropsy in an
advanced stage.”

For fumigating a room that has been used by a patient with an infectious disease, a solution used as a
spray destroys all fungi.

Dose: To make an infusion, several tablespoonfuls of the berries are generally prepared by macerating
(softening by soaking), then adding them to | pint of boiling water for % hour or more. Cool and divide
the mixture into four portions, which are then taken morning, noon, afternoon, and evening. Dose of the
tincture, 10-30 drops.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh ripe berries for dropsy, dysmenorrhea, hemorrhage.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Mozshevelnik obiknovennyi, or Juniper vulgaris, grows in many parts of Russia.
The berries and twigs are used for medicinal purpose with nastoika (in vodka) as diuretic, expectorant,
disinfectant, digestive, antiseptic (Atlas, Moscow, 1962). Junipers are direct in affect and the doses
should be kept very small; steep 1 teaspoonful in 1 cup of boiling water for 15 minutes, strain, take |
tablespoonful three times a day. WARNING: cannot be used when kidneys are inflamed. Used successfully in
colpatitis (vaginal inflammation) (Saratov University, 1962). The raw berries for stomach ulcers;
decoction of berries and twigs for menstrual restoration and diatheses (uric acid) retention throughout, or
specific parts of the body.

----- PAGE 126 -----
LADY’S SLIPPER
Cypripedium pubescens

COMMON NAMES: Nerve root, Noah’s ark, yellow lady’s sliper, American valprian, yellow moccasin
flower.

FEATURES: Lady’s slipper is among the primitive members of the family Orchidaceae and is among the
most beautiful and best-known orchids. Some fifty species comprise the genus Cypripedium, found in
Europe, Asia, and North America and as far south as the tropics. There are eleven species found in North
America. Professor Rainesque of the University of Pennsylvania says in Medical Botany. “All species
are equally remedial.”

The plant grows in North America in rich woods and meadows and flowers in May and June. The two
or more folded and prominently ribbed leaves are sheathed, located near the base of the plant or on the
stem. The usually showy flowers (numbering 1—12) are characterized by the sessile, inflated or pouch-
shaped, variously colored lip, from which the plant receives its general name, Aphrodite’s shoe. Native
Americans called the beautiful plant “mocassin flower’; its use was known to them for generations. The
empirics of New England, particularly Samuel Thompson, had much respect for mutual evidence. The
fibrous roots are the parts used in medicine, and they should be gathered and carefully cleaned in August
or September.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, diluted alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antiperiodic, nervine, tonic.

Uses: This medicine is an excellent nervine and acts as a tonic to the exhausted nervous system,
improving by circulation and nutrition of the nerve centers. It relieves pain (if present) and produces a
calm and tranquil condition of body and mind. From the quick response and high attributions many
suppose it possesses narcotic properties, but to this the answer is “none present.”

It is of special value in reflex functional disorders or chorea, hysteria, nervous headache, insomnia,
low fevers, nervous unrest, hypochondria, and nervous depression accompanying stomach disorders.
During fevers its use is indicated for restlessness, and during the early fever stages of pneumonia,
combined with a little lobelia (Lobelia inflata) and ginger (Zingiber), it will often cut short the trouble.
Combine with skullcap (Scutellaria) in various nervous affections such as hysteria, headache, Saint
Vitus’ dance, or other diseases of this nature. For the feeling of depression due to stomach disorders,
lady’s slipper (Cypripedium) and chamomile (Chamaemelum nobile) should be taken before meals and
on retiring. As a home remedy the root is best roughly ground, 5 tablespoonfuls in | pint of boiling water;
steep for an hour, take 1 tablespoonful every hour, as needed. Of the tincture of Cypripedium alone, 5—30
drops, according to age and severity of condition.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture and infusion of fresh root gathered in autumn for brain affections,
chorea, convulsions, debility and sleeplessness, delirium tremens, ecstasy, epilepsy, mental despondency,
nervous debility, neuralgia, postinfluenza debility, sleeplessness, spermatorrhea, stye.

----- PAGE 127 -----
LICORICE
Glycyrrhiza glabra

COMMON NAME: Sweetwood.

FEATURES: A perennial species introduced into various countries from southern Europe and western Asia.
It grows 3-5 feet tall, bears imparipinnate dark green leaves in pairs of 4-7, ovate and smooth. The
yellowish white, pale blue, or purplish spike-shaped flowers are followed by 1—6-seeded, 1-inch-long,
brown, flat ova fruit pods. Root grayish brown or dark brown, wrinkled lengthwise, internally yellow,
and four times sweeter than cane sugar. The roots are dug when sweetest, in autumn of the fourth year,
preferably of plants that have not borne fruit, which exhausts the sweetness of the sap.

MEDICINAL PART: Dried root.
SOLVENT: Water, sparingly in alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Demulcent, expectorant, laxative, pectoral.

Uses: Licorice is the well-known root extract for coughs and chest complaints. It is best combined with
some, or all, of the following: black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa), wild cherry (Prunus serotina),
flaxseed (Linum), ginger root (Zingiber), and lemon and made into an infusion for wheezing or shortness
of breath, pains of the breasts and lungs, dry cough or hoarseness. Can be used alone, however, as the root
of this plant is greatly esteemed. Some of the latest research from Green Medicine Research Laboratories
in Long Island has found active materials in licorice root to have a molecular structure similar to that of
hormones from the adrenal cortex (a most important component of the endocrine glandular system),
besides being useful in treating chronic skin conditions. From M. B. Kreig’s Green Medicine:
“Derivatives from Licorice were given to patients with gastric ulcers, with the result that the ulcers
disappeared in 37 per cent of the cases, and were greatly reduced in the remainder according to the
researchers.” The reason being, licorice is a beneficial laxative and demulcent, thus removing gastric-
ulcer causing material from the intestinal tract and relieving the conditions of the unwanted ulcers.

Used since ancient times, it was considered a mild demulcent of little value except as a flavoring agent
until more recent research found the root to be valuable as a source of estrogenic hormones. Culpeper
used licorice for dropsy and to allay thirst, besides the already mentioned ailments. Too much licorice is

----- PAGE 128 -----
apt to sicken the stomach or even produce vomiting from its relaxing character.

Dose: | pound of licorice root boiled in 3 pints of water, reduced by boiling to 1 quart, is an all-purpose
decoction; 1 teaspoonful three times a day. 1 teaspoonful of the dried root to 1 cup of boiling water can be
taken as a herbal tea, made fresh daily. Of the tincture, 2-1 fluidram.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Solodka gladkaya, smooth (polished) licorice, grows in many parts of Russia. It is
used for commercial, industrial, and medical purposes. Folk medicine: Domestically very old medicine
for cough, bronchitis, stomachic, including ulcers, diuretic for inflammation of kidney and bladder,
chronic constipation. Clinically: Preparations as extracts, powders, and syrups are used for a variety of
compounds, not only for its aromatic and sweetening properties; of late, clinically useful for regulating
water and salt metabolism (Medicina, Moscow, 1965). Externally: An ointment for eczema, psoriasis,
redness of skin, is made by adding 2 percent licorice juice to an antibiotic formula (Saratov University
1962). Industrial: Licorice is collected with tractors, transported by trainload, and exported by shipload
for the food and pharmaceutical industries. The uses are many: sweetening and flavoring in the candy and
canning industries: in soft drinks, beer, and liquor; by tobacco houses for taste and appeal in chewing
tobacco; in fire extinguishers, as it foams when mixed with water.

INDIAN EXPERIENCE: Jethi madh, madhoka, mithi lakdi are a few of the common names for licorice in
India. It grows wild in the northern and western sections of India and Pakistan. Folk medicine: Generally
used in doses of 10-30 grains for dysuria, throat conditions, hoarseness, of voice, bronchitis, coughs,
asthma, etc.; for catarrhal conditions of bowel, kidney, and bladder. Clinically: Alterative, expectorant,
emollient, demulcent, laxative, pectoral, sweet tonic, stomachic. In pharmacy the syrup is used for all
compounds that require aromatics and sweeteners.

----- PAGE 129 -----
LIFE ROOT

Senecio aureus

COMMON NAMES: Squaw weed, ragwort, false valerian, golden senecio, female regulator, cocash weed,
groundsel.

FEATURES: Life root and various other composite herbs of the genus Senecio are common in most parts of
the world. In North America they are found mostly in the eastern states. As these species possess the same
medicinal properties, they can be used interchangeably. These perennial, coarse, yellow-flowered plants
are allied to the thistles. Can be found in low marshy grounds and on the banks of creeks. The stems are
erect and smooth, 1—2 feet high; radical leaves are simple and rounded, upper leaves are few, dentate, and
sessile. Flowers in May and June. Popular with Native Americans, homeopaths, and herbalists.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, whole herb.
SOLVENT: Diluted alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diuretic, emmenagogue, pectoral, astringent, tonic.

Uses: We of the modern age are bewildered by so many female abnormalities, from granddaughter to
grandmother. The time-honored “female regulator” (Senecio aureus), of specific use and without
complications, is still reliable. Senecio stimulates the pelvic organs relieving engorgement by removing
pressure stemming from the perineum, bladder, and rectum. A completely safe aid in gynecological
disorders such as dysmenorrhea (painful menstruation), menorrhagia (excessive menstruation),
suppressed menstruation, atonic leukorrhea (excessive mucous secretion), and other disturbances of the
pelvic organs, including various functional irregularities of menopause. It strengthens flabby uterine
ligaments and has a use for diseases of men when prostatic enlargement is of the soft, boggy, and atonic
type. It is also valuable in gravel, stones, and diarrhea.

In pulmonary complaints it is advisable to combine 1 teaspoonful of the fluid extract with other
pectorals in sweetened water. Life root is indicated for many different uses as a household remedy.

CAUTION: Toxic in doses larger than those indicated below.

----- PAGE 130 -----
Dose: Tincture of Senecio alone, 10—20 drops in water three or four times a day.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant in flower for amenorrhea, ascites, coryza, cough,
dropsy, dysmenorrhea, dysuria, epistaxis, fainting, gleet, gonorrhea, hemorrhages, homesickness, hysteria,
kidney (inflammation of), lumbago, mania, menorrhagia, menstruation (delayed, early, profuse, obstructed,
vicarious), nails (brittle), nervousness, neurasthenia, phthisis, prostatitis, puerperal mania, renal colic,
sciatica, spermatic cord (pain in), wounds.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Life root, Senecio platyphylus (broadleaf), grows in Russia’s Caucasus
Mountains; known in Russian as krestovnik. There is no folk medicine practice indicated in Russian
literature. Clinically: Extracts of the root and herb are used in powder form and ampoules (Atlas,
Moscow, 1962). Clinically given for stomach and intestinal spasm, spasmodic constipation, ulcers,
colitis, colic, liver malfunction, bronchial asthma, high blood pressure, angina pectoris, disturbance and
circulation of the blood stream due to spasmodic character. Also used in eye practice. Commercial: to
meet the demand for life root, successful plantations are located in many parts of central Russia,
Byelorussia, and Ukraine. For one acre they seed 5—6 pounds in square nest system; row system, 7—8
pounds. The first year’s collection of the dried herb is about 100-200 pounds per acre. The third year’s
harvest jumps to 800—1,000 pounds of the dried roots and herb for the same acre.

----- PAGE 131 -----
LINDEN

Tilia cordata

COMMON NAMES: Lime tree, common lime, linden flower, American basswood.

FEATURES: Linden is a common name for trees of the genus Zilia in the family Tiliaceae, which in Great
Britain are commonly called limes and in America basswood (the native species at least), which is Tilia
americana, a magnificent forest tree that reaches 130 feet in height. The genus comprises some thirty
species of handsome large- or medium-sized trees native to the north temperate zone whose taxonomy is
much confused because of free hybridization among many members. All lindens grow best in rich, moist
soil and shed their leaves early in dry locations.

The species is characterized by prominent winter buds and the lack of a terminal bud; the leaves, which
are mostly roundish ovate with oblique and more or less cordate bases, are always toothed and often have
tufts of down in the axils of the veins of the lower surface. Flowers are dull white or yellowish, about %
inch wide, with five sepals and petals and numerous stamens cohering in groups in many species. The
flowers appear in June and August and are very fragrant; they produce copious amounts of nectar, that is
very attractive to bees. The linden honey is of high quality and rather strong flavor. One of two varieties
produce substances poisonous to bees. The fruit is the size and shape of a pea and is commonly called
monkey nuts. The fine-grained wood is soft and light, making it ideal for carving, and it was used by the
Iroquois. Of no use in construction.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Flowers, leaves.

SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Nervine, stimulant, tonic.

Usgs: A well-known and much-used herb for domestic use in nervous conditions and disorders following
colds. Promotes perspiration in fevers and relieves cough and hoarseness, helps remove mucus from the
lungs and trachea, and provides relief from bronchial catarrh. Advisable to combine with coltsfoot
(Tussilago farfara) for this purpose. The infusion will also flush the kidney, bladder, and stomach of
unwanted mucus when present and prevent the development of serious abdominal conditions that are
sometimes the cause of lung and windpipe complaints. It is also excellent for female complaints and has
had a great reputation for aid in epilepsy.

Dose: Infusion of leaves or flowers—1 teaspoonful to 1 cup of boiling water, steep ’2 hour, cool and
drink as frequently as required. Tincture, 15—20 drops as indicated by condition.

----- PAGE 132 -----
EXTERNALLY: Poultices on boils and other painful swellings.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh blossom for dentition, enuresis, epistaxis, leukorrhea, lichen,
neuralgia, peritonitis, rheumatism, toothache, urticaria, uterus (bearing down in, prolapses of,
inflammation of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Russian lippa (linden) is a most popular tree, there being eleven species
throughout Russia; they sometimes grow so closely that /ippa foliage is all that can be seen. It is estimated
that there are about 2 million acres of pure linden, besides many square miles of assorted trees. Folk
medicine: As diuretic (cool or warm), diaphoretic (hot with honey or raspberry syrup), conditions of
colds, inflamed lungs, headache, nerve tension or debility, sterility, amenorrhea. One teaspoonful of
linden charcoal and goat’s milk is given for tuberculosis. The leaves and flowers are steeped as a strong
tea for throat and cough soreness and as a gargle. Externally: Linden tar is used for eczema, the leaves as
poultice for boils and carbuncles. Industrial: Wine industry uses aromatic linden flowers; and honey,
which is considered the best. The soft elastic wood is excellent for all kinds of wooden kitchenware, and
furniture.

----- PAGE 133 -----
LOBELIA
Lobelia inflata

\

<

ay

Led

= g
y,
J

a

fis
PY)

COMMON NAMES: Indian tobacco, emetic weed, poke weed, asthma weed, gagroot, wild tobacco.

FEATURES: A genus of more than two hundred species of showy annual or perennial herbs or subshrubs of
tropical and temperate regions, belonging to the bellflower family (Campanulaceae). This plant grows
wild in most sections of the United States and is often known as Indian tobacco because of its taste.
However, it is inno way related to tobacco and does not contain nicotine or other poisonous properties.

In all species the tubular, five-lobed corolla is irregular with a split on the upper side, an upper lip
with two erect lobes, and a lower one with three spreading lobes. Lobelia flowers from July to
November; the flowers are small and numerous, pale blue in this species, and a variety of red, yellow,
white, or blue in others. The leaves are alternate, ovate, lanceolate, veiny, and hairy; it has a fibrous root
and an erect, angular, very hairy stem 6 inches to 3 feet in height. The fruit is a two-celled ovoid capsule
containing numerous small brown seeds. More than twenty species attain considerable heights (up to 15
feet in the high mountains of Africa and Asia). Some dwarf lobelia plants (Lobelia erina) are cultivated
as bedding plants or in hanging baskets.

The proper time for gathering is from the last of July to the middle of October. The plant should be
dried in the shade and then preserved in packages or covered vessels, especially if reduced to powder.
The people of New England used it long before the time of Samuel Thompson, its assumed discoverer.
Contains various alkaloids, lobeline and others. The milky juice is very poisonous to livestock. The
whole plant is active, and the stalks are used indiscriminately with the leaves by those who are better
acquainted with its properties. The root is supposed to be more energetic, medicinally, than any other part
of the plant.

----- PAGE 134 -----
MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, stems, root.
SOLVENT: Water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Emetic, stimulant, antispasmodic, expectorant, diaphoretic, relaxant, nauseant,
sedative (secondary cathartic and astringent).

Uses: Native Americans used the root and plant of red lobelia for syphilis and for expelling or destroying
intestinal worms. The Shoshones made a tea of lobelia for use as an emetic and physic.

Lobelia is dual in its activities; it is a relaxant and a stimulant. In small doses it stimulates, in large
doses it relaxes. Lobelia is one of the most valuable herbs used in botanic practice. Much has been
written regarding whether this herb is poisonous, but experience suggests that it is an antidote to poison,
whether of animal or vegetable variety. Lobelia is an antidote, chiefly used as an emetic, and may be
prescribed whenever one is indicated. It seems strange that though lobelia is an excellent emetic, when
given in small doses for irritable stomach it will stop spasmodic vomition. It tends to remove obstructions
from every part of the system and is felt even to the ends of the toes. It not only cleanses the stomach but
exercises a beneficial influence over every part of the body. It is very diffusable, however, and needs to
be used with capsicum or some other permanent stimulant to keep alive the blaze that it has kindled.

The action is different on different people, and given alone lobelia cannot cure but is very beneficial if
given in association with other measures. For irritable conditions of the nervous system it is invaluable
and can be relied upon in ordinary convulsions; it should be combined with some nervine, such as lady’s
slipper (Cypripedium pubescens). As an expectorant it may be used to great advantage in small doses for
colds, along with the decided pulmonary agent coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara). For spasmodic croup it is
invaluable; it has also gained a great reputation for asthma along with nervines such as blue cohosh
(Caulophyllum thalictroides) and skullcap (Scutellaria laterifolia). It has been successfully used in
lockjaw. Large doses will relax the whole system, completely, so that even the smallest muscles cannot be
used. This condition is termed the “alarm,” and Dr. J. H. Greer tells us “it is uncomfortable although not
dangerous, unless poisons should be administered, which are in this condition quickly absorbed.” This is
not advisable administration for the lay public, however.

Lobelia, in fevers, is suited for phrenitis, meningitis, pneumonia, pleurisy, hepatitis, peritonitis,
nephritis, periostitis. This is not a continually used agent; the intention is to clean out, clean up, and keep
clean the many areas of congestion of the vertebral arteries to pave the way for the use of other remedial
nourishment. In bronchial and pulmonary complaints its action is speedily and wonderfully beneficial.
Can also be used to subdue spasms, epilepsy, tetanus, cramps, hysteria, chorea, and convulsions. Give
first of all an infusion of catnip (Nepeta) to the bowels, which of itself will do much to relieve the brain
and can be administered even when the patient is delirious. Give lobelia in small quantities as the case
may require, but clean out the waste material and relieve the locked-up condition of the body that is
causing the trouble. It is a temporary relief in any case when administered internally, if not used with great
skill and caution it may do as much harm as good.

CAUTION: Never administer lobelia where the system is relaxed or when there is congestion.

Dose: | ounce of the herb to | pint of boiling water makes an ordinary infusion, to be administered in
tablespoonful doses every hour or half-hour. A weak infusion given in teaspoonful doses every 10 minutes
(termed “broken doses”) will thoroughly relax the muscular system and prove a great aid in reducing
fractures and dislocations, especially if a cloth soaked in the warm infusion is applied over the seat of the
difficulty. For convulsions, injections of the herb as infusion is best.

EXTERNALLY: A salve or tincture of lobelia and other soothing barks and roots can be employed for
inflammations and swellings, not recommended for indolent ulcers or dark sores.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant, trituration of leaves only for alcoholism, alopecia,

----- PAGE 135 -----
amenorrhea, angina pectoris, asthma, cardialgia, cough, croup, deafness, debility, diarrhea, dysmenorrhea,
dyspepsia, emphysema, faintness, gallstones, gastralgia, hemorrhoidal discharge, hay asthma, heart
(affections of), hysteria, meningeal headaches, Millar’s asthma, morning sickness (of drunkards, of
pregnancy), morphia habit, palpitation, pleurisy, psoriasis, rigid as seborrhea, shoulders (pain in), tea
(effects of), urethra (stricture of), vagina (serious discharge from), vomiting (of pregnancy), wens,
whooping cough.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The Russians pronounce lobelia the same as do the Americans. Lobelia is popular
as both a commercial and industrial cultivation in central Russia—Krasnodar, Voronezh, Moscow, and
Byelorussia. The use of folk medicine is not indicated in the available literature. Clinically: The whole
plant is used for many critical conditions. The all-important adrenal glands are aroused by stimulating
adrenalin into the blood stream; it is not accumulative and can be used repeatedly. Respiratory area is
soon relieved of symptoms of asthma and spasmodic conditions. Is useful in cases where first aid is
needed when shocked by electricity, sun- and heatstroke, to force vomiting when poisoned by narcotics,
food, or medicine, in carbon monoxide poisoning, and in infections (Atlas, Moscow, 1962).

----- PAGE 136 -----
LUNGWORT

Pulmonaria officinalis

COMMON NAMES: Spotted lungwort, maple lungwort, Jerusalem cowslip, spotted comfrey.

FEATURES: Lungwort may be any of several plants used as folk remedies for lung disease. One is a
widely distributed lichen (Lobaria pulmonaria), that grows usually on tree trunks. Others are hairy
perennials that belong to the genus Pulmonaria of the borage family (Boraginaceae) and have pink, blue,
purple, or white flowers; sometimes grown as ornamentals in northern latitudes. This particular perennial
species (P. officinalis) is a smooth plant with a stem about | foot high. The flowers are blue, funnel-
shaped, with a five-angled corolla with stigma, flowering in May. They are without any particular odor.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Demulcent, mucilaginous, pectoral.

UsEs: Its virtues seem to be entirely expended upon the lungs, and it is certainly an efficaciously reliable
agent for all morbid conditions of these organs, especially when there is bleeding from the lung structure
and functions. Also valuable as a treatment for coughs, asthma, colds, bronchial and catarrhal affections.
Seems to seal the weakened tissue and take away inflammation.

Dose: The infusion of 2 ounces in | pint of boiling water is taken in frequent doses of a wineglassful.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Two species of lungwort grow in Russia, lungwort obscura and Pulmonaria
angustifolia (narrow-leaf lungwort). Both species are used for the same purpose. In this case, as with
many other of our folk medicines around the world, the people have independently discovered the useful
properties of the plant and named the plant according to its most influential action on certain parts of the
body. Such is the attractive lungwort: in Latin, pulmonaria (pulm-lung); in Russian, legochnitza, (legkie-
lung); in English, lungwort (from the lung). Folk medicine: The medical properties of lungwort have long
been accepted as emollient, mild astringent, tonic, and a natural source of minerals for stomach and
intestinal sickness and lung and pulmonary conditions. There have been recent (1963) reports in medical

----- PAGE 137 -----
literature of lungwort being used with other compounds. Externally: Vulnerary for dressing and washing
wounds and swellings, and in treatment of amenorrhea, as it is antiseptic. Clinically: Moscow Medical
Institute has conducted experimental work, and the findings give support to folk medicine wisdom and
belief. To those of us who like to know what herbal medicine contains, and why it repairs the body’s ills,
perhaps the following itemization will help us realize that plants contain many of the elements we also are
made of, or that are necessary for healthy blood. Lungwort contains vitamins C and B and minerals—iron,
copper, silver, manganese, keratin, titan, nickel—to mention a few of the necessities. Further study by the
medical world is expected to produce significant findings.

----- PAGE 138 -----
MANDRAKE
Podophyllum peltatum

. L

COMMON NAMES: Mayapple, hog apple, American mandrake, Indian apple, raccoonberry, wild lemon.

FEATURES: In the United States the name mayapple is applied to Podophyllum peltatum, a herbaceous
member of the barberry family (Berberidaceae) that has a perennial and sometimes divided rootstock.
The American mandrake is an entirely different plant from white bryony, or English mandrake. American
mandrake is native to eastern North America and can be found growing throughout the States in moist
open woods and pastures.

The jointed, dark brown root, about half the size of a finger, is very fibrous and internally yellow. The
stem is simple, round, smooth, erect, about 1 foot high, divided at the top into two petioles 3—6 inches
long, each supporting two large, peltate, deeply lobed leaves and a solitary nodding white flower 1-2
inches across; flowers in spring and in flavor resembles the strawberry. The 2-inch fleshy berry is
yellow, edible when ripe only, and is sometimes used for preserves; rarely develops until July. In the
green state the rhizome, foliage, seeds, and green fruit are poisonous. The proper time for collecting the
root is the latter part of October or early part of November, soon after the fruit has ripened. Its active
principle is podophyllin, which acts upon the liver in the same manner as mercury but is far superior to
mercury; with intelligent physicians it has dethroned that noxious mineral as a cholagogue.

MEDICINAL PART: Rhizome and the resin extracted from it.
SoLvENts: Alcohol, boiling water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Cathartic, hepatic, hydragogue, cholagogue, alterative, tonic, emetic, purgative.

Usss: Its usefulness covers a wide range, brought to our attention by the Native Americans. It seldom
fails in cases of urine incontinence or diseases associated with it. The influence is exercised on every
part of the system, stimulating glands to a healthy action, releasing obstructions such as those leading to
bilious and typhoid febrile disease. In chronic liver diseases it has no equal in the whole range of herbal
practice. For all chronic scrofulous, dyspeptic complaints it is highly valuable, acting upon the bowels
without disposing them to subsequent costiveness. In cases of determination of blood to the brain,
mandrake, given in cathartic doses, is prompt and will soon restore the equilibrium of the circulation. In

----- PAGE 139 -----
old cases of mecurial poisoning it acts promptly; as a tonic and alterative should always be combined
with other herbs. For children, smaller doses should be prescribed, according to age. This herb is
powerful in action and should be combined with a supporting herb such as black root (Veronicastrum),
senna leaves (Cassia senna), etc., for better results.

CAUTION: Should not be used by pregnant women.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the root, cut small, to 1 pint of boiling water. Take | teaspoonful at a time as
required. Of the tincture, 2—5 minims.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of root gathered after fruit has ripened, of whole fresh plant, of ripe
fruit. Solution of resinous extract, podophyllin, for acidity, amenorrhea, anus (prolapse of), asthma
(bronchial), bilious attack, bronchitis, cataract, cholera infantum, cornea (ulcer of), dentition, diarrhea
(cramp), duodenum (catarrh of), dysentery, dyspepsia (from calomel), fevers, flatulence, gagging,
gallstones, gastric catarrh, goiter, hemorrhoids, headache (sick, bilious), heart (pains in), hydrocephalus,
intermittents, jaundice, leukoma, liver (affections of), ophthalmia, ovaries (pain in, numbness in, tumor
of), palpitation, pneumonia, proctitis, prostatitis, pustules, sciatica, stomatitis, strabismus, taste (lost,
perverted, illusions of), tenesmus, tongue (burning in), urticaria, uterus (prolapse of), whooping cough,
worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Russian literature refers to the Latin name Podophyllum (podofil). Mandrake does
not grow wild in Russia, but they import American Podophyllum and find that the importance of this
medical plant warrants cultivation. Clinically: For chronic constipation, liver and gallbladder conditions,
to promote bile, malignancy of the skin (cancer) (Atlas, Moscow, 1963). For the lymphatic system,
spleen, blood conditions, skin malignancies and growths (Naukova dumka, Kiev, 1965). Commercial:
American mandrake, Podophyllum peltatum, and India’s Podophyllum emodi are under special agro-
technological supervision. American mandrake receives the most attention, being cultivated in two ways.
One is by planting root sections, which can produce twenty-five to thirty plants, and the other by seeding.
Harvest quantity is not revealed in literature to date. Mandrake does not flower before the third year.
Requires the correct soil, climate, cultivation, weeding and much attention to water, as it cannot stand

dryness.

----- PAGE 140 -----
MILKWEED

Asclepias syriaca

COMMON NAMES: Emetic root, snake milk, milk ipecac.

FEATURES: Most of the 150 species of the Asclepiadaceae family are erect perennial herbs 2-4 feet high.
The root is yellowish, large, and branching. The leaves are scattered, sessile, oblong, smooth in some
plants, very hairy in others, and 1—2 inches in length. The attractive flowers are white and purplish white,
with fruit in a three-celled capsule. The genus is named in honor of the Greek god Asclepius (god of
medicine).

Milkweed grows abundantly in Canada and the United States in dry fields and woods, and flowers
from June to September. When the leaves are pulled off, or the stem cut, a milky white liquid rushes to the
exposed surface. Asclepius is poisonous to cattle and sheep but rarely to horses. The Native Americans
used the inside fibers for rope and fishing nets; the milk was collected and rolled until firm enough to
make chewing gum. The boiled roots taste like asparagus. The green plant was collected when very small
and boiled in two waters to use as greens. We do not advise this for the general public, as the amount and
correct species is of importance when taken in quantity. (Many common plant names are duplicated; this
milkweed—Asclepius—is not the same as bitterroot—Apocynum androsaemifolium, dog-bane family—
often also called milkweed.)

MEDICINAL PART: Root.

SOLVENT: Water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Diaphoretic, expectorant.

Uses: Medicinally the Native Americans used Asclepias for inflammatory rheumatism. Today it is still
employed for rheumatism, dyspepsia, and scrofulous conditions of the blood. A helpful remedy for female
complaints, bowel and kidney trouble, asthma, and stomach complaints. Used for dropsy, as it increases
the flow of urine. Effective remedy for gallstones. J. Kloss (Back to Eden) says: “Take equal parts of
milkweed and marshmallow (Althaea), steep a teaspoonful in a cup of boiling water, take 3 cups daily,
and one upon retiring. It will expel gallstones in a few days, where combined with this. Fomentations
applied to the liver and the liver thoroughly massaged at the same time is very effective.”

Dose: Bruise 4 ounces of the root and boil in 3 quarts of water, reducing down to | quart or less, and take

----- PAGE 141 -----
4 teacupful three times a day. Of the saturated tincture, 1-2 teaspoonfuls three times a day.

EXTERNALLY: The fresh milky fluid that weeps from the cut stem will in most cases cause warts to
disappear if applied often to the elevated part only.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the root for abortion, bronchitis, catarrhal fever, dropsy,
dysmenorrhea, hay fever, headache, indigestion, influenza, pleurisy, rheumatism, uremia, uterine pains.

----- PAGE 142 -----
MINT
Mentha piperita

COMMON NAMES: Peppermint, brandy mint, curled mint.

FEATURES: The genus Mentha consists of probably not more than fifteen true species, but with numerous
transitional forms several hundred species have been described. Practically all are native to Eurasia or
Australia. The two best-known forms are M. spicata, the spearmint, with narrow, interrupted spikes of
pink to pale violet flowers and sessile leaves, and M. piperita, the peppermint, with thicker spikes of
purplish flowers and petiole, dark green leaves. This perennial herb is 1—3 feet high, smooth square stem,
erect and branching, generally smooth on both sides but sometimes hairy on the veins of the lower surface.
Both of these species have escaped from North America. They flower from July to September; blossoms
are small and purplish. Can be found in rich soils in northern Indiana and southern Michigan and in
Canada. Peppermint oil is distilled from the dried, upper portions of the plant and consists largely of
menthol, which is used medicinally and for flavoring confections, chewing gum, and toothpaste. Should be
collected in dry weather, August and September, just as the flowers appear. If for oil, just after the
flowers have expanded.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, stems.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Aromatic, stimulant, stomachic, carminative.

Uses: A most agreeable and harmless herb for cramps and hiccups of infants, children, and adults. My
mother of eight children always had mint growing somewhere in the garden as a reliable preparation for
unpredictable tummy trouble. A wise and beneficial herbal tea to replace coffee; it will strengthen the
heart muscle rather than causing the digestive hindrance and weakening effect of coffee. Peppermint is
cleansing and strengthening to the entire system. A strong cup of peppermint tea and ten minutes of
relaxation may obviate the need of aspirin. Peppermint is a general stimulant and will act more
powerfully on the system than any liquor stimulant, without the degenerative possibilities. Useful to check
nausea and vomiting, to expel wind, relieve hysterics, and prevent the gripping effect of cathartics. The
fresh leaves may be bruised and applied to the stomach for the above mentioned and the tea taken
internally. Also an agent for suppressed menstruation and a remedy for seasickness.

----- PAGE 143 -----
Dose: | teaspoonful of mint, fresh or dried, to 1 cupful of boiling water, steep 3-10 minutes. Children
less, use as needed. Of the tincture, “2-1 fluidram.

EXTERNALLY: The bruised leaves bound on the forehead will relieve most headaches.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole plant, dilutions of essence for cough (dry), headache,
hoarseness, influenza, pruritus, throat (sore), voice (weakness of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Miatta, mentol, common names for Russian peppermint. Mint does not grow wild
in Russia, but together with the United States, Japan, Italy, and France, Russia is among the largest
producers of peppermint for industrial and medical purposes. Clinically and home medicine: The leaves,
oil, and menthol are used as an anodyne for headaches, for stomach trouble—gas, bloating, wind,
heartburn—toothache, as an antiseptic, for inflammations of lungs, bronchitis, sinus, throat (sore), colds.
Relaxant and antispasmodic to stop vomiting, nausea, indigestion (nastoika with vodka). It is useful for
seasickness, dizziness, diaphoretic, and to promote bile. Used in many compounds as aromatic,
carminative, tonic, relaxant, in the form of teas, tablets, oil, extract (Saratov University, 1965). Industry:
Agro-technology has developed mechanized procedures for mint plantations in many parts of European
Russia and Byelorussia. Cultivation was started in the eighteenth century in the Medical Botanics
Gardens, for medical purposes only. Today, after much experimentation, mint is cultivated through
propagation, as seeds require especially favorable conditions and still only a small percentage will
thrive. For one acre they can collect, on an average, 1,000—2,000 pounds of dry herb, which is cut first in
July and August, the flowering season. In some districts it can be cut once again before the frost comes.

----- PAGE 144 -----
MOTHERWORT

Leonurus cardiaca

COMMON NAMES: Lion’s tail, lion’s ear, throwwort.

FEATURES: There are about ten Eurasian species of this plant, three of them having been introduced into
North America from Europe. The genus is of the mint family (Labiatae). Motherwort is an exotic
perennial found growing in pastures and fields, with pink or white flowers in dense auxiliary whorls,
from May to September. The upper lip of the corolla is shaggy; the calyx has stiff teeth. The rigid stem
grows up to 5 feet, bearing some resemblance to horehound but has much longer and darker leaves.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Tops, leaves.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antispasmodic, emmenagogue, nervine, laxative.

Uses: Motherwort has been employed from time immemorial as a domestic remedy in infusion
preparations. It is especially strengthening to the heart when problem is of a palpitation nature. A valuable
bitter tonic for almost all conditions of the stomach. Being a true nervine it is excellent for suppressed
menstruation and other female trouble, hysteria, urinary cramps, albumin in the urine, and scanty muddy
urine of typhoid. The long-established hidden talent of Leonurus has yet to be scientifically explained.
Experience shows it has also given matchless benefits in rheumatism, sciatica, neuritis, sleeplessness,
convulsion, delirium, and chest colds. Motherwort seems to seek out and eliminate unwanted congested
material that is causing discomfort. S. Clymer, in Nature's Healing Agents, suggests Leonurus in small
doses for prevention of prenatal kidney complications, especially albumin in the urine. Also an agent for
unsuspected worms. Combines well with all herbs and is used for liver affections in combinations.

Dose: Of the decoction, 1—2 wineglassfuls every 2—3 hours; of the extract, 3—5 grains.

----- PAGE 145 -----
EXTERNALLY: Hot fomentations made from strong tea will relieve cramps and pain in menstruation, etc.
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture or infusion of fresh plant for dysentery, hemorrhage.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Pustirnik serdechny, ‘heart herb’, is one of the names for motherwort, of which
there are many species. It seems to be the forgotten herb of Europe. In the fifteenth century it was
prominent in herbal books, but in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries it seems to have been neglected.
Its popularity still holds good in folk medicine of Romania as an aid to heart conditions, goiter, and
epilepsy and also in Britain for hysteria, neuralgia, weakness of heart, shortness of breath. Folk
medicine: Considers the fresh leaves and flowers better than dried. The fresh juice is extracted and
prepared for winter use—2 parts of juice to 3 parts of alcohol (Vishaya Schkola, 1963). For female
complaints of amenorrhea, dysmenorrhea, sleeplessness, nervousness, tuberculosis of the lungs (Bello-
Russ. Academy of Science, 1965). For heart neurosis, high blood pressure, goiter, epilepsy, used as a tea
(Moscow University, 1963). In place of valerian (Valeriana officinalis), the fresh juice of leaves and
flowers, 30-40 drops, for calming (Saratov University, 1963). Clinically: Extract and tablets are
combined with many other herbs for neurosis of the heart, high blood pressure (cardiosclerosis, sensitive
nerves), slight form of goiter. Experimentally, toxicity is not shown, but it is used for improving the
central nervous system and heart tone, and to regulate blood pressure (Atlas, Moscow, 1963).
Commercial: Commercial cultivation: 7-8 pounds of seed needed for row system; 3—4 pounds for square
net procedure. Plantation harvest runs four years, with about 1,000 pounds of dry leaves and flowers to an
acre from the first year’s crop. For the following three years, 2,000—3,000 pounds per acre are attained, if
maintained with loving care.

----- PAGE 146 -----
MUGWORT

Artemisia vulgaris

COMMON NAMES: Mugwort, felon herb.

FEATURES: Mugwort grows wild in North America in hedges and waste places. A slender to moderately
stout herb 1—5 feet tall; the leaves are alternate, with 5—7 lobes, silvery white beneath, nearly smooth
above. Flowers are small, ovoid, yellow to purplish, in numerous clusters from July to August. Odor
aromatic, leaves slightly bitter.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Emmenagogue, diuretic, diaphoretic.

Uses: Native Americans used the leaves medicinally in decoctions for colds, colic, bronchitis,
rheumatism, and fever. Safe for suppressed menstruation, also effective in female complaints of various
nature when combined with marigold (Calendula), crampbark (Viburnum opulus), black haw (Viburnum
prunifolium), and mint (Mentha). Of importance in kidney and bladder inflammations and their many
reflected ailments, gout, sciatica, water retention, etc. Culpeper used the herb for counteraction of opium.

CAUTION: Prolonged use can cause injury to the nervous system.

Dose: | teaspoonful to 1 cupful of boiling water, steeped for 20 minutes. To be taken in wineglassful
amounts.

EXTERNALLY: After using a poultice of slippery elm (Ulmus rubra), cleavers, and bear’s foot
(Helleborus foetidus), bathe the inflammatory swelling with a strong tea of mugwort. Some cases of
tumors have been known to disappear, as well as abscesses, carbuncles, and bruises, if repeated
faithfully. Culpeper states: “The fresh juice mixed with hog’s grease and whipped into an ointment takes
away wens and hard kernals that grow about the neck and throat, and eases the pain, more effective if
field daisies be up with it.” The Native Americans also used it externally for wounds, and the juice was
used for poison oak.

----- PAGE 147 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root for catalepsy, chorea, convulsions, dysmenia, epilepsy,
hydrocephalus, hysteria, somnambulism, worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Mugwort is common to Russian people as Polin obiknovennaya or chernobilnik,
which grows in all parts of Russia and was an accepted home medicine before being thought of as
material for books. Folk medicine: Uses the leaves, roots, and whole plant in female sickness of many
varieties—amenorrhea, dysmenorrhea, cramps, labor pains; generally as calming, nervine for
convulsions, epilepsy, neurasthenia, and other nervous disorders (Atlas, Moscow, 1962); for colds,
stones (kidney, bladder, gallbladder) (Medicina, Moscow, 1965); roots and herb as decoction for
tubercular lungs, epilepsy (Moscow University, 1963); decoction of the whole plant for gastric
conditions, nervousness, fright, epilepsy, convulsions, female weakness; decoction of the plant in painful
and feverish labor after delivery; in female sickness as diuretic and abortive (Bello-Russ. Academy of
Science, 1965). Externally: Decoction of nastoika (with vodka) for inflammations of mucous
membranes, wounds, and ulcers (Saratov University, 1962). Decoction of whole plant to bathe children
with rickets.

----- PAGE 148 -----
MULLEIN

Verbascum blattaria, V. thapsus

COMMON NAMES: Moth mullein, white mullein, verbascum flowers, woollen blanket herb, flannel
flower, cow’s lungwort, velvet leaf.

FEATURES: The genus comprises some three hundred species native to Europe, North Africa, and western
and central Asia. Some species have escaped and are common in the United States, growing in recent
clearings, sparsely inhabited fields, and along roadsides. They vary greatly in size and form, but most
have a columnar aspect, are hairy or woolly, and have yellow, red, purplish, or brownish red flowers
arranged in dense terminal spikes or in narrow panicles. The best-known species in America is the
common Verbascum thapsus, marked by a stout, erect, unbranched, woolly stem 2-3 feet tall, with basal
leaves narrowing at the base into wings that pass down the stem. This characteristic of V thapsus enables
it to be distinguished from the various other mulleins. The dense spikes of small yellow flowers bloom in
July and August; the fruit is a capsule or pod. The flowers and leaves have a faint, rather pleasant odor
and a somewhat bitterish, albuminous taste. Keeps well if properly dried and stored for winter use.

MEDICINAL PARTs: Leaves, flower (Culpeper used the root also).
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Demulcent, diuretic, anodyne, antispasmodic, astringent, pectoral.

Uses: The dried leaves were smoked by Native Americans to relieve lung congestion, this being one of
their many uses. Herbalists of the space age know of its remedies for coughs, colds, and pectoral
complaints, including hemorrhages from the lungs, shortness of breath, and pulmonary complaints.
Mullein has been considered a treatment for hemorrhoids for several hundred years and is still used for
this purpose, both internally and as a fomentation. A decoction made with equal parts of horsemint
(Monarda punctata) and mullein (V. thapsus) and taken three times a day is excellent for kidney diseases.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the leaves or flowers to 1 cupful of boiling water. Of the tincture, 15—40 drops in
warm water every 2-4 hours, according to condition.

EXTERNALLY: A very early German remedy for deafness resulting from dried earwax, wax too soft, or

----- PAGE 149 -----
insufficient wax: mullein oil, sun distilled from green Mullein flowers, 3 to 5 drops twice a day until the
condition is corrected.

A fomentation of the leaves in hot vinegar and water forms an excellent local application for inflamed
piles, ulcers, tumors, mumps, acute inflammation of the tonsils, malignant sore throat, dropsy of the joints,
sciatica, spinal tenderness, etc. A mixture of simmered leaves can also be inhaled through a teapot spout
for many of the mentioned conditions.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant gathered at the commencement of flowering for anus
(itching of), colic, constipation, cough, deafness, enuresis, hemorrhoids, neuralgia, brosopalgia, urine
(incontinence of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Mullein, or koroviak visoky, is common in all parts of Russia. This herb is seldom
mentioned in ancient books but was a common medicine in the Middle Ages. Folk medicine: Leaves and
flowers are used as astringent, demulcent, expectorant, and tonic in the form of teas, extracts, as nastoika
(with vodka) either straight or in combinations. The uses are many, as most natural treatments improve or
assist the body as a complete unit rather than treating only specialized, isolated areas. Mullein is thought
of first for pulmonary conditions, colds, shortness of breath, asthma, thus improving heart conditions,
nervous disorders, kidney and bladder; female and venereal diseases with or without associated bleeding;
epilepsy and headache in children (Atlas, Moscow, 1962). Externally: The leaves and flowers simmered
and used as a wash for old wounds, broken skin, and to kill skin epidermis worms (Vishaya Shkolla,
Moscow, 1963). Fresh leaves bruised and applied to boils and carbuncles. Veterinary: For tapeworms
of cows the fresh leaves are given internally.

----- PAGE 150 -----
NETTLE

Urtica dioica

COMMON NAMES: Great stinging nettle, great nettle.

FEATURES: Nine of thirty species of Urtica, a herbaceous plant or shrub of the Urticaceae family, are
found in temperate regions of the United States and Canada, in waste places, beside hedges and gardens.
The most common is Urtica dioica, the stinging nettle, which grows to a height of almost 3 feet. The root
of this perennial is creeping and branching. The dull green stem is usually covered with stinging hairs that
pierce the skin and emit an acrid fluid when touched, causing pain. When the nettle is grasped in such a
way as to press the hairs to the stem, however, no stinging occurs. The leaves of stinging nettle are coarse,
opposite, and conspicuously acuminate. The small green flowers can be seen from June to September.
Always use the tender leaves. The Scots and Irish use the young leaves for greens, the French prepare
seven different dishes from the tops.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Roots, leaves.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, astringent, tonic, pectoral.

Uses: The Native Americans used nettle as a counterirritant when in pain, by striking affected parts with
the branches. A root decoction was made to bathe rheumatic pains and joint stiffness. Pounded leaves
rubbed on limbs, and hot poultices of the bruised leaves were also used to dress rheumatic discomfort.
Nettle is an excellent styptic, checking the flow of blood from the surface almost immediately upon
application of the powdered root or leaves softened and bruised. (If the fresh leaves are left on too long
they will encourage water blisters.) For spitting of blood and all hemorrhages of the lungs, stomach, and
urinary organ, this is one of the most powerful agents in the vegetable materia medica.

Drs. Wood and Ruddock, in Vitalogy (1925), relay the following: “For haemorrhages the express juice
of the fresh leaves is regarded as more effective than the decoction, given in teaspoonful doses every hour
or as often as the nature of the case requires.” In decoction, nettle is valuable in diarrhea, dysentery, piles,
neuralgia, gravel, inflammation of the kidney. Tea made from the young or dried root is of great help in
dropsy of the first stages. A herbal nettle tea will expel phlegm from the lungs and stomach and will clean

----- PAGE 151 -----
the urinary canal. The seeds are used in coughs and shortness of breath.
Dose: Of the decoction, 2-4 fluidounces. Of the powdered root or leaves, 20-40 grains.

EXTERNALLY: J. Kloss, in Back to Eden, says: “Use nettle simmered for 30 minutes and massage into the
scalp after rinsing the hair to bring back the natural colour.” For those suffering from rheumatism without
relief, rub or stick the troubled part with fresh nettles for a few minutes daily. The relief of joint pain will
often justify a few moments of unpleasant stinging.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the fresh plant in flower for agalactia, bee stings, burns, calculus
(prevention of), deltoid (rheumatism of), dysentery, erysipelas (vesicular), erythema, gout, gravel,
hemorrhage, intermittents, lactation, leukorrhea, menorrhagia, phlegmasia dolens, renal colic, rheumatism,
spleen (affections of), throat (sore), uremia, urticaria, nodosa, vertigo, whooping cough, worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Krapiva (nettle) grows everywhere in Russia. After three hundred years modern
science has established and gives credit to nettle as an antiseptic. Folk medicine: Since the seventeenth
century Russian herbalists have given credit to nettle as antiseptic, astringent, and blood purifier, which
are only a few of its properties. Nettle ranks high in some of the first books on herbs and their uses and is
still recommended for treatment. Decoction of the whole plant for headache; decoction with honey or
sugar to improve the function of the heart, liver, kidney, anemia, blood purifying, gastritis, tubercular
lungs; taken cold after delivery for afterbirth, whooping cough; decoction of the root for whooping cough
and any internal bleeding; flower decoction for diabetes. Externally: “Decomposing flesh will be
cleansed, wounds and ulcers healed after treatments of Nettle. The boiled Herb is used to strengthen,
stimulate new growths and stop falling hair if used as a hair wash.” (Vishaya Schkolla, M., 1963).
Bruised fresh leaves are used for rheumatic pain, dropsy, and chest pain (Bello-Russ. Academy of
Science, 1965). Clinically: As extracts and compounds. Food: The young spring leaves are among the
best used as garden greens and are a main ingredient in Caucasian national recipes.

INDIAN AND PAKISTAN EXPERIENCE: Local name bichu, chicru. Bodily influence: Diuretic, astringent,
emmenagogue, hemostatic, anthelmintic, lithotriptic, antiperiodic. Uses: Nettle decoctions are used for
kidney diseases and hemorrhage, especially from the uterus, and to treat kidneys, consumption, and
jaundice. Young tops as a fresh nettle tea are used for intermittent fever, gravel in the kidneys, and
excessive menstrual flow. Juice is very effective in checking bleeding from the nose, lungs, uterus, and
other internal organs. Externally: The pulverized dry herb is used to sniff for nose bleeding (J. F. Dastur,
Medical Plants of India and Pakistan, India, 1962).

----- PAGE 152 -----
OAK

Quercus robur

COMMON NAMES: English oak, tanners bark.

FEATURES: Approximately eighty species of the beech family (Fagaceae) are native to the United States,
of which fifty-eight are trees. These forest trees vary in size according to the climate and soil. The
pubescence of the leaves and twigs consists of fascicled hairs that are intricately branched. The April
flowers appear with, or after, the leaves and later develop into the cup of the fruit known as the acorn. In
some areas, Native Americans would gather 500 pounds per family, which was a year’s supply. These
were stored and later used for bread, pudding, soup, etc., prepared fresh from the ground acorn. White
oak (Quercus alba) bark is chiefly used in medicine. It has a brownish color, is faintly odorous, very
astringent, slightly bitter.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, acorn.

SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, tonic, hemostatic, antiseptic.

Usss: A decoction of acorns and bark added to milk and taken internally resists the forces of poisonous
medicines, or when the bladder becomes ulcerated by taking them and shows voidance of bloody urine.
The bark is an agent in chronic diarrhea, chronic mucous discharges, passive hemorrhages, and wherever
an internal astringent is required. White oak (Quercus alba) bark as an infusion is best known as a goiter
remedy, and is still being used for excess of stomach mucus, which causes the common complaint of sinus
congestion, postnasal drip, etc. It relieves the stomach by paving the way for better internal absorption
and secretion, thus improving metabolism. The distilled water of the buds before they become leaves can
be used either externally or internally for inflammation, burning fevers, and infections; also used for
leukorrhea, womb troubles, hemorrhoids, and prolapsed rectum (sitz bath). The oak bark tea acts like a
resin in a strengthening way on the outer vessels; often dangerous fistules on the rectum are dissolved and
healed by this method, occasionally by using the diluted tea as a colonic.

----- PAGE 153 -----
Dose: A decoction is made from | ounce of bark in 1 quart of water, boiled down to 1 pint, and taken in
wineglassful doses.

EXTERNALLY: Excellent as a gargle for sore or relaxed throat. For neck enlargements, fomentations are
beneficial if applied often. Native Americans are known to have allowed acorn meal to go moldy in a
dark, damp place and then scraped the mold off for application to boils, sores, and other inflammations.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of acorns (peeled and crushed or shredded), spirit distilled from
tincture (spiritus glandium quercus), water extract of acorn with addition of alcohol (aqua glandium
quercus) for alcoholism, breath (offensive), constipation, diarrhea, dropsy (splenic), fistula, dizziness,
gout, intermittent fever, leukemia splenica, spleen (affections of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Oak, or in Russian, dub, grows wild; besides being used medicinally it is also
widely used in industry, especially in the food and tanning trades. Folk medicine: Oak bark should be
collected in the early spring while the sap is active. The bark must be from young branches, twigs, and
thin young trunks. Decoctions are used for diarrhea, menstrual disturbance; tea and decoction with honey
for tubercular lungs, gastritis, bleeding from the bladder and bloody urine, and as a gargle for swollen or
irritated tongue; coffee of acorns for scrofula, children’s skin rash, hysteria. Externally: Antiseptic for
malignant wounds containing decayed cells. A tea solution prepared for painful bleeding and itching
hemorrhoids. Can also be used to stop falling hair and dandruff. Leaves and bark for inflammation of
burns.

----- PAGE 154 -----
OATS

Avena sativa

‘ As

\Wy
SA

\

i’

“IRA Y IS

COMMON NAME: Groats.

FEATURES: Widely distributed in most parts of the world, in field cultivation. The oats of commercial and
general use are the seeds of Avena sativa with the husk removed. The crushed or coarsely flaked grain is
known as oatmeal. The tincture and powder are used in herbal combinations of tonics and capsules.
MEDICINAL PART: Seeds.

SOLVENT: Water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Nervine, tonic, stimulant, antispasmodic.

Uses: Cheerfulness is health; its opposite, melancholy, is disease. The cliché “He’s feeling his oats”
usually refers to a spirited horse who has been fed on oats. It is a recognized natural food, appealing in
taste and nourishment, and has long been used as a family remedy in an infusion, usually accepted by
patients of weak digestion when other foods fail. The properties of Avena sativa in tincture of oats beards
has been recognized by people of all lands as a naturalizer to the sexual gland system. An important
restorative in nervous prostration and exhaustion after all febrile diseases, it seems to support the heart
muscles and urinary organs. Instead of coffee, a drink made from equal parts of oat beards, roasted
acorns, and chicory, in equal proportions, is a welcome and beneficial change.

Dose: The tea is made by steeping | teaspoonful of the beards in a cup of hot water for 10 minutes or
more, then straining and adding honey if desired. Taken a mouthful at a time throughout the day.
EXTERNALLY: Culpeper recommends oatmeal boiled in vinegar as an application for the removal of
freckles and spots on the face and body.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant in flower for alcoholism, cholera, debility, influenza,
neurasthenia, opium habit, palpitation, sexual excess, sleeplessness, tuberculosis.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russia oves (oats) are highly regarded for both human and domestic animal
consumption, having a great value as both food and medicine. Folk medicine: Employs its virtues in
decoctions and tea (grain and oat straw) as diuretic, diaphoretic, carminative, and febricide (to reduce

----- PAGE 155 -----
fever). Recommended as an all-around food for the sick, weak, and healthy. Externally: Hot oat straw
compresses applied to the painful areas of kidney stone attack will soon bring about welcome relief. Oat
straw and oak bark decoctions are used for excessive foot perspiration. Oat straw steam baths are used
for children with rickets and scrofula, and as a cosmetic aid to a fresh, healthy skin.

----- PAGE 156 -----
PARSLEY

Petroselinum crispum

COMMON NAMES: Parsley breakstone, garden parsley, rock parsley.

FEATURES: Parsley belongs to a small genus of the Mediterranean plant family Umbelliferae, cultivated
since antiquity and now grown in various forms in all of the civilized world. Parsley is a many-branched,
bright green, smooth-stemmed, biennial herb with ternately pinnate decompound, sometimes crisp, leaves;
greenish yellow flowers. The root is the official part. French chemists have succeeded in obtaining an
essential oil named apiol that has proved a good replacement for quinia in intermittent fever and for ergot
as a parturient.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, roots, seeds.
SOLVENTS: Leaves and powder in water, oil in alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, aperient, expectorant.

Usss: Is chiefly used for renal congestion, inflammation of the kidney and bladder, for gravel, stones, and
urine retention, the culprit of many malfunctions. The root or leaves are excellent for the liver and spleen
when jaundice and venereal diseases are present. Also useful in epilepsy. A worthy ingredient, combined
with other herbs such as buchu (Borosma), black haw (Viburnum prunifolium), crampbark (Viburnum
opulus), for female troubles. Drink as much as 3 cupfuls a day.

Parsley is high in vitamin B and potassium, a substance in which cancerous cells cannot multiply.
Should be considered among the preventive herbs. The seeds contain apiol, which is condidered a safe
and efficient emmenagogue and is used in amenorrhea and dysmenorrhea. Of assistance in intermittent
fever or agues.

Dose: Of the oil, for diuretic purposes, 3-4 drops a day. Of the infusion, 2-4 cupfuls.

EXTERNALLY: Often the bruised leaves are applied to swollen glands and swollen breasts to dry up milk.
Hot fomentations wrung out of the tea will relieve insect bites and stings.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plant when coming into bloom for catheter fever,
cystitis, dysuria, gleet, gonorrhea, gravel, intermittent fever, night blindness, priapism.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Petrushka, parsley, a common vegetable in all gardens, is used as food and home
medicine. Preparations of tea and decoctions from the root, leaves, and seeds are administered for
dropsy, kidney and bladder, female corrective, indigestion, liver and spleen ailments, prostatitis.
Externally: The fresh juice is used as a nontoxic insect repellent in the summertime.

----- PAGE 157 -----
PLANTAIN

Plan tago major

COMMON NAMES: Broadleaved plantain, ripple grass, wagbread, white man’s foot.

Features: Most of the two hundred or more widely distributed species of plantain are weedy herbs or
subshrubs of the family Plantaginaceae. Plantago major is the best-known backyard plantain, abundant in
most of North America. It is native to Europe but was spread so rapidly by human explorers in America
that the Native Americans called it “white man’s foot.”

The leaves all radiate from the base but in some species are broader than in others (both are good).
They are dark green in color and strongly ribbed lengthwise. The flower stem is stiff and smooth and
attains heights of 6-18 inches. The head is short and studded with tiny four-parted dull white flowers with
long slender stamens.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole plant.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, astringent, diuretic, antiseptic.

Uses: Plantain was used by the Native Americans both internally and externally; we have adopted their
uses of it for cooling, soothing, and healing. Plantain is agreeable to most people. It is excellent for
healing fresh or chronic wounds or sores, used both internally or externally. In the absence of scientific
names, the body still responds to the ingredients of organic treatments.

Plantain is a superior remedy for neuralgia—take 2—5 drops of the tincture every 20 minutes; usually a
few drops will give relief. The green seeds and stem boiled in milk will generally check diarrhea and
bowel complaints of children. Culpeper used the seeds as treatment for dropsy, epilepsy, and yellow
jaundice. The clarified juice, seeds or both, made into tea or jellylike water and taken by itself or mixed
with other herbs, relieves intestinal pain of ulcers, spitting of blood, excessive menstrual flow, and
inflammation of the intestines. For kidney and bladder trouble, including bed-wetting, and pain in the
lumbar region, plantain is of use; also to clear the ear of mucus. If venereal diseases are in the first stages
a strong decoction of plantain leaves and root, one or two times a day in wineglassful amounts, will often
leave the afflicted a new admirer on the long list of plantain users. It is also useful in scrofula,
hemorrhoids, leukorrhea. Make a strong tea and let steep 30 minutes; for hemorrhoids inject a

----- PAGE 158 -----
tablespoonful or more several times a day and after bowel evacuation. As feminine wash, 2
tablespoonfuls of plantain to 1 pint of water, simmer covered, cool, strain, add enough water to fill
container.

Dose: | teaspoonful of plantain to 1 cupful of boiling water. Of the tincture, 2-1 fluidram.

EXTERNALLY: The juice of the leaves will counteract the bite of rattlesnakes, poisonous insects, etc. Take
1 tablespoonful every hour, at the same time applying the bruised leaves to the wounds. Also to check
external bleeding, erysipelas, ulcers, eczema, burns, and scalds. Can be used as a strong tea to bathe the
area often. Apply poultice to rheumaticlike pain, or add large amount to bathwater for relief. The leaves
dipped in cider vinegar and dried overnight, then placed on the feet before putting stockings on, will aid
leg pains. An ointment can be made by slowly boiling for 2 hours 2 ounces of granulated plantain in | pint
of soy bean, coconut, peanut, or other soluble oil.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plant, tincture of root for ciliary neuralgia, diabetes,
diarrhea, dysentery, earache, ear (inflammation of), emissions, enuresis, erysipels erythema, hemorrhoids,
impotence, neuralgia (of herpes), polyuria, snakebite, spleen (pains in), tobacco habit, toothache,
urination (delayed), worms, wounds.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Wild plantain is known to the Russians as Podoroshnik, meaning near the road or
along the road. Plantain grows easily in any climate and soil. Among almost thirty species Plantago
lanceolata is cultivated commercially in France, Spain, and the United States. This and Plantago major
are given the most credit. The herb has an old and honorable history as an Arabian and Persian medicine
for dysentery and all other stomach and intestinal trouble. Ancient Roman and Greek medicine valued and
gave credit to the healing power of Plantago. Folk medicine: Usually prepared as a tea from the fresh or
dried herb, or as conserved juice of freshly picked leaves and flowers with the faithful vodka (nastoika).
Seeds are used for inflammation of the stomach and intestines, for ulcers, and to reduce stomach pain.
Their use coincides with the uses of antiquity for all stomach conditions, gastritis, loose bowels, stomach
ulcers, internal wounds, abscesses, and internal bleeding. To induce appetite a drink of plantain is given,
also for kidney, bladder, and heart conditions, coughs, tuberculosis of the lungs, red inflamed skin,
headache, and snakebite. Plantain is rich in minerals and vitamins C, K, and factor “T,” which helps to
stop bleeding (Medicine, Moscow, 1963). Clinically: After observation of many cases of stomach
sickness, it was found that chronic ulcers responded to treatment with the fresh juice of plantain, or
nastoika. Also used for dysentery, dyspepsia, and to correct acid condition of the stomach, and regulate
secretion of the stomach. The Russian Ministry of Health recommends plantain for chronic colitis and
acute stomach conditions of gastritis, enteritis, enterocolitis. Externally: Extensive clinical research and
experiments have proved that fresh plantain juice is suitable for dressing wounds, ulcers, furnicles, boils
(M. P. Rasman), and as a powder for abscesses, ulcers, wounds of bleeding, and chronic skin conditions
(Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, 1965).

----- PAGE 159 -----
POKE

Phytolacca americana

COMMON NAMES: Pigeon berry, garget, scoke, coakum, inkberry, pocan.

FEATURES: Poke, a strong-smelling perennial herb of the family Phytolaccaceae. Poke is native to the
United States from Maine to Florida and westward to Minnesota and Texas. Found in dry fields, hillsides,
and roadsides. The root matures to a very large size; it is easily cut or broken; the fleshly fibrous tissue is
covered with a thin brownish bark. The stems are annual, about | inch in diameter, round, smooth, green
when young, and grow 3-12 feet in height. The small greenish white flowers appear in July and August,
surrounded by dense foliage, followed by dark purple berries that ripen in late summer and autumn and
are nearly globular, each containing ten carpels. The berries are only collected when fully matured. The
young shoots and seedlings are often eaten; the former like asparagus, the latter like spinach. Make sure
the root is scrupulously removed before using as a table vegetable. Phytolaccin is its active principle.
Poke has had a long history of usefulness in medicine; it is toxic in too large amounts, and persons using it
should understand both its value and its limitations.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, berries.
SOLVENTS: Dilute alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Emetic, cathartic, alterative, deobstruent.

Uses: Preparation and dosage vary considerably with the condition of the root. Thurston, Hammer, and
other physiomedical practitioners recommended that only the green root be used, owing to its rapid
deterioration. Poke helps greatly in detoxifying the system from poisonous congestions. It stimulates
metabolism and is useful for medication of the undernourished. Poke has creditable influence when the
lymphatic glands, spleen, and particularly the thyroid glands are enlarged (excellent in goiter, internally
and externally), and on hardening of the liver and reduced biliary flow. The root excites the whole
glandular system and is very useful in the removal of mercurio-syphilitic affection, scrofula, and chronic
skin diseases.

Very few, if any, of the alteratives have superior power to poke if properly gathered and prepared for
medicinal uses. Both the berries and root have high recognition for the treatment of rheumatism and
arthritis, especially when used with black cohosh (Cimicifuga) and prickly ash (Xanthoxylum
americanum). Poke is indicated, and should be combined in formulas, for throat conditions when
membrane dark in color, tonsils swollen, shooting pains through the ear with difficulty in swallowing.

CAUTION: Toxic in large amounts.

Dose: Tincture of Phytolacca alone, 2—5 drops, as frequently as indicated by symptoms. As a decoction,
1 tablespoonful of the root, leaves, or berries, cut small, to 1 pint of boiling water, steeped 10 minutes.
Take a mouthful at a time several times a day. The juice of the ripe berries preserved in syrup may be
used in teaspoonful doses every 3 hours.

EXTERNALLY: Drs. Wood and Ruddock in Vitalogy (1925): “The juice of the berries dried in the sun until
it forms the proper consistency for a plaster, applied twice a day has cured cancer.” It is a dependable
agent in the treatment of mammillary swelling, from which so many women suffer following childbirth,
making nursing impossible. In such cases a mixture of 3 parts Phytolacca, to | part of glycerine will

----- PAGE 160 -----
abate the swelling in its beginning; or when suppuration has taken place it will help to bring about
granulation. In bone enlargements and bone growths from injuries, when in a chronic state, apply a
solution of poke root tea, made fresh daily. This will also relieve itching skin.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root dug in winter, tincture of the ripe berries, tincture of fresh
leaves, solution of the resinous extract phytolaccin for abortion (threatened), albuminuria, angina pectoris,
anus (fissure of), asthma, barber’s itch, boils, bone (disease of, tumors of), breasts (affections of), cancer,
cholera, cicatrix, ciliary neuralgia, constipation, corpulence, cough, dentition (difficulty), diarrhea,
diphtheria, diplopia, dysentery, dysmenia, ears (affections of), erythema nodosum, eustachian tubes
(affections of), glands (enlarged), gleet, glossitis, gonorrhea, gout, granular conjunctivitis, hemorrhoids,
headache, hearing (altered), heart (affection of, hyperthrophy of, fatty), impotence, influenza, intestinal
catarrh, itch, lactation (abnormal), laryngismus, leukorrhea, lichen, liver (affections of), lumbago, lupus,
mercury (effects of), mouth (ulcer), mumps, neuralgia, nipples (sore), nursing (painful), orchitis, ozena,
panophthalmitis, paralysis (diphtheritic), parotitis, prostatitis, prostate (affection of), rectum (cancer of),
respiration (abnormal), rheumatism (syphilitic, gonorrheal), ringworm, rodent ulcer, salivation, sciatica,
sewer gas poisoning, spinal irritation, spleen (pain in), stiff neck, syphilis, syphilitic eruptions, tetanus,
throat (sore: diphtheritic, herpetic, glandular), toothache, tumors, ulcers, uterus (affection of), warts,
wens.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Phytolacca americana is not native to Russia. Poke was brought from North
America to the Black Sea regions of Caucasia and Crimea. The natives have adopted fitalaka americana
(or from folk medicine, /akonos americana) as the identifying name.

----- PAGE 161 -----
PRICKLY ASH

Xanthoxylum americanum

COMMON NAMES: Yellow wood, toothache tree, suterberry.

FeATUuRES: This beautiful little tree grows 8-15 feet high and is native to North America from Canada to
Virginia and west to the Mississippi. This perennial shrub is of the rue family (Rutaceae) and grows in
woods, thickets, and on river banks. The branches are armed with sharp scattered prickles; when the bark
is cut it shows green in the outer part and yellow in the inner. The flowers appear before the leaves, in
April and May, and are small and greenish. The fruit is an oval capsule, varying from green to red and
blue-black in color, and grows in clusters on the top of the branches. The taste is very pungent, causing
salivation, and there is little odor when the tree is cut. Xanthoxylene is its active principle.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, berries.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, dilute alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diaphoretic, alterative, nervine, sialagogue.

Usss: Excellent innocent tonic used for convalescence from fevers and other diseases. It promotes general
perspiration, invigorates the stomach, and strengthens the digestive organs when slow, which permits
unwanted sluggish fermentation; at the same time equalizes the circulation. For more effectiveness the
infusion, or tincture preferably, of 5-10 drops prickly ash (Xanthoxylum), 3 drops goldenseal
(Hydrastis), and 1 drop capsicum should be given shortly before meals in warm water. In chronic cases
the tincture is more desirable than the infusion and may be used where there is lack of hepatic and
pancreatic activity, chronic muscular rheumatism, lumbago, scrofula, temporary paralysis, chronic female
trouble, and syphilis. J. Kloss in Back to Eden: “The berries are stimulant, antispasmodic, carminative
acting mostly on the mucous tissue removing obstructions in every part of the body.”

Prickly ash will increase the flow of saliva and moisten the dry tongue often found in liver
malfunctions, and is helpful in paralysis of the tongue and mouth. The fresh bark chewed will give relief
in the most inveterate cases of toothache; also if the inside bark is steeped in whiskey and the tincture
applied. In all the above mentioned, if the stomach is irritable and sensitive prickly ash may not be kindly
received and then the tincture should be given in warm water.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the bark, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water; drink a mouthful at a

----- PAGE 162 -----
time throughout the day, more according to case. Of the tincture, 5—20 drops.

EXTERNALLY: The powdered bark is applied directly on indolent ulcers and old wounds. Coffin
recommends | ounce of the pulverized powder to 4 ounces of olive oil, heated and used as a massage
night and morning for rheumatic pain.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh bark for after-pains, asthma, coccygodynia, dysmenorrhea,
earache, fibroma, headache, hemiplegia, hysteria, jaw joint (pain in), lactation, menstruation (painful),
nerves (injured), nervousness, neuralgia, ophthalmia, sciatica, toothache, ulcers.

----- PAGE 163 -----
RASPBERRY

Rubus idaeus

COMMON NAMES: American raspberry, wild red raspberry.

FEATURES: A native to North America and Europe, the raspberry, due to popularity, has been cultivated
since the sixteenth century. Species of raspberries are seen in most temperate parts of the world. The
plants are perennial, but they have a characteristic biennial growth habit. The canes are generally erect,
freely branched, and prickly, 3-4 feet high and covered with small, straight, slender prickles. The leaves
are pale green above, gray-white beneath, doubly serrated with a rounded base, about 3 inches long and 2
inches broad. The small, white, pendulous flowers bloom in May or June in simple clusters, with the
ripening of the raspberry in June and July. The fruit is not a true berry but aggregates composed of a
number of drupelets.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, berries.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, stimulant, tonic.

Uses: Raspberry has long been established as a remedy for dysentery and diarrhea, especially in infants.
It is mild, pleasant, soothing. It will remove cankers from mucous membranes, at the same time toning the
tissue involved, be it of the throat (as a gargle) or alimentary tract. It is much used in relief of urethral
irritation and is soothing to the kidneys, urinary tract, and ducts. Compound of:

Tincture of bayberry (Myrica cerifera), 5—10 drops
Tincture of raspberry (Rubus idaeus), 10-40 drops

In water three or four times a day is a useful solution for the uterus and to stop hemorrhages. Raspberry
leaf tea can be taken freely before and during confinement; it will strengthen and prevent miscarriage and
render parturition less laborious. The infusion will also relieve painful menstruation and aid the flow; if
too abundant it will decrease without abruptly stopping it. Infuse with prickly ash (Xanthoxylum
americanum) and blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides) and take '2 cup three times a day. Raspberry
leaves as a feminine douche for leukorrhea is made with | tablespoonful of the leaves simmered in | pint
of water for 10 minutes, covered, cooled, and added to container of room-temperature water.

Dose: Tincture of raspberry alone, 30—60 drops in water as required. Infusion, 1 teaspoonful to | cupful

----- PAGE 164 -----
of boiling water; steep at least 3 minutes.
EXTERNALLY: The infusion is a valuable wash in sores, ulcers, and raw surfaces, as an astringent.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Maiina (raspberry) is a most popular aromatic berry. This wild plant alone covers
vast areas of the country. It is used and also cultivated for wine, food, medicine (domestic and clinical).
Folk medicine employs the most common and simple things from the surroundings. Folk medicine: Tea,
decoction, nastoika (with vodka) are employed for colds, coughs, and as a diaphoretic, when required.
Berries are enjoyed by most and have a therapeutic value for grippe. Also stem twigs as tea for the above
and for difficulty in breathing. Clinically: Used in syrups to improve the taste of other compounds and as a
tonic itself.

----- PAGE 165 -----
RED CLOVER

Trzfohum pretense

COMMON NAMES: Purple clover, trefoil, cleaver grass, cow grass.

FEATURES: True clover, plants of the genus Trifolium, family Leguminosae, number about 250 species. It
is believed that the true clovers originated in southeastern Europe and southwestern Asia Minor, although
more than eighty species are listed as indigenous to North America. The clovers are herbaceous annuals
or perennials, depending on insect pests or climatic conditions.

Red clover is an upright perennial 18—36 inches in height that behaves as a biennial under most Eastern
conditions. The colors of the flowers of the many species include white, pink, purple, red, yellow, and
combinations of shades thereof. The flowers are borne on conspicuous heads, with 55—200 florets for
such species as red clover. The leaves, composed of three leaflets, grow on alternate sides of the stem.
The leaflets themselves are broad, oval, pointed, and frequently show a white spot. The hairy stem
supports the generous numbers of separate blossoms at the end of the flower stalk.

Common in pastures, lawns, roadsides, and meadows throughout the United States and Canada.
Harvesting varies, depending on the species. Agriculturally they are classified as winter annuals.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Blossoms, leaves.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, sedative, deobstruent.

Uses: A quote from herbalists of the past: “The likelihood is that whatever virtue the Red Clover can
boast for counteracting a scrofulous disposition and as antidote to cancer, resides in its highly elaborated
lime, silica and other earthy salts.” It is not recognized, however, by the orthodox medical profession as
being of use. It possesses very soothing and pleasant-tasting properties and promotes healthy granulation.
Admirable for malignant ulcers, scrofula, indolent sores, burns, whooping cough, and various spasm,

----- PAGE 166 -----
bronchial, and renal conditions. The warm tea is very soothing to the nerves. J. Kloss, in Back to Eden,
gives a splendid formula for the above. Combine Trifolium pratense with equal parts of:

Blue violet (Amara dulcis)

Burdock (Arctium lappa)

Yellow dock (Rumex crispus)
Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)
Rock rose (Helianthemum canadensis)
Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)

As you can see, red clover can be used alone or supported by many other effective herbs.

As a gargle for sore and inflamed throat, make a strong tea and gargle four to five times a day,
swallowing a fresh mouthful after each cleansing. Also of use for ectal and vaginal irritation, making sure
to hold in the solution for several minutes before releasing.

Dose: Internally as an infusion, 1 teaspoonful of clover to | cupful of boiling water, steeped 30 minutes
or more. Take 4-6 cupfuls a day, children less. Of the tincture, 5-30 drops in water, according to age and
purpose.

EXTERNALLY: Red clover blossoms have been long and successfully used in a form of a salve for the
removal of external cancer and indolent ulcers. A tea is also helpful to bathe the affected part, making it
fresh daily.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of flower heads for cancer, constipation, cough, mumps, pancreas
(affections of), throat (sore, mucus in), uvula (pain in).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: For Russian clover change the o to e, clever, and your Russian friends will
recognize it and perhaps add to your knowledge of its use. Species grow wild in Russia, but severak are
cultivated. Folk medicine: Clever flowers are used as tea, decoctions, nastoika (with vodka) for children
of all ages when anemic, as the properties are nutritious, aiding relief from general weakness and
shortness of breath. Assists in stopping the bleeding of dysmenorrhea. Decoction of herbs for coughs.
Externally: Clover is known to Russians as being a strong natural antiseptic and is adaptable as poultices
for burns and abscesses. Fresh leaf juice is used for external eye wash. Decoction of leaves and salt as a
poultice for headache.

----- PAGE 167 -----
SAGE
Salvia officinalis

COMMON NAMES: Garden sage, wild sage.

FEATURES: Sage is a name covering both the common garden herb (Salvia officinalis) and other plants of
diverse families, that somewhat resemble it in color or odor. Sage is native to southern Europe but has
been naturalized in North America for the last three centuries as a garden and wild herbal shrub. This
perennial is erect, branched, semi-shrubby, hoary down. The majority of the leaves are gray-green,
opposite, entire, and reticulate veined, with the base leaves of a woolly white. The flowers, blue with
white and purple streaks, blossom in whorls of varying lengths, springing from a common stem, in June
and July, and this is the proper time to carefully gather the leaves and tops to dry for future use. Found in
stony places throughout the United States.

The strong, aromatic, camphorous odor is a characteristic of sage, and it has a warm, slightly bitter
taste. Highly prized as winter fodder for livestock. Sage is well known for seasoning, dressing, soups,
roasts, etc. A volatile oil can be obtained by distilling the plant.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.

SOLVENTS: Dilute alcohol, boiling water (partial solvent).

BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, astringent, expectorant, diaphoretic.

Uses: An old English proverb: “He that would live for aye must eat sage in May.” The infusion is much
valued in cases of gastric debility, checking flatulence with speed and certainty. The warm infusion will
activate its diaphoretic tendency. In fevers it should be given in cold infusions as a substitute for fruit
juice. Use 2 teaspoonfuls in | pint of boiling water, steep 1 hour, cool, strain, and when cold take every
hour or two until sweating subsides.

The expressed juice taken for a considerable time is excellent in rheumatic pains and was formerly
used as an agent against venereal disease, but since the introduction of mercury that use has been set
aside.

When conditions advance to consumption quickly use 3 tablespoonfuls of the juice with a little honey;

----- PAGE 168 -----
this will usually stop the spitting of blood. For foul ulcers or old lesions use as indicated by case.

The infusion as a gargle for sore, ulcerated, strained, relaxed uvulva, etc., of the throat is worth
remembering, used alone or with cider vinegar, honey, sumac (Rhus glabra).

From Dr. Brown (1875): “It is called by some a most capital remedy for spermatorrhoea, and for
excessive venereal desire, and I am one of those who know from experience in my practice that it is grand
for what is termed sexual debility when its use is indicated.”

Dose: Tincture, 16—40 drops three or four times a day. Decoction, 1 teaspoonful of leaves to 1 cupful of
boiling water, hot or cold, depending on condition for which it is used.

EXTERNALLY: The decoction is used to cleanse old ulcers and wounds, and massaged into the scalp if
troubled with dandruff, falling hair, or loss of hair (if the root is dormant and not destroyed).

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh leaves and blossom tip for cough (tickling), phthisis, mght
sweats.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In the Middle Ages much credit was given to the power of shalfey (sage) as a food
and medicine. Many couplets like the following have been written about it:

Contra vim mortis

Crescit salvia in hortis.
(Against power of death
Sage grows in the garden.)

Cur moriatur homo

cui salvia crescit in hortis.

(Why man would die

When sage grows in the garden.)

More than five hundred species grow wild, some being cultivated in south Russia and west Siberia as
food and medicine aromatics. Folk medicine and clinically: Aromatic, astringent, antiseptic, carminative,
disinfectant (against inflammations). Commercial: Seven to eight pounds of seed are sown per acre, and
in five years’ time they can harvest two or three times a season, gathering up to 600 pounds per acre the
first year and 1,200 pounds the following season. With exceptional climate conditions and care it is
possible to gain 3,000 pounds per acre.

----- PAGE 169 -----
SANICLE

Sanicula marilandica

COMMON NAMES: Black snakeroot, pool root, American sanicle, wood sanicle.

FEATURES: Sanicle, of the parsley family, is an indigenous perennial common to the United States and
Canada. The fibrous root is aromatic in taste and odor, with a smooth reddish furrowed stem, 1-3 feet
high. The leaves are digitate, mostly radical, and on petioles, 6-12 inches long, nearly 3 inches across,
glossy green above, less color underneath. The flowers bloom in June and July; they are mostly barren
white, sometimes yellowish, the fertile ones sessile.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, leaves.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Vulnerary, astringent, alterative, expectorant, discutient, depurative.

Uses: Used by Native Americans in intermittent fevers and for treating a variety of skin conditions. The
action upon the system very much resembles that of valerian, possessing (besides the previously
mentioned) nervine and anodyne properties.

J. Kloss in Back to Eden: “This is one of the herbs that could well be called a ‘Cure All’, because it
possesses powerful cleansing and healing virtues, both internally and externally.” It heals, stops bleeding,
diminishes tumors, whether of a recent or long-standing nature. The properties, when administered, seem
to seek the area most in distress, be it the throat, lungs, intestines, renal tract, reproductive organs. You
name it; sanicle will find it. Its qualifications are many as a cleansing and healing herb of both man and
animal.

For throat discomforts, gargle a strong tea with honey as often as necessary. The fresh juice can be
given in tablespoonful doses in treatment of dysentery; a strong decoction of the leaves made by boiling 1
ounce of the leaves in 1’% pints of water, reduced to 1 pint, can be taken constantly in wineglassful doses
till hemorrhage ceases.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the root or leaves, cut small or crushed, to 1 cupful of boiling water. Take | cupful

----- PAGE 170 -----
% hour before meals. If hemorrhaging, it is best to refrain from food until bleeding stops. Of the tincture,
15-30 drops; of the powder, | dram.

EXTERNALLY: For cutaneous or subcutaneous skin conditions, chapped hands, or bleeding skin ulcerations
use a fresh preparation daily for chronic conditions until they improve. Internally and externally, can be
combined with other supporting herbs.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Amenorrhea, asthma, bee stings, boils (blind), borborygmus, coccyx (soreness
of), condyloma, conjunctivitis, constipation (of children), cornea (ulceration of), coryza, cough, dandruff,
debility, diabetes, diarrhea, digestion (slow), dropsy (during pregnancy), eczema, emaciation, enuresis,
excoriations, foot sweat, gastritis, gum (suppressed), itching, leukorrhea, liver (soreness of), lumbago,
melancholy, milk (thin), mouth (sore), neuralgia, neurasthenia, night terrors, nose (crusts in), ophthalmia
(tarsi), os uteri (dilated), ossification (too early), ozena, perspiration (excessive), potbellied children,
pregnancy (sickness of, dropsy of), rectum (cramp in), rheumatism, rickets, scurvy, seasickness, shoulders
(rheumatism of), throat (sore), tongue (ringworm of, burning), toothache, uterus (prolapse of, soreness of,
tumor of), vomiting (of milk, of water), wrist (boils on).

----- PAGE 171 -----
SARSAPARILLA

Aralia nudicaulis

COMMON NAMES: Red sarsaparilla, small spikenard, spignet, quay, quill.

FEATURES: There are several species of sarsaparilla that are indigenous to Central America, southern
Mexico, northern South America, and such West Indian islands as Jamaica. The name sarsaparilla is
derived from the Spanish zarza (shrub) and parrilla (little vine), known in the south as bamboo brier.
Aralia racemosa, American sarsaparilla, is a member of the ginseng family.

The sarsaparilla of commercial use consists of very long roots having a thick bark of a grayish or
brownish color, with many slender rootlets, deeply furrowed longitudinally. When cut, sections show a
brown, hard bark with a porous center portion. The roots that have a deep orange tint are the best, and the
stronger the acrid and nauseous qualities the better are the properties of the root. Height 1—2 feet, bearing
several bunches of yellowish green flowers, followed by clusters of small berries resembling, to some
extent, the common elderberry.

Chemically we know the root contains salseparin, a coloring matter; starch; chloride of potassium;
essential oil, basserin; albumin; and pectic and acetic acids; and the several salts of lime, potash,
magnesium, and oxide of iron. The taste is mucilaginous, with scarcely any odor.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTs: Water, dilute alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, diuretic, demulcent, stimulant, antiscorbutic.

Uses: Alfred Metraus, Swedish anthropologist, found Amazon Indians using sarsaparilla to cure general
debilities, and he said that it was invigorating to the entire system. Indian hunting expeditions subsisted
for long periods on sarsaparilla root.

In the mid-1800s sarsaparilla was something of a national phenomenon in the United States as a spring
tonic to eliminate poisons from the blood and purify the system from all leftover infections of winter. It is
dependably useful in rheumatism, gout, skin eruptions, ringworm, scrofula, internal inflammation, colds,
catarrh, fever, and to relieve gas from stomach and bowels.

When in need of an excellent antidote for deadly poisons, cleanse stomach with an emetic, causing

----- PAGE 172 -----
vomiting, and drink copiously of the tea. As an alterative tea it is best prepared with burdock (Arctium
lappa). One of the best herbs to use for infants infected with veneral diseases. They can be cleansed
without the use of mercurials. Also wash the pustules of sores with a tea made of the root and administer
inwardly by mixing the powdered root with food.

Dose: | ounce of the root boiled in | pint of water, taken in wineglassful amounts three times a day. For
colds, etc., it should be used as a syrup, | teaspoonful to | tablespoonful four times a day, depending on
age and condition. Of the tincture, 20-40 drops four times a day.

EXTERNALLY: As a strong tea for skin infections.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Triturations and tincture of the dried rhizome for asthma, bladder (affections
of), bones (affections of), breast (scirrhus of), Bright’s disease, calculi, climaxis, constipation, dyspepsia,
dysuria, enuresis, eruptions, eyes (affections of), faintness, glands (enlarged), gonorrhea, gout, gravel,
hands (chapped), headache, hernia, herpes (of prepuce), hiccup, intermittents, marasmus, masturbation
(effects of), melancholia, mercury (abuse of), mycosis, nipples (retracted), renal colic, rhagades,
rheumatism (gonorrheal), seborrhea, spermatic cords (swelling of), spermatorrhea, strangury, syphilis,
ulcers, warts.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In the Russian Far East a shrub known as Aralia manchuria is used as a general
tonic of nastoika (with vodka) for physical and mental exhaustion.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Known as country sarsaparilla, or Indian sarsaparilla, it grows in
many parts of India and Pakistan. The roots are considered a substitute for American sarsaparilla. Bodily
influence: Demulcent, alterative, blood purifier, diuretic, tonic, diaphoretic. Uses: As an appetizer and
for dyspepsia, fever, skin diseases, syphilis, leukorrhea, diseases of the genitourinary tract, chronic
cough, etc. Dose: Powdered roots, 10-60 grains with milk. Also used as syrup and decoctions from the
root. Externally: Ointment for swelling, rheumatic pains, boils, carbuncles.

----- PAGE 173 -----
SASSAFRAS

Sassafras albidum

COMMON NAMES: Saxifrax, saloop, ague tree, cinnamon wood.

FEATURES: Sassafras is the generic name of three species of trees, two native to eastern Asia, one to
eastern North America, in the laurel family Lauraceae. In the United States and Canada, sassafras extends
from Maine, southern Ontario, and Michigan to Texas and Florida. May approach 100 feet in height and 6
feet in diameter, but is usually smaller, sometimes shrubby.

The bark is dark red-brown, deeply furrowed, soft and brittle with short, corky, layered fractures, with
many oil cells. The young twigs are green. The heartwood of sassafras is dark or orange-brown and
resistant to decay. The leaves, bright green above, downy beneath, are 4-6 inches long, oval, especially
on older branches often mitten-shaped, or three-lobed on younger shoots or twigs. In autumn they turn
various shades of yellow, orange, pink, and deep red. The small greenish flowers appear in April or early
May before the leaves. The fruit pistil, which ripens into a blue drupe, is eagerly devoured by the birds.
The bark has an aromatic, agreeable taste and similar fragrance.

In the book Trees and Shrubs of Massachus, 1894, sassafras is given credit for having aided in the
discovery of America. The windswept fragrance of the trees encouraged Columbus to persuade his
mutinous crew that land was near.

Sold in some areas under the name of salap or saloop.
MEDICINAL PARTs: Root bark.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diaphoretic, aromatic, tonic, diuretic, alterative.

Uses: Early explorers and settlers in the New World were told by the Native Americans that it would
cure diverse ills, and it was eagerly sought and shipped to Europe. In domestic practice it enjoys a wide
field of application and use, especially as a so-called spring renovator to thin and purify the blood. J. H.
Greer tells us: “Sassafras should not be used by thin-blooded persons.” It would accentuate the positive.

It is used as corrective in rheumatism, varicose ulcers; given in painful menstruation it soon relieves
the sufferer, and is effective in afterpains of childbirth and in all skin eruptive diseases. It is antagonistic
to narcotic effect of alcohol. The essential oil will often relieve most painful toothache. Sassafras is used
with other compounds to improve their flavor and render their properties more cordial to the stomach.

----- PAGE 174 -----
CAUTION: Sassafrass oi] taken internally can cause liver and kidney damage.

Dose: Infusion of 1 ounce of crushed or chipped bark to | pint of boiling water. Of the tincture, 15—30
minims.

EXTERNALLY: A poultice of the root is a good application for ill-conditioned uclers. The oil may be used
as an ingredient in liniment, and provides an excellent application for bruises and swellings.

----- PAGE 175 -----
SENEGA
Polygala senega

COMMON NAMES: Snakeroot, milkwort, rattlesnake root, mountain flax.

FEATURES: Polygala is a genus of more than five hundred annual and perennial herbs and shrubs of the
family Polygalaceae. Most species are subtropical, but nearly two hundred are North American. Polygala
senega, known as mountain flax or senega snakeroot, grows from New Brunswick to Alberta and
southward to Georgia and Arkansas. This indigenous plant has a perennial, firm, hairy, branching root,
with a thick bark, and sends up several annual stems that are erect, smooth, 8—14 inches high,
occasionally tinged with red. The leaves are alternate, nearly sessile lanceolate with a sharpish point,
smooth. The new, small white flowers consists of five sepals and three petals; the capsules are small,
two-celled, and two-valved.

Found in rocky woods and on hillsides, flowering in July. The English name is milkwort. The botanical
name means “much milk,” which has been applied to some species for their increase of milk flow. Its
chemical constituents are polygalic, virginic, pectic, and tannic acids, an oil, gum, albumin, salts of
alumina, silica, magnesium, and iron. For medicinal purposes, gather in the autumn just before the frost;
the taste is bitter, though somewhat sweet.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.

SOLVENTs: Water, dilute alcohol.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Diaphoretic, diuretic, expectorant; large doses emetic and cathartic.

Uses: In the early part of the eighteenth century Scottish physician Tennant heard from the Seneca tribe of
the use of senega in cases of snakebite and investigated its merits. He discovered that an infusion of the
dried roots would actively promote salivation, desirable in chronic catarrh, croup, asthma, and lung
disorders of pleurisy and pneumonia, but that it is too irritating for recent coughs of active inflammatory
diseases. It increases the secretions and circulation and is indicated where there is prostration from blood
poisoning, smallpox, asthma, diseases of the lungs, bronchitis, chronic catarrh, croup, dropsy, and

----- PAGE 176 -----
rheumatism.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the root, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water. Of the tincture, 15—
20 drops; of the powder, 5—20 grains.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of powdered dried root for ascites, asthma, bladder (irritable, catarrh
of), bronchitis, constipation, cornea (opacity of), cough, enuresis, facial paralysis, hay fever, influenza,
iritis, esophagus (stricture of, catarrh of), phthisis mucosa, pleurisy, pneumonia, snakebite, sneezing (fits
of, at the end of cough), throat (sore), whooping cough.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Senega is known and pronounced the same as in North America. Cultivated in
south Russia for experimental observation and study of the medicinal roots and rhizomes for expectorant
influence in chronic bronchitis and long-established respiratory illness.

----- PAGE 177 -----
SENNA

Cassia marilandica

COMMON NAMES: Wild senna, locust plant.

FEATURES: Cassia is a genus of leguminous plants inhabiting the tropical parts of the world, consisting of
trees, shrubs, or herbs. American senna is to be found from New England to Carolina growing in rich
soils.

The leaves have long petioles, ovate at the base; each petiole has eight or ten leaflets that are oblong,
smooth, 1—2 inches long, and quite narrow. The flowers are a bright yellow, and the leaves are gathered
while in bloom from June to September. The fruit is a legume, 2—4 inches long, and contains a quantity of
thick pulp that is mildly laxative and cathartic and is used in the composition of the confection of cassia
and of senna. It belongs to the sugar class of laxatives, its properties being due, for the most part, to the
water-attracting properties of the sugar while in the intestinal canal.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENTS: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Laxative, vermifuge, cathartic.

Usgs: Senna sometimes causes griping effects. To modify this, combine senna leaves with one of the
aromatic herbs: ginger, anise, caraway, fennel, or coriander. Can also be used in combination with pink
root (Spigelia marilandica). Should not be used in cases of inflammation of the stomach.

Dose: Of the tincture, 1—2 tablespoons; of the powder, 10—20 grains; of the infusion, 2-1 cupful steeped
30 minutes.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Colic (flatulent) of infants, exhaustion, nitrogenous waste, sleeplessness,
sneezing, with heat.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russia senna leaves are known as Alexandre leaves, or cassia. The species
Cassia acutifolia grows in Russia, having the same properties as the American variety. Use: For treating
conditions of constipation they prefer the buds with oils; this can be used repeatedly without side effect.
The leaves alone are rather harsh, so a compound of Cassia with similar herbs is recommended.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Many varieties of senna grow in India and Pakistan, one being
Cassia angustifolia (Indian senna). Uses: Their traditional use is not only as a laxative but also for
biliousness, gout, and rheumatism, in the form of decoctions, infusions, powder, and confections.
WARNING: it should not be administered for inflammatory conditions of the alimentary canal, fever, piles,
menorrhagia, prolapse of the rectum and uterus, or pregnancy. Externally: For skin diseases and pimples
use a paste of the dried leaves made with vinegar.

----- PAGE 178 -----
SKULLCAP

Scutellaria laterifolia

COMMON NAMES: Blue skullcap, blue pimpernel, hoodwort, mad-dog weed, side flower, skullcap helmet
flower, American skullcap.

FEATURES: Indigenous to North America, this little herb is very abundant throughout the land, growing in
damp places, meadows, ditches, and by the sides of ponds from Connecticut south to Florida and Texas.

This small perennial, with fibrous yellow roots, has an erect and very branching square stem, 1-3 feet
in height. The tooth-edged leaves grow opposite each other on short stalks. It derives its common name
from the helmet-shaped upper lid of its small seedpods; the pale blue flowers bloom in pairs just above
the leaves in July and August.

The whole plant is medicinal and should be gathered while in flower, dried in the shade, and kept in
well-closed tin vessels, as it deteriorates rapidly from age and heat. Chemically it contains essential oil,
yellowish green fixed oil, a volatile matter, albumin, an astringent principle, lignin, chloride of soda, salts
of iron, silica, etc.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENTS: Dilute alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, nervine, antispasmodic, slightly astringent.

Usss: Skullcap, by its action through the cerebrospinal centers, is a most valuable remedy for controlling
nervous irritation. In many cases of hydrophobia it has been known to eventually render the patient free
from disturbances; also in cases of insomnia, excitability, restlessness, wakefulness, Saint Vitus’ dance,
hysteria, epilepsy convulsions, shaking palsy, rickets, bites of poisonous insects and snakes, and all
nervous affections. It supports the nerves, quietening and strengthening the system. It is also effective in
reducing temperature and inducing perspiration in feverish children.

Skullcap was known to the original inhabitants of the New World and country people as hoodwort or
mad-dog weed.

For persons troubled by undue sexual desires, skullcap taken freely and persistently will prove a most
efficient regulator without damage of any sort. When given with pennyroyal (Hedeoma pulegioides) as a
tea it is successfully used as a female remedy for cramps and severe pain caused by suppressed
menstruation due to colds.

The following formulas have been proved effective by prominent herbalists and doctors of both the
past and present.

For weakness of the heart:

Tincture of skullcap (Scutellaria laterifolia) 3-15 drops
Tincture of goldenseal (Hydrostis conadensis), 7-10 drops
Tincture of cayenne pepper (Capsicum) 2-4 drops

In warm water as often as required.

For irritable and nervous conditions:

----- PAGE 179 -----
Tincture of lady’s slipper (Cypripedium pubescens), 10-20 drops
Tincture of skullcap (Scutellaria laterifolia), 2-15 drops
In warm water every 2—4 hours.

For hydrophobia and bites of poisonous snakes:

Tincture of coneflower (Echinacea angustifolia), 15—20 drops
Tincture of skullcap (Scutellaria laterifolia), 2-15 drops
In water, in doses as frequently as indicated.

For insomnia or exhaustion, whether from excessive application to business or due to alcoholism:

Tincture of skullcap (Scutellaria laterifolia), 2-12 drops
Tincture of passion flower (Passiflora incarnata), 15-40 drops
In water every 3 hours, or more frequently depending on age and condition.

Dose: Tincture alone, 3—12 drops in water as indicated. As an intrusion, | teaspoonful of the cut or
powdered herb steeped in 1 cupful of boiling water for 2 hour; take every 3-4 hours for adults; in
proportion for children.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plants for ardor urinae, brain (irritation of), chorea, delirium
tremens, dentition, flatulence, headache (nervous), hiccup, hydrophobia, hysteria, night terrors,
sleeplessness, tobacco heart.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Scutellaria baikalensis georgi is one species of skullcap growing in Siberia, the
Russian Far East, north China, Mongolia, and Japan. In Russia shlemnic baikalski (skullcap) is not
mentioned in medical folk medicine literature, but a lot of interest is shown in it because Chinese,
Mongolian, and Tibetan practice accept the properties. Chinese medicine administers skullcap as
stimulant, tonic, sedative, and nervine in the treatment of cramps, convulsions, epilepsy, and heart
conditions, to reduce fever, for severe rheumatism and pain, and to expel tapeworms. Extensive study and
experiments confirm Tibetan and Chinese practice (Tomsk University, Siberia, Russia). Clinically: To
reduce high blood pressure, heart conditions (including pains in the heart), slowly progressive disorders
of the central nervous system, headaches, head noise, sleeplessness. All experiments indicate that the
preparation is not toxic.

----- PAGE 180 -----
SLIPPERY ELM

Ulmus rubra

COMMON NAMES: Slippery elm, red elm, Indian elm, American elm, moose elm.

FeATuRES: The deciduous elm can be found in Central and North America and Asia. There are about
twenty species belonging to the elm family (Ulmaceae). Slippery, or red, elm is smaller than the rest of
the elm family (60 feet or less), with a wide-open crown. The bark and leaves are characteristically
rough, deeply furrowed, underlayers ruddy brown, protecting the white aromatic fibers used medicinally.
Odor, distinct; taste, mucilaginous. The leaves are extremely rough on top, deep yellowish olive-green,
lighter, and sometimes rusty beneath; flowering in March or April before the leaves appear; fruit nearly
round in outline, winged without hairy fringe, ripening in the spring at intervals of two to four years.

MEDICINAL PART: The inner bark (fresh or dried).
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Demulcent, emollient, nutritive.

Uses: Slippery elm is an agreeable emulsive drink in any disease. The finely powdered bark prepared as
an ordinary gruel has shown definite results as a demulcent in catarrhal affection of the entire digestive
and urinary tracts, and in all diseases involving inflammation of the mucous membrane of the stomach,
bowels, and kidneys, and will sustain ulcerated and cancerous stomach when nothing else will. The bark
may be chewed and the fluid swallowed for irritation of the throat. It has remarkable soothing, cleansing,
and healing qualities on all the parts (internally or externally) it comes in contact with. It is interesting to
learn that its nutritional value is equivalent to oatmeal.

J. Kloss, in Back to Eden, gives us another use for slippery elm bark: “An excellent treatment in female
troubles in the following: Make a thick paste with powdered Slippery elm with pure water, shape into
pieces about one inch long and one inch thick. Place in warm water for a few minutes. These are called
vaginal suppositories. Insert three, afterwards inserting a sponge with a string attached. Let it remain two
days, then remove the sponge and give douche which will remove the Slippery elm. This is an excellent
treatment for cancer and tumours of the womb, all growths in the female organs, fallen womb,
leucorrhoea, or inflammation and congestion of any part of the vagina or womb and as a rectal
suppository, renewed after bowel elimination.”

As a nourishing gruel for children and adults, take 1 teaspoonful of the powder, mix well with the same
quantity of honey or maple syrup, add 1 pint of boiling water, soya bean milk, nut milk, or milk, slowly
mixing as it is poured on. May be flavored with cinnamon or nutmeg to suit the taste. As a tea, |
teaspoonful of the inner bark to 1 cupful of boiling water, steeped for 1 hour or overnight. Can be
simmered, strained, and then used. This will be like a thick syrup; use small amounts often.

EXTERNALLY: For poultice the ground powder or bark should be used, softened with water containing a
little glycerine. As a mixture: 2 parts slippery elm, 2 parts cornmeal, | part each of bloodroot, blue flag,
ragweed, chickweed, and burdock. Mix well, add warm water to required consistency, and use on
abscesses, fresh wounds, inflammation, congestion, eruptions, enlarged prostate, swollen glands of the
neck, groin, etc. If applied to a hairy surface, coat the face of the poultice with olive oil. Always use
clean white cotton and change often if drainage is noticed.

----- PAGE 181 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Pounded dried inner bark, decoction of dried bark, tincture of fresh bark for
constipation, deafness, hemorrhoids, herpes, pain, syphilis.

----- PAGE 182 -----
SOLOMON’S SEAL

Polygonatum commutatum, P. multiflorum

COMMON NAMES: Drop berry, sealwort, seal root.

FEATURES: Solomon’s seal consists of about thirty species of usually hardy perennial herbs of the
Liliaceae family. Native to moist, shady woods in the north temperate zone. They grow in colonies, each
simple (in some species branched) arching stem 12—18 inches, arising in the spring from a thick, fleshy,
many-jointed white rhizome on which, when the stem dies away in the winter, a round scar is left, the
“seal” (though this name may derive from the pattern of a cross-section of the stem). The leaves are
simple, linear to ovate, sometimes in whorls but mostly alternate, opposite, and in two close ranks. The
small white or greenish bell-shaped, three-partite flowers are seen in May and June; later the globular
bluish black berries. Taste is mucilaginous, sweet, then acrid.

MEDICINAL PART: Rhizome.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, demulcent, tonic.

Uses: From herbalists of the past: “If any of what age or sex so ever chance to have any bones broken in
what part of their bodies so ever their refuse is to stamp the root here of and give it unto the patient, in ale
to drink, which sodereth and glues together the bones in very short space and very strongly, yea though the
bones be but slenderly and unhandsomely placed and wrapped up.”

As a successful decoction used for pectoral affections, menorrhagia, female debilities, whites,
inflammation of the stomach and intestines. Will relieve pain and heal hemorrhoids if a tea solution is
injected three or four times a day. An agent for obvious conditions such as erysipelas, itch, etc.; also of
use in neuralgia and ruptures when taken internally, and as an external poultice applied to painful area.

Dose: | ounce of the root to | pint of boiling water, taken in wineglassful amounts.

EXTERNALLY: The extract from the root is used to diminish freckles and discoloration of the skin. If the
fresh root is used, proceed with caution and dilute with water until you find individual acceptance. Used
for congested blood caused from bruises, and will close fresh and bleeding wounds.

----- PAGE 183 -----
RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Koopena medical, Solomon’s seal, grows throughout the country. Folk medicine
has used its properties for many centuries. Recently modern science of Russia has been interested
(Zemlinsky, 1951, Hoppe 1958). Folk Medicine and Clinically: Decoction of the dried rhizome for
stomach and duodenal ulcer (Popov 1964, Bello-Russ. Academy of Science 1965). Externally: The fresh
juice of the rhizome and decoction of it dried is useful for old and fresh wounds. Fresh juice for freckles
(Cholovsky 1888).

----- PAGE 184 -----
SPIKENARD

Aralia racemosa

COMMON NAMES: Indian spikenard, American spikenard, petty morrel, like of man, spignet, old man’s
root, wild licorice.

FEATURES: Spikenard is a perennial plant of the ginseng family Araliaceae. Found from Quebec to
southeastern Manitoba, south to Georgia and Kansas, in rich wooded areas. The root stalk is light brown,
thick, and fleshy, with prominent stem scars and furnished with numerous long, thick roots that have a
spicy taste and have been used in flavoring root beer. The large, compound, rather imposing leaves,
sometimes nearly 3 feet long and with broad leaflets, grow alternately from a slightly zigzag stem; they
are light green with deeply furrowed indentations the length of the leaf. The flowers are small and
greenish yellow or greenish white and are in many-branched, long clusters. The dark purple berries are
pleasantly flavored and can be made into jelly.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Root, rhizome.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, diaphoretic, expectorant.

Usrs: Native Americans used the whole root as food. For many years spikenard has been used as an
addition to cough syrups, with other agents according to the nature of the cough. For irritable conditions,
combine with | ounce of wild cherry syrup (Prunus serotina); for old coughs, with 1 ounce of
elecampane (/nula helenium); for relaxed coughs, with | ounce coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara). Any one of
the above to be mixed with 1—2 ounces of the tincture of spikenard (Aralia racemosa) in syrup form. The
alterative properties are of use in general uric acid disorders of rheumatic conditions. Often used by
Native American women a few months before the time of delivery to shorten pain and delivery; every
misery prevented is a new blessing. Spikenard is combined with many other well-known herbs to build or
purify the bloodstream, the true source of pimples, acne, eruptions, etc.

Dose: The infusion of % ounce in | pint of boiling water is taken in wineglassful doses. Of the tincture,
1-2 fluidrams.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh wild plant in bloom for asthma, cough, diarrhea,
hemorrhoids, hay fever, leukorrhea, prolapsus ani.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In far eastern Russia, Manchuria, and China, a shrub known as Aralia manchuria
grows up to 15 feet in height and is of the same family as the American spikenard. Uses: The properties of
the plant are very close to ginseng. They use the roots as a general tonic and stimulant, especially for
physical and mental exhaustion. Clinically: In Khabarovsk, far eastern Russia, they produce the extract for
clinical use.

----- PAGE 185 -----
ST. JOHN’S WORT

Hypericum perforatum

COMMON NAMES: Johnswort, St. John’s grass, klamath weed.

FEATURES: This plant grows abundantly in the United States and Europe. An ornamental herb to our
meadows, often considered a pest when too freely mingled in corn and wheat fields. It is said that St.
John’s wort is well known among bakers, as a small quantity added to the flour improves the quality of
bread.

The upright, woody, slender stem reaches a height of 1—2 feet. The leaves are stalkless, 2 inches long,
growing in pairs on opposite sides of the stem. The dark green leaves are full of transparent holes, which
can be plainly seen when the leaf is held up to the light, and are sometimes marked with black spots on the
underside. From June to August, at the tops of the stalks and branches stand the yellow flowers of five
petals apiece, rather close-clustered, with many yellow threads in the middle, which when bruised yield a
reddish juice like blood, after which come small round heads wherein are contained small blackish seeds
smelling like resin. The fruit is a three-celled capsule.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Tops, flowers.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Expectorant, diuretic, astringent, sedative.

Uses: An old custom of Native Americans was to dry Hypericum and use it as a meal, as they did acorn.
They were also known to eat the fresh leaves for their soothing effect. In many cases of bronchitis, has
been known to eliminate all signs of the condition. A family remedy to overcome bedwetting if taken
every night before going to bed. Dose, 4 teaspoonful of leaves and flowers to 4-1 cupful of boiling
water, steeped | hour.

St. John’s wort can be administered to all, whatever age or sex, and was at one time found in almost
every country household. For treatment of dysentery, diarrhea, bleeding of the lungs, worms, jaundice,
suppressed urine, pus in the urine, hysteria, and nervous irritability. It will help correct irregular

----- PAGE 186 -----
menstruation along with a proper diet. A specific for deep, low pain of the coccyx (the vertebra at the
base of the spine), head complaints arising from watery matters of obstructions of phlegm in the head, or
from the gases rising to the head, stomach spasm; slight obstructions of phlegm on the chest and lungs are
healed at once by tea made of St. John’s wort. The tea with a small amount of aloe powder is of special
influence on the liver. This can be observed chiefly in the urine; whole flakes of morbid matter are
sometimes washed away with it.

J. Kloss, in Back to Eden, gives us the following: “The seeds steeped in boiling water will expel
congealed blood from the stomach caused by bruises, falls, or bursting veins. For this purpose use a
heaping teaspoonful of the seeds to a cup of boiling water, and take a large mouthful of the tea often,
throughout the day.”

Dose: Of the tincture, 8-15 drops in water before meals. As a tea, 1 teaspoonful of the tops and flowers,
cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water; sweeten to taste with honey.

EXTERNALLY: The fresh bruised flowers added to olive oil and placed in a glass container to age in the
sun for ten days to two weeks, after which time fresh flowers replace the old ones, and simmered in the
original container on a bed of straw (to keep the glass from breaking) is excellent for swollen breasts and
hard tumors, sciatic pain, ulcers, old sores, and all wounds. Can be applied as a fomentation of boiled
flowers and tops for the above mentioned when caught unprepared.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plant for after-pains, asthma, bites, brachial neuralgia,
breast (affections of), brain (concussion of), bruises, bunions, compound fractures, corns, coxalgia,
diarrhea, gunshot wounds, hemorrhoids, headache, hydrophobia, hypersensitiveness, impotence, labor
(effects of), meningitis, mind (affections of), neuralgia, operations (effects of), panaritium, paralysis,
rheumatism, scars, sciatica, spastic paralysis, spinal concussion, spinal irritation, stiff neck, tetanus,
ulceration, whooping cough, wounds.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Zveroboi, “killing the beast,” or “beast killer,” grows in many parts of Russia.
After eating zveroboi (Hypericum) in the summertime, sheep, cattle, horses, and pigs develop white spots
and become extremely sensitive to sunshine, eventually developing skin eruptions. The animals will
recover if kept in a dark place, but a successful precaution is to paint them with nontoxic dark dye. This
can also happen with dry Hypericum (Medicine, Moscow, 1963). We are pleased to say human skin is not
sensitive in this way. This is a very old herbal remedy that has been on the forgotten list for too long. Folk
medicine: For generations folk medicine has used Zveroboi in many serious cases of acute and chronic
stomach disorders, gastroenteritis, liver, jaundice, kidney and bladder, ulcers, tuberculosis anemia,
scrofula, rheumatism, boils, carbuncles, hemorrhoids, coughs, and all inflamed processes. In many female
disorders, including excessive bleeding, preventive in bleeding and to dry wounds, ulcers (Bello-Russ.
Academy Minsk, 1965). To break bedwetting, 1 cupful of tea before retiring (Naukova Dumka, Kiev,
1963). A strong decoction of mouthwash to heal gums and offensive mouth odor. Simmer 1 tablespoonful
of the flowers in % glassful of water for 10 minutes, cool, strain, and gargle a mouthful before meals,
three times a day. Externally: The Medical Academy of Russia introduced a special external preparation,
“Tmanin,” for skin conditions and burns, which is now used nationwide (Vishaya Schkola, Moscow,
1963). Extract with sunflower or sweet almond oil for skin ulcers and skin conditions: 1 part flowers to 2
parts of oil; keep at least three weeks. The fresh crushed flowers or juice can be used for skin conditions
of recent lesions, broken skin, bruises, eruptive skin, etc. Clinically: Used as astringent, disinfectant,
antiseptic, styptic, tonic, in the forms of extracts, tinctures, decoctions, and tea. Industrial: Depending on
strength, colors of yellow, green, red, and pink are made and used for fabric dyes. Collection of wild
Hypericum cannot keep up with the growing demand, so in Russia they have special plantations. Two or
three months before spring seeding they mix the seeds with wet sand and keep in freezing compartments at
0°C. They plan on 3-4 pounds of seed per acre. Once it is planted, the plant is good for four or five years.

----- PAGE 187 -----
Zveroboi is harvested when the flower is in full bloom; after thirty to forty-five days it can again be
harvested, sometimes yielding a larger and richer crop than the first. The first year they collect on the
average up to 2,000 pounds of dry herb; in following years 3,000—4,000 pounds. It comes to the state
collecting stations and is processed as tea, extracts, and other preparations.

----- PAGE 188 -----
STRAWBERRY

Fragaria vesca, F- Americana

FeATuRES: A member of the Rosaceae family, one of several native species of North America highly
prized for their fruit. Fragaria vesca, or wood strawberry, is a perennial herb, highly aromatic but with
small fruit. Strawberries vary in size, shape, color, texture, etc.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, root, berries.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Mild astringent, diuretic.

Usrs: The common strawberry leaf is still recognized as an effective blood-purifying and blood-building
agent and treatment for eczema, the outward appearance of acute or chronic blood contamination. Use a
strong tea or decoction of leaves or roots sweetened with honey freely for children and adults for
intestinal malfunctions of diarrhea, dysentery, weakness of the intestines, affections of the urinary organs;
will also prevent night sweats, acting as a general tonic. A strong tea used as a gargle will strengthen the
gums.

Dose: | teaspoonful of fresh or dried herb to 1 cupful of boiling water, steeped 15 minutes. Take 4-5
cupfuls a day; children wineglassful amounts. For a more effective agent, combine with equal parts of
dandelion (Taraxacum), burdock (Arctium), and just enough rhubarb (Rheum) to assure regular bowel
evacuation. Dose of the tincture, 5—15 drops in water three times a day.

EXTERNALLY: A strong decoction to cleanse and heal eczema and other skin conditions.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the ripe fruit, in fusion of the root for anasarca, biliousness,
chilblains, convulsions, erysipelas, gonorrhea, psilosis (or sprue), tapeworm, tongue (strawberry,
swollen), urticaria, weaning.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Zemlianika, strawberry, grows in wooded settings throughout Russia and is highly
praised as foodstuff and medicine. However, some people’s systems cannot tolerate strawberries, and
they can cause skin rash, itching, redness, etc. If there are indications of this, consumption should be
avoided in any form: tea, jam, pie, etc. Folk medicine: Uses the fresh and dried leaves and berries for

----- PAGE 189 -----
anemia, general weakness, bleeding, tapeworm, kidney and bladder, children’s diarrhea (Atlas, Moscow,
1963). Also of use for kidney and liver stones, female bleeding, scurvy, and vitamin deficiency. To some
extent for reducing high blood pressure.

----- PAGE 190 -----
SUMAC
Rhus glabra

COMMON NAMES: Smooth sumac, Indian salt (powder on the berries), scarlet sumac, mountain sumac,
dwarf sumac.

FEATURES: There are several species of sumac, care should be taken in their identification, as some are
poisonous. But this, the blue glabra, may be easily distinguished by the color, acidity of the berries, and
their appearance in cone-shaped bunches. Rhus glabra is a shrub 6-15 feet tall, consisting of many
straggling branches covered with a pale gray bark having occasionally a reddish tint. The leaves are
alternate, consisting of 6-15 lanceolate, acuminate leaflets, shining and green above, whitish beneath,
turning red in the autumn. When the green leaves or limbs are cut or broken, a milky juice exudes. The
flowers are greenish red on spikes, followed by long bunches of hard, red down-covered berries,
extremely sour to the taste, which is due to malate of lime.

They can be found growing in thickets and waste grounds of Canada and the United States, flowering
June to July, the fruit maturing in September and October. The berries should be gathered before the rain
washes away the acid properties that reside in the external, downy efflorescence.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, fruit.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Bark is astringent, tonic, antiseptic; berries are refrigerant, diuretic.

Uses: Native Americans crushed the fruit to make a refreshing drink, and also dried the berries for winter
use. For application to skin diseases, they made a poultice of the bruised leaves and fruit. Where
conditions of irritated mucous membranes, as in dysentery, scalding of the urinary passage, sumac is
appreciably reliable. The infusion as an injection of the bark (being stronger), and tea taken internally,
will give prompt relief in leukorrhea, rectal conditions, chronic diarrhea, and rectal hemorrhage. Of use
in malaria and all kinds of fevers, canker in the mouth, and as a gargle for sore throat. Sumac is often
combined with slippery elm (U/mus rubra) and white pine bark (Pinus strobus) for scrofula. The tea is
cleansing to the system, and sumac berries with blueberry (Vaccinium myrtillus) are most effective in
diabetes. A syrup may be made with the berries by covering them with boiling water, steeping for | hour,

----- PAGE 191 -----
straining, adding honey, boiling into a syrup, and bottling for future use.

Dose: | teaspoonful of either the bark, leaves, or berries steeped % hour in 1 cupful of boiling water.
When cool, 2-4 cupfuls a day. Of the tincture, 10—20 drops.

EXTERNALLY: For old sores and skin ulcers and wounds apply poultice of bruised leaves and fruit, or a
strong tea, and bathe area as needed.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh bark, roots, or berries for debility, diarrhea, dreams
(annoying), dysentery, epistaxis, hemorrhages, headache, mouth (ulcers in).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The sumac species Rhus cariaria grows in south Russia and south Asiatic Russia.
From the raw material, the extract contains an estimated 33 percent tannin (Medicine, Moscow, 1965).
Sumac can be very irritating, especially on hot summer days, when a simple touch of the leaves can
inflame the skin in various ways. Uses: Russian homeopaths and Chinese medicine use sumac for
rheumatism (Moscow University, Moscow, 1963) and for internal bleeding, diarrhea, enteritic colitis
(Atlas, Moscow, 1963). Externally: Tannin extracts are used for burns, fresh wounds, chronic ulcers,
eczema, and as a gargle for inflammation of the throat (Atlas, Moscow, 1963).

----- PAGE 192 -----
SUNDEW

Drosera rotundifolia

COMMON NAMES: Round leaf, sundew, flytrap, dew-plant.

FEATURES: Drosera is a genus of carnivorous plants with ninety species throughout the world. Drosera
rotundifolia is common in North America in damp, sandy soil near bogs from Labrador to Florida,
Alaska to California; sometimes so abundant the dew-beds are aglow with glistening red.

The fibrous black rootlets are reddish inside. The leaves are round on long stems extending from the
root; the top side of each leaf bears as many as two hundred red tentacles, each tipped with a gland
exuding an exceedingly sticky drop of fluid. The flat little rosette of spatulate leaves is formed around a
dainty white flower on a stem 1-2 inches tall. The tentacles are expanded until the pressure of a small
insect’s body, held by the sticky drops, causes them to bend over the prey, enclosing it in a sort of
stomach. Digestive juices, analogous to pepsin, are excreted, and the insect is dissolved and absorbed.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, expectorant, demulcent, antispasmodic.

Uses: In the conditions for which sundew is used it is almost as if the dewdrops are quenching the dry
and tickling condition of the respiratory organs. Considered a prophylactic (prevents the spread of
disease) in whooping cough, and controls the spasms and characteristic coughs; also indicated in
laryngitis, for tobacco cough, some types of asthma, chronic bronchitis, and catarrh, when attended with
dryness of the mucous membranes and irritable states of the nervous system. Excellent in the early stages
of consumption when attended with a harassing cough without expectoration.

S. Clymer gives us a formula that proves very effective:

Tincture of sundew (Drosera rotundifolia), 2-5 drops
Tincture of queen’s root (Stillingia sylvatica), 1-40 drops
Tincture of passionflower (Passiflora incarnata), 3-10 drops

----- PAGE 193 -----
In water as frequently as necessary.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the herb, cut small, to 1 pint of boiling water; take a mouthful at a time as
required. Of the tincture alone, 3-6 drops in water as indicated. External application may cause water
blisters on the skin.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the active fresh plant for amblyopia, asthma, bronchitis, catarrh,
consumption, cough, coxalgia, epilepsy, hemorrhage, headache, laryngitis, measles, nausea, sciatica,
vomiting, whooping cough.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Rossianka, “round leaf’ (Drosera), grows in many parts of Russia including the
Far East and Siberia. Commercially collected in Belorussia, Siberia, and northern Russia in June and July
when the plant is in full flower. Long orange needles are used to extract crystalline plumbagin. Plumbagin,
which suppresses some pathogenic fungus and bacterial growths, was discovered in other plants in 1828.
In northern Russia farmers used the plant in boiling water to disinfect milk containers. The plant also
contains peptic ferment of antispasmodic properties, which explains the calming effect for spasmodic and
whooping cough. Folk medicine: For nervous headache, sickness, and disorders due to nerve
maladjustment, plague, diphtheria, and as nastoika (with vodka) for malaria (Bello-Russ. Academy of
Science, 1965). Prepared as extracts, decoctions, tea, and nastoika. Dose: 10-20 drops of extract three
times daily. As a tea, 1 teaspoonful steeped in cupful of boiling water, three times a day in tablespoonful
amounts. Externally: Fresh juice for warts (Moscow University, Moscow, 1963).

----- PAGE 194 -----
SUNFLOWER

Helianthus annuus

FEATURES: This plant belongs to a large composite genus, Helianthus, so called because its golden-rayed
flowers are likened to the sun. Perhaps the sunflower seed’s nutritional richness is due to the flower’s
amazing ability to follow and face the sun from morning to night. Scientists call this ability heliotropism.
The robust annuals (Helianthus annuus) are never known in the wild state; they existed in cultivation in
pre-Columbian America. The root system of the sunflower is quite extensive and goes down deep, thus
extracting many of the trace minerals not always present in topsoil.

The leaves are numerous, rough, very large, and somewhat heart-shaped. The disk is very broad and
brownish, and its tubular florets develop four-sided, very oily achenes (a small dry carpel containing a
single seed that does not burst when ripe). The yellow petals are daisylike in pattern. The plant reaches
15 feet in height and is often planted as a concealing border. The sunflower is the state flower of Kansas
and a floral symbol of Peru.

MEDICINAL PART: Seed.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, expectorant, nourishing.

Uses: Native Americans used the mineral-grasping root in combination with other roots for snakebite and
a warm decoction was used as a wash for rheumatism and inflammations. They boiled the flower heads to
extract the oil and used it as a hair tonic. As a nourishing meal, the roasted shells or seeds were crushed
and sifted; the same was also made into a hot beverage; the parched and crushed seed was used for bread
meal. Herbalists use the plant in syrup or infusions for coughs, bronchitis, clergyman’s sore throat,
pulmonary difficulties, early stages of consumption, and disease of the kidneys. Infusion of the pith stalk
used as a wash will often act effectively in early stages of inflammatory sore eyes, the same being taken
internally. Sunflower leaves have also been used for the treatment of malaria. The sun-drenched,
deeprooted sunflower is known to contain the following: Phosphorus: Essential for building bones, teeth,
activating and regulating enzymes, proper fat and carbohydrate digestion, and is a vital building material

----- PAGE 195 -----
for all body cells. Calcium: Our bodies need calcium for building strong bones, hard teeth, good muscle
and tissue tone, well-being of nerves, and proper clotting of blood. Iron: Found in good amount, and
while iron is most essential for the formation of healthy, red blood corpuscles, evidence also points to the
necessity of copper being present, even though in minute quantities, for the proper utilization of iron.
There are very few foods in which copper is found in any amount; however, sunflower seeds present a
rich source. Fluorine, iodine: Iodine has always been associated with seafoods, sea salt, and sea moss or
vegetation, but it is also found in sunflower seeds. Natural fluorine, so essential for hard tooth enamel
formation, is present in amounts of 2.6 parts per million. Fluorine is also needed in the development of
the skeleton, since no normal bony substance can be formed without it. Potassium: Without potassium life
as we know it would not exist. It is very predominant in brain tissue and appears to be vital in the proper
functions of this organ and of the nervous system. Magnesium: Magnesium contributes to the formation of
the albumin of the blood and is also found in greater amounts than calcium in muscular tissues, brain and
nervous tissue, and lungs. Sodium: It is interesting to note that sunflower seeds are unusually low in
sodium, containing only 0.4 milligrams. Protein: Sunflower seeds contain up to 30 percent protein, plus
all of the amino acids needed for building and repairing the body cells. This protein is 98 percent
digestible, has a biological or utilization value of 64.5 percent, and does not putrefy, as does animal
protein. Thiamine: Sunflower seeds contain a good amount of vitamin B, this being essential for normal
growth and metabolism, maintenance of appetite, nerve functioning, and for good mobility and tone of the
stomach and intestines. Niacin: Niacin is another important vitamin that is also known as the pellagra-
preventive vitamin. A lack of this vitamin affects the skin and digestive and nervous systems of the body.
Sunflower seeds are a very good source of this vitamin. Vitamin D: Every 100 grams of sunflower seeds
contain 92 U.S.P. units, or 23 percent of an adult minimum daily requirement of vitamin D. This vitamin is
necessary for controlling the metabolism of calcium and phosphorus in bone building and teeth formation.
While no definite minimum daily requirement has been established, it has been shown that this vitamin
appears to be important in the prevention of sterility and for increasing endurance. Further tests have also
indicated its value in heart conditions, and in some countries it is used to treat heart trouble (due to the
unsaturated fatty acids, the opposite of which, saturated fats, form high cholesterol in the bloodstream).
Sunflower seeds are used by those who know and respect this vital source of natural nourishment for
snacks, soups, meatless loaves, and desserts.

Dose: Prepared as medication, 2 ounces of sunflower seeds to | quart of water; boil down to 12 ounces
and strain; add 6 ounces of gin and 6 ounces of honey. The dose is 1—2 teaspoonsfuls three or four times a
day. Make sure the seeds are fresh, as old and rancid oil is detrimental.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The Russian name is podsolnechnik, “under the sun.” Sunflowers are inseparable
from Russian daily life as a plant of decoration, food, and medicine.

The sunflower originated in North America. Archaeological discovery reveals sunflower seeds found
in clay containers over three thousand years old, indicating that the original people of this continent knew
how to cultivate and use this essential plant. In 1510 the Spaniards were the first to bring the sunflower
species to Spain, where Madrid Botanic Garden started its cultivation for decorative purposes only, as
the flowers resembled giant chamomile and daisys. Botanist Lobelius, in the sixteenth century, gave us the
first botanical description, named Helenithus annuus, which was also grown for decoration only. Russian
czar Peter the Great first observed the sunflowers while visiting Holland. His orders for seed supplies
were filled and Russia soon started cultivation, at first experimentally in St. Petersburg Botanic Garden;
but soon small farms in Ukraine and central Russia were producing comparatively larger and healthier
species due to the rich black soil. The plants grew to over 15 feet. A pleasant discovery soon found
persons of all ages enjoying the seed meat as dried or roasted tidbits when entertaining. The pressed oil
was found to be superior, and thus the handsome plant soon had another purpose. The practical usefulness

----- PAGE 196 -----
of the sunflower brought about The Academy of Science Review in 1779. There botanical and
commercial descriptions of Russia’s sunflower were established.

In 1835 a practical gardener in Ukraine cultivated the first commercial sunflower plantation. Within
fifteen to twenty years the waste areas of central Russia, Ukraine, south Russia, and many parts of Siberia
were covered. It is now hard to imagine a garden without a sunflower plant (Vishaya Schkolla, Moscow,
1963). For the past one hundred years the Russians have known the sunflower as a source of nourishment
as well as a decorative flower. Folk medicine: In Byelorussia the whole head (basket) of the sunflower
is used when the seeds begin to ripen. They cut this into small pieces, add soap chips, nastoika (vodka),
and place in the sun for nine days. The aged liniment is used externally for rheumatic pain. Decoctions
made from the flowers are taken internally as nastoika, | part flowers to 5 parts vodka, 30-40 drops
three times a day. Soft, pulpy stem parts are used as tea for fevers (Bogdanovich 1895). Clinically: Many
oil preparations of ointments, liniments, and medical compounds; decoction of the seeds for jaundice,
malaria, heart conditions, diarrhea, kidney and bladder (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965);
oil as foodstuff is a part of daily life; decoction or tea from flowers and leaves for malaria (Atlas,
Moscow, 1963).

The sunflower serves as an illustration of how a native plant can travel around the world and gain
recognition as a new-found food. Nutrition takes many forms and sources, and the towering sunflower is
one of the almost perfectly balanced foods, yet to be experienced by the majority.

----- PAGE 197 -----
SWAMP BEGGAR’S TICK

Bidens connata

COMMON NAMES: Cockhold herb, beggar’s tick, Spanish needles, devil’s pitchfork.

FEATURES: This is a common weed, found in wet grounds, rich fields, swamps, and ditches from New
England to Missouri. The herb has a smooth stem, 1-3 feet high. The leaves are lanceolate, opposite,
serrate, acuminate, and decurrent on the petiole. The terminal florets are yellow and can be seen in
August; the fruit is a wedge-formed achenium.

MEDICAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Emmenagogue, expectorant, antispasmodic, diaphoretic.

Usss: Dr. Brown (1857): “The root and seeds are emmenagogue and expectorant; the seeds, in powder or
tincture have been used in amenorrhoea, dysmenorrhoea, and some other uterine derangements, and an
infusion of the root has proved beneficial in severe cough.” It has been used with great success for
palpitation of the heart and for croup. For the latter affliction a strong infusion of the leaves sweetened
with honey and administered in tablespoonful doses every 15 minutes until vomiting is produced is
regarded as a cure. The leaves, heated to the form of a poultice and laid upon the throat and chest in cases
of bronchial and laryngeal attacks from exposure to cold, etc, are very beneficial.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the root, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water. Drink cold 1 cupful
during the day, a large mouthful at a time. Of the tincture, 5—20 drops. Either Bidens bipinnata (Spanish
needles) Bidens connata, or B. frondosa (beggar’s tick) can be employed, both having the same medical
properties.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Some variety of Bidens connata grows throughout Russia. Chereda (B. tripartita)
has the most attention medicinally and commercially. The well-dried leaves keep their natural color and
have a specific aroma and an astringent, slightly bitter taste. Folk medicine: Employed Chereda long
before it was written about. Decoctions were used for tension of fear, blood purifying, liver trouble,

----- PAGE 198 -----
colds, inflammation of the bladder, headache, eczema (internally as tea, decoction, extracts), external
bathing for skin irritations, nervous upset in children to induce sleep (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science,
Minsk, 1965). Tea used for scrofula, rickets, diathesis, gout, and as a diuretic and diaphoretic. For
improved metabolism, 1 tablespoonful to 1 cupful of boiling water, steeped 10 minutes and strained.
Dose, | tablespoonful eight times a day (Moscow University, Moscow, 1963). Clinically: In the form of
nastoika, extracts, and decoctions in combinations of compounds for treatment of internal and external
ailments. Pharmacopoeias of late have given attention to B. tripartita (Atlas, Moscow, 1963).
Commercial: The wild collection of Bidens falls short of the demand. Cultivation is very successful: they
seed 12—14 pounds per acre and harvest up to 2,500 pounds of dry herb. Cutting starts just before the buds
flower and when the plant is about 50 centimeters high, using only the leaves and tops (Medicine,
Moscow, 1965). Industrial: Beautiful creamy shades of brown, orange, and yellow are used for dyeing
wool and silk.

----- PAGE 199 -----
SWEET FLAG

Acorus calamus

COMMON NAMES: Calamus, myrtle flag, sweet grass, sweet sedge, sweet rush root.

FEATURES: Sweet flag resembles blue flag (/ris versicolor). It is not an iris, however, and may be
distinguished from it by its corm and the pungent taste of the leaves. This perennial herb grows throughout
the United States on the borders of ponds and marshes where the soil is constantly moist and rich.

MEDICINAL PART: Rhizome.
SoLveENts: Alcohol, hot water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Aromatic, carminative, stomachic, stimulant, tonic.

Usss: The first candied root was used by Indians and Turks for dyspepsia. It is also frequently used for
heartburn caused by distention of the stomach by gas. In many instances those suffering from stomach
discomfort from some unknown cause found calamus a remedy by chewing the root or using the tea
several times a day. The uncomfortable feeling of burning water from the stomach into the throat is usually
brought under control by this ancient method. Useful in flatulence, wind, colic, ague, upset or sour
stomach, dyspepsia, etc. Taken at regular intervals, it is a most innocent and effecive stomach conditioner,
the ill health of which more than half of our illnesses stem from. The Egyptians used sweet flag for the
legendary disease of scrofula, but it should be combined with supporting, more effective herbs for this
chronic condition.

Doses: Infusion of | ounce of the cut or granulated herb to 1 pint of boiling water. May be taken
frequently in cupful amounts. Tincture of calamus alone, 10-40 drops in water, according to age and
severity of condition.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: There are many insinuating names for sweet flag (Acorus calamus) in Russia, two
of which are Mongolian poison and bitter poison. Originally China and India were the motherland of
calamus, which was first brought to Russia in the eleventh century when the Mongolians overcame the
Russian territory. Tatars believed that calamus purified the water. When they planned on settling in a new
territory, calamus was always planted near the watering place to ensure pure drinking water for the
horses. The Mongolians brought many new adapataions from China to Russia. Around this time in history

----- PAGE 200 -----
China was on a very high cultural standard and medicine, particularly herbal, was in great favor (Vishaya
Schkolla, Moscow, 1963). Folk Medicine: Soon discovered calamus was anything but Mongolian poison
and praised it highly as a healing agent. Decoction or tea for stomach condition, liver, gallbladder, kidney
and bladder, stones in the kidney and bladder, malaria; nastoika (with vodka) as a gargle for mouth
irritations and toothache. The country people kept the fresh leaves in the house as aromatic, disinfectant,
and insecticide. The roots were burned to clear the air when sickness from cholera, typhus, flu, etc., were
present. It is used as an aromatic bitter to improve appetite and the digestive system, to relieve the central
nervous system, in decoctions, nastoika, and extracts. Decoctions and tea for kidney and bladder, liver,
gallbladder, and general tonic. Powder used internally and externally (Atlas, Moscow, 1963).
Externally: Nastoika (with vodka) is used for bathing wounds, infected ulcers, shingles, scurvy, children
with rickets, scrofula, and various skin conditions. Powder for wounds and ulcers. A hair decoction of
calamus, burdock, and hops is a preventative for falling hair and improves the hair and scalp if
application is massaged regularly. Veterinary: For stomach, liver, and various internal ailments. The
powder for external wounds, ulcers, etc. Commercial and industrial: One ton of raw rhizomes when dry
yields about 500 pounds (Naukova Dumca, Academy of Science, Ukraine, Kiev, 1963). Sweet flag oil is
used medicinally, in the food industry, and as a wine aromatic.

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Known as Bacha or Vacha, it has been used for generations. Bodily
influence: aromatic, antispasmodic, aphrodisiac, bitter tonic, carminative, diuretic, expectorant, emetic,
emmenagogue, laxative, nauseant, stimulant. Uses: Diarrhea, dysentery, bronchitis, and chest affections.
Infusion for epilepsy of children. In small doses for flatulence, colic, chronic diarrhea and dysentery, loss
of appetite, bronchitis and catarrh, fevers, ague, hemorrhage. As an emetic, 30 grains is effective, used
instead of ipecac. For asthma, 10 grains every 3 hours. Externally: The burned root mixed with some
bland oil is used as a poultice for flatulence and colic. Also for paralyzed limbs and rheumatic swellings.
Dry powdered root is dusted over foul and indolent ulcers and wounds. The above mentioned are the
most popular, but use varies individually and by location (Medical Plants, India, Pakistan, J. F. Dastur,
Bombay, 1962).

----- PAGE 201 -----
SWEET GUM
Liquidambar styraciflua

COMMON NAME: Red gum, star-leaved gum.

FEATURES: Sweet gum, a tree of the witch hazel family (Hamamelidaceae), native of the eastern United
States, Mexico, and Central America. Along the rivers of the southeastern United States, sweet gums
exceed 125 feet in height and 4 feet in diameter. The deeply cut gray or brownish gray bark forms winged
projections on the twigs. The alternate, palmate, shiny leaves usually have five-pointed, finely toothed
lobes and are fragrant when bruised. In the autumn the starshaped leaves turn brilliant red to purple,
making a valuable ornamental tree. The staminate flowers are inconspicuous, the pistillate in spherical
heads maturing into long-stalked, globose masses of spiky-tipped capsules. The wood is fine-grained,
moderately hard, and fairly strong; the heartwood is known as red gum and hazelwood, is variously
colored red and brown; the sapwood is paler. From incisions made in the tree a gum (storax) exudes that
is resinous and adhesive and somewhat like white turpentine in appearance; it eventually hardens.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, juice.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water (bark, partially), warm alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, expectorant, diuretic, antispetic, disinfectant.

Uses: As a remedy for catarrhs of genitourinary passages, coughs of pulmonary affection generally,
gonorrhea, gleet, amenorrhea, leukorrhea, phthisis (wasting disease, tuberculosis of the lung,
consumption), and asthma. Also excellent for bloody flux, dysentery, and all bowel complaints of
children.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the cut or granulated bark to 1 cupful of boiling water; drink 1 or 2 cupfuls a
mouthful at a time during the day; adjust for condition and age.

EXTERNALLY: The balsamic juice may be melted with equal parts of olive oil or tallow as a detergent
ointment when conditions of indolent ulcers, frostbite, scabies, itch, ringworm, fistula, scrofula, fever
sores, and hemorrhoids are present.

----- PAGE 202 -----
TAMARACK

Larix laricina

COMMON NAMEs: American larch, black larch, hackmatack, salisb.

FEATURES: Larch, the common name of a small genus (Larix) of medium-sized coniferous trees of the pine
family (Pinaceae). They differ from other coniferous genera in being deciduous and in bearing short,
green, needlelike leaves on dwarf and long shoots. The sprucelike, erect cones with thin, persistent scales
and long, accuminate bracts mature in one season. Most species are 40-80 feet high except when growing
near the timberline. Of the ten species now recognized, American larch (Larix americana), also known as
black larch or tamarack, is the most common in the eastern United States and Canada, extending west to
the Rocky Mountains and northwest to the Yukon River in Alaska, where it is sometimes called L.
alaskensis; grows in the southern parts of this area in swamps and sphagnum bogs. The gummy sap that
seeps from the tree has a very good flavor when chewed.

MEDICINAL PART: The inner bark.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, diuretic, laxative.

Uses: Because of its astringent and gently stimulating qualities the inner bark is especially useful for
melancholy that is often caused by the enlarged, sluggish, hardened condition of the liver and spleen,
which inactivate various other functions of the metabolism. For domestic use in emergencies, or long-
standing bleeding of any kind in lungs, stomach, bowels, or too profuse menstruation. Also for diarrhea,
rheumatism, bronchitis, asthma, and poisonous insect bites. J. Kloss, in Back to Eden, recommends the
weak tea as an eyewash and the warm tea dropped in the ear to relieve earache. A decoction of the bark,
combined with spearmint (Mentha spicata), juniper (Juniperus communis), horseradish (Armoracia
lapathifolia), and taken in wineglassful doses has proven valuable in dropsy.

Doss: As a tea, | teaspoonful of the inner bark to 1 cupful of boiling water; steep 30 minutes.

EXTERNALLY: As a wash used to cleanse ulcerated sores of long standing if the condition has progressed
to the bone, combine with comfrey (Symphytum officinale) fresh or dried (taken internally too). As a
poultice, dress often and continue until new skin seals the areas. Also used for hemorrhoids as a salve, or
sitz bath.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Listvennitza sibirsky, larix siberia (tamarack), grows 150 feet tall in Siberia and
the Far East. The very wide branching tree is one of the most beautiful and magnificent to adorn the
countryside. Turpentine of Larix, known in Russia as venetian terpentain, is one of the byproducts.
Externally: The oil in compound is used for rheumatism, neuralgia, gout; new twigs and bark made into
an antibiotic and antispetic is used as an inhalant steam for catarrh of the lungs, abscesses, gangrene of the
lungs, throat, bronchitis. Also of help to kidney and bladder. Clinically: As oil of turpentine.

----- PAGE 203 -----
TANSY

Tanacetum vulgare

GREEK NAME: Alhanasia, “immortality.”

FEATURES: Tansy, of a perennial, creeping root, was introduced into America from the northern Old
World. The tough, slightly ribbed stems reach a height of 2—3 feet, terminating in flat, buttonlike, gold-
colored heads of rayless florets. The plant may be easily recognized in July and August, as the flower
heads look as if all the petals have been pulled off, leaving only the central florets. It is a handsome plant,
with dark green, deeply cleft and pinnatifid, fernlike leaves, being 6-8 inches long and 4 inches broad. A
familiar herb of wastelands and roadsides. The crushed leaves and flowers give a pronounced aromatic
smell and have a bitter taste.

Tansy contains volatile oil, wax, stearin, chlorophyll, bitter resin, yellow coloring matter, tannin with
gallic acid, bitter extractive gum and tanacetic acid, which is crystallizable, and precipitate lime, baryta,
and oxide of lead.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENT: Alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, emmenagogue, diaphoretic, stimulant.

Usrs: Large doses cause vomiting, convulsions, coma, feeble respiration and pulse, and may induce
abortion. In small doses the cold infusion will be found useful in convalescence from exhausting diseases,
dyspepsia, and jaundice. The warm infusion is diaphoretic and emmenagogue and is used for colds,
fevers, grippe, and agues. The herb is also used for treatment of hysteria and certain other of the nervous
disorders of women. For this purpose take | tablespoonful of the infusion frequently, when needed.

Tansy seeds are vermifuge and should be steeped, 1/4 ounce to | pint of boiling water, and taken after
night and morning fast, previously cleansing the alimentary tract with a herbal laxative. You may like to
know the creatures respond more favorably when the moon is full.

A good remedy to promote menstruation, but should be used only when the suppression is due to

----- PAGE 204 -----
conditions other than pregnancy. Tansy is a capable and useful herb in the hands of the experienced when
prescribed for daily use.

CAUTION: Should not be used by pregnant women.

Dose: Of the tincture, 5—10 drops, the larger dose only in extreme cases of hysteria and suppression of the
menses due to causes other than pregnancy. Of the infusion, 1 teaspoonful of tansy steeped in | pint of
boiling water for % hour; 1 teaspoonful every three hours.

EXTERNALLY: Hot fomentations wrung out of tansy tea are excellent for swellings, tumors, inflammations,
sciatica, bruises, freckles, and sunburn, and will check palpitation of the heart in a very short time, (J. L.
Kloss, Back to Eden).

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the fresh plant in flower, attenuations of the oil for abortion,
amenorrhea, chorea, dysmenorrhea, epilepsy, eyes (sclerotica inflamed), hydrophobia, labia (abscess of),
paralysis, strabismus (right inward), worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Riabinka obiknovennaya, or Pishma, grows everywhere in Russia except the
extreme north. Folk medicine: Used as a tea and powder with honey or sugar for worms; decoction in
stomach sickenss, diarrhea, nervous disroders, liver, headache, tuberculosis of the lungs. Children are
bathed in a solution when frightened (BelloRuss. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965); 5 percent of the
flowers with vodka (Nastoika) for stomach and duodenal ulcers (Moscow University, Moscow, 1965).
Clinically: Flowers, and in some cases the whole plant, are used. Oil for worms is very effective but
toxic. Powder, decoction, oil for ascaris and various other worms, diarrhea, liver, and stomach (Atlas,
Moscow, 1963). Industrial: Powder used as insecticide (Moscow University, 1965).

----- PAGE 205 -----
THUJA

Thuja occidentalis

COMMON NAMES: Arborvitae, yellow cedar, tree of life, false white cedar.

FEATURES: The name white cedar is often applied to the arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis), a well-known,
handsome ornamental American evergreen. It attains heights of 70-80 feet, with a trunk diameter of 2-6
feet, which is sometimes distorted. The erect spreading branches have thin and flat pendulous twigs,
fragrant green leaves, and tiny bluish purple cones covered with bloom, turning reddish brown, with 6—12
pointless thin oblong scales. Found growing in wet ground from New Hampshire to Florida. There are
various species of cedar found in Africa, India, Australia, and Alaska.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Branchlets, leaves.
SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diuretic, irritant, expectorant, emmenagogue, anthelmintic.

Uses: Thuja is useful as a counterirritant in the relief of muscular aches and pains, chronic coughs with
association of shortness of breath, fevers, sudden attacks of acute pain in the joints that may last for a few
days or weeks, and associated gout (uric acid retention). The pain of menstruation due to the cessation of
flow is relieved by the hot tea taken frequently.

Dose: Infusion of | teaspoonful to 1 pint of boiling water taken in teaspoonful to wineglassful amounts.

EXTERNALLY: The leaves and twigs boiled with oil make an excellent salve. Also for removal of warts
and fungoid growths.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the fresh green twigs for abdomen (distended), abortion, angina
pectoris, anus (fistula in, fissure of), asthma, balanitis, cancer, catalepsy, chorea, clavus, condyloma,
constipation, convulsions, coxalgia, diarrhea, disparunia, dysmenorrhea, ear (polypus of), enuresis,
epilepsy, epulis, eyes (tumors of, granular inflammation of), fatty tumors, feet (fetid), flatus
(incarcerated), frontal sinuses (catarrh of), ganglion, gleet, gonorrhea, hemorrhage, hemorrhoids, hair
(affections of), headache, hernia, herpes zoster, ichthyosis, intussusception, jaw (growth on), joints
(cracking in), levitation, Morvan’s disease, mucous patches, muscae volitantes, myopia, naevus, neck
(chronic catarrh of, polypus of), paralysis, pemphigus, polypus, postnasal catarrh, pregnancy (imaginary),
prostate (disease of), ptosis, ranula, rheumatism (gonorrheal), rickets, sciatica, seminal emissions,
nocturnal sycosis, syphilis, tea (effects of), teeth (caries of), tongue (ulcers of, biting of), toothache,
tumors, vaccination, vaccinosis, vaginismus, warts, whooping cough.

----- PAGE 206 -----
THYME

Thymus vulgaris

COMMON NAMES: Garden or common thyme, tomillo, mother of thyme, serpyllum.

FEATURES: Originating in the Old World, thyme is recognized around the world as an aromatic, flavoring
herb, or for ornamental decor. The small shrubby perennial herb Thymus vulgaris is an erect or somewhat
decumbent plant, 1-3 feet high, has sessile linear lanceolate leaves with revolute margins. The pale lilac
flowers are small, in interrupted, whorled spikes at the end of the branches. It has a strong, pungent, spicy
taste and odor. In preparing the herb for out-of-season use, it should be collected in the summer when in
blossom and thoroughly dried in the shade. Thyme is favored by bees, and the honey is a superior
replacement for sugar.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.

SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, carminative, emmenagogue, antispasmodic.

Uses: Culpepper states: “It is under the domination of Venus and under the sign of Aries and therefore
chiefly appropriated to the head.” Astrology or not, we agree with Culpeper, as we use thyme for hysteria,
headache, nervous disorders of giddiness, and weakening nightmares. This unsuspecting herb is
admirable for strengthening the lungs and for children’s colic, colds, irritable stomach, dyspepia,
flatulence, and ill disposition. To sooth the throat of bronchial irritation and in spasms of whooping
cough, thyme has been most reliable; it induces free perspiration, important to the beginning of a cold and
in ordinary fever. (Make sure the person is free from draft and is kept warm.) Also of use in suppressed
menstruation. Use the cold tea freely in small amounts for stomach complaints.

Dose: Infusion of 1 teaspoonful of thyme to 1 cupful of boiling water; steep 2 hour. Of the tincture, 20-50
drops in hot water.

EXTERNALLY: The oil of thyme is used for toothache, neuralgia, and painful swellings.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: This plant’s name is easily recognizable in three languages: Thymus is Latin,

----- PAGE 207 -----
Timian Russian, and thyme English. The extreme north is too cold for this herb, but it grows elsewhere in
Russia. Clinically: In a pharmacopoeial preparation, thymol, a volatile oil, is extracted and used as
antiseptic and disinfectant. Combined with other herbs for congested chest, bronchitis, whooping cough,
worms, and skin conditions (Atlas, Moscow, 1963). Commercial: Plantations in Ukraine, Moldavia, and
the Don River regions have been assisted by agro-technology. They seed 4-5 pounds per acre and collect
1—2 tons of dry herb. Once seeded, plantations can be harvested for three or four years (Medicine,
Moscow, 1965).

----- PAGE 208 -----
TURKEY CORN

Corydalis canadensis

COMMON NAMES: Wild turkey corn, stagger weed, choice dielytra, squirrel corn.

FEATURES: This indigenous perennial plant is a beautiful little herb that grows in North America, Canada
to Kentucky, in rich soil, on hills, among rocks and old decayed timber. The plant grows 6—12 inches high.
It has small, tender stalks and small, fine leaves of bluish green color; a round bulbous root about the size
of a large pea, 2-4 of these peas to a stalk, attached to small roots that are hard and of yellowish color; is
quite bitter and nearly odorless. The 6-10 small, reddish purple, nodding flowers are seen very early in
the spring, and the root should be gathered while the plant is in flower. The fruit is a pod-shaped, many-
seeded capsule. The alkaloid corydaline is the active principle.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SoLvents: Alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, diuretic, alterative.

Uses: Do not discount the value of this herb because of the barnyard sound of its common name (the root
growth resembles a corn kernel). Turkey corn is one of the best alterative agents in the herbal kingdom. It
is usually combined with other remedies such as burdock (Arctium lappa), queen’s delight (Stillingia), or
prickly ash (xanthoxylum americanum). A Philadelphia professor has this to say about the small root:
“There is no fact better established than that this medicine, judiciously administered, has the power to
remove syphilis from the system.” The tincture should be prepared from the fresh herb and given in doses
of 20-30 drops, three times a day. Also admirable for scrofula and all skin diseases. Recommended in
menstrual complaints, as its tonic properties render it as an alterative in all enfeebled conditions.

Dose: Infusion of 1 teaspoonful of the root, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water; steep %
hour; drink a cold wineglassful three or four times a day. Of the powder, 5—10 grains; of the tincture, 20—
30 drops three or four times a day.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of bulbous root gathered when plant is in flower, trituration of dried
root, trituration of corydaline for gastric catarrh, scrofula, syphilis, ulcerations.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: The most interesting Russian reference is to one kind of turkey corn, Corydalis,
commonly caled chochlatka, which means in folk language hens or chickens cackling indiscriminately.
The shadowy bush or brush growth of central and south Russia is an ideal setting for survival. Indication
of past use as folk medicine is not mentioned, only Atlas (1963) giving botanical description and medical
details. Clinically: As extracts of corydil, and in combinations, for trembling, nerve paralysis, and nerve
disorders, it stimulates and increases muscle tone. Experiments on animals show positive effect on the
central nervous system. Physiologically iscoriaodine is calming to the central nervous system.

This brief information is given with the thought that the local knowledge of the Native Americans and
folk medicine in North America has been confirmed scientifically and clinically by scientists in other
countries.

----- PAGE 209 -----
VALERIAN

Valeriana officinalis

COMMON NAMES: Great wild valerian, setwell, capon’s tail.

FEATURES: The genus Valeriana incorporates many species of herbs or shrubs growing in Africa, Britian,
Greece, the United States, etc. The flowers have five-parted perianths and funnel-shaped, shortspurred
corollas that are generally of a pale rose color, flowering June to August. The calyx, which is
rudimentary, when in flower becomes a feathery pappus at the top of the fruit. The plant is often cultivated
in gardens for its flowers and its root. It has an erect, round, pale greenish stem, 2—5 feet long. The leaves
are simple or pinnate, without stipules; ascending rhizome, with many fibrous roots. Has a warm,
camphoraceous, slightly bitter, somewhat acrid, and nauseous taste growing stronger with age. Cats are
very fond of the odor of valerian and tear the plant to pieces and roll in it. They are said even to dig up
the roots and devour them. The root as trap bait attracts rats if you don’t have a cat around to catch them.

Found in many damp places, low-lying meadows and woods, along banks of rivers and lakes, and in
marshy, swampy ground generally. The carrotlike roots of Valeriana edulis, a tall glabrous plant of the
western United States with undivided stem leaves and yellowish-white flowers in elongated panicles, are
eaten by Native Americans either raw or dried. The Piautes even grind them into flour to use in the form
of bread or mush. To this day in northern England the dried root is used in broths, porridge, and meats as
a counterpoison and medicinal preservative against pestilence, as are treacles, mithridates, etc. Besides
valerianic acid the root contains starch, albumin, valerian yellow extractive matter, balsamic resin,
mucilage, valerianate of potash, malates of potash, lime, phosphate of lime, and silica.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antispasmodic, calmative, stimulating tonic, nervine.

Uses: Valerian is used by herbalists today as a nerve tonic. Is best combined with skullcap (Scutellaria),
blue vervain (Verbena hastata), and mistletoe (Viscum album). Gentian (Gentiana lutea) and peppermint

----- PAGE 210 -----
(Mentha piperita) increase the promptness of its action, which is more effective than when combined
with bromide. Employed in epileptic fits, Saint Vitus’ dance, nervous derangement or irritations, debility,
hysterical affections (especially female), restlessness, and in wakefulness during fever. Valerian excites
the cerebrospinal system. In medicinal doses it acts as a stimulating tonic, antispasmodic, and calmative.
In large doses it causes headaches, mental excitement, visual illusions, giddiness, restlessness, agitation,
and even spasmodic movement.

Dose: Of the tincture, 1-2 teaspoonfuls three times a day; of the infusion, a wineglassful; of the extract, 3—
6 grains; of the oil, 5 drops.

EXTERNALLY: An infusion of 2 cupful of the root can be used in the bath to relieve nervous exhaustion.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Vaieriana is known to folk medicine as having a general calming and sedative
effect on the central nervous system, to induce sleep and rest, for spasms of the stomach, intestines, and
blood vessels, nervous heart conditions. Further acknowledgement as appetizer, for headache relief,
hysteria, epilepsy, tapeworm, diarrhea, loose stomach, fever. Externally: Vapor baths given to children
will quieten and encourage restful sleep (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965). Clinically:
Extracts of valerian are used in compounds of tablets, tinctures, etc.

----- PAGE 211 -----
VIOLET

Viola odorata

COMMON NAME: Sweet violet.

FEATURES: The violets have a large family tree of some four hundred species, predominantly perenmal
herbs but with a few annuals. Violets are found in damp woods and other shady places and are among the
best-known wild plants, with characteristically scented and colored flowers. They are highly adapted to
cross-pollination by insects. Some species are indigenous to North America; however, Viola odorata is
native to Europe but has been naturalized in the United States. Violet leaves contain certain glucosidal
principles of distant antiseptic properties; the flowers are expectorant and have been used for generations
in syrup form for coughs, colds, etc.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, flowers.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antiseptic, expectorant.

Usss: Violets are mostly thought of as decorative, or to commemorate a tender occasion. Their admirable
qualities as an herb are never realized by out-of-touch-with-nature modern society.

The influence of the dissolving properties seems to reach places only the blood and lymphatic fluids
penetrate. For difficulty in breathing when conditions are caused from a morbid accumulation of material
in the stomach and bowels causing gas, distention, and pressure, violet tea taken daily for some time will
make you feel that the beauty of the plant is of secondary importance. It is cooling to any high temperature
of the body, internally or externally. Of service in headaches and heat to the head; a specific for ear
disturbances, having a soothing and healing effect on inflamed mucal surfaces. Colds, sore throat,
inflammation of lungs, hoarseness, whooping cough, etc., of children and adults is greatly controlled by a
handful of dried or fresh violet leaves and flowers in 4 pint of water, steeped for % hour; administer 2—3
tablespoons (more for adults) every 2—3 hours, and a mouthful to gargle (make sure the bowels eliminate

properly).

----- PAGE 212 -----
Dose: As a tea | teaspoonful of the herb to 1 cupful of boiling water.

EXTERNALLY: Crushed violet bound as compress on inflamed tumors, sore throat, swollen breasts, to the
back of the neck for headache, or the cloth saturated in violet tea will often give surprising results, if
applied assiduously. Keep a supply of the dried leaves and flowers for out-of-season use.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant in flower for cancer, choroiditis, cough (spasmodic, by
day), hoarseness, hysteria, neuralgia (supraorbital), otorrhea (suppressed), rheumatism, seminal
emissions, styes, whooping cough, wrist (rheumatism of).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Fialka polevaya, violet is a popular all-year-round decoration, in the fields in the
summertime and as a house plant in winter. Tricolor violets are formally and tenderly called Anutini
glazki, “eyes of Annie,” but much sentiment is lost in the English translation. The country folk are less
revealing in speech, calling them Ivan and Mary, Ivan da Maria. Medical properties and uses are carried
over from ancient history (Vishaya Schkolla, Moscow, 1963). Folk medicine: Uses decoctions, tea,
nastoika (with vodka), internally and externally, as diuretic, diaphoretic, blood purifer. For diathesis,
coughs, eczema, tuberculosis of the skin, and other skin conditions (Byelorussia). Decoction for female
condition, toothache, chest pain of cold (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965). Externally:
Decoction to drink and as poultices, or for complete bath immersion, for chronic and persisting skin
conditions, scrofula, eruptions, children’s eczema (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, 1965). Clinically:
Special preparations of the whole plant are administered for lung and chest trouble, as expectorant in
chronic catarrhal accumulation (Atlas, Moscow, 1963).

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Known as banaf shah, the flowers are emollient, demulcent,
astringent, diaphoretic, diuretic, laxative. Used in cases of prolaps of the uterus and rectum, nervous
disorders, biliousness, epilepsy, inflamed swellings. For diaphoretic use when needed for colds, coughs,
kidney and bladder disorders. In large doses the flowers are emetic; 2 ounces of stem will act as
purgative, emetic; juice will cause nausea, vomiting, and nervous conditions. The underground stem is
emetic and purgative and is valuable if used instead of ipecac. Also used as antipyretic and febrifuge. In
Medical Plants of India (by J. F. Dastur, Bombay, India, 1962) credit is given for the control of cancer in
the following way: “The fresh leaves are a reputed drug for the treatment of Cancer: they relieve pain of
cancerous growths, especially in the throat; two and a half ounces of the fresh leaves are infused in a pint
of boiling water in a covered stone jar for 12 hours; the strained liquid is taken in the course of a day, in
doses of a wineglassful at a time; for treatment of cancer of the tongue only half the quantity is taken in a
day; the other half is used to foment the tongue; a liquid extract of the fresh leaves, in teaspoonful doses, is
equally efficacious. On cancerous growths either the hot infusion or an extract of the fresh leaves is
applied as a compress.” Dose: | part of flower to 100 parts of water or a syrup; 30-50 gram doses. As
emetic, dose 40—50 grains. Externally: For eczema.

----- PAGE 213 -----
VIRGINIA SNAKEROOT

Anstolochza serpentaria

COMMON NAMES: Red River snakeroot, Texas snakeroot, sangrel, sangree root, birthwort, serpentaria.

FEATURES: Virginia snakeroot is a perennial plant found in hilly woods of Pennsylvania, Virginia, Ohio,
Indiana, and Kentucky, and the southern states of Louisiana and Texas. The root is fibrous and of a brown
color, has numerous stem scars, and bears a dense tress of branching roots about 3 inches long with a
gingery, aromatic, identifiable fragrance, bitter taste. The one or more erect, zigzag, jointed stems are 1—2
feet high, with a purplish color near the plant’s base. The leaves are oblong and about 3 inches long and 1
inch wide. June and July find the few purple or dull brown flowers in bloom, attached to short stems that
come from the root.

SoLveEnts: Alcohol, boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Stimulant, diaphoretic, anodyne, antispasmodic, tonic, nervine.

Uses: The action of Virginia snakeroot is so prompt that it has a great reputation for snakebite, hence its
name. This is a pure stimulant whose action is mainly employed in diverting the flow of blood outward;
for this reason it is largely employed in eruptive diseases before the appearance of outward
manifestations are noticed. It rids the system of any offending matter by producing perspiration and
supporting the vital forces. As a nerve stimulant it acts very promptly and is much used in depressed or
exhausted conditions of the nervous system, especially in the latter stages of smallpox, scarlet fever, and
pneumonia. The influence on the circulation will also be felt by the whole arterial system as the heart’s
impulse becomes stronger and fuller. Suppressed menstruation due to colds will be brought about by 5—10
drops of Virginia snakeroot tincture in pennyroyal tea. Also for cold extremities of hands and feet due to
general receding of blood from the surface. The cold infusion is used for strengthening purposes; it may
be drunk freely and is often employed with good effect in dyspepsia, croup, throat and kidney congestion,
and renal torpor. In proper doses it stimulates appetite and digestion in indicated conditions.

CAUTION: Large doses can cause vomiting, vertigo, and respiratory paralysis.

----- PAGE 214 -----
Dose: Of the tincture, 5—20 drops three times daily. As an infusion, 1 teaspoonful of the granulated root to
1 cupful of boiling water, steeped 30 minutes. Take in tablespoonful amounts three to six times a day.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Trituration of dried roots for dyspepsia, flatulence.

----- PAGE 215 -----
WATERCRESS

Nasturtium officinale

COMMON NAMES: Tall nasturtium.

FEATURES: Watercress is of the mustard family, native to Europe, but has migrated to most of North
America and is found in moist banks and running waters below 8,000 feet. The branching stems are 1-3
feet long and generally extended with leaves above the water. The leaves are somewhat fleshy, elliptic,
and in pairs of 3—7 with small white flowers in enlongated racemes; pods 2-1 inch long. Watercress is
most popular as a garnish only, the mineral-rich plant is an excellent addition to daily salads. Has been
thus in use since ancient times.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Leaves, root.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, stimulant, blood purifying.

Usrs: Native Americans used the herb for liver and kidney trouble and to dissolve kidney stones.
Parkinson, in 1640, says: “The leaves of juice applied to the face or other parts troubled with freckles,
pimples, spots or the like at night and washed away in the morning. The juice mixed with vinegar to the
forehead is good for lethargy or drowsy feeling.” For the above, use the fresh herb daily for skin
improvement. The high vitamin and mineral content is a preventive for scurvy and a blood builder in
every sense of the word. The Romans considered it as excellent food for those who have deranged minds.

J. E. Meyers, Botanical Gardens of Hammond, Indiana, informs us that watercress is one of the best
sources of vitamin E. This is the fertility vitamin (it was discovered by Professor Herbert Evans of the
University of California), helping the body use oxygen, which increases physical endurance and stamina
and improves heart response. Tests and research by professors of science show that dried watercress
contains three times as much vitamin E as does dried lettuce. (Researchers Mendel and Vickery worked
with Dr. Karl E. Mason, of Vanderbilt University.)

Dose: Infusion of the fresh or dried herb, 1 teaspoonful to 1 cupful of boiling water, then steeped. Drink
3-4 cupfuls daily.

----- PAGE 216 -----
Be sure to wash watercress carefully if there is possible drainage from farmyards. Also be cautious of
polluted water.

----- PAGE 217 -----
WATER PEPPER

Polygonum punctatum

COMMON NAMES: Smartweed, American water smartweed, arsesmart, pepperwort.

FEATURES: This annual plant is a member of the buckwheat family, growing in England and America in
ditches, lowlands, among rubbish, and around brooks and water courses.

The herb has a smooth stem, 1—2 feet, with a reddish or greenish brown color of the often decumbent
base. The leaves are alternate, lanceolate, petiolate, with dots of thin skin throughout. The small greenish
white or greenish pink flowers are loose, slender, and drooping with erect spikes. It flowers in August
and September. The taste is bitter, pugnent, and acrid. Water pepper should be collected and made into
tincture or tea while fresh, as age decreases its properties and results.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.

SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.

BODILY INFLUENCE: Antiseptic, diuretic, diaphoretic, emmenagogue.

Uses: The infusion in cold water has been found serviceable in gravel, colds and coughs, and in milk
sickness. For the pain of suppressed menstruation, taken internally; fomentations wrung from the hot tea
and applied to the lower back, where there is usually pain, will soon bring relief. Of use in female
obstruction as a feminine douche when in pain, itching, or leukorrhea. In cholera, if the patient is wrapped
in a sheet moistened with a hot decoction, it will aid recovery; also taken internally but making sure the
bowels are active. The infusion in cold water forms an excellent local application in the sore mouth of
nursing mothers and in mercurial salivation.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the herb, cut small, to 1 cupful of warm water; taken in wineglassful, or teacupful,
amounts. The decoction or infusion in hot water is not so active as when prepared in cold or warm water.
Of the tincture, 30-60 minims.

EXTERNALLY: The fresh leaves bruised with the leaves of plantain (Plantago major) and moistened with
oil of turpentine and applied to the skin will speedily relieve chronic erysipelatous inflammations.

----- PAGE 218 -----
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole fresh plant for amenorrhea, antrum (pain in), blepharitis,
colic (flatulent), cough, diarrhea, dysentery, dysuria, eczema, epilepsy, gonorrhea, gravel, hemorrhoids,
heart (affections of), hysteria, laryngitis, nephritis, neuralgia, orchitis, prostatitis, sciatica, spermatic cord
(pain in), spleen (affections of), strangury, ulcers.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Vodianoy peretz, water pepper, grows in Siberia and other parts of Russia, but
more abundantly in European Russia. Russian literature credits for medical, commercial, and industrial
properties are prominent. The fresh leaves when used as food are bitter, burning, and spicy (Vishaya
Schkolla, Moscow, 1965). The whole plant is used and collected in late autumn when in full flower. It is
cut 10-20 centimeters from the ground, with attention given to proper species, as it is easily mistaken for
other Polygonum species with less benefit. Folk medicine: As a tea for bleeding of the stomach, female
complaints, hemorrhoids. Externally: The fresh leaves slightly bruised and applied to the back of the
neck instead of mustard poultice for headaches. Simmer, covered, % pound of leaves | hour and add to
sitzbath for bleeding hemorrhoids. Clinically: Strong warning is given about using the extract:
recommended for use by medical practitioners only. Extracts, nastoika (with vodka), and in preparations
with other ingredients for female bleeding, bleeding hemorrhoids, and to stop pain (Atlas, Moscow,
1963). Recent study and experiment show that the plant is a rich source of vitamin K (coagulating
substance), vitamin P, vitamin C, and rutin. Industrial: For textile dye, Polygonum can be collected from
spring to autumn for beautiful shades of golden green, gold steel, and camouflage shading of green.

----- PAGE 219 -----
WHITE PINE

Pinus strobes

COMMON NAMES: Eastern white pine, soft pine, deal pine.

FEATURES: Pine is the common name of the largest and economically most important genus (Pinus) of the
pine family (Pinaceae). Of the ninety or more species of pines, thirty are native to North America,
distributed from north of Mexico to eastern, northern, and western states.

The outstanding characteristics of the genus are: mostly erect, much branched, twigs with long shoots
with scaled leaves, and dwarf branched, bearing long needles surrounded by scaled leaves at the base;
the leaves are either primary, solitary, scalelike, or spirally arranged, and usually deciduous some weeks
after their appearance. The unisexual flowers (cones, strobile) appear in the spring on the same tree.
Conifers often produce twin trees, resulting from the presence of more than one embryo in a single ovule.
Traditionally the genus Pinus is subdivided into two main groups: (1) the soft, or white, pines and (2) the
hard, or yellow, pines.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Inner bark, sprigs.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Expectorant.

Uses: Pine trees played an important part in the domestic life of Native Americans. They used pine
needles for sewing, resins as cement, and the nuts as food and decoration. The use as medicine and food
is, to us, the most outstanding. Pine nuts were made into a paste consistency and added to soups for infants
and adults. They chewed the gum resin for sore throats; the same was also dried, powdered, and applied
to the throat with a swab. The resin and parts of some other plants, such as small twigs of juniper
(Juniperus osterosperma), were used as a tea for colds, rheumatism, tuberculosis, influenza, chronic
indigestion, kidney trouble, etc. The bark and new sprigs are useful as an expectorant, to modify quality
and quantity of mucous secretions, and to favor its removal in bronchial and catarrhal trouble,
rheumatism, scurvy, all chest affections, tonsilitis, laryngitis, croup, and the like.

It is best to combine | teaspoonful of each of the following with 2 teaspoons white pine and | pint of
water: wild cherry bark (Prunus serotina), sassafras (S. albidum) and spikenard (Aralia racemosa);
steep 2 hour; administer 2 teaspoonful to a mouthful every hour, depending on age and condition. Of use
in diabetes with bearberry (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi), marshmallow (Althaea), and poplar bark
(Populuas tremuloides). Prepare as above and take 3-4 cupfuls daily; of the tincture, 2-1 fluidram.

EXTERNALLY: The heated resin is used as a dressing to draw out imbedded splinters or to bring boils to a

----- PAGE 220 -----
head; sores, cuts, swellings, and insect bites also respond favorably. The hot resin can be spread on a hot
cloth and applied as you would a mustard plaster for treating pneumonia, sciatic pains, and any general
muscular soreness.

----- PAGE 221 -----
WHITE POND LILY
Nymphaea odorata

COMMON NAMES: Water nymph, water cabbage, sweet scented pond lily, cow lily.

FEATURES: The lily family embraces many economically important genera, including sources of fibers,
food (onion, garlic), spices, resins, medicines, soap, poisons, and essential oils. However, the so-called
water lily (Nymphaea) and calla lily (Calla palustris) are not members of the lily family. White pond lily
grows in ponds, with large, round, dark green leaves floating in the water, bearing a large white flower
that looks like a large gardenia in shape. Growing from Canada to Florida and Louisiana.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENT: Water
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antiseptic, astringent, demulcent, discutient.

Uses: An old-fashioned home remedy brought into use by Native Americans, the knowledge of which has
been passed down for generations. There are few remedies that act more promptly than this in old cases
of leukorrhea, where there is chronic inflammation of the womb or abrasion of the vagina; and for
ulceration of the womb it has proven efficacious, having completely cured the disease after all other
available means have failed. It should be used locally, by injection of the infusion to the neck of the
womb, and taken internally. Very accommodating in cases of dropsy and kidney trouble, catarrh of the
bladder, irritation of the prostate. Has been used largely for diarrhea and bowel complaints, excellent for
infant diarrhea, scrofula, and diseases of the lungs. The infusion is healing to sores, ulcerated mouth,
inflamed gum, canker, sore throat.

Dose: | ounce of the root boiled in 1 pint of water for 20 minutes, taken in wineglassful to teacupful
amounts two or three times a day. Of the fluid extract, 10-15 drops, morning and night.

EXTERNALLY: The fresh juice of the root mixed with lemon juice is excellent for removing freckles,
pimples, and dark discolorations of the skin. Make a strong tea for use as a local application applied with
Turkish towels, or white cotton, for painful swellings, boils, ulcers, etc. The bruised leaves are healing to
wounds and cuts, applied as poultice.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the root for back (pain in), coryza, diarrhea, throat (sore).

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russian literature mention is made of two kinds of pond lily, kuvshinka—

----- PAGE 222 -----
Nymphaea alba and Nymphaea candida. They are slightly different but used the same way medically. In
some undisturbed areas of ponds, lakes, and slow-running water up to 6 feet deep, lilies will cover the
peaceful surface. Folk medicine: Uses both species as astringent for female trouble of amenorrhea.

Clinically: The rhizome is used medically for papilloma of the kidney and acidic gastritis (Bello-Russ.
Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965).

----- PAGE 223 -----
WILD CARROT

Daucus carota

COMMON NAMES: Bird’s nest, Queen Anne’s lace, devil’s plague.

Features: Daucus, from the Greek daukos or daukon—a kind of carrot or parsnip—a genus of about
sixty species of annual, biennial, or perennial herbs mainly of Mediterranean and African distribution,
belonging to the parsley family (Umbelliferae). The biennial wild carrot is an herb naturalized in
America, found growing in old meadows and pastures.

The fleshy root is tapered, yellowish white, sweetish, and faintly aromatic. Its erect, branching, bristly-
hairy stem is usually 1-5 feet high. The leaves are basal or alternate and pinnately compound. The
flowers are usually white or roseate to purplish and arranged in flat-topped compound umbels with a
central flower that is usually dark red or deep purple; blooms in June or July. The seeds are of a dull
brown color, flat on one side and convex on the other. The wild carrot cannot be transplanted to gardens
to produce an edible product. It taints milk with a bitter flavor if cattle eat too much of it, although it is not
poisonous.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole plant.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Diuretic, deobstruent, stimulant.

Uses: Culpeper comments “Wild Carrot belongs to Mercury, and therefore breaketh wind, and removeth
stitches in the sides, provoketh urine and women’s courses, and helpeth to break and expel the stones.”
Wild carrot blossoms are used as a tea and are effective as a remedy for dropsy when all other treatment
fails. The root and seeds are often ground and used for colic, liver, kidney and bladder, painful urination,
to increase the menstrual flow, and in expelling worms from the bowels. Some physicians believe that the
bruised seeds steeped (not boiled) are more effective in kidney diseases, dropsy, inflammation of the
bladder, and in gravel. You will find that improvement in some of the above conditions will relieve
rheumatic pain.

----- PAGE 224 -----
Dose: Infusion of seeds, herb, or both, 1 teaspoonful to 1 pint of boiling water, steeped 30 minutes, 3-4
cupfuls daily.

EXTERNALLY: Grated root made into a poultice is recommended for ulcers, abscesses, carbuncles,
scrofula, cancerous sores, and bad wounds. The leaves bruised and applied with honey are also cleansing
to running sores or ulcers. Apply according to severity, fresh with each application.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Markov, wild carrot, grows everywhere in Russia except the extreme north. Folk
medicine: Decoctions of the plant for worms and as laxative; decoction of the whole plant for liver,
gallbladder, and jaundice conditions. Roots along for anemia (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk,
1965). Externally: For swelling and abscesses crush the whole plant. Decoctions to bathe children when
skin becomes yellow (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965). Clinically: Doucorin extract is
one of the many properties found in carrots. Clinically prepared as a mild laxative, antispasmodic, and
for avitaminosis, arterisclerosis, and coronary deficiences with the symptoms of stenocardia (Atlas,
Moscow, 1963).

----- PAGE 225 -----
WILD YAM

Dioscorea villosa

COMMON NAMES: Colic root, China root, rheumatism root.

FEATURES: Yam is the common name for plants of the genus Dioscorea of the family Dioscoreaceae
(called the yam family), or for their tubers. Yams are herbaceous vines whose stems twine consistently to
the right or left, depending on the species, of which about six hundred are known; four are native to the
United States and Canada. Yams are among the most important tropical root crops, some kinds being
baked, boiled, fried, used in soup, or dried and ground into meal. Most species are nutritious. The variety
differs greatly in shape, color, and size of tubers.

Dioscorea is thought to have sixty-seven species in Mexico alone. The complicating resemblance of the
leaves is misleading. This delicate, twining vine grows in thickets and hedges of Canada and the United
States, more prolific in the south. The vine and leaves resemble a philodendron with a reddish brown
stem. One has to be very observant to find the small greenish white flowers in June and July. Botanically
the potato is long, branched, crooked, and weighs about 4 pounds, the average size collected. The flesh
inside is moist, fibrous, and faintly rose colored. Referred to as a rhizome, or underground stem, as is the
iris. From this a preparation of dioscorein is made containing its active qualities.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Antispasmodic, antibilious, diaphoretic.

Uses: Aztec records show that chipahuacxibuitl, or “the graceful plant,” known to us as Dioscorea, was
used for skin treatment of scabies and poultice for boils. Mexican yam is a source of the male sex
hormone testosterone and is used for rejuvenating effects. The Chinese use the wild yam to brighten the
eyes and as an elixir. North American herbalists employ its properties for bilious colic and spasm of the
bowels. To relieve the nauseous symptoms of pregnancy, dioscorein is the very best and is prompt in
action. Given in small, frequent doses during pregnancy and until the woman is a mother.

J. Kloss, in Back to Eden: “Combined with Ginger (Asarum canadense) will greatly help to prevent
miscarriage.” Can be combined with squaw vine (Mitchella repens) and raspberry leaves (Rubus
ideaus) for the above mentioned, given every 2 hour or a mouthful of the tea as needed throughout the

----- PAGE 226 -----
day.

Herbalists of the past and present combine the root in many formulas for a variety of ailments. It
stimulates the removal of accumulated wastes and congestions in the system, relieving pain and joint
stiffness. Natures Healing Agent, by C. Clymer, recommends the following:

Tincture of burdock root (Arctium lappa), 10-40 drops
Tincture of black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa), 2-15 drops
Tincture of motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca), 10-20 drops
Tincture of rheumatism root (Dioscorea villosa), 20-40 drops
In water three or four times a day.

In large doses wild yam is regarded as diuretic and as an expectorant. For this it is always best to
combine with other material of a similarly excellent character. Valued in hepatic congestion and rheumatic
pains.

Dose: Of the decoction, 2—4 ounces; of the tincture, 20-60 drops; dioscorein, 1-4 grains.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root, or trituration of resinoid, dioscorein, for abdomen
(distended), acne, angina pectoris, biliousness, cholerine, chorea, colds, colic, constipation, cough,
cramps, diarrhea, dysentery, dysmenorrhea, dyspepsia, enteralgia, flatulence, gallbladder (affection of),
gastralgia, hemorrhoids, headache, knee (pain in), legs (pain in), liver (disorders of), lumbago, mind
(affection of), neuralgia, paronychia, parotitis, pregnancy (pyrosis of), renal colic, rheumatism, sciatica,
side (pain in), spinal irritation, spleen (pain in), smell (disordered), spermatorrhea, tea (effect of),
toothache, whitlow.

----- PAGE 227 -----
WILLOW, BLACK

Salix nigra

COMMON NAMES: Pussywillow, catkin willow.

Features: Willow of the family Salicaceae and genus Salix, has many trees and shrubs; three hundred
species vary from less than | inch in height to trees of 100 feet or more, depending on local and climatic
conditions. In North America we can claim over 100 of the various species. Largest of the willows of
eastern North America is the black willow, Salix nigra. It has dark brown, ridged bark, reddish to orange
twigs, and long, narrow leaves that are taper-pointed. The flowers are in elongated clusters—aments, or
catkins—either male or female; however, in rare instances the flowers are bisexual. The “precocious”
catkins are ornamental. Among flowering plants willow is ancient, fossils extending back to the
Cretaceous period.

MEDICINAL PART: Bark.
SOLVENT: Boiling water
BODILY INFLUENCE: Aphrodisiac, tonic, astringent, detergent, antiperiodic.

Uses: Willow is very similar in action to quinine; the active principle is salicin and is believed to be far
more valuable than quinine for ague and low grades of fever. These salicylic acids are found in a number
of herbal remedies used throughout the world, some dating as far back as the Stone Age. We do not know
how the willow first became known to the Native Americans, we only know that when they were in need
of a fever-reducing agent willow-bark tea was given.

In 1763 the Reverend Edward Stone made an old-fashioned deduction: three things occurred together—
low, marshy regions, rheumatism, willow trees. So he tried a decoction of willow bark on sufferers of
rheumatic complaints and thus rediscovered the effectiveness of salicylic acid (salix is Latin for willow).
It wasn’t long before experimentally inclined chemists began synthesizing this substance from common
coal tar and petroleum derivatives, according to a standard recipe given in many elementary chemistry
textbooks. Today it is known as common aspirin. The amount swallowed annually in the United States is
approaching 35 million pounds, or five tablets a week for every man, woman, and child. Modern aspirin
is of human invention rather than from nature’s goodness. Willow is highly recommended and largely used
in the treatment of spermatorrhea, nocturnal emissions, etc. Also relieves ovarian pain.

Dose: Combine 3 grains willow (Salix nigra) and ‘2 grain Capsicum (cayenne) when there is great

----- PAGE 228 -----
prostration. Add % grain goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) when the heart as well as the nervous system
needs sustaining. To be given in gelatin capsule three times daily before meals. Of the infusion, 1 ounce of
bark to 1 pint of boiling water, steeped 15 minutes, taken in wineglassful amounts three of four times
daily.

EXTERNALLY: A poultice made by simmering the powdered bark in cream is most effective in gangrene,
indolent ulcers, etc.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh bark for diarrhea, emissions, fever, gonorrhea, impotence,
masturbation, night sweats, nymphomania, prostatitis, satyriasis, spermatorrhea.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: There are several kinds of willow, Eva, in Russia, Salix alba, S. caprea, S.
fragilis, and others. The willow, especially weeping willow, so artistically portrayed in melancholy
expressions of poetry and music, is extremely popular in parks and private gardens. Folk medicine: No
preference is shown as to the species used for medical purposes. A decoction is prepared for fevers,
rheumatism, worms, and to stop bleeding (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965). Industrial:
The willow is not capricious as to soil conditions and is used to control eroding soil, as it is fast growing
(Moscow University, Moscow, 1963). The wood is used in many farm implements and household items.
The bark is used in the leather tanning industry.

----- PAGE 229 -----
WINTERGREEN

Gaultheria procumbens

COMMON NAMES: Teaberry, boxberry, checkerberry.

FEATURES: Wintergreen is a name applied to several plants of the family Ericaceae that retain their
foliage during winter. In eastern North America the aromatic little Gaultbeira procumbens is the one most
often referred to. This low-growing barley, 6 inches high, has glossy, leathery, broad leaves with creeping
stems from which arise erect reddish branches. They bear solitary white flowers, usually below the
leaves, followed by the rather generous fruit (considering the size of the plant), which encloses the seed
capsules and assumes the form of a bright scarlet, edible, mealy, and spicy berry. The whole plant is
pungent in taste the spiciness due to the volatile oil. Collection is somewhat difficult in its scattered wild
state. Cultivation requires specially constructed shade such as goldenseal and ginseng provide. Wild
plants may be used for propagation; divisions of these may be set in the autumn or spring, about 6 inches
apart each way, in permanent beds. The soil, which should be thoroughly mixed with a 4-inch depth of
leaf mold, will give a fairly good growth. Collection is usually at the end of the growth season, around
October.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole plant.
SOLVENT: Water.
BODILY INFLUENCES: Astringent, stimulant, anodyne.

Uses: Distilled wintergreen oil is chiefly used for flavoring confectionery or pharmaceutical
preparations. Native Americans employed the plant for rheumatic conditions, internally and externally.
Compared to the size of willow (Salix nigra) or birch (Betula alba), wintergreen is a very small plant,
but they all have a common agent, salicylate, which is most useful in relieving pains of rheumatism and as
a stimulating nervine. May be employed in diarrhea and as an infant’s carminative. Adjust dose according
to age.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the plant, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water; drink 1 cupful, cold
or hot, during the day, a large mouthful at a time. Of the tincture, 5-20 minims. Too large an amount can
cause vomiting.

EXTERNALLY: Oil of wintergreen may be added to the bath or steam cabinet. The fresh or dried herb put
into a white cotton bag and simmered in a large vessel, adding liquid and container bag to the bathwater,
is effective for joint paints and swellings. Do not immerse the whole body, just waist deep; if the

----- PAGE 230 -----
shoulders and neck are also rheumatic, squeeze the simmered bag over this area. If you feel drowsy, too
relaxed, or have heart palpitations, get out. Continue once or twice a week for thirty times consecutively.
Other suitable herbs can also be used and combined in this type of bath. It is wise to drink a herbal
diuretic tea mixture during this period so that the uric acid, or deposits will not relocate.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh leaves for gastritis, neuralgia, pleurodynia, rheumatism,
sciatica.

----- PAGE 231 -----
WITCH HAZEL

Hamamelis virginiana

COMMON NAMES: Spotted adler, snapping hazel nut, winter bloom.

FEATURES: Witch hazel is of the family Hamamelidaceae, or of the extract of Hamamelis virginiana. The
genus includes five species, of which two are native to eastern and central North America and three to
eastern Asia. H. virginiana, the common witch hazel of eastern North America, is a shrub or small tree
found growing in bunches like the alder in damp woods in nearly all parts of the United States.

In appearance it comprises several crooked branching stems, 2—6 inches in diameter and 10-12 feet
high, covered with a smooth gray bark with brown spots. The leaves are alternate, oval, wavy-margined,
and turn yellow in the autumn. They possess a degree of fragrance and when chewed are at first somewhat
bitter, very sensibly astringent, and then leave a pungent sweetish taste that remains for a considerable
time. Its flowers have four yellow, strap-shaped petals, four fertile stamens and four staminoid; blooms
mostly in November and December after the leaves have fallen. The fruit, ripening the next autumn, is a
nutlike capsule or pod. Witch hazel is unusual, especially among trees and shrubs, in its time of flowering.
Twigs and crotches of H. virginiana have been used as divining rods.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Bark, leaves.
SOLVENT: Boiling water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, tonic, sedative.

Uses: Another medicinal tree used by Native Americans for various irritations. To check internal
bleeding it is among the best, especially for excessive menstruation, hemorrhages from the lung, stomach,
uterus, bowels, etc. There is hardly an inflamed condition, internally or externally, that does not respond
to the properties of this product. It is useful for weakening and pain of diarrhea, dysentery, excessive
mucus, and is seldom surpassed for hemorrhoids. If bleeding, inject 2 ounce solution into the rectum and
retain as long as possible; repeat after every bloody discharge. Make the ointment from the boiled leaves,
bark, and coconut oil; chill and make into suppostories. A solution can be used also as enema in diarrhea
and dysentery, and as a douche for leukorrhea, simple vaginitis, and falling of the womb. Has been valued
in incipient tuberculosis and painful tumors. A mouthwash is useful for bleeding gums and inflamed
conditions of the mouth and throat; also as a cotton application for inflamed eyes. The leaves, twigs, and
bark may be made into an infusion and are stronger than the distilled extract.

CAUTION: Tincture from the bark should not be applied directly to the skin. It is extremely astringent and
can cause disfiguration.

Dose: Simmer 10 minutes 1 ounce of the leaves or bark to 1 pint of water. Take in wineglassful doses
three or four times daily. Of the tincture, 5—20 drops. Children according to age.

EXTERNALLY: Native Americans used witch hazel in poultice form for all external irritations of broken or
unbroken skin conditions. Has been mixed with flax seed for inflamed swelling and tumors of a painful
character. For varicose veins an extract of the fresh leaves and young twigs of witch hazel is applied on a
loosely woven white cotton cloth and kept constantly moist, for relief and to arouse circulation.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh bark of twigs and root (a resinoid, hamamelin, is also

----- PAGE 232 -----
prepared) for abortion (threatened), ankles (weak), black eye, bruises, burns, cancer, chilblains,
constipation, enteric fever, gastric ulcer, hematemesis, hematuria, hemorrhages, hemorrhagic diathesis,
hemorrhoids, leuckorrhea, menstruation (disorders of, vicarious), nipples (sore), noises in the head, nose
(bleeding from), ovaries (affections of), pelvic hematocele, phimosis, phlegmasia alba dolens, purpura,
rheumatism, scapula (rheumatism of), scurvy, smallpox, testicles (inflamed), ulcers, uterus (affections of),
vagina (spasm of), varicocele, veins (varicose), wounds.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: In Russian literature close attention is given to witch hazel; they use the same Latin
name with a Russian accent. Witch hazel does not grow wild in Russia. Hamamelis virginiana, native of
North America, and Japonica, of Japan, are cultivated commercially. Folk medicine: Is not indicated.
Clinically: Extracts used in unwanted, excessive, bleeding; bleeding hemorrhoids; and other similar cases
(Atlas, Moscow, 1963).

----- PAGE 233 -----
WORMSEED

Cheno podium ambrosioides var. anthelmintium

COMMON NAMES: American wormseed, Jerusalem oak, chenopodium, Mexican tea.

FEATURES: Wormseed is the common name given to various plants and their derivatives. American
wormseed, Chenpodium ambrosioides, also known as C. anthelmintium, is in the goosefoot family
Chenopodiaceae, which is a native of the American tropics but has widely escaped to waste places in
almost all parts of the United States (cultivated in Maryland).

The plant grows 2-4 feet high and has yellowish green flowers that are oval and gland-dotted on the
underside; they flower from July to September. The glossy black seeds ripen in the autumn, at which time
they should be collected. The entire plant and seeds are distinguished by a peculiar disagreeable smell.
The oil is the best form of administration.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Seeds, top.
SOLVENTS: Distilling with water or superheated steam; 70 proof alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Anthelmintic, antispasmodic.

Uses: Chiefly used to expel intestinal worms, the cause of many mistreated symptoms. The infusion of the
plant is often employed to promote menstruation, and to overcome uterine colic and cases of hysteria, if
used in small amounts daily.

Dose: Of the oil, 4-20 drops with honey or molasses, for children according to age. The infusion of the
tops and pulverized seeds, 1 teaspoonful to 1 cupful of boiling water; steep 15 minutes, administer in
wineglassful amounts. To expel worms with more success plan to give the above during a full moon, as
the tenants are more active at this time. Omit the evening meal, give the prescribed dose, and give again in
the morning before breakfast, followed by a herbal cathartic; repeat for three days to make sure the larvae
are expelled.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh plant, solution of oil seed for aphasia, apoplexy, asthma,
cerebral deafness, convulsions, dropsy, epilepsy, headache, hemicrania, hemiplegia, leuckorrhea, menses
(suppressed), paralysis, scapula (pain in), tinnitus, tonsilitis.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Two kinds of mar (wormseed), Cheno podium anthelmintium and Cheno podium

----- PAGE 234 -----
ambrosioides, are cultivated. Russian literature attests to the properties of healing as well as its being a
prophylactic agent for several types of worms. There is no indication from available books of its being
used as folk medicine. Clinically: Chenopodium oil is used for worms: ascariasis, ancylostomiasis
(hookworms), and others. For children the oil is prepared with castor oil (laxative) and given
occasionally in small doses; it has no side effect in this amount. Usually after expelling the worms most
people are relieved of the sometimes visible worm eggs and larvae as well. They do warn that an
overdose can cause headache, vomiting, stomach pain, dizziness, etc. May also affect the liver, kidney,
bladder, blood pressure, breathing. Commercial: Russian agro-technology instructions may get you off to
a faster start. Since the seeds are slow growing (14-16 days) they are mixed with seeds of some fast-
growing plant like lettuce, about 15—20 pounds per acre. Wormseed harvest is %2—1 ton per acre. For
industrial oil extraction, cutting machines are set to harvest the plant just to the lower stem, which does
not have leaves. This is done when the plant becomes brownish and seeds are mostly ripened, which is
the time of maximum content for volatile oil, chenopodium and ascaridol. Seed harvest alone is by a
selected method.

----- PAGE 235 -----
WORMWOOD

Artemisia absinthium

COMMON NAMES: Absinth, ajenjo, old woman.

FEATURES: Wormwood is native to Eurasia and has been introduced into North America, where it occurs
as a casual weed in waste places in the northern United States and southern Canada. Michigan,
Wisconsin, and Oregon grow this herb commercially. There are various other species of Artemisia;
common wormwood, sea wormwood, and Roman wormwood, similar in appearance but different in
properties. A. absinthium, of the Compositae family, is a perennial, commonly 2—4 feet tall, with
clustered stems and silvery gray herbage. The leaf blades are up to about 4 inches long and are divided
into numerous blunt or rounded small segments, the basal leaves being long-stalked and larger than those
of the stem. The numerous flower heads, which are scattered along branches that have reduced leaves, are
small, yellowish, and individually rather inconspicuous, being hardly 4 inches wide, flowering from June
to September. Odor, aromatic; taste, very bitter. It yields what is known to druggists as absinthin.

MEDICINAL PARTS: Tops, leaves.
SOLVENTS: Diluted alcohol, water (partial solvent).
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, stomachic, stimulant, febrifuge, anthelmintic, narcotic.

Uses: Wormwood ranks first for conditions of enfeebled digestion and debility. Often melancholy is due
to liver inactivity, and it is impious for a good man to be sad. A small amount of wormwood daily will
decrease the yellowness of the skin, revealing the improvement of the gallbladder.

This herb is used for intermittent fever, jaundice, worms, want of appetite, amenorrhea, chronic
leukorrhea, diabetes, obstinate diarrhea, swelling of the tonsils, and quinsy. Travelers who are much
troubled with indigestion and nausea should take with them as a faithful companion their little bottle of
wormwood in tincture form, mixed with enough alcohol to ensure that it will last as a traveling
companion for a long time.

CAUTION: Taken too strong and too often it will irritate the stomach and dangerously increase the action
of the heart and arteries. It can also result in intoxication and delirium.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the tops and leaves, cut small or granulated, to 1 cupful of boiling water; take in
wineglassful amounts three or four times a day. Of the tincture, 5-30 drops three or four times a day,

----- PAGE 236 -----
according to age and condition; of the powder, 3-4 grains twice a day.

EXTERNALLY: The oil of wormwood is an effective ingredient in liniment for sprains, bruises, lumbago,
etc. Fomentation from the hot tea is excellent for rheumatism, swellings, sprains, and local inflammations.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root for catalepsy, chorea, convulsions, epilepsy,
hydrocephalus, hysteria, somnambulism, worms.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Wormwood, known in Russia as polin, is considered the most bitter plant in the
world; 10,000 parts water to 1 part wormwood will still have a bitter taste. It used to be thought that the
bitter taste of wormwood was due to the plant’s absorption of bitter human sufferings and the dissolution
of mankind, therefore its properties would drive sickness from the body and restore peace and calmness
to the soul (similia similibus curantur). In the eighteenth century a toast to joy, happiness, and pleasure
was accompanied by a drop of wormwood in a cup.

It is written by the most ancient that wormwood has many healing properties. Today science confirms
that it contains absentine and anabsentin, vitamin C, and volatile oil. Lonicerius wrote: “The herb, leaves
and flowers added to food and beverage is useful for the stomach, promotes bile, warms the body and
expels poison.” Folk medicine: Uses the medicine straight or in compound with sage, mint, sunflower
leaves, etc., depending on conditions being treated. Nastoika (with vodka), tea, decoctions for
indigestion, appetizer, gastritis, stomach ulcers, dysentery, tuberculosis of the lungs, liver and spleen
conditions, kidney and bladder, headache, purifying poisoned blood, fever, bleeding, etc. Decoction of 1
teaspoonful to 1 cupful of water, steeped and cooled, used as an enema, will kill intestinal worms.
Externally: Many centuries ago Pliny wrote: “If pedestrians keep some Wormwood on his body,
especially the feet, he will not be tired.” Russians in the seventeenth century used the juice for wounds
and foul ulcers. (Vishaya Schkolla, Moscow, 1963). Can be used as compresses and poultices for bruises,
injuries, or insect bites. Green bruised leaves for corns. Flowers and leaves scattered on the floor and
furniture will discourage unwanted house insects (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1965).
Clinically: Extract for spasm, bronchial asthma, rheumatism, eczema, burns (X ray or other) (Atlas,
Moscow, 1963).

INDIAN AND PAKISTANI EXPERIENCE: Called afsantin or vilayati afsantin, the plant is used much as in the
United States and Russia. They use the whole herb but prefer the leaves, and consider the fresh plant more
effective than the dried. As tonic, aromatic, anthelmintic. Uses: It is praised highly for round- and
tapeworms. Powder, 10-60 grains. Small doses are used for dispersing the yellow bile of jaundice from
the skin, and for liver and spleen conditions. A tonic for the stomach, digestive system, anemia, female
complaints, amenorrhea, general debility, wasting diseases. A decoction as an enema for intestinal
worms, which will kill them instantly. The oil is anthelmintic; they mix one part of it with eight parts olive
oil and give it in 50-100-gram doses.

----- PAGE 237 -----
YARROW
Achillea millefolium

FEATURES: A perennial plant of the composite family (Compositae), yarrow inhabits Europe and North
America. It is found in pastures, meadows, and along roadsides, flowering from May to October. Yarrow
has a rough angular stem and grows to heights of 3 feet; the alternate leaves are 1-6 inches long,
pinnatifid, slightly woolly, cut into very fine segments, and clasp the stem at the base. The flowers are
white (if you are lucky you may find pink yarrow), borne in flat-top daisylike clusters up to 1 foot across.
The plant possesses a faint, pleasant, peculiar fragrance and an ether-sharp, rough, astringent taste, which
properties are due to tannic and achilleic acid, essential oil, and bitter extractive achilleine. The genus to
which yarrow belongs was named after Achilles, who supposedly discovered the medicinal virtues of the
plant.

MEDICINAL PART: The whole herb.
SOLVENTs: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Astringent, alterative, diuretic, tonic.

Uses: Yarrow as a useful agent was known to the Native Americans as a tonic for run-down conditions
and indigestion. The juice put in the eye will take away redness. Herbalists know that yarrow, together
with plantain (Plantago lanceolata) and comfrey (Symphytum), will stop hemorrhages of the lungs,
bowels, hemorrhoids, and other internal bleeding. Yarrow is most useful in colds, influenza, measles,
smallpox, chickenpox, fevers, and acute catarrhs of the respiratory tract. The properties have the ability to
keep up strength and act as a blood cleanser, at the same time opening the pores to permit free
perspiration, which takes along with it unwanted waste and relieves the kidneys; more effective than
quinine for the above mentioned when combined with elder flowers (Sambucus canadensis) and
peppermint (Mentha piperita).

Yarrow exercises influence over many ailments, including incontinence of urine and instances of
mucous discharge from the bladder, dyspepsia, amenorrhea, suppressed or restrained menses, and
menorrhagia or profuse continued menstruation; as a feminine solution for administration for leukorrhea

----- PAGE 238 -----
(whites). An internal decoction of yarrow boiled with white wine is used to stop the running of the reins
in men and discharge in women. Chewing the leaves when troubled by toothache will frequently ease the
pain.

Dose: Infusion of 1 teaspoonful to 1 cupful of boiling water is given in wineglassful to cupful amounts,
three or four times a day. The essential oil, 5-20 drops three or four times a day.

EXTERNALLY: Native Americans used the leaves as a poultice for skin rash. It is currently used for
treatment of skin wounds, ulcers, and fistulas in an ointment or poultice application; both are soothing for
hemorrhoids. The oil or decoction will prevent hair from falling out, if taken internally and applied to the
scalp.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Tisiachelistnik and krovavnik means “one thousand leaves” and “blood plant.”
Achillea millefolium, also translated as “one thousand leaves” in Russia, A. asiatica, and A. setacea are
only three of the species of yarrow to be found there. The leaves, flowers, and unseparated tops are
usually called yarrow, as known in North America. Folk medicine: Since the fifteenth century Russian
herbalists have used and recommended yarrow. As tea, decoction, nastoika (with vodka) for bleeding,
stomach sickness, gastritis, ulcers, dysentery, diarrhea, female bleeding, inflamed processes, cold, cough,
liver, anemia, headache, tuberculosis of the lungs, shortness of breath, nervousness, high blood pressure,
tabes of spinal marrow. Externally: Decoctions and poultice for surface or subcutaneous skin conditions:
Clinically: Recently recognition has been given to extracts and decoctions for stomach sickness,
especially ulcers, and for bleeding and gastritis. Also as an appetizer and externally as styptic (Atlas,
Moscow, 1963).

----- PAGE 239 -----
YELLOW DOCK

Rumex crispus

COMMON NAMES: Curled dock, narrow dock, sour dock, rumex, garden patience.

FEATURES: The docks are members of the buckwheat family, native to Europe (except the blunt-leaved,
which is indigenous); they have been introduced into the United States. There are four varieties of dock
that may be used in medicine: Rumex aquaticus (great water dock), R. britannica (water dock), R.
obtusifolius (blunt-leaved dock), and R. crispus (yellow dock). They all possess similar medicinal
qualities, but yellow dock is the only one entitled to extensive consideration.

The yellowish spindle-shaped root has scarcely any odor but has an astringent, bitter taste. The plant
grows 2-3 feet high with slender, crisped-edged leaves that are lanceolate, acute, and of a light green
color; the leaves and stalk have a sour taste. The flowers are numerous, pale green, drooping, and
interspersed with leaves below; can be seen in June and July.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTS: Water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Alterative, astringent, laxative, anti-scorbutic, tonic.

Usss: A favorite herb of Native Americans, old-time doctors, early settlers, and herbal practitioners. For
some conditions it has no equal, especially if compounded with other supporting herbs. Rich and easily
digested iron so essential for human, animal, and plant, is one of the main contents of yellow dock. This
common herb has valuable ingredients for conditions of the blood and glandular system and is indicated
in scrofula, ulcerated eyelids and skin conditions, itch, scurvy, and eruptive diseases, especially when
discharges are experienced, as in running of the ears.

When accumulation of waste matter progresses to swelling or tumors, yellow dock is of service both
internally and externally. Many herbalists use the mineral-rich plant for cancer, leprosy, bleeding of the
lungs and bowels, and for rheumatic conditions. It also has much merit in dyspepsia, chronic bronchitis,
ulcers, and conditions affected by the spleen and lymphatic glands; also for female weakness when due to
iron deficiency.

Dose: | teaspoonful of the grated or crushed root to | cupful of boiling water; drink 3-4 cupfuls daily. A

----- PAGE 240 -----
syrup may be made by boiling 4 pound of the crushed root in | pint of syrup; taken in teaspoonful doses
three or four times a day.

EXTERNALLY: Ulcers, hard tumors, eruptive skin diseases, etc., have been removed by the application of
the bruised root in poultice form. An ointment made with the root simmered in oil (coconut oil will
harden when cold and can be used for rectal suppositories) is also used for the above external care.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of fresh root for abortion, aphonia, asthma, borborygmus, bronchitis,
catarrh, corns, coryza, cough, diarrhea, dyspepsia epistaxis, feet (tender), gastralgia, heart (pain in,
affections of), indigestion, irritation, lichen, mouth (ulceration of), phimosis, phthisis, prurigo,
rheumatism, throat (sore, ulcerated), trachea (affections of), urticaria.

RUSSIAN EXPERIENCE: Several species of Rumex can be found in Russia. In literature most attention is
given to R. rumicis, or konsky shavel, which means “horse dock.” Folk medicine: Use the roots and fruit
as astringent to check bleeding of lungs, female bleeding, hemorrhoids, bleeding diarrhea; also for
tubercular lungs and skin conditions. In Byelorussia a decoction of the flowers is used for diarrhea,
dysentery, kidney and bladder, stomach sickness; a decoction of the root for pain after heavy lifting.
Externally: Decoctions used for ulcers, burns, and skin diseases. Fresh leaves for foul wounds and
ulcers, shingles or itching skin (Bello-Russ. Academy of Science, Minsk, 1966).

----- PAGE 241 -----
YELLOW PARILLA

Menispermum canadense

COMMON NAMES: Vine-maple, moonseed, Canadian moonseed, Texas sarsaparilla, yellow sarsaparilla.

FEATURES: A perennial member of the moonseed family, yellow parilla grows from Canada to Carolina
and west to the Mississippi. The horizontal, very long, woody root of a beautiful yellow color thrives in
moist woods, hedges, and near streams. The taste is bitter, and it is nearly odorless.

The stem is round and climbing and about | foot in length, with roundish smooth leaves, 4—5 inches in
diameter, green above, paler beneath. The small yellow flowers are in clusters in the month of July
followed by one-seeded fruit that is thick, black, and resembles grapes. Its active principle, menispermin,
is sometimes used as a substitute for sarsaparilla.

MEDICINAL PART: Root.
SOLVENTs: Alcohol, water.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Tonic, alterative, diuretic, laxative.

Uses: Dr. O. P. Brown (1875): “Yellow Parilla seems to possess one virtue which is paramount to all
others, it is essentially and particularly antisyphilitic, anti-scrofulous, anti-mercurial.” Achieving this, it
is of much merit for all diseases arising from either hereditary or acquired impurities of the system. It
exerts its influence principally on the gastric and salivary glands and is found expressly beneficial in
cases of adhesive inflammation and where it is necessary to break up organized deposits and hasten
disintegration of unwanted tissue. It is believed by some to be superior to sarsaparilla as a blood purifier
for scrofula, blood disorders, gout, rheumatism, and cutaneous skin diseases generally. Also acts as a
tonic and nervine and may be given in all cases of debility and dyspepsia.

Dose: | teaspoonful to 1 cupful of boiling water, steeped 15 minutes; take 1-4 cupfuls a day. Of the
tincture, 5—20 minims; of the powder, 1-4 grains. If it produces vomiting, reduce the dosage.
HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of the root, trituration of menispermin for backache, headache, itching,
tongue (swelling of).

----- PAGE 242 -----
YERBA SANTA

Eriodictyon californicum

COMMON NAMES: Mountain balm, bear’s weed, consumptive’s weed, tarweed, gum bush.

FEATURES: This evergreen shrub is a member of the water leaf family (Hydrophyllaceae), of which many
species are known. It is somewhat branching and attains a height of 2-4 feet. The stems are smooth and
exude a gummy substance. Leaves are 3-4 inches in length, distinctively woolly on the undersides,
containing a network of prominent veins, and the resinous substance causes the woolly fibers to appear
varnished; upper surface is smooth, with depressed veins. The flowers are terminal, appearing in shades
of dark lavender through pale shades of lavender to white, forming funnel-shaped clusters at the top of the
plant. Yerba santa honey is amber, with a slightly spicy flavor. If one follows bees to this plant it will be
found growing on dry California mountain slopes and ridges throughout the coastal ranges and up into the
foothills of the Sierra Nevada from Monterey and Tulare counties northward. The capsule fruit is oval,
grayish brown, and contains small brown shriveled seeds.

MEDICINAL PART: Leaves.
SOLVENTS: Boiling water, alcohol.
BODILY INFLUENCE: Aromatic, tonic, stimulant, expectorant.

Uses: The name yerba santa (holy weed) was given by the Spanish fathers who became aware of this
corrective substance through the Native Americans. They boiled the fresh or dried leaves for colds,
coughs, sore throat, catarrh, stomachaches, vomiting, and diarrhea. Yerba santa is known to physicians as
a leading agent for all respiratory conditions and has a reputation for healing hemorrhoids when other
sources fail. Also used in kidney conditions and rheumatic pain. For more effective results some
physicians recommend that gum plant (Grindelia robusta) be combined with yerba santa in syrup form. It
should be used in small amounts, as too large doses of G. robusta will irritate the kidneys. Make a
mixture of three parts yerba santa to one part gum and take in fluid extract, 10-30 drops, three or four
times a day.

Dose: Infusion of 1 teaspoonful of crushed leaves to 1 cupful of boiling water, steeped ’2 hour; take 1-4
cupfuls daily. Of the solid extract, 3-6 grains. Fluid extract '2—1 teaspoonful three to four times daily.

EXTERNALLY: Native Americans used the fresh or dried leaves as a poultice for broken and unbroken skin
of both humans and animals when in pain from rheumatism, fatigued limbs, swelling, sores, etc.

HOMEOPATHIC CLINICAL: Tincture of whole plant for asthma, bronchitis, catarrh, influenza, phthisis.

----- PAGE 243 -----
DEFINITIONS

Alterative Producing a healthful change without perception.
Anodyne_ Relieves pain.

Anthelmintic A medicine that expels worms.

Antibilious Acts on the bile, relieving biliousness.
Antiemetic Stops vomiting.

Antihilitic Prevents the formation of stones in the urinary organs.
Antileptic Relieves fits.

Antiperiodic Arrests morbid periodic movements.
Antirheumatic Relieves or cures rheumatism.
Antiscorbutic Cures or prevents scurvy.

Antiseptic A medicine that aims at stopping putrification.
Antispasmodic Relieves or prevents spasms.
Antisyphilitic Having affect on or curing venereal diseases.
Aperient Gently laxative without purging.

Aromatic A stimulant, spicy.

Astringent Causes contraction and arrests discharges.
Carminative Expels wind from the bowels.

Cathartic Evacuating from the bowels.

Cephalic Remedies used in diseases of the head.
Cholagogue Increases the flow of bile.

Condiment Improves the flavor of foods.

Demulcent Soothing, relieves inflammation.
Deobstruent Removes obstruction.

Depurative Purifies the blood.

Detergent Cleansing to boils, ulcers, and wounds.
Diaphoretic Produces perspiration.

Discutient Dissolves and heals tumors.

Diuretic Increases the secretion and flow of urine.
Emetic Produces vomiting.

Emmenagogue Promotes menstruation.

Emollient Softens and soothes inflamed parts.

Esculent Edible.

Exanthematous Remedy for skin eruptions and diseases.
Expectorant Facilitates expectoration.

Febrifuge Abates and reduces fevers.

Hepatic A remedy for diseases of the liver.

Herpetic A remedy for skin diseases of all types.
Laxative Promotes bowel action.

Lithotriptic Dissolves calculi in the urinary organs.
Maturating Ripens or brings boils to a head.
Mucilaginous Soothing to all inflammation.

----- PAGE 244 -----
Nauseant Produces vomiting.

Nervine Acts specifically on the nervous system, stops nervous excitement.
Ophthalmicum A remedy for eye diseases.

Parturient Induces and promotes labor at childbirth.
Pectoral A remedy for chest affections.

Refrigerant Cooling.

Resolvent Dissolves boils and tumors.

Rubefacient Increases circulation and produces red skin.
Sedative A nerve tonic, promotes sleep.

Sialagogue Increases the secretion of saliva.

Stomachic Strengthens the stomach. Relieves indigestion.
Styptic Arrests bleeding.

Sudorifile Produces profuse perspiration.

Tonic A remedy that is invigorating and strengthening.
Vermifuge Expels worms from the system.

----- PAGE 245 -----
INDEX

Note: Index entries from the print edition of this book have been included for use as search terms.
They can be located by using the search feature of your e-book reader.

Abdomen, plethora of
Abortion; threatened
Abscess. See also Boil; Carbuncle
Absentine

Achilles tendon, pain in
Acne. See also Skin

Acritis

Adder’s mouth

Adrenal glands

Adynamic fever

African pepper

Aging. See Longevity
Agropyron

Ague

Ajenjo

Albumin

Albuminuria

Alcoholism. See also Delirium tremens
Alimentary tract, ailments of
Alopecia

Alteratives

Alum

Amaurosis

Amblyopia

Amenorrhea

Anabsentin

Anasarca

Anemia

Aneurysm

Angina, pectoris. See also Heart
Animal bites

Ankles, weak

Anodyne

Anorexia

Anthelmintic

Antibilious

Antibiotic

Antidote

Antiperiodic

Antiscorbutic

Antiseptic

Antispasmodic

Antitoxin

Antrum, pain in

Anus; affections of; burning; fissure of; itching of; prolapse of. See also Rectum
Aperient

Aphasia

Aphonia

Aphrodisiac

----- PAGE 246 -----
Aphthae
Apiol
Apoplexy
Appendicitis
Appetite
Arberry
Arborvitae
Archangel
Aromatic
Arsemart
Arteriosclerosis
Arthritis
Ascites
Asthma
Astham weed
Astringent
Aunee

Backache; kidneys and

Balanitis

Baldness. See also Hair

Bear’s weed

Bedsores

Bedstraw

Bed wetting. See also Enuresis

Beechnut tree

Bee stings. See also Insect bites; Stings
Beggar’s buttons

Beggar’s tick

Berry

Biliary colic

Bilious attack

Biliousness

Birch mushroom

Bird pepper

Bird’s nest

Birth root

Birthwort

Bites. See also Insect bites; Snakebite

Bitter bloom

Bitter clover

lack eye

lack larch

lack sampson

lack snakeroot

ladder; inflammation; irritable; stones; ulcerated
leeding, internal; stopping. See also Hemorrhages
lepharitis

lood: builder; circulation; cleansing of; coagulation; conditions; disease; poisoning; purifying; regulator
lood pressure, high

low ball

lue ginseng

lue gum tree

lue pimpernel

lue skullcap

Boil. See also Abscess; Carbuncle; Skin
Bombay aloe

Bone; cancer; disease; fractured. See also Fractures
Borborygmus

Bottlebrush

Bowel, bleeding; children’s; cramps; spasms of
Boxberry

Brachial neuralgia

Brain; concussion of

WDWWWBWBDDWDWBBTOD

----- PAGE 247 -----
Bramble berry

Brandy mint

Breast

Breast cancer

Breast feeding; sore mouth of mother; weaning from
Breath, offensive

Breathing difficulties
Bright’s disease
Broadleaved plantain
Bronchial: complaints; tubes
Bronchitis

Bruises

Buffalo herb

Bugbane

Bull’s foot

Bunions

Burns

Calamus

Calcium

Calculus; dissolving
Calmative

Canada snake root
Canadian moonseed
Cancer; breast; skin; stomach; throat; womb. See also Tumors
Cancer root

Candle berry
Canker root

Canker sores
Cankerwort
Capon’s tail
Capillary bronchitis
Carbonate of lime
Carbuncles. See also Abscess; Boil; Skin
Cardiac stimulant
Cardialgia
Carminative
Carotene

Castor oil

Catalepsy

Cataract

Catarrh; respiratory
Catchstraw
Cathartic

Catheter fever
Catkin willow
Catmint

Cat’s foot

Cat’s wort

Cayenne

Cecum

Cedar, yellow
Celandine

Cervix, ulceration of
Chamomile
Chancre. See also Syphilis; Venereal disease
Chancroids
Chaparral

Chaparro

Chapped lips
Chapped skin. See also Skin
Checkerberry
Chelidonium
Chenopodium

----- PAGE 248 -----
Cherry birch

Cherry, wild black

Chest, affections of; pain
Chicken pox

Chilblains

Childbirth; afterbirth; after pains; pain relief; pains; postpartum; hemorrhages
China root

Chloasma

Choice dielytra
Chokecherry

Cholagogue

Cholera

Cholerine

Cholesterol, reducing
Chordee

Chorea

Choroiditis

Christmas tree

Ciliary neuralgia
Cimicifugin

Cinnamon wood
Circulation

Cleaver grass

Clothburr

Coagulation, blood. See also Hemorrhages
Coakum

Cocash weed
Cocecygodynia

Coccyx pain

Cockhold herb

Colds

Colic; bilious; cramp; infant
Colic root

Colitis

Colpatitis

Complexion. See also Skin
Compresses

Concussion

Congestion

Conjunctivitis. See also Eyes
Constipation; of children; chronic. See also Laxative
Consumption
Consumptive’s weed
Convalescence
Convulsions, infantile
Copper

Cornea, ulceration of. See also Eyes
Corns

Corus

Coryza

Cough

Coughwort

Cow grass

Cow lily

Cow’s lungwort

Coxalgia

Cramps

Creosote bush

Croup

Crusta lactea

Culver’s physic

Culver’s root

Curled dock

Cystitis

----- PAGE 249 -----
Dandruff. See also Hair
Dead arsemart
Deafness, cerebral. See also Ears
Deal pine

Debility

Delirium

Delirium tremens. See also Alcoholism
Demulcent

Dentition

Deobstruent
Depression

Depurative

Dermatitis

Detergent

Devil's pitchfork

Devil's plague
Dewberry

Dewplant

Diabetes

Diaphoretic
Diaphagmitis

Diarrhea of children
Digestion, enfeebled
Digestive

Diphtheria

Diplopia

Discutient

Disinfectant

Diuretic

Dizziness

Dog bane

Dog grass

Drop berry

Dropsy

Duodenum

Dupuytren's contracture
Durfa grass

Dwarf evergreen oak
Dwarf sumac
Dysentery, cathartic
Dysmenia
Dysmenorrhea
Dyspepsia. See also Indigestion
Dysuria

Ear; disturbances; hearing; mucus; polypus of; ringing; tympanites; wax; worms in. See also Deafness
Earache

Eastern white pine

Ecchymosis

Eczema. See also Skin

Edema

Elf dock

Elm, red

Emetic

Emetic root

Emetic weed

Emetocathartic

Emissions

Emmenagogue. See also Menstruation
Emollients

Emphysema

Endive, wild

Endocrine system. See also Glands

----- PAGE 250 -----
English oak

Enteric fever

Enuresis

Epididymitis

Epilepsy, fits

Epistaxis

Erysipelas

Erythema

Esophagus, spasm of; stricture of

Estrogenic hormones

European beech

Eustachian tubes

Exhaustion

Expectorant

Eye; black; cataract; conjunctivitis; cornea; ulceration of; improvement of sight; inflamed; myopia; night blindness; pain over; pains; redness;
sclerotica inflamed; styes; tumors of; twitching; wash

Eyelids, ulcerated

Eyesight, restoration of

Face, neuralgia of; paralysis of; redness of
Fainting

Faintness

Falling sickness

False valerian

False white cedar
Fatigue

Favus

Feather few
Featherfoil

Febrifuge

Febrile diseases

Feet; fetid; perspiration of; sore; swollen; tender
Felon herb

Felonwort

Fertility

Fever; remittent infant
Fever sores

Fever twig

Fibroma

Fistulas

Five finger root

Five leaves grass

Flag lily

Flannel flower
Flatulence

Fluorine

Flytrap

Foal’s foot

Fractures. See also Bones
Freckles. See Skin
Frostbite

Fumigation

Fungoid growths

Gagroot

Galactagogic

Gallbladder

Gallstones

Ganglion

Gangrene

Garget

Gargle

Gas. See also Flatulence
Gastralgia

----- PAGE 251 -----
Gastric ulcer

Gastritis

Gastrodynia
Gastroenteritis
Gastrointestinal catarrh
Gill go by ground
Ginger root

Ginseng, yellow
Glands; enlarged; swollen
Gleet

Glossitis

Glucose

Gobonadoraz

Goiter

Golden senecio
Gonorrhea. See also Venereal disease
Goose grass

Gout

Gout berry

Gravel

Greasewood

Grippe

Groats

Ground apple

Ground raspberry
Groundsel

Guelder rose

Gum

Gum bush

Gum plant

Gums; bleeding; inflamed; sore
Gynecological disorders

Hackmatack

Hair color, restoration of; diseases of; falling; growth of; loss prevention; tonic. See also Dandruff
Halitosis

Hands, chapped, cold

Hayfever

Headeaches; bilious; migraine; nervous
Heart; affections of; conditions; disease; pain in; palpitations; strengthener; weakness. See also Angina; Pulmonary
Heartburn

Hellebore green

Hematemesis

Hematuria

Hemicrania

Hemoptysis

Hemorrhage; internal; postpartum. See also Bleeding
Hemorrhoids; loss prevention. See also Piles
Hemostatic

Hepatic

Hepatic diseases

Hepatitis

Hernia; strangulated

Herpes; labialis pudendi; zoster

Hiccups

High cranberry

Hip disease

Hoarseness

Hog apple

Hoodwort

Hormones estrogenic

Horse chestnut

Horse hoof

Huckleberry

----- PAGE 252 -----
Hurtleberry
Hydragogue
Hydrangea wild
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocyanie acid
Hyperpyrexia
Hypnotic

Hyssop wild
Hysteria

Ichthyosis

Impetigo

Impotence

Incontinence

Indian apple

Indian balm

Indian elm

Indian ginger

Indian hyssop

Indian plant

Indian poke

Indian salt

Indian spikenard

Indian tobacco

Indigestion. See also Dyspepsia
Infections septic

Influenza

Injuries swollen. See also Swellings
Inkberry

Insect bites; bee stings; stings
Insect repellent

Insomnia

Intestines; chronic inflammation of; inflammation of; ulceration of; ulcer pain
Tnulin

Todine

Iris

Iritis

Tron

Itching

Itch weed

Jaundice
Jerusalem cowslip
Jerusalem oak
Johnswort

Joint affections
Joint stiffness
Juniper

Keratin

Keratitis

Kidney; backache and; congestion; inflammation; prenatal problems and; stones; ulceration of
Klamath weed

Knee pain

Knit bone

Labor. See Childbirth

Lactation; ending

Lady’s slipper, yellow

Lappa

Laryngitis

Larynx

Laxatives. See also Constipation
Lead colic

----- PAGE 253 -----
Lead poisoning
Leg pain

Lemon wild
Leopard’s bane
Leprosy
Leptandra
Leukemia
Leukemia splenica
Leukoma
Leukorrhea
Lichen

Licorice wild

Like of man

Lime tree

Linden flower
Lion’s ear

Lion’s tail

Lion’s tooth

Lips, cancer of; chapped
Liver; disorders; feverish; suppressed. See also Jaundice
Liver lily

Liver spots
Lockjaw

Locust plant
Longevity

Lucern

Lumbago
Lumbricoid worms
Lungs; bleeding; disease; disorders of; edema of; inflammation of; strengthening of; ulcerated. See also Consumption
Lupus

Lymphatic glands
Lymphatic relief

Macrotin

Maddog weed

Magnesia

Magnesium

Malaria

Malarial fever

Malic acid

Malignancy. See Cancer; Tumors
Manganese

Maple lungwort

Masterwort

Mayapple

Measles

Melancholia

Melancholy

Melanoma. See also Cancer
Meningitis

Menorrhagia

Menstruation; difficult; disorders of; flow; obstructed; painful; profuse; promotion of; suppressed. See also Emmenagogue
Mercurial poisoning

Mercury

Metabolism

Metrorrhagia

Mexican tea

Migraine. See also Headache
Milk ipecac

Milkweed

Milkwort

Minerals

Mint curled

Miscarriage; prevention of. See also Childbirth; Pregnancy

----- PAGE 254 -----
Moka aloe
Moonseed

Moose elm
Morning sickness. See also Pregnancy
Mortal

Mother of thyme
Moth mullein
Mountain balm
Mountain box
Mountain cranberry
Mountain flax
Mountain mahogany
Mountain sumac
Mouth sores; ulcers
Mouth root
Mouthwash
Mucilaginous
Mucus, treatment of diseased. See also Catarrh
Mumps

Muscles sore
Muscle tone
Myalgia

Myelitis

Myopia

Myrica

Myrtle flag

Nails; brittle
Narcotic

Narrow dock

Nasal polypus

Nasal stoppage
Nasturtium, tall
Nausea

Nauseant

Neck, stiff

Nephritic

Nephritis

Nerve root

Nerves; strengthener
Nervine

Nervous diseases
Nervous exhaustion
Nervous irritation
Nervousness
Nervous system; calming of
Nettle, great stinging
Nettlerash

Neuralgia

Neuritis

Niacin

Nickel

Night blindness
Nightshade

Night sweats

Ninsin

Nipbone

Nipples, sore

Noah’s ark

Nose

Nosebleeds; polypus; stoppage
Nursing. See Breastfeeding
Nutrients

Nutritive

----- PAGE 255 -----
Oil

Old man’s beard
Old man’s root
Old woman
Ophthalmia
Orange root
Ovarian neuralgia
Ovaries; pain in
Oxytocic

Ozena

Pain

Palma christie
Palpitation; heart. See also Heart
Palsy

Panax

Pancreas

Pannag

Pappoose root
Paralysis; facial
Paronychia

Parsley

Parturient

Patience garden
Peachwort

Pectin

Pectoral; affections
Pectorals

Pectoris

Pelvic hematocele
Peppermint

Pepper, red
Pepperwort

Pepsin

Perineum
Peritoneum
Peritonitis. See also Stomach
Perspiration; foot; promotion of. See also Feet
Petty morrel
Pewterwort
Pharyngitis

Pharynx

Phimosis

Phosphate of potash
Phosphaturia
Phosphorus

Phrenitis

Phthisis

Pigeon berry

Piles. See also Hemorrhoids
Pinheads

Pinworms
Pipperidge bush
Pityriasis

Pleurisy

Pleurodynia
Plumbago
Pneumonia

Pocan

Poison ash
Poisoning; antidote; antitoxin; mercurial; rhus; strychnine
Poison oak

Poke weed
Polysaccharide

----- PAGE 256 -----
Polyuria

Pool root

Postpartum hemorrhages

Potassium

Pregnancy; disorders of; kidney problems with; miscarriage, prevention; morning sickness; vomiting. See also Childbirth
Proctitis

Prostate; enlarged; irritation of
Prostatitis

Protein

Psilosis

Psoriasis

Puerperal fever

Pulmonary complaints. See also Heart
Pulse

Purgative

Purple angelica

Purple clover

Purple coneflower

Purpura

Pussy willow

Pustules. See also Abscess Boil; Carbuncle
Putrefication

Pyoemia

Pyorrhea. See also Gums

Pyrethrum

Pyrosis

Quack grass

Quay

Queen Anne’s lace
Quick grass

Quill

Quinsy

Raccoonberry
Ragwort

Raspberry, wild red
Rash. See also Skin
Rattleroot
Rattlesnake bite
Rattlesnake root
Rectum; cancer of; cramp in; irritation of; prolapsed. See also Anus
Red berry

Red elm

Red gum

Red puccoon

Red river snakeroot
Refrigerant
Relaxant

Renal colic

Renal congestion
Renal torpor

Renal tract
Reproductive organs
Resolvent
Respiratory, organs, dry, tickling
Restlessness
Restorative
Rheumatism; deltoid
Rheumatism root
Rhus poisoning
Rickets

Ringworm

Ripple grass

----- PAGE 257 -----
Rock parsley

Rose pink
Rough-fruited cinquefoil
Round leaf

Rubefacient

Rumex

Rutin

Sacrum, pain in

Sage

Saint John’s grass

Saint Vitus’ dance

Salisb

Salivation; promotion of

Saloop

Salpingitis

Sambucus

Sang

Sangree root

Sangrel

Sanguinaria

Sarsparilla, red; yellow

Satin flower

Saxifrax

Scabies

Scabs

Scabwort

Scapula

Scarlatina

Scarlet fever

Scarlet sumac

Scars

Scarwort

Sciatica

Sclerosis

Scoke

Scrofula

Scurvy

Seal root

Sealwort

Seasickness

Seborrhea. See also Skin

Sedative

Senna wild

Septicemia

Serpeginosa

Serpentaria

Serpullum

Setwell

Seven barks

Shave grass

Shingles

Shock

Sialagogue

Side flower

Silicon

Silver

Silvery cinquefoil

Simpler’s joy

Sinus congestion

Siplas

Skin; cancer; chancre; chancroids; complexion; conditions; discolorations; disease; eruptions; freckles, removal of; lesions; psoriasis; rash;
redness of; seborrhea; ulcers. See also Acne; Boils; Carbuncles; Eczema

Skullcap helmet flower

----- PAGE 258 -----
Sleeplessness. See also Insomnia
Smallpox

Small spikenard
Smartweed
Smooth sumac
Snakebite

Snake lily

Snake milk
Snakeroot
Snapping hazel nut
Sneezing
Snowball tree
Snowdrop tree
Sodium

Soft pine
Somnambulism
Sores

Sour dock

Spanish chestnut
Spanish needles
Spasmodic
Spasms; bowel
Speedwell tall
Spermatorrhea
Spice birch
Spignet

Spinal, concussion
Spleen; choleric conditions; suppressed
Splenalgia
Splinters

Spotted adler
Spotted comfrey
Spotted lungwort
Sprains

Squaw bush
Squawroot

Squaw weed
Squirrel corn
Stagger weed
Starch
Star-leaved gum
Starweed

Sterility
Sternutatory
Stimulants; carminative
Stings, bee. See also Insect bites
Stitchwort
Stomach; choleric conditions; conditions; cramps; hemorrhages; inflammation of; pains; spasms; ulcers. See also Peritonitis
Stomachic; bitter
Stones

Stools

Strangury
Strychnine poisoning
Stuma

Styes

Styptic

Subacute

Sudorific

Sunburns

Sundew

Sunstroke
Suterberry

Sweet birch
Sweet chestnut

----- PAGE 259 -----
Sweet elder

Sweet grass

Sweet rush root

Sweet scented pond lily
Sweet sedge

Sweet violet
Sweetwood

Swellings

Swollen glands

Swollen injuries
Syphilis. See also Venereal disease
Systemic emetic

Tallow shrub

Tanners bark

Tannic acid

Tapeworms

Tarweed

Taste disorders

Teaberry

Teeter

Teeth; calculus; prevention of. See also Toothache
Tenesmus

Testes, cancer of

Testicles, inflamed

Tetanus

Tetters

Tetterwort

Texas sarsaparilla

Texas snakeroot

Thiamine

Thorny burr

Throat; cancer; congestion; gargle; sore
Throwwort

Thyme, common

Thyroid, imbalance

Thyroid, gland enlarged

Tibia pains in

Tinnitus

Titan

Tobacco, wild

Tomillo
Tongue; burning; mapped; strawberry; swelling of
Tonsillitis

Tonsils; swollen

Toothache

Toothache tree

Trachea

Tree of life

Trefoil

Tuberculosis. See Consumption
Tumeric root

Tumors; fungoid. See also Cancer
Turkey aloe

Turkey corn wild

Turn hoof hay maids

Twitch grass

Tympanites. See also Ear
Typhoid fever

Typhus

Ulcers; external; gastric; pain; spreading; stomach
Upland cranberry
Uremia

----- PAGE 260 -----
Urethra; stricture of

Urethritis

Uric acid disorders

Urinary organs; hemorrhages

Urinary tract; inflammations of

Urination; delayed; difficulties; disorders; flow; increase of; painful; retention; suppressed. See also Enuritis
Urticaria

Uterine colic

Uterus; pains in; prolapse; prolapsed

Uva-ursi

Uvula

Vaginismus

Vagina: discharge; inflammation of; irritation of; spasm of
Vaginismus

Vaginitis

Valerian, great wild

Varicocele

Varicose veins

Vegetable gold

Velvet dock

Velvet leaf

Venereal disease; infants with. See also Gonorrhea Syphilis
Verbascum flowers

Vermifuge

Vermont snake root

Vinemaple

Violet bloom

Vitality

Vitamins, A; B; Bg; C; D; E; G; K; P; thiamine
Vomiting

Vulnerary

Wagbread
Wake-robin
Warts

Water cabbage
Water flag
Water nymph
Water pepper
Water retention
Wax berry

Wax myrtle
Weaning

Weight loss
Wens

Wheezing

White birch
White fringe
White man’s foot
White mullein
Whitlow
Whooping cough
Whortleberry
Winter bloom
Wood sanicle
Woollen blanket herb
Worms; intestinal; retention of
Wounds; chronic

Yellow fever

Yellow jaundice. See Jaundice
Yellow moccasin flower
Yellow puccoon

----- PAGE 261 -----
Yellow root
Yellow wood

Zanzibar aloe

----- PAGE 262 -----
Sign up to learn more about our books and receive special offers from Shambhala Publications.

Sign Up

Or visit us online to sign up at shambhala.com/eshambhala.

----- PAGE 263 -----
RECOMMENDED BOOKS. lick image(s) to read / download

THE
) 2WEEK

A DIET )

CARLOS CAVALLO

FOREVER

A Step-By-Step Guide To Understanding
How Men Think, Act And Behave

Acne No More™

The Secrets To Curing PSELEITE Dh
Your Acne Holistically Al goal ever need. to

Lean Toned. &

Emotional
INA Formula

.bikinibod ‘kouts..
www.bikinibodyworkouts.com By: Eline Chase

How to go from

“flello” to “1 do” fev
as fast as womanly possible f
EVEN IF He's a hard to land man to get the

ae

Lovetraction
Lines ii
