
----- PAGE 1 -----
Herbal Medicines
Third edition

Joanne Barnes, Linda A Anderson
and J David Phillipson

----- PAGE 2 -----
y Herbal Medicines

----- PAGE 3 -----


----- PAGE 4 -----
Herbal Medicines

THIRD EDITION

Joanne Barnes
BPharm, PhD, MRPharmS, RegPharmNZ, MPSNZ, FLS

Associate Professor in Herbal Medicines
School of Pharmacy

University of Auckland

New Zealand

Linda A Anderson
BPharm, PhD, FRPharmS

Principal Pharmaceutical Assessor
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency
London, UK

J David Phillipson
BSc (Pharm), MSc, PhD, DSc, FRPharmS, FLS

Emeritus Professor

Centre for Pharmacognosy & Phytotherapy
The School of Pharmacy

University of London, UK

aP)

London e Chicago Pharmaceutical Press

----- PAGE 5 -----
Published by the Pharmaceutical Press
An imprint of RPS Publishing

1 Lambeth High Street, London SE1 7JN, UK
100 South Atkinson Road, Suite 200, Grayslake, IL 60030-7820, USA

© Pharmaceutical Press 2007

All photographs © Plantaphile, Germany 2007, with the exception of blue flag (Iris
versicolor) figure 2 © Brian Mathew 2007 and nettle (Urtica dioica) figure 2 ©
Tom Cope 2007. Photographs reproduced with permission.

(P ) is a trade mark of RPS Publishing

RPS Publishing is the publishing organisation of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society
of Great Britain

First edition 1996
Second edition 2002
Reprinted 2003, 2006
Third edition 2007

Text design by Eric Drewery, East Molesey, Surrey
Typeset by Data Standards Ltd, Frome, Somerset
Printed in Great Britain by Butler and Tanner, Frome, Somerset

ISBN 978 0 85369 623 0

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior
written permission of the copyright holder.

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

Front cover images (from top I-r): Echinacea, Hops, Calendula, Echinacea root
(dry), Milk Thistle, Calendula (dry), Passionflower, German Chamomile (dry),
German chamomile

All cover photographs © Plantaphile, Germany 2007, with the exception of
Echinacea root Digital Vision, Getty Images and German chamomile ©
Photodisc, Getty Images.

Disclaimer

Inclusion of a substance or preparation in Herbal Medicines is not to be
considered a recommendation for use, nor does it confer any status on the
substance or preparation. Although considerable efforts have been made to check
the material in Herbal Medicines, the authors and publisher make no
representation, express or implied, with regard to the accuracy of the
information contained in this book and cannot accept any legal responsibility
or liability for any errors or omissions that may be made. Also, the reader is
assumed to possess the necessary knowledge to interpret the information provided.

The views expressed in this book are those of the authors and do not represent
those of the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, European
Medicines Agency, World Health Organization, or any other institution or
organisation mentioned. Mention of specific product names is for clarity and
identification purposes and does not represent endorsement.

----- PAGE 6 -----
¥ Contents

Preface to the Third Edition viii
About the Authors x

How to Use Herbal Medicines
Introduction 3

Chemical Constituents of Plants
Used as Herbal Medicines 29

General References 34

The monographs

TA)

Agnus Castus 36
Agrimony 42

Alfalfa 45
Aloe Vera 48
Aloes 50
Angelica 53
Aniseed 57
Apricot 61
Arnica 64

Artichoke 67
Asafoetida 72

Avens 75
®

Bayberry 77
Bilberry 79

Bloodroot 84
Blue Flag 87
Bogbean 89
Boldo 91
Boneset 94

Borage 96
Broom 98
Buchu 100
Burdock 102
Burnet 105

Butterbur 107

1

@

Calamus 118
Calendula 121
Capsicum 125

Cascara 128

Cassia 130

Cat’s Claw 132
Celandine, Greater 136
Celery 146

Centaury 149

Cereus 151
Chamomile, German 152
Chamomile, Roman 156
Chaparral 159
Cinnamon 162

Clivers 164

Clove 166

Cohosh, Black 168
Cohosh, Blue 180

Cola 183

Coltsfoot 185

Comfrey 188

Corn Silk 191
Couchgrass 193
Cowslip 195

Cranberry 197

®

Damiana 201
Dandelion 204
Devil's Claw 207
Drosera 215

@

Echinacea 217
Elder 237
Elecampane 240

Ephedra 243

Eucalyptus 247
Euphorbia 249
Evening Primrose 251
Eyebright 256

@

False Unicorn 258
Fenugreek 260
Feverfew 263
Figwort 268
Frangula 270
Fucus 273
Fumitory 276

@

Garlic 279
Gentian 290
Ginger 293

Ginkgo 299

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus
Ginseng, Panax 325
Golden Seal 337
Gravel Root 340
Ground lvy 342

Guaiacum 344

@

Hawthorn 346

Holy Thistle 352

Hops 354

Horehound, Black 358
Horehound, White 361
Horse-chestnut 363
Horseradish 367
Hydrangea 369
Hydrocotyle 371

oO

Ispaghula 374

315

----- PAGE 7 -----
wi Contents

oO

Jamaica Dogwood 379
Java Tea 381
Juniper 386

@

Kava 389

@

Lady’s Slipper 403
Lemon Verbena 405

Liferoot 407
Lime Flower 409
Liquorice 411
Lobelia 416

@

Marshmallow 418
Maté 421
Meadowsweet 423

Melissa 425

Milk Thistle 429
Mistletoe 436
Motherwort 447

Myrrh 449
®
Nettle 452
CP)

Parsley 456
Parsley Piert 459
Passionflower 461
Pennyroyal 470
Pilewort 472
Plantain 474

Pleurisy Root 477
Pokeroot 479

Poplar 482

Prickly Ash, Northern 484
Prickly Ash, Southern 486
Pulsatilla 489

@
Quassia 491
Queen’s Delight 493

CR)

Raspberry 495
Red Clover 498
Rhodiola 500
Rhubarb 506
Rosemary 508

CS]

Sage 512
Sarsaparilla 515
Sassafras 518

Saw Palmetto 521
Scullcap 530
Senega 533

Senna 537
Shepherd’s Purse 541
Skunk Cabbage 543
Slippery Elm 545
Squill 547

St John’s Wort 549
Stone Root 570

oO

Tansy 572
Thyme 574

CU)

Uva-Ursi 577

@

Valerian 580
Vervain 591

®

Wild Carrot 593
Wild Lettuce 596
Willow 598
Witch Hazel 601

LY)

Yarrow 604
Yellow Dock 608

Yucca 610
Appendices
oO

Potential Drug—Herb Interactions
612

(2)

Pharmacological Activities and
Constituents of Herbal Ingredients
616

C3]

Council of Europe — Categories for
Natural Sources of Flavourings 622
(4)

Preparations Directory 623

6

Suppliers Directory 660

Index 690

----- PAGE 8 -----
This book is dedicated to the memory of
the late Dr W Gwynne Thomas,
former Director of Pharmaceutical Sciences at the
Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain.
The inspiration for the book came from him and
it is due to his efforts that the necessary funding
was obtained.

----- PAGE 9 -----
- Preface to the Third Edition

This third edition of Herbal Medicines: A guide for healthcare
professionals comes a little over ten years after publication of the
first edition, and reflects continuing public, professional, research,
commercial and other interests in medicinal plants. At the same
time, there have been ongoing concerns surrounding the quality,
safety and efficacy of herbal medicinal products, and heightened
awareness of the need to protect the public against poor-quality
and unsafe products. Pharmacists, doctors, nurses, herbal-
medicine practitioners and other healthcare providers should be
knowledgeable about these is
patients and the public on the safe, effective and appropriate use
of herbal preparations; this book aims to provide pharmacists and
other healthcare professionals with summarised, yet sufficiently
detailed, scientific information to enable them to do so.

Herbal medicines continue to be a popular
with the general public not only for health maintenance and well-
being, minor ailments (e.g. coughs and colds), chronic conditions
(e.g. back pain) and serious chronic diseases (e.g. asthma, cancer,
depression, diabetes), but also for 'enhancement'
processes, such as the use of Ginkgo biloba products for memory
enhancement. The general public receives information on herbal
medicines through various sources, including popular magazines
and newspaper articles, as well as television, internet and other
sources of advertising literature provided by manufacturers. Much
of this information is presented uncritically, and targeted to the
consumer along with details of substantial price reductions on
products, including continuous sales promotions, that often are
the main recommendations for the products. There is an
increasing number of products that respond to the public demand
for so-called ‘lifestyle’ medicines, and manufacturers market, for
example, herbal alternatives to Viagra (sildenafil), 'slimming/
weight-loss' preparations, 'hangover' cures, and_breast-enlarge-
ment products. Typically, these types of products are sold over the
internet without any assurance of their quality, safety and efficacy.

The last decade h en several important developments with
respect to herbal medicines. The most significant of these has been
the introduction of a new regulatory framework for traditional
herbal medicines in the UK and the 27 other member states of the
European Union (EU) following the implementation in 2005 of the
EU Directive on Traditional Herbal Medicinal Product:
other countries worldwide have introduced new legislation to
regulate herbal medicinal products: Australia and Canada, for
example, have been particularly active in this respect. That the
regulatory landscape for herbal medicines has changed substan-
tially has required a full revision of the ‘Introduction to the
Monographs’, which in this edition can be found under 'How to
Use Herbal Medicines'; this now includes details of new
legislation in Europe and a summary of regulations for herbal
medicines in several other countries.

Although there are new regulations, in Europe there is a
transitional period until 2011 to allow manufacturers time to
comply with the new requirements, so issues relating to the
quality, safety and efficacy of herbal medicines are likely to
continue, even beyond the next edition of this book! Therefore,
with respect to quality, consumers and healthcare professionals
should be aware that the labels of unlicensed (unregulated) herbal

ues and should be able to advise

ealthcare choice

of functions or

Several

medicines may not reflect their actual contents, and that the
precise constituents of herbal medicines containing the same
herbal ingredient(s) but produced by different manufacturers are
likely to differ. The quality of herbal medicines (i.e. uniformity of
dose) is important for their efficacy: clinical trial results for a
particular herbal medicinal product cannot necessarily be
extrapolated to other products containing the same ingredient,
since their precise contents may differ. Details of herbal medicinal
products tested in clinical trials are provided in individual
monographs in this book. There is an increasing amount of
research comprising qualitative (i.e. the profile of chemical
constituents) and quantitative (quantity of chemical constituents)
analysis of herbal medicines and showing variations in the
contents of different manufacturers' products. For those herbal
ingredients for which there is substantial information, and for
commonly encountered herbal ingredients, we have summarised
the findings of these analyses
monographs on Quality of plant material and commercial
products (for examples, see the monographs on St John's wort
and Echinacea).

The quality of herbal medicines is also important as regards
their safety, and safety concerns with herbal medicines, including
intrinsic toxicity as well as problems due to adulteration and
contamination, continue to arise. This edition includes new
monographs on kava (Piper methysticum) and greater celandine
(Chelidonium majus) and a fully revised monograph on black
cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa), all of which have been associated
with hepatotoxic reactions. The concurrent use of herbal and
other medicines remains a major concern for healthcare profe:
sionals because of the potential for important drug interactions.
Evidence of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interactions
between St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) and 'conven-
tional’ medicines emerged in the year 2000 and, since then, reports
have been made of interactions between other herbal medicines
and conventional medicines, typically those with a low therapeutic
index. At present though, there has been little formal clinical
research into interactions between herbal and other medicines,
and information relies mainly on spontaneous reports and, to
some extent, findings of in-vitro studies of the effects of certain
rbal medicines on cytochrome P450 drug-metabolising enzymes.
Information on known and potential interactions is summarised
in the Appendices to this book, and further information and detail
is provided in the individual monographs.

Continual vigilance and reporting of adverse effects, including
interactions and problems related to poor quality, associated with
herbal medicines is essential in order to detect safety issues as
soon as possible. In the UK, pharmacists and other  state-
registered healthcare providers and, since 2005, patients and
consumers, can report suspected adverse drug reactions (ADRs)
associated with herbal medicines directly to the Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) using ‘yellow
card' report forms. These forms are included in the British
National Formulary and available on-line (see www.mhra.gov.uk),
and for the first time several are included in this book so that they
may be more readily at hand to healthcare professionals using this
book for information on adverse effects experienced and reported

in a new section in some

>
e

----- PAGE 10 -----
to them by consumers and patients. Many other countries have an
ADR reporting scheme similar to that of the UK and encourage
reporting of suspected herbal ADRs, at least by healthcare
professionals. The World Health Organization's Uppsala Mon-
itoring Centre in Sweden receives such reports from over 70
countries, including Australia, Canada, France, Germany, New
Zealand, UK and the USA, an
information for a number of herbal medicines for which there
have been important safety concerns (see individual monographs).

The effects of herbal medicines are, of course, brought about by
their chemical constituents. It may not be fully recognised by some
individuals that while, for example, aspirin tablets contain a
measured quantity (within narrow limits) of a single active
chemical compound, tablets (and indeed other dosage forms) of a
herbal medicine typically contain a complex mixture of many
(hundreds or more) chemical compounds. In order to appreciate
the quality control and quality assurance procedur
essential for herbal medicinal products and to understand their
pharmacological and toxicological effects, it is necessary to be
aware of the different types of chemical constituents,
kaloids, glycosides, flavonoids, etc, that may be present, as
well as the individual constituents in specific herbal medicines.
This edition includes two new features which provide this
information: chemical structural formulae are included with
virtually every monograph to supplement the textual information
on constituents, and a new chapter 'Chemical Constituents of
Plants Used as Herbal Medicines' has been added, which
summarises the different groups of natural product compounds
(e.g. alkaloids, glycosides, flavonoids, terpenes) that are present in
medicinal plants.

The first edition of this book provided information on herbal
medicines available in pharmacies in the UK, whereas we have
expanded the scope of this third edition to include new
monographs on herbal medicines that may not necessarily be
found in UK pharmacies but which are of public or professional
interest. Hence, this edition includes new monographs on

we have summarised this

that are

eS

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to the following Pharmaceutical Press staff for
their active help and encouragement with this book: Tamsin
Cousins, Simon Dunton, Louise McIndoe, Karl Parsons, Linda
Paulus, Paul Weller and John Wilson. We also thank Marion
Edsall for her proofreading work, and Lida Teng, PhD student at
the School of Pharmacy, University of London, for administrative
assistance.

Photographs are included with kind permission of Thomas
Brendler (www.plantaphile.com, Germany). Some of the photo-
graphs were supplied to Plantaphile by Larry Allain, Pierre
Cabalion, Alvin Diamond, Ulrich Feiter, Trish Flaster, Nigel
Gericke, Michael Guiry, MJ Hatfield, Gary Kauffman, Diane
Robertson, Joachim Schmitz, Stan Shebs and Michael Wink.

In addition, the photograph of blue flag is reproduced with kind
permission of Brian Mathew, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, UK,
Honorary Research Associate, and the photograph of nettle with
kind permission of Dr Tom Cope, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew,
UK.

Preface to the Third Edition

butterbur (Petasites hybridus), greater celandine (Chelidonium
majus), kava (Piper methysticum) and rhodiola (Rhodiola rosea).
Kava has been prohibited in the UK since 2002 because of its
association with hepatotoxic reactions; we include a monograph
here as it is possible that consumers and patients in the UK may
obtain supplies from overseas. At least 10 existing monographs on
popular herbal medicines have been completely revised, sub-
stantial updates and revisions have been made to over 20 other
monographs, and minor amendments have been made to all
remaining monographs. In addition, in response to comments
from practising pharmacists, academics and other users of this
ook, this edition includes photographs of the crude herbal drugs
which feature in the monographs as well as, for many
monographs, the plants from which they originate. Also for the
first time the individual monographs contain information from
several countries on marketed products containing the respective
erbal ingredients. We hope that these new features will be both
useful and pleasing to the eye! As always, keeping a book up to
date is a never-ending task, and the explosion in the scientific
iterature on herbal medicines makes this ever more difficult. In
the last five years, there have been over 500 scientific papers
published on St John's wort alone, and it is impossible and
undesirable to describe each of them. The need for a book that
reviews and summarises all this information has, perhaps, never
en greater and we hope that this edition will provide healthcare
professionals with the information they need to be able to advise
their patients, competently and confidently, on the safe, effective
and appropriate use of herbal medicines.

Constructive criticism of the contents of Herbal Medicines is
welcome and may be used to assist in the preparation of any
future editions. The reader is asked to send any comments to the
publisher by post or email (pharmpress@rpsgb.org).

Joanne Barnes, Linda Anderson, David Phillipson
Auckland and London
May 2007

Most of the herbal plant photographs were taken in major
European botanical gardens. Photographs of the drug material
were taken from materials supplied by reputable German herbal
medicinal product suppliers.

We are also very grateful to Dr Christine Leon (Royal Botanic
Gardens, Kew, UK), who provided helpful advice and suggestions
on appropriate botanical names and synonyms to include. Dr
Leon was able to call on the specialist advice of the following
colleagues, whom we thank. Staff at the Royal Botanic Gardens,
Kew, UK: Dr Tom Cope, Dr Aaron Davis, Dr Nicholas Hind, Dr
Sven Landrein, Dr Gwilym Lewis, Eve Lucas, Dr Alan Paton, Dr
Nigel Taylor. Kew Honorary Research Associates: Jill Cowley, Dr
Phillip Cribb, Dr David Frodin, Brian Mathew. Dr Leon and
colleagues also provided helpful comments on the photographs.

We thank all of the above individuals for their support with this
publication. If there are any errors or omissions in the content of
this book, then they are our responsibility.

----- PAGE 11 -----
- About the Authors

Dr Joanne Barnes
BPharm, PhD, MRPharmS, RegPharmNZ, MPSNZ, FLS

Joanne Barnes obtained a degree in Pharmacy from the University
of Nottingham in 1988, a postgraduate Certificate in Pharma-
covigilance and Pharmacoepidemiology from the London School
of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine in 1999, and a PhD in
Pharmacy from the School of Pharmacy, University of London in
2001. She has been registered as a pharmacist with the Royal
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain since 1989, was made a
Fellow of the Linnean Society of London in 2003 and achieved
registration as a pharmacist in New Zealand in 2007. She was
Research Fellow in Complementary Medicines in the Department
of Complementary Medicine, University of Exeter (1996-1999),
Research Fellow (1999-2002) and Lecturer in Phytopharmacy
(2002-2005) in the Centre for Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy,
School of Pharmacy, University of London, UK and, since 2005,
has been Associate Professor in Herbal Medicines, School of
Pharmacy, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of
Auckland, New Zealand. Her research focuses on the utilisation,
efficacy and safety of herbal medicines, particularly in exploring
issues related to pharmacovigilance. Before embarking on an
academic career, she practised as a hospital clinical pharmacist, as
a medical information pharmacist in the pharmaceutical industry
and worked in pharmaceutical publishing.

She was Editor (1996-1999) and a co-founder of the journal
Focus on Alternative and Complementary Therapies (FACT), Co-
editor (2003-2005) of Complementary Therapies in Medicine and
is an Associate Editor of Phytochemistry Letters and a member of
the editorial boards of Phytotherapy Research, Drug Safety and
the International Journal of Pharmacy Practice. She is a member
of the Health Canada Natural Health Product Directorate's
Expert Resource Group, the RPSGB's complementary medicine
working group, and was a member of the UK Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency's Independent Review
Panel for the Classification of Borderline Products (2000-2005).

Dr Linda A Anderson
BPharm, PhD, FRPharmS

Linda Anderson obtained her first degree in Pharmacy and her
PhD in Pharmacognosy at the Welsh School of Pharmacy in
Cardiff. She was a postdoctoral research and teaching fellow at the
School of Pharmacy, University of London from 1981 to 1987.

Dr Anderson joined the Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency (MHRA, Department of Health, UK;
formerly Medicines Control Agency) in 1987.

Within the MHRA, she was initially involved in the assessment
of new chemical entities and is now mainly involved with abridged
applications and has specific responsibility for herbal products.
She is Principal Assessor to the Committee on Safety of
Medicine's (CSM) Expert Advisory Group on Chemistry,
Pharmacy and Standards (CPS) and is UK delegate to the
European Committee on Human Medicinal Products (CHMP)
Quality Working Party. Dr Anderson is also UK Delegate to the
European Medicines Agency (EMEA) Committee on Herbal
Medicinal Products (HMPC), a member of the Herbal Medicines
Advisory Committee (HMAC) of the MHRA, and is Vice-Chair

of the British Pharmacopoeia Expert Advisory Group on Herbals
and Complementary Medicines. She is a member of the Royal
Pharmaceutical Society's Science Committee's working group on
complementary/alternative medicine.

Linda Anderson has been awarded a Fellowship of the Royal
Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain (2001).

Professor J David Phillipson
BSc(Pharm), MSc, PhD, DSc, FRPharmS, FLS

David Phillipson graduated BSc in Pharmacy (1956), MSc (1959),
and DSc (1979) from the University of Manchester, and PhD (1965)
from the University of London. He was Lecturer in Pharmacognosy
(1961-1972) at the Department of Pharmacy, Chelsea College,
London, and Senior Lecturer (1973-1979), Reader in Phytochem-
istry (1979-1981), and Professor and Head of the Department of
Pharmacognosy (1981-1994) at the School of Pharmacy, University
of London. On retirement he became Emeritus  Profe:
Pharmacognosy. In 1995 he was appointed as Wilson T S Wang
Distinguished International Visiting Professor at the Chinese
University of Hong Kong from January to June. His research
included investigations of the chemistry and biological activities of
natural products from higher plants with special interests in indole
and isoquinoline alkaloids, and plants used in traditional
medicines for the treatment of malaria and other protozoal
diseases. Collaboration with the pharmaceutical industry included
the application of radioligand—receptor binding assays in the search
for natural products with activity in the central nervous system.
David Phillipson has received awards from the Phytochemical
Society of Europe including the Tate and Lyle Award (1982), Medal
(1994), and the Pergamon Prize for Creativity in Plant Biochemistry
(1996). He was awarded the Korber Foundation Prize for
Achievement in European Science (1989) in collaboration with
Professor MH Zenk of the University of Munich and four other
European colleagues, was presented with the Harrison Memoria
Medal of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain (1999),
and with the Sir Hans Sloane Medal of the Faculty of the History
and Philosophy of Medicine and Pharmacy, Society of Apothecaries
(2001). In 1985 he was Science Chairman of the British
Pharmaceutical Conference and has been Secretary (1977-1982),
Vice-Chairman (1982-1984, 1986-1988) and Chairman (1984—
1986) of the Phytochemical Society of Europe. He has been awarded
Fellowships of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain
(1980) and of the School of Pharmacy, University of London (1998).
He has supervised 33 PhD students and 11 postdoctoral
researchers, publishing some 222 full research papers, 150 short
communications, 42 review articles, and has edited six books on
natural products. Collaborative research was established with
scientists in many countries world-wide and in 1989 he was
appointed Honorary Professor of the Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences at the Institute of Medicinal Plant Research
and Development, Beijing, China. For 19 years he was a member of
the Natural Products Group of the International Foundation for
Science, Sweden, helping to award research grants to individual
young scientists in developing countries. He has been a member of
a number of national and international committees, including the
Herbal Medicines Advisory Committee (HMAC) of the MHRA.

or of

----- PAGE 12 -----
= How to Use Herbal Medicines

Purpose and Scope

Herbal Medicines is intended to serve as a reference work for
pharmacists, doctors, nurses and other healthcare professionals,
sting in their provis
medicines to members of the public. Herbal Medicines is not
intended to represent a guide to self-diagnosis and self-treatment
with herbal medicines, and should not be used as such.

The term ‘herbal medicine! or ‘herbal medicinal product' (or,
less frequently, ‘herbal remedy!) is used to describe a marketed
product, whereas ‘herbal ingredient! refers to an individual herb
that is present in a herbal medicine.
describe a specific chemical constituent of a herbal ingredient.
Thus, as examples, Valerian Tablets are a herbal product, valerian
root is a herbal ingredient, and valtrate is a herbal constituent of
valerian.

The main criterion for inclusion of a herbal ingredient in the
text is its presence in herbal medicines that are used in the UK,
particularly those which are sold through pharmacies. In addition,
herbs that have recently been the subject of media or scientific
interest have been included. The aim of Herbal Medicines is to
draw the attention of the reader to the reputed actions and uses of
herbal ingredients, and to whether or not these have been
substantiated by evidence from preclinical and/or clinical studies.
In addition, any known or potential toxicities of herba
ingredients, and how these may influence the suitability for
inclusion in herbal medicines or for use with conventiona

on of advice on the use of herbal

a

‘Herbal constituent! is used to

medicines, are also discussed.

Introduction to the Monographs

The introductory section to the 152 monographs on the individua
herbal ingredients contained in Herbal Medicines di s the
legal aspects of herbal medicines including licensed medicines and
non-licensed products in the UK and within the European Union
(EU). All medicines are a: ed for their quality, safety and

Sus

efficacy and, in the context of herbal medicines, there are often
ssment of

specific criteria which are not encountered in the as
other medicines. As a first line in ensuring the safety and efficacy
of herbal medicines there is a series of guidelines for quality
ssment and this is briefly discussed. In terms of safety, it is a
popular conception that because herbs are 'natural' then they must
also be safe. This is a misconception, and it is emphasised that
se

a

some herbal ingredients have the capability to cause advet
effects, whilst some are decidedly toxic. Within the context of the
152 monographs on herbal ingredients, most have documented
adverse effects, or the potential to interact with other medication,
and few can be recommended for use during pregnancy.

Tables in the Introduction and appendices at the end of the
monographs summarise the safety aspects of these herbal
ingredients and give information on biologically active herbal
ingredients and their active principles. Clinical efficacy has not
been established for the majority of the herbal ingredients
described in this handbook and, in some instances, there is a
lack of documentation for chemical constituents and for
pharmacological actions.

The Herbal Monographs

Some 152 monographs on individual herbal ingredients found in
herbal products are included, the title used for the monograph
being their preferred common name. A data sheet-type format
was chosen for the monographs because it was felt important to
arrange the relevant information in a format familiar to
pharmacists, doctors, nurses and other healthcare prof
Although conventional data sheets are written for products, it was
decided to draw up the data sheets for herbal ingredients and not
for specific products, although where possible details are provided
of the specific products assessed in the studies discussed.

The headings used in the herbal monographs are listed below
ith a brief explanation of the information provided under them.

ionals.

w

Monograph title

Common name for the herbal ingredient; if more than one common name exists,
this is the chosen preferred name.

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

This section is designed to give the reader an overall summary of the monograph
contents, indicating the extent of phytochemical, pharmacological and clinical
data available for the herbal ingredient, whether or not proposed herbal uses are
justified, concerns over safety and, based on this information, whether or not the
herbal ingredient is considered suitable for use as a herbal medicine

Species (Family)

Preferred botanical name with authority, together with the plant family.

Synonym(s)

Other common or botanical names.

Part(s) Used

Plant part(s) traditionally used in herbal medicine.

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Key pharmacopoeial monographs and texts on herbal medicines.

UK Legal Category

Legal category of the herb with respect to licensed products. For the majority of
herbal ingredients this will be the General Sales List (GSL).

Constituents

Main documented chemical constituents grouped into categories such as alkaloids
(type specified), flavonoids, iridoid glycosides, saponins, tannins, triterpenes,
volatile oil and other constituents for miscellaneous and minor chemical
components.

table continues

----- PAGE 13 -----
w How to Use Herbal Medicines

Chemical structural formulae
Quality of plant material and commercial products
Food Use

Herbal Use

Photographs

Dosage

Pharmacological Actions
Side-effects, Toxicity
Contra-indications, Warnings

Preparations

References

Chemical structural formulae are included for key constituents of herbal ingredients
for virtually every monograph. This information supplements the textual
information on constituents.

This section has been included for several herbal ingredients commonly
encountered in commercial products. It describes studies examining the variation
in phytochemical content of crude plant material and marketed products and other
aspects relating to product quality, such as differences between actual and labelled
content of commercial products.

Provides an indication as to whether the herbal ingredient is used in foods. The
Council of Europe (COE) category, which reflects the opinion of the COE on the
suitability of the herbal ingredient for use as a food flavouring, is quoted where
applicable.

States the reputed actions and uses of the herbal ingredients, based on information
from several sources. In some instances, current investigations of particular interest
are included.

Provided for most of the monographs for the crude drug substance and the plant
from which it originates. As we do not provide botanical, macroscopical or
microscopical descriptions, these photographs are for illustrative purposes only and
are not intended to be used for identification purposes.

States the traditional dose of the herbal ingredient, mainly from the British Herbal
Pharmacopoeia (BHP), German Commission E and European Scientific Co-
operative on Phytotherapy (ESCOP) monographs, giving doses for plant part used
(e.g. herb, rhizome, leaf), liquid extract and infusion. Where possible, dosages
typically used in clinical trials are included.

Describes any documented pharmacological actions for the herbal ingredient. This
is further divided into a section on In vitro and animal studies and a Clinical studies
section, which describes studies involving humans.

Details documented side-effects to the herbal ingredient and toxicological studies.
If side-effects or toxicity are generally associated with any of the constituents in the
herbal ingredient, or with its plant family, then these are mentioned here. See also
Table 1 and Table 2 in the Introduction.

Describes potential contra-indications and potential side-effects, and individuals
who may be more susceptible to a particular side-effect. This section should be
used in conjunction with Appendices 1-3. Comments on Pregnancy and lactation
are included; a summary is provided in Table 3 of the Introduction.

Describes product information from over 35 countries. Arranged in two sections,
the first section lists by country the proprietary names (product names) of
preparations containing the single herbal ingredient described in the monograph.
The second section lists by country products that contain multiple ingredients
including the herbal ingredient described in the monograph. Specific suppliers of
preparations are shown in Appendix 4 along with the supplier contact information
in Appendix 5.

References are included at the end of the text on each monograph. There is
considerable literature on herbal plants and general references have been selected
for use with the handbook. These General References, referred to as G1 to G88, are
listed after the Introduction. For some well-known herbal ingredients only general
references are cited. The majority of the monographs also contain specific
references which are cited at the end of each monograph.

----- PAGE 14 -----
Introduction

A general disillusionment with conventional medicines, coupled
with the desire for a 'natural' lifestyle has resulted in an increasing
utilisation of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM)
across the developed world.

A study of long-term trends in the use of CAM therapies in the
United States of America reported that the use of CAM therapies
has increased steadily since the 1950s.) Use of CAM. has
increased independent of gender, ethnicity and level of education,
but is more common in younger people. The use of herbal
medicine increased particularly in the 1970s and then again in the
1990s. The report concluded that the continuing demand for
CAM will affect delivery of healthcare for the foreseeable future.
More recent studies have confirmed that the prevalence of CAM
use has remained stable with about a third of US adults reported
to use CAM therapies.) The ten top-selling herbal products in
the US in 2004 have been reported as garlic, echinacea, saw
palmetto, ginkgo, soy, cranberry, ginseng, black cohosh, St John's
wort and milk thistle. The continuing use of CAM has also been
reported in South Australia where in 2004, CAMs were reportedly
used by over 50% of the population. Several other studies have
documented the growing use of CAM in the United Kingdom,
with the most common complementary therapies reported as
acupuncture, homeopathy, herbal medicine and manipulative
therapies, chiropractic and osteopathy.

Estimates of the prevalence of CAM utilisation amongst the
general population in the UK range from 10.6%, for use of a
limited list of CAM therapies, to 46.6% for use of CAM therapies
or over-the-counter (OTC) CAM products. In its report on
complementary and alternative medicine, the House of Lords
Select Committee on Science and Technology's Subcommittee on
Complementary and Alternative Medicine highlighted the lack of
comprehensive information on the use of herbal medicines in the
UK. Estimates of herbal medicine use are available, but it is

difficult to gauge usage accurately as many products are
considered to be food supplements. Nevertheless, a national
telephone survey of a nationally representative sample of 1204
British adults found that around 7% of those contacted had used
herbal medicines in the previous year." In another cross-
sectional study, over 5000 randomly selected adults in England
were sent a postal questionnaire on their use of CAM.” Around
20% of the respondents had bought an over-the:
remedy in the previous 12 months.

Estimates of expenditure on herbal medicines vary, but data
generally show that the global market for herbal products has
grown rapidly in the past decade. In the USA, annual retail sales
of herbal medicines were estimated to be US$ 1.6 billion in
1994," and almost US$ 4 billion in 1998.2) However, since then
there have been reports that the US market has levelled off and in
some cases declined.» Retail sales of herbal products in the
European Union (EU) were estimated to be US$ 7000 million in
1996." A detailed analysis of the European herbal medicines
market reported that Germany and France make up more than
70% of the market share.''”’ In 1997, total sales of herbal products
(using wholesale prices) were US$1.8 billion in Germany and US
$1.1 billion in France. In the UK, retail sales of herbal products
are reported to have increased by 43% in the period from 1994 to

counter herbal

1998, with retail sales of licensed herbal medicinal products
reported to be £50 million in 1998.

Market reports from 2003 indicated a growth in the UK sales of
complementary medicines of almost 60% over the previous five
years with an estimated value of £130 million. Herbal medicines
were reported to represent 60% of the market.''®
indicate that the UK market has continued to expand by 45%
from 1999 to 2004, with sales of herbal medicines accounting for
more than 50%, having risen by 16% since 2002.”

These figures demonstrate that herbal medicinal products are
being used increasingly by the general public on a self-selection
basis to either replace or complement conventional medicines.
Against this background of increasing usage of herbal medicines
by the public, a number of major public health issues have raised
concerns about these products and have highlighted the need for
healthcare professionals to have up-to-date scientific information
on the quality, safety and efficacy of these products. The
substitution of toxic Aristolochia species in traditional Chinese
medicines (TCM) has resulted in cases of serious renal toxicity
and renal cancer in Europe, China and America.''®) The
emergence of interactions between Hypericum perforatum (see
St John's wort) and certain prescription medicines has necessitated
regulatory action world-wide.”

Serious cases of liver damage including a number of fatalities
associated with the use of Piper methysticum (see Kava) have led
to restrictions on its use in many countries.2” Frequent reports of
the presence of toxic heavy metals and pharmaceutical substances
in Ayurvedic and traditional Chinese medicines reflect a global
problem of poor quality of many herbal products.?"

Pharmacis
rational and safe use of all medicines. Studies in the UK, Australia
and the US show that pharmacists are frequently involved in the
supply of herbal medicines.°**

In order to fulfil this role, pharmacists need to be knowledge-
able about herbal medicines and should have ac
information in order to advise patients and the public on the safe,
effective and appropriate use of herbal preparations. The need to
be reliably informed of the quality, safety and efficacy of herbal
medicines has been highlighted.°” 7” Also, many other healthcare
professionals are becoming increasingly aware of their patients!
use of herbal medicines and need to be informed of the suitability
of these products for use as medicines.

This handbook brings together in one text a series of
monographs on 152 herbs commonly present in herbal medicina
products sold through pharmacies in the UK. Three appendices
are also presented, grouping together herbs with specific actions,
and highlighting potential interactions with conventional medi-
cines.

As a preface to the monographs, an overview of UK an
European legislation concerning herbal products is provided,
together with issues pertaining to their quality, safety and efficacy.
In addition to retail purchase, herbs can be obtained by picking
the wild plant or from a herbal practitioner. This handbook does
not discuss the self-collection of plant material for use as a herba
remedy or the prescribing of herbal medicines by herba
practitioners.

» Recent reports

s need to be able to advise the consumer on the

s to reliable

----- PAGE 15 -----
Introduction

Herbal Medicines and Phytotherapy

Herbal medicines are also referred to as herbal remedies, herbal

products, herbal medicinal products, phytomedicines, phytother-
apeutic agents and phytopharmaceuticals. The use of herbal
medicines in an evidence- or science-based approach for the
treatment and prevention of disease is known as (rational)
phytotherapy. This approach to the use of herbal medicines
contrasts with traditional medical herbalism which uses herbal
medicines in a holistic manner and mainly on the basis of their
empirical and traditional uses. Although these two approaches —
traditional/holistic and rational/evidence-based — are entirely
different, in some instances they use the same terminology. For
example, traditional herbalism is also described as 'phytotherapy'
and refers to preparations of plant material as 'herbal medicines’.
Today, a continuum between these approaches exists and many
herbalists also use scientific evidence to support their traditional
use of herbal medicines. Plants have been used medicinally for
thousands of years by cultures all over the world. According to the
World Health Organization, 80% of the world's population uses
plant-based remedies as their primary form of healthcare; in
some countries, herbal medicines are still a central part of the
medical system, such as Ayurvedic medicine in India and
traditional Chinese medicine in China. Herbal medicine has a
long history and tradition in Europe.

Herbal homeopathic remedies are
mistaken by the layperson to be similar. However, homeopathy
is based on the principle of ‘like should be treated by like', and
involves the administration of minute doses of remedies that, in
larger doses, produce symptoms in a healthy person mimicking
those expressed by people who are ill. Many, but not all,
homeopathic remedies originate from plants. By contrast, herbal
medicine (phytotherapy) involves the use of dried plant material
or extracts of plant parts in therapeutic doses to treat the
symptoms exhibited. In this latter respect, it is similar to
conventional medicine.

medicines and often

Regulatory Controls on Herbal Medicines

Herbal medicinal products in Europe

Herbal products are available in all Member States of the
European Union (EU), although the relative size of their markets
Since the late 1980s, the regulation of
herbal products has been a major issue within the EU because of
the differences between Member States in the way herbal products
are classified and the difficulties this might present in the
completion of the single market for pharmaceuticals.

According to Council Directive 2001/83/EEC, as amended, a
medicinal product is defined as 'any substance or combination of
substances presented as having properties for treating or
preventing disease in human beings or any substance or
combination of substances which may be administered to human

varies between countrie:

beings with a view to restoring, correcting or modifying
physiological functions by exerting a pharmacological, immuno-
logical or metabolic action, or to making a diagnosis.'°”
Herbal products are considered as medicinal products if they
fall within the definition of the Directive. However, the legal
ification is complicated by the fact that in most Member
States herbal products are available both as medicinal products
with therapeutic claims and also as food/dietary supplements
without medicinal claims. The situation is further complicated in
that some Member States, including the UK (see Current
regulatory position of herbal products in the UK), have national

clas

provisions which permit certain herbal medicinal products to be
exempt from the licensing provisions under specific conditions. In
general, in all Member States, herbal products are classified as
medicinal products if they claim therapeutic or prophylactic
indications.

The advent of the new pan-European marketing authorisation
system in 1993 raised questions with regard to herbal products
and, in particular, concerns that major differences
classification/assessment would hinder free circulation within
the EU. The new systems for marketing authorisations involve
three procedures: centralised, decentralised (mutual recognition)
and national.°***) The centralised procedure is mandatory for
biotechnology products and since November 2005 was mandatory
for orphan medicinal products and any medicinal product for
human use containing new active substances (i.e. one not
previously authorised in the Community) for the treatment of
AIDS, cancer, neuro-degenerative disease and diabetes.° The

in their

decentralised procedure or mutual recognition system involv
agreement of assessment between the Member States involved;

this procedure became compulsory from January 1998, for
products requesting authorisation in more than one Member
State. Since then, simultaneous national applications have been
possible, but the mutual recognition system automatically
becomes involved once an authorisation has been granted in the
first Member State. The original intention was to retain existing
national procedures for medicinal products requesting authorisa-
tion in a single Member State only. However, the European
Commission agreed that national procedures could continue for
bibliographic applications, including those for herbal products
until the harmonisation issues could be resolved.

In 1997, upon the initiative of the European Parliament, the
European Commission and the (then) European Medicines
Evaluation Agency (EMEA), now European Medicines Agency,
an ad hoc Working Group on Herbal Medicinal Products
(HMPWG) was established at the EMEA. The main thrust of
the HMPWG was the protection of public health by preparing
guidance to help facilitate mutual recognition of marketing
authorisations in the field of herbal medicines, and to minimise
CHMP (Committee on Human Medicinal Products) formerly the
Committee on Proprietary Medicinal Products (CPMP) arbitra-
tions.

A major study undertaken by the AESGP (Association of the
European Self-medication Industry) in 1998 at the request of the
European Commission confirmed the different approaches taken
by Member States in the regulation of herbal medicinal
products." Different traditions in the therapeutic use of herbal
preparations, coupled with different national approaches to their
sment, have resulted in differences in the availability of some
herbal medicines. For example, ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) is available
as a prescription-only medicine in some EU countries, but as a
food supplement in others. Similarly, St John's wort (Hypericum
perforatum) is accepted as a treatment for depression in some
Member States, but not in others.

The AESGP study revealed that, in general, herbal medicinal
products were either fully licensed with efficacy proven by clinical
trials or by bibliography (in accordance with Article 10.1 a (i) of
Council Directive 2001/83/EC), or that herbal products had a
more or less simplified proof of efficacy, according to their
national use. Furthermore, the study found major discrepancies
between Member States in the classification of individual herbal
preparations and products into one of these categories, as well as
in the requirements for obtaining a marketing authorisation
(product licence). The report highlighted the need for clarification

----- PAGE 16 -----
of the regulatory framework and harmonisation of the regulatory
requirements to ensure that herbal medicinal products could have
access to the single market for pharmaceuticals.

An important initiative in the harmonisation proce:
the formation of the European Scientific Cooperative on
Phytotherapy (ESCOP), an organisation representing national
associations for phytotherapy. ESCOP was founded in 1989 by six
EU national scientific associations with the objective of establish-
ing a scientific umbrella organisation to provide harmonised
criteria for the assessment of herbal medicinal products, to
support scientific research and contribute to the acceptance of
phytotherapy in Europe.°°*”

ESCOP now comprises 13 national associations across Europe,
and the American Botanical Council. The ESCOP Scientific
Committee has published 80 monographs for individual herbal
drugs; the monographs follow the European Summary of Product
Characteristics (SPC) format.°*) The EMEA Herbal Medicinal
Products Working Party (HMPWP) formerly used the ESCOP
monographs as a basis for its work in developing core SPCs from
ESCOP monographs. The HMPWP has now been superseded by
the Herbal Medicinal Products Committee (HMPC) as discussed
below and the collaboration with ESCOP continues in accordance
with the new EU regulations.

s has been

New regulations for traditional herbal medi

in the EU

al products

From the late 1980s, the need for a new regulatory framework for
herbal products has been under discussion supported by the
European Parliament and the European Commi
generally accepted that a significant number of herbal medicina
products did not fulfil the requirements for marketing authoriza-
tions. In September 1999, the European Pharmaceutical Commit-
tee set up a working group of Member States to investigate the
possibility of a directive for traditionally used medicines. Work
commenced in April 2000 and a new EU Directive on Traditiona
Herbal Medicinal Products 2004/24/EC came into force in Apri
2004 requiring Member States to implement registration schemes
by October 2005.°?) The aim is to remove the differences which
create obstacles to the free movement of medicinal products in the
EU, while ensuring protection for public health. For unlicensed
herbal medicines legally on the market on 30 April 2004, the
Directive provides a seven-year transitional period to allow
companies time to meet the new requirements. The new Directive
provides a framework for the regulation of traditionally used
herbal medicinal products requiring them to meet specific and
appropriate standards of safety and quality and for the product to
be accompanied by suitable information to ensure its safe use.
Registered products are required to be suitable for self-medication
without the need for the intervention of a medical practitioner.
The normal requirement for medicines to be proven to be
efficacious, as required under Directive 2001/83/EC for a market-
ing authorisation, is replaced by a requirement to demonstrate 30
years’ traditional use for the required medicinal indication; at least
15 years of this usage must have been within the EU.
Registration applications have to include a bibliographic review
of the safety data associated with the use of the herbal product in
a particular indication. In addition, this review will need to be
accompanied by an expert report on the safety data submitted.
The normal quality requirements applicable to licensed medicines
will apply, including good manufacturing practice (GMP) and
European Pharmacopoeia standards. Labelling and package
leaflets for registered products will be required to include

on. It was

Introduction

information and instructions about the safe use of the product
and will include a statement to the effect that the product is based
on long-standing use. In addition to the herbal ingredients,
vitamins and minerals can be added provided that they are
ancillary to the herbal active ingredients. Manufacturers will be
required to have in place an adequate pharmacovigilance system
to maintain records of all suspected adverse drug reactions
(ADRs) occurring world-wide and will have to report all ADRs to
the national regulatory licensing authority.

The Directive established a new European Committee at the
EMEA, the Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC)
with responsibilities to prepare Community monographs and a
Community list of herbal substances. A Community herbal
monograph comprises the committee's scientific opinion on a
given herbal medicinal product, based on its evaluation of
available scientific data (well-established use) or on the historic
use of that product in the European Community (traditional use).
For some herbal medicinal products, the Community monograph
established use and traditional use. The

will cover both well

Community monographs are intended to assist harmonisation of
requirements for bibliographic! marketing authorisation applica-
tions. When the HMPC has produced a draft Community
monograph it is released for public consultation on the EMEA
website, usually for a period of three months. The comments
ved are subsequently reviewed and the final version of the
mmunity herbal monograph is published.

The Community list will contain, for each herbal substance or
preparation, the indication, the specified strength and the
posology, the route of administration and any other information
necessary for the safe use of the herbal substance or preparation
used as an ingredient of a traditional medicinal product. The
Community list will provide a harmonised approach at EU level
for providing information on substance(s) or preparation(s) that
constitute traditional herbal medicinal products. The list will
cover substances and preparations that have been in medicinal use
for a sufficiently long time, and therefore considered not to be
harmful under normal conditions of use. List entries are also
released for public consultation on the EMEA website, usually for
a period of three months. Applicants for traditional registrations
can refer to the list rather than have to provide evidence of
traditional use and safety thus further simplifying the registration
procedure. Draft and adopted Community monographs are
available on the EMEA website.“

A simplified registration scheme was introduced in the UK in
October 2005 for traditional herbal medicinal products. A new
advisory committee, the Herbal Medicines Advisory Committee
(HMAC), has been established to advise Health Ministers on
issues relating to registration of traditional herbal medicinal
products and the safety and quality of unlicensed herbal remedi

rec

Current regulatory position of herbal products in the UK

Herbal products are available in the UK through various retail
outlets, such as pharmacies, health-food shops, mail order
companies, supermarkets, department stores and, increasingly,
via the internet. Some herbal products con solely of loose,
dried plant material; others are presented as pre-packaged
formulated products in a variety of pharmaceutical forms for
both internal (tablets, capsules, liquids) and external use (creams,
ointments) and may contain one or several herbal ingredients
which may be dried herbs or their extracts. The current regulatory
position is complicated by the fact that herbal products can fall
into one of three categories: licensed herbal products, those

----- PAGE 17 -----
Introduction

exempt from licensing and those marketed as food supplements.
In addition, from November 2005, the registration procedure for
traditional herbal medicinal products has introduced a further
category, that of 'registered products’.

The majority of herbal products are marketed without
medicinal claims either exempt from licensing (see Herbal
remedies exempt from licensing) or as food supplements. Those
supplied as food supplements are controlled under food legislation
whilst those exempt from licensing are controlled under medicines
legislation. Difficulties in defining the status of produc
occupying the borderline between medicines and foods have
resulted in similar products being marketed in both these
categories. Provided the products were marketed without reference
to medicinal claims, the Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency (MHRA; formerly Medicines Control Agency
(MCA)), the government body responsible for regulating medic-
inal products has, in the past, generally been satisfied that the
products were not subject to medicines legislation.“ However,
implementation of the definition of a medicinal product in
accordance with EC Directives has meant that greater emphasis is
now being placed on the nature of the herbal ingredients being
supplied as food supplements.

ensed herbal medicinal products

Almost all of the licensed herbal medicines on the UK market have
been available for some time and most originally held Product
Licences of Right (PLR). Following the implementation of the UK
Medicines Act in 1971, Product Licences of Right were issued to
all medicinal products already on the market in September 1971,
however, scientific assessment was not undertaken at the time the
PLR was granted. A subsequent review of all PLRs for safety,
quality and efficacy took place culminating in 1990. During the
UK review of herbal medicinal products holding a PLR, the
Licensing Authority agreed to accept bibliographic evidence of
efficacy for herbal medicinal products which were indicated for
minor, self-limiting conditions.) No evidence was required from

new clinical trials provided the manufacturers agreed to label their
products as 'a traditional herbal remedy for the symptomatic relief
of and to include the statement 'if symptoms persist consult
your doctor'. The Licensing Authority considered it inappropriate
to relax the requirements for proof of efficacy for herbal medicinal
products indicated for more serious conditions. Thus, evidence
was required from controlled clinical trials for herbal medicinal
products indicated for conditions considered inappropriate for
self-diagnosis and treatment. Many features of the new traditional
use registration scheme are similar to those applied during the
review of PLRs.

The MHRA regulates medicinal products for human use in
accordance with The Medicines (Marketing Authorisations etc.)
Amendment Regulations 2005, (The Regulations) and the
Medicines Act 1968.) The Medicines Act and secondary
legislation made under it remain the legal basis for other aspects
of medicines control including manufacturer and wholesale
dealers' authorisations, controls on sale and supply and controls
on promotion. Further explanation may be obtained by reference
to a chapter on herbal remedies in Dale and Appelbe's Pharmacy
Law and Ethics.

e

Applications for marketing authorisations (product licences)
for new herbal products are assessed by the MHRA for quality,
safety and efficacy in accordance with EC and UK legislation.
Specific EC guidelines exist on the quality, specifications and

34048) Few

manufacture of herbal medicinal product applications
for new marketing authorisations are successful and the
difficulties faced by herbal manufacturers in fulfilling the
regulatory requirements have led to the development of the new
simplified traditional use registration scheme outlined above. It
will continue to be possible to obtain a marketing authorisation
for a herbal medicinal product provided that the required data on
safety, quality and efficacy can be demonstrated.

Herbal remedies exempt from licensing

Under the Medicines Act, herbal remedies manufactured and sold
or supplied in accordance with specific exemptions set out in
Sections 12(1) or (2) or Article 2 of the Medicines (Exemptions
from Licences) (Special and Transitional Cases) Order 1971 (SI
1450) are exempt from the requirement to hold product
licences. The exempt products are those compounded and
supplied by herbalists on their own recommendation, those
comprised solely of dried, crushed or comminuted plants sold
under their botanical name with no written recommendations as
to their use, and those made by a holder of a Specials
Manufacturing Licence on behalf of a herbalist.

The exemptions are intended, for example, to give herbal
practitioners the flexibility they need to prepare their own
remedies for individual patients without the burden of licensing,
and to enable simple dried herbs to be readily available to the
public. Supply of herbal remedies by herbal practitioners is not
affected by the new regulations on traditional medicines.
Proposals for the reform of the regulation of unlicensed herbal
remedies made up to meet the needs of individual patients are
currently under consideration.”

At the present time, most manufactured over-the-counter herbal
medicines in the UK are sold under the exemptions provided for
by Section 12(2) of the Medicines Act. It has been recognised for
some time that the arrangements for unlicensed herbal medicinal
products do not afford sufficient protection for public health and
that there is a need to improve the regulatory position. The
MHRA is now of the view that the present regulatory
arrangements for unlicensed herbal medicines have significant
weaknesses.” The regime for unlicensed herbal products is
considered not to provide sufficient protection or information for
the public and there are no specific safeguards in place to ensure
adequate product quality and safety.”

The all party House of Lords Select Committee on Science and
Technology concluded: 'We are concerned about the safety
implications of an unregulated herbal sector and we urge that
all legislative avenues be explored to ensure better control of this
unregulated sector in the interests of public health."

Evidence of the risks to public health have continued to emerge
and in September 2004 the Committee on Safety of Medicines
(CSM) repeated an earlier warning about their concerns in
relation to the poor quality of some traditional Chinese medicines
on the UK market.”

The MHRA has indicated that it is the Government's intention
that, following the transitional period of the Traditional Use
Directive, Section 12 (2) would cease to provide a regulatory route
by which manufactured herbal medicinal products can reach the

market place without a traditional registration or product
(53)

licence.

Control of herbal ingredients in the UK

Most of the herbal ingredients used in licensed herbal medicines
have been used as traditional remedies for centuries without major

----- PAGE 18 -----
safety problems, and the majority is included in the General Sales
List (GSL).°* Potentially hazardous plants such as digitalis,
rauwolfia and nux vomica are specifically controlled under the
Medicines Act as prescription only medicines (POM), °°) and thus
are not available other than via a registered medical practitioner.
In addition, certain herbal ingredients are controlled under The
Medicines (Retail Sale and Supply of Herbal Remedies) Order
1977 SI 2130.°° This Order (Part I) specifies 25 plants which
cannot be supplied except via a pharmacy, and includes well-
known toxic species, such as Areca, Crotalaria, Dryopteris and
Strophanthus. In Part Il, the Order specifies plant species, such as
Aconitum, Atropa, Ephedra and Hyoscyamus, which can be
supplied by ‘herbal practitioners', and in Part III defines the
dosages and routes of administration permitted.

Legislation has been introduced to prohibit the use of
Aristolochia species or species likely to be confused with
Aristolochia in unlicensed medicin

37)
©” These measures were

introduced in the wake of cases of serious toxicity and evidence
showing widespread substitution of certain ingredients in
traditional Chinese medicines with Aristolochia (see Quality,
Safety and Efficacy of Herbal Medicines).

Following cases of serious liver damage suspected to be
associated with its consumption Piper methysticum (see Kava)
was prohibited in unlicensed herbal medicines in January 2003.°°
The MHRA has also announced the need to update the list of
herbal ingredients subject to restrictions or prohibitions
unlicensed medicines to take account of the herbal ingredients
used in traditional Chinese and Ayurvedic medicines.”

in use in

Regulatory control of herbal medicines world-wide

The World Health Organization (WHO) has conducted a recent
global survey on the regulatory control of herbal medicines and
has reported findings from 141 countries." This work provides a
valuable update to the earlier WHO reviews and illustrates the
wide differences in the approach to regulation between these
(61,62) The recent survey confirms that during the past
four years many countries have established, or initiated, the
process of establishing national policy and regulations regarding
herbal medicines. The most important challenges faced by
countries were those related to regulatory status, ass
safety and efficacy, quality control and safety monitoring. In
response to requests from Member States, WHO has resolved to
provide technical support for the development of methodology to
monitor or ensure product safety, efficacy and quality, preparation
of guidelines, and promotion of information exchange. WHO
guidelines have recently been developed in a number of important
areas including consumer information, pharmacovigilance and
good agricultural and collection practices (GACP).'°* ®)

Herbal products are well established as phytomedicines in some
countries, whereas in others they are regarded as foods, and
therapeutic claims are not allowed. In the context of this book, it
should be noted that many of the herbs included in the
monographs are of economic importance in some non-European
countries, particularly Australia, Canada and the USA.

In Australia, therapeutic goods for human use which are
imported or manufactured are subject to the Therapeutic Goods
Act, 1989 and all therapeutic goods imported into, supplied in or
exported from Australia must be included in the Australian
Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG).® Herbal medicines,
including traditional medicines such as Ayurvedic medicines and
traditional Chinese medicines (TCM) are regulated as comple-
mentary medicines. For the purpose of labelling requirements,

countries

S.

sment of

Introduction

herbs are included in the List of Australian Approved Names for
Pharmaceutical Substances, which is published by the Therapeutic
Goods Administration. The Australian system has a two-tiered
approach based on risk. Low risk medicines, which include most
complementary medicines, are included in the ARTG as listed
medicines. These medicines are not evaluated before they are
market, but are checked to ensure that they
comply with certain legislative requirements. Listed medicines
have limited therapeutic indications, for example health enhance-
ment, reduction in risk of a disease, disorder or condition,
reduction in frequency of a discrete event, aiding or assisting
management of a symptom, disease, disorder or condition, relief
of symptoms. Indications and claims referring to treatment,
management, cure or prevention of a disease, disorder, or
condition or reference to a serious form of a disease are generally
not permitted for listed medicines. Those medicines deemed to be
higher risk are assessed individually for safety, quality and efficacy
prior to marketing.

In Canada, new regulations, the Natural Health Products
Regulations, came into force in January 2004.” Products that fall
within the new regulations include herbal remedies, homeopathic
medicines, vitamins, minerals, traditional medicines, probiotics,
amino acids and essential fatty acids. The new regulations
introduce a system of product licensing, site licensing, GMP,
adverse reaction reporting and requirements for labelling. Persons
marketing products before January 2004 have a transition period
of two years to comply with the site licence requirements of the
regulations and those products with a valid Drug Identification
Number, from the previous regulatory regime, have six years to
obtain a product licence under the new regulations. Product
licence applications are assessed for safety and efficacy and
different types of claims can be proposed, e.g. therapeutic claims,
risk reduction claims or structure-function claims supported by
traditional use or non-traditional use.

In the USA, the majority of medicinal herbs and their products
are regulated like foods as dietary supplements, under the 1994
Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA).*%?
Whilst medicinal claims cannot be made for the products,
labelling may describe effects on general well-being. Unlike new
medicines, dietary supplements do not generally have to go
through review by the Food and Drug Administration for safety
and effectiveness or be approved before they can be marketed.
However, manufacturers must provide premarket notice and
evidence of safety for any supplements they plan to sell that
contain dietary ingredients that were not on the market before
DSHEA was passed. Concerns have been raised about the
effectiveness of the DSHEA legislation following the emergence
of major safety issues arising with unsafe ingredients e.g. ephedra,
lack of GMP, poor labelling and inadequate reporting of adverse
(67) Th response, the FDA has announced the
development of strategies to monitor and evaluate product and
ingredient safety; to assure product quality (current good
manufacturing practice regulations (CGMP); and to improve
product labelling.” 7”)

It is apparent that not only is the regulation of medicinal herbs
different from one country to another, but also that the regulatory
processes are not necessarily ideal and are under current review.

released on to the

se!

reactions.

Quality, Safety and Efficacy of Herbal Medi

In order to ensure public health, medicinal products must be safe,
efficacious and of suitable quality for use. To obtain a marketing
authorisation (product licence) within the EU, manufacturers of

es

----- PAGE 19 -----
Introduction

herbal medicinal products are required to demonstrate that their
products meet acceptable standards of quality, safety and efficacy.

Quality

Over the past decade the quality of herbal products has continued
to be a major concern. The importance of quality in ensuring the
safety and efficacy of herbal products has been reviewed
“ved, (2573-78)
extensively.

Problems with unregulated herbal products
The vast majority of quality-related problems are associated with
unregulated herbal products. There is substantial evidence that
many ethnic medicines, in particular, those used in traditional
Chinese medicine (TCM) and traditional Asian medicines
(Ayurvedic and Unani), lack effective quality controls and may
give rise to serious public health concerns. The problems include
deliberate or accidental inclusion of prohibited or restricted
ingredients, substitution of ingredients, contamination with toxic
substances and differences between the labelled and actual
contents. These problems are further compounded by demand
outstripping supply of good quality ingredients, confusing
nomenclature over plant species, cultural difference:
over toxicity and traditional practices such as substituting one
ingredient for another having a reportedly similar action.

Although individual herbs present in traditional Chinese
medicines and traditional Asian medicines are not the subject of
monographs in this book, they do illustrate the problems that may
be associated with the quality and safety of herbal medicines.

of view

Substitution and adulteration

Aristolochia Exposure to Aristolochia species in unlicensed herbal
medicines has resulted in cases of nephrotoxicity and
carcinogenicity in Europe, China, Japan and the USA."*
Concerns were first raised about the effects of products
containing aristolochic acids in Belgium where, since 1993,
over 100 cases of irreversible nephropathy have been reported
in young women using a preparation claimed to aid weight
loss. The nephrotoxicity was traced to the inadvertent use of
the toxic Aristolochia fangchi root in the formulation as a
substitute for Stephania tetrandra. Aristolochic acids, the toxic
components of Aristolochia spec
nephrotoxic, carcinogenic and mutagenic. The International
Agency for Research on Cancer classifies products containing
Aristolochia species as human carcinogens.” Several of the

Belgian patients have subsequently developed urothelial cancer
80-84)

s, are known to be

as a result of exposure to the toxic aristolochic acids."
Seven cases of nephropathy involving substitution of
Aristolochia fangchi and Stephania tetrandra have been
reported in France.) Toxicity has also resulted from the

substitution of Aristolochia manshuriensis stem for the stem of
Clematis and Akebia species.''® In the UK, two such cases of
end-stage renal failure were reported in 1999.59 Other cases
have been reported in China (17 cases with 12 fatalities) and
Japan (ten cases of renal failure). Also, the FDA has
reported two cases of serious renal disease due to Aristolochia
being substituted for Clematis species in a dietary supple-
ment.”

Substitution of one plant species for another, often of a
completely different genus, is an established practice in TCM.
Furthermore, herbal ingredients are traded using their
common Chinese Pin Yin names, and this can lead to
confusion. For example, the name Fang ji can be used to
describe the roots of Aristolochia fangchi, Stephania tetrandra

or Cocculus species, and the name Mu Tong can be used to
describe the stem of Aristolochia manshuriensis, Clematis or
Akebia species. The widespread substitution with Aristolochia
species in TCM products available in the UK was shown in a
MHRA study which reported the presence of aristolochic acids
in at least 40% of TCM products containing Fang ji and Mu
Tong.*)

The problems associated with Aristolochia have prompted
regulatory action world-wide and new legislation has been
introduced in the UK to prohibit the use of Aristolochia species
in unlicensed medicines in the UK.°”

Despite warnings and an import alert issued by the US FDA
in 2001, products containing aristolochic acid were found to be
available on US websites in 2003.°”) The MHRA has reported
that it continues to find products containing Aristolochia on
the UK market. In 2003, a product called Xie Gan Wan was
found to contain aristolochic acids and in December 2004,

tablets called Jingzhi Kesou Tanchuan were found to contain
Aristolochia fructus.°° Also in December 2004, the Hong
Kong authorities alerted other health authorities to a product
Shen Yi Qian Lie Hui Chin that contained aristolochic acids. In
December 2005, MHRA issued a warning about the possible
presence of Aristolochia species in African herbal remedies
available in the UK.

Digitalis Cases of serious cardiac arrhythmias were reported in the
USA in 1997 following the accidental substitution of plantain
with Digitalis lanata.°" Subsequent investigation revealed that
large quantities of the contaminated plantain had been shipped
to more than 150 manufacturers, distributors and retailers over
a two-year period.

Podophyllum Fourteen cases of podophyllum poisoning have been
reported from Hong Kong following the inadvertent use of the
roots Podophyllum hexandrum instead of Gentiana and
Clematis species.°”) It is reported that this accidental
substitution arose because of the apparent similarity in
morphology of the roots.

Aconitum Cases of cardiotoxicity resulting from the ingestion of
Aconitum species used in TCM have been reported from Hong
Kong.”) In TCM, Aconitum rootstocks are processed by
soaking or boiling them in water in order to hydrolyse the
aconite alkaloids into their less toxic aconine derivatives.
Toxicity can, however, result when such processes are
uncontrolled and unvalidated. In the UK, the internal use of
aconite is restricted to prescription only.

Star Anise The dangers of confusing Chinese (Illicium verum
Hook.f.) and Japanese star anise (Illicium anisatum L.), have
been known for many years as the dried fruits cannot be
distinguished through visual examination. Japanes
is similar to the Chinese variety but has been reported to cause
neurologic and gastrointestinal toxicities due to the presence of
anisatin.°) In 2001 cases of poisoning were reported in the
Netherlands, Spain and France where Japanese star anise had
been accidentally used in place of Chinese star anise.°°?®
Several cases were epileptic-type seizures in babies who had
been given star anise infusions. This led to over 50 cases of
poisoning being reported, but there was no evidence that the
affected products had been imported into the UK. In the US,
seven cases of adverse neurologic reactions have been reported
among infants aged two weeks to three months who were
exposed to star anise tea.)

> star anise

----- PAGE 20 -----
Adulteration with heavy metals/toxic elements and synthetic
drugs

The adulteration of ethnic medicines with heavy metals/toxic
elements and synthetic drugs continues to be a major interna-
tional problem. A comprehensive review in 1992 summarised test
results on products and case histories of patients who had
experienced toxic effects.” Similar findings continue to be
reported and the potential impact on public health is signifi-
cant.” In most cases involving synthetic drugs, the drugs are
undeclared in the product and only come to light when the user
experiences adverse effects which are sufficiently serious to
warrant medical intervention. Exposure to the undeclared drug
is revealed in the subsequent investigation of the clinical case. Of
particular concern is the deliberate addition of closely related
derivatives of pharmaceutical drugs, for example the use of

nitrosofenfluramine instead of fenfluramine in weight-loss pro-
)

situation with the heavy metals/toxic elements differs in
that whilst these ingredients may arise from the plant ingredients
themselves or be introduced as trace contaminants during
processing, they are also frequently added intentionally and
declared as ingredients within some TCM and Asian medicine
formulations. The Chinese Pharmacopoeia, for example, includes
monographs for realgar (arsenic disulfide), calomel (mercurous
chloride), cinnabaris (mercuric sulfide) and hydrargyri oxydum

rubrum (red mercuric oxide), and includes formulations for nearly
00)

50 products that include one or more of these substances. !

A US survey in 1998 reported widespread inconsistencies and
adulterations in imported Asian medicines."° Of 260 imported
products tested, at least 83 (32%)
pharmaceuticals (most commonly ephedrine, chlorphenamine,
methyltestosterone and phenacetin) or heavy metals (lead, arsenic
or mercury). Another survey found evidence of a continuing
problem, with 10% of 500 OTC products testing positive for
undeclared drugs and/or toxic amounts of lead, mercury or
arsenic.)

contained undeclared

Elsewhere, health departments have reported similar conclu-
sions based on their findings. A survey conducted in Singapore
between 1990 and 1997 on TCM products reported that 42
different products were found to contain excessive amounts of
heavy metals (mercury, lead, arsenic) and that 32 different TCM
products were found to contain a total of 19 drugs." In total, 93
cases of excessive content of toxic heavy metals and undeclared
drugs were detected. The drugs detected included
antihistamines (chlorphenamine, promethazine, cyproheptadine),
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (diclofenac, indometacin,
ibuprofen), analgesic antipyretics (paracetamol, dipyrone), corti-
costeroids (prednisolone, dexamethasone, fluocinonide), sym-
pathomimeti agents (ephedrine), bronchodilators
(theophylline), diuretics (hydrochlorthiazide) and the antidiabetic
phenformin. A study in Taiwan found that more than 20% of
2609 products were found to be adulterated with synthetic drugs,

most commonly caffeine, paracetamol, indometacin and hydro-
chlorthiazide."

erberine,

Other examples of adulterated products come from a report
from the Singapore Ministry of Health which identified sildenafil
in two Chinese proprietary medicines,"'° and a report from the
USA FDA which described the recall of a herbal product after
traces of chlordiazepoxide were found in the capsules. In 2001,
the UK MCA reported presence of mercury (due to the inclusion
of cinnabaris) in samples of the product Shugan Wan on the UK
market.”

Cases of toxicity associated with synthetic drugs present in

Introduction

ethnic medicines include a case of poisoning in Hong Kong
resulting from the use of a TCM product containing antic-
onvulsant agents (phenytoin, carbamazepine and valproate).°”
In 2000, the USA FDA issued a public health warning on five
herbal products following adverse effects in patients.°* The
products were found to contain the antihyperglycaemic prescrip-
tion drugs glibenclamide and phenformin. In March 2001, the UK
MCA reported a serious case of hypoglycaemic coma in a patient
who had taken a TCM product, Xiaoke Wan, which contained
glibenclamide."

Cases of toxicity associated with heavy metals in ethnic
medicines include a patient from Taiwan who developed a unique
syndrome of multiple renal tubular dysfunction after taking a
Chinese herbal medicine contaminated with cadmium." In the
USA, two cases of alopecia and sensory polyneuropathy resulting
from thallium in a TCM product have been reported.''"” In the
UK, cases have been reported of two patients with heavy metal
intoxication following ingestion of an Indian remedy containing
inorganic arsenic and mercury,''” and of a patient with lead
poisoning after exposure to an Indian medicine containing toxic
3) In a case reported from
Macau, death of a 13-year-old girl from arsenic poisoning has
been linked with a Chinese herbal product Niu Huang Chieh Tu
Pien.“1!

Evidence of this international problem continues to grow and a
substantial body of literature is now available. The adulteration of

Chinese and Ayurvedic herbal medicines with synthetic drugs and
21, 22, 115-119)

amounts of lead, arsenic and mercury.

toxic metals has been extensively reviewed.
A survey of 70 Ayurvedic herbal medicinal products available in
Boston-area stores (US) found that 20% contained potentially
harmful concentrations of lead, mercury and/or arsenic.‘!?°) In
response to the many issues arising with herbal products the
MHRA has introduced a specific web page Herbal Safety News to
provide information on safety alerts.°° Regular notifications
concerning the presence of heavy metals/toxic elements and
pharmaceutical drugs in TCM/Ayurvedic products and steroids in
dermatological preparations are posted. Of particular concern in
recent years has been the discovery of TCM slimming products
containing potentially harmful ingredients such as fenfluramine,
nitrosofenfluramine, sibutramine, methylphenidate. In March
2004, the Agency was made aware of a UK case of irreversible
liver failure suspected to be caused by a product called 'Shubao-
Slimming Capsules’. The patient required a liver transplant. The
product was labelled as only containing botanical ingredients but
was found to contain undeclared nitrosofenfluramine, a drug
closely related to the prescription only medicine (POM),
fenfluramine. Nitrosofenfluramine is known to be toxic to the
liver. Other samples of Shubao tested were found to contain
nitrosofenfluramine and/or fenfluramine.
The MHRA has issued guidance to the public alerting them to
e specific concerns with TCM. slimming products.°° In
September 2004, MHRA issued a press statement warning
consumers that the poor quality of some TCM products could
pose a health risk to those using them. The MHRA emphasised
that it continued to find examples of products containing the
prohibited ingredients Aristolochia and Ephedra as well as
products containing heavy metals/ toxic elements, prescription
rugs as well as human placenta and bat excreta.”

o

Quality of regulated herbal products

Compared with conventional preparations, herbal medicinal
products present a number of unique problems when quality
aspects are considered. These arise because of the nature of the

----- PAGE 21 -----
Introduction

herbal ingredients, which are complex mixtures of constituents,
and it is well documented that concentrations of plant
constituents can vary considerably depending on environmental
and genetic factors. Furthermore, the constituents responsible for
the claimed therapeutic effects are frequently unknown or only
partly explained and this precludes the level of control which can
routinely be achieved with synthetic drug substances in conven-
tional pharmaceuticals. The position is further complicated by the
traditional practice of using combinations of herbal ingredients,
and it is not uncommon to have five herbal ingredients or more in
one product.

In recognition of the special problems associated with herbal
medicinal products, the CHMP (formerly CPMP) has issued
specific guidelines dealing with quality, specifications and
manufacture. These guidelines have recently been updated.“
The EMEA HMPC has also issued guidance on Good Agricul-
tural and Collection Practice (GACP) for starting materials of
herbal origin."?"” The CHMP guidelines highlight the need for
good control of both the starting materials and the finished
product, and emphasise the importance of good manufacturing
practice in the manufacture of herbal medicinal products.

The WHO has also published guidelines dealing with the
quality control of medicinal plant materials and on good
agricultural and collection practices (GACP).'°> '”)

European Pharmacopoeia

Since its creation in 1964, the European Pharmacopoeia (Ph Eur)
has devoted part of its work to the establishment of monographs
on herbal drugs which are used either in their natural state after
drying or extraction, or for the isolation of natural active
ingredients. The Ph Eur includes over 120 monographs on herbal
drugs, and a similar number of monographs are under develop-
ment. Many general methods of analysis are also described in the

Ph Eur, including te: for pesticides and for microbial
(123)

&

contamination.

Herbal ingredients

Control of the starting materials is essential in order to ensure
reproducible quality of herbal medicinal products.°*”* 74 The
following points are to be considered in the control of starting
materials.

Authentication and reproducibility of herbal ingredients The
problems associated with unregulated herbal products, as
illustrated above, highlight the major public health issues that
can arise when their herbal ingredients have not been
authenticated correctly. Herbal ingredients must be accurately
identified by macroscopical and microscopical comparison
with authentic material or accurate descriptions of authentic
herbs.‘ It is essential that herbal ingredients are referred to
by their binomial Latin names of genus and species; only
permitted synonyms should be used. Even when correctly
authenticated, it is important to realise that different batches
of the same herbal ingredient may differ in quality due to a
number of factors.
Inter- or intraspecies variation For many plants, there is
considerable inter- and intraspecies variation in constituents,
which is genetically controlled and may be related to the
country of origin.
Environmental factors The quality of a herbal ingredient can
be affected by environmental factors, such as climate, altitude
and growing conditions.

Time of harvesting For some herbs the optimum time of
harvesting should be specified as it is known that the
concentrations of constituents in a plant can vary during the
growing cycle or even during the course of a day.

Plant part used Active constituents usually vary between plant
parts and it is not uncommon for a herbal ingredient to be
adulterated with parts of the plant not normally utilised. In
addition, plant material that has been previously subjected to
extraction and is therefore 'exhausted' is sometimes used to
increase the weight of a batch of herbal ingredient.
Post-harvesting factors Storage conditions and_ processing
treatments can greatly affect the quality of a herbal ingredient.
Inappropriate storage after harvesting can result in microbial
contamination, and processes such as drying may result in a
loss of thermolabile active constituents.

adult-
erated with other plant material and conventional medicines,

Adulteration/substitution Instances of herbal remedi

and the consequences of this, have been discussed above. In
particular, the serious public health consequences that may
arise from the substitution of herbal ingredients by toxic
Aristolochia species have been highlighted. Reports of herbal
products devoid of known active constituents have reinforced
the need for adequate quality control of herbal remedies.

Identity tests In order to try to ensure the quality of licensed
ential not only to establish the
botanical identity of a herbal ingredient but also to ensure
batch-to-batch reproducibility. Thus, in addition to macro-
scopical and microscopical evaluation, identity tests are
ssary. Such tests include simple chemical tests, e.g. colour
or precipitation and chromatographic tests. Thin-layer chro-
matography is commonly used for identification purposes but
for herbal ingredients containing volatile oils a gas-liquid
chromatographic test may be used. Although the aim of such
tests is to confirm the presence of active principle(s), it is
frequently the case that the nature of the active principle has
not been established. In such instances chemical and chroma-

herbal medicines, it is es

nec

tographic tests help to provide batch-to-batch comparability
and the chromatogram may be used as a 'fingerprint’ for the
herbal ingredient by demonstrating the profile of some
common plant constituents
Assay For those herbal ingredients with known active
principles, an assay should be established in order to set the
criterion for the minimum accepted percentage of active
substance(s). Such assays should, wherever possible, be specific
for individual chemical substances and high-pressure liquid
chromatography or gas-liquid chromatography are the meth-
ods of choice. Where such assays have not been established
then non-specific methods such as titration or colorimetric
assays may be used to determine the total content of a group of
closely related compounds.

such as flavonoids.

Contaminants of herbal ingredients Herbal ingredients should

be of high quality and free from insects, other animal matter
and excreta. It is not possible to remove completely all
contaminants and hence specifications should be set in order to
limit them:
Ash values Incineration of a herbal ingredient produces ash
which constitutes inorganic matter. Treatment of the ash with
hydrochloric acid results in acid-insoluble ash which consists
mainly of silica and may be used to act as a measure of soil
present. Limits may be set for ash and acid-insoluble ash of
herbal ingredients.

----- PAGE 22 -----
Foreign organic matter It is not possible to collect a herbal
ingredient without small amounts of related parts of plant or
other plants. Standards should be set in order to limit the
percentage of such unwanted plant contaminants.

Microbial contamination Aerobic bacteria and fungi are
normally present in plant material and may increase due to
faulty growing, harvesting, storage or processing. Herbal
ingredients, particularly those with high starch content, may
be prone to increased microbial growth. It is not uncommon
for herbal ingredients to have aerobic bacteria present at 107
10° colony forming units per gram. Pathogenic organisms
including Enterobacter, Enterococcus, Clostridium, Pseudo-
monas, Shigella and Streptococcus have been shown to
contaminate herbal ingredients. It is essential that limits be
set for microbial contamination and the Ph Eur now gives non-
mandatory guidance on acceptable limits.”

Pesticides Herbal ingredients, particularly those grown as
cultivated crops, may be contaminated by DDT (dichlorodi-
phenyltrichloroethane) or other chlorinated hydrocarbons,
organophosphates, carbamates or polychlorinated biphenyls.
Limit tests are necessary for acceptable levels of pesticide
contamination of herbal ingredients. The Ph Eur includes
details of test methods together with mandatory limits for 34
potential pesticide residues.''??)

Fumigants Ethylene oxide, methyl bromide and phosphine have
been used to control pests which contaminate
ingredients. The use of ethylene oxide as a fumigant with
herbal drugs is no longer permitted in Europe.
Toxic metals Lead, cadmium, mercury, thallium and arsenic
have been shown to be contaminants of some

herbal

herbal
ingredients. Limit tests for such toxic metals are essential for
herbal ingredients.
Other contaminants As standards increase for the quality of
herbal ingredients it is possible that tests to limit other
contaminants such as endotoxins, mycotoxins and_radio-
nuclides will be utilised to ensure high quality for medicinal
purposes.

Herbal products

Quality assurance of herbal products may be ensured by control of
the herbal ingredients and by adherence to good manufacturing
practice standards. Some herbal products have many herbal
ingredients with only small amounts of individual herbs being
present. Chemical and chromatographic tests are useful for
developing finished product specifications. Stability and shelf life
of herbal products should be established by manufacturers. There
should be no differences in standards set for the quality of dosage
forms, such as tablets or capsules, of herbal medicines from those

of other pharmaceutical preparations.
The quality of an unregulated herbal remedy will not have been
assessed by a Regulatory Authority and may thus potentially affect
the safety and efficacy of the product. In view of this, it may be
concluded that a pharmacist should only sell or recommend
herbal medicinal products that hold a product licence or a
traditional herbal medicine registration. However, the majority of
herbal medicinal products are only available as unlicensed
products. When deciding upon the suitability of such products,
a pharmacist should consider the intended use and the
manufacturer. It is highly likely that unlicense
manufactured by an established pharmaceutical company will
have been subjected to suitable in-house quality control proce-
dures.

herbal remedies

Introduction

Safety

As with all forms of self-treatment, the use of herbal medicinal
products presents a potential risk to human health.°*!7° There
are concerns that the patient may be exposed to potentially toxic
substances either from the herbal ingredients themselves or as a
result of exposure to contaminants present in the herbal product.
Furthermore, self-administration of any therapy in preference to
orthodox treatment may delay a patient seeking qualified advice,
or cause a patient to abandon conventional treatment without
first seeking appropriate advice. Emerging evidence suggests that
herbal medicinal products may in some cases compromise the
efficacy of conventional medicines, for example through herb—
drug interactions.

The safety of all medicinal products
importance. All applications for marketing authorisations for
new medicines undergo extensive evaluation of their risks and
benefits and, once granted, licensed products are closely
monitored for the occurrence of suspected adverse effects. The
safety of herbal medicinal products is of particular importance as
the majority of these products is self-prescribed and is used to
treat minor and often chronic conditions.

is of the utmost

The extensive traditional use of plants as medicines has enabled
gns of toxicity to be well
recognised and their use avoided. However, the premise that
traditional use of a plant for perhaps many hundreds of years
establishes its safety does not necessarily hold true.2? 2% ?”) The
more subtle and chronic forms of toxicity, such as carcinogenicity,
mutagenicity and hepatotoxicity, may well have been overlooked
by previous generations and it is these types of toxicities that are
of most concern when assessing the safety of herbal remedies.

A UK Medical Toxicology Unit conducted a study of
potentially serious adverse reactions associated with exposure to
traditional medicines and food supplements during 1991 to
1995.8) Of 1297 enquiries from healthcare professionals, a total
of 785 cases were identified as possible (n = 738), probable (n =
35) or confirmed (1 = 12) cases of poisoning caused by traditional
medicines or food supplements. The report concluded that the
overall risk to public health from these types of products was low.
However, clusters of cases were identified that gave cause for

those medicines with acute and obvious

concern. Twenty-one cases of liver toxicity, including two deaths,
were associated with the use of traditional Chinese medicines,
although no causative agent was identified.

Potential hepatotoxicity associated with herbal medicines has
(29,150) Hepatotoxicity has been
reported with a number of herbal medicines (see monographs on
Black Cohosh, Chaparral, Comfrey, Ephedra, Kava). Teucrium
species (see Scullcap) have also been implicated in hepatotoxicity.
Following reports of serious cases of liver toxicity associated with
the use of Piper methysticum (see Kava), P. methysticum has been
prohibited in unlicensed medicinal products in the UK since
January 2003.°°)

At the time of writing, MHRA was aware of 79 cases of liver
damage associated with the consumption of kava that have been
reported worldwide.” Cases of hepatotoxicity associated with
the use of Black Cohosh have also been reported (see Black
Cohosh).°°

been discussed for some time.

Intrinsically toxic constituents of herbal ingredients

Limited toxicological data are available on medicinal plants.
However, there exists a considerable overlap between those herbs
used for medicinal purposes and those used for cosmetic or
culinary purposes, for which a significant body of information
exists. For many culinary herbs used in herbal remedies, there is

----- PAGE 23 -----
Introduction

no reason to doubt their safety providing the intended dose and

route of administration is in line with their food us

intended for use in larger therapeut
herbs requires re-evaluation.

When
tic doses the safety of culinary

Culinary herbs Some culinary herbs contain potentially toxic

constituents. The safe use of these herbs is ensured by limiting
the amount of constituent permitted in a food product to a
concentration not considered to represent a health hazard.

Apiole The irritant principle present in the volatile oil of
parsley is held to be responsible for the abortifacient
action.3" Apiole is also hepatotoxic and liver damage has
been documented as a result of excessive ingestion of parsley,
far exceeding normal dietary consumption, over a prolonged
period (see Parsley) ."3"
B-Asarone Calamus rhizome oil contains B-asarone as the
major component, which has been shown to be carcinogenic in
animal studies." Many other culinary herbs contain low
levels of B-asarone in their volatile oils and therefore the level
of B-asarone permitted in foods as a flavouring is restricted.
The EMEA HMPC has concluded that in view of the toxicity
of a-and f-asarone, their concentration in herbal medicinal
products should be reduced to minimum and diploid varieties
should always be preferred. In analogy with the food
regulation (limitation of the intake of B-asarone from food
and alcoholic beverages), a limit of exposure from herbal
medicinal products of approximately 115 tg/day, i.e. about

2 ug/kg body weight/day could be accepted temporarily until a
(132)

full benefit—risk assessment has been carried out.
Estragole (Methylchavicol) Estragole is a constituent of many
culinary herbs but is a major component of the oils of
tarragon, fennel, sweet basil and chervil. Estragole has been
reported to be carcinogenic in animals.“3" The level of
estragole permitted in food products as a flavouring is
restricted. The EMEA HMPC has concluded that the present
exposure to estragole resulting from consumption of herbal
medicinal products (short time use in adults at recommended
posology) does not pose a significant cancer risk. Nevertheless,
further studies are needed to define both the nature and
implications of the dose-response curve in rats at low levels of
exposure to estragole. In the meantime exposure of estragole to
sensitive groups such as young children, pregnant and
breastfeeding women should be minimised. Toxicological
assessment of preparations for topical and external use needs
further investigation because data on absorption through the
skin are missing.“3»

Safrole Animal studies involving safrole, the major component
of sassafras oil, have shown it to be hepatotoxic and
carcinogenic.''* The permitted level of safrole as a flavouring
in foods is 0.1 mg/kg.
Methyleugenol Methyleugenol is a constituent of many
culinary herbs and is present in small amounts in cassia bark
oil and clove oil (see Cassia, Clove). Chronic toxicity data on
methyleugenol show the compound to be a_ genotoxic
carcinogen. The EMEA HMPC has concluded that the present
exposure to methyleugenol resulting from consumption of
herbal medicinal products (short time use in adults at
recommended posology) does not pose a significant cancer
risk. Nevertheless, further studies are needed to define both the

nature and implications of the dose-response curve in rats at
low levels of exposure to methyleugenol. In the meantime,
exposure of sensitive groups, such as young children, pregnant
and breastfeeding women, to methyleugenol should be

minimised. Toxicological assessment of preparations for
topical and external use needs further investigation because
data on absorption through the skin are missing.‘'*

Other intrinsically toxic constituents Aristolochic acids are

reported to occur only in the Aristolochiaceae family. They
have been reported in Aristolochia species, and appear to occur
throughout the plant in the roots, stem, herb and fruit. The
aristolochic acids are a series of substituted nitrophenanthrene
carboxylic acids. The main constituents are 3,4-methylene-
dioxy-8-methoxy-10-nitrophenanthrene-1-carboxylic acid. Low
concentrations of aristolochic acids have been reported in
Asarum species, another member of the Aristolochiaceae
family. Aristolochic acids have been shown to be nephrotoxic,
carcinogenic and mutagenic. ''%)

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids are present in a number of plant
genera, notably Crotalaria, Heliotropium and Senecio. Many
of these plants have been used in African, Caribbean and South
American countries as food sources and as medicinal 'bush
Hepatotoxicity associated with their consumption is well
documented and has been attributed to the pyrrolizidine
alkaloid constituents.” Pyrrolizidine alkaloids can be
divided into two categories based on their structure, namely
those with an unsaturated nucleus (toxic) and those with a
saturated nucleus (considered to be non-toxic).

Several herbs currently used in herbal remedies contain
pyrrolizidines; they include liferoot, borage, comfrey, coltsfoot
and echinacea (see individual monographs).

In addition to preclinical data, cases of human hepatotoxi-
city associated with the ingestion of comfrey have been
documented (see Comfrey). The concentrations of pyrrolizi-
dine alkaloids present in borage and coltsfoot are thought to be
too low to be of clinical significance, although the dangers
associated with long-term low-dose exposure are unclear. The
use of borage oil as a source of gamma-linolenic acid and as an
alternative to evening primrose oil is currently very popular.
The pyrrolizidine alkaloids identified in echinacea to date have
been of the non-toxic saturated type. In 2002, MHRA raised
concerns about a TCM product known as Qianbai Biyan Pian
available on the UK market containing Senecio scandens which
is reported to contain the unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids,
iphylline.°”

Benzophenanthridine alkaloids are present in bloodroot and
in prickly ash. Although some of these alkaloids have exhibited
cytotoxic properties in animal studies, their toxicity to humans
as been refuted (see Bloodroot).

Lectins are plant proteins that pos haemagglutinating
and potent mitogenic properties. Both mistletoe and pokeroot
contain lectins temic exposure to pokeroot has resulted in
aematological aberrations. Mistletoe lectins may also inhibit
protein synthesis."3® (see Mistletoe and Pokeroot).
Viscotoxins, constituents of mistletoe, are low molecular
weight proteins which possess cytotoxic and cardiotoxic
properties." For many years, mistletoe preparations have
een used in Europe as cancer treatments. Clinical tria
carried out with Iscador, a product produced from the
naturally fermented plant juice of mistletoe, have concluded
that Iscador may exhibit some weak antitumour effects but
should only be used alongside conventional therapy in the
ong-term treatment of cancer.

Lignans. Hepatotoxic reactions reported for chaparral have
en associated with the lignan constituents (see Chaparral).

teas!

senecionine and sene

Ss

----- PAGE 24 -----
Table 1
Potential adverse effect

Allergic (see Appendix 2, Table 11)
Hypersensitive

Phototoxic

Immune

Cardiac (see Appendix 2, Table 2)
Endocrine

Hypoglycaemic (see Appendix 2, Table 8)
Hyperthyroid

Hormonal (see Appendix 2, Table 9)
Mineralocorticoid

Oestrogenic; Anti-androgen

Irritant (see Appendix 2, Table 12)

Gastrointestinal

Renal
Toxic

Hepatotoxic/carcinogenic

Mitogenic
Cyanide poisoning

Convulsant

Saponins. Pokeroot also contains irritant saponins which
have produced severe gastrointestinal irritation involving
intense abdominal cramping and haematemesis. Systemic
exposure to these saponins has resulted in hypotension and
tachycardia. In May 1979, the US Herb Trade Association
requested that all its members should stop selling pokeroot as a
rbal beverage or food because of its toxicity,*”)
Diterpenes. The irritant properties of many diterpenes are
well documented and queen's delight contains diterpene esters
which are extremely irritant to all mucosal surfaces (see
Queen's Delight).

Cyanogenetic glycosides are present in the kernels of a
number of fruits including apricot, bitter almond, cherry, pear
and plum seeds. Gastric hydrolysis of these compounds
following oral ingestion results in the release of hydrogen
cyanide (HCN), which is rapidly absorbed from the upper
gastrointestinal tract and which can lead to respiratory failure.
It has been estimated that oral doses of SOmg of HCN,
equivalent to about 50-60 apricot kernels, can be fatal‘! (
Apricot). However, variation in cyanogenetic glycoside content
of the kernels could reduce or increase the number required for
a fatal reaction. In the early 1980s a substance called amygdalin
promoted ‘natural’
Amygdalin is a cyanogenetic glycoside that is also referred to
as laetrile and ‘vitamin B,7'. Two near-fatal episodes of HCN
poisoning were recorded in which the patients had consumed
apricot kernels as an alternative source of amygdalin, due to
the poor availability of laetrile. Scientific research did not
support the claims made for laetrile, although a small number
of anecdotal reports suggested that laetrile may have some

>
e

see

was as a non-toxic cure for cancer.

Introduction

Examples of adverse effects that may occur with herbal ingredients

Constituent/Herbal ingredient

Sesquiterpene lactones: arnica, chamomile, feverfew, yarrow
Furanocoumarins: angelica, celery, wild carrot
Canavanine: alfalfa

Cardiac glycosides: pleurisy root, squill

Alfalfa, fenugreek

lodine: fucus

Triterpenoids: liquorice

lsoflavonoids: alfalfa; red clover
Saponins: ginseng, saw palmetto.

Numerous compounds including anthraquinones (purgative),
capsaicinoids, diterpenes, saponins, terpene-rich volatile oils

Aescin: horse-chestnut; terpene-rich volatile oils

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: comfrey, liferoot; B-asarone: calamus; lignans:
chaparral; safrole: sassafras; hepatotoxic constituents unconfirmed:
black cohosh, kava

Proteins: mistletoe, pokeroot
Cyanogenetic glycosides: apricot

Camphor/thujone-rich volatile oils

slight anticancer activity. As a result, legislation drawn up in
1984") restricted the availability of cyanogenetic substances
so that amygdalin can only be administered under medical
supervision.

Furanocoumarins are found predominantly in the families
Umbelliferae (e.g. parsley, celery), Rutaceae (e.g. bergamot,
Citrus species), Moraceae and Leguminosae. The furanocou-
marins and branched forms:
commonly reported linear furanocoumarins are 8-methoxy-
psoralen, 5-methoxypsoralen (bergapten) and psoralen. The
furanocoumarins are phototoxic. Severe phototoxic reactions
have been reported in humans following the use of bergamot
oil in topical preparations. Severe phototoxic burns have been
reported in a Swedish patient following a visit to a suntan
parlour after ingestion of a large quantity of celery soup.) In
the UK, a patient developed severe phototoxicity during oral
photochemotherapy with psoralen and ultraviolet A (PUVA)
after eating a large quantity of soup made from celery, parsley
and parsnip.''*» The authors highlighted the potential hazards
of eating foods containing psoralens during PUVA therapy. In
the UK, the MCA received two reports describing severe skin
burns in patients who had been treated with TCM prepara-
tions derived from Psoralea corylifolia fruit.‘'

Volatile oils. See Precautions in specific patient groups,
Pregnant/breastfeeding mothers, below.

occur as linear the most

Herbal ingredients that may cause adverse effects

Examples of adverse effects that have been documented in humans
or animals for the herbal ingredients described in the monographs
are summarised in Table 1. These adverse effects include allergic,

----- PAGE 25 -----
ace Introduction

Table 2 Potential adverse effects of herbal ingredients listed in the monographs

Herb

Agnus Castus
Alfalfa

Aloes

Angelica

Aniseed

Apricot

Arnica®

Artichoke
Asafoetida
Bayberry

Blue Flag

Bogbean

Boldo

Borage

Broom

Buchu

Butterbur
Calamus
Capsicum

Cascara

Cassia

Celery

Cereus
Chamomile, German
Chamomile, Roman
Chaparral
Cinnamon

Clove

Cohosh, Blue

Cola

Coltsfoot
Comfrey
Corn Silk
Cowslip

Damiana

Dandelion

Echinacea
Elecampane
Eucalyptus

Evening Primrose Oil
Eyebright

Feverfew

Frangula

Adverse effect

Allergic reactions

Systemic lupus erythematosus syndrome
Purgative, irritant to Gl tract

Phototoxic dermatitis

Contact dermatitis

Cyanide poisoning, seed

Dermatitis, irritant to Gl tract
Allergenic, dermatitis

Dermatitis, irritant

Carcinogenic to rats

Nausea, vomiting, irritant to Gl tract and eyes

Purgative, vomiting

Toxicity, irritant

Genotoxic, carcinogenic, hepatotoxic
Cardiac depressant

Irritant to Gl tract, kidney

Genotoxic, carcinogenic, hepatotoxic
Carcinogenic, nephrotoxic, convulsions
Irritant

Purgative, irritant to Gl tract
Allergenic, irritant

Phototoxic, dermatitis

Irritant to Gl tract

Allergic reactions

Allergic reactions

Dermatitis, hepatotoxic

Allergenic, irritant

Irritant

Irritant to Gl tract

Sleeplessness, anxiety, tremor
Genotoxic, carcinogenic, hepatotoxic
Genotoxic, carcinogenic, hepatotoxic
Allergenic, dermatitis

Allergenic

Convulsions

Allergenic, dermatitis
Allergenic, irritant
Allergenic, irritant
Nausea, vomiting

Mild indigestion, increased risk of epilepsy

Mental confusion, raised intraocular pressure

Allergenic, dermatitis

Purgative, irritant to Gl tract

Reasons/Comments

Canavanine, toxic amino acid
Anthraquinones
Furanocoumarins

Anethole in volatile oil
Cyanogenetic glycosides
Sesquiterpene lactones
Sesquiterpene lactones

Gum, related species

Fresh root, furfural (volatile oil)
In large doses

Volatile oil

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Sparteine (alkaloid)

Volatile oil

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
B-Asarone in oil
Capsaicinoids
Anthraquinones
Cinnamaldehyde in volatile oil
Furanocoumarins

Fresh juice

Sesquiterpene lactones
Sesquiterpene lactones
Lignans

Cinnamaldehyde in volatile oil
Eugenol in volatile oil

Seeds poisonous

Caffeine

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
Quinones

High dose (one report only), quinones,
cyanogenetic glycosides

Sesquiterpene lactones
Polysaccharide
Sesquiterpene lactones

Volatile oil

Schizophrenic patients taking phenothiazines

Tincture
Sesquiterpene lactones

Anthraquinones

table continues

----- PAGE 26 -----
Table 2 continued

Herb

Fucus
Garlic

Ginseng

Golden Seal
Gravel Root
Greater Celandine
Ground Ivy
Guaiacum

Hops

Horehound, White
Horse-chestnut
Horseradish
Hydrangea
Hydrocotyle
Ispaghula

Jamaica Dogwood
Juniper

Lady’s Slipper
Liferoot
Liquorice

Lobelia

Maté

Mistletoe
Motherwort
Nettle

Parsley
Pennyroyal
Pilewort®
Plantain

Pleurisy Root
Pokeroot

Prickly Ash, Southern
Pulsatilla®
Queen’s Delight
Red Clover
Rhubarb
Rosemary

Sage

Sassafras

Scullcap

Senega

Senna
Shepherd's Purse
Skunk Cabbage

Adverse effect
Hyperthyroidism
Irritant to Gl tract, dermatitis

Mastalgia, vaginal bleeding, insomnia

Gastric upset

Genotoxic, carcinogenic, hepatotoxic
Hepatotoxic

Irritant to Gl tract, kidneys
Allergenic, dermatitis

Allergenic, dermatitis

Dermatitis, irritant

Nephrotoxic

Allergenic, irritant

Dermatitis, irritant to Gl tract
Phototoxic, dermatitis

Oesophageal obstruction, flatulence
Irritant, numbness, tremors

Irritant, abortifacient

Allergenic, dermatitis, hallucinations
Genotoxic, carcinogenic, hepatotoxic
Hyperaldosteronism

Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea
Sleeplessness, anxiety, tremor
Hepatitis, hypotension, poisonous
Phototoxic dermatitis

Irritant

Irritant, hepatitis, phototoxic, abortifacient
Irritant, nephrotoxic, hepatotoxic
Irritant

Allergenic, dermatitis, irritant
Dermatitis, irritant, cardiac activity
Mitogenic, toxic, nausea, vomiting, cramp
Toxic to animals

Allergenic, irritant

Irritant to Gl tract

Oestrogenic

Purgative, irritant to Gl tract
Convulsions

Toxic, convulsant

Carcinogenic, genotoxic

Hepatotoxicity

Irritant to Gl tract
Purgative, irritant to Gl tract
Irritant

Itch, inflammation

Introduction 1s

Reasons/Comments

lodine content
Sulfides

Various effects reported but species
unconfirmed (see Ginseng, Eleutherococcus)

Berberine, potentially poisonous
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Alkaloids

Pulegone in volatile oil

Lignans

Oleo-resin

Plant juice

Aescin

Glucosinolates

If swallowed with insufficient liquid
High doses

Volatile oil, confusion with savin
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Excessive ingestion

Lobeline (alkaloid)

Caffeine

Mixed herbal preparation
Volatile oil

Amines

Apiole in volatile oil, excessive ingestion
Pulegone in volatile oil
Protoanemonin

Mustard-type oil

Cardenolides

Lectins

Protanemonin

Diterpenes

Isoflavonoids

Anthraquinones

Camphor in volatile oil
Thujone, camphor in volatile oil
Safrole in volatile oil

Due to adulteration with hepatotoxic Teucrium
spp.

Saponins

Anthraquinones

Isothiocyanates

table continues

----- PAGE 27 -----
Introduction

Table 2 continued

Squill Irritant, cardioactive Saponins

St. John’s Wort Phototoxic Hypericin

Tansy Severe gastritis, convulsions Thujone in volatile oil
Thyme Irritant to GI tract Thymol in volatile oil
Wild Carrot Phototoxic, dermatitis Furanocoumarins
Yarrow Allergenic, dermatitis Sesquiterpene lactones

Yellow Dock Purgative, irritant to Gl tract

Anthraquinones

*Not recommended for internal use.

cardiac, hepatic, hormonal, irritant and purgative effects, and a
range of toxicities. Some of the potential adverse effects of the
herbal ingredients which are the subject of the 152 monographs
are listed in Table 2. For further detailed information, including
literature references, the reader should consult individual mono-
graphs. The following few examples are illustrative of some of the
adverse effects caused by herbal ingredients.

Comfrey, coltsfoot Hepatotoxic reactions have been documented
for comfrey and coltsfoot. Both of these herbal ingredients contain
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, compounds known to be hepatotoxic.
However, it was later reported that the reaction documented for
coltsfoot may have in fact involved a herbal tea containing a
Senecio species rather than coltsfoot.”” The Senecio genus is
characterised by its pyrrolizidine alkaloid constituents.
Mistletoe, scullcap A case of hepatitis has been reported for a
woman who was taking a multi-constituent herbal product (see
Mistletoe). Based on the known toxic constituents of mistletoe
and other herbal ingredients present in the product, it was
concluded that mistletoe was the component responsible for the
hepatitis. Lectins and viscotoxins, the toxic constituents in
mistletoe, are not known to be hepatotoxic and no other reports
of liver damage associated with mistletoe ingestion have been
documented. The product also contained scullcap, which is
recognised to be frequently adulterated with a Teucrium species.
Hepatotoxic reactions have been associated with germander
(Teucrium chamaedrys) (see Scullcap).

Pokeroot Severe gastrointestinal irritation and haematological
abnormalities documented for pokeroot can be directly related to
the saponin and lectin constituents of pokeroot.”*

Sassafras Hepatotoxicity has been associated with the consump-
tion of a herbal tea containing sassafras. The principal component

of sassafras volatile oil is safrole, which is known to be
(127)

hepatotoxic and carcinogenic.

Excessive ingestion

Ginseng Excessive doses of ginseng have been reported to cause
agitation, insomnia, and raised blood pressure and have been
referred to as abuse of the remedy. Side-effects have also been
reported for ginseng following the ingestion of recommended
doses, and include mastalgia and vaginal bleeding. However, the
reports are in the older literature, the products are poorly
described and a causal association with ginseng has not been
established (see Ginseng, Panax).

Liquorice Excessive ingestion of liquorice has resulted in typical
corticosteroid-type side-effects of oedema and hypertension (see
Liquorice).

Parsley Parsley volatile oil contains apiole which is structurally
related to the recognised hepatocarcinogen, safrole. Ingestion of
apiole has resulted in a number of cases of fatal poisoning.‘'*”

Hypersensitivity reactions

Chamomile Sesquiterpene lactones are known to possess aller-
genic properties. They occur predominantly in herbs of the
Compositae (Asteraceae) family, of which chamomile is a member.
Hypersensitivity reactions have been reported for chamomile and
other plants from the same family (see Chamomile, German,
Chamomile, Roman). Cross-sensitivity to other members of the
Compositae family is well recognised. The EMEA HMPC has
issued a public statement proposing the following SPC statement
for chamomile products: 'Hypersensitivity reactions to (German)
chamomile (e.g. contact dermatitis) are very rare. Cross reactions
may occur in people with allergy to compositae (e.g. artemisia/
mugwort). Very rarely severe allergic reactions (anaphylactic
shock, asthma, facial oedema and urticaria) following internal use
have been reported.'"'*

Feverfew The sesquiterpene lactones present in feverfew are
considered to be the active principles in the herb. It is unknown
whether documented side-effects for feverfew, such as mouth
ulcers and swollen tongue, are also attributable to these
constituents (see Feverfew).

Phototoxic reactions

Parsley Furanocoumarins, compounds known to cause phototoxic
reactions, are constituents of parsley. Excessive ingestion of
parsley has been associated with the development of photo-
sensitive rash which resolved once parsley consumption ceased
(see Parsley).(3”

Precautions in specific patient groups

Pregnant/breastfeeding mothers Few conventional medicines have
been established as safe to take during pregnancy and it is
generally recognised that no medicine should be taken unless the
benefit to the mother outweighs any possible risk to the foetus.
This rule should also be applied to herbal medicinal products.
However, one of the major problems is that herbal products are
often promoted to the public as being 'natural’ and completely
'safe' alternatives to conventional medicines. A survey of 400
pregnant Norwegian women found that 36% had used herbal
products during pregnancy.) This finding was higher than in
other published studies from western countries. Of those women
having used herbal products in pregnancy, nearly 40% used herbal
products that the authors considered possibly harmful or where
information on safety in pregnancy was missing. Interestingly,
43% of the women used herbal galactagogues and this is of
concern as there is limited information on the safety of such
products to the mother or infant (see Breastfeeding mothers
below). The lack of information about the safety of herbal
medicines during pregnancy is recognised.)

----- PAGE 28 -----
Introduction 7

Table 3 Herbal ingredients best avoided or used with caution during pregnancy. Absence of a herbal ingredient from this list does not signify
safety and, as with all medicines, herbal remedies should only be used where the perceived benefit outweighs any possible risk. For a number of
herbs the chemistry and pharmacology are poorly documented and their use in pregnancy should be avoided. Some of the herbs listed are
reputed to be abortifacient or to affect the menstrual cycle although no recent clinical or experimental data exist. In view of the potential serious
effects caution in their use is advised.

Herb Effect

Agnus Castus Hormonal action

Aloes Cathartic, reputed abortifacient

Apricot Cyanide toxicity

Asafoetida Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

Avens Reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Blue Flag Irritant oil

Bogbean Irritant, possible purgative

Boldo Irritant oil

Boneset Cytotoxic constituents (related species)

Borage Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Broom Sparteine is oxytoxic

Buchu Irritant oil

Burdock Uterine stimulant, in vivo

Butterbur Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Calendula Reputed to affect menstrual cycle, uterine stimulant, in vitro
Cascara Anthraquinones, non-standardised preparations to be avoided
Chamomile, German Reputed to affect menstrual cycle, uterine stimulant with excessive use
Chamomile, Roman Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle with excessive use
Chaparral Uterine activity, hepatotoxic

Cohosh, Black Uterine oestrogen receptor binding in vitro, potential hepatotoxicity
Cohosh, Blue Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

Cola Caffeine, consumption should be restricted

Coltsfoot Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Comfrey Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Cornsilk Uterine stimulant, in vivo

Damiana Cyanogenetic glycosides, risk of cyanide toxicity in high doses
Eucalyptus Oil should not be taken internally during pregnancy
Euphorbia Smooth muscle activity, in vitro

Fenugreek Oxytoxic, uterine stimulant, in vitro

Feverfew Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

Frangula Anthraquinones, non-standardised preparations to be avoided
Fucus Thyroid gland activity, possible heavy metal contamination
Gentian Reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus Hormonal activity

Ginseng, Panax Hormonal activity

Golden Seal Alkaloids with uterine stimulant activity, in vitro

Ground Ivy Irritant oil

Hawthorn Uterine activity, in vivo, in vitro

Hops Uterine activity, in vitro

Horehound, Black Reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Horehound, White Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle
Horseradish Irritant oil; avoid excessive ingestion

table continues

----- PAGE 29 -----
18 Introduction

Table 3 continued

Herb Effect

Hydrocotyle Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

Greater Celandine Hepatotoxic

Jamaica Dogwood Uterine activity, in vitro, in vivo; irritant

Juniper Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle. Confusion over whether oil is toxic

Kava Hepatotoxic

Liferoot Pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Liquorice Oestrogenic activity, reputed abortifacient

Lobelia Lobeline, toxicity

Maté Caffeine, consumption should be restricted

Meadowsweet Uterine activity, in vitro

Mistletoe Toxic constituents, uterine stimulant, in vivo

Motherwort Uterine activity, in vitro, reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Myrrh Reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Nettle Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

Passionflower Harman, harmaline uterine stimulants, in vivo

Pennyroyal Abortifacient, irritant oil (pulegone)

Plantain Uterine activity, in vitro; laxative

Pleurisy Root Uterine activity, in vivo; cardioactive constituents

Pokeroot Toxic constituents, uterine stimulant, reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Poplar Conflicting reports over use of aspirin in pregnancy; salicylates excreted in breast milk may cause
rashes in babies

Prickly Ash, Northern Pharmacologically active alkaloids and coumarins

Prickly Ash, Southern Pharmacologically active alkaloids

Pulsatilla Reputed to affect menstrual cycle, uterine activity, in vitro, in vivo; irritant (fresh plant)

Queen’s Delight Irritant diterpenes

Raspberry Uterine activity, in vitro, traditional use to ease parturition

Red Clover Oestrogenic activity

Rhubarb Anthraquinones, non-standardised preparations to be avoided

Sage Reputed abortifacient

Sassafras Abortifacient (oil), hepatotoxic (safrole)

Scullcap Traditional use to eliminate afterbirth and promote menstruation; potential hepatotoxicity

Senna Anthraquinones, non-standardised preparations to be avoided

Shepherd’s Purse Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

Skunk Cabbage Reputed to affect menstrual cycle

Squill Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle

St John’s Wort Slight uterine activity, in vitro

Tansy Uterine activity, abortifacient (thujone in oil)

Uva-Ursi Large doses, oxytocic

Vervain Reputed abortifacient, oxytocic, utero-activity in vivo

Wild Carrot Oestrogenic activity, irritant oil

Willow Conflicting reports over use of aspirin in pregnancy; salicylates excreted in breast milk may cause
rashes in babies

Yarrow Reputed abortifacient and to affect menstrual cycle (thujone in oil)

Yellow Dock Anthraquinones, non-standardised preparations to be avoided

----- PAGE 30 -----
Table 3 lists some herbal ingredients taken from the following
152 monographs that specifically should be avoided or used with
caution during pregnancy. As with conventional medicines, no
herbal products should be taken during pregnancy unless the
benefit outweighs the potential risk.

Volatile oils Many herbs are traditionally reputed to be
abortifacient and for some this reputation can be attributed to
their volatile oil component."*!
the genito-urinary tract if ingested and may induce uterine
contractions. Herbs that contain irritant volatile oils include
ground ivy, juniper, parsley, pennyroyal, sage, tansy and yarrow.
Some of these oils contain the terpenoid constituent, thujone,
which is known to be abortifacient. Pennyroyal oil also contains
the hepatotoxic terpenoid constituent, pulegone. A case of liver
failure in a woman who ingested pennyroyal oil as an abortifacient
has been documented (see Pennyroyal).
Utero-activity A stimulant or spasmolytic action on uterine
muscle has been documented for some herbal ingredients
including blue cohosh, burdock, fenugreek, golden seal, hawthorn,
Jamaica dogwood, motherwort, nettle, raspberry and vervain.
Raspberry is a popular remedy taken during pregnancy to help
promote an easier labour by relaxing the uterine muscles. The
pharmacological activity exhibited by raspberry may vary between
different preparations an
Raspberry should not be used during pregnancy unless under
medical supervision (see Raspberry).
Herbal teas Increased awareness of the harmful effects associated
with excessive tea and coffee consumption has prompted many
individuals to switch to herbal teas. Whilst some herbal teas may
offer pleasant alternatives to tea and coffee, some contain
pharmacologically active herbal ingredients, which may have
unpredictable effects depending on the quantity of tea consumed
and strength of the brew. Some herbal teas contain laxative herbal
ingredients such as senna, frangula and cascara. In general
stimulant laxative preparations are not recommended during
pregnancy and the use of unstandardised laxative preparations is
particularly unsuitable. A case of hepatotoxicity in a newborn
baby has been documented in which the mother consumed a
herbal tea during pregnancy as an expectorant.''**) Following
analysis the herbal tea was reported to contain pyrrolizidine
alkaloids which are known to be hepatotoxic.
Breastfeeding mothers A medicinal product taken by a breastfeed-
ing mother presents a hazard if it is transferred to the breast milk
in pharmacologically or toxicologically significant amounts.
Limited information is available regarding the safety of conven-
tional medicines taken during breastfeeding. Mucl
ists for herbal ingredients, and generally the use of herbal
is not recommended during lactation.

) Several volatile oils are irritant to

from one individual to another.

less informa-

Paediatric use Herbal medicines have traditionally been used to
treat both adults and children. The belief that natural remedies
may be safer than conventional medicines may influence
parents in choosing herbal medicines for their children. Herbal
medicines may offer a milder alternative to some conventional
medicines, although the suitability of a herbal remedy needs to
be carefully considered with respect to quality, safety and
efficacy. Herbal medicines should be used with caution in
children and medical advice should be sought if in doubt. The
administration of herbal teas to children is generally unwise
unless used according to professional advice.”
surveys indicate that herbal use in children is increasing and
it has been estimated that 28-40% of children may be exposed
to herbal preparations for the management of asthma, anxiety,

Several

Introduction

attention deficit hyperactivity disorders, insomnia and respira-

: : 150, 151
tory infections. SY

A survey of 503 chi

dren attending the Royal Children's

Hospital, Melbourne, found that the use of CAM by children is

common. Herbal produ
surveyed and a further

cts were used by 12% of the group
8% were taking echinacea products

Sixty-three percent of those reporting CAM use had not
discussed this with their treating doctor. The authors
concluded that given the potential risk of adverse events
associated with the use of CAM or
conventional management, doctors should ask about their
use as a part of routine history taking.”

A review has been carried out of some of the most
commonly used herbal products subjected to randomised
controlled clinical trials in children including Andrographis
paniculata, cranberry, echinacea, evening primrose oil, garlic,
ivy leaf, and valerian. The authors concluded that whilst some
of the studies showed promising results others suffered from
methodological flaws such as small sample size, lack of product
quality control, improper placebo and dose issues. Further
well-designed randomised, controlled clinical trials are needed
to evaluate these therapies for the paediatric population."

Systematic reviews of the risks associated with the use of

interactions with

herbal medicines in children and adolescents have been carried
(54155) The findings show that many of the reports of
adverse effects are associated with products of poor quality
where the adverse effect is caused by adulteration with heavy
metals or conventional pharmaceutical drugs. In many cases it
is not possible to demonstrate a causal relationship between
the product taken and the adverse effect. The need for further
investigations in the paediatric population is clear.

out.

Older patients Surveys show that the use of herbal medicinal
products by older patients is increasing and that typically more
than one herbal product is used at a time, often concomitantly
with prescription medicines. Older patients are reluctant to tell
their doctor that they are taking herbal products and so are at
risk of potential drug-herb interactions.'°° '*)

A review has considered the available evidence on the use of
medicinal products (St John's wort, valerian,
ginkgo, horse-chestnut, saw palmetto and yohimbe) by older
‘ the treatments may offer considerable
for a range of conditions, there is a need for caution,
particularly with regard to potential drug—herb interactions
and possible adverse effects, when herbal medicinal products
are used by older patients.

several herba

Patients with cardiovascular disease Concerns have been raised
about the use of herbal medicinal products for the treatment of
(and by patients with) cardiovascular di >, in particular,
because of the lack of scientific assessment and the potential
for toxic effects and major drug-herb interactions (see Herb—
drug interactions).

A systematic review of the literature covering 1990-2001
found evidence mostly from case reports and case series that
herbal medicinal products could lead to serious cardiovascular
adverse events. The adverse effects were attributed not only to
the toxicity of the herbal products but in some cases to
contamination of the products with substances such as

prescription medicines, as well as to drug—herb interac-
(161)

tions.

A systematic review of the literature between January 1996
and February 2003 has been undertaken to determine the
possible interactions between herbal medicines and cardiovas-

----- PAGE 31 -----
Introduction

cular drugs. Forty-three case reports and eight clinical trials
were identified. Warfarin was the most common cardiovascular
drug involved. It was found to interact with boldo, curbicin,
fenugreek, garlic, danshen, devil's claw, dong quai, ginkgo,
papaya, lycium, mango, PC-SPES (resulting in over-antic-
oagulation) and with ginseng, green tea, soy and St John's wort
(causing decreased anticoagulant effect). Gum guar, St John's
wort, Siberian ginseng and wheat bran were found to decrease
plasma digoxin concentration; aspirin interactions include
spontaneous hyphema when used concurrently with ginkgo
and increased bioavailability if combined with tamarind.
Decreased plasma concentration of simvastatin or lovastatin
was observed after co-administration with St John's wort and
wheat bran, respectively. Other adverse events reported were
hypertension after co-administration of ginkgo and a diuretic
thiazide, hypokalaemia after liquorice and antihypertensives
and anticoagulation after phenprocoumon and St John's wort.
The authors concluded that interaction between herbal
medicines and cardiovascular drugs is a potentially important
safety issue with patients taking anticoagulants at the highest
risk.''%) The potential for herb-drug interactions is discussed
further below (see Herb-drug interactions).

The British Heart Foundation has produced a Factfile
entitled Herbs and the Heart in association with the British
Cardiac Society which informs patients about the use of herbal
products. The Factfile highlights possible cardiotoxicity that
might occur with certain herbal ingredients, such as black
hellebore, figwort, hawthorn, ephedra and yohimbe. The
potential for drug—herb interactions is also discussed, in
particular with warfarin, simvastatin, ciclosporin§ and

digoxin.)
Patients with cancer Studies have shown that CAM use in
patients with cancer is high in many countries.°*! Surveys

indicate that this use is increasing and, interestingly, that
patients with breast cancer appear to use more CAMs than
individuals with other types of malignancy." Studies in
Europe have reported use of CAM in 23.6% of lung cancer
patients, 32% of colorectal cancer patients and 44.7% of
breast cancer patients after the diagnosis of cancer. In all of
these surveys use of herbal medicine was the most common
therapy used in over 40% of patients using CAM."7°'7)) A
survey carried out at the Royal Marsden Hospital in 2004
found that 164 (51.6%) of 318 patients were taking some
complementary alternative medicine during their cancer
treatment. Of these, 10.4% were taking herbal medicines,
42.1% were taking food supplements and 47.6% were taking a
combination of the two. Of these patients, 30% were unsure
why they were taking the remedies and 50% had not discussed
the use with their doctor.”

In view of the prevalence of use of herbal products by cancer
patients it is
and seek information from patients. It is well known that
patients are often reluctant to discuss their use of CAM with
their doctors.''”?) In most cases the impact of herbal medicines
on the patient's treatment is unknown and the potential for
drug-herb interactions exists as shown by the effect of St
John's wort on irinotecan used in the treatment of colon
cancer.’ There is also potential for other herbal ingredients
such as garlic, ginkgo, echinacea, ginseng and kava to interact
with anticancer agents (see also Herb-drug interactions).””

ential that healthcare professionals are aware

Peri-operative use Concerns about the need for patients to

discontinue herbal medicinal products prior to surgery have

Menopausal women Many studies

been highlighted.''”* '”?) Studies in the US have shown that the
use of herbal medicines is common among. surgical
patients." In one study of 2186 patients, 38% had taken
herbal medicines in the two years before surgery and 16%
continued the use of herbal medicines in the month of surgery.
Herbal medicine use was found to be higher in patients
undergoing gynaecologic (52%) and urologic (45%) proce-
dures and lower amongst patients undergoing vascular (10%)
surgical procedures."®° A study of herbal medication use in
paediatric surgical patients found that the prevalence of use
was higher in children of parents who used herbal medications
and children whose parents considered them to be chronically
ill."8) Whilst 21% of the parents were users of herbal
medicines only 4% of their children used them. The most
common herbal medicines used were echinacea, chamomile
and aloe. Forty-two per cent of the children using herbal
medicines were also taking prescription medicines concur-
rently. Interestingly, the study found that only 10% of parents
reported that the surgeon enquired about patient herbal
medication use.

From the available evidence, it has been suggested that the
potential exists for direct pharmacological effects, pharmaco-
dynamic interactions and pharmacokinetic interactions with
eight commonly used herbal medicinal products (echinacea,
ephedra, garlic, ginkgo, ginseng, kava, St John's wort,
valerian). The need for phys
standing of the herbal medicinal products being used by
patients and to take a detailed history was highlighted."”” The
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has reported that
several anaesthesiologists have noted significant changes in
heart rate or blood pressure in some patients who have been
taking herbal medicinal products, including St John's Wort,
ginkgo and ginseng. The ASA has produced information
leaflets for both patients and physicians advising patients to
tell their doctor if they are taking herbal products before
surgery and emphasising the need for physicians to specifically
ask patients if they are using herbal medicines." '**)

The Royal College of Anaesthetists (RCA) and The
Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
(AAGBI) has produced an information leaflet specifically
targeted for patients which advises patients to bring any herbal
remedies along with them to hospital. Patients are advised that
they may need to discontinue the use of herbal remedies prior
to their operation.“'*) The MHRA has advised patients due to
have a surgical operation to always tell their doctor about any
herbal remedy they are taking.°”

ians to have a clear under-

show that use of herbal
medicines by women is greater than men and in some recent
surveys this use appears to be increasing significantly.»
Women often try herbal medicines around the time of their
menopause.‘'*>!8” Use of conventional hormone replacement
therapy (HRT) products has declined since 2002 following
reports that HRT increas
lism, stroke, endometrial cancer and breast cancer. In the wake
of these reports, the use of herbal products for the relief of
menopausal symptoms has increased substantially. Results of a
national survey in the USA of 750 women aged 40 to 65 years

revealed that 29% of the women had taken herbal remedies or

s the risk of venous thromboembo-

soya products to ease menopause symptoms. The vast majority
of the women had not discussed the use of the herbal products
with their doctors but many were frustrated that their doctors
did not provide enough information about herbal and dietary

----- PAGE 32 -----
supplements to relieve menopause symptoms. Some 70% of the
women expressed at least some concern or uncertainty about
the safety of the products they were taking. The r
highlighted the lack of patient—physician communication and

called for more education for women about these treat-
(188)

searchers

ments.

The main herbal ingredients found in products for
menopausal symptoms are those containing isoflavones (red
clover, soya), black cohosh, dong quai, ginseng, evening
primrose oil and wild yam.\'*?) Isoflavones are members of a
group of polyphenolic non-steroidal plant compounds known
as phytoestrogens. Other phytoestrogens include flavonoids,
stilbenes and lignans. Epidemiological and experimenta
studies have shown that the consumption of phytoestrogen-
rich diets may have protective effects on menopausa
symptoms, diseas
osteoporo:

Concerns have been raised about the use of isoflavone
containing herbal medicines particularly in women with
oestrogen-sensitive cancers. Limited data are available but
some studies have shown that certain extracts of red clover and
soya may induce cell proliferation in MCF-7 cells, an
established in vitro oestrogen-dependent mammary tumour
model." In the same study, extracts of black cohosh tested
did not cause cell proliferation. The authors concluded that
preparations containing red clover and soya should be used
with caution in the treatment of menopausal symptoms in
women at risk of, or with a history of, oestrogen-sensitive
breast cancer. Similar advice has been included in a fact sheet,
Herbal Medicines and Breast Cancer Risk prepared by the US
Program on Breast Cancer and Environmental Risk Factors
(BCERF) at Cornell University.’ A recent study of 452
women with family histories of breast cancer who were
enrolled in a cancer risk assessment programme found that
32% reported soy food consumption.” The authors
concluded that these women would benefit from clear messages

such as prostate and breast cance
(190)

Sy

and cardiovascular diseases.

regarding the health effects of soy.

Concerns have been raised about the potential for drug—herb
interactions, known or theoretically associated with herbal
medicines commonly used by women for the relief of

menopausal symptoms.'!?”

Herb-drug interactions
The evidence of significant problems associated with the ingestion
of grapefruit juice concurrently with certain medicines has
emphasised the fact that clinically relevant interactions between
drugs and natural products, both herbs and foods, may occur.‘!?~
') The potential for interactions between herbal and conven-
tional medicines has been recognised for some time but awareness
has increased considerably since the emergence of clinically
significant interactions between St John's Wort and a range of
prescribed medicines.°*7° The potential for drug-herb inter-
actions has been reviewed extensively.(1?7°? 7°

Concerns have been raised in the literature about herbal
medicines interfering with breast cancer treatment, antirheumatic
treatment and potential interactions between herbal products and
cardiac drugs.?°” 7!

Generally, information on herb-drug interactions, particularly
in the clinical setting, is limited and in most cases there has been

little formal clinical investigation. Instances of drug interactions
have been tentatively linked, retrospectively, to the concurrent use
of herbal medicine:
difficult to explain if knowledge regarding the phytochemical

The rationale for such interactions is often

Introduction

constituents of the herbal product, their pharmacological activity
and metabolism are poorly understood. As with conventional
drug interactions, herb—drug interactions may be pharmacody-
namic or pharmacokinetic. Pharmacodynamic interactions could
result when a herbal drug and a conventional drug have similar or
antagonistic pharmacological effects or adverse effects. These
interactions are usually predictable from a knowledge of the
pharmacology of the interacting herb and drug. Pharmacokinetic
interactions could occur when a herb alters the absorption,
distribution, metabolism or elimination of a drug (and vice versa).
These interactions are not easy to predict. In addition, there is
also the potential issue of herb-herb interactions where
combinations of herbal ingredients are used or where patients
take a number of herbal products together. Little is known about
the pharmacokinetics of herbal ingredients and whether or not
they can, for example, induce their own metabolism.

As with all potential drug interactions there are particular
concerns when patients are stabilised on conventional medicines,
igoxin, anticonvulsants (e.g. phenytoin) and
ciclosporin that are known to have a narrow therapeutic window.
Potential herb-drug interactions are considered for each herb
under the individual monographs.

A recent review has illustrated the difficulties in assessing the
significance of herb-drug interactions using four commonly used
herbal substances, namely St John's wort, ginseng, ginkgo and
liquorice.?!” The authors concluded that conclusive evidence of
herb-drug interactions is often lacking and where clinical
observations have been made or studies conducted, issues with
respect to the type, quality and content of the herbal products are
often not described. There is a need for rigorous studies to assess
the mechanism and clinical significance of potential interactions
in order to guide healthcare profes:

In the absence of a comprehensive evidence b:

such as warfarin,

ionals and consumers.

5 patients
receiving drugs with a narrow safety margin (e.g. immunosup-
pressants, anticoagulants, digoxin,) and those patients most at
risk of serious drug interactions (i.e. patients who are elderly, have
chronic illness, have organ dysfunction and those receiving
multiple medicines) should be closely monitored to avoid the
possible adverse consequences of herb-drug interactions. As
highlighted in this review, the importance of the quality of the
herbal product in terms of its phytochemical profiles should be
emphasised. In view of the significant variability in herbal
products, extrapolation of findings with a specific extract to
other extracts may not be valid. For example, recent investiga-
tions reporting no alteration in bleeding time in elderly patients
and no interactions with anticoagulant medicines with the
specific ginkgo extract EGB 761 may not be valid for other
ginkgo extracts.2!77!9)

St John’s wort Since 1998 evidence has emerged from sponta-
neous reports and published case reports of the interactions
between St John's wort and certain prescribed medicines
leading to a loss of or reduction in therapeutic effect of these
prescribed medicines (see St John's Wort).°?° Drugs that
may be affected include indinavir, warfarin, ciclosporin,
digoxin, theophylline and oral contraceptives. There have
also been reports of increased serotonergic effects in patients
taking St John's wort concurrently with selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (e.g. sertraline, paroxetine). Results of drug
interaction studies have provided some evidence that St John's
Wort may induce some cytochrome P450 (CYP) drug-
metabolising enzymes in the liver as well as affecting P-
glycoprotein (a transport protein). Regulatory Authorities

----- PAGE 33 -----
Introduction

throughout the EU and elsewhere have
and healthcare profe:

ued advice to patients
sionals.

Interactions with warfarin Several herbal ingredients have been
reported to potentially interfere with warfarin, including
devil's claw, dong quai, feverfew, garlic, ginkgo, ginseng and
St John's wort.20% 710214)

A survey of 1360 patients in the UK found that 8.8% were
taking one or more herbal remedies thought to interact with
warfarin. Complementary or homeopathic treatments not
specified in the survey questionnaire were taken by 14.3% of
responders.*!°) Overall, 19.2% of the patients were taking one
or more such medicines. Of these patients, 28.3% thought that
herbal medicines might or definitely could interfere with other
drugs prescribed by their doctor, however, patients taking any
non-prescribed medication were less likely to believe this The
use of herbal medicines had not been discussed with a
conventional healthcare professional by 92.2% of patients.

Another UK study which conducted a retrospective analysis
of the pharmaceutical care plans for 631 patients attending an
outpatient anticoagulation clinic found that 26.9% of patients
were using some form of CAM; of the CAM users, 58% were
taking a CAM that could interfere with warfarin. The authors

stressed the importance of taking a full drug history to avoid
6)

M-warfarin interactions.”!
The CSM has issued advice to health profe:
possibility of interaction between warfarin and cranberry
juice.?!77!8 By October 2004, the MHRA had received 12
reports of suspected interactions involving warfarin and
cranberry juice; eight ca in INR and/or
bleeding episodes, in three cases the INR was reported to be
unstable and in one case the INR decreased. The CSM has
advised that it is not possible to define a safe quantity or brand
of cranberry juice and therefore patients taking warfarin
should avoid this drink unless the health benefits are
considered to outweigh any risks (which is unlikely). It is not
known whether other cranberry products, such as capsules or
concentrates, might also interact with warfarin. Therefore
similar caution should be observed with these products.

The evidence for and understanding of most drug—herb
interactions is limited. An attempt can be made, however, to
identify herbal ingredients that have the potential to interfere
with specific categories of conventional drugs, based on known
phytochemical information and pharmacological properties of
the constituents of the herb, and on any documented adverse
effects. For example, prolonged or exc
diuretic may potentiate existing diuretic therapy, interfere with
existing hypo-/hypertensive therapy, or potentiate the effect of
certain cardioactive drugs due to hypokalaemia. Herbs which
have been documented to lower blood sugar concentrations
may cause hypoglycaemia if taken in sufficient amounts and
interfere with existing hypoglycaemic therapy. An individual
receiving antihypertensive therapy may be more susceptible to
the hypertensive adverse effects that have been documented
with, for example, ginseng or which are associated with the
ive ingestion of plants such as liquorice. This approach
has been used in drawing up Appendix 1, Table 1 and
Appendix 2, Tables 1-12, which provide information on
potential drug-herb interactions. Appendix 1, Table 1 groups
together various therapeutic categories of medicines that may
be affected by a particular herb or group of herbs. Appendix 2,
Tables 1-12 list herbal ingredients that are claimed to have a
specific activity alphabetically within each table, including

ionals about the

involved increase

ive use of a herbal

exc

laxative, cardioactive, diuretic, hypo-/hypertensive, anticoagu-
lant/coagulant, hypo-/hyperlipidaemic, sedative, hypo-/hyper-
glycaemic, hormonal, immunostimulant, allergenic or irritant.
Some commonly occurring groups of natural products found
within these 152 herbal ingredients contribute towards their
ies or adverse effects. Appendix 2, Tables 13—
21 list those herbal ingredients that contain amines, alkaloids
or have sympathomimetic anti-inflammatory or antispasmodic
activities, coumarins, flavonoids, iridoids, saponins, tannins or
volatile oils.

activities, toxic

Interactions of herbal products in therapeutic drug
monitoring

There are also examples of herbal medicinal products which
appear to cross-react with diagnostic markers in therapeutic drug
monitoring, e.g. with a digoxin assay (see Ginseng, Eleuther-
ococcus) 7°

Reporting of adverse reactions to herbal medicinal products
It is essential that information on the risks associated with the use
of herbal products is systematically collected and analysed in
order to protect public health. There is an increasing awareness of
the need to develop pharmacovigilance practices for herbal
22,219) The WHO has recently produced guidelines on
safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance
systems.“ The current arrangements for pharmcovigilance of
herbal medicinal products in the UK have been reviewed.*!”)

In 1996, the UK MHRA extended its 'Yellow Card Scheme’ for
adverse drug reaction reporting to include reporting of suspected
adverse reactions to unlicensed herbal products. This followed a
report from a UK Medical Toxicology Unit on potentially serious
adverse reactions associated with herbal remedies. Twenty-one
cases of liver toxicity, including two deaths, were associated with
the use of TCMs.'!?*)

The need to further improve pharmacovigilance on herbal
products was highlighted in a study of patients’ perceived
behaviour towards reporting adverse reactions. The study found
that patients would be less likely to consult their doctor for
suspected adverse drug reactions (minor or severe) to herbal
remedies than for similar adverse reactions to conventional over-
the-counter medicines. This illustrates the need for greater public
awareness that adverse reactions can occur and that such reactions
should be reported. It also highlights the need for healthcare
professionals to take a detailed medical history including use of
herbal products and to be aware that patients may be reluctant to
provide information. The UK Yellow Card scheme has recently
been extended to include reporting from patients and carers for
prescribed and OTC medicines as well as herbal and comple-
mentary medicines.”7° The Uppsala Monitoring Centre (UMC)
of the World Health Organization plays an important role in the

international monitoring of adverse health effects associated with
(221)

medicines."

herbal medicines.

The UMC recognises the problems inherent in adverse drug
reaction reporting for herbal medicines and has established a
Traditional Medicines project to stimulate reporting in this area
and to standardise information on herbal medicines, particularly
with regard to nomenclature. For example, a special set of herbal
anatomical—therapeutic-chemical (ATC) codes has been devel-
oped which is fully compatible with the regular ATC classification
system for conventional medicines.”””) Another important project
has focused on developing a herbal substance register for use in
the international drug monitoring programme.'~*) Comprehen-
sive guidelines issued by UMC for setting up and running a

----- PAGE 34 -----
pharmacovigilance centre are included in the recent WHO
publication.“

Efficacy

Despite the growing popularity of herbal medicines world-wide
there is a dearth of scientific evidence of efficacy for most herbal
medicines. Indeed, many of the herbs used medicinally in Europe
have a traditional reputation for their uses, but there is little
scientific documentation of their active constituents, pharmaco-
logical actions or clinical efficacy.°°**3" Examples of this group
include avens, boneset, burdock, clivers, damiana, Jamaica
dogwood, parsley piert, pulsatilla and wild lettuce. For other
herbs, documented phytochemical data or pharmacological data
from animal studies may provide a plausible basis for their
traditional uses, but evidence of efficacy from clinical studies is
limited.

The current emphasis on evidence-based medicine requires
evidence of efficacy from rigorous randomised controlled trials.
Where possible, the evidence is best evaluated by systematic
reviews and meta-analyses of available clinical trial data, as such
approaches minimise both selection bias and random error.

Such approaches are now being applied to herbal medicines.
Systematic reviews have been undertaken for a number of herbal
ingredients, e.g. aloe vera, artichoke, echinacea, evening primrose,
feverfew, garlic, ginger, ginkgo, ginseng, hawthorn, horse-chest-
nut, mistletoe, peppermint, saw palmetto, St John's wort and
(231-239) (see individual monographs). Several reviews have
been prepared by the Cochrane Collaboration (the international
association dedicated to preparing and maintaining systematic
reviews of the effects of healthcare interventions).°” Most

reviews highlight that, in many cases, the evidence base is weak
235, 236)

valerian

and studies are often flawed. ) In other cases, studies have
been methodologically sound and evidence of efficacy is strong.

St John's wort, a widely used herbal product, has been
investigated in many clinical studies (see St John's Wort). A
recent systematic review of the evidence from 37 randomised
controlled trials has concluded that extracts seem more effective
than placebo and as effective as standard antidepres
treating mild-to-moderate depr
highlighted that these findings apply only to the preparations
tested in the trials as marketed preparations vary considerably.?>*
There is, however, a need for further studies to evaluate efficacy
compared with that of standard treatments, particularly newer
antidepressant agents, in well-defined patient groups and
conducted over longer time periods.

One of the fundamental problems characteris
medicinal products is that the individual herbal ingredients
contain a vast array of chemical constituents. Further, herbal
medicines traditionally involve mixtures of different herbal
ingredients, although in developed countries, recent trends
indicate that single-ingredient herbal products are becoming
increasingly popular. Herbalists would argue that combinations of
ingredients are designed to provide the best therapeutic outcome
while reducing adverse effects and toxicity. Evidence is emerging
that different constituents within a herbal preparation may
contribute to the overall therapeutic effect of the product and
that in some cases synergistic and additive effects play an
important role.3?4

In most cases there is a lack of knowledge of the phytochemical
constituents responsible for the claimed therapeutic effects of
many herbal ingredients. To further complicate matters, it is well
known that herbal products derived from the same herbal drug

ants for

ion. However, the authors

ic of herbal

Introduction

can vary considerably in terms of their phytochemical constituents
depending on the source of plant material, the manufacture of the
extracts and formulation of the dosage forms. As a result, efforts
to establish clinical efficacy are hampered by how far results for a
specific product can be extrapolated to other products containing
the same plant but different extracts. Where the active
constituents of a herbal ingredient are known it is possible and,
in most cases, desirable to standardise the extract/product. The
aim of standardisation is to obtain an optimum and consistent
quality of a herbal drug preparation by adjusting it to give a
defined content of a constituent or a group of constituents with
nown therapeutic activity. Examples of herbal drugs with
constituents with accepted, known therapeutic activity are few.
Herbs with documented activities (and known active constituents)
include: senna, frangula (hydroxyanthracenes); belladonna (alka-
oids) and horse-chestnut (saponins).

In the case of St John's wort, early studies concentrated on the
ypericin constituents but more recent work suggests that
yperforin and possibly flavonoids also contribute to the
antidepressant properties.) Studies analysing St John's wort
products have reported differing contents of hypericin and
yperforin.**! 9) Furthermore, some products showed consis-
tent batch-to-batch concentrations of hypericin and hyperforin,
whilst others exhibited significant interbatch variability.-*?

Despite the dearth of documented clinical evidence for the
effects of the majority of herbal ingredients, there is no reason
why herbal medicinal products should not be available for use in
minor conditions, providing that these are consistent with
traditional uses and that the herbal ingredients are of suitable
quality and safety. It would seem to be more appropriate to use
those herbal ingredients for which documented phytochemical and
pharmacological data support the traditional u Herbal
medicines intended for use in more serious medical conditions
require evidence of efficacy to support their use.

Conclusion

The use of herbal medicinal products continues to increase and
there is growing evidence that herbal medicines are used widely by
all groups of society including children, pregnant and breastfeed-
ing mothers, women, especially during the menopause, and the
elderly. Of particular importance is the use of herbal medicines by
patients with a wide range of conditions many of whom are
stabilised on prescription medicines and findings that patients are
reluctant to tell their doctors about herbal products they are
taking. Over the last five years the significance of herb-drug
interactions has been recognised and with this the realisation that
healthcare professionals need to be aware that patients may be
taking herbal medicinal products, and need to understand their
effects and be aware of the potential problems associated with
their use. This handbook provides the reader with factual
information on 152 herbal ingredients present in herbal medicinal
products in European and other developed countries. Herbal
medicinal products can offer an alternative to conventional
medicines in non-life-threatening conditions, providing they are
of adequate quality and safety, and are used in an appropriate
manner.

References

1 Kessler RC et al. Long-term trends in the use of complementary and
alternative medical therapies in the United States. Ann Intern Med
2001; 135: 262-268.

----- PAGE 35 -----
10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24
25

26

27

28

29

30

31

Introduction

Barnes P et al. Complementary and alternative medicine among
adults: United States, 2002. Adv Data 2004; 343: 1-19.

Tindle HA et al. Trends in use of complementary and alternative
medicine by US adults: 1997-2002. Alt Ther Health Med 2005; 11(1):
42-49.

Blumenthal M. Herb sales down 7.4 percent in mainstream market.
Herbalgram 2005; 66: 63.

MacLennan AH et al. The continuing use of complementary and
alternative medicine in South Australia: costs and beliefs in 2004. MJA
2006; 184: 27-31.

Barnes J. Herbal medicine. Pharm J 1998; 260: 344-348.

Thomas KJ e¢ al. Use and expenditure on complementary medicine in
England: a population based survey. Complement Ther Med 2001; 9:
2-11.

Dixon A. et al. Complementary and Alternative Medicine in the UK
and Germany — research and evidence on supply and demand. Anglo-
German Foundation for the Study of Industrial Society 2003. http://
www.agf.org.uk December 2005.

House of Lords Select Committee on Science and Technology Session
1999-2000, 6th Report. Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 21
November 2000.

Ernst E, White AR. The BBC survey of complementary medicine use
in the UK. Complement Ther Med 2000; 8: 32-36.

Brevoort P. The US botanical market — an overview. Herbalgram 1996;
36: 49-57.

Brevoort P. The booming US botanical market. A new overview.
Herbalgram 1998; 44: 33-46.

Rogers G. Herb consumers' attitudes, preferences profiled in new
market study. Herbalgram 2005; 65: 60-61.

Blumenthal M. Herbs and phytomedicines in the European
Community. In: Blumenthal M, ed. The Complete German
Commission E Monographs. Therapeutic Guide to Herbal Medicines.
Austin, Texas: American Botanical Council, 1998.

Institute of Medical Statistics (IMS) Self-Medication International.
Herbals in Europe. London: IMS Self-Medication International, 1998.
Complementary Medicines — UK. Mintel International Group Ltd.
April 2003.

Complementary Medicines — UK. Mintel International Group Ltd.
March 2005.

EMEA Herbal Medicinal Products Committee. Public statement on
the risks associated with the use of herbal products containing
Aristolochia species. www.emea.curopa.eu/pdfs/human/hmpc/
13838105en.pdf November 2005.

Barnes J et al. St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.): a review of
its chemistry, pharmacology and clinical properties. J Pharm
Pharmacol 2001; 53: 583-600.

O'Sullivan HM, Lum K. The poisoning of ‘awa: the non-traditional
use of an ancient remedy. Pac Health Dialog. 2004; 11(2): 211-215.
Ernst E. Contamination of herbal medicines. Pharm J 2005; 275: 167—
168.

De Smet PAGM. Health risks of herbal remedies: An update. Clinical
Pharmacology Therapeutics 2004; 76(1): 1-17.

Barnes J, Abbot NC. Experiences with complementary remedies: a
survey of community pharmacists. Pharm J 1999; 263 (Suppl. Suppl.)
R37-R43.

Kayne S. A helping hand? Chemist and Druggist 2002; 12: 26-28.
Naidu S et al. Attitudes of Australian pharmacists toward
complementary and alternative medicines. Annals Pharmacotherapy
2005; 39: 1456-1461.

Welna EM et al. Pharmacists’ personal use, professional practice
behaviours, and perceptions regarding herbal and other natural
products. Journal American Pharmacists Association 2003; 4.
602-611.

Ernst E. Complementary medicine pharmacist. Pharm J 2004; 273:
197-198.

Ernst E. Recommended information sources. Pharm J 2005; 275: 348.
Nathan JP et al. Availability of and attitudes toward resources on
alternative medicine products in the community pharmacy setting. ]
Am Pharm Assoc 2005; 45(6): 734-739.

Evans WC. Trease and Evans' Pharmacognosy, 15th edn. London: WB
Saunders, 2001.

Council Directive 2001/83/EC. Official Journal of the European
Communities 2001; 311: 67-128.

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

41

42

43

45

47

48

49

50

S1

52.

53

54

5S

56

57

58

Britt R. The New EC Systems in the UK, Regulatory Affairs ] 1995; 6:
380-384.

Gaedcke F, Steinhoff B. The European marketing authorisation
system. In: Herbal Medicinal Products. Stuttgart: medpharm GmbH
Scientific Publishers, 2003: 81-88.

Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 of the European Parliament and of the
Council Official Journal of the European Communities 2004; 136: 1-
33.

AESGP (Association of the European Self-medication Industry).
Herbal Medicinal Products in the European Union, 15 March 1999.
http://www.aesgp.be

Steinhoff B. The contribution of the European Scientific Cooperative
on Phytotherapy and World Health Organisation monographs. Drug
Inform J 1999; 33: 17-22.

Gaedcke F, Steinhoff B. Legal provisions relating to the efficacy and
safety of herbal medicinal products: Attempts to harmonise the
assessment criteria. In: Herbal Medicinal Products. Stuttgart:
medpharm GmbH Scientific Publishers, 2003:117-130.

ESCOP Monographs (European Scientific Cooperative on
Phytotherapy). The Scientific Foundation for Herbal Medicinal
Products, Exeter. 2nd edition (2003).

Council Directive 2004/24/EC. Official Journal of the European
Communities 2004, 136: 85-90.

EMEA Committee for Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC).
Community Herbal Monographs. www.emea.curopa.eu/htms/human/
hmpc/hmpcmonographsadopt.htm March 2007.

Medicines Act Leaflet (MAL) 8. A Guide to the Status under the
Medicines Act of Borderline Products for Human Use. London:
Medicines Control Agency.

Medicines Act Leaflet (MAL 2). Guidelines on Safety and Efficacy
Requirements for Herbal Medicinal Products. Guidance Notes on
Applications for Product Licences; 1989, 53-54.

Statutory Instrument (SI) 2005:2759. The Medicines (Marketing
Authorisations etc.) Amendment Regulations 2005.

The Medicines Act, 1968. London: HM Stationery Office.

Appelbe GE, Wingfield J. Dale and Appelbe's Pharmacy Law and
Ethics, 8th edn. London: Pharmaceutical Press, 2005.

CPMP/QWP 2819/00 (EMEA/CVMP 814/00) Guideline on Quality of
Herbal Medicinal Products. EMEA website: www.emea.curopa.cu/
pdfs/human/qwp/281900en.pdf October 2006.

CPMP/QWP 2820/00 (EMEA/CVMP 814/00) Guideline on
Specifications: test procedures and acceptance criteria for herbal
drugs, herbal drug preparations and herbal medicinal products.
EMEA website: www.emea.europa.cu/pdfs/human/qwp/282000en.pdf
October 2006.

CPMP/CVMP Note for Guidance on Manufacture of Herbal
Medicinal. Products. The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the
European Union 1992, vol. 1V: 127-129.

Statutory Instrument (SI) 1971: 1450. The Medicines (Exemptions
from Licences) (Special and Transitional Cases) Order.

MHRA Consultation Letter MLX 299. Proposals for the reform of the
regulation of unlicensed herbal remedies in the United Kingdom made
up to meet the needs of individual patients. March 2004.

Holder S. Regulatory aspects of herbal medicines: a global view. The
Regulatory Review 2001; 4; 13-17.

Reminder: Safety of Traditional Chinese Medicines and herbal
remedies. Current Problems 2004; 30: 10.

Traditional Herbal Medicines Registration Scheme: Future changes to
Section 12(2) of the Medicines Act? MHRA website: http://www.
mhra.gov.uk February 2006.

Statutory Instrument (SI) 1984: 769, The Medicines (Products Other
than Veterinary Drugs) (General Sales List) Order, 1984, as amended
by SI 1985:1540, SI 1987: 910, SI 1989: 969 and SI 1990: 1129.
Statutory Instrument (SI) 1983: 1212, The Medicines (Products Other
than Veterinary Drugs) (Prescription Only) Order 1983, as amended.
Statutory Instrument (SI) 1977: 2130, The Medicines Retail Sale or
Supply of Herbal Remedies Order, 1977.

Statutory Instrument (SI) 2001:1841, The Medicines (Aristolochia and
Mu Tong etc) (Prohibition) Order, 2001.

Statutory Instrument (SI) 2002:3170, The Medicines for Human Use
(Kava-kava) (Prohibition) Order, 2002.

----- PAGE 36 -----
59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

Medicines Control Agency. Review of herbal ingredients for use in
unlicensed herbal medicinal products.. www.mhra.gov.uk September
2001

Anon. National Policy on Traditional Medicine and Regulation of
Herbal Medicines: Report of a WHO global survey. Geneva: WHO,
2005S.

Anon. Regulatory Situation of Herbal Medicines — a Worldwide
Review. Geneva: WHO, 1998.

Anon. Legal Status of Traditional Medicine and Complementary/
Alternative Medicine: A Worldwide Review. Geneva: WHO, 2001.
World Health Organization. WHO Guidelines for Developing
Consumer Information on Proper Use of Traditional Medicines and
Complementary/Alternative Medicines. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization, 2004.

World Health Organization. WHO Guidelines on Safety Monitoring
of Herbal Medicines in Pharmacovigilance Systems. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2004.

World Health Organization. WHO Guidelines on Good Agricultural
and Collection Practices (GACP) for Medicinal Plants. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2003.

Briggs D. The regulation of herbal medicines in Australia. Toxicology
2002; 181-182: 565-570.

Natural Health Products Directorate. A Regulatory Framework for
Natural Health Products. www.he-sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/prodnatur/about-
apropos/glance-apercu_e-html February 2006.

The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act 1994 Pub L No.
103-417 Washington.

FDA Centre for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. Dietary
supplements. http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/supplmnt.html

Marcus DM, Grollman AP. Botanical medicines — the need for new
regulations. N Engl J Med 2002; 347(25): 2073-2076.

Wechsler J. Standards for supplements. Pharmaceutical Technology
Europe 2003; March: 18-20.

Food and Drug Administration. FDA announces major initi
dietary supplements. 4 November 2004. www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/news/
2004/NEW01130.html

De Smet PAGM. Toxicological outlook on quality assurance of herbal
remedies. In: Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs, vol 1. Berlin: Springer
Verlag, 1992.

De Smet PAGM. Overview of herbal quality control. Drug Inform J
1999; 33: 717-724.

Bauer R. Quality criteria and standardization of
phytopharmaceuticals: Can acceptable drug standards be achieved?
Drug Inform J 1998, 32: 101-110.

Busse W. The significance of quality for efficacy and safety of herbal
medicinal products. Drug Inform J 2000, 34: 15-23.

Corbin Winslow L. Herbs as medicines. Arch Intern Med 1998: 158:
2192-2199,

Gaedcke F, Steinhoff B. Quality assurance of herbal medicinal
products. In: Herbal Medicinal Products. Stuttgart: medpharm GmbH
Scientific Publishers, 2003: 37-66.

IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of
Chemicals to Humans. Lyons, France: IARC Press, 2002 Volume 82.
Vanherweghem JL, et al. Rapidly progressive interstitial renal fibrosis
in young women: association with slimming regimen including
Chinese herbs. Lancet 1993; 341: 135-139.

Cosyns JP et al. Chinese herbs nephropathy: A clue to Balkan endemic
nephropathy. Kidney Int 1994; 45: 1680-1688.

Van Ypersele C, Vanherweghem JL. The tragic paradigm of Chinese
herb nephropathy. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1995; 10: 157-160.
Cosyns J-P et al. Urothelial lesions in Chinese-herb nephropathy. Am J
Kidney Dis 1999; 33: 1011-1017.

Nortier JL et al. Urothelial carcinoma associated with the use of a
Chinese herb (Aristolochia fangchi). N Engl ] Med 2000; 342: 1686—
1692.

Lord G et al. Nephropathy caused by Chinese herbs in the UK. Lancet
1999; 354: 481482.

Lord GM et al. Urothelial malignant disease and Chinese herbal
nephropathy. Lancet 2001; 358: 1515-1516.

FDA Press Release. Vital Nutrients Recalls Joint Ease & Verified
Quality Brand Joint Comfort Complex because of adverse health risk
ciated with aristolochic acid. www.fda.gov-USA June 2001.

ives for

as:

Introduction

88 Charvill A. Investigation of formulated Traditional Chinese Medicines
(TCM) and raw herbs for the presence of Aristolochia species. British
Pharmaceutical Conference Science Proceedings 2001. London:
Pharmaceutical Press, 2001: 295.

89 Gold LS, Slone TH Aristolochic acid, an herbal carcinogen, sold on
the Web after FDA alert. N Engl J] Med 2003; 349: 1576-1577.

90 Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA).
Herbal Safety News. www.mhra.gov.uk

91 Slifman NR. Contamination of botanical dietary supplements by
Digitalis lanata. N Engl ] Med 1998; 339: 806-811.

92 But PPH et al. Adulterants of herbal products can cause poisoning.
BM] 1996; 313: 117.

93 Tai YT et al. Cardiotoxicity after accidental herb-induced aconite
poisoning. Lancet 1992; 340: 1254-1256.

94 Read BE Bastard anise poisoning and its antidotal measures. Chinese ]
Physiol 1926; 1: 15-22.

95 Biessels GJ et al. Epileptic seizure after a cup of tea: intoxication with
Japanese star anise. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd 2002; 146: 808-811.

96 L'Agence francaise de sécurité sanitaire des produits de santé
(Afssaps). Badiane et risque convulsive, 2001. Available at: http://
agmed.sante.gouv.fr/htm/10/filcoprs/011103c.htm February 2006.

97 Laboratoires de la DGCCRE. Mise en évidence de la contamination de
la badiane de Chine (Illicium verum Hoocker f.) par d'autres espéces
de badiane, Marseille, France; 2003. Available at: www.finances.gouv.
fr/DGCCR F/activites/labos/2001/badiane.htm. Accessed April 22,
2003.

98 2002/75/EC: Commission Decision of 1 February 2002 laying down
special conditions on the import from third countries of star anise
(text with EEA relevance) (notified under document number C(2002)
379). Off ] Eur Commun 2002; L: 33-34.

99 Diego Ize-Ludlow MD et al. Neurotoxicities in infants seen with
consumption of star anise tea. Pediatrics 2004; 114 (5): e653-e656.

100 Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China (English edition).
Chemical Industry Press, 2005.

101 Ko R. Adulterants in Asian patent medicines. N Engl ] Med 1998; 339:
847.

102 Au AM et al. Screening methods for drugs and heavy metals in
Chinese patent medicines. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 2000; 65:
112-119.

103 Koh H-L, Woo S$-O. Chinese Proprietary Medicine in Singapore:
Regulatory control of toxic heavy metals and undeclared drugs. Drug
Safety 2000; 23: 351-362.

104 Huang WF et al. Adulteration by synthetic substances of traditional
Chinese medicines in Taiwan. J Clin Pharmacol 1997; 37: 344-350.

105 Singapore Ministry of Health Press Statement. Chinese Proprietary
Medicine Found Adulterated with Sildenafil. 3 March 2001.

106 FDA Press Release. Anso Comfort Capsules Recalled by Distributor.
13 February 2001. www.fda.gov-USA.

107 Lau KK et al. Phenytoin poisoning after using Chinese proprietary
medicines. Hum Exp Toxicol 2000; 19: 385-386.

108 FDA Press Release. State Health Director Warns Consumers about
Prescription Drugs in Herbal Products. 15 February 2000. www.fda.
gov-USA.

109 Medicines Control Agency. Hypoglycaemia following the use of
Chinese herbal medicine Xiaoke Wan. Curr Probl Pharmacovigilance
2001; 27: 8.

110 Wu M-S. Multiple tubular dysfunction induced by mixed Chinese
herbal medicines containing cadmium. Nephrol Dialysis Transplant
1996; 11: 867-870.

111 Schaumburg HH e¢ al. Alopecia and sensory polyneuropathy from
thallium in a Chinese herbal medication. JAMA. 1992; 268: 3430-
3431.

112 Kew J et al. Arsenic and mercury intoxication due to Indian ethnic
remedies. BMJ 1993; 306: 506-507.

113 Sheerin NS et al. Simultaneous exposure to lead, arsenic and mercury
from Indian ethnic medicines. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1994; 48: 332-333.

114 Cuncha J et al. Arsenic and acute lethal intoxication. Hong Kong
Pharm J] 1998; 7: 50-53.

115 Ernst E. Adulteration of Chinese herbal medicines with synthetic
drugs: a systematic review. Journal of Internal Medicine 2002; 252:
107-113.

116 Ernst E. Heavy metals in traditional Indian remedies. Eur J Clin Phar
2002; 57: 891-896.

----- PAGE 37 -----
Introduction

117 Ernst E. Toxic heavy metals and undeclared drugs in Asian herbal
medicines. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2002; 23(3): 136-139.

118 Cole MR, Fetrow CW. Adulteration of dietary supplements. Am J]
Health-Syst Pharm 2003; 60: 1576-1580.

119 Ernst E. Risks of herbal medicinal products. Pharmacoepidemiology
Drug Safety 2004; 13: 767-771

120 Saper RB et al. Heavy metal content of Ayurvedic herbal medicine
products. JAMA 2004; 292: 2868-2873.

121 EMEA Committee for Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC). Guideline
on Good Agricultural and Collection Practice for starting materials of
herbal origin. www.emea.curopa.eu/pdfs/human/hmpc/2468 1605en.
pdf August 2006.

122 World Health Organization. Quality Control of Medicinal Plant
Materials. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1998.

123 European Pharmacopoeia, 5th edn. 2005. Strasbourg: Council of
Europe, 2005.

124 Phillipson JD. Quality assurance of medicinal plants. In: Franz C et al.
First World Congress on medicinal and aromatic plants for human
welfare, WOCMAP, quality, phytochemistry, industrial aspects,
economic aspects. Acta Horticult 1993; 333: 117-122.

125 Houghton P. Establishing identification criteria for botanicals. Drug
Inform ] 1998; 32: 461469.

126 De Smet PAGM. Health risks of herbal remedies. Drug Safety 1995;
13: 81-93.

127 De Smet PAGM. Adverse effects of herbal remedies. Adverse Drug
React Bull 1997; 183: 695-698.

128 Shaw D et al. Traditional remedies and food supplements. A 5-year
toxicological study (1991-1995). Drug Safety 1997; 17: 342-356.

129 Chitturi S, Farrell GC. Herbal hepatotoxicity: an expanding but
poorly defined problem. Journal Gastroenterology and Hepatology
2000; 15: 1093-1099.

130 Pittler MH, Ernst E. Systematic review: hepatotoxic events associated
with herbal medicinal products. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2003; 18:
451-471.

131 Tisserand R, Balacs T. Essential Oil Safety. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1995.

132 EMEA HMPC. Public Statement on the use of herbal medicinal
products containing asarone. www.emea.europa.eu/pdfs/human/
hmpc/13921505en.pdf November 2005.

133 EMEA HMPC. Public Statement on the use of herbal medicinal
products containing estragole. www.emea.europa.eu/pdfs/human/
hmpce/13721205en.pdf November 2005.

134 EMEA HMPC. Public Statement on the use of herbal medicinal
products containing methyleugenol. www.emea.curopa.eu/pdfs/
human/hmpe/1383630Sen.pdf November 2005.

135 De Smet PAGM. Aristolochia species. In: Adverse Effects of Herbal
Drugs, vol 1. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1992.

136 D'Arcy PE. Adverse reactions and interactions with herbal medicines.
Part 1. Adverse reactions. Adverse Drug React Toxicol Rev 1991; 10:
189-208.

137 Mattocks AR. Chemistry and Toxicology of Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids.
New York: Academic Press, 1986.

138 Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Mistletoe — the magic herb. Pharm J
1982; 229: 437-439.

139 Tyler VE. The Honest Herbal, 3rd edn. New York: Howarth Press,
1993.

140 Chandler RF et al. Controversial laetrile. Pharm J 1984; 232: 330-332.

141 Statutory Instrument (SI) 1984:87. The Medicines (Cyanogenetic
Substances) Order 1984.

142 Ljunggren B. Severe phototoxic burn following celery ingestion. Arch
Dermatol 1990; 126: 1334-1336.

143 Boffa MJ et al. Celery soup causing severe phototoxicity during PUVA
therapy. Br J Dermatol 1996; 135: 330-345.

144 Medicines Control Agency. Psoralea corylifolia fruit in Traditional
Chinese Medicines causing severe skin reaction. Curr Probl
Pharmacovigilance 2001; 27: 12.

145 EMEA HMPC. Public statement on chamomilla containing herbal
medicinal products. www.emea.curopa.eu/pdfs/human/hmpe/
1383090Sen.pdf March 2006.

146 Nordeng H, Havnen G. Use of herbal drugs in pregnancy: a survey
among 400 Norwegian women. Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug
safety 2004; 13: 371-380.

147 Gallo M et al. The use of herbal medicine in pregnancy and lactation.
In: Koren G, ed. Maternal-fetal toxicology. A clinician's guide. 3rd ed.
New York: Marcel Dekker; 2001; 569-601.

148 Roulet M et al. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease in newborn infant of a
woman drinking herbal tea. J Pediatr 1988; 112: 433-436.

149 Allen JR et al. Are herbal teas safe for infants and children? Aust
Family Physician 1989; 18: 1017-1019.

150 Sawini-Sikand A et al. Use of complementary/alternative therapies
among children in primary care pediatrics. Ambul Pediatr 2002; 2: 99-
103.

151 OttoliniMC et al. Complementary and alternative medicine use
among children in Washington, DC area. Ambul Pediatr 2000; 1: 122—
125.

152 Lim A et al. Survey of complementary and alternative medicine use at
a tertiary children's hospital. Journal of Paediatrics and Child Health
2005; 41(8): 424-427.

153 Hrastinger A et al. Is there clinical evidence supporting the use of
botanical dietary supplements in children? Journal of Pediatrics 2005;
146: 311-317.

154 Ernst E. Herbal medicines for children. Clin Pediatr 2003; 42: 193-196.

155 Ernst E. Serious adverse effects of unconventional therapi
children and adolescents: a systematic review of recent evidence. Eur ]
Pediatr 2003; 162: 72-80.

156 Foster D et al. Alternative medicine use in older Americans. ] Am
Geriatr Soc 2000; 48: 1560-1565.

157 Canter PH, Ernst E. Herbal supplement use by persons aged over 50
years in Britain. Drugs Aging 2004; 21(9): 597-605.

158 Raji MA et al. Ethnic differences in herb and vitamin/mineral use in
the elderly. Annals of Pharmacotherapy 2005; 39: 1019-1023.

159 Ernst E. Herbal Medications for common ailments in the elderly.
Drugs Ageing 1999; 15: 423-428.

160 Mashour NH. Herbal medicine for the treatment of cardiovascular
di e. Arch Intern Med 1998; 158: 2225-2234.

161 Ernst E. Cardiovascular adverse effects of herbal medicines: a
systematic review of recent literature. Canadian Journal of Cardiology
2003; 19(7): 818-827.

162 Izzo AA et al. Cardiovascular pharmacotherapy and herbal medicines:
the risk of drug interaction. Int J Cardiol 2005; 98(1):1-14.

163 British Heart Foundation. Herbs and the heart. 28 July 2003 (www.
bhf.org.uk January 2006).

164 Ernst E. A primer of CAM commonly used by cancer patients. MJA
2001; 174: 88-92.

165 Richardson MA, Straus SE. Complementary and alternative medicine:
Opportunities and challenges for cancer management and research.
Semin Oncol 2002; 29: 531-

166 Lowenthal RM. Public illne:
CAM for a prominent polit
576-S79.

167 DiGianni LM et al. Complementary and alternative medicine use
among women with breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2002 (Suppl.
Suppl.18); 20: 345-388.

168 Girgis A et al. The use of complementary and alternative therapies by
patients with cancer. Oncol Res 2005; 15(5): 281-289.

169 Morris KT et al. A comparison of complementary therapy use
between breast cancer patients and patients with other primary tumor
sites. Am J Surg 2000; 179: 407-411.

170 Scott JA et al. Use of complementary and alternative medicine in
patients with cancer: a UK survey. Eur J Oncol Nurs 2005; 9(2): 131-
137.

171 Molassiotis A et al. Complementary and alternative medicine use in
lung cancer patients in eight European countries. Conrplement Ther
Clin Pract 2006; 12(1): 34-39.

172 Molassiotis A et al. Complementary and alternative medicine use in
colorectal cancer patients in seven European countries. Complement
Ther Med 2005; 13(4): 251-257.

173 Molassiotis A et al. Complementary and alternative medicine use in
breast cancer patients in Europe. Support Care Cancer 2006; 14(3):
260-267.

174 Werneke U et al. Potential health risks of complementary alternative
medicines in cancer patients. British Journal of Cancer 2004; 90: 408-
413.

175 Richardson MA et al. Discrepant views of oncologists and cancer
patients on CAM. Support Care Cancer 2004; 12: 797-804.

for

iow the community recommended
an with cancer. MJA 2005; 183 (11/12):

----- PAGE 38 -----
176 Mathijssen RH et al. Effects of St John's Wort on irinotecan
metabolism. J Natl Cancer Inst 2002; 94: 1247-1249.

177 Sparreboom A et al. Herbal remedies in the United States: Potential
adverse interactions with anticancer agents. J Clin Oncol 2004; 22:
2489-2503.

178 McLesky CH et al. The incidence of herbal and selected nutraceutical
use in surgical patients. Anaesthesiology 1999; 91 (3A): A1168.

179 Ang-lee MK et al. Herbal medicines and peri operative care. JAMA
2001; 286: 208-216.

180 Adusumilli P e¢ al. The prevalence and predictors of herbal medicine
use in surgical patients. J Am Coll Surg 2004: 198(4): 583-590.

181 Noonan K et al. Herbal medication use in the pediatric surgical
patient. Journal Pediatric Surgery 2004; 39(3): 500-503.

182 American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA). What you should know
about herbal and dietary supplement use and anesthesia. www.asahq.
org/patientEducation/herbPatient.pdf February 2006.

183 American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA). What you should know

nes and other dietary

ion/herbPhysician.pdf

about your patients’ use of herbal medi

supplements. www.asahq.org/patientEduca
February 2006.

184 Royal College of Anaesthetists. You and Your Anaesthetic. 2nd
edition. www.rcoa.ac.uk/docs/yaya.doc January 2003.

185 Armato P, Marcus DM. Review of alternative therapies for the
treatment of menopausal symptoms. Climacteric 2003; 6: 278-284.

186 Mahady GB et al. Botanical dietary supplements usage in peri- and
postmenopausal women. Menopause 2003; 10: 65-72.

187 Barnes J. Women's health. Pharm J 2003; 270: 16-18.

188 Stafford RS et al. Women's decision-making concerning alternative
menopause treatments post WHI: Results from national on-line
survey [abstract]. Washington, DC: North American Menopause
Society 2004 Annual Meeting; October 6-9, 2004. Abstract P-125.

189 Mason P. How effective are complementary therapies for menopausal
symptoms? Pharm ] 2004; 273: 59-61.

190 Cos Pet al. Phytoestrogens: recent developments. Planta Medica 2003;
69: 589-599.

191 Bodinet C, Freudenstein J. Influence of marketed herbal menopause
preparations on MCEF-7 cell proliferation. Menopause 2004; 11(3):
281-289.

192 Program on breast cancer and environmental risk factors. Herbal
medicines and breast cancer risk. http://envirocancer.cornell.edu/
factsheet/diet/fs53.herbal.cfm (accessed January 2006).

193 Fang CY et al. Correlates of soy food consumption in women at
increased risk for breast cancer. J Am Diet Assoc 2005; 105(10):1552—
1558.

194 Huntley A. Drug-herb interactions with herbal medicines for
menopause. Journal British Menopause Society 2004; 10(4): 162-165.

195 Anon. Grapefruit and drug effects. Drugs Q 1999; 3: 25-28.

196 Huang SM et al. Drug interactions with herbal products and
grapefruit juice: A conference report. Clinical Pharmacology
Therapeutics 2004; 75(1): 112.

197 Fujita KI. Food-drug interactions via human cytochrome P450 3A
(CYP3A). Drug Metabol Drug Interact 2004; 20(4): 195-217.

198 Ernst E. Possible interactions between synthetic and herbal medicinal
products. Perfusion 2000; 13: 4-15.

199 Fugh-Berman A. Herb-drug interactions. Lancet 2000; 355: 134-138.

200 Miller L. Selected clinical considerations focusing on known and
potential drug-herb interactions. Arch Intern Med 1998; 158: 2200—
2211.

201 Brown R. Potential interactions of herbal medicines with
antipsychotics, antidepressants and hypnotics. Eur J Herb Med 1997;
3: 25-28.

202 Barnes J et al. Herbal interactions. Pharm J 2003; 270: 118-121.

203 Williamson EM. Drug interactions between herbal and prescription
medicines. Drug Safety 2003; 26(15): 1075-1092.

204 Mannel M. Drug interactions with St John's Wort. Drug Safety 2004;
27(11): 773-797.

205 Hu Z et al. Herb-drug interactions. Drugs. 2005; 65(9); 1239-1282.

206 Williamson EM. Interactions between herbal and conventional
medicines. Expert Opinion Drug Safety. 2005; 4(2): 355-378.

207 Boyle F. Herbal medicines can interfere with breast cancer treatment.
Med J Aust 1997; 167: 286.

208 Holden W. Use of herbal remedies and potential drug interactions in
rheumatology outpatients. Ann Rheum Dis 2005; 64: 790.

Introduction

209 Cheng TO. Herbal interactions with cardiac drugs. Arch Intern Med
2000; 160: 870-871.

210 Izzo AA, Ernst E. Interactions between herbal medicines and
prescribed drugs. A systematic review. Drugs 2001; 61(15): 2163-2175.

211 Coxeter PD et al. Herb-drug interactions: an evidence based approach.
Current Medicinal Chemistry 2004; 11: 1513-1525.

212 Halil M e¢ al. No alteration in the PFA-100 in vitro bleeding time
induced by the Ginkgo biloba special extract, Egb 761, in elderly
patents with mild cognitive impairment. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis
2005; 16: 349-35.

213 Gaus W et al. Identification of adverse drug reactions by evaluation of

a prescription database, demonstrated for 'risk of bleeding’. Methods
Inf Med 2005; 44: 697-703.

214 Stenton SB et al. Interactions between warfarin and herbal products,
minerals and vitamins: a pharmacist's guide. Can J Hosp Pharm 2001;
54: 184-190.

215 Smith L et al. Co-ingestion of herbal medicines and warfarin. Br ] Gen
Pract 2004; 54(503): 439-441.

216 Ramsay NA. Complementary and alternative medicine use among
patients starting warfarin. British Journal Haematology 2005; 130(5):
777-780.

217 Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Possible
interaction between warfarin and cranberry juice. Curr Probl
Pharmacovigilance 2003; 29: 8.

218 Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Interaction
between warfarin and cranberry juice: new advice Curr Probl
Pharmacovigilance 2004; 30: 10.

219 Barnes J. Pharmacovigilance of herbal medicines: a UK perspective.
Drug Safety 2003; 26(12): 829-851.

220 Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Patient
reporting of suspected adverse drug reactions. www.mhra.gov.uk
February 2006.

221 Farah MH et al. International reporting of adverse health effects
associated with herbal medicines. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Safety
2000; 9: 105-112.

222 World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for International
Drug Monitoring. Draft guidelines for herbal ATC classification.
Uppsala: The Uppsala Monitoring Centre, 2002.

223 Fucik H et al. Building a computerised herbal substance register for
implementation and use in the WHO international drug monitoring
programme. Drug Information Journal 2002; 36: 839-854.

224 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (1). An introduction to herbal medicinal
products. Pharm J 2002; 268: 804-806.

225 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (2). Depression. Pharm J 2002; 268:
908-910.

226 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (3). Cognitive deficiency and dementia.
Pharm J, 2002; 269: 160-162.

227 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (4). Hyperlipidaemia. Pharm J 2002;
269: 193-195.

228 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (5). Insomnia. Pharm J 2002; 269: 219-
221.

229 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (6). Benign prostatic hyperplasia. Pharm
J 2002; 269: 250-252.

230 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (7). Colds. Pharm J 2002; 269: 716-718.

231 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (8). Gastrointestinal system and liver
disorders Pharm J] 2002; 269: 848-850.

232 Ernst E, Pittler MH. The efficacy of herbal drugs. In: Herbal
Medicine: a Concise Overview for Professionals. London:
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2000: 69-81.

233 Ernst E. The clinical efficacy of herbal treatments: an overview of
recent systematic reviews. Pharm J 1999; 262: 85-87.

234 Ernst E. Herbal medicines: where is the evidence? BMJ 2000; 321:
395-396.

235 Linde K et al. Systematic reviews of herbal medicines — an annotated
bibliography: Forsch Komplementarmed Klass Naturheilkd 2003; 10
(Suppl. Suppl.1): 17-27.

236 Ernst E. The efficacy of herbal medicine — an overview. Fundam Clin
Pharmacol 2005; 19(4): 405-409.

237 The Cochrane Library. www.update-software.com/cochrane/

238 Linde K et al. St John's Wort for depression. The Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews 2006 Issue 1.

----- PAGE 39 -----
Introduction

239 Williamson EM. Synergy — myth or reality? In: Herbal Medicine: a
Concise Overview for Professionals. London: Butterworth-
Heinemann, 2000: 43-8.

240 Williamson EM. Synergy and other interactions in phytomedicines.
Phytomedicine 2001; 8(5): 401-409.

241 Wurglics M et al. Comparison of German St John's wort products
according to hyperforin and total hypericin content. J Am Pharm
Assoc 2001; 41: 560-566.

242 Bergonzi MC et al. Variability in the content of the constituents of
Hypericum perforatum L. and some commercial extracts. Drug Dev
Indust Pharm 2001; 26: 491-497.

243 Chandrasekera DH et al. Quantitative analysis of the major
constituents of St John's wort with HPLC-ESI-MS. J] Pharm
Pharmacol 2005; 57(12):1645-1652.

----- PAGE 40 -----
- Chemical Constituents of Plants Used
as Herbal Medicines

All living organisms produce numerous chemical substances that
are termed natural products. Those natural products that are
common to all life forms are known collectively as primary
metabolites and are exemplified by carbohydrates, proteins and
fats. Thus, many of the chemical building blocks of primary
metabolism are found in all medicinal plants (e.g. amino acids,
common sugars, such as glucose, and fatty acids). In addition to
primary metabolites, plants also produce other compounds with a
more restricted distribution and these are referred to collectively
as secondary metabolites. Plants are a rich source of secondary
metabolites and some of these are of such limited distribution that
they are found only in a particular genus (e.g. Papaver), or even in
only a single species (e.g. Papaver somniferum). On the other
hand, some secondary metabolites are widely distributed through-
out many of the plant families. It is not always understood why
particular plants produce specific secondary metabolites, but
some of them are known to have definite functions; for example,
some are toxic and form a defence against predators, while some
are attractive to insects and aid pollination. W hatever their roles
are within plants, many of them have pharmacological actions and
this has been exploited to provide medicinal drugs such as
codeine, morphine, digoxin and quinine. Some secondary
metabolites have proved to be too toxic for human use (e.g.
aconitine from aconite), but investigations of their mode of action
have stimulated research into synthetic analogues as potential
therapeutic agents.

For more details of plant secondary metabolites, the reader is
recommended to consult specialist texts, for example on the
biosynthesis of medicinal natural products (e.g. Dewick, 2002"),
on scientific background to herbal medicines (e.g. Evans, 2002;
Heinrich et al., 2003) and on specific chemical structures (e.g.
Harborne and Baxter, 1993; Dictionary of Natural Products
CD-ROM”).

Numerous secondary metabolites are derived from a common
biosynthetic precursor; for example, shikimic acid is involved in
the formation of coumarins, lignans, phenylpropanes and tannins.
Although each of these groups of secondary metabolites is
different chemically they all contain a common structural feature,
namely a C6-C3 moiety. Among the most prevalent of secondary
metabolites are alkaloids, glycosides and phenols. Examples of
these types of secondary metabolite can be found in many of the
medicinal plants.

e

Alkaloids

A typical alkaloid is chemically basic (alkaline) and contains a
secondary or tertiary amine function within a heterocyclic ring
(e.g. codeine). Alkaloids may be classified by their chemical
skeleta (Figure 1) into the following major types: pyrrolidine (e.g.
betonicine from white horehound); pyridine (e.g. gentianine from
gentian); piperidine (e.g. lobeline from lobelia); pyrrolizidine (e.g.
symphytine from comfrey); quinolizidine (e.g. sparteine from
broom); quinoline (e.g. quinine from cinchona); isoquinoline (e.g.
boldine from boldo); indole (e.g. harman from passionflower);

tropane (e.g. hyoscine from belladonna); imidazole (e.g. pilocar-
pine from jaborandi); and xanthine (e.g. caffeine from maté).
Biosynthetically related compounds that do not follow the above
definition of an alkaloid may also be referred to as alkaloids, for
example phenylalkylamines that do not contain an N-heterocyclic
ring (e.g. ephedrine from ephedra), or that are not basic (e.g.
colchicine from colchicum). Examples of medicinal plants that
contain alkaloids are given in Appendix 2, Table 15. For further
information on alkaloids the reader is referred to other texts (e.g.
references 1, 3 and 6).

Glycosides

A glycoside consists of two components, an aglycone (non-sugar)
part and a sugar part. The aglycone portion may be of several
different types of secondary metabolite (Figure 2), including
coumarin (e.g. scopolin from horse-chestnut, see also Appendix 2,
Table 16), flavonoid (e.g. rutin from buchu, see also Appendix 2,
Table 17), or hydroxyanthracene (e.g. cascaroside A from cascara,
see also Appendix 2, Table 1). The sugar moiety is linked to the
aglycone by a direct carbon-to-carbon bond (C-glycoside), or
through an oxygen-to-carbon bond (O-glycoside). Cyanide glyco-
sides, (e.g. amygdalin from apricot) release toxic hydrogen cyanide
when cells are damaged and act as a defence mechanism.
Glucosinolates (e.g. sinigrin from horseradish) contain nitrogen
and sulfur and are pungent. Hydroxyanthracene glycosides are the
active principles of the laxative herbs c

Appendix 2, Table 1).

ara and senna (see also

H

Pyrrolidine Pyridine Piperidine
CO CO Cr
N N a
N
Pyrrolizidine Quinolizidine — Quinoline

»

H
lsoquinoline Indole Tropane

H fe)
N H
cI HN ‘
uy,
oN N

H
Imidazole Xanthine

Figure 1 Examples of alkaloid skeleta.

----- PAGE 41 -----
CHO ~

Glucose-O ie) [e)

Scopolin

Glucose-O

QO OH
: : : CH20H

HY “Glucose

Cascaroside A

Figure 2. Examples of glycosides.

Phenolics

Many of the aromatic constituents of plants contain hydroxy
substituents and are phenolic. There is a wide variety of phenolics
in medicinal plants and they range in chemical structure from
simple phenolic acids (Figure 3), e.g. caffeic acid from artichoke,
to complex tannins (see Appendix 2, Table 20).

Where chemical structures are included in a monograph they
may be the active principles or they may be compounds that can
be used as chemical markers for that plant, i.e. they are present in
significant quantities or are otherwise characteristic for a
particular plant. As some compounds are of common occurrence
in medicinal plants, their chemical structures are not necessarily
included within a monograph. Some of the commonly encoun-
tered natural products, including mono-, sesqui-, di- and
triterpenes, flavonoids and tannins, are briefly summarised below.

Rt COOH
R2

R? R! R?_ | RS
p-Hydroxybenzoic acid H OH

it

Protocatechuic acid OH OH

Vanillic acid OCH3; | OH | H
Gallic acid OH OH | OH
Rt SS - COOH
R? RI R2
p-Coumaric acid H OH
Caffeic acid OH OH
Ferulic acid OCH3 | OH

Figure 3. Examples of simple phenolic acids.

Chemical Constituents of Plants Used as Herbal Medicines

Terpenes

Terpenes are derived from two CS units (isopentane), dimethy-
lallylpyrophosphate and isopentenylpyrophosphate. The mono-
terpenes contain two isopentane units (C10) and are constituents
of many volatile oils (see Appendix 2, Table 21). Some of the more
common monoterpenes are shown in Figure 4. Sesquiterpenes
contain three isopentane units (C15) and occur as different
skeletal types, e.g. eudesmane, germacrene, guaiane (Figure 5). A
large number of sesquiterpenes contain a y-lactone ring and these
are known as sesquiterpene lactones. Some sesquiterpene lactones
are allergenic (see Appendix 2, Table 11). Examples of different
skeletal types of molecule, including eudesmolide, germacranolide
and guaianolide (e.g. constituents of comfrey) and pseudoguaia-
nolide (e.g. matricine, chamomile), are illustrated in Figure 5.
Diterpenes are derived from four isopentane units (C20) and
examples of abietane (e.g. carnosic acid from sage), daphnane,
kaurene, labdane (e.g. rotundifarine from agnus castus), taxane
and tigliane are given in Figure 6. The ginkgolides from ginkgo are
examples of complex diterpenes. Triterpenes are derived from six
isopentane units (C30), and some commonly occurring com-
pounds are illustrated in Figure 7, e.g. campesterol, f-sitosterol,
stigmasterol, #- and B-amyrin, oleanoic and ursolic acids. Cardiac
glycosides (cardenolides, see Appendix 2, Table 2) and saponins
(see Appendix 2, Table 19) are examples of triterpenes that are less
widely distributed in plants than the triterpenes illustrated in

Figure 7.
5

a-Terpineol

OL,
aN

(-)-Menthol

oO
ie)
SS

(+)-Linalool

1,8-Cineole

oO

(+)-Menthone

(-)-Thujone (+)-Carvone {-)-Piperitone
OH
a-Pinene Camphor Carvacrol

Figure 4 Some common monoterpenes from volatile oils.

----- PAGE 42 -----
Chemical Constituents of Plants Used as Herbal Medicines on

Flavonoids

Flavonoids are biosynthesised from a phenylpropane unit (C6-
C3), derived via shikimic acid and phenylalanine, and a C6 unit
from three molecules of malonyl-CoA. They are widely
distributed in the plant kingdom and occur in many medicinal
plants (see Appendix 2, Table 17). There are five major types:
chalcones, flavanones, flavones, flavonols and anthocyanins
(Figure 8). The flavones and their 3-hydroxy analogues (flavonols)
are the most widespread. The five aglycones kaempferol,
quercetin, myricetin, apigenin and luteolin, as well as the
quercetin glycosides quercitrin and rutin are among the most
commonly present in medicinal plants (Figure 9).

Tannins

Tannins are also common constituents of many medicinal plants
(see Appendix 2, Table 20) and they occur as two major types —
the hydrolysable tannins and the non-hydrolysable (condensed)
tannins. The hydrolysable tannins are esters of sugars with
phenolic acids and they are either gallotannins (galloyl esters of
glucose), e.g. pentagalloyl glucose, or ellagitannins (hexahydrodi-
phenic acid, derived from two units of gallic acid, esters with
glucose), e.g. agrimoniin from agrimony. Non-hydrolysable
tannins, also known as condensed tannins or proanthocyanidins,

RQ

?

Eudesmane Germacrene
°
. [e)
Guaiane Eudesmolide
[e)
[e}
[e)
fe)
Germacranolide Guaianolide

eo

Pseudoguaianolide

Figure 5
lactones.

Some skeletal types of sesquiterpenes and sesquiterpene

are polymers of catechin or gallocatechin linked by C-C bonds
(e.g. cola tannins). Examples of some chemical structures of
hydrolysable and non-hydrolysable tannins are given in Figure 10.

A KP

Abietane Kaurane
Labdane Tigliane
Daphnane Taxane

Figure 6 Examples of some different skeletal types of diterpenes.

,

B-Sitosterol

,

Campesterol

MN

Stigmasterol

B-Amyrin CH3
Oleanolic acid COOH

Figure 7 Examples of some common triterpenes.

a-Amyrin CH3
Ursolic acid COOH

----- PAGE 43 -----
ry Chemical Constituents of Plants Used as Herbal Medicines

Chalcone Flavanone

CT
O. SS
OH
[e) [e}
Flavone Flavonol

@
s
»
OC
Anthocyanin

Figure 8 Examples of some flavonoid skeleta.

Kaempferol H OH
Quercetin H OH
Myricetin OH | OH

Rt | R2
Apigenin OH|H
Luteolin OH] OH

Figure 9 Examples of some common flavonoids.

OH
HO. fo) O
16em
OR

OH O R
Quercitrin Rhamnosyl

Rutin Rutinosyl

"Do

----- PAGE 44 -----
Chemical Constituents of Plants Used as Herbal Medicines iB

Hydrolysable tannins Non-hydrolysable tannins
HO OH

fe)
2 OH
HO HO. Qo 6 OH Cx

HO OH HO 0 |
H
HO. OH °
HO. ON oo OH
HO OH

OH
1,2,6-Trigalloyl glucose

OH
HO

Trimer of epicatechin

fe)
e] OH
Onan
HO [e)
le)
Ellagic acid

Figure 10 Examples of components of tannins.

References

1 Dewick PM. Medicinal Natural Products. A Biosynthetic Approach,
2nd edn. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons, 2002.

2 Evans WC. Trease and Evans Pharmacognosy, 15th edn. Edinburgh,
London: WB Saunders, 2002.

3 Heinrich M et al. Fundamentals of Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy.
Edinburgh, London: Churchill Livingstone, 2004.

4 Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary. London: Taylor
and Francis, 1993.

5. Dictionary of Natural Products (CD-ROM). London: Chapman &
Hall/CRC, 2003.

6 Cordell GA. Introduction to Alkaloids: a Biogenetic Approach. New
York: Wiley Interscience, 1981

----- PAGE 45 -----
- General References

General references are cited with the prefix

in the monographs

(e.g. 'G1').

1

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia and Therapeutic Compendium.
Analytical, quality control and therapeutic monographs. Santa Cruz,
California: American Herbal Pharmacopoeia, 1997-2005.

Bisset NG, ed. Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals (Wichtl M,
ed., German edition). Stuttgart: medpharm, 1994.

Blumenthal M e¢ al., eds. The Complete German Commission E
Monographs. Austin, Texas: American Botanical Council, 1998.
Blumenthal M et al., eds. Herbal Medicine. Expanded Commission E
Monographs. Austin, Texas: American Botanical Council, 2000.
Boon H, Smith M. The Botanical Pharmacy. The Pharmacology of 47
Common Herbs. Kingston: Quarry Press, 1999.

Bradley PR, ed. British Herbal Compendium, vol 1. Bournemouth:
British Herbal Medicine Association, 1992.

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia. Keighley: British Herbal Medicine
Association, 1983.

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia, 1990, vol 1. Bournemouth: British
Herbal Medicine Association, 1990.

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia, 1996. Exeter: British Herbal Medicine
Association, 1996

British Pharmaceutical Codex 1934. London: Pharmaceutical Press,
1934.

British Pharmaceutical Codex 1949. London: Pharmaceutical Press,
1949.

British Pharmaceutical Codex 1973. London: Pharmaceutical Press,
1973.

British Pharmacopoeia 1993. London: HMSO, 1993.

British Pharmacopoeia 1999. London: The Stationery Office, 1999
British Pharmacopoeia 2001. London: The Stationery Office, 2001.
Council of Europe. Flavouring Substances and Natural Sources of
Flavourings, 3rd edn. Strasbourg: Maisonneuve, 1981.

Council of Europe. Natural Sources of Flavourings. Report No. 1.
Strasbourg: Council of Europe, 2000.

Cupp MJ, ed. Toxicology and Clinical Pharmacology of Herbal
Products. Totawa, New Jersey: Humana Press, 2000.

De Smet PAGM et al., eds. Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs, vol 1.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1992.

De Smet PAGM et al., eds. Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs, vol 2.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1993.

De Smet PAGM et al., eds. Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs, vol 3.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1997.

Duke JA. Handbook of Medicinal Herbs. Boca Raton: CRC, 1985.
European Medicines Evaluation Agency. Herbal Medicinal Products
Working Party Draft Core Summary of Product Characteristics for
Valerian and Ispaghula (accessed 20 February 2002).

European Pharmacopoeia, 2nd edn. Strasbourg: Maisonneuve, 1980.
European Pharmacopoeia, 3rd edn. Strasbourg: Council of Europe,
1997.

European Pharmacopoeia, 3rd edn, 1998 Supplement. Strasbourg:
Council of Europe, 1998.

European Pharmacopoeia, 3rd edn, 1999 Supplement. Strasbourg:
Council of Europe, 1999.

European Pharmacopoeia, 4th edn, 2002. Strasbourg: Council of
Europe, 2002.

Evans WC. Trease and Evans' Pharmacognosy, 14th edn. London: WB
Saunders Company, 1998.

Farnsworth NR. Potential value of plants as sources of new
antifertility agents I. J Pharm Sci 1975; 64: 535-598.

Fetrow CW, Avila JR. Professional's Handbook of Complementary
and Alternative Medicines. Springhouse: Springhouse Corporation,
1999.

Foster S, Tyler VE. Tyler's Honest Herbal, 4th edn. New York: The
Haworth Herbal Press, 1999.

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

41

42

43

45

47

48

49

50

S1

52.

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

Frohne D, Pfander HJ. A Colour Atlas of Poisonous Plants. London:
Wolfe, 1984.

Grieve M. A Modern Herbal. Thetford, Norfolk: Lowe and Brydon,
1979.

Gruenwald J et al., eds. PDR for Herbal Medicines, 1st edn.
Montvale: Medical Economics Company, 1998.

Gruenwald J et al., eds. PDR for Herbal Medicines, 2nd edn.
Montvale: Medical Economics Company Inc, 2000.

The Medicines (Products other than Veterinary Drugs) (General Sales
List), SI No.769: 1984, as amended SI No.1540: 1985; SI No.1129:
1990; and SI No.2410: 1994.

Guenther E. The Essential Oils, six volumes. New York: Van
Nostrand, 1948-1952.

Hamon NW, Blackburn JL. Herbal Products — A Factual Appraisal for
the Health Care Professional. Winnipeg: Cantext, 1985.

Hoppe HA. Taschenbuch der Drogenkunde. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1981.
Leung AY. Encyclopedia of Common Natural Ingredients Used in
Food, Drugs and Cosmetics. New York-Chichester: Wiley, 1980.
Mabey R., ed. The Complete New Herbal. London: Elm Tree Books,
1988.

Martindale. The Complete Drug Reference, 32nd edn. (Parfitt K, ed.).
London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1999.

Martindale: The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 28th edn. (Reynolds JEF, ed.).
London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1982.

Martindale: The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 29th edn. (Reynolds JEF, ed.).
London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1989.

Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia: 30th edn. (Reynolds JEF, ed.).
London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1993.

Martindale. The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 31st edn. (Reynolds JEF, ed.).
London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.

The Merck Index. An Encyclopedia of Chemicals, Drugs and
Biologicals, 11th edn. Rahway, NJ: Merck, 1989.

Mills SY. The Dictionary of Modern Herbalism. Wellingborough:
Thorsons, 1985.

Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy. Edinburgh:
Churchill Livingstone, 2000.

Mitchell J, Rook A. Botanical Dermatology — Plants and Plant
Products Injurious to the Skin. Vancouver: Greengrass, 1979.
Monographs on the Medicinal Uses of Plant Drugs, Fascicules 1 and 2
(1996), Fascicules 3, 4 and 5 (1997), Fascicule 6 (1999). Exeter:
European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy.

Morelli I et al. Selected Medicinal Plants. Rome: FAO, 1983.
Robbers JE, Tyler VE. Tyler's Herbs of Choice. New York: The
Haworth Herbal Press, 1999.

Schulz V, Hansel R, Tyler V. Rational Phytotherapy. A Physicians’
Guide to Herbal Medicine. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1998.

Schulz V, Hansel R, Tyler V. Rational Phytotherapy. A Physicians’
Guide to Herbal Medicine, 4th edn. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2000.
Simon JE et al. Herbs — An Indexed Bibliography, 1971-80. Oxford:
Elsevier, 1984.

Tisserand R, Balacs T. Essential Oil Safety. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1995.

Trease GE, Evans WC. Pharmacognosy, 13th edn. London: Baillitre
Tindall, 1989.

Tyler VE. The Honest Herbal, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: Strickley, 1993.
United States Pharmacopeia 24 and National Formulary 19 and
Supplements. Rockville, Maryland, US: United States Pharmacopeial
Convention, 2000.

Wagner H et al. Plant Drug Analysis. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1983.
World Health Organization. WHO Monographs on Selected
Medicinal Plants, vol 1. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1999.
Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations (revised, Williamson EW, Evans FJ). Saffron Walden:
Daniel, 1988.

----- PAGE 46 -----
65

66

67

68

69

70

71
72

73

74
75

76

77

78

www.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/eafus.html (US Food and Drug
Administration).

British Herbal Medicine Association. A Guide to Traditional Herbal
Medicines Bournemouth: British Herbal Medicine Association
Publishing, 2003.

Martindale. The Complete Drug Reference, 33nd edn. (Sweetman S,
ed.). London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 2002.

Evans WC. Trease and Evans Pharmacognosy, 15nd edn. Edinburgh:
WB Saunders, 2002.

Williamson EM. Potter's Herbal Cyclopaedia. Saffron Walden: CW
Daniel Co., 2003.

World Health Organization. WHO Monographs on Selected
Medicinal Plants, vol 2. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2002.
British Pharmacopoeia 2002. London: The Stationery Office, 2002.
European Pharmacopoeia, 4th edn, 2004 Supplement. Strasbourg:
Council of Europe, 2004.

United States Pharmacopoeia 26 and National Formulary 21 and
Supplements. Rockville, Maryland, US: United States Pharmacopeial
Convention, 2003.

British Pharmacopoeia 2004. London: The Stationery Office, 2004.
Wichtl M (ed.). Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals. A handbook
for practice on a scientific basis. 3rd edition. Stuttgart: medpharm
Scientific publishers, 2004.

European Scientific Co-operative on Phytotherapy. ESCOP
monographs. 2nd edition. Exeter, Stuttgart, New York: ESCOP, Georg
Thieme Verlag, Thieme New York, 2003.

Martindale. The complete drug reference. 34th edn. (Sweetman S, ed.)
London: Pharmaceutical Press, 2005.

British National Formulary 49. London: British Medical Association
and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, 2005.

79

80

81

82

83

84
85
86

87

88

General References

Stockley IH (editor in chief). Stockley's Drug Interactions. 6th edn.
London: Pharmaceutical Press, 2002.

European Medicines Agency. Committee on Herbal Medicinal
Products. Community Herbal Monograph on Valeriana officinalis L.,
radix. London, 26 October 2006. Doc. Ref. EMEA/HMPC/340719/
2005.

European Pharmacopoeia, 5th edn, and Supplements 5.1-5.7.
Strasbourg: Council of Europe, 2004-2007.

European Medicines Agency. Committee on Herbal Medicinal
Products. Community Herbal Monograph on Plantago ovata Forssk.,
seminis tegumentum. London, 26 October 2006. Doc. Ref. EMEA/
HMPC/340857/2005.

European Medicines Agency. Committee on Herbal Medicinal
Products. Community Herbal Monograph on Plantago ovata Forssk.,
semen. London, 26 October 2006. Doc. Ref. EMEA/HMPC/340861/
2005.

British Pharmacopoeia 2007. London: The Stationery Office, 2007.
Martindale. The Complete Drug Reference, 35th edn. (Sweetman S,
ed.) London: Pharmaceutical Press, 2007.

United States Pharmacopeia 29 and National Formulary 24 and
Supplements. Rockville, Maryland, US, United States Pharmacopeial
Convention, 2006.

Majerus PW, Tollefsen DM. Anticoagulant, thrombolytic and
antiplatelet drugs. In: Hardman JG, Limbird LE (eds). Goodman &
Gilman's The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 10th edn. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 2001: 1519-1538.

European Medicines Agency. Committee on Herbal Medicinal
Products. Community Herbal Monograph on Aloe barbadensis Miller
and on Aloe (various species, mainly Aloe ferox Miller and its
hybrids). London, 26 October 2006. Doc. Ref. EMEA/HMPC/76310/
2006.

----- PAGE 47 -----
Agnus Castus

prolactin concentrations following treatment with certain
agnus castus preparations, although further research is
needed to confirm these findings.

Similarly, only limited data relating to the safety of agnus
castus preparations are available, and further investigation of
safety aspects is required. The available evidence indicates
that certain agnus castus preparations are well-tolerated
when used according to recommended dosage regimens. In
view of the lack of data, the use of agnus castus preparations
should be avoided in pregnancy and breastfeeding. As there is
pharmacological evidence that agnus castus has
dopaminergic activity, agnus castus should not be used with
dopamine receptor agonists or antagonists.

Species (Family)

Vitex agnus-castus L. (Verbenaceae)

Synonym(s)
Agni Casti, Chasteberry, Chaste Tree, Monk's Pepper

Part(s) Used

Fruit

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia‘?!

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007'°8)

BHMA 2003'¢°®

Complete German Commission E”
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'°*”

PhEur 20078”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G75.

Diterpenes  Labdane-type, including rotundifuran 0.04-0.3%,
vitexilactone 0.02-0.17%, 6B,7B-diacetoxy-13-hydroxy-labda-
8,14-diene 0.02-0.15%,'"” vitexlactam A (6f-acetoxy-9a-
hydroxy-13(14)-labden-16,15-amide.

Flavonoids Casticin  (3',5-dihydroxy-3,6,7,4'-tetramethoxy-
flavone) 0.02-2.0%, penduletin, chrysoplenol. C-glycosides orien-
tin, isoorientin and isovitexin.*°°7"° The total flavonoid
content of three Croatian samples varied from 0.05 to 0.08%.

Iridoids Agnuside (p-hydroxybenzoylaucubin) 0.6% and aucubin
0.3%. The agnuside content of eight samples of dried fruits
varied from 0.01-0.21%" and a standard of 0.02-0.40% has
been proposed.“©”

Polyphenols Seven Croatian samples analysed contained tannin
0.24-1.6% and total polyphenols 6.92-13.24%.")

Essential oil 0.8-1.8%; 85 compounds identified.” There are
two distinct chemotypes, one containing a-pinene and the other o-
terpinylacetate.") Comminution, maturity of fruit, length of
distillation and extraction method markedly affect yields and
composition of the oil: sabinene 16.4-44.1%, 1,8-cineole 8.4—
15.2%, B-caryophyllene 2.1-5.0% and trans-B-farnesene 5.0—
11.7%." A yield of 0.5% volatile oil containing 35%
monoterpenes (mainly -pinene, sabinene, B-phellandrene and
4-terpineol) and 52% sesquiterpenes (mainly f-caryophyllene,
allo-aromadendrene, germacrene B, spathulenol and t-cadinol)
has been reported.”

Other constituents Fatty acids, including oleic, stearic, palmitic,
a-linolenic and linoleic acids.'©’®

Other parts of the plant ‘The flowering stems contain the
iridoids 6'-O-foliomenthoyl-mussaenosidic acid (agnucastoside
A), 6'-O-(6,7-dihydro-foliomenthoyl-mussaenosidic acid (agnu-
castoside B), 7-O-trans-p-coumaroyl-6'-O-trans-caffeoyl-8-epilo-
ganic acid (agnucastoside C), aucubin, agnuside, mussaenosidic
acid and 6'-O-p-hydroxybenzoylmussaenosidic acid together with
a phenylbutanone glucoside (myzodendrone).\'*)

Material from agnus castus contains the flavonoids luteolin,
artemetin, isorhamnetin, luteolin-6-C-(4’’-methyl-6”-O-trans-caf-
feoylglucoside), luteolin-6-C-(6"-O-trans-caffeoylglucoside),
luteolin-6-C-(2''-O-trans-caffeoylglucoside) and luteolin-7-O-(6"-
p-hydroxy-benzoylglucoside).""” The source of the material
concerned is unclear: the experimental section of the paper refers
to the fruit, whereas other sections of the paper mention the root

bark.

----- PAGE 48 -----
Flavonoids

Rr R? Re Rt RS
quercetagetin OH OH OH OH OH

casticin OCH3 OCH; OCH; OH OCH;
chrysopleno|D OCH; OCH; OCH; OH OH

Iridoids Diterpenes
HO H
Sy
ROCH, 4
HOCH, °
HO
HO. ‘OH
R
aucubin H vitexilactone
agnuside p-hydroxybenzyl
vitexlactam A
vitexilabdine A
rotundifuran
Figure 1 Selected constituents of agnus castus.
Food Use

Agnus castus is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Traditionally, agnus castus has been used for menstrual problems
resulting from corpus luteum deficiency, including premenstrual
symptoms and spasmodic dysmenorrhoea, for certain menopausal
conditions, and for insufficient lactation.{°+°” The German
Commission E approved it for internal use for irregularities of the

. . (G3)
menstrual cycle, premenstrual complaints and mastodynia.'°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in older
standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Fruit 0.5-1.0g three times daily;‘@*)

corresponding to 30-40 mg daily of dried crushed fruit.

aqueous—alcoholic extracts
(G3)

Tincture 1:5 (g/mL), 50-70% ethanol (v/v) 0.15-0.2 mL.‘C®

Agnus Castus

Figure 3 Agnus castus — dried drug substance (fruit).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Previously it was thought that agnus castus does not contain any
oestrogenic constituents, although new findings are conflicting on
this point. In an in vitro assay, a methanol extract of V. agnus-
castus fruits showed competitive binding to both oestrogen
receptors of the a- (ER-«) and B-subtypes (ER-B), with mean
(standard deviation) ICso values of 46 (3) and 64 (4) [g/mL,
respectively.*” In vitro ligand binding assays showed that a 68%
ethanol extract of V. agnus-castus dried fresh fruits bound to ER-B
in a concentration-dependent manner with an ECso of around
10pg/mL, but binding to ER-% was not observed." Bioassay-
guided fractionation revealed that apigenin was the constituent
with the greatest affinity for ER-B (ECso = 0.08 ptg/mL), whereas
penduletin and vitexin had ECso values of 0.25 and 10,1g/mL,
respectively. The compounds were all found to be selective for ER-
8. In contrast, in in vitro experiments using a recombinant cell

----- PAGE 49 -----
Agnus Castus

bioassay, a methanol extract of agnus castus (not further specified)
strogenic activity,°”

Extracts of agnus castus act at dopamine receptors and affect
prolactin release. Dopamine D,-receptor binding of extracts has
been demonstrated for three different dopamine receptors (rat
striatum, calf striatum and human recombinant receptors) and for
two separate ligands (sulpiridine and spiroperidol).""?*74 The
active compounds acted as dopamine agonists and were
characterised as labdane diterpenes. The two most active
diterpenes, rotundifuran and 68,7B-diacetoxy-13-hydroxy-labda-
8,14-diene, had ICso values (calf striatum preparation, *H-
spiroperidol ligand) of 45,1g/mL (124nmol/mL) and 79 pg/mL
(194nmol/mL), respectively.*? A lyophilised extract of agnus
castus (5mg/mL) was similar in activity to 10~* mol/L dopamine
in receptor-ligand binding assays, displacing *H-spiroperidol
from calf brain striatal preparations.

An extract of agnus castus inhibited release of acetylcholine
from *H-choline loaded rat brain striatal cells on electrical
stimulation, and had an ICso value of 30 ptg/mL.°”

Hexane fractions of agnus castus bind to human opiate
receptors with ICso values of 20p1g/mL (,-receptors) and 10 p1g/
mL (-receptors).'>?

Similar properties have been described for several different 60%
ethanol extracts of Vitex agnus-castus dried fruits that contained
at least 0.08% casticin. In radioligand binding studies, mean ICso
values for binding to dopamine-D receptors ranged from 40 to
70 utg/mL for the five ethanolic extracts tested, and the ICs value
was 32 g/mL for a hexane subfraction (containing diterpenes and
fatty acids) of an 80% methanol extract.°® The chemical profile
of the ethanolic extracts varied quantitatively and extracts were
characterised with respect to the constituents casticin (0.54—
1.22%), rotundifuran (1.04-2.23%), vitexilactone (0.34-1.01) and
6B,7B-diacetoxy-13-hydroxy-labda-8,14-diene (0.18-0.80%).

In in vitro experiments using rat pituitary cells, an ethanolic
extract of agnus castus (not further specified) inhibited basal and
thyroxine releasing hormone-stimulated prolactin secretion in a
concentration-dependent manner at concentrations of 115-460 1g/
mL.°” The effect was blocked by addition of a dopamine receptor
agonist to the system, indicating that the inhibition of prolactin
secretion by agnus castus was brought about through a
dopaminergic effect of constituents of the agnus castus extract.
Other experiments using rat pituitary cells have demonstrated
inhibition of basal and thyroxine releasing hormone-stimulated
prolactin secretion by a 60% ethanol extract of agnus
seeds.°® Further experiments showed that the inhibition of
prolactin release was not due to a cytotoxic effect on rat pituitary
cells, and that the agnus castus extract had no effect on
gonadotrophin release.

An ethanol extract of V. agnus-castus fruit significantly
inhibited phorbol-ester-promoted Epstein-Barr virus early antigen
(EBV-EA) activation in vitro.°?) This assay is used to identify
potential cancer chemopreventive substances. Cytotoxic effects
have been described for an ethanol extract of V. agnus-castus fruit
against various non-cancer (human uterine cervical canal
fibroblast, HCF) and cancer cell lines (gastric signet ring
carcinoma (KATO-III), colon cancer (COLO-201), small-cell
lung carcinoma (Lu-134-A-H), ovarian cancer (MCF-7), cervical
carcinoma (SKG-3a) and breast carcinoma (SKOV-3)). The
cytotoxic effect correlated significantly with the growth rate of
the respective cells and, therefore, was greatest in those cells with
a higher growth rate (HCK MCF-7, SKG-3a and SKOV-3);
cytotoxic activity did not appear to be selective for cancer cells.°”
Further work using KATO-III cells suggested that V. agnus-castus

had no measurable o:

castus

extract may bring about apoptosis through a mechanism involving
oxidative stress." These findings, however, cannot be extra-
polated to the clinical setting, and further investigation of the
potential cytotoxic effects of V. agnus-castus fruit extract,
including with respect to normal cells, is required. Several
flavonoid compounds with cytotoxic activity against P388
lymphocytic leukaemia cells have been isolated from the root
bark of V. agnus castus."”)

Antimicrobial activity has been described for extracts of V.
agnus-castus fruits in in vitro assays using a disc-diffusion
method. Ethanol, methanol, n-hexane and aqueous extracts
inhibited the growth of Escherichia coli ATCC29998, E. coli
ATCC11230, Staphylococcus aureus ATCC29213, S. epidermidis
ATCC12228 and Salmonella typhimurium CCM5445 (zone of
inhibition including disc >6 mm). The ethanol, n-hexane and
aqueous extracts also inhibited the growth of S. aureus
ATCC6538P and Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC27853. None
of the extracts, however, was active against the yeast Candida

albicans. Ether and ethanol extracts of the leaves of V. agnus-
33)

castus have also shown antibacterial activity in vitro."

A carbon dioxide extract of the seeds of V. agnus-castus at a
concentration of 1-3% in a formulation containing human skin
care substances provides protection against ticks, fleas, mosqui-
toes and biting flies in various animal models for up to eight
hours, according to a preliminary report.

cli

cal studies

Clinical trials of agnus castus preparations have focused on
assessing effects in premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and mastalgia,
although rigorous clinical investigations are limited. In addition,
studies have tested different agnus castus preparations, including
combination herbal preparations containing agnus castus extract.
At present there is insufficient evidence to support definitively the
efficacy of specific agnus castus products.

One of the most robust studies was a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial in which 170 women with PMS received a
casticin-standardised agnus castus extract (ZE-440) 20 mg daily, or
placebo, for three menstrual cycles. At the end of the third
menstrual cycle, self-a: sd improvements in PMS symptoms
(irritability, mood alteration, anger, headache, breast fullness,
bloating) were significantly greater in the agnus castus group,
compared with the placebo group (p < 0.001). Clinical global
impression (CGI) scores for severity of condition, global
improvement and the overall benefit-harm profile were also
significantly better for agnus castus, compared with placebo (p <
0.001).°°

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 37 women with
deficiencies in corpus luteal phase and latent hyperprolactinaemia
received an agnus castus preparation (1 = 17) or placebo (n = 20)
for three menstrual cycles. In the treated group, the luteal phase
was extended to 10.5 days from an initial 3.4-5.5 days.°

A small number of other trials has compared the effects of
agnus castus preparations with those of other agents. In a
randomised, double-blind trial, 41 women aged 24-45 years with
regular menstrual cycles and who were diagnosed with pre-
menstrual dysphoric disorder received a V. agnus-castus extract
20-40 mg daily (not further specified), or fluoxetine 20-40 mg
daily, for eight weeks. At the end of the study, daily symptom
record scores, Hamilton depression scale scores and psychiatrist-
assessed clinical global impression scores were significantly
improved for both groups, compared with baseline values, and
there were no statistically significant differenc

s between the two

----- PAGE 50 -----
groups (p > 0.05 for all at the 8-week endpoint). However,
these findings can only be considered preliminary as the study has
several methodological limitations: at present, there is insufficient
evidence that fluoxetine is efficacious in premenstrual dysphoric
disorder and, as a placebo arm was not included in the study, a
placebo response in both the fluoxetine and the agnus castus
groups cannot be excluded; a sample size calculation does not
appear to have been carried out; the statistical analysis appears to
have been carried out with the 'per protocol’ population, and an
intention-to-treat analysis using last available measurements for
participants who withdrew was not reported; and the study
involved treatment over two menstrual cycles only. Further
randomised, controlled trials that include a placebo arm and
have sufficient statistical power are required.

Another randomised, double-blind, controlled trial involving
women with PMS (n = 175) compared the effects of an agnus
castus fruit extract (Agnolyt capsules; drug to extract ratio 9.6—
11.5:1, equivalent to 3.5—4.2 mg extract per capsule) two capsules
daily with those of pyridoxine (vitamin B,) over three me
cycles. essed and physician-assessed
PMS scores were reported for both groups.* However, the results
of this study should be interpreted with caution as evidence for
pyridoxine in reducing PMS symptoms is at present inconclusive,
therefore, a placebo response in both groups cannot be excluded.

Results of randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials
involving women with mastalgia alone who received a combina-
tion preparation (Mastodynon) containing agnus castus extract
and five other herbal ingredients (at various dilutions) have
provided some evidence of efficacy for this product although
definitive studies are still required. One such study which involved
104 women who received the preparation formulated as a solution,
or as tablets, or placebo, for three menstrual cycles found that
breast pain was reduced to a significantly greater extent with
agnus castus than with placebo (p = 0.0067 and p = 0.0076 for
solution and tablets, respectively, versus placebo)."” Basal
prolactin concentrations were reduced significantly in the agnus
castus groups, compared with the placebo group (reductions of
4.35, 3.7 and 0.57ng/mL for the solution, tablets and placebo
group; p = 0.04 and 0.02 for solution versus placebo and tablets
versus placebo, respectively).

A similar trial involving 97 women with cyclic mastalgia who
received Mastodynon solution 30 drops twice daily (equivalent to
32.4mg V. agnus-castus fruit extract daily), or placebo, found
statistically significant differences in reduction of breast pain
intensity as measured by visual analogue scale scores between
treatment and placebo after one and two menstrual cycles (p =
0.018 and p = 0.006, respectively), but no statistically significant
difference (p = 0.064) after three menstrual cycles.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study,
30 women aged 24-46 years who had tried unsuccessfully to
conceive for 6-36 months received a combination preparation
containing extracts of agnus castus and green tea (not further
specified), L-arginine and several vitamins and minerals, three
capsules daily, or placebo, for three menstrual cycles.“ After
three months, four women in the treatment group had become
pregnant whereas none had done so in the placebo group (p =
0.02). During an open-label extension in which all participants
received the combination preparation, another woman became
pregnant. The pregnancies resulted in four healthy live births; one
pregnancy resulted in a miscarriage.

Several open, uncontrolled studies involving small numbers of
women with fertility disorders, hyperprolactinaemia and men-
strual disorders have explored the effects of treatment with

strual

Similar reductions in self-ass

Agnus Castus

preparations containing extracts of agnus castus (e.g. Mastodynon
and Agnucaston; Bionorica), administered orally, generally at
doses equivalent to 30-40 mg drug daily for several months. These
studies report decreased prolactin concentrations at the end of
treatment, compared with baseline values.” *» By contrast, in an
open-label study involving 50 women who received a casticin-
standardised preparation of agnus castus (Ze-440, containing
20mg of a 60% ethanol extract of V. agnus-castus fruit; drug to
extract ratio 6-12:1) during three menstrual cycl
statistically significant difference in plasma concentrations of
prolactin at the end of treatment, compared with baseline values (p
> 0.05). However, the design of these studies does not allow the
observed effects to be attributed definitively to the intervention.

The effects of agnus castus have also been investigated in men.
In an open, placebo-controlled, crossover study, 20 healthy men
were given a commercial preparation of agnus castus fruit extract
(BP-1095E1) at doses of 120, 240 and 480 mg extract (3-12 times
higher than doses used in women) for 14 days, with a wash-out
period of at least one week between each study phase. A
statistically significant increase in serum prolactin concentrations
was observed with the lowest dose tested, compared with placebo
(p = 0.033) whereas the higher dose decreased prolactin
concentrations (p = 0.016).

In an open, placebo-controlled, crossover study designed to
effects on melatonin secretion, 20 healthy male volunteers
ved a 70% ethanol-water extract of V. agnus-castus fruit 120,
240 and 480 mg daily in three divided doses for 14 days, with a
wash-out period of at least one week between each treatment
phase.“ During treatment with agnus castus extract, the area
under the serum concentration curve of melatonin was signifi-
cantly higher than during placebo administration (p < 0.005). The
effects of agnus castus on melatonin secretion require further
investigation in randomised, double-blind, controlled experi-
ments.

2s, there was no

Preliminary reports describe the use of agnus castus prepara-
tions in the treatment of acne,” although randomised controlled
trials assessing the effects of agnus castus in this indication are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Clinical data relating to safety aspects of V. agnus-castus
preparations are from including
controlled clinical trials, post-marketing surveillance studies and
spontaneous reports of suspected adverse reactions associated
with agnus castus preparations.

Only limited data relating to the safety of agnus castus
preparations are available from randomised controlled trials. In
a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial in which 170 women
with PMS received a casticin-standardised agnus castus extract
(ZE-440) 20 mg daily, or placebo, for three menstrual cycles, the
frequency of adverse events was similar in the agnus castus and the
placebo groups (4.7 and 4.8%, respectively).°°
reported for agnus acne, multiple abscesses,
intermenstrual bleeding and urticaria, and for placebo, acne,
early menstrual period and gastric upset; all adverse events were
considered to be mild and resolved without discontinuation of

available several sources,

) Adverse events

castus were

treatment. Adverse events were either not observed or not reported

in other placebo-controlled trials of agnus castus preparations.
In a randomised, double-blind trial, 41 women aged 24-45

years with regular menstrual cycles and who were diagnosed with

----- PAGE 51 -----
Agnus Castus

premenstrual dysphoric disorder received a V. agnus-castus extract
20-40 mg daily (not further specified), or fluoxetine 20-40 mg
daily, for eight weeks.°” During the study, 17 participants (nine in
the fluoxetine group and eight in the agnus castus group) reported
a total of 36 adverse events (20 and 16 with fluoxetine and agnus
castus, respectively), most commonly nausea and headache in
both groups. Another randomised, double-blind, controlled trial
involving women with PMS (n = 175) compared the effects of an
agnus castus fruit extract (Agnolyt capsules; drug to extract ratio
9.6-11.5:1, equivalent to 3.5-4.2mg extract) with those of
pyridoxine (vitamin Bg) over three menstrua cycles.°% Adverse
events were reported for five agnus castus recipients (persistent
gastroenteritis, nausea, acneiform facial inflammation, allergic
rashes (2)), and four placebo recipients (sensation of a lump in the
throat, abdominal discomfort, recurrence of ulcerative colitis,
persistent bleeding of unknown origin). Although current desire
to conceive was an exclusion criterion for the study, five women,
all from the agnus castus group, became pregnant during the
trial.

A systematic review of publications containing data relating to
adverse events associated with agnus castus preparations included
five post-marketing surveillance studies of an agnus castus fruit
extract (Agnolyt) formulated as a tincture.“*) The studies involved
a total of over 7500 patients who received the agnus castus
preparation at a dose of around 40 drops daily, typically for
around four to six months, although in one study the duration of
administration ranged from one week to 19 months. Four studies,
involving a total of 7152 participants, reported the number of
participants withdrawing from the respective studies because of
adverse events (total 7 = 71; 1.0%). Adverse events reported most
frequently included nausea and other gastrointestinal distur-
bances, such as diarrhoea.

In another post-marketing surveillance study in Germany in
which 1634 women with premenstrual syndrome received a dried
extract of V. agnus-castus fruit (Femicur capsules containing 1.6-
3.0 mg extract, corresponding to 20 mg drug; drug to extract ratio,
6.7-12.5:1) for around three months, 37 participants reported a
total of 45 adverse events, most commonly skin complaints and
hair loss (7 = 13) and gastrointestinal symptoms (7 = 6), none of
which were considered serious. Of these, 23 adverse events
occurring in 20 participants were considered to be related to
treatment with agnus castus.“”’ During treatment with the agnus
castus preparation, 23 participants became pregnant and for 12 of
these women treatment with agnus castus was stopped because of
the pregnancy. A report of the study does not state whether
pregnancy was intended or unintended (although it was stated
that 19 of the 23 women had previously tried unsuccessfully to
become pregnant), whether or not they were concurrently taking
oral contraceptives, for how long during pregnancy agnus castus
was taken, or what were the outcomes of the pregnancies in
women who consumed agnus castus while pregnant.

In an open-label study, 50 women received a casticin-
standardised preparation of agnus castus (Ze-440, containing
20 mg of a 60% ethanol extract of V. agnus-castus fruit; drug to
extract ratio 6-12:1) during three menstrual cycles. During the
study, 20 participants reported 37 adverse events, most commonly
acne (n = 7), headache (6), 'spotting' (5) and gastrointestinal
symptoms (5).

Preclinical data

Cytotoxic effects have been described for an ethanol extract of V.
agnus-castus fruit against various non-cancer (human uterine

cervical canal fibroblast, HCF) and cancer cell lines (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies).°

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None have been described for agnus castus
preparations. However, as there is pharmacological evidence that
agnus castus has dopaminergic activity, agnus castus should not be
used with dopamine receptor agonists or antagonists. As with
other herbal medicines, the potential for preparations of V. agnus
castus to interact with other medicines administered concurrently
should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the documented pharma-
cological actions and lack of toxicity data, the use of agnus castus
during pregnancy should be avoided. Agnus castus has been
reported to stimulate milk secretion without altering the composi-
tion of the breast milk.” Nevertheless, agnus castus should be
avoided during breastfeeding until further information is available.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study,
30 women aged 24-46 years who had tried unsuccessfully to
conceive for 6-36 months received a combination preparation
containing extracts of agnus castus and green tea (not further
specified), L-arginine and several vitamins and minerals, three
capsules daily, or placebo, for three menstrual cycles.“" After
three months, four women in the treatment group had become
pregnant whereas none had done so in the placebo group (p =
0.02). During an open-label extension in which all participants
received the combination preparation, a further woman became
pregnant. The pregnancies resulted in four healthy live births; one
pregnancy resulted in a miscarriage. In another placebo-controlled
study, current desire to conceive was an exclusion criterion for the
study, yet five women, all from the agnus castus group, became
pregnant during the trial.°* The effects of agnus castus contain-
ing preparations on fertility and on resulting pregnancies require
further investigation.

An isolated case report describes a 32-year-old woman with
tubal infertility who was undergoing unstimulated in vitro
fertilisation (IVF) treatment and who took a V. agnus-castus
preparation at the beginning of a fourth IVF treatment cycle.°”
The woman developed multiple follicles (7 = 4), whereas previous
IVF treatment cycles, and two subsequent cycles, resulted in the
development of a single follicle. In addition, the woman's serum
gonadotrophin and ovarian hormone concentrations were dis-
ordered during ingestion of agnus castus. None of the six cycles of
IVF treatment (i.e. three before the woman took agnus castus, one
during and two afterwards) resulted in a pregnancy.

ton; Evana. Germany: Agno-Sabona; Agnolyt; Agnucaston;
Agnufemil; Biofem; Castufemin; Cefanorm; Femicur N;
Feminon A; Femisana mens; Gynocastus; Hevertogyn; Sarai;
Strotan; Valverde Monchspfeffer bei Menstruationsbeschwer-
den. Hungary: Agnucaston; Cefanorm; PreMens. Mexico:
Cicloplant. Russia: Agnucaston (Arnykacron). Spain: Disme-
gyn; Femiplante. Switzerland: Agnolyt; Emoton; Oprane;
Prefemine; PreMens. Thailand: Agnucaston. UK: Herbal
Premens.

----- PAGE 52 -----
Lifesystem Herbal Formula 4 Women's Formula; PMT
Complex; Women's Formula Herbal Formula 3. Canada:
Natural HRT. Singapore: Phytoestrin. USA: Women's Meno-

pause Formula.

References

1

2

10

cel

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

Hoberg E et al. Diterpene aus agni-casti fructus und ihre analytik. Z
Phytother 1999; 20: 140-158.

Hoberg E e¢ al. Quantitative high performance liquid
chromatographic analysis of diterpenoids in Agni-Casti Fructus.
Planta Med 2000; 66: 352-355.

Li S-H et al. Vitexlactam A, a novel labdane diterpene lactam from the
fruits of Vitex agnus-castus. Tetrahedron Lett 2002; 43: 5131-5134.
Belic I et al. Constituents of Vitex agnus castus seeds. Part 1. Casticin.
J Chem Soc 1961; 2523-2525.

Gomaa CS et al. Flavonoids and iridoids from Vitex agnus castus.
Planta Med 1978; 33: 277.

Wollenweber E, Mann K. Flavonols from fruits of Vitex agnus castus.
Planta Med 1983; 48: 126-127.

Male¥ Z. Determination of the content of the polyphenols of Vitex
agnus-castus L. f. rosea. Acta Pharm 1998; 48: 215-218.

Rimpler H. Verbenaceae. Iridoids and ecdysones from Vitex species.
Phytochemistry 1972; 11: 2653-2654.

Gérler K, et al. Iridoidfithrung von Vitex agnus-castus. Planta Med
1985; 530-531.

Hoberg E et al. An analytical high performance liquid
chromatographic method for the determination of agnuside and p-
hydroxybenzoic acid contents in Agni-casti fructus. Phytochem Anal
2000; 11: 327-329.

Antolié A, Male’ Z. Quantitative analysis of the polyphenols and
tannins of Vitex agnus-castus L. Acta Pharm 1997; 47: 207-211.
Senatore F et al. Constituents of Vitex agnus-castus L. essential oil.
Flav Frag Journal 1996; 11: 179-182.

Novak J et al. Essential oil composition of Vitex agnus-castus —
comparison of accessions and different plant organs. Flav Frag
Journal 2005; 20: 186-192.

Sorensen JM, Katsiotis STh. Parameters influencing the yield and
composition of the essential oil from Cretan Vitex agnus-castus fruits.
Planta Med 2000; 66: 245-250.

Kustrak D et al. The composition of the volatile oil of Vitex agnus
castus. Planta Med 1992; 58 (Suppl. Suppl.1): A681.

Zwaving JH, Bos R. Composition of the essential fruit oil of Vitex
agnus castus. Pharm World Sci 1993; 15 (Suppl. Suppl.H): H15.
Zwaving JH, Bos R. Composition of the essential fruit oil of Vitex
agnus-castus. Planta Med 1996; 62: 83-84.

Kuruiiziim-Uz A et al. Glucosides from Vitex agnus-castus.
Phytochemistry 2003; 63: 959-964.

Hirobe C et al. Cytotoxic flavonoids from Vitex agnus-castus.
Phytochemistry 1997; 46: 521-524.

Liu J et al. Evaluation of estrogenic activity of plant extracts for the
potential treatment of menopausal symptoms. J Agric Food Chem
2001; 49: 2472-2479.

Jarry H et al. Evidence for estrogen receptor B-selective activity of Vitex
agnus-castus and isolated flavones. Planta Med 2003; 69: 945-947.
Oerter Klein K et al. Estrogen bioactivity in Fo-Ti and other herbs
used for their estrogen-like effects as determined by a recombinant cell
bioassay. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003; 88: 4077-4079.

Jarry H et al. Auf der suche nach dopaminergen substanzen in agni-
casti-fructus-praparaten: warum eigentlich? Z Phytother 1999; 20:
140-158.

Berger D et al. Rezeptorbindungsstudien mit extrakten und daraus
isolierten substanzen. Z Phytother 1999; 20: 140-158.

Brugisser R e¢ al. Untersuchungen an opioid-rezeptoren mit Vitex
agnus-castus L. Z Phytother 1999; 20: 140-158.

Meier B et al. Pharmacological activities of Vitex agnus-castus
extracts in vitro. Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 373-381.

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S51

Agnus Castus

Sliutz G e¢ al. Agnus castus extracts inhibit prolactin secretion of rat
pituitary cells. Horm Metab Res 1993; 25: 253-255.

Jarry H et al. In vitro prolactin but not LH and FSH release is
inhibited by compounds in extracts of agnus castus: direct evidence for

a dopaminergic principle by the dopamine receptor assay. Exp Clin
Endocrinol 1994; 102: 448-454.

Kapadia GJ et al. Inhibitory effect of herbal remedies on 12-O-
tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-promoted Epstein-Barr virus early
antigen activation. Pharmacol Res 2002; 45(3): 213-220.11884218
Ohyama K et al. Cytotoxicity and apoptotic inducibility of Vitex
agnus-castus fruit extract in cultured human normal and cancer cells
and effect on growth. Biol Pharm Bull 2003; 26: 10-18.

Ohyama K et al. Human gastric signet ring carcinoma (KATO-III) cell
apoptosis induced by Vitex agnus-castus fruit extract through
intracellular oxidative stress. Int ] Biochem Cell Biol 2005; 37: 1496—
1510.

Kiveak B et al. Antimicrobial and cytotoxic activities of Vitex agnus-
castus L. J Fac Pharm Gazi 2002; 19: 55-59.

Pepeljnjak § e¢ al. Antibacterial and antifungal activities of the Vitex
agnus-castus L. extracts. Acta Pharm 1996; 46: 201-206.

Mehlhorn H et al. Extract of the seeds of the plant Vitex agnus castus
proven to be highly efficacious as a repellent against ticks, fleas,
mosquitoes and biting flies. Parasitol Res 2005; 95: 363-365.
Schellenberg R. Treatment for the premenstrual syndrome with agnus
castus fruit extract: prospective, randomised, placebo controlled study.
BM] 2001; 322: 134-137.

Milewicz A et al. Vitex agnus castus extract in the treatment of luteal
phase defects due to latent hyperprolactinaemia. Results of a
randomized placebo-controlled double blind study.
ArnzneimittelForsch 1993; 43: 752-756.

Atmaca M et al. Fluoxetine versus Vitex agnus castus extract in the
treatment of premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Human
Psychopharmacol Clin Exp 2003; 18: 191-195.

Lauritzen CH et al. Treatment of premenstrual tension syndrome with

Vitex agnus castus — Controlled, double-blind study versus
pyridoxine. Phytomedicine 1997; 4: 183-189.

Wuttke W et al. Behandlung zyklusabhangiger Brustschmerzen mit
einem Agnus-castus-haltigen Arzneimittel. Geburtshilfe Frauenheilkd

1997; 57: 1-14.

Halaska M et al. Treatment of cyclical mastalgia with a solution
containing a Vitex agnus castus extract: results of a placebo-controlled
double-blind study. The Breast 1999; 8: 175.

Westphal LM et al. A nutritional supplement for improving fertility in
women. A pilot study. J Reproductive Med 2004; 49: 289-293.
Gorkow C. Klinischer Kenntnisstand von Agni-casti fructus: Klinisch-
pharmakologische Untersuchungen und Wirksamkeitsbelege. Z
Phytother 1999; 20: 159-168.

Gorkow C et al. Evidence of efficacy of Vitex agnus castus
preparations. In: Loew D, Blume H, Dingermann TH, eds.
Phytopharmaka V, Forschung und Klinische Anwendung. Darmstadt:
Steinkopf Verlag, 1999: 189-208.

Berger D et al. Efficacy of Vitex agnus-castus L. extract Ze 440 in
patients with pre-menstrual syndrome (PMS). Arch Gynecol Obstet
2000; 264: 150-153.

Merz PG et al. The effects of a special Agnus castus (BP1095E1) on
prolactin secretion in healthy male subjects. Exp Clin Endrocrinol
Diabetes 1996; 104: 447-453.

Dericks-Tan JSE et al. Dose-dependent stimulation of melatonin
secretion after administration of agnus castus. Exp Clin Endocrinol
Diabetes 2003; 111: 44-46.

Amann W. Akne vulgaris und Agnus castus (Agnolyt®). Z Allg Med

1975; 51: 1645-1648.

Daniele C et al. Vitex agnus castus: a systematic review of adverse
events. Drug Safety 2005; 28: 319-332.

Loch E-G et al. Treatment of premenstrual syndrome with a
phytopharmaceutical formulation containing Vitex agnus castus. ]
Women's Health Gender-Based Med 2000; 9: 315-320.

Bruckner C. In mitteleuropa genutzte heilpflanzen mit

milchsekretionsférdernder wirkung (galactagoga). Gleditschia 1989;
17: 189-201.

Cahill DJ et al. Multiple follicular development associated with herbal
medicine. Hum Reprod 1994; 9: 1469-1470.

----- PAGE 53 -----
A = Agrimony

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment agrimony can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the

Limited information is available on the chemistry and final product."

pharmacological properties of agrimony. Clinical .

investigation of agrimony is extremely limited and rigorous

studies are needed to establish the efficacy of agrimony. The Herbal Use

tannin constituents may justify the astringent activity ————

attributed to the herb. In view of the lack of toxicity data, Agrimony is stated to possess mild astringent and diuretic
excessive use of agrimony and use during pregnancy and properties." It has been used for diarrhoea in children, mucous
breastfeeding should be avoided. The potential for colitis, grumbling appendicitis, urinary incontinence, cystitis, and
preparations of agrimony to interfere with other medicines as a gargle for acute sore throat and chronic nasopharyngeal
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or catarth,(0* ©?)

opposing effects, should be considered.

Species (Family)

Agrimonia eupatoria L. (Rosaceae)

Synonym(s)

Agrimonia

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996 ‘“”)

BP 2007'°8)

Complete German Commission E'°
Martindale 35th edition'**?

Ph Eur 2007'08)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including Figure 1 Agrimony (Agrimonia eupatoria).
References 1 and 2, and General Reference G2.

Acids Palmitic acid, salicylic acid, silicic acid and stearic acid.
Flavonoids Apigenin, luteolin, luteolin-7-glucoside, quercetin,
quercitrin, kaempferol and glycosides.)

Tannins = 3-21%. Condensed tannins in herb; hydrolysable

tannins (e.g. ellagitannin).

Vitamins Ascorbic acid (vitamin C), nicotinamide complex
(about 100-300 g/g leaf), thiamine (about 2 g/g leaf) and
vitamin K.

Other constituents Bitter principle, triterpenes (e.g. o&-amyrin,
ursolic acid, euscapic acid), phytosterols and volatile oil 0.2%.

Food Use

Agrimony is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of .
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that Figure 2 Agrimony - dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 54 -----
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried herb 24g by infusion three times daily.(©”
Liquid extract 1-3 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”

Tincture 1-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Significant uricolytic activity has been documented for agrimony
infusions and decoctions (15% w/v), following their oral
administration to male rats at a dose of 20 mL/kg body weight
(equivalent to 3g dry drug). Diuretic activity was stated to be
minimal and elimination of urea unchanged. A hypotensive effect
in anaesthetised cats has been documented for an agrimony
extract given by intravenous injection; blood pressure was lowered
by more than 40%.°

Marked antibacterial activity against Staphylococcus aureus
and a-haemolytic streptococci has been reported for agrimony.

An aqueous ethanol extract of the herb was tested for
immunomodulative activity in the peritoneal cavities of mice.”
Immunostimulant activity resulted in an increase in phagocytic
activity and increases in the activities of lysozyme and peroxidase.
Agrimonia eupatoria given in the diet of mice for 12 days prior to
intraperitoneal administration of streptozotocin resulted in a
reduction in hyperglycaemia. Further investigation revealed
stimulation of 2-deoxyglucose transport, glucose oxidation and
incorporation of glucose into glycogen in mouse abdominal
muscle. An aqueous extract (0.25-1 mg/mL) stimulated insulin
secretion from a BRIN-BD11 pancreatic B cell line.” These
findings demonstrate that A. eupatoria aqueous extract given
orally to mice has antihyperglycaemic, insulin-releasing and
insulin-like activity.”

A related species, A. pilosa, has also been investigated. In vivo
antitumour activity in mice has been attributed to the tannin
agrimoniin"” which has not been reported as a constituent of A.
eupatoria. Agrimoniin was administered intraperitoneally into
ascites-type and solid tumours in rodents." At doses of greater
than 10 mg/kg, given before or after intraperitoneal inoculation
with MM? cells, it completely rejected tumour growth in mice."
Solid tumours of MH134 and Meth-A were inhibited by
agrimoniin, and the number of peripheral blood cells was
increased, indicating that agrimoniin has antitumour activity
and that it exerts its effect by enhancing the immune response. In
vitro studies have reported that agrimoniin induces the cytotoxi-
city of murine peritoneal exudate cells,” and that it induces
interleukin 1 in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells and in
mouse adherent peritoneal exudate cells in vivo." Several
phloroglucinols isolated from A. pilosa have demonstrated
activity against Staphylococcus aureus, and a methanol extract
of the herb inhibited HIV-1 protease activity.) An aqueous
suspension of A. pilosa herb (1 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg) given orally or
intraperitoneally significantly reduced blood glucose concentra-
tions in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.

An aqueous extract of the aerial parts of A. eupatoria inhibited
the secretion of hepatitis surface antigen in an in vitro system
using HepG2.2.15 cells, which produce complete virion particles
and viral proteins.‘

Agrimony

Clinical studies

Clinical investigation of the effects of agrimony is extremely
limited and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
needed. The use of agrimony infusions to treat cutaneous
porphyria in a group of 20 patients has been described.
Improvements in skin eruptions, and a decrease in serum iron
concentrations and urinary porphyrins were observed,"®) although
the methodological limitations of this small, uncontrolled study do
not allow any conclusions to be made on the effects of agrimony.

A combination herbal preparation containing agrimony has
been used in 35 patients suffering from chronic gastroduodeni-
tis.) After 25 days of therapy, 75% of patients claimed to be free
from pain, 95% from dyspeptic symptoms and 76% from
palpitation pains. Gastroscopy was said to indicate that previous
erosion and haemorrhagic mucous changes had healed. However,
the methodological limitations of this small, uncontrolled study do
not allow any conclusions to be made on the effects of agrimony.

Side-effects, To

None documented for A. eupatoria. A polar fraction containing
flavonoids and triterpenes, but not tannins, produced a negative
result in the Ames test.”

In mice, agrimoniin has been documented to cause stretching
and writhing reactions when administered by intraperitoneal
injection, and cyanosis and necrosis at the site of intravenous
injection.{!” These reactions were considered to be inflammatory
reactions. The LDso of agrimoniin in mice has been estimated as
33 mg/kg (by intravenous injection), 101 mg/kg (by intraperitoneal
injection), and greater than 1g/kg (by mouth)."” Cytotoxic
activity has been reported for A. pilosa''® (see Pharmacological
Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the tannin constituents, excessive use of agrimony
should be avoided.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of agrimony, the potential for preparations of agrimony to
interfere with other medicines administered concurrently (parti-
cularly those with similar or opposing effects) should be
considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Agrimony is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle.(@??) In view of the lack of toxicity data, use of
agrimony should be avoided during pregnancy and lactation.

Austria: Amersan; Gallen- und Lebertee St Severin; Novocho-

lin. Czech Republic: Amersan; Cynarosan; Eugastrin;
Hemoral; Naturland Grosser Swedenbitter; Nontusyl; Species
Cholagogae Planta; Stomaran; The Salvat; Ungolen; Zlucni-
kova Cajova Smes. France: Tisane Hepatique de Hoerdt.
Russia: Herbion Drops for the Gallbladder (Cep6uon Kaman
2Keaueronnsie). Spain: Natusor Astringel; Natusor Farinol.
UK: Piletabs.

----- PAGE 55 -----
A

Agrimony

References

1

2

10

Bilia AR et al. Constituents and biological assay of Agrimonia
eupatoria. Fitoterapia 1993; 64: 549-550.

Carnat A et al. L'aigremoine: étude comparée d'Agrimonia eupatoria
L. et Agrimonia procera Wallr. Plantes médicinales et phytothérapie
1991; 25: 202-211.

Sendra J, Zieba J. Flavonoids from Agrimonia eupatoria L. Diss
Pharm Pharmacol 1971; 24: 79-83.

Giachetti D et al. Ricerche sull'attivita diuretica ed uricosurica di
Agrimonia eupatoria. Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper 1986; 62: 705-711.
Petkov V. Plants with hypotensive, antiatheromatous and
coronarodilatating action. Am J Chin Med 1979; 7: 197-236.
Petkov V. Bulgarian traditional medicine: A source of ideas for
phytopharmacological investigations. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15:
121-132.

Bukovsky M, Blanarik P. Immunomodulative effects of ethanolic-

aqueous extracts of herba Agrimoniae, flos Chamomillae and flos
Calendulae cum calyce. Farmaceutiky Obzor 1994; 63: 149-156.
Swanston-Flatt SK e¢ al. Traditional plant treatments for diabetes in
normal and streptozotocin diabetic rats. Diabetologia 1990; 33: 462—
464,

Gray AM, Flatt PR. Actions of the traditional anti-diabetic plant,
Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony): effects on hyperglycaemia, cellular
glucose metabolism and insulin secretion. Br J Nutr 1998; 80: 109-
114.

Miyamoto K e¢ al. Isolation of agrimoniin, an antitumour constituent,
from the roots of Agrimonia pilosa Ledeb. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo)
1985; 3977-3981.

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

Miyamoto K et al. Antitumour effect of agrimoniin, a tannin of
Agrimonia pilosa Ledeb., on transplantable rodent tumors. Jpn J
Pharmacol 1987; 43: 187-195.

Miyamoto K et al. Induction of cytotoxicity of peritoneal exudate cells
by agrimoniin, a novel immunomodulatory tannin of Agrimonia
pilosa Ledeb. Cancer Immunol Immunother 1988; 27: 59-62.
Murayama T et al. Agrimoniin, an antitumour tannin of Agrimonia
pilosa Ledeb., induces interleukin-1. Anticancer Res 1992; 12: 1471-
1474,

Yamaki M et al. Antimicrobial activity of naturally occurring and
synthetic phloroglucinols against Staphylococcus aureus. Phytother
Res 1994; 8: 112-114.

Min BS et al. Screening of Korean plants against human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 protease. Phytother Res 1999; 13: 680-
682.

Hsu F-L, Cheng J-T. Investigation in rats of the antihyperglycaemic
effect of plant extracts used in Taiwan for the treatment of diabetes
mellitus. Phytother Res 1992; 6: 108-111.

KwonDH et al. Inhibition of hepatitis B virus by an aqueous extract of
Agrimonia eupatoria L. Phytother Res 2005; 19: 355-358.

Patrascu V et al. Rezultate terapeutice favorabile in porfiria cutanata
cu Agrimonia eupatoria. Dermato-venerologia 1984; 29: 153-157.
Chakarski | et al. Clinical study of a herb combination consis

ing of
Agrimonia eupatoria, Hipericum perforatum, Plantago major,
Mentha piperita, Matricaria chamomila for the treatment of patients
with chronic gastroduodenitis. Probl Vatr Med 1982; 10: 78-84.

----- PAGE 56 -----
Alfalfa

ly
the seeds, also suggests that excessive ingestion is not

advisable. In view of the reports of arthralgia, alfalfa should
not be recommended for the treatment of arthritis. Coumarin
compounds detected so far in alfalfa do not possess the
minimum structural requirements (a C-4 inpelroxsil substituent
and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)‘©®” for
anticoagulant activity.

Species (Family)

Medicago sativa L. (Fabaceae/Leguminosae)

Synonym(s)

Lucerne, Medicago, M. afganica (Bord.) Vass, M. grandiflora
(Grossh.) Vass, M. ladak Vass, M. mesopotanica Vass, M.
orientalis Vass, M. polia (Brand) Vassi, M. praesativa Sinsk, M.
sogdiana (Brand) Vass, Purple Medick, Trigonella upendrae
Chowdh. and Rao

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)
Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G19, G22 and G41.

Acids Lauric acid, maleic acid, malic acid, malonic acid, myristic
acid, oxalic acid, palmitic acid and quinic acid.

Alkaloids Pyrrolidine-type (e.g. stachydrine, homostachydrine);
pyridine-type (e.g. trigonelline) in the seeds only.

Amino acids Arginine, asparagine (high concentration in seeds),
cystine, histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenyl-
alanine, threonine, tryptophan and valine. The non-protein toxic

amino acid canavanine is present in leaves (0.9—-1.2 mg/g), stems
(0.6-0.9 mg/g) and seeds (5—14 mg/g).'°!”)

Coumarins Medicagol.

Isoflavonoids Coumestrol, biochanin A, daidzein, formononetin
and genistein.

Saponins 2-3%. Hydrolysis yields aglycones, medicagenic acid,
soyasapogenols A-F and hederagenin.'” Sugar chain components
include arabinose, galactose, glucuronic acid, glucose, rhamnose
and xylose.

Steroids Campesterol, cycloartenol, B-sitosterol (major compo-
nent), o&-spinasterol and stigmasterol.

Other constituents Carbohydrates (e.g. arabinose, fructose,
sucrose, xylose), vitamins (A, By, Be, Biz, C, E, K), pectin
methylesterase, pigments (e.g. chlorophyll, xanthophyll, B-caro-
tene, anthocyanins), proteins, minerals and trace elements.

Food Use

Alfalfa is widely used in foods and is listed by the Council of
Europe as a source of natural food flavouring (categories N2 and
N3). These categories indicate that alfalfa can be added to

Pterocarpans \soflavonoids

R' Re
daidzein H H
formononetin H CH3
genistein OH H

Coumestans

coumestrol

Triterpenes

hederagenin

soyasapogenin
Selected constituents of alfalfa.

Figure 1

----- PAGE 57 -----
Alfalfa

foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible limitation of an
active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final product.'°'?
Previously, alfalfa has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised
As Safe).‘64)

Herbal Use

The herb was not valued by ancient civilisations and is not
detailed in classical herbals. Herbal use probably developed in the
USA where claims have been made for it in the treatment of
arthritis, high cholesterol, diabetes and peptic ulcers.%°!S”)
Reputedly, the herb has bactericidal, cardiotonic, diuretic, emetic,
emmenagogue and oestrogenic properties.” Commercial prepara-
tions including teas, tablets and capsules are available.'©!” Alfalfa
is stated to be a source of vitamins A, C, E and K, and of the
minerals calcium, potassium, phosphorus and iron. It has been
used for avitaminosis A, C, E or K, hypoprothrombinaemic
purpura, and debility of convalescence.'(67 °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried herb 5-10 as an infusion three times daily.©”
Liquid extract
daily.'6”

5-10mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Alfalfa top (stem and leaves) saponins have been reported to
decrease plasma cholesterol concentrations without changing
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol concentrations,
decrease intestinal absorption of cholesterol, increase excretion
of neutral steroids and bile acids, prevent atherosclerosis and
induce the regression of atherosclerosis.)

Hypocholesterolaemic activity has been reported for root
saponins, when given to monkeys receiving a high-cholesterol
diet.” Alfalfa herb fed to monkeys reduced hypercholesterolae-
mia and atherosclerosis; the effect may be partially due to the
saponin constituents.'©!” In mice fed with alfalfa (6.25% of diet)
for 12 days before administration of streptozotocin, hyperglycae-
mia was reduced compared with values for control animals."

Figure 2 Alfalfa — dried drug substance (herb).

Oestrogenic activity in ruminants has been documented for
coumestrol and the isoflavone constituents.'(°7” “*

An investigation into the effect of various herbs on hepatic drug
metabolising enzymes in the rat, showed that alfalfa potentiated
the activity of aminopyrine N-demethylase but had no effect on
glutathione S-transferase or epoxide hydrolase activities.

The seeds are reported to contain trypsin inhibitors."
Saponins isolated from the aerial parts have been reported to
stimulate the lipolytic activity of neopancreatinum (a mixture of
porcine pancreatic enzymes including lipase, amylase and
proteases).

Alfalfa root saponins have been documented to exhibit selective
toxicity towards fungi.'"** A medicagenic acid glycoside with
low haemolytic activity, isolated from alfalfa root, was found to
exhibit both strong inhibitory and fungitoxic activities towards
several medically important yeasts including Candida species,
Torulopsis species, Geotrichum canadidum and Rhodotorula
glutinis.© It has been proposed that the antimycotic activity of
alfalfa saponins is related to their ability to complex steroids and
that fungi sensitive to the saponins may contain relatively more
steroids in their membranes. Antifungal properties have also
been documented for alfalfa.‘C*”

The saponin constituents are documented to be haemolytic and
to interfere with vitamin E utilisation, and are believed to be one
of the causes of ruminant bloat.'(C* Haemolytic activity is
associated with the medicagenic acid glycosides and not the
hederagenin and soyasapogenol glycosides.

The effects of polysaccharides from alfalfa on mice lympho-
cytes in vitro indicated immunopotentiating activity,

(G41)

Clinical studies

Clinical investigation of the effects of alfalfa is extremely limited
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required. In
a short-term study involving three normolipidaemic individuals
given alfalfa seeds (60-80 g daily), serum cholesterol concentra-
tions were reported to be reduced.'@'” In another small study in
which heat-treated alfalfa seeds (40g three times daily for eight
weeks) were taken by eight type-IIA hyperlipoproteinaemic
patients and three type IIB patients, a significant decrease was
noted in total serum cholesterol concentrations, low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and apolipoprotein B. The LDL
cholesterol concentration fell by less than 5% in two of the 11
patients.) The methodological limitations of this small,
uncontrolled study do not allow any conclusions to be made on
the effects of alfalfa.

The manganese content of alfalfa (45.5 mg/kg) is reported to be
the active principle responsible for a hypoglycaemic effect
documented for the herb.) A case report descibes a diabetic
patient, treated with soluble insulin but poorly controlled, in
whom control of diabetes was achieved following use of an alfalfa
extract. When administered separately, only small doses of
manganese chloride (5-10 mg) were required to have a hypogly-
caemic effect. However, no effect was seen on the blood sugar
concentrations of non-diabetic controls or of other diabetic
patients, who were also administered manganese.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

Both alfalfa seed and herb have been reported to induce a systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE)-like syndrome in female monkeys. '*
G1°,632) This activity has been attributed to canavanine, a non-
protein amino acid constituent which has been found to have
effects on human immunoregulatory cells in vitro." Reactivation

----- PAGE 58 -----
of quiescent SLE in humans has been associated with the ingestion
of alfalfa tablets which, following analysis, were found to contain
canavanine.") It was not stated whether the tablets contained
seed or herb material. Canavanine is known to be toxic to all
animal species because it is a structural analogue of arginine and
may interfere with the binding of this amino acid to enzymes and
its incorporation into proteins." ©!” Alfalfa seeds are reported
to contain substantial quantities of canavanine (8.33-13.6 mg/kg),
whereas the herb contains considerably less.{'% '7)

Pancytopenia has been associated with human ingestion of
ground alfalfa seeds (80-160 g/day), which were taken to lower
plasma cholesterol concentrations."

Dietary studies using alfalfa top saponins (ATS) in the diet of
rats and monkeys showed no evidence of toxicity and serum lipid
concentrations were lowered. !?° In addition, when ATS were
given to cholesterol-fed animals, a reduction in serum lipid
concentrations was observed. '?7 ATS are reported to be free
of the SLE-inducing substance that is present in the seeds.)

Coumarin compounds detected so far in alfalfa do not possess
the minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl substituent
and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)'C*” for anticoagulant
activity.

Negative results were documented for alfalfa when tested for
mutagenicity using Salmonella strains TA98 and TA100.°”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Individuals with a history of SLE should avoid ingesting alfalfa.
Ingestion of large amounts of alfalfa (exceeding amounts
normally consumed in the diet) should be avoided in view of the
documented pharmacological activities. Alfalfa may affect blood
sugar concentrations in diabetic patients because of the manga-
nese content.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of alfalfa the potential for preparations of alfalfa to
interfere with those of other medicines administered concurrently,
particularly those with similar or opposing effects, such as
medicines with hormonal activity, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Alfalfa seeds are reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle and to be lactogenic.'(©®” Although the safety of
alfalfa herb has not been established, it is probably acceptable for
use during pregnancy and lactation provided that doses do not
exceed the amounts normally ingested as a food. Alfalfa seeds
should not be ingested during pregnancy or lactation.

8 ip)
Zine Zenith. Chile: Calcio 520. France: Gonaxines Gynosoja.
USA: B-100 Complex; My Favorite Multiple Energizer; My
Favorite Multiple Take One; My Favorite Multiple Take One
Iron-Free; Natural Herbal Water Tablets; Zero Flush Niacin
400mg.

Alfalfa

References

1

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

Oleszek W, Jurzysta M. Isolation, chemical characterization and
biological activity of alfalfa (Medicago media Pers.) root saponins.
Acta Soc Bot Pol 1986; 55: 23-33.

Berry M. Alfalfa. Pharm J 1995; 255: 353-354.

Malinow MR et al. Lack of toxicity of alfalfa saponins in cynomolgus
macaques. J Med Primatol 1982; 11: 106-118.

Malinow MR et al. Prevention of elevated cholesterolemia in monkeys
by alfalfa saponins. Steroids 1977; 29: 105-110.

Swanston-Flatt SK e¢ al. Traditional plant treatments for diabetes in
normal and streptozotocin-diabetic mice. Diabetologia 1990; 33: 462—
464.

Garrett BJ et al. Consumption of poisonous plants (Senecio jacobaea,
Symphytum officinale, Pteridium aquilinum, Hypericum perforatum)
by rats: chronic toxicity, mineral metabolism, and hepatic drug-
metabolizing enzymes. Toxicol Lett 1982; 10: 183-188.

Sroka Z et al. Stimulation of pancreatic lipase activity by saponins
isolated from Medicago sativa L. Z Naturforschung, Section C, ]
Biosci 1997; 52: 235-239.

Polacheck I et al. Activity of compound G2 isolated from alfalfa roots
against medically important yeasts. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
1986; 30: 290-294.

Jurzysta M, Waller GR. Antifungal and haemolytic activity of aerial
parts of alfalfa (Medicago) species in relation to saponin composition.
Adv Expl Med Biol 1996; 404: 565-574.

Zhao WS et al. Immunopotentiating effects of polysaccharides
isolated from Medicago sativa L. Acta Pharmacol Sinica 1993; 14:
273-276.

Mélgaard J et al. Alfalfa seeds lower low density lipoprotein
cholesterol and apolipoprotein B concentrations in patients with type
II hyperlipo proteinemia. Atherosclerosis 1987; 65: 173-179.
Rubenstein AH et al. Manganese-induced hypoglycaemia. Lancet
1962; ii: 1348-1351.

Malinow MR et al. Systemic lupus erythematosus-like syndrome in
monkeys fed alfalfa sprouts: role of a nonprotein amino acid. Science
1982; 216: 415-417.

Alcocer-Varela J et al. Effects of L-canavanine on T cells may explain
the induction of systemic lupus erythematosus by alfalfa. Arthritis
Rheum 1985; 28: 52-57.

Roberts JL, Hayashi JA. Exacerbation of SLE associated with alfalfa
ingestion. N Engl J Med 1983; 308: 1361.

Natelson $. Canavanine to arginine ratio in alfalfa (Medicago sativa),
clover (Trifolium), and the jack bean (Canavalia ensiformis). ] Agric
Food Chem 1985; 33: 413-419.

Natelson S. Canavanine in alfalfa (Medicago sativa). Experientia 1985;
41: 257-259.

Malinow MR et al. Pancytopenia during ingestion of alfalfa seeds.
Lancet 1981; i: 615.

Malinow MR et al. The toxicity of alfalfa saponins in rats. Food
Cosmet Toxicol 1981; 19: 443-445.

René M et al. Lack of toxicity of alfalfa saponins in rats. Cholesterol
Metab 1981; 40: 349.

White RD et al. An evaluation of acetone extracts from six plants in
the Ames mutagenicity test. Toxicol Lett 1983; 15: 25-31.

----- PAGE 59 -----
A - Aloe Vera

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Aloe vera is obtained from the mucilaginous tissue in the centre
of the Aloe vera leaf and consists mainly of polysaccharides and
lipids. It should not be confused with aloes, which is obtained
by evaporation of water from the bitter yellow juice that is
drained from the leaf. Unlike aloes, aloe vera does not contain
any anthraquinone compounds and does not, therefore, exert
any laxative action. Studies have reported an anti-
inflammatory and anti-arthritic action for total leaf extracts but
the activity seems to be associated with anthraquinone
compounds. Hypoglycaemic activity has been reported for
aloe vera extract. Aloe vera is a source of gamolenic acid. The
literature on burn management with aloe vera gel preparations
is confused and further studies are required.

Species (Family)

*Aloe vera (L.) Burm.f., (Xanthorrhoeaceae)
A, africana Mill.

Synonym(s)

*Aloe barbadensis Mill.,
Aloe Gel

Part(s) Used

Leaf gel

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Martindale 35th edition'@*”
WHO volume 1 1999'C%)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Aloe vera is not included in the GSL.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Aloe vera is reported to contain mono- and polysaccharides,
tannins, sterols, organic acids, enzymes (including cyclooxygen-
ase), saponins, vitamins and minerals.)

Carbohydrates Glucomannan and other polysaccharides con-
taining arabinose, galactose and xylose.

Lipids Includes cholesterol, gamolenic acid and arachidonic acid."

Food Use

Aloe vera is not used in foods.

Herbal Use
Traditionally, aloe vera has been used in ointments and creams to

assist the healing of wounds, burns, eczema and psoriasis.'C” °®
Gal, G64)

Dosage

None documented.

Pharmacological Actions

Aloe vera refers to the mucilaginous tissue located in the leaf
parenchyma of Aloe vera or related Aloe species. However, many
documented studies for Aloe vera have utilised homogenised leaf
extracts which therefore combine aloe vera with aloes, the laxative
preparation obtained from the bitter, yellow juice also found in
the leaf (see Aloes). Unless otherwise specified, the following
refers to a total leaf extract.

In vitro and animal studies

Gel preparations have been reported to be effective against
radiation burns, skin ulcers and peptic ulcers.) However, the gel
was also found to be ineffective against drug- and stress-induced
gastric and peptic ulcers in rats.)

Anti-inflammatory activity has been observed in various rat and
mouse models that received subcutaneous injections of Aloe vera

Figure 1 Aloe vera (Aloe vera).

Figure 2 Aloe vera — dried drug substance (leaf gel).

----- PAGE 60 -----
leaf extract. A positive response was noted in wound-healing
(10 mg/kg, rat; 100mg/kg, mouse), mustard oedema (10 mg/kg,
rat) and polymorphonuclear leukocyte infiltration (2 mg/kg,
mouse) tests, although no activity was demonstrated in the
antifibrosis test (cotton pellet granuloma) (400 mg/kg, rat).

Anti-arthritic and anti-inflammatory activity have been docu-
mented for a cream containing homogenised Aloe africana leaves,
ribonucleic acid, and ascorbic acid, following topical application
to rats which had been injected (day 0) with Mycobacterium
butyricum to cause adjuvant arthritis.” This model is considered
a good experimental tool for studying rheumatoid arthritis.” The
cream was found to be active when applied both as a prevention
(days 1-13) and as a regression (days 21-35) treatment.
Subsequent work suggested that anthraquinone compounds
(anthraquinone, anthracene and anthranilic acid) may be the
active components in the aloe leaf mixture.’ These compounds
are, however, constituents of aloes rather than aloe vera (see
Aloes). Aloe vera juice (presumably containing the anthraquinones
contained in aloe preparation) has been applied directly to open
pressure sores to assist in their healing. The aloe vera extract
exhibited an anaesthetic reaction, antibacterial action and
increased local microcirculation.

Endogenous cyclooxygenase in Aloe vera has been found to
convert endogenous arachidonate to various prostanoids, namely
PGE) (major), TXB, PGD2, PGF», and 6-keto-PGF 3." The
production of these compounds, especially PGE, has been
associated with the beneficial effect of an aloe vera extract on
human bronchial asthma) (see Clinical studies).

Hypoglycaemic actions have been documented for aloes extracts
(see Aloes).

Clinical studies

Enhancement of phagocytosis in adult bronchial asthma has been
attributed to a non-dialysable fraction of the extract, consisting of
active components that are a mixture of polysaccharide and
protein or glycoprotein.” Despite the nature of these proposed
active components, it has been proposed that activity of the
fraction may be related to the previous observation that aloe vera
synthesises prostaglandins from endogenous arachidonic acid
using endogenous cyclooxygenase.” In this study,” activity of the
aloe vera extract required dark storage at 4-30°C for a period of
3-10 days. These conditions are reported to be favourable for
the hydrolysis of phospholipids, thus releasing arachidonic acid
for synthesis of prostanoids.” In addition, activity was dependent
on patients not having received prior treatment with a
corticosteroid.

The gel has been reported to be effective in the treatment of
mouth ulcers.

The literature on burn management with aloe vera gel
preparations is confused and further studies are required.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Hypoglycaemic activity has been documented for an aloe vera
extract, although it is unclear whether this is associated with the
true aloe vera gel or aloes extract."

Aloe Vera

Pregnancy and lactation The external application of aloe vera
gel during pregnancy is not thought to be any cause for concern.
However, products stated to contain aloes extracts or aloe vera
may well contain gastrointestinal stimulant anthraquinone
components that are well recognised as the active constituents in
aloes (laxative). As such, ingestion of such preparations during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Ecoschiuma; Ninfagin; Vicks Baby Balsam; Vulnopur. Malay-
sia: Lorasil Feminine Hygeine; Neo-Healar. Mexico: Gelco-
nordin; Hipoglos Cremoso. New Zealand: Chap Stick; Odor
Eze. Portugal: Alkagin; Antiacneicos Ac-Sal; Multi-Mam
Compressas. Singapore: Desitin Creamy. UK: Herbal Laxative
Tablets. USA: Aloe Grande; Biotene with Calcium; Bodi Kleen;
Dermtex HC with Aloe; Entertainer's Secret; Geri-Lav Free;
Gold Bond Medicated Triple Action Relief; Hawaiian Tropic
Cool Aloe with I.C.E.; Hemorid For Women; MSM with
Glucosamine Creme; Maximum Strength Flexall 454; Nasal-
Ease; OraMagicRx; Solarcaine Aloe Extra Burn Relief.

References

1 Afzal M et al. Identification of some prostanoids in Aloe vera extracts.
Planta Med 1991; 57: 38-40.

2. Parmar NS et al. Evaluation of Aloe vera leaf exudate and gel for
gastric and duodenal anti-ulcer activity. Fitoterapia 1986; 57: 380-381.

3 Davis RH et al. Biological activity of Aloe vera. Med Sci Res 1987; 15:
235.

4 Davis RH et al. Topical effect of aloe with ribonucleic and vitamin C
on adjuvant arthritis. J Am Pod Med Assoc 1985; 75: 229-237.

5S Davis RH et al. Antiarthritic activity of anthraquinones found in aloe
for podiatric medicine. J Am Pod Med Assoc 1986; 76: 61-66.

6 Cuzzell JZ. Readers’ remedies for pressure sores. Ant J Nurs 1986; 86:
923-924.

7 Shida T et al. Effect of Aloe extract on peripheral phagocytosis in
adult bronchial asthma. Planta Med 1985; 51: 273-275.

8 Plemons JM e¢ al. Evaluation of acemannan in the treatment of
aphthous stomatitis. Wounds 1994; 6: 40-45.

9 Marshall JM. Aloe vera gel: What is the evidence? Pharm ] 1990; 244:
360-362.

10 Ghanam N et al. The antidiabetic activity of aloes: preliminary clinical

and experimental observations. Hormone Res 1986; 24: 288-294.

----- PAGE 61 -----
methods, but is obtained from the mucilaginous tissue in
centre of the leaf and does not contain anthraquinones (see
Aloe Vera). Aloes is a potent purgative which has been
superseded by less toxic drugs such as senna and cascara.
Generally, the use of unstandardised preparations containing
anthraquinone glycosides should be avoided, since their
pharmacological effect is unpredictable and they may cause
abdominal cramp and diarrhoea. In particular, the use of
products containing combinations of anthraquinone laxatives
should be avoided.

Species (Family)

*Aloe vera (L.) Burm. f.
Aloe ferox Mill. (Xanthorrhoeaceae)

Synonym(s)
*Aloe barbadensis Mill.

Part(s) Used

Dried leaf juice

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 1996'C*)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission EC)
ESCOP 1997 (Cape Aloes)'‘@*”)
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Ph Eur 200708

USP29/NE24'¢8)

WHO volume 1 1999'°°?)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
References 1-7, and General References G2, G20 and G32.

Anthranoids Cape aloes anthranoids are qualitatively identical
to leaf exudate of A. ferox.? Anthrones (up to 30%), mainly the
C-glycosides aloins A and B (= barbaloin, isobarbaloin, stereo
isomers of 10-glucosyl-aloe-emodin anthrone); other glycosides
include 8-O-methyl-7-hydroxy aloins A and B, aloinosides A and
B (aloin-11-O-a-L-rhamnosides). Small quantities of 1,8-dihy-
droxyanthraquinoid aglycones, including aloe-emodin and chry-
sophanol are also present.

Chromones Major constituents are aloesin (2-acetonyl-5-methyl-
8-glucosyl chromone) and aloeresin E. Lesser quantities of
isoaloeresin D, 8-C-glucosyl-7-O-methyl-aloesol and related
glycosides, which may be esterified at the glucose moiety by
either cinnamic, p-coumaric or ferulic acids, are also present.
Non-glycosylated chromones include 7-hydroxy-2,5-dimethylchro-
mone, furoaloesone, 2-acetonyl-7-hydroxy-8-(3-hydroxyacetonyl)-
5-methyl chromone and 2-acetonyl-8-(2-furoylmethyl)-7-hydroxy-
5-methylchromone.*”

Phenyl pyrones Glycosides include aloenin and aloenin B.""”

Other constituents Cinnamic acid and 1-methyltetralin.“@”

Food Use

Aloes is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3).'©'® This category indicates that
aloes can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted
manner, although there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity. The concentration of
aloin present in the final product is limited to 0.1 mg/kg; 50 mg/kg
in alcoholic beverages.'“!® Previously, aloes has been listed as
GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).‘“4”

Herbal Use

Aloes is recommended for the treatment of atonic constipation
and suppressed menstruation. ‘©? “46%

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried juice 50-200 mg or equivalent three times daily.'C%

In view of potential adverse effects, the dose recommended for
adults and children aged over 10 years is 10-30mg_ of
hydroxyanthracene derivatives (calculated as barbaloin) once daily
at night.(?) Use of aloes as a laxative in self-treatment of
constipation for more than two weeks is not recommended.‘

Pharmacological Actions

The activity of aloes can be attributed to the anthranoid glycoside
content. The glycosides are metabolised by glycosidases in the
intestinal flora to form active anthrones. The laxative action is due
to an increase in motility of the large intestine by inhibition of the
Na*/K* pump and chloride ion channels; enhanced fluid secretion

occurs due to stimulation of mucus and chloride ion secre-
+ (G52)
tion.

In vitro and animal studies

Nine hours after oral administration, aloes produced diarrhoea at
doses of 5 g/kg (in 20% of rats) and 20 g/kg (in 100% of rats).
Pretreatment of rats with the nitric oxide (NO) synthase inhibitor
N-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester given intraperitoneally reduced
diarrhoea induced by aloes (20g/kg) nine hours after oral

----- PAGE 62 -----
administration. The results suggest that endogenous NO
modulates the diarrhoeal effects of Cape aloes.”

Inhibitory effects of aqueous extracts of five species of Aloe,
including A. ferox and A. barbadensis, and aloe powder (Japanese
Pharmacopoeia) on histamine release from rat peritoneal mast
cells induced by antigen were investigated in vitro. All extracts
tested inhibited histamine release in a concentration-dependent
Aloe ferox extract, Japanese
Pharmacopoeia aloes and barbaloin strongly inhibited histamine
release (ICs 0.16, 0.07 and 0.02 jtg/mL, respectively).

Aqueous extracts of aloes are said to elevate the rate of ethanol
oxidation in vivo.) Oral administration of aloin (300 mg/kg) to
rats 12 hours prior to administration of alcohol (3 g/kg) resulted

manner under the test condition:

Anthracene glycosides
OH O OH

‘ ‘CH,OH
AY Re
R' R2
aloinA H Glucosyl
aloinB Glucosyl H
OH O OH
; ‘CH20-Rhamnosy
RY OR?
R! Re
aloinoside AH Glucosyl

aloinosideB Glucosyl H

Chromones
HOQH

RO. CH;

R! R?
aloesin A p-coumarate
aloesin B H H
aloesin C p-coumarate Glucosyl

Phenylpyrones

HO. O.
‘Glucosyl

ICH3

aloenin A

Figure 1 Selected constituents of aloes.

Aloes

in a significant decrease (40%) in blood alcohol concentration.”

Treatment with intraperitoneal aloe-emodin two hours prior to
alcohol administration significantly reduced blood alcohol con-
centrations; it was hypothesised that aloin is metabolised to aloe-
emodin which exerts its effect on alcohol metabolism.” Activity-
guided fractionation of the leaves of A. aborescens resulted in the
isolation and characterisation of elgonica-dimers A and B
(dimeric C-glycosides of anthrone emodin-10'-C-B-p-glucopyra-
noside and aloe-emodin) as potent inhibitors of cytosolic alcohol
dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase activities in vitro."

Aloe-emodin and an alcoholic extract of aloes have been
reported to possess antitumour activity.C4)

Hypoglycaemic activity has been shown in alloxan-diabetic
mice for aloes and in diabetic rats for an aloe gum
extract.(1%!®

Barbaloin is active in vitro against Mycobacterium tuberculosis
and Bacillus subtilis (minimum inhibitory concentration 0.125 mg/
mL and 0.25 mg/mL, respectively).'°!®

Clinical studies

The purgative action of the anthraquinone glycosides is well
recognised (see Senna), although aloes is reported to be more
potent than both senna and cascara.‘“4"S*) Orally ingested
anthranoid glycosides are not metabolised until they reach the
colon. In humans, the intestinal flora break down O-glycosides
readily and C-glycosides to some extent. The main active
metabolite is aloe-emodin-9-anthrone.'¢)

An aloes extract in doses too small to cause abdominal cramps
or diarrhoea had a significant hypoglycaemic effect in five patients
with non-insulin-dependent diabetes." However, the methodo-
logical limitations of this small, uncontrolled study do not allow
any conclusions to be drawn on the effects of aloes.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Aloes is a potent purgative that may cause abdominal pains,
gastrointestinal irritation leading to pelvic congestion and, in
large doses, may result in nephritis, bloody diarrhoea and
haemorrhagic gastritis.4"°*” Like all stimulant’ purgativ
prolonged use of aloes may produce watery diarrhoea with
excessive loss of water and electrolytes (particularly potassium),
muscular weakness and weight loss.‘

Tests of the possible carcinogenicity of hydroxyanthraquinones
and their glycosides showed that exposure to certain aglycones
and glycosides may represent a human cancer risk.''”) Most of the
aglycones tested were found to be mutagenic and some, such as
emodin and aloe-emodin, were genotoxic in mammalian cells.

Administration of dried aloes extract 50 mg/kg per day for 12
weeks to mice did not result in the development of severe
pathological symptoms, although a raised sorbitol dehydrogenase
concentration was suggested to be indicative of liver damage.‘©?”
No mutagenic effects in Salmonella typhimurium and Va7 cells, or
DNA repair induction in rat hepatocytes, were observed. These
negative results are due to the inability of the test systems to
release mutagenic anthranoids from the C-glycosides.(©” Retro-
spective and prospective studies have shown no causal relationship
between anthranoid laxative use and colorectal cancer.‘°)

>

Contra-indications, Warnings

Aloes has been superseded by less toxic laxatives.‘°*) The drastic

purgative action of aloes contra-indicates its use in individuals
with haemorrhoids and existing kidney disease. In common with

----- PAGE 63 -----
Aloes

all purgatives, aloes should not be given to patients with
inflammatory disease of the colon (e.g. Crohn's disease, ulcerative
colitis), appendicitis, intestinal obstruction, abdominal pain,
nausea or vomiting. Aloes colours alkaline urine red. Long-term
use should be avoided and a doctor should be consulted within
two weeks of treatment initiation if symptoms persist.

Drug interactions Hypokalaemia resulting from laxative abuse
potentiates the action of cardiac glycosides, interacts with anti-
arrhythmic drugs, and with drugs which induce reversion to sinus
rhythm, e.g. quinidine. Concomitant use with thiazide diuretics,
adrenocorticosteroids and liquorice may aggregate electrolyte
imbalance.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the irritant and cathartic
properties documented for aloes, its use is contra-indicated during
pregnancy.) Anthraquinones may be secreted into breast milk
and, therefore, aloes should be avoided during lactation (see
Senna).

Aloes is reputed to be an abortifacient and to affect the
menstrual cycle.

(G22)

Mom (Aoxrop Mom); Original Grosser Bittner Balsam
(Opurmmaapnerit Boapmoii Baansam Burrnepa). South Africa:
Helmontskruie; Lewensessens; Moultons Herbal Extract;
Turulington Tincture; Wonderkroonessens. Spain: Alofedina;
Crislaxo; Cynaro Bilina; Laxante Sanatorium; Nico Hepato-

Vagisil.

References

1

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

Park MK et al. Analysis of 13 phenolic compounds in Aloe species by
high performance liquid chromatography. Phytochem Anal 1998; 9:
186-191.

Okamura N et al. High-performance liquid chromatographic
determination of phenolic compounds in Aloe species. | Chromatogr
A 1996; 746: 225-231.

Van Wyk E-E et al. Geographical variation in the major compounds of
Aloe ferox leaf exudate. Planta Med 1995; 61: 250-253.

Reynolds T. Chromatographic examination of some old samples of
drug aloes. Pharmazie 1994; 49: 524-529.

Rauwald HW, Sigler A. Simultaneous determination of 18 polyketides
typical of Aloe by high performance liquid chromatography and
photodiode array detection. Phytochem Anal 1994; 5: 266-270.
Rauwald HW, Beil A. High-performance liquid chromatographic
separation and determination of diastereomeric anthrone-C-glucosyls
in Cape aloes. J Chromatogr 1993; 639: 359-362.

Rauwald HW et al. Three 8-C-glucosyl-5-methyl-chromones from
Aloe barbadensis (Ph. Eur. 1997). Pharmazie 1997; 52: 962-964.
Speranza G et al. Studies on aloe, 12. Furoaloesone, a new 5-
methylchromone from Cape aloe. J Nat Prod 1993; 56: 1089-1094.
Speranza G et al. Studies on aloe, 15. Two new 5-methylchromones
from Cape aloe. J Nat Prod 1997; 60: 692-694.

Izzo AA et al. The role of nitric oxide in aloe-induced diarrhoea in the
rat. Eur J Pharmacol 1999; 368: 43-48.

Yamamoto M et al. Inhibitory effects of aloe extracts on antigen- and
compound 48/80-induced histamine release from rat peritoneal mast
cells. Jpn ] Toxicol Environ Health 1993; 39: 395-400.

Chung J-H et al. Acceleration of the alcohol oxidation rate in rats
with aloin, a quinone derivative of aloe. Biochem Pharmacol 1996; 52:
1461-1468.

Shin KH et al. Elongica-dimers A and B, two potent alcohol
metabolism inhibitory constituents of Aloe arborescens. J Nat Prod
1997; 60: 1180-1182.

Ghannam N et al. The antidiabetic activity of aloes: preliminary and
experimental observations. Horm Res 1986; 24: 288-294.

Al-Awadi FM, Gumaa KA. Studies on the activity of individual plants
of an antidiabetic plant mixture. Acta Diabetol Lat 1987; 24: 37-41.
Al-Awadi FM e¢ al. On the mechanism of the hypoglycaemic effect of
a plant extract. Diabetologia 1985; 28: 432-434.

Westendorf J et al. Possible carcinogenicity of anthraquinone-
containing medical plants. Planta Med 1988; 54: 562.

----- PAGE 64 -----
Angelica

intake should be avoided. Angelica contains furanocoumarins
which are known to possess photosensitising properties.
Coumarin compounds detected so far in A. archangelica do
not possess the minimum structural requirements (a C-4
hydroxyl substituent and a C-3 non-polar carbon
substituent)“®” for anticoagulant activity.

Species (Family)
Angelica archangelica L. (Apiaceae/Umbelliferae)

Synonym(s)

Angelicae Radix, Archangelica officinalis Hoffm., Garden Angel-
ica

Part(s) Used

Fruit, leaf, rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission EC”
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'0*?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
cL O—OS

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.
The literature mainly refers to constituents of the root.

Coumarins Over 20 furanocoumarins, including angelicin,
archangelicin, bergapten, isoimperatorin and xanthotoxin." ©)
Also the coumarins osthol (major constituent in rhizome/root,
0.2%) and umbelliferone.““?) The root also contains the
furanocoumarins 2/-angeloyl-3'-isovaleryl vaginate,”” heraclenol-
2'-O-senecioate and heraclenol-2'-O-isovalerate.

Volatile oils 0.35—1.3% in root and fruit. 80-90% monoterpenes,
including «- and B-phellandrene, «%- and B-pinene, sabinene, «-
thujene, limonene, linalool, borneol" and four macrocyclic
lactones.

Other constituents Archangelenone (a flavonoid), palmitic acid,
caffeic and chlorogenic acids, sugars (fructose, glucose, sucrose,
umbelliferose).

The chemistry of A. sinensis is similar to that of A.
archangelica, with coumarins and volatile oil being major
components. In addition, a series of phthalides (e.g. ligustilide,
butylphthalide, butylidenephthalide) have been isolated.

Food Use

Angelica is widely used in foods.’ ) Angelica is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (stem:
category 1; other parts and preparations: category 4, with limits
on coumarin and furanocoumarin) (see Appendix 3).(1)
Previously, angelica has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).‘C*?

1, G32)

Coumarins
BS
fe) fe) fe)
angelicin
OR
V =
9 07 So
R

bergapten Cl

Hg
isoimperatorin wk

fo) le}
Oo o So
an:
OCH3
xanthotoxin archangelicin
Flavonoids
ae
HO. ; 0.
OH O

archengelenone

Figure 1 Selected constituents of angelica.

----- PAGE 65 -----
sa Angelica

Herbal Use

Angelica is stated to possess antispasmodic, diaphoretic, expec-
torant, bitter aromatic, carminative, diuretic and local anti-
inflammatory properties. It has been used for respiratory catarrh,
psychogenic asthma, flatulent dyspepsia, anorexia nervosa,
rheumatic diseases, peripheral vascular disease, and specifically
for pleurisy and bronchitis, applied as a compress, and for
bronchitis associated with vascular deficiency,'67 0 9°” The
German Commission E monograph states that angelica can be
used for lack of appetite and dyspeptic complaints such as mild
stomach cramps and flatulence.‘“?

Many related species, including A. sinensis (dong quai), are
traditionally used in Chinese medicine.'(“” A
about 70% of all traditional Chinese medicine prescriptions to
treat dysmenorrhoea, postnatal disturbances, anaemia, constipa-
tion and chronic pelvic infections.) Western naturopaths
recommend the use of dong quai in hypertension, for modification
of high blood sugar concentrations, regulation of the immune
system, liver detoxification, anaemia and to relieve allergic
conditions. Several unlicensed over-the-counter (OTC) products
containing dong quai are readily available.

. sinensis occurs in

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried leaf 2-5 g by infusion three times daily.'C”

Leaf liquid extract 2-SmL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily'©”

Leaf tincture 2-5 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.‘©”

Dried rhizome/root Daily dose 4.5g'°” or 1-2g by infusion
three times daily,'(C+S”

Rhizome/root liquid extract 0.5—2.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol)
G7)

three times daily.‘

Figure 2 Angelica (Angelica archangelica).

Rhizome/root tincture 0.5—2mL (1:5 in 50% alcohol) three
times daily.'C”

Fruit 1-2.g.0)

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Minimal anti-inflammatory activity (1% inhibition of carragee-
nan-induced rat paw oedema) has been documented for fruit
extracts (100mg/kg body weight by mouth) given 45 minutes
This was compared with 45%
inhibition by indometacin (5 mg/kg by mouth).

Angelica is reported to possess antibacterial and antifungal
properties.©4" 9 Antibacterial activity against Mycobacterium
avium has been documented, with no activity exhibited against
Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, Streptococcus faecalis or
Salmonella typhi.” Antifungal activity was reported in 14 of 15
fungi tested.”

A methanolic extract of A. archangelica root showed anti-
spasmodic activity against spontaneous contractions of circular
smooth muscle (ICso 265 g/mL) and inhibited acetylcholine- and
barium chloride-induced contractions of longitudinal smooth
muscle (ICs9 values 242 and 146 g/mL, respectively).

Extracts of A. archangelica root exhibit calcium channel-
blocking activity.” A series of isolated coumarins showed activity,
the most active being archangelicin with an ICso 1.2 g/mL
(verapamil 2.0 g/mL) as a calcium channel antagonist as assessed
by inhibition of depolarisation in GH4C, rat pituitary cells.

Sixteen coumarin compounds isolated from A. archangelica
were tested for activity in cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) and 5-
lipoxygenase (5-LO) inhibition assays in vitro. None of the
compounds demonstrated activity against COX-1, but osthol and
oxypeucedanin isovalerate were active in the 5-LO assay.

In rabbits, a uterotonic action has been documented for
Japanese angelica root following intraduodenal administration
of a methanolic extract (3 g/kg).''” A. sinensis is reported to have
‘S57. Pharmacological

before eliciting oedema.

induced uterine contraction and relaxation.

investigations have shown that phthalides and coumarins found in
A. sinensis have antispasmodic activity. The volatile constituents
generally exert a hypotensive effect. A polysaccharide component
is active against Ehrlich ascites tumours in mice and_ has
immunostimulating activity,
against ethanol- and indometacin-induced damage.

) and protects the gastric mucosa

(14)

Figure 3. Angelica - dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 66 -----
Clinical studies

None documented for angelica (A. archangelica). The furanocou-
marin constituent bergapten (5-methoxypsoralen) has been used
in the PUVA (psoralen (P) and high-intensity long-wavelength
ultraviolet irradiation) treatment of psoriasis.'“*?

Clinical investigation has failed to support the claims for A.
sinensis with respect to relieving menopausal symptoms.) A.
sinensis has been reported to be effective in improving abnormal
protein metabolism in patients with chronic hepatitis or hepatic
cirrhosis."

Side-effects, Toxicity

Both angelica and the root oil have been reported to cause
photodermatitis and phototoxicity, respectively, following external
contact.(7 ©3658) Angelica contains furanocoumarin consti-
tuents which are known to cause photosensitisation. Concern has
been expressed at the possible carcinogenic risk of the furano-
coumarin bergapten. Seven species of plants known to cause
dermatitis were analysed for psoralen, 8-methoxypsoralen
(xanthotoxin) and 5-methoxypsoralen (bergapten). The highest
total yield was obtained from A. archangelica."”

The root oil has been reported to be non-irritant and non-
sensitising on animal and human skin."

Root and fruit oils obtained by steam distillation are claimed to
be devoid of furanocoumarins, although extracts may contain
them.'@*

Coumarin compounds detected so far in A. archangelica do not
possess the minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl
substituent and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)©*” for
anticoagulant activity.

Toxicity studies have been documented for the root oil.” Acute
LDs5o values have been reported as 2.2 g/kg body weight (mouse,
by mouth) and 11.16 g/kg (rat, by mouth). Death was attributed to
liver and kidney damage, although animals surviving for three
days completely recovered with a reversal of organ damage. An
acute LDso (rabbit, dermal) value was reported to be greater than
Sg/kg. Subacute toxicity studies, lasting eight weeks, suggested
that the tolerated dose in the rat was 1.5 g/kg, although at lower
doses the animals weighed less than the controls.”

Furanocoumarins isolated from another related Chinese
species, Angelica koreana, have been reported to affect the hepatic
metabolism of hexobarbitone. The compounds were found to
cause a marked inhibition of drug metabolism in the first phase
and an acceleration in the second phase, and were thought to be
drug-metabolising enzyme inhibitors rather than enzyme indu-
cers. Furanocoumarins investigated included imperatorin and
oxypeucedanin, which are also documented as constituents of A.
archangelica.

An extract of dong quai administered subcutaneously to rabbits
did not affect prothrombin time given alone, but did after
concurrent administration of a single dose of warfarin.®
Elevation of prothrombin time was noted in a patient stabilised
on warfarin who began taking dong quai.''”) Coagulation values
returned to normal one month after discontinuing use of dong

quai.

Contra-indications, War

gs
Angelica may provoke a photosensitive allergic reaction because of
the furanocoumarin constituents.

The use of bergapten in cosmetic and suntan preparations is

stated to be ill-advised by some regulatory authorities,'“*” in view

Angelica

of the concerns regarding the risk of skin cancer. The Interna-
tional Fragrance Association recommended that angelica root oil
be limited to a maximum of 0.78% in products applied to skin
which is then exposed to sunshine.'“**

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of angelica to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Angelica root is reputed to be an
abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle. In view of this and
the photosensitising constituents, the use of angelica during
pregnancy and lactation in amounts exceeding those used in foods
should be avoided.

Theiss Schwedenbitter; Stomaran; Valofyt Neo. France:
Dystolise; Mediflor Tisane Digestive No 3. Germany:
Abdomilon; Abdomilon N; Gastritol; Iberogast; Klosterfrau
Melisana; Melissengeist; Schwedentrunk Elixier. Italy: Flor-
elax. Russia: Doppelherz Melissa (Aormeasrepy Meancca);
Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opurunaapuerit Boapmoit
Baavsam burruepa). South Africa: Melissengeist; Spiritus
Contra Tussim Drops. Spain: Agua del Carmen; Himelan.
Switzerland: Gastrosan; Iberogast. UK: Melissa Comp..

References

1 Czygan F-C. (Root of the holy ghost or Angelica root — Angelica
archangelica). Z Phytother 1998; 19: 342-348.

2 Harmala P et al. A furanocoumarin from Angelica archangelica.
Planta Med 1992; 58: 287-289.

3 Sun H, Jakupovic J. Further heraclenol derivatives from Angelica
archangelica. Pharmazie 1986; 41: 888-889.

4 Holm Y et al. Enantiomeric composition of monoterpene
hydrocarbons in n-hexane extracts of Angelica archangelica L. roots
and seeds. Flavour Fragrance J 1997; 12: 397-400.

5 Awang DVC. Dong quai. Can Pharm J 1999; 132: 38-41.

6 Zielinska-Jenczylik J et al. Effect of plant extracts on the in vitro
interferon synthesis. Arch Immunol Ther Exp 1984; 32: 577.

7 Opdyke DLJ. Angelica root oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1975; 13 (Suppl.
Suppl.): 713.

8 Izzo AA et al. Spasmolytic activity of medicinal plants used for the
treatment of disorders involving smooth muscles. Phytother Res 1996;
10: $107-S108.

9 Harmala P et al. Choice of solvent in the extraction of Angelica
archangelica roots with reference to calcium blocking activity. Planta
Med 1992; 58: 176-183.

10 Harmala P et al. Isolation and testing of calcium blocking activity of
furanocoumarins from Angelica archangelica. Planta Med 1991; 57:
AS8-AS9.

11 Roos G et al. Isolation, identification and screening for COX-1 and 5-
LO inhibition of coumarins from Angelica archangelica. Pharmaceut
Pharmacol Lett 1997; 7: 157-160.

12. Harada M et al. Effect of Japanese angelica root and peony root on
uterine contraction in the rabbit in situ. J] Pharm Dyn 1984; 7: 304-
311.

----- PAGE 67 -----
13

14

15

Angelica

Choy YM et al. Immunological studies of low molecular weight
polysaccharide from Angelica sinensis. Am ] Chin Med 1994; 22: 137—
145.

Cho CH et al. Study of the gastrointestinal protective effects of
polysaccharides from Angelica sinensis in rats. Planta Med 2000; 66:
348-351.

Hirata JD et al. Does dong quai have oestrogenic effects in
postmenopausal women? A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.
Fertil Steril 1997; 68: 981-986.

16

17

18

19

Chang H-M, But PP-H. Pharmacology and Applications of Chinese
Materia Medica, vol 1. Singapore: World Scientific, 1986: 499.
Zobel AM, Brown SA. Dermatitis-inducing psoralens on the surface
of seven medicinal plant species. J Toxicol Cutan Ocul Toxicol 1991;
10: 223-231.

Lo ACT et al. Dong quai (Angelica sinensis) effects the
pharmacodynamics but not the pharmacokinetics of warfarin in
rabbits. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 1995; 20: 55-60.

Page RL, Lawrence JD. Potentiation of warfarin by dong quai.
Pharmacotherapy 1999; 19: 870-876.

----- PAGE 68 -----
Aniseed

ealth when it is consumed in amounts normally encountered
in foods. Anethole was reaffirmed as GRAS (Generally
Regarded As Safe) in 1997 on the basis of the recognised
metabolic detoxication of trans-anethole in humans at low
levels of exposure (1 mg/kg body weight).“” For medicinal
use, it is recommended that treatment should not be
continued for extended periods.

Species (Family)

Pimpinella anisum L. (Apiaceae/Umbelliferae)

Synonym(s)

Anise, Anisi Fructus, Anisum, Anisum officinarum Moench.,
Anisum vulgare Gaertn.

Part(s) Used

Fruit

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission E'”
ESCOP 1997)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Ph Eur 2007'0*?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G52.

Coumarins Scopoletin, umbelliferone, umbelliprenine; bergapten
(furanocoumarin).

Flavonoids Flavonol (quercetin) and flavone (apigenin, luteolin)
glycosides, e.g. quercetin-3-glucuronide, rutin, luteolin-7-gluco-
side, apigenin-7-glucoside; isoorientin and isovitexin (C-gluco-
sides).

Volatile oils 26%. Major components are trans-anethole (80-
95%), with smaller amounts of estragole (methyl chavicol) ,“¢
anise ketone (p-methoxyphenylacetone) and f-caryophyllene.

Minor components include anisaldehyde and anisic acid (oxida-
tion products of anethole), linalool, limonene, -pinene, pseudo-
isoeugenol-2-methyl butyrate, acetaldehyde, p-cresol, cresol,
hydroquinone, B-farnesene, o-, B- and y-himachalene, bisabolene,
d-elemene, ar-curcumene and myristicin.”

Other constituents Carbohydrate (50%), lipids 16% (saturated
and unsaturated), B-amyrin (triterpene), stigmasterol (phyto-
sterol) and its palmitate and stearate salts.

Food Use

Aniseed is used extensively as a spice and is listed by the Council
of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category N2).
This category allows small quantities of aniseed to be added to
foodstuffs, with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.'©'® Previously, aniseed has been
listed as GRAS.(0 C4?

Phenylpropanoids

OCH; OCH;
5
trans-anethole methyl chavicol
(estragole)
Aromatic aldehyde
OCH3
HO
anisaldehyde
Coumarins
1
Bool
R' fe) le)

R' Re
umbelliferone H OH
scopoletin OCH; OH

OCH;
Vi =
0 o~ So
bergapten

Figure 1 Selected constituents of aniseed.

----- PAGE 69 -----
Aniseed

Herbal Use

Aniseed is stated to possess expectorant, antispasmodic, carmi-
native and parasiticide properties. Traditionally, it has been used
for bronchial catarrh, pertussis, spasmodic cough, flatulent colic;
topically for pediculosis and scabies; its most specific use is for
bronchitis, tracheitis with persistent cough, and as an aromatic
adjuvant to prevent colic following the use of cathartics.'°> ©” 0
Modern use of aniseed is mainly for the treatment of dyspeptic
complaints and catarrh of the upper respiratory tract.(@4h @* 979)

Aniseed has been used as an oestrogenic agent.) It has been
reputed to increase milk secretion, promote menstruation,
facilitate birth, alleviate symptoms of the male climacteric and
increase libido.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults, unless otherwise stated)
for traditional uses recommended in older and contemporary
standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried fruit Adults: 1.0-5.0 g crushed fruits in 150 mL water as an
infusion several times daily.“°*” Children: 0-1 year old, 1.0g of
crushed fruits as an infusion; 1-4 years of age, 2.0g; over four
years, use adult dose.‘@”)

Oil 0.05-0.2 mL three times daily.“©”
Spirit of anise (BPC 1949) 0.3-1.0mL three times daily.
Distilled anise water (BPC 1934) 15-30 mL three times daily.

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological effects of aniseed are largely due to the
presence of anethole, which is structurally related to the
catecholamines adrenaline, noradrenaline and dopamine. Aneth-
ole dimers closely resemble the oestrogenic agents stilbene and
diethylstilbestrol.

In vitro and animal studies

Antimicrobial, antifungal and insecticidal activities |The
volatile oil has antibacterial, antifungal and insecticidal activi-
(G41,G52) A nethole, anisaldehyde and myristicin have exhibited
mild insecticidal properties.(“*”

ties.

Figure 2 Aniseed (Pimpinella anisum).

Antispasmodic activity Anise oil (200mg/L) was shown to
antagonise carbachol-induced spasms in a guinea-pig tracheal
muscle preparation.“°)

Secretolytic and expectorant effect Application of aniseed
(6.4¢/140mL) to isolated ciliated epithelium of frog trachea
induces small increases in transport velocity.” Dilutions of
anise oil increased respiratory tract fluid in anaesthetised guinea-
pigs, rats and cats. A similar action was observed in anaesthetised
rabbits inhaling anise oil.'°*” The reputed lactogogic action of
anise has been attributed to anethole, which exerts a competitive
antagonism at dopamine receptor sites (dopamine inhibits
prolactin secretion), and to the action of polymerised anethole,
which is structurally related to the oestrogenic compounds
stilbene and diethylstilbestrol.

CNS activities Whole plant aqueous infusions have been reported
to delay (but not prevent) the onset of picrotoxin-induced seizures
and to reduce the mortality rate in mice following intraperitoneal
injection.” Aniseed has also been found to slightly elevate y-
aminobutyric acid (GABA) concentrations in brain tissue. The
anticonvulsant effect is much weaker with aniseed than with
conventional drug treatment and therefore its use as an anti-
convulsant in Arabic folklore is not supported. Anise oil diluted
in sesame oil (0.25-1.0 mL/kg) given intraperitoneally to mice
increased in a dose-dependent manner the dose of pentylene-
tetrazole needed to induce clonic and tonic seizures.) Activity
was also observed against tonic seizures induced by maximal
electric shock. Motor impairment was observed at higher doses of
anise oil. Pentobarbital-induced sleeping time was prolonged by
intraperitoneal administration of anise oil (50 mg/kg) to mice.'C”

Other activities Oral administration of anethole (250-1000 mg/
kg) to Swiss albino mice with Ehrlich ascites tumour in the paws
indicated antitumour activity.) The conclusions were based on
biochemical changes (nucleic acids, proteins, malondialdehyde,
glutathione), survival rate and tumour weight. Anise oil given to
rats (100 mg/kg given subcutaneously) stimulated liver regenera-
tion after partial hepatectomy.'°”)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of documented clinical research involving aniseed
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Figure 3. Aniseed — dried drug substance (fruit).

----- PAGE 70 -----
Side-effects, Toxicity

Contact dermatitis reactions to aniseed and aniseed oil have been
attributed to anethole.” "°°" Reactions have been reported
with products, such as creams and toothpastes, flavoured with
aniseed oil.'“*") The volatile oil and anethole have been stated to
be both irritant and sensitising.(©?" “>” Two female workers in a
cake factory developed severe dermatitis, and patch tests indicated
sensitivity to anise oil and to anethole. Soreness, dryness and
cracking of lips and perioral skin occurred in an individual using a
herbal (fennel) toothpaste; anethole was reported to be the
sensitising agent. Bergapten is known to cause photosensitivity
reactions and concern has been expressed over the possible
carcinogenic risk of bergapten.'“*)

Ingestion of as little as 1-5 mL of anise oil can result in nausea,
vomiting, seizures, and pulmonary oedema.”

The LDso values per kg body weight for anise oil and trans-
anethole are 2.7g and 2-3 g, respectively.(©” Mild liver lesions
were observed in rats fed repeated anethole doses (695 mg/kg) for
an unspecified duration." Hepatic changes have been described in
rats fed anethole in their daily diet (1%) for 15 weeks,'C?”
although at a level of 0.25% there were no changes after one year.
Rats fed with 0.1% trans-anethole in their diet for 90 days showed
no toxic effects, but higher concentrations (0.3%, 1.0% and 3.0%)
resulted in liver oedema.“°”) In therapeutic doses, anethole is
reported to cause minimal hepatotoxicity.©? Trans-anethole
given orally to rats (50-80 mg/kg) resulted in dose-dependent anti-
implantation activity." Significant oestrogenic activity was
observed, but no anti-oestrogenic, progestational, anti-progesta-
tional, androgenic or antiandrogenic activity.”

Oral administration (1% of diet) of trans-anethole to rats
resulted in induction of parathion-degrading drug enzymes.'°)
Male Wistar rats were treated with trans-anethole (125 or 250 mg/
kg) by gavage for 10 days and the activities of liver microsome and
cytosol phase I and II biotransformation enzymes were deter-
mined.) There was no effect on cytochrome P450, but UDP-
glucuronyltransferase activity in the cytosol towards the sub-
strates 4-chlorophenol and 4-hydroxyphenol was significantly
increased for both doses. It was concluded that trans-anethole
preferentially induces phase II biotransformation in rat liver in
vivo."
The safety of trans-anethole (4-methoxy propenylbenzene) has
been reviewed by the Expert Panel of the Flavour and Extract
Manufacturer Association (FEMA).”) The evaluation was based
on whether the hepatotoxic metabolite anethole epoxide is
produced. At low levels of exposure, trans-anethole is efficiently
detoxicated in rodents and humans, primarily by O-demethylation
and @-oxidation, respectively, while epoxidation is only a minor
pathway. At higher doses in rats, a metabolic shift occurs resulting
in epoxidation and formation of anethole epoxide. The contin-
uous intake of high doses of trans-anethole induces a continuum
of cytotoxicity, cell necrosis and cell proliferation. In chronic
dietary studies in rats, hepatotoxicity resulted when the daily
production of anethole epoxide exceeded 30 mg anethole epoxide
per kg body weight. Neither trans-anethole nor anethole epoxide
showed any evidence of genotoxicity. The Expert Panel concluded
that the hepatocarcinogenic effects in female rats occur via a non-
genotoxic mechanism and are secondary to hepatotoxicity caused
by continuous exposures to high hepatocellular concentrations of
anethole epoxide. Trans-anethole was reaffirmed as GRAS, based
on a thorough study of the scientific literature." Because trans-
anethole undergoes efficient metabolic detoxication in humans at
low levels of exposure, the neoplastic effects in rats associated

Aniseed

with dose-dependent hepatotoxicity are not indicators of any
significant risk to human health from the use of trans-anethole as
a flavouring substance.‘

Coumarin compounds detected so far in aniseed do not possess
the minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl substituent
and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)'©*” for anticoagulant
activity.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Aniseed may cause an allergic reaction. It is recommended that the
use of aniseed oil should be avoided in dermatitis, and
inflammatory or allergic skin conditions."*"°® Aniseed should
be avoided by persons with known sensitivity to anethole.“°”)
Bergapten may cause photosensitivity in sensitive individuals. In
view of the structural similarity reported between anethole and
myristicin, consumption of large amounts of aniseed may cause
neurological effects similar to those documented for nutmeg.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of aniseed to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar (e.g.
hormonal therapies) or opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Traditionally, aniseed is reputed to be
an abortifacient'©” and also to promote lactation. The safety of
aniseed taken during pregnancy and lactation has not been
established; however, there are no known problems provided that
doses taken do not greatly exceed the amounts used in foods. It
has been proposed that aniseed and preparations used at
recommended dosages may be used during pregnancy and
lactation.'©”

No 3; Mucinum a I'Extrait de Cascara. Germany: Em-medical;
Floradix Multipretten N; Majocarmin-Tee; Ramend Krauter.
Hong Kong: Mucinum Cascara. Israel: Jungborn. Italy:
Cadifen; Cadimint; Dicalmir; Lassatina; Tisana Kelemata.
Russia: Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opuramaapunii
Boasmoit Baansam Burruepa). South Africa: Clairo; Cough
Elixir. Spain: Crislaxo; Digestovital; Laxante Sanatorium;
Laxomax. Switzerland: Kernosan Elixir; Kernosan Heidelber-
ger Poudre; Tisane favorisant l'allaitement. UK: Herb and
Honey Cough Elixir; Revitonil. Venezuela: Neo-Atropan.

References

1 Newberne P et al. The FEMA GRAS assessment of trans-anethole
used as a flavouring substance. Food Chem Toxicol 1999; 37: 789-811.

2. Burkhardt G et al. Terpene hydrocarbons in Pimpinella anisum L.
Pharm Weekbl (Sci) 1986; 8: 190-193.

3. Albert-Puleo M. Fennel and anise as estrogenic agents. J
Ethnopharmacol 1980; 2: 337-344.

4 Abdul-Ghani A-S et al. Anticonvulsant effects of some Arab medicinal
plants. Int J Crude Drug Res 1987; 25: 39-43.

5 Pourgholami MH et al. The fruit essential oil of Pimpinella anisum
exerts anticonvulsant effects in mice. J Ethnopharmacol 1999; 66:
211-215.

----- PAGE 71 -----
Aniseed

6 Al-Harbi MM e¢ al. Influence of anethole treatment on the tumour 9 Franks A. Contact allergy to anethole in toothpaste associated with
A induced by Ehrlich ascites carcinoma cells in paw of Swiss albino loss of taste. Contact Dermatitis 1998; 38: 354-355.
mice. Eur J Cancer Prevent 1995; 4: 307-318. 10 Dhar SK. Anti-fertility activity and hormonal profile of trans-anethole
7 Chandler RE, Hawkes D. Anisced — a spice, a flavor, a drug. Can in rats. Indian ] Physiol Pharmacol 1995; 39: 63-67.
Pharm J 1984; 117: 28-29. 11 Rompelberg CJM et al. Effects of the naturally occurring
8 Garcia-Bravo B et al. Occupational contact dermatitis from anethole alkenylbenzenes eugenol and trans-anethole on drug-metabolising

in food handlers. Contact Dermatitis 1997; 37: 38. enzymes in the rat liver. Food Chem Toxicol 1993; 31: 637-645.

----- PAGE 72 -----
Apricot

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Interest in apricot kernels was generated as a result of claims
in the late 1970s that laetrile, a semi-synthetic derivative of
the naturally occurring constituent amygdalin, was a natural,
non-toxic cure for cancer. Apricot kernels were seen as an
alternative source for this miracle cure. These claims have
since been disproved and it has been established that laetrile
(amygdalin) is toxic, particularly if administered orally. Fatal
cases of cyanide poisoning have been reported following the
ingestion of apricot kernels. Amygdalin was made a
prescription-only medicine in the UK in 1984.“

Species (Family)

Armeniaca vulgaris Lam. var. vulgaris

Synonym(s)

Ku Xing Ren (seed/kernel), Prunus armeniaca L., Prunus tiliifolia

Salisb.

Part(s) Used

Kernel (seed), expressed oil

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Apricot is not included in the GSL. Amygdalin (a cyanogenetic
glycoside) is classified as a POM.”

Constituents

Acids Phenolic. Various quinic acid esters of caffeic, p-coumaric
and ferulic acids.” Neochlorogenic acid major in kernel,
chlorogenic in fruit.

Glycosides Cyanogenetic. Amygdalin (mandelonitrile digluco-
side). Cyanide content of kernel varies from 2 to 200 mg/100g.°

Tannins Catechins, proanthocyanidins (condensed).

Other constituents Cholesterol, an oestrogenic fraction (0.09%)
containing estrone (both free and conjugated) and a-estradiol.

Other plant parts

Leaves and fruit contain various flavonol (kaempferol, quercetin)
glycosides including rutin (major).°)

Food Use

Apricot fruit is commonly eaten. Apricot is listed by the Council
of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (categories N1
and N2). These categories limit the total amount of hydrocyanic
acid permitted in the final product to 1 mg/kg. Exceptions to this
are 25 mg/kg for confectionery, 50 mg/kg for marzipan and 5 mg/

kg for fruit juices.““'® Previously, apricot kernel extract has been
listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).'°°

Herbal Use

Traditionally, the oil has been incorporated into cosmetic and
perfumery products such as soaps and creams.'“*

Cyanogenetic glycosides

HOH,C
fe}
HQi9 °
Ong A
H
HQ Oye _C
OH
amygdalin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of apricot.

Figure 2 Apricot (fruit).

Figure 3. Apricot - dried drug substance (kernel).

----- PAGE 73 -----
Apricot

Dosage

None documented. Traditionally, apricot kernels have not been
utilised as a herbal remedy.

Pharmacological Actions

During the late 1970s and early 1980s considerable interest was
generated in apricot from claims that laetrile (a semi-synthetic
derivative of amygdalin) was an effective treatment for cancer.
Two review papers” discuss these claims for laetrile together
with its chemistry, metabolism and potential toxicity.

The claims for laetrile were based on three different theories.
The first claimed that cancerous cells contained abundant
quantities of B-glucosidases, enzymes which release hydrogen
cyanide from the laetrile molecule as a result of hydrolysis.
Normal cells were said to be protected because they contained low
concentrations of -glucosidases and high concentrations of
rhodanese, an enzyme which converts cyanide to the less toxic
thiocyanate. However, this theory was disproved when it was
shown that both cancerous and normal cells contain only trace
amounts of B-glucosidases, and similar amounts of rhodanese. In
addition, it was thought that amygdalin was not absorbed intact
from the gastrointestinal tract.'°”

The second theory proposed that following ingestion, amygda-
lin was hydrolysed to mandelonitrile, transported intact to the
liver and converted to a B-glucuronide complex. This complex was
then carried to the cancerous cells, hydrolysed by B-glucuroni-
dases to release mandelonitrile and subsequently hydrogen
cyanide. This theory was considered to be untenable.”

A third theory proposed that laetrile is vitamin By7, that cancer
It of a deficiency of this vitamin, and that chronic
administration of laetrile would prevent cancer. Again this was
not substantiated by any scientific evidence.”

is a re

Clinical studies

A Cochrane systematic review that aimed to assess the efficacy of
laetrile in cancer reported that there were no controlled clinical
trials available in this indication.) The review concluded,
therefore, that there is no evidence from controlled clinical trials
to support the alleged beneficial effects of laetrile as an anticancer
agent, or as an adjunctive agent in cancer chemotherapy.

A retrospective analysis of the use of laetrile by cancer patients
reported that it may have slight activity.'>”
subsequent clinical trial concluded that laetrile was ineffective in
cancer treatment. Furthermore, it was claimed that patients
taking laetrile reduced their life expectancy as a result of lack of
proper medical care and chronic cyanide poisoning.”

However, a

Side-effects, Toxicity

Laetrile and apricot kernel ingestion are the most common
sources of cyanide poisoning, with more than 20 deaths
reported.©” Apricot kernels are toxic because of their amygdalin
content. Hydrolysis of the amygdalin molecule by B-glucosidases,
heat, mineral acids or high doses of ascorbic acid (vitamin C)
yields hydrogen cyanide (HCN), benzaldehyde, and glucose. B-
Glucosidases are not generally abundant in the gastrointestinal
tract, but they are present in the kernels themselves as well as
certain foods including beansprouts, carrots, celery, green peppers,
lettuce, mushrooms and sweet almonds. Hydrolysis of the
amygdalin molecule is slow in an acid environment but much
more rapid in an alkaline pH. There may therefore be a delay in
the onset of symptoms of HCN poisoning as a result of the transit

time from the acid pH of the stomach to the alkaline environment
of the small intestine.

Acute poisoning

Cyanide is rapidly absorbed from the upper gastrointestinal tract,
diffuses readily throughout the body and promptly causes
respiratory failure if untreated. Symptoms of cyanide toxicity
progress rapidly from dizziness, headache, nausea, vomiting and
drowsin to dyspnoea, palpitations, marked hypotension,
convulsions, paralysis, coma and death, which may occur from
1-15 minutes after ingestion. Antidotes for cyanide poisoning
include nitrite, thiosulfate, hydroxocobalamin, cobalt edetate and
aminophenol.'%7)

Chronic poisoning

Principal symptoms include increased blood thiocyanate, goitre,
thyroid cancer, lesions of the optic nerve, blindness, ataxia,
hypertonia, cretinism and mental retardation.') These symptoms
may develop as a result of ingesting significant amounts of
cyanide, cyanogenetic precursors in the diet, or cyanogenetic drugs
such as laetrile. Demyelinating lesions and other neuromyopathies
reportedly occur secondary to chronic cyanide exposure, including
long-term therapy with laetrile. Agranulocytosis has also been
attributed to long-term laetrile therapy.”

Individual reports of adverse reactions and cyanide poisoning in
patients using laetrile have been documented.‘“*”

Normally, low concentrations of ingested cyanide are controlled
naturally by exhalation or by rapid conversion to the less toxic
thiocyanate by the enzyme rhodanese. Oral doses of 50mg of
hydrogen cyanide (HCN) can be fatal. This is equivalent to
approximately 30g kernels which represents about 50-60 kernels,
and approximately 2mg HCN/g kernel. Apricot seed has also
been reported to contain 2.92mg HCN/g."”) A 500-mg laetrile
tablet was found to contain between 5 and 51mg HCN/g.

There may be considerable variation in the number of kernels
required to be toxic, depending on the concentration of amygdalin
and f-glucosidases present in the kernels, the timespan of
ingestion, the degree of maceration of the kernels, individual
variation in hydrolysing, and detoxifying ab

Systemic concentrations of B-glucosidases are low and therefore
toxicity following parenteral absorption of amygdalin is low.
However, cyanide poisoning has been reported in rats following
intraperitoneal administration of laetrile, suggesting another
mechanism of hydrolysis had occurred.'%”)

It is thought that cyanogenetic glycosides may possess
carcinogenic properties. Mandelonitrile (amygdalin = mandeloni-
trile diglucoside) is mutagenic and guanylate
cyclase.”

es.

stimulates

Contra-indications, Warnings

Apricot kernels are toxic due to their amygdalin content.
Following ingestion hydrogen cyanide is released and may result
in cyanide poisoning. Fatalities have been reported following the
ingestion of apricot kernels. Contact dermatitis has been reported
following contact with apricot kernels.

Drug interactions None documented.

Pregnancy and lactation Apricot kernels are toxic and should
not be ingested. The ingestion of cyanogenetic substances may
result in teratogenic effects.
reported where no acute toxicity was noted in the infant when

However, one case has been

----- PAGE 74 -----
laetrile was used during the third term of pregnancy. It was
unknown whether chronic effects would be manifested at a later
date.’ Breeding rats fed ground apricot kernels had pups with
normal birth weights, but with lower survival rates and lower
weaning weights.”

References

1 The Medicines (Cyanogenetic Substances) Order, SI 1984 No. 187,
London: HMSO, 1984.

2 Moller B, Herrmann K. Quinic acid esters of hydroxycinnamic acids
in stone and pome fruit. Phytochemistry 1983; 22: 477-481.

3. Miller KWet al. Amygdalin metabolism and effect on reproduction of
rats fed apricot kernels. J Toxicol Environ Health 1981; 7: 457-467.

10

Apricot

Awad O. Steroidal estrogens of Prunus armeniaca seeds.
Phytochemistry 1973; 13: 678-690.

Henning W, Herrmann K. Flavonol glycosides of apricots (Prunus
armeniaca L.) and peaches (Prunus persica Batch). 13. Phenolics of
fruits. Z Lebensm Unters Forsch 1980; 171: 183-188.

Chandler RF et al. Laetrile in perspective. Can Pharm J 1984; 117:
517-520.

Chandler RF et al. Controversial laetrile. Pharm J 1984; 232: 330-332.
Milazzo S$ et al. Laetrile treatment for cancer. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews, issue 2, 2006. London: Macmillan.

Holzbecher MD et al. The cyanide content of laetrile preparations,
apricot, peach and apple seeds. Clin Toxicol 1984; 22: 341-347.
G6ransson K. Contact urticaria to apricot stone. Contact Dermatitis
1981; 7: 282.

----- PAGE 75 -----
Arnica

constituents. Arnica is not suitable for internal use, although it
is present in some homeopathic products. External use of
arnica tincture, which is included as an ingredient in some
cosmetics, hair shampoos and bath preparations, may cause
an allergic reaction. The pyrrolizidine alkaloids tussilagine and
isotussilagine, reportedly present in arnica, are non-toxic.
Moreover, they are artefacts produced during the extraction
process with methanol.

Species (Family)

Arnica montana L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)
Arnica chamissonis Less. subsp. foliosa (Nutt.) Maguire also
allowed in German Pharmacopoeia.“

Synonym(s)

Arnicae Flos, Leopard's Bane, Mountain Tobacco, Wolf's Bane

Part(s) Used

Flower

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

ESCOP 1997'C>*)
Martindale 35th edition'@*
Ph Eur 20078

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSL, for external use only.@*”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
References 1-3, and General References G2 and G52.

Alkaloids = Traces of non-toxic alkaloids tussilagine and
isotussilagine™ but these are reportedly artefacts produced during
extraction.)

Amines Betaine, choline and trimethylamine.
Carbohydrates Mucilage, polysaccharides including inulin.

Coumarins Scopoletin and umbelliferone.

Flavonoids  Betuletol, eupafolin, flavonol glucuronides,"

hispidulin, isorhamnetin, kaempferol, laciniatin, luteolin, patule-
tin, quercetin, spinacetin, tricin and 3,5,7-trihydroxy-6,3’,4/-
trimethoxyflavone.

Terpenoids Sesquiterpene lactones of the pseudoguaianolide-
type, 0.2-0.8%.'°”) Pharmacopoeial standard not less than
0.4% ("C8 Helenalin, 110,13-dihydrohelenalin and_ their
esters with acetic, isobutyric, methacrylic, tiglic and other
carboxylic acids.'°*”) Diterpenes including z-labda-13-ene-80,15-
diol.

Volatile oils Up to 1%, normally about 0.3%. Thymol and
thymol derivatives.

Other constituents Amino acid (2-pyrrolidine acetic), bitter
principle (arnicin), caffeic acid, carotenoids, fatty acids, phytos-
terols, polyacetylenes, resin, tannin (unspecified).

Food Use

Arnica is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that arnica
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'“!® Previously, arnica has been listed by the Food and
Drugs Administration (FDA) as an ‘unsafe herb!,““?” and is only
approved for food use in alcoholic beverages.'@*

Herbal Use

Arnica is stated to possess topical counter-irritant properties. It
has been used for unbroken chilblains, alopecia neurotica, insect
bites, gingivitis, aphthous ulcers, rheumatoid complaints and
specifically for sprains and bruises.'C* 676%

German Commission E approved external use for injuries and
consequences of accidents, e.g. haematoma, dislocation, contu-
sions, oedema due to fracture, rheumatoid muscle and joint pains,
inflammation of oral and throat region, furuncolosis, inflamma-
tion caused by insect bites and superficial phlebitis.'°> ©?

Arnica is mainly used in homeopathic preparations; it is used to
a lesser extent in herbal products.

Sesquiterpene lactones

Hé
0. OH

helenalin

Hi
0. OH

11,13-dihydrohelenalin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of arnica.

----- PAGE 76 -----
Dosage

Recommendations for external use (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Tincture of arnica flower
application only.

(BPC 1949) 2-4mL for external

Preparations Ointments, creams, gels, compresses made with 5—
25% v/v tinctures, S—25% v/v fluid extracts, diluted tinctures or

fluid extract (1:3-1: 10), decoctions 2.0g drug/100 mL water.'°*
G4)

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antimicrobial activity Arnica has been reported to exhibit
bactericidal properties against Listeria monocytogenes and
Salmonella typhimurium.“* Helenalin and related sesquiter-
penes from arnica have antimicrobial activity against Bacillus
subtilis and Staphylococcus aureus, Corynebacterium insido-
sum, Micrococcus roseus, Mycobacterium phlei, Sarcinia lutea
and Proteus vulgaris.° Antifungal activity against Trichophy-
ton mentagrophytes, Epidermaphyton spp. and Botrytis cinerea is
reported for helenalin.“ °°)

Antitumour activity The cytotoxicity of 21 flavonoids and five
sesquiterpene lactones from Arnica spp. has been investigated in
vitro in studies using GLC, (a human small cell lung carcinoma)
and COLO 320 (a human colorectal cancer) cell lines.’ The most
potent compound, helenalin, had an ICs value of 0.44 tmol/L
against GLC, and 1.0 mol/L against COLO 320 after two hours!
exposure.” Some of the individual flavonols and flavones of
arnica at non-toxic concentrations significantly reduced helenalin-
induced cytotoxicity in vitro."

Anti-inflammatory activity Moderate (29%) anti-inflammatory
effect in the carageenan rat paw model has been reported for
arnica." Helenalin is a potent inhibitor in this test and in
chronic adjuvant arthritis tests in rats."'?) The o-methylene-y-
lactone moiety of sesquiterpenes is required for activity, and the
potency of helenalin is enhanced by the presence of the 6-hydroxy
group." The mode of action of sesquiterpene lactones as anti-
inflammatory agents is at multiple sites. At a concentration of 5 x
10-4 mol/L, the compounds uncoupled oxidative phosphorylation
of human polymorphoneutrophils, elevated cyclic adenosine

Arnica 65

monophosphate (cAMP) levels of rat neutrophils, and rat and
mouse liver cells, and inhibited free and total lysosymal enzyme
?) Human polymorphonuclear neutrophil chemotaxis
was inhibited at 5 x 10°*mol/L, whereas prostaglandin
synthetase activity was inhibited at concentrations of 10-* mol/
L. Helenalin and 11e-13-dihydrohelenalin inhibited collagen-
induced platelet aggregation, thromboxane formation and 5-

hydroxytryptamine secretion in a concentration-dependent man-
(14)

activity.!

ner.

Other activities Helenalin has potent activity in the hotplate tail
flick analgesic test in mice."

Helenalin has also been reported to possess immunostimulant
activity in vitro," while high molecular weight polysaccharides
have been found to exhibit immunostimulant activity in vivo in
the carbon clearance test in mice." '®
Arnica contains an adrenaline-like pressor substance and a

cardiotonic substance.'((*)

Clinical studies

Clinical investigation of the effects of arnica is limited, and
rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required. A gel
preparation of arnica flowers applied externally to the limbs of 12
male volunteers was more effective than placebo in the treatment
of muscle ache.“ In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study, 89 patients with venous insufficiency received
arnica gel (20% tincture) or placebo.'©™ It was reported that
arnica treatment produced improvements in venous tone, oedema
and in feeling of heaviness in the legs.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Arnica is poisonous if taken internally. It is irritant to mucous
membranes and ingestion may result in fatal gastroenteritis,
muscle paralysis (voluntary and cardiac), increase or decrease in
pulse rate, palpitation of the heart, shortness of breath, and may
even lead to death.'©**°*) Helenalin is stated to be the toxic
principle responsible for these effects.3 Thirty millilitres of a
20% arnica tincture, taken by mouth, was reported to produce
serious, but not fatal, symptoms.'@*) The topical application of
arnica has been documented to cause dermatitis."”°°" Arnica is
a strong sensitiser, with the sesquiterpene lactone constituents
implicated as the contact allergens: they possess an «-methylene
group exocyclic to a y-lactone ring, which is recognised as an
immunological prerequisite for contact allergy.''”'® Helenalin is
also reported to possess cytotoxic activity and this has been

Figure 2. Arnica (Arnica montana).

Figure 3 Arnica — dried drug substance (flower).

----- PAGE 77 -----
Arnica

attributed to its ability to alkylate with sulfhydryl groups.'©*?

Helenalin was not mutagenic in the Salmonella typhimurium

assay. (C)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Arnica should not be taken internally except in suitable
homeopathic dilutions.'(C”

Externally, arnica is poorly tolerated by some people,
precipitating allergic reactions in sensitive individuals.'C) It
should only be applied to unbroken skin and withdrawn at the
first sign of reaction.'“” Toxic allergic skin reactions have
occurred following application of the tincture.'©*?)

Pregnancy and lactation There are insufficient data on the use
of arnica preparations during pregnancy and breastfeeding, and
their use should be avoided during these periods.

Stullmaton; Trauma-cyl; Varicylum-S; Venengel. Hong Kong:
New Patecs A. Italy: Flebolider. Mexico: Reudol. South Africa:
Combudoron; Dynexan; Lotio Pruni Comp cum Cupro;
Muscle Rub; Wecesin. Spain: Arnicon. Switzerland: Combu-
doron; Euceta avec camomille et arnica; Fortacet; Onguent aux
herbes Keller; Perskindol Cool Arnica; Topaceta. UK:

References

1 Merfort I, Wendisch D. Flavonoidglycoside aus Arnica montana und
Arnica chamissonis. Planta Med 1987; 53: 434-437.

2 Merfort I. Flavonol glycosides of Arnicae flos DAB 9. Planta Med
1986; 52: 427.

3 Merfort I, Wendisch D. Flavonolglucuronide aus den bliiten von
Arnica montana. Planta Med 1988; 54: 247-250.

4 Passreiter CM et al. Tussilagine and isotussilagine: two pyrrolizidine
alkaloids in the genus Arnica. Planta Med 1992; 58: 556-557.

5 Passreiter CM. Co-occurrence of 2-pyrrolidine acetic acid with the
pyrrolizidines tussilaginic acid and isotussilaginic acid and their 1-
epimers in Arnica species and Tussilago farfara. Phytochem 1992; 31:
4135-4137.

6 Leven W, Willuhn G. Spectrophotometric determination of
sesquiterpenlactone ($1) in 'Arnicae flos DAB 9' with m-dinitro-
benzene. Planta Med 1986; 52: 537-538.

7 Schmidt Th e¢ al. First diterpenes from Arnica. Planta Med 1992; 58:
A713.

8 Lee K-H et al. Structure—antimicrobial activity relationships among
the sesquiterpene lactones and related compounds. Phytochemistry
1977; 16: 117-118.

9 Woerdenbag HJ et al. Cytotoxicity of flavonoids and sesquiterpene
lactones from Arnica species against the GLC, and the COLO 320 cell
lines. Planta Med 1994; 60: 434-437.

10 Woerdenbag HJ et al. Decreased helenalin-induced cytotoxicity by
flavonoids from Arnica as studied in a human lung carcinoma cell line.
Phytomedicine 1995; 2: 127-132.

11 Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

12. Hall 1H et al. Mode of action of sesquiterpene lactones as anti-
inflammatory agents. J Pharm Sci 1980; 69: 537-543.

13. Hall IH et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of sesquiterpene lactones
and related compounds. J Pharm Sci 1979; 68: 537-542.

14 Schréder H et al. Helenalin and 11¢,13-dihydrohelenalin, two
constituents from Arnica montana L., inhibit human platelet function
via thiol-dependent pathways. Thrombosis Res 1990; 57: 839-845.

15 Chang HM et al. Advances in Chinese Medicinal Materials Research.
Philadelphia: World Scientific, 1985.

16 Puhlmann J, Wagner H. Immunologically active polysaccharides from
Arnica montana herbs and tissue cultures. Planta Med 1989; 55: 99.

17, Rudzki E, Grzywa Z. Dermatitis from Arnica montana. Contact
Dermatitis 1977; 3: 281-282.

18 Hausen BM. Identification of the allergens of Arnica montana L.
Contact Dermatitis 1978; 4: 308.

----- PAGE 78 -----
Artichoke

treatment of hyperlipidaemia generally report positive results.
However, further rigorous clinical trials are required to
establish the benefit of globe artichoke leaf extract as a lipid-
and cholesterol-lowering agent. Hepatoprotective and
hepatoregenerating activities have been documented for
cynarin in vitro and in animals (rats). However, these effects
have not yet been documented in clinical studies.

Species (Family)

Cynara scolymus L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)
Globe Artichoke.

Globe artichoke should not be confused with Jerusalem
artichoke, which is the tuber of Helianthus tuberosus L.

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission EC”
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'0*?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
References 1 and 2, and General Reference G41.

Acids Phenolic, up to 2%. Caffeic acid, mono- and dicaffeoyl-
quinic acid derivatives, e.g. cynarin (1,5-di-O-caffeoylquinic acids)
and chlorogenic acid (mono derivative).

Flavonoids 0.1-1%. Flavone glycosides, e.g. luteolin-7B-rutino-

side (scolymoside), luteolin-7B-p-glucoside and_ luteolin-4B-p-
glucoside.

Volatile oils  Sesquiterpenes -selinene and caryophyllene
(major); also eugenol, phenylacetaldehyde, decanal, oct-1-en-3-
one, hex-1-en-3-one, and non-trans-2-enal.

Other constituents Phytosterols (taraxasterol and f-taraxa-
sterol), tannins, glycolic and glyceric acids, sugars, inulin, enzymes
including peroxidases,” cynaropicrin and other sesquiterpene
lactones, e.g. grosheimin, cynarotriol.“ The root and fully
developed fruits and flowers are devoid of cynaropicrin; highest
content reported in young leaves.”

Food Use

Artichoke is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
artichoke can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the

Hydrolysable tamnins

or*
HOQC. y a~OR®
y 2 fs

Rt IR?

R! R? R° RY
chlorogenic acid H H H_— caffeoyl
(5-O-catfeoyl
quinic acid)
cynarin caffeoyl caffeoyl) H H
(1,3-dicaffeoyl
quinic acid)

Phenylpropanoids
Sore
HO’

caffeic acid

Sesquiterpene lactones

ot
‘CH.OH

ot

HO'

[e}
cynaropicrin

grosheimin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of artichoke.

----- PAGE 79 -----
Artichoke

final product.'©!® Previously, in the USA, artichoke leaves were
approved for use in alcoholic beverages only, with an average
maximum concentration of 0.0016% (16 ppm).(“*”

Herbal Use

Artichoke is stated to possess diuretic, choleretic, hypocholester-
olaemic, hypolipidaemic, and hepatostimulating properties.”
Modern use of artichoke is focused on its use in the treatment of
hyperlipidaemia, hyperlipoproteinaemia, non-ulcer dyspepsia and
conditions requiring an increase in choleresis. There is also
interest in the potential hepatoprotective properties of globe
artichoke, although this has not yet been tested in controlled
clinical trials." '?

Dosage

The German Commission E recommended an average daily dose
of 6g drug, or an equivalent dose of extract (based on the herb-to-
extract ratio) or other preparations, for dyspeptic problems.'C*
58) 4 recommended dosage regimen for liquid extract (1:2) is 3-
8 mL daily.“

Dosages used in clinical trials of globe artichoke leaf extract
have assessed the effects of dosages of up to 1.92 g daily in divided
doses for up to six months.‘?)

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological properties have been documented for
artichoke leaf, including inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis,
hypolipidaemic, antioxidant and hepatoprotective activity. It
remains unclear which of the constituents of artichoke are
responsible for its pharmacological activities. The dicaffeoylquinic
acids, which include cynarin, are likely to be an important group
of constituents in this respect." °° The sesquiterpene lactones,
such as cynaropicrin, and flavonoids, such as luteolin glycoside,
may also exert biological effects.”

Figure 2. Artichoke (Cynara scolymus).

In vitro and animal studies

Hypolipidaemic, hypocholesterolaemic and choleretic activity
Hypolipidaemic, hypocholesterolaemic and choleretic activities
are well documented for globe artichoke leaf extract and
particularly for the constituent cynarin.“°'” Globe artichoke
leaf extract not only increases choleresis and, therefore, choles-
terol elimination, but also has been shown to inhibit cholesterol
biosynthesis."° Preparations of globe artichoke leaf extract
inhibit cholesterol biosynthesis in a concentration-dependent
manner in studies in cultured rat hepatocytes." '?
concentrations (<0.1 mg/mL) of globe artichoke extract achieved
around 20% inhibition, whereas 65% inhibition was noted with
concentrations of 1 mg/mL. Luteolin was considered to be one of
the most important constituents for this effect, and it was
suggested that a possible mechanism of action might be indirect
inhibition of hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-
CoA)."® Other in vitro studies have documented a concentra-
tion-dependent inhibition of de novo cholesterol biosynthesis in
cultured rat and human hepatocytes for globe artichoke leaf
extract 0.03-0.1 mg/mL."

Several other experimental studies have documented lipid-
lowering effects for globe artichoke leaf extract and cynarin in
vivo."°'» A study in rats explored the hypocholesterolaemic,
hypolipidaemic and choleretic effects of purified (containing 46%

Low

reductase

caffeoylquinic acids, calculated as chlorogenic acid) and total
extracts of globe artichoke leaf (containing 19% caffeoylquinic

Figure 3 Artichoke.

Figure 4 Artichoke - dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 80 -----
acids, calculated as chlorogenic acid). The purified extract was
found to be more potent than the total artichoke extract: purified
extract 25 mg/kg intraperitoneally reduced plasma triglyceride and
cholesterol concentrations by 33% and 45%, respectively, whereas
reductions of only 18% and 14%, respectively, were observed with
the total extract (100 mg/kg intraperitoneally).” Both purified
(25 mg/kg intraperitoneally) and total extract (200 mg/kg intraper-
itoneally) significantly enhanced bile secretion following treat-
ment, compared with baseline values; the increase in bile
seen with the purified extract was still statistically s
three hours after treatment. The more potent pharmacologica
activities observed with the purified extract were attributed to the
higher concentration of monocaffeoylquinic acids (e.g. chloro-
genic, neochlorogenic) compared with dicaffeoylquinic acids (e.g.
cynarin) present.

Another study investigated the effects of cynarin on total
cholesterol concentrations in serum and liver of rats given ethano
(6g/kg/day by gavage over three days). In rats given ethanol
alone, serum cholesterol concentrations rose significantly by 44%,
compared with controls (p < 0.01). Rats given ethanol plus
cynarin (30mg/kg intraperitoneally 30 minutes before gavage)
showed a significant reduction in serum cholesterol concentra-
tions, compared with controls (p < 0.05).

Antioxidant and hepatoprotective activity In vitro, a luteolin-
rich globe artichoke leaf aqueous extract (flavonoid content
around 0.4% w/w) retarded low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
oxidation in a concentration-dependent manner (determined by
a prolongation of the lag phase to conjugated diene formation).
The same tests carried out with the pure aglycone luteolin at
concentrations of 0.1-1 ftmol/L showed that this constituent had a
similar concentration-dependent effect on LDL oxidation in this
model. Luteolin-7-O-glucoside also demonstrated a concentra-
tion-dependent reduction in LDL oxidation, but was less potent
than luteolin.

Several in vitro and in vivo studies have investigated the
antioxidative and hepatoprotective properties of globe artichoke
leaf extracts, and their constituents, against liver cell damage
induced by different hepatotoxins.

The hepatoprotective effect of polyphenolic compounds
isolated from artichoke has been investigated in vitro using rat
hepatocytes. Cynarin was the only compound reported to
exhibit significant cytoprotective activity, with a lesser action
demonstrated by caffeic acid. A standardised extract of globe
artichoke (Hepar-SL forte) significantly inhibited the formation of
malondialdehyde induced by tert-butylhydroperoxide (t-BHP) in a
concentration-dependent manner within 40 minutes of incuba-
tion, compared with control.''*) The protective antioxidant effect
of globe artichoke was reported to be significant, compared with
control, even at a concentration of 1 ttg/mL. A reduction in ¢-BHP-
induced cell death with globe artichoke extract was also observed.
Further studies assessed the antioxidative and protective potential
of the same extract (Hepar-SL forte) in cultures of primary rat
hepatocytes exposed to t-BHP."” Incubation of cultured hepato-
cytes with globe artichoke extract and t-BHP inhibited ¢-BHP-
induced malondialdehyde formation in a concentration-dependent
manner. Globe artichoke extract was significantly effective,
compared with control, at concentrations down to 0.001 mg/mL.
Furthermore, concentrations of globe artichoke extract down to
0.005 mg/mL significantly enhanced hepatocyte survival. The
antioxidative effect of the extract was not affected by various
pretreatments (including tryptic digestion, boiling and acidifica-
tion), although it w:

nsitive to alkalinisation. Incubation with

Artichoke

the globe artichoke constituents chlorogenic acid and cynarin
resulted in significant inhibition, and incubation with both
compounds was reported to have a synergistic effect, although
an additive effect may
findings. Chlorogenic acid and cynarin were not solely responsible
for the antioxidant effect, as reduction of malondialdehyde
formation by the extract was at least twofold that seen with the
chlorogenic acid and cynarin.") The antioxidative and hepato-
protective potential of globe artichoke extract was confirmed in

other studies which also indicated that several constituents of the
)

© a more accurate description of the

extract may contribute to the effects.7°

The effects of globe artichoke leaf extract and its constituents
have also been investigated for activity against oxidative stress in
studies using human leukocytes.?" Globe artichoke leaf extract
demonstrated a concentration-dependent inhibition of oxidative
stress induced by several agents, such as hydrogen peroxide and
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate, that generate reactive oxygen
species. The constituents cynarin, caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid
and luteolin also showed concentration-dependent inhibitory
activity in these models.

In vivo hepatoprotectivity against tetrachloromethane-induced
epatitis has been documented for globe artichoke leaf extract
(500 mg/kg) administered orally to rats 48 hours, 24 hours and one
our before intoxication.) Concentrations of liver transaminases
were significantly lower in rats given globe artichoke leaf extract,
compared with those in controls. A hepatoregenerating effect has
also been described for an aqueous extract of globe artichoke leaf
administered orally to rats for three weeks following partial
epatectomy.”) Regeneration was determined by stimulation of
mitosis and increased weight in the residual liver when animals
were sacrificed in globe artichoke-treated rats, compared with
controls. In a similar study, aqueous extract of globe artichoke leaf
(0.5 mL daily for five days preceding hepatectomy) was found to
more potent than a root extract.)

Clinical studies

Several clinical trials have explored the choleretic and hypolipi-
daemic properties of globe artichoke leaf extract, and its effects in
patients with symptoms of dyspepsia. A randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial involving 20 male
volunteers as:

sed the choleretic effects of a single intraduodenal
dose (1.92 g in 300mL water) of the globe artichoke leaf extract
Hepar-SL forte.° Intraduodenal bile secretion, the primary
outcome variable, was measured using multichannel probes
starting 30 minutes after drug administration and continuing for
up to four hours afterwards. An increase in bile secretion was
observed in both groups; maximal increases for globe artichoke
leaf extract and placebo were 152% at 60 minutes after drug
administration, and 40% at 30 minutes, respectively. Differences
between globe artichoke leaf extract and placebo were statistically
significant at 30, 60 and 90 minutes after drug administration (p <
0.01) and at 120 and 150 minutes after drug administration (p <
0.05). In another randomised controlled trial, 60 patients with
dyspepsia received a combination preparation containing extracts
of globe artichoke 50mg, boldo (Peumus boldus) 30mg and
chelidonium (Chelidonium majus) 20mg per tablet, or placebo,
three times daily for 14 days.**) The volume of bile secreted,
measured using a duodenal probe, increased significantly in the
treatment group, compared with the placebo group (p < 0.01).
Also, an improvement in symptoms was reported for 50% of the
treatment group, compared with 38% of the placebo group. There
are also clinical studies in the older literature (some of which were

----- PAGE 81 -----
Artichoke

placebo-controlled trials, whereas others were open, uncontrolled
studies) which report choleretic effects with globe artichoke leaf

These trials have been
(10, 24, G50)

extract. summarised in several

reviews.

The effects of globe artichoke leaf extract have also been
monitored in several postmarketing surveillance (phase IV) studies
in patients with non-specific gastrointestinal complaints, includ-
ing dyspepsia,” functional biliary tract complaints, constipation
and gastric irritation.") The studies monitored the effects of
globe artichoke leaf extract (Hepar-SL forte; one capsule contains
320 mg standardised aqueous extract; drug-extract ratio: 3.5 to
5.5:1) up to six capsules daily for six weeks''” or six months.”
Both studies reported improvements in clinical symptoms and
reductions in serum total cholesterol and triglyceride concentra-
tions, compared with baseline values. A subgroup analysis of 279
patients with at least three of five symptoms of irritable bowel
syndrome reported significant reductions in the severity of
symptoms and favourable evaluations of overall effectiveness by
both physicians and participants.°® The findings from post-
marketing surveillance studies provide supporting data for the
effects of globe artichoke leaf extract, but these are open studies
and do not include a control group and, therefore, are not
designed to assess efficacy.

The efficacy of globe artichoke leaf extract in patients with
hyperlipoproteinaemia has been assessed in a randomised, dou!
blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial involving 143 patients
with initial total cholesterol concentrations of >7.3 mmol/L
(>280mg/dL).°” Participants received globe artichoke leaf
extract (CY450; drug-extract ratio: 25 to 35:1) 1800 mg daily
in two divided doses, or placebo, for six weeks. At the end of the
study, mean total cholesterol concentrations had decreased by
18.5% to 6.31 mmol/L and by 8.6% to 7.03 mmol/L in the CY450
and placebo groups, respectively (p < 0.0001). CY450 treatment
also led to a significant reduction in LDL cholesterol, compared
with placebo (p = 0.0001). There was no difference between
CY450 recipients and placebo recipients in blood concentrations
of the liver enzyme gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT).

A published abstract reports the findings of a previous
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of a globe
artichoke leaf extract (Hepar-SL forte; 640 mg three times daily
for 12 weeks) involving 44 healthy volunteers. Mean baseline
total cholesterol concentrations for participants in this study were
low (placebo group: 203.0 mg/dL; globe artichoke extract group:
204.2 mg/dL). Subgroup analysis suggested lipid-lowering effects
with globe artichoke extract for participants with baseline total
cholesterol concentrations of >200 mg/dL. However, numbers of
participants included in this analysis were small. The study
indicates only that trials in patients with hyperlipoproteinaemia
are required.

As
administration of pressed globe artichoke juice (obtained from
fresh leaves and flower buds) 10 mL three times daily for up to 12
weeks to a total of 84 patients with secondary hyperlipidaemia
(total cholesterol >260mg/dL).°* After six weeks' treatment,
total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations
decreased, whereas high-density lipoprotein cholesterol tended to
increase. Another uncontrolled study involved the administration
of cynarin to 17 patients with familial type Ila or type IIb
hyperlipoproteinaemia for whom blood lipid concentrations were
maintained with dietary treatment alone.?” Cynarin was taken 15
minutes before meals at either 250 mg or 750 mg daily dose. Over a
period of three months, cynarin was reported to have no effect on
mean serum cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations.” The

le-

ries of three open, uncontrolled studies involved the

results were in agreement with the findings of some previous
workers, but also in contrast to other studies that have reported
cynarin to be effective in lowering serum concentrations of
cholesterol and triglycerides when taken in daily doses ranging
from 60 mg to 1500 mg.?”

A Cochrane systematic review” of randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled studies of artichoke preparations for hyper-
cholesterolaemia included two studies (see above).{!>?” The
review concluded that there is limited evidence from randomised
controlled trials to support the use of artichoke leaf preparations
in hypercholesterolaemia and that such preparations cannot be
recommended as a treatment option.

Side-effects, Toxicity

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
143 patients with hyperlipoproteinaemia reported a similar
frequency of adverse events for globe artichoke leaf extract
(CY450) and placebo groups.” A total of 28 adverse events were
reported during the study, 26 of which related to mild changes in
laboratory values. The relationship to the globe artichoke was
considered to be ‘unlikely’ in all cases.

Postmarketing surveillance (phase IV) studies have monitored
patients with non-specific gastrointestinal complaints receiving
treatment with globe artichoke leaf extract (Hepar-SL forte; up to
1.92g daily for six weeks" or six months''”)). In one study
involving 533 patients with non-specific gastrointestinal com-
plaints, including dyspepsia, functional biliary tract complaints,
constipation and gastric irritation, seven adverse events (weak-
ness, hunger, flatulence) were reported (1.3% of participants).
No serious adverse events were reported. A second postmarketing
surveillance study involved 203 patients with symptoms of
dyspepsia who received globe artichoke leaf extract up to 1.92¢
daily for up to six months.” It was reported that no adverse
events were recorded during the study, and that the physi
overall judgement of tolerability was given as 'good' or ‘excellent’
in 98.5% of cases.

Allergic contact dermatitis, with cross-sensitivity to other
Compositae plants, has been documented for globe artichoke.°"
SS) A case of occupational contact urticaria syndrome in a 20-
year-old woman has been reported in association with globe
artichoke. The woman developed acute generalised urticaria,
angioedema of the hands, forearms and face, and respiratory
symptoms after handling globe artichokes. The clinical history
and results of skin-prick tests indicated that the woman had
developed type I allergy to globe artichoke antigen(s).°” An
isolated case of allergy to ingested globe artichoke has also been
described.

Cynaropicrin and other sesquiterpene lactones with allergenic
potential have been isolated from globe artichoke.°'°*) Purified
globe artichoke extract is more toxic than a total extract. LDso
values (rat, by intraperitoneal injection) have been documented as
greater than 1000 mg/kg (total extract) and 265 mg/kg (purified
extract).

clan's

Contra-indications, Warnings

Globe artichoke yields cynaropicrin, a potentially allergenic
quiterpene lactone.‘@*” Individuals with an existing hypersen-
sitivity to any member of the Compositae family may develop an
allergic reaction to globe artichoke.

se

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of artichoke to interact with other medicines

----- PAGE 82 -----
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or

opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of toxicity data,
excessive use of globe artichoke should be avoided during
pregnancy and lactation.

Spark; Hepaclem; Hepax. Germany: Carmol Magen-Galle-
Darm; Cynarzym N; Gallexier; Gallexier. Hong Kong:
Hepatofalk. Italy: Colax; Digelax; Epagest. Malaysia: Dande-
lion Complex. Mexico: Chofabol; Hepedren; Ifuchol. Russia:
Herbion Drops for the Gallbladder (Pep6uon Kanan
2Keaueronnsie). Spain: Cynaro Bilina; Lipograsil; Menabil
Complex; Nico Hepatocyn. Switzerland: Bilifuge; Boldocy-
nara; Demonatur Gouttes pour le foie et la bile; Heparfelien;
Strath Gouttes pour le foie et la bile; Tisane hepatique et
biliaire. UK: Bio-Strath Artichoke Formula; Boots Alternatives
Easy Digest. USA: Ultimate Antioxidant Formula.

References

1 Brand N. Cynara scolymus L. — Die Artischocke. Z Phytother 1990;

11: 169-175.
2 Hammouda FM et al. Quantitative determination of the active

constituents in Egyptian cultivated Cynara scolymus. Int ] Pharmacog

1993; 31: 299-304.

3 Kamel MY, Ghazy AM. Peroxidases of Cyanara scolymus (global
artichoke) leaves: purification and properties. Acta Biol Med Germ
1973; 31: 39-49.

4 Jouany JM et al. Dosage indirect de la cynaropicrine dans la Cynara

scolymus (Compositae) par libération de sa chaine latérale
hydroxyméthylacrylique. Plant Méd Phytothér 1975; 9: 72-78.

5 Barbetti P et al. Grosulfeimin and new related guaianolides from
Cynara scolymus L. Ars Pharmac 1992; 33: 433-439.

6 Schneider G, Thiele Kl. Die Verteilung des Bitterstoffes Cynaropicrin

in der Artischocke. Planta Med 1974; 26: 174-183.
7 Lietti A. Choleretic and cholesterol lowering properties of two
artichoke extracts. Fitoterapia 1977; 48: 153-158.

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

Artichoke

Adzet T et al. Hepatoprotective activity of polyphenolic compounds
from Cynara scolymus against CCl, toxicity in isolated rat
hepatocytes. J Nat Prod 1987; 50: 612-617.

Adzet T et al. Action of an artichoke extract against CCly-induced
heptotoxicity in rats. Acta Pharm Jugosl 1987; 37: 183-187.

Kraft K. Artichoke leaf extract — recent findings reflecting effects on
lipid metabolism, liver and gastrointestinal tracts. Phytomedicine
1997; 4: 369-378.

Fintelmann V, Menssen HG. Artichoke leaf extract. Current
knowledge concerning its efficacy as a lipid-reducer and antidyspeptic
agent. Dtsch Apoth Ztg 1996; 136: 1405-1414.

Fintelmann V, Petrowicz O. Long-term administration of an artichoke
extract for dyspepsia symptoms. Results of an observational study.
Natura Med 1998; 13: 17-26.

Gebhardt R. Artischockenextrakt. In vitro Nachweis einer
Hemmwirkung auf die Cholesterin-Biosynthese. Med Welt 1995; 46:
348-350.

Gebhardt R. Inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis in primary cultured
rat hepatocytes by artichoke (Cynara scolymus L.) extracts. ]
Pharmacol Exp Ther 1998; 286: 1122-1128.

Petrowicz O et al. Effects of artichoke leaf extract (ALE) on
lipoprotein metabolism in vitro and in vivo. Atherosclerosis 1997; 129:
147.

Wojcicki J. Effect of 1,5-dicaffeylquinic acid (Cynarine) on cholesterol
levels in serum and liver of acute ethanol-treated rats. Drug Alcohol
Depend 1978; 3: 143-145.

Brown JE, Rice-Evans CA. Luteolin-rich artichoke extract protects
low density lipoprotein from oxidation in vitro. Free Radic Res 1998;
29: 247-255.

Gebhardt R. Protektive antioxidative Wirkungen von Artischocken-
extrakt an der Leberzelle. Med Welt 1995; 46: 393-395.

Gebhardt R. Antioxidative and protective properties of extracts from
leaves of the artichoke (Cynara scolymus L.) against hydroperoxide-
induced oxidative stress in cultured rat hepatocytes. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 1997; 144: 279-286.

Gebhardt R, Fausel M. Antioxidant and hepatoprotective effects of
artichoke extracts and constituents in cultured rat hepatocytes.
Toxicology in Vitro 1997; 11: 669-672.

Perez-Garcia F et al. Activity of artichoke leaf extract on reactive
oxygen species in human leukocytes. Free Radic Res 2000; 33: 661—
665.

Maros T et al. Wirkungen der Cynara scolymus-Extrakte auf die
Regeneration der Rattenleber. Arzneimittelforschung 1966; 16: 127—
129.

Maros T et al. Wirkungen der Cynara scolymus-extrakte auf die
Regeneration der Rattenleber. Arzneimittelforschung 1968; 18: 884-
886.

Kirchhoff R e¢ al. Increase in choleresis by means of artichoke extract.
Phytomedicine 1994; 1: 107-115.

Kupke D e¢ al. Priifung der choleretischen Aktivitat eines pflanzlichen
Cholagogums. Z Allg Med 1991; 67: 1046-1058.

Walker A et al. Artichoke leaf extract reduces symptoms of irritable
bowel syndrome in a post-marketing surveillance study. Phytother Res
2001; 15: 58-61.

Englisch W et al. Efficacy of artichoke dry extract in patients with
hyperlipoproteinemia. Arzneim-Forsch/Drug Res 2000; 50: 260-265.
Dorn M. Improvement in raised lipid levels with artichoke juice
(Cynara scolymus L.). Br J Phytother 1995/96; 4: 21-26.

Heckers H et al. Inefficiency of cynarin as therapeutic regimen in
familial type II hyperlipoproteinaemia. Atherosclerosis 1977; 26: 249-
253.

Pittler MH et al. Artichoke leaf extract for treating
hypercholesterolaemia (Review). Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews issue 3, 2002. London: Macmillan.

Meding B. Allergic contact dermatitis from artichoke, Cynara
scolymus. Contact Dermatitis 1983; 9: 314.

Quirce § e¢ al. Occupational contact urticaria syndrome caused by
globe artichoke (Cynara scolymus). J Allergy Clin Immunol 1996; 97:
710-711.

Romano C et al. A case of allergy to globe artichoke and other clinical
cases of rare food allergy. J Invest Allergol Clin Immunol 2000; 10:
102-104.

----- PAGE 83 -----
Asafoetida

Asafoetida is commonly used in foods but little scientific
evidence is available to justify the herbal uses. In view of the
known pharmacologically active constituents, asafoetida
should not be taken in amounts exceeding those used in
foods.

Species (Family)
There are reportedly 172 species of Ferula. The main source is

believed to be from Ferula assafoetida L. and Ferula foetida
(Bunge) Regel.

Synonym(s)

Asafetida, Asant, Devil's Dung, Ferula foetida (Bunge) Regel,
Gum Asafetida

Part(s) Used

Oleo gum resin obtained by incising the living rhizomes and roots.

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6, G59 and G62.

Gum fraction 25%. Glucose, galactose, L-arabinose, rhamnose
and glucuronic acid.

Resins 40-64%. Ferulic acid esters (60%), free ferulic acid
(1.3%), asaresinotannols and farnesiferols A, B and C, coumarin
derivatives (e.g. umbelliferone), coumarin-sesquiterpene com-
plexes (e.g. asacoumarin A and asacoumarin B).") Free ferulic
acid is converted to coumarin during dry distillation.

Volatile oils = 3-17%.
disulfides as major components, various monoterpenes.

The oleo gum resins of different Ferula species are not identical
and many papers have documented their phytochemistry,? 1?
reporting polysulfanes,?"'" complex acetylenes,® phenylpropa-
noids” and many sesquiterpene derivatives." *° *”)

C-3 prenylated 4-hydroxycoumarin derivatives (e.g. ferulenol)
are thought to represent the toxic principles in the species Ferula
communis,”

Sulfur-containing compounds with
a

Food Use

Asafoetida is used widely in foods. Asafoetida (essential oil, fluid
extract and gommo-oleoresin) is listed by the Council of Europe
as a source of natural food flavouring (category 5) (see Appendix
3).6!” Previously, asafoetida was approved for food use in the
USA.(C4)

Herbal Use

Asafoetida is stated to possess carminative, antispasmodic and
expectorant properties. It has been used for chronic bronchitis,
pertussis, laryngismus stridulus, hysteria and specifically for
intestinal flatulent colic.'C%°”

Phenylpropanoids
HO’
ferulic acid

Coumarins

farnesiferol A

Saeco
AnKKK~ 0” So
OH

asacoumarin A

Disulfides
HgCH2C._H

ZN,
H3C S—S—C=CHCHs
H
2-butyl-1-propenyl disulfide

H3CH2C.

HsC—S* ‘s-S-C=cHCH,
H

1-(1-methylthiopropyl)-
1-propenyl disulfide

Figure 1 Selected constituents of asafoetida.

----- PAGE 84 -----
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal and pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

Powdered resin 0.3-1g three times dailyC*°”

Tincture of asafoetida (BPC 1949) 2-4mL

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Asafoetida has been reported to possess anticoagulant and
hypotensive properties,'“*" although the scientific basis for these
statements is not clear; coumarin constituents detected so far in
asafoetida do not possess minimum structural requirements for
anticoagulant activity. Asafoetida is an ingredient of a plant
mixture reported to have antidiabetic properties in  rats.'!)
However, when the individual components of the mixture were
studied asafoetida was devoid of antidiabetic effect with myrrh
and aloe gum extracts representing the active hypoglycaemic
principles.”

Oestrogenic activity in rats has been documented for carotane
sesquiterpenes and ferujol (a coumarin) isolated from Ferula
jaeschkeana."\>'®

Clinical studies

Clinical investigation of asafoetida is limited and rigorous
randomised controlled clinical trials are required. A protective
action against fat-induced hyperlipidaemia has been documented
for asafoetida and attributed to the sulfur compounds in the
volatile oil fraction of the resin."'” Two double-blind studies have

reported significant effects for asafoetida in the treatment of
18, 19)

irritable bowel syndrome‘

Figure 2 Asafoetida (Ferula assafoetida).

Asafoetida

Side-effects, To

Asafoetida is documented to be relatively non-toxic; ingestion of
15g produced no untoward effects.'“*) A report of methaemo-
globinaemia has been associated with the administration of
asafoetida (in milk) to a five-week-old infant for the treatment of
colic." Asafoetida was found to exert an oxidising effect on fetal
haemoglobin but not on adult haemoglobin.

Coumarin constituents detected so far in asafoetida do not
possess minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl
substituent and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)‘C*” for
anticoagulant activity.

A weak sister chromatid exchange-inducing effect in mouse
spermatogonia?” and clastogenicity in mouse spermatocytes”
has been documented for asafoetida. Chromosomal damage by
asafoetida has been associated with the coumarin constituents.

Toxic coumarin constituents of a related species, Ferula
communis, have been documented to reduce prothrombin
concentrations and to cause haemorrhaging in livestock.2*

Two other species, Ferula galbaniflua and Ferula rubicaulis, are
stated to contain a gum that is rubefacient and irritant, causing
contact dermatitis in sensitive individuals.(7 °C)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Asafoetida should not be given to infants because of the oxidising
effect on fetal haemoglobin resulting in methaemoglobinaemia.?”
The gum of some Ferula species is reported to be irritant and
therefore may cause gastrointestinal irritation or induce contact
dermatitis in some individuals.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of asafoetida to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Asafoetida has a folkloric reputation
as an abortifacient and an emmenagogue.(“*” However the use of
asafoetida during pregnancy is probably acceptable, provided
doses do not exceed amounts normally ingested in foods. In view
of the toxic effect to infants (e.g. methaemoglobinaemia),
asafoetida should be avoided during breastfeeding.

Figure 3 Asafoetida — dried drug substance (resin).

A

----- PAGE 85 -----
Asafoetida

India: Tummy Ease. South Africa: Entressdruppels HM;
Stuidruppels. Thailand: Flatulence Gastulence. UK: Daily
Tension & Strain Relief; Nerfood Tablets.

References

1 Kajimoto T e¢ al. Sesquiterpenoid and disulphide derivatives from
Ferula assa-foetida. Phytochemistry 1989; 28: 1761-1763.

2 Dawidar A-A et al. Marmaricin, a new sesquiterpenoid coumarin
from Ferula marmarica L. Chem Pharm Bull 1979; 27: 3153-3155.

3. de Pascual Teresa J et al. Complex acetylenes from the roots of Ferula
communis. Planta Med 1986; 52: 458-462.

4 Miski M. Fercoperol, an unusual cyclic-endoperoxynerolidol
derivative from Ferula communis subsp. communis. ] Nat Prod 1986;
49: 916-918.

5 Garg SN et al. Feruginidin and ferugin, two new sesquiterpenoids
based on the carotane skeleton from Ferula jaeschkeana. ] Nat Prod
1987; 50: 253-255.

6 Garg SN et al. New sesquiterpenes from Ferula jaeschkeana. Planta
Med 1987; 53: 341-342.

7 Gonzalez AG et al. Phenylpropanoid and stilbene compounds from
Ferula latipinna. Planta Med 1988; 54: 184-185.

8 Miski M. New daucane and germacrane esters from Ferula orientalis
var. orientalis. | Nat Prod 1987; 50: 829-834.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

Miski M. New daucane esters from Ferula tingitana. ] Nat Prod 1986;
49: 657-660.

Samimi MN and Unger W. Die gummiharze afghanischer asa foetida-
liefernder ferula-arten. Beobachtungen zur herkunft und qualitat
afghanischer asa foetida. Planta Med 1979; 36: 128-133.

Zhi-da M et al. Polysulfanes in the volatile oils of Ferula species.
Planta Med 1987; 53: 300-302.

Valle MG et al. Prenylated coumarins and sesquiterpenoids from
Ferula communis. Phytochemistry 1987; 26: 253-256.

Al-Awadi FM et al. On the mechanism of the hypoglycaemic effect of
a plant extract. Diabetologia 1985; 28: 432-434.

Al-Awadi FM, Gumaa KA. Studies on the activity of individual plants
of an antidiabetic plant mixture. Acta Diabetol Lat 1987; 24: 37-41.
Singh MM et al. Contraceptive efficacy and hormonal profile of
ferujol: a new coumarin from Ferula jaeschkeana. Planta Med 1985;
S1: 268-270.

Singh MM et al. Antifertility and hormonal properties of certain
carotane sesquiterpenes of Ferula jaeschkeana. Planta Med 1988; 54:
492-494.

Bordia A, Arora SK. The effect of essential oil (active principle) of
asafoetida on alimentary lipemia. Indian ] Med Res 1975; 63: 707-
711.

Rahlfs VW, Méssinger P. Zur Behandlung des Colon irritabile.
Arzneimittelforschung 1976; 26: 2230-2234.

Rahlfs VW, Méssinger P. Asafoetida bei colon irritabile. Dtsch med
Wochenschr 1978; 104: 140-143.

Kelly KJ et al. Methemoglobinemia in an infant treated with the folk
remedy glycerited asafoetida. Pediatrics 1984; 73: 717-719.

Abraham SK, Kesavan PC. Genotoxicity of garlic, turmeric and
asafoetida in mice. Mutat Res 1984; 136: 85-88.

Walia K. Effect of asafoetida (7-hydroxycoumarin) on mouse
spermatocytes. Cytologia 1973; 38: 719-724.

Aragno M et al. Experimental studies on the toxicity of Ferula
communis in the rat. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol 1973; 59:
399-402.

----- PAGE 86 -----
- Avens

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited phytochemical or pharmacological data are available
for avens, although reported tannin constituents would
indicate an astringent action thus supporting the traditional
use in diarrhoea and haemorrhage. In view of the lack of
toxicity data, excessive use should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Geum urbanum L. (Rosaceae)

Synonym(s)

Benedict's Herb, Colewort, Geum, Herb Bennet, Wood Avens

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHP 1983'°”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

G37)

Avens is not included in the GSL.'

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G40, G49, G64.

Limited information is available on the herb. Constituents
reported include bitter principles, resin, tannins and volatile oil.

Other plant parts

The root has been more extensively studied and is reported to
contain a phenolic glycoside (gein), yielding eugenol as the
aglycone and vicianose (disaccharide) as the sugar component;\”)
30% tannin, including gallic, caffeic and chlorogenic acids
(pseudotannins generally associated with condensed tannins);“?
a bitter substance, a flavonoid, and volatile oil.

Food Use

Avens is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that avens
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.‘@!

Phenylpropanoids

“Or
HO
eugenol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of avens.

Herbal Use

Avens is stated to possess antidiarrhoeal, antihaemorrhagic, and
febrifugal properties. It has been used for diarrhoea, catarrhal
colitis, passive uterine haemorrhage, intermittent fevers, and
specifically for ulcerative colitis.'(C7°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried herb 1-4g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Liquid extract 1-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A 20% aqueous decoction of avens, administered by intravenous
injection, has been reported to produce a reduction in blood

Figure 3 Avens — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 87 -----
Avens

pressure in cats.”

astringent properties.

Tannins are generally known to possess

Clinical studies

None documented.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented.

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the reported tannin constituents and the lack of toxicity
data, it is advisable to avoid excessive use of avens.

Drug interactions None documented.

Pregnancy and lactation Avens is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle.“ In view of the lack of phytochemical,
pharmacological and toxicological data, the use of avens during
pregnancy should be avoided.

References

1 Psenak M et al. Biochemical Study on Geum urbanum. Planta Med
1970; 19: 154-159.

2. Petkov V. Plants and hypotensive, antiatheromatous and
coronarodilating action. Am J Chin Med 1979; 7: 197-236.

----- PAGE 88 -----
7 Bayberry

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited chemical information is available for bayberry.
Documented tannin constituents justify some of the herbal
uses. In addition, mineralocorticoid activity has been reported
for one of the triterpene constituents. In view of this and the
tannin constituents, excessive use of bayberry should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Myrica cerifera L. (Myricaceae)

Synonym(s)

Candleberry Bark, Myrica, Southern Bayberry, Southern Wax
Myrtle, Wax Myrtle Bark

Part(s) Used
Root bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22, G41, G48 and Gé4.

Flavonoids Myricitrin.

Tannins 3.9% (bark), 34.82% (total aqueous extract).

Terpenoids Myricadiol, taraxerol and taraxerone.'”

Other constituents Albumen, red dye, gum, resin, starch, wax
containing palmitic, myristic and lauric acid esters.

Food Use

Bayberry is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Bayberry is stated to possess antipyretic, circulatory stimulant,
emetic and mild diaphoretic properties. It has been used for
diarrhoea, colds and specifically for mucous colitis. An infusion
has been used as a gargle for a sore throat, and as a douche for
leucorrhoea. Powdered root bark has been applied topically for
the management of indolent ulcers.(7 4" °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Powdered bark 0.6-2.0g by infusion or decoction three times
daily.'C”

Liquid extract 0.6-2.0mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Myricitrin has been reported to exhibit choleretic, bactericidal,

paramecicidal, and spermatocidal activity; myricadiol has miner-
Gal

alocorticoid activity.“*? Tannins are known to possess astringent

properties.

Figure 1 Bayberry (Myrica cerifera).

Figure 2 Bayberry — dried drug substance (root bark).

----- PAGE 89 -----
Bayberry

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical investigation with bayberry and rigorous
randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

A total aqueous extract, tannin fraction, and tannin-free fraction
from bayberry were all reported to produce tumours in NIH black
rats, following weekly subcutaneous injections for up to 75
weeks.) The number of tumours that developed were stated to
be statistically significant for the tannin fraction and tannin-free
fraction. Analysis of the tannin-free fraction revealed the presence
of four phenolic compounds, one of which was identified as
myricitrin. No tumours were reported in a later study, in which
rats were given subcutaneous injections of total aqueous extract
for 78 weeks.

Large doses may cause typical mineralocorticoid side-effects
(e.g. sodium and water retention, hypertension).

Contra-indications, Warnings
Excessive use of tannin-containing herbs is not recommended.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of bayberry to interact with other medicines

administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects (e.g. steroids or those with hypo-/hypertensive
activity), should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of bayberry has not been
established. In view of the possible mineralocorticoid activity and
the reported carcinogenic activity, the use of bayberry during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

UK: EP&C Essence; Peerless Composition Essence.

References

1 Paul BD et al. Isolation of myricadiol, myricitrin, taraxerol, and
taraxerone from Myrica cerifera L. root bark. J Pharm Sci 1974; 63:
958-959,

2. Kapadia GJ et al. Carcinogenicity of Camellia sinensis (tea) and some
tannin-containing folk medicinal herbs administered subcutaneously
in rats. J Natl Cancer Inst 1976; 57: 207-209.

3. Kapadia GJ et al. Carcinogenicity of some folk medicinal herbs in
rats. J Natl Cancer Inst 1978; 60: 683-686.

----- PAGE 90 -----
a Bilberry

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of bilberry is well documented and there is
good evidence that the anthocyanin constituents are
responsible for the pharmacological effects of bilberry.

Data from in vitro and animal studies provide supportive
evidence for some of the uses of bilberry. There have been
several clinical studies investigating the effects of bilberry in a
range of conditions. However, many studies have been
uncontrolled, involved only small numbers of patients and
had other methodological flaws. Further, well-designed
clinical trials are required to establish the efficacy of bilberry.

There are some limited toxicity and safety data for bilberry
which together with data on adverse effects reported in
clinical trials provide some support for the safety of bilberry
when used at recommended doses in the short term.
However, further data on the long-term safety of bilberry use
are required and, therefore, excessive use of bilberry should
be avoided.

Several of the intended uses of bilberry are not suitable for
unsupervised self-treatment.

Species (Family)

Vaccinium myrtillus L. (Ericaceae)

Synonym(s)

Blueberry, bogberry, huckleberry, Myrtilus niger Gilib., whortle-
berry

Part(s) Used

Fruit (berries), leaves

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia‘?

BP 200708

Complete German Commission E'C
Martindale 35th edition (Myrtillus)‘“*
Ph Eur 2007'°8?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Bilberry is not included in the GSL.

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G55.

Berries

Flavonoid glycosides Anthocyanins (particularly glycosides of
delphinidin, cyanidin, petunidin, peonidin, malvidin),“"” querce-
tin-3-glucuronide and hyperoside.”?)

Polyphenols Catechin, epicatechin and tannins.

Other constituents Pectins and vitamin C.

Leaves

Flavonoids
trin).{)

Quercetin and its glycosides (hyperoside, querci-

Phenolic acids Caffeic, p-coumaric, p-hydroxybenzoic, proto-
catechuic and melilotic.

Other constituents Tannins and iridoids.'?

Food Use

Bilberries are used in foods.” Bilberry is listed by the Council of
Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category N1). This
category indicates that there are no restrictions on the use of

bilberry in foods.'¢!®

Flavonoids

(+)-catechin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of bilberry.

Figure 2 Bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus).

----- PAGE 91 -----
Bilberry

Herbal Use

Bilberry is stated to possess astringent, tonic and antiseptic
properties and has traditionally been used in the treatment of
diarrhoea, dysentry, haemorrhoids, gastrointestinal inflamma-
tions, mouth infections, scurvy and urinary complaints.” Tt has
also been used in diabetes, gout and rheumatism and applied
locally in eye inflammation, burns and skin infections.”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried fruit 20-60 g daily as a decoction for the treatment of
diarrhoea.‘©”)

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological activities have been documented for
bilberry, including ophthalmic activity and anti-inflammatory,
wound-healing, anti-ulcer, anti-atherosclerotic and vasoprotective
properties.”

In vitro and animal studies

An anthocyanidin extract of V. myrtillus has been reported to act
as a superoxide anion scavenger’) and as an inhibitor of lipid
peroxidation in rat liver microsomes‘? **®
in vivo,” and to inhibit potassium ion loss induced by free radicals
in human erythrocytes." V. myrtillus extract is stated to have a
potent protective antioxidant action on human low-density
lipoproteins (LDLs) in vitro during copper-mediated oxidation.”
Oxidative activity is recognised as a major process in tissue damage
in a variety of pathological conditions, such as atherosclerosis and
carcinogenesis. In addition, oxidative stress is thought to be
involved in brain ageing and age-related neurodegenerative disease.
A study in rats reported that, compared with rats fed a control diet,
dietary supplementation of blueberry (bilberry) extract for eight
weeks reversed age-related deficits in several neuronal and
behavioural parameters, such as enhancement of dopamine release
from striatal slices and a water maze performance test.

V. myrtillus anthocyanins inhibit aggregation of human
platelets in vitro in a concentration-dependent manner” and, in
rats, V. myrtillus anthocyanins administered orally at doses
ranging from 5-400 mg/kg prolong bleeding time markedly.‘!?
Inhibition of platelet aggregation has also been reported in

’ and in mouse liver tissue

humans treated with V. myrtillus anthocyanins (see Clinical
studies)“

In vitro inhibition of elastase, a proteolytic enzyme involved
with elastic fibre and connective tissue degeneration and with
some pathological vascular conditions, has been demonstrated in
studies using anthocyanins extracted from V. myrtillus.”

The hypolipidaemic activity of oral administration of extracts
of V. myrtillus leaves has been demonstrated in rats."'°!4 In
genetically hyperlipidaemic rats, plasma triglyceride and choles-
terol concentrations, but not free fatty acids, decreased signifi-
cantly." In streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats, plasma glucose
concentrations as well as plasma triglyceride concentrations
decreased significantly compared with values in control rats.‘
In further experiments using bilberry and clofibrate, both
preparations reduced plasma triglyceride concentrations in a
dose-dependent manner in rats fed a hyperlipidaemic diet and in
ethanol-treated normolipidaemic rats." Bilberry, however, did
not prevent fructose-elicited increases in plasma _ triglyceride
concentrations. Other studies in glucose-loaded mice failed to
demonstrate hypoglycaemic activity following oral administration
of bilberry leaf extract!)

Several in vitro studies have demonstrated the relaxing effects of
V. myrtillus anthocyanins on isolated vascular smooth muscle
preparations, including the thoracic vein and splenic and coronary
arteries."°"'® There is evidence that the mechanism for this
smooth muscle relaxant effect is via stimulation of prostaglandin
release within vessel walls.’

Effects of V. myrtillus anthocyanins on enhancing arterial
vasomotion (rhythmic variation of arteriole diameter in the
microvasular network which influences microvascular blood flow
and the formation of interstitial fluid) have been shown in
experimental models, including the cheek pouch microcirculation
of hamsters.?° This model has also been used to investigate the
effects of V. myrtillus anthocyanins on ischaemia—reperfusion
injury.°”) Oral administration for two and four weeks of
Myrtocyan, a commercially available product comprising bilberry
anthocyanin complex, reduced the increase in capillary perme-
ability, decreased leukocyte adhesion and improved capillary
perfusion compared with controls. In rats, oral administration of
V. myrtillus anthocyanins for 12 days before the induction of
hypertension (by ligature of the abdominal aorta) limited the
increase in vascular permeability and maintained a normal blood—
brain barrier permeability.°”

Components of bilberry exhibit potential anticarcinogenic
activity in vitro as demonstrated by inhibition of the induction

Figure 3 Bilberry — dried drug substance (leaves).

Figure 4 Bilberry — dried drug substance (fruit).

----- PAGE 92 -----
of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) by the tumour promoter
phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (TPA).?

Myrtocyan and one of its anthocyanin constituents have
displayed anti-ulcer activity in various experimental models of
acute gastric ulcer and in chronic ulcer induced by acetic acid.?”
The mechanism for this may be by potentiation of the defensive
barriers of the gastrointestinal mucosa, such as the secretion of
gastric mucus or stimulation of cellular regeneration."

Extracts of V. myrtillus leaves have antibacterial activity against
several species, including Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia
coli, as determined by the hole-plate diffusion method and the
microdilution broth method.?° Y, myrtillus fruit extracts were

less active.

The pharmacokinetics of V. myrtillus anthocyanins have been
studied in rats.°% Following a single oral administration, plasma
anthocyanin concentrations peaked after 15 minute:
rapidly within two hours. No hepatic first-pass
observed; elimination occurred mostly through the urine and bile.

and declined

effect was

Clinical studies

Clinical studies with extracts of V. myrtillus fruits (berries) have
focused mainly on its therapeutic applications in certain
ophthalmological conditions and in altered microcirculation and
peripheral venous insufficiency.”

A study involving 30 healthy subjects with normal platelet
aggregation investigated the effects of administration of V.
myrtillus anthocyanins (Myrtocyan) (480mg) daily, ascorbic acid
3g daily and V. myrtillus anthocyanins plus ascorbic acid on
collagen- and ADP-induced platelet aggregation."!" Platelet
aggregation in blood samples taken from participants after 30
and 60 days' treatment was reduced in all subjects compared with
baseline values. The reduction in platelet aggregation was greater
in subjects who received V. myrtillus anthocyanins alone than in
those who received ascorbic acid alone and was most marked in
subjects who received both preparations. Platelet aggregation
returned to baseline values when tested 120 days after disconti-
nuation of treatment.”

Early studies involving healthy subjects and patients with visual
disorders who received V. myrtillus extracts alone or in
combination with B-carotene and vitamin E reported improve-
ments in night vision and faster adjustment to darkness and
restoration of visual acuity following exposure to a bright flash of
light." Other studies reported improvements in retinal sensitivity
and the visual field in patients with myopia or glaucoma following
short- or long-term (six months) treatment with V. myrtillus
anthocyanins. included a control
group, and so the observed effects cannot be attributed to bilberry
treatment. Other uncontrolled studies in small numbers of
patients with retinal pathologies have reported improvements in
retinal function, compared with pretreatment values (e.g. ref. 27).

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 40
patients with diabetic and/or hypertensive retinopathy received
Myrtocyan (160mg) twice daily or placebo for one month.”® At
the end of the study, the placebo group received Myrtocyan for one
month. It was reported that 77-90% of treated patients
experienced improvement compared with the pretreatment period,
as determined by ophthalmoscopy and fluorescein fundus
angiography.) However, there does not appear to have been a
statistical comparison between the treatment and placebo groups.
A similar placebo-controlled trial involving 40 patients with early-
phase diabetic retinopathy who received Myrtocyan for 12 months
also reported improvements in Myrtocyan-treated patients.?”

) However, none of these studi

Bilberry

In a randomised, double-blind trial involving 51 patients with
mild senile cortical cataract who received V. myrtillus anthocya-
nins plus vitamin E twice daily for four months, treated patients
showed significant improvements in lens opacity compared with
placebo recipients.°”

Studies involving patients with peripheral vascular disorders of
various origins are stated to have demonstrated clinical benefits
with V. myrtillus extracts.) Other studies in patients with
ulcerative dermatitis secondary to post-thrombotic or venous
capillary fragility secondary to liver disorders and
other conditions, or chronic venous insufficiency have been
reported to have shown improvements in clinical signs and
symptoms.) However, several of these studies appear to have
been uncontrolled (e.g. refs 31-33) and/or included only small
numbers of patients (e.g. refs 31 and 32). A double-blind, placebo-
controlled study involving 47 patients with peripheral vascular
disorders reported reductions in subjective symptoms, such as
paraesthesia, pain and heaviness and improved oedema in patients
treated with Myrtocyan (480 mg/day) for 30 days.” A single-blind
study involving 60 patients with venous insufficiency who received
Myrtocyan (480mg/day) or placebo for 30 days reported
significant improvements in oedema, paraesthesia, cramp-like
pain and pressure sensation in Myrtocyan-treated patients
compared with pretreatment values in these patients.”

V. myrtillus anthocyanins have been investigated in a variety of
other disordei

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of V.
myrtillus anthocyanins (320 mg/day) taken for three days before
menstruation was conducted involving 30 patients with chronic
primary dysmenorrhoea.” Significant differences between the
active treatment and placebo groups were reported for several
symptoms investigated, including nausea and vomiting and breast
tenderness; there was no effect on headache.

In a trial involving 60 patients who had undergone haemor-
rhoidectomy, participants were randomised to receive V. myrtillus
anthocyanins (320-480 mg/day) postoperatively in addition to
usual medical care or to no additional treatment. Reductions in
itch and oedema occurred in bilberry recipients, but there were no
effects on other symptoms.)

Other studies, all of which were uncontrolled, have reported
beneficial effects following administration of V. myrtillus extracts
in patients with fibrocystic mastopathy®® and type II diabetes
mellitus,°” in infantile dyspepsia®® and in pregnant women with
lower limb venous insufficiency and acute-phase haemor-
rhoids.°”

varicose sta

Side-effects, Toxicity

A review of clinical trials of V. myrtillus extracts stated that no
adverse effects had been observed, even following prolonged
‘) However, most trials involved relatively small
numbers of patients and, therefore, would only be able to detect
very common acute adverse effects.

The same review summarised the results of an unpublished
postmarketing surveillance study which had involved 2295 subjects
who had taken Myrtocyan, usually 160mg twice daily for 1-2
months, for lower limb venous insufficiency, capillary fragility,
functional changes in retinal microcirculation or haemorrhoids.
Ninety-four subjects reported side-effects, mainly relating to the
skin and gastrointestinal and nervous systems.”

Long-term consumption of bilberry leaves may lead to toxicity.
Chronic administration of doses of 1.5 g/kg per day or more to
animals has been reported to be fatal.'©?)

treatment.

----- PAGE 93 -----
Bilberry

Animal toxicity data indicate that in mice and rats, the LD so for
Myrtocyan is over 2g/kg and, in dogs, single doses of 3 g/kg
produced no adverse effects other than marked darkening of urine
and faeces (demonstrating absorption). Oral daily doses to rats
and dogs of 125-500 mg/kg and 80-320 mg/kg, respectively, for six
months did not induce mortality or toxic effects.” Pharmaco-
kinetic studies of V. mzyrtillus anthocyanins in rats demonstrated
that anthocyanins are removed rapidly from the systemic
circulation within two hours of oral administration.°%

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of bilberry to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. For example, there is
evidence from preclinical studies that V. myrtillus anthocyanins
inhibit platelet aggregation and prolong bleeding time, although
clinical evidence is limited. It is not known whether or not the use
of bilberry preparations concurrently with antiplatelet or antic-
oagulant agents carries an increased risk of bleeding; concurrent
use of bilberry with such agents, and initiation or cessation of
bilberry treatments, should be monitored

Pregnancy and lactation In an uncontrolled study, V. myrtillus
anthocyanin extract (Tegens) (80 or 160 mg) twice or three times
daily for three months was administered to pregnant women with
lower limb venous insufficiency and acute-phase haemorrhoids
with no apparent adverse effects." However, the safety of
bilberry has not been established and, in view of the lack of
toxicity data, the use of bilberry during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

Italy: Alvear con Ginseng; Angioton; Api Baby; Bebimix;
Biolactine; Capill; Dermilia Flebozin; Evamilk; Memovisus;
Mirtilene; Mirtilux; Mirtilux; Neomyrt Plus; Nerex; Pik Gel;
Retinovit; Tussol; Ultravisin; Varicofit. Netherlands: Difrarel.
Spain: Antomiopic; Mirtilus. UK: I-Sight, Nature's Garden; Se-
Power. USA: Bilbery 40mg; Eye Support Formula Herbal Blend;
Healthy Eyes; Mental Clarity; My Favorite Multiple Iron-Free;
My Favorite Multiple Original; My Favorite Multiple Prime
Multi Vitamin; My Favorite Multiple Take One; My Favorite
Multiple Take One Iron-Free; Ultimate Antioxidant Formula;
Ocusense.

References

1

2

10

cae

12

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

Morazzoni P, Bombardelli E. Vaccinium myrtillus L. Fitoterapia 1996;
66: 3-29.

Di Pierro K Morazzoni P. Reaping the benefits: the role of two edible
plants (Vaccinium myrtillus and Glycine max). Proceedings of the
Herbal Medicine in the New Millennium Conference, Lismore, NSW,
Australia, 1999: 146-150.

Fraisse D et al. Composition polyphénolique de la feuille de myrtille.
Ann Pharm Fr 1996; 54: 280-283.

Dombrowicz E et al. Phenolic acids in leaves of Arctostaphylos uva
ursi L., Vaccinium vitis idaea L. and Vaccinium myrtillus L. Pharmazie
1991; 46: 680-681.

Martin-Aragon S et al. In vitro and in vivo antioxidant properties of
Vaccinium myrtillus. Pharm Biol 1999; 37: 109-113.

Martin-Aragon S et al. Antioxidant action of Vaccinium myrtillus L.
Phytother Res 1998; 12 (Suppl. Suppl.): $104-S106.

Laplaud PM et al. Antioxidant action of Vaccinium myrtillus extract
on human low-density lipoproteins in vitro: initial observations. Fund
Clin Pharmacol 1997; 11: 35-40.

Joseph JA et al. Reversals of age-related declines in neuronal signal
transduction, cognitive, and motor behavioral deficits with blueberry,
spinach, or strawberry dietary supplementation. J Neurosci 1999; 19:
8114-8121.

Bottecchia D et al. Preliminary report on the inhibitory effect of
Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides on platelet aggregation and clot
retraction. Fitoterapia 1987; 58: 3-8.

Morazzoni P, Magistretti MJ. Activity of Myrtocyan, an anthocyanin
complex from Vaccinium myrtillus (VMA), on platelet aggregation
and adhesiveness. Fitoterapia 1990; 61: 13-21.

Pulliero G et al. Ex vivo study of the inhibitory effects of Vaccinium
myrtillus anthocyanosides on human platelet aggregation. Fitoterapia
1989; 60: 69-75.

Jonadet M et al. Anthocyanosides extraits de Vitis vinifera, de Vaccinium
myrtillus et de Pinus maritimus. J Pharm Belg 1983; 38: 41-46.
Cignarella A et al. Hypolipidaemic activity of Vaccinium myrtillus
leaves on a new model of genetically hyperlipidaemic rat. Planta Med
1992; 58 (Suppl. Suppl.1): AS81—A582.

Cignarella A et al. Novel lipid-lowering properties of Vaccinium
myrtillus L. leaves, a traditional antidiabetic treatment, in several
models of rat dyslipidaemia: a comparison with clofibrate. Thromb
Res 1996; 84: 311-322.

Neef H et al. Hypogylcaemic activity of selected European plants.
Phytother Res 1995; 9: 45-48.

Bettini V et al. Effects of Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides on
vascular smooth muscle. Fitoterapia 1984; 55: 265-272.

Bettini V et al. Interactions between Vaccinium myrtillus
anthocyanosides and serotonin on splenic artery smooth muscle.
Fitoterapia 1984; 55: 201-208.

Bettini V et al. Mechanical responses of isolated coronary arteries to
barium in the presence of Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides.
Fitoterapia 1985; 56: 3-10.

Morazzoni P, Magistretti MJ. Effects of Vaccinium myrtillus
anthocyanosides on prostacyclin-like activity in rat arterial tissue.
Fitoterapia 1986; 57: 11-14.

Colantuoni A et al. Effects of Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides on
arterial vasomotion. Arzneimittelforschung 1991; 41: 905-909.
Bertuglia S et al. Effect of Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides on
ischaemia reperfusion injury in hamster cheek pouch microcirculation.
Pharmacol Res 1995; 31: 183-187.

Detre Z et al. Studies on vascular permeability in hypertension: action
of anthocyanosides. Clin Physiol Biochem 1986; 4: 143-149.
Bomser J e¢ al. In vitro anticancer activity of fruit extracts from
Vaccinium species. Planta Med 1996; 62: 212-216.

Magistretti MJ et al. Antiulcer activity of an anthocyanidin from
Vaccinium myrtillus. Arzneimittelforschung 1988; 38: 686-690.
Brantner A, Grein E. Antibacterial activity of plant extracts used
externally in traditional medicine. J Ethnopharmacol 1994; 44: 35-40.
Morazzoni P et al. Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides
pharmacokinetics in rats. Arzgneimmittelforschung 1991, 41: 128-131.
Forte R et al. Fitotherapy and ophthalmology: considerations on
dynamized myrtillus retinal effects with low luminance visual acuity.
Ann Ottal Clin Ocul 1996; 122: 325-333.

----- PAGE 94 -----
28

29

30

31

32

33

Perossini M et al. Diabetic and hypertensive retinopathy therapy with
Vaccinium myrtillus anthocianosides (Tegens) double-blind placebo-
controlled clinical trial. Ann Ottal Clin Ocul 1988; 113: 1173-1190.
Repossi P et al. The role of anthocyanosides on vascular permeability
in diabetic retinopathy. Ann Ottal Clin Ocul 1987; 113: 357-361.
Bravetti GO et al. Preventive medical treatment of senile cataract with
vitamin E and Vaccinium myrtillus anthocianosides: clinical
evaluation. Ann Ottal Clin Ocul 1989; 115: 109-116.

Coget J, Merlen JE. Etude clinique d'un nouvel agent de protection
vasculaire le difrarel 20, composé d'anthocyanosides extraits du
Vaccinum myrtillus. Phlebologie 1968; 21: 221-228.

Piovella F et al. Impiego di antocianosidi da Vaccinium myrtillus al
25% come antocianidine nel trattamento della diatesi emorragica da
deficit dell'emostasi primaria. Gaz Med It 1981; 140: 445-449.

Tori A, D'Errico F. Gli antocianosidi da Vaccinium myrtillus nella
cura delle flebopatie da stasi degli arti inferiori. Gaz Med It 1980; 139:
217-224.

34

36

37

38

39

Bilberry

Colombo D, Vescovini R. Studio clinico controllato sull'efficacia degli
antocianosidi del mirtillo cel trattamento della dismenorrea
essenziale. Giorn It Ost Gin 1985; 7: 1033-1038.

Pezzangora V et al. La terapia medica con antocianosidi del mirtillo
nei pazienti operati di emorroidectomia. Gaz Med It 1984; 143: 405-
409.

Leonardi M. Il trattamento della mastopatia fibrosa con antocianosidi
di mirtillo. Minerva Ginecol 1993; 45: 617-621.

Ionescu-Tirgoviste C et al. Efectul unui amestec pe plante asupra
echilibrului metabolic la bolnavii cu diabet zaharat de tip 2. Med
Intern 1989; 41: 185-192.

Tolan L et al. Utilizarea prafului de afine in dispepsiile sugarului.
Pediatria 1969; 18: 375-379.

Teglio L et al. Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides in the treatment

of venous insufficiency of inferior limbs and acute piles in pregnancy.
Quaderni Clin Osterica Ginecol 1987; 42: 221-231.

----- PAGE 95 -----
= Bloodroot

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Bloodroot is characterised by isoquinoline alkaloid
constituents (benzophenanthridine-type), predominantly
sanguinarine. A wide range of pharmacological activities has
been documented for this class of compounds including
antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, antihistaminic, cardiotonic
and antiplaque. Other benzophenanthridine alkaloids have
been associated with cytotoxic activities. However, recent
interest over the potential use of bloodroot in oral hygiene
has stimulated considerable research into both sanguinarine
and bloodroot extracts. Results have indicated that products
such as oral rinses and toothpastes containing either
sanguinaria extracts or sanguinarine may be of value in dental
hygiene.

Species (Family)

Sanguinaria canadensis L. (Papaveraceae)

Synonym(s)

Red Indian Paint, Red Root, Sanguinaria, S$. australis Greene, S.
canadensis var. rotundifolia (Greene) Fedde, S. dilleniana Greene,
Tetterwort

Part(s) Used

Rhizome

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 198307)

Martindale 35th edition'**

Alkaloids

0.
See
fe)
(S)

OR?
R! Re
sanguinarine —CH,—
chelerythrine CHs CHs

protopine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of bloodroot.

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Bloodroot is not included in the GSL.‘“”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22 and G41.

Alkaloids Isoquinoline type. 3.0-7.0%.'? Sanguinarine (approx.
1%), sanguidimerine, chelerythrine, protopine; others include
oxysanguinarine, &- and B-allocryptopine, sanguilutine, dihydro-
sanguilutine, berberine, coptisine and homochelidonine.

Other constituents Resin, starch, organic acids (citric, malic).
Alkaloid content of other plant parts recorded as 0.08% (leaf),
1.8% (root).

Food Use

Bloodroot is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that
bloodroot can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted
manner, although there is insufficient information available for an

: . (G16
adequate assessment of potential toxicity.(©'?

Herbal Use

Bloodroot is stated to act as an expectorant, spasmolytic, emetic,
cathartic, antiseptic, cardioactive, topical irritant and escharotic
(scab-producing). Traditionally it is indicated for bronchitis
(subacute or chronic), asthma, croup, laryngitis, pharyngitis,
deficient capillary circulation, nasal polyps (as a snuff), and
specifically for asthma and bronchitis with feeble peripheral

circulation.“©”

Figure 2 Bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis).

----- PAGE 96 -----
Figure 3 Bloodroot - dried drug substance (rhizome).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Rhizome 0.06-0.5 g (1-2 g for emetic dose) three times daily.(©”

Liquid extract 0.06-0.3 mL (1:1 in 60% alcohol) (1-2 mL for
emetic dose) three times daily.“©”

Tincture 0.3-2 mL (1:5 in 60% alcohol) (2-8 mL for emetic dose)
three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

Activities documented for bloodroot are principally attributable to
the isoquinoline alkaloid constituents, in particular sanguinarine.
Interest has focused on the use of sanguinarine in dental hygiene
products. Unless otherwise stated, the following actions refer to
sanguinarine.

In vitro and animal studies

Considerable antimicrobial activity has been documented against
both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, Candida and
dermatophytes (fungi), and Trichomonas (protozoa). In addi-
tion, anti-inflammatory activity has been described against
carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema."

Prolongation of the ventricular refractory period has been
attributed to an inhibition of NatK* ATPase.‘+*) However, a
single intravenous injection of sanguinarine to anaesthetised dogs
reportedly exerted no effect on cardiovascular parameters
monitored.

In vitro inhibition of bone resorption and collagenase has been
documented.”

Clinical studies

Many studies have investigated the efficacy of bloodroot extracts
in oral hygiene.” Preparations containing bloodroot extracts,
such as oral rinses and toothpastes, have been reported to
significantly lower plaque, gingival and bleeding indices.”
Alteration of the oral microbial flora, or development of resistant
microbial strains has not been observed with the use of bloodroot
extracts.)

Bloodroot

Side-Effects, Toxicity

None documented for bloodroot. Much has been documented
concerning the potential toxicity of the alkaloid constituents in
bloodroot, in particular of sanguinarine.

Conclusions reached in the 1960s over the carcinogenic
potential of sanguinarine have more recently been disproved.
In addition, negative mutagenic activity has been observed in the
Ames test (microbial, with and without activation).

Sanguinarine is poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract.
This is reflected in stated acute oral LDso values (rat) of 1.7 g/kg
(sanguinarine) and 1.4 g/kg (sanguinaria extract), compared with
an acute intravenous LDso (rat) value of 28.7 mg/kg (sanguinar-
ine). Symptoms of diarrhoea, ataxia and reduced activity were
observed in animals receiving high oral doses of sanguinarine.”
The acute dermal toxicity (LD5o) of sanguinarine is stated to be
greater than 200 mg/kg in rabbits.” The first experimental study
of sanguinarine toxicity (1876) reported prostration and severe
respiratory distress as the most marked signs of oral toxicity.’
However, in more recent short-term toxicity studies no toxic signs
were observed in the fetuses of rats following maternal
administration of 5-30 mg/kg/day of sanguinarine. ‘?

The reproductive and developmental toxicity potential of an S.
canadensis extract has been evaluated in rats and rabbits.'®
Developmental toxicity (increase in postimplantation loss, slight
decrease in fetal and pup body weights) was only evident at
maternally toxic doses. No effect was reported on reproductive
capabilities, on parturition or on lactation. It was concluded that
oral ingestion of sanguinaria extract has no selective effect on
fertility, reproduction, or on fetal or neonatal development.

Hepatotoxicity has been documented in rats following a single
intraperitoneal administration (10mg/kg) of sanguinarine.)
Toxicity was indicated by an increase in serum alanine
aminotransferase and serum asparate aminotransferase activity,
and by a significant reduction in microsomal cytochrome P450
and benzfetamine N-demethylase activities.’ Macroscopic lesions
were also observed but the authors stated that the two events
could not be conclusively directly related.) No hepatotoxicity has
been observed in short-term toxicity studies involving oral
administration of sanguinarine.)

Animal studies have indicated sanguinarine to be non-irritant
and to exhibit no allergenic or anaphylactic potential. Human
patch tests have shown sanguinarine to be non-irritant and non-
sensitising.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of bloodroot to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation There is limited evidence from animal
studies that bloodroot is non-toxic during pregnancy (see above).
However, in view of its pharmacologically active constituents and
lack of clinical data on safety, use of bloodroot during pregnancy
and lactation should be avoided.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Lexat. Canada: Mielocol; Viadent; Wampole
Bronchial Cough Syrup. Italy: Dentosan Carie & Alito.

----- PAGE 97 -----
1

Bloodroot

References

Becci PJ et al. Short-term toxicity studies of sanguinarine and of two
alkaloid extracts of Sanguinaria canadensis. ] Toxicol Environ Health
1987; 20: 199-208.

Godowski KC. Antimicrobial action of sanguinarine. J Clin Dent
1989; 1: 96-101.

Lenfield J et al. Antiinflammatory activity of quaternary

benzophenanthridine alkaloids from Chelidonium majus. Planta Med
1981; 43: 161-165.

Schwartz HG. Safety profile of sanguinarine and sanguinaria extract.
Compend Cont Educ Dent Suppl 1986; 7: S212-S217.

Dalvi RR. Sanguinarine: its potential as a liver toxic alkaloid present
in the seeds of Argemone mexicana. Experientia 1985; 41: 77-78.
Keller KA. Reproductive and developmental toxicological evaluation
of Sanguinaria extract. J Clin Dent 1989; 1: 59-66.

----- PAGE 98 -----
y Blue Flag

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Little is known about the phytochemical, pharmacological or
toxicological properties of blue flag and its constituents,
although related species are known to be toxic. In view of
these factors, the use of blue flag is not recommended.

Species (Family)

Iris versicolor L.

Synonym(s)

Iris caroliniana Watson, Iris virginica L.

Part(s) Used

Rhizome

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19926
BHP 1996”

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22, G40, G48 and Gé4.

Acids Isophthalic acid 0.002%, salicylic acid, lauric acid, stearic
acid, palmitic acid and 1-triacontanol.

Volatile oils 0.025%. Furfural.

Other constituents Iridin, B-sitosterol, iriversical'? and tannin.

Food Use

Blue flag is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Blue flag is stated to possess cholagogue, laxative, diuretic,
dermatological, anti-inflammatory and antiemetic properties. It
has been used for skin diseases, biliousness with constipation and

liver dysfunction, and specifically for cutaneous eruptions.(67°*
Triterpenes
HOHZC. OH
OHC. 4

a

X

iriversical

Figure 1 Selected constituents of blue flag.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal and pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

G6, G7,

Dried rhizome 0.6-2.0g as a decoction three times daily.‘
G10)

Liquid extract
daily.(* G7, G10)

1-2mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Side-effects, Toxicity

It has been stated that the fresh root of blue flag can cause nausea
and vomiting.) Therefore, dosage recommendations relate to

small doses of dried root.
Furfural, a volatile oil constituent, is known to be irritant to
mucous membranes causing lachrymation, inflammation of the

Figure 2 Blue flag (Iris versicolor).

Figure 3 Blue flag — dried drug substance (rhizome).

----- PAGE 99 -----
Blue Flag

eyes, irritation of the throat, and headache.‘°**) Whether these
irritant properties are attributable to the volatile oil of blue flag
has not been established. Acute oral toxicity (rat, LDso) for
furfural has been documented as 127 mg/kg body weight.'°*
Iridin has been reported to be poisonous in both humans and
livestock.'©?”) However, it is unclear whether this substance is the
same iridin documented as a constituent of blue flag.

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the possible irritant nature of the volatile oil, blue flag
may not be suitable for internal use.

Drug interactions None documented.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of blue flag has not been
established. In view of this, together with the documented irritant

properties of some of the constituents, blue flag should not be
taken during pregnancy.

UK: Catarrh Mixture; HRI Clear Complexion; Napiers Skin
Tablets; Skin Eruptions Mixture.

References

1 Krick W e¢ al. Isolation and structural determination of a new
methylated triterpenoid from rhizomes of Iris versicolor L. Z
Naturforsch 1983; 38: 689-692.

----- PAGE 100 -----
- Bogbean

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of bogbean is well studied, but no
pharmacological information is available to justify the herbal
uses. In view of the lack of toxicity data, excessive doses
should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Menyanthes trifoliata L. (Menyanthaceae)

Synonym(s)

Buckbean, Marsh Trefoil, Menyanthes

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission E'C»
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'0*?

Iridoids
S
CH2OH
C—O, fe) oO
4
fe)

H
O-Glucosyl O-Glucosyl

dihydrofoliamenthin menthiafolin

H
\_sO-Glucosyl

H3CO2C

O-Glucosy!
loganin

sweroside
Coumarins
HO’ [e) [e)
scopoletin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of bogbean.

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G62 and G64.

Acid Caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid, ferulic acid, p-hydroxyben-
zoic acid, protocatechuic acid, salicylic acid, vanillic acid;‘"”) folic
acid and palmitic acid.)

Alkaloids Gentianin and gentianidine (pyridine-type); choline.”
Coumarins Scopoletin.”

Flavonoids Hyperin, kaempferol, quercetin, rutin and trifolio-
24 (1,2)

side.

Iridoids

ee oy (2
menthiafolin and sweroside.?

7',8'-Dihydrofoliamenthin, foliamenthin, loganin,
)

Other constituents Carotene, ceryl alcohol, enzymes (e.g.
emulsin, invertin), o-spinasterol, an unidentified substance with
haemolytic properties.
mixture of five sterols with o-spinasterol and stigmast-7-enol as
major components.)

) y-Spinasterol has been reported to be a

Food Use

Bogbean is
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
bogbean can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a

possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
G16)

sted by the Council of Europe as a natural source of

final product."

Herbal Use

Bogbean is stated to pos bitter and diuretic properties. It has
been used for rheumatism, rheumatoid arthritis, and specifically

for muscular rheumatism associated with general asthenia.(C> ©”
G8, G64)

Figure 2. Bogbean (Menyanthes trifoliata).

----- PAGE 101 -----
Bogbean

Figure 3. Bogbean - dried drug substance (leaf).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf 1-2 or by infusion three times daily.©”

Liquid extract 1-2 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.‘

Tincture 1-3 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A choleretic action has been described for caffeic acid and ferulic
acid; a stomachic secretive action has been reported for
protocatechuic acid and p-hydroxybenzoic acid. The iridoids
possess bitter properties.” The bitter index (BI) of bogbean is
stated to be 4000-10000 (compared to gentian BI 10000-
30.000).“” Bogbean extracts have antibacterial activities.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

Large doses of bogbean are stated to be purgative and may cause
vomiting. An unidentified substance with haemolytic activity
has been isolated from bogbean.”)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Excessive doses may be irritant to the gastrointestinal tract,
causing diarrhoea, griping pains, nausea and vomiting.”

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
bogbean to interact with other medicines administered concur-
rently, particularly those with similar or opposing effects, should
be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of bogbean has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data and possible
purgative action, the use of bogbean during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Austria: Mariazeller. Czech Republic: Naturland Grosser
Swedenbitter. France: Tisane Hepatique de Hoerdt. Germany:
Gallexier. Russia: Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opuru-
naApnpiit Boapmoit Baansam Burruepa). UK: Modern Herbals
Rheumatic Pain; Rheumatic Pain; Rheumatic Pain Relief;
Rheumatic Pain Remedy; Rheumatic Pain Tablets; Sciatica
Tablets; Vegetex.

References

1 Swiatek L et al. Content of phenolic acids in leaves of Menyanthes
trifoliata. Planta Med 1986; 52: 530.

2. Giaceri G. Chromatographic identification of coumarin derivatives in
Menyanthes trifoliata L. Fitoterapia 1972; 43: 134-138.

3 Battersby AR et al. Seco-cyclopentane glucosides from Menyanthes
trifoliata: foliamenthin, dihydrofoliamenthin, and menthiafolin. Chem
Commun 1968; 1277-1280.

4 Loew P et al. The structure and biosynthesis of foliamenthin. Chem
Commun 1968; 1276-1277.

5 Popov S. Sterols of the Gentianaceae family. Dok! Bolg Akad Nauk
1969; 22: 293-296.

6 Moskalenko SA. Preliminary screening of Far-Eastern ethnomedicinal
plants for antibacterial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15: 231-259.

7 Bishop CJ, MacDonald RE. A survey of higher plants for antibacterial
substances. Can J Bot 1951; 29: 260-269.

8 Todd RG, ed. Martindale: The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 25th edn.
London: Pharmaceutical Press, 1967.

----- PAGE 102 -----
Boldo

studies are required to establish this. The reputed diuretic an
mild urinary antiseptic properties of boldo are probably
attributable to the irritant volatile oil. In view of the toxicity
data and the irritant nature of the volatile oil, excessive and/or

long-term use of boldo should be avoided.“¢5®

Species (Family)

Peumus boldus Molina (Monimiaceae)

Synonym(s)
Boldi Folium, Boldus

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C?)
ESCOP 1996'°)
Martindale 35th edition!
Ph Eur 2007'°8”

WHO volume 1 1999°%)

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G52 and G62.

Alkaloids soquinoline-type. 0.25—0.7%. Pharmacopoeial stan-
dard not less than 0.1% alkaloid calculated as boldine.(@#"°*
Boldine 0.06% (major, disputed), isoboldine, 6a,7-dehydrobol-
dine, isocorydine, isocorydine-N-oxide, norisocorydine, laurolit-
sine,  laurotetanine, | N-methyllaurotetanine — (aporphines),
reticuline; (—)-pronuciferine (proaporphine) and _ sinoacutine
(morphinandienone)."~?

Flavonoids Flavonols (e.g. isorhamnetin) and their glycosides."
Volatile oils 2.5%. Some 38 components have been identified,
including p-cymene 28.6%, ascaridole 16.1%, 1,8-cineole 16.0%,
linalool 9.1%, terpinen-4-o1 2.6%, o-terpineol 0.9%, fenchone
0.8% and terpinolene 0.4%.

Other constituents Coumarin 0.5%, resin and tannin.

Food Use

Boldo is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that boldo
can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted manner,
although insufficient information is available for an adequate
assessment of potential toxicity.““'® Previously, in the USA, boldo
was approved for food use in alcoholic beverages only.'°*?

Herbal Use

Boldo is stated to possess cholagogue, liver stimulant, sedative,
diuretic, mild urinary demulcent, and antiseptic properties. It has
been used for mild digestive disturbances, constipation, gallstones,
pain in the liver or gall bladder, cystitis, rheumatism, and
specifically for cholelithiasis with pain.'C?°7°° The German
Commission E approved use for treatment of dyspepsia and mild
spastic gastrointestinal complaints.“

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Alkaloids
Rt HgCO.
C1.
Re HO Fy, CHg
H
HO. ;
H3CO HgCO
(S)-reticuline
R! R?
boldine OH OCHs
isoboldine OCH3 OH
Monoterpenes
.
p-cymene 1,8-cineole

Y-

linalool ascaridole

Figure 1 Selected constituents of boldo.

----- PAGE 103 -----
92 Boldo

Dried leaf 60-200 mg as an infusion three times daily;‘@” 2-5 g as

(G52)
a tea,“C)

Liquid extract 0.1-0.3mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily©”

Tincture 0.5-2.0 mL (1:10 in 60% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Boldo has exhibited choleretic (highest activity in rats), diuretic,
stomachic and cholagogic properties.(“4"% The choleretic
activity may be due to synergy between flavonoids and
alkaloids.“ Experiments in rats have failed to demonstrate
choleretic activity after oral administration of 400 or 800 mg/kg
aqueous ethanolic extract, intraduodenal administration of
200mg or 800 mg/kg, and intravenous administration of 32.5—
130 mg/kg of a dry ethanolic extract.”

An aqueous ethanolic extract (equivalent to 0.5-1.0 mg/mL
dried ethanolic extract) and also boldine (33p1g/mL) gave
significant hepatoprotection against t-butyl hydroperoxide-
induced hepatotoxicity in rat hepatocytes in vitro. Boldine at
a concentration of 0.015 mol/L inhibited microsomal lipid
peroxidation in a rat liver preparation by 50%. A dried aqueous
ethanolic extract (0.06-0.115%) of boldine at a dose of 500 mg/kg
gave 70% protection against carbon tetrachloride-induced hepa-

Figure 2 Boldo (Peumus boldus).

nyu l

13

iL pee LAL uF ft. Wf ym
vole 23 OM 18 1% MN

Figure 3 Boldo — dried drug substance (leaf).

18

totoxicity in mice, and boldine alone (10mg/kg) gave 49%
protection.” An aqueous ethanolic extract of boldo at doses of 50
and 100 mg/kg administered intraperitoneally showed anti-inflam-
matory activity in the rat paw carrageenan-induced oedema test,
whereas boldine alone appeared to be inactive.”

Boldine showed concentration-dependent relaxant activity on
isolated rat ileum (ECso 1.7 x 10°*mol/L), and acted as a
competitive antagonist of acetylcholine and as a non-competitive
antagonist of barium.) Boldine at low micromolar concentra-
tions prevented oxidation in rat brain homogenate and lipid
peroxidation of red cell plasma membranes, led to inactivation of
lysozymes, indicating high reactivity of free radicals."

Boldo essential oil contains terpinen-4-ol, the irritant and
diuretic principle in juniper oil.

Clinical studies

Clinical investigation of the effects of boldo is extremely limited
and rigorous randomized controlled clinical trials are required. In
a controlled trial, boldo, in combination with cascara, rhubarb
and gentian, had a beneficial effect on a variety of symptoms such
as loss of appetite, digestion difficulties, constipation, flatulence
and itching“! Rhubarb and gentian were found to be more
effective with respect to appetite-loss related symptoms, and
boldo and cascara more effective in relieving constipation-related
symptoms.

Two preparations containing extracts of boldo and cascara have
been documented to increase biliary flow without altering the
lithogenic index or bile composition.» Treatment of 12 human
volunteers with boldo dry extract resulted in prolongation of
intestinal transit time.'“* However, the methodological limita-
tions of this small, uncontrolled study do not allow any
conclusions to be drawn on the effects of boldo.

Ascaridole, a component of the volatile oil, previously found a
clinical use as an anthelmintic agent." However, this use has
declined with the development of synthetic compounds with lower
toxicity and a wider range of activity.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Boldo volatile oil is stated to be one of the most toxic oils.'**)

Application of the undiluted oil to the hairle:
an irritant effect." The oil contains irritant terpenes, including
terpinen-4-ol, the irritant principle in juniper oil.

An acute oral LDso value for boldo oil has been given as 0.13 g/
kg body weight in rats, with doses of 0.07 g/kg causing
convulsions.) The acute dermal LDso in rabbits has been
reported as 0.625-1.25 g/kg." No acute toxicity was observed in
rats given oral doses of 3 g/kg of dry aqueous ethanolic extract,
and in mice, an aqueous ethanolic extract (1:1) had an LDso of
6 g/kg (intraperitoneal administration).'©° The LDso values of
total alkaloids and of boldine in mice were 420 and 250 mg/kg
(intraperitoneal administration), re pectively,'°*) Total alkaloids
(intraperitoneal administration) given to dogs produced vomiting,

diarrhoea and epileptic symptoms with a recovery after 50
(G52)

backs of mice has

minutes.

Boldine was not genotoxic as indicated by the SOS chromotest
with Escherichia coli, or in the Ames test, and did not induce
mutations in Saccharomyces cerevisiae." Boldine did not induce
an increase in the frequency of chromosome aberrations in human
lymphocytes in vitro, or in mouse bone marrow cells in vivo.
There were no signs of genotoxicity in mouse bone marrow, as

(16)

assessed by the micro nucleus test.

----- PAGE 104 -----
Contra-indications, Warnings

Excessive doses of boldo may cause renal irritation, because of the
volatile oil, and should be avoided by individuals with an existing
kidney disorder. Boldo is contra-indicated in individuals with
obstruction of bile duct or severe liver disease. Boldo should only
be used in patients with gallstones after consultation with a
physician.“ Ascaridole is toxic and use of the oil is not
recommended. '“**)

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of boldo to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of boldo taken during
pregnancy has not been established. In view of the potential
irritant nature of the volatile oil, the use of boldo during
pregnancy should be avoided.

loerdt. Verdauungstee
Solu-Lipar. Hong Kong: Mucinum Cascara. Italy: Amaro
Medicinale; Caramelle alle Erbe Digestive; Coladren; Colax;
Confetti Lassativi CM; Critichol; Digelax; Dis-Cinil Complex;
Eparema-Levul; Eparema; Eupatol; Hepatos B12; Hepatos;
Magisbile; Mepalax; Solvobil. Mexico: Chofabol; Hepedren

2

10

1

12

13

14

15
16

Boldo

References
1

Urztia A, Acuiia P. Alkaloids from the bark of Peumus boldus.
Fitoterapia 1983; 4: 175-177.

Urzua A, Torres R. 6a,7-Dehydroboldine from the bark of Peumus
boldus. J Nat Prod 1984; 47: 525-526.

Hughes DW e¢ al. Alkaloids of Peumus boldus. Isolation of
laurotetatine and laurolitsine. J Pharm Sci 1968; 57: 1619-1620.
Hughes DW et al. Alkaloids of Peumus boldus. Isolation of (+)-
reticuline and isoboldine. J Pharm Sci 1968; 57: 1023-1025.
Bombardelli E et al. A new flavonol glycoside from Peumus boldus.
Fitoterapia 1976; 46: 3-S.

Krug H, Borkowski B. Neue Flavonol-Glykoside aus den Blattern von
Peumus boldus Molina. Pharmazie 1965; 20: 692-698.

Lanhers MC e¢ al. Hepatoprotective and anti-inflammatory effects of
a traditional medicinal plant of Chile, Pnewmus boldo. Planta Med
1991; 57:110-115.

Cederbaum AI e¢ al. Inhibition of rat liver microsomal lipid
peroxidation by boldine. Biochem Pharmacol 1992; 44: 1765-1772.
Speisky H et al. Activity of boldine on rat ileum. Planta Med 1991; 57:
519-522.

Speisky H et al. Antioxidant properties of the alkaloid boldine in
systems undergoing lipid peroxidation and enzyme inactivation.
Biochem Pharmacol 1991; 41: 1575-1581.

Borgia M et al. Pharmacological activity of a herbs extract: A
controlled clinical study. Curr Ther Res 1981; 29: 525-536.

Borgia M et al. Studio policentrico doppio-cieco doppio-controllato
sull'attivita terapeutica di una nota associazione di erbe
medicamentose. Clin Ter 1985; 114: 401-409.

Salati R et al. Valutazione delle proprieta coleretiche di due preparati
contenenti estratti di boldo e cascara. Minerva Dietol Gastroenterol
1984; 30: 269-272.

Wagner H, Wolff P, eds. New Natural Products and Plant Drugs with
Pharmacological, Biological or Therapeutical Activity. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1977.

Boldo leaf oil. Food Chem Toxicol 1982; 20 (Suppl. Suppl.B): 643.
Moreno PRH et al. Genotoxicity of the boldine aporphine alkaloid in
prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. Mutat Res 1991; 260: 145-152.

----- PAGE 105 -----
= Boneset

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The constituents of boneset are fairly well documented and
include many pharmacologically active classes such as
flavonoids, sesquiterpene lactones (typical for the Asteraceae
family) and triterpenes. Immunostimulant activity (in vitro)
has been reported for sesquiterpene lactone and
polysaccharide components, but there is a lack of rigorous
clinical research assessing the efficacy of boneset. Many
pharmacological studies have focused on the cytotoxic/
antitumour actions of sesquiterpene lactone components of
various Eupatorium species, although these actions have not
been reported for sesquiterpene lactones isolated from
boneset. Little is known regarding the toxicity of boneset.
Hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids, which have been
documented for other Eupatorium species, have not been
reported for boneset.

Species (Family)

Eupatorium perfoliatum L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Common Boneset, Eupatorium chapmanii Small, Feverwort,
Thoroughwort. Snakeroot has been used to describe poisonous
Eupatorium species.

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19830” :
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

(G37)

GSL — as Boneset and Eupatorium.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22, G41 and G48.

Flavonoids Flavonol (kaempferol, quercetin) glycosides including
astragalin, hyperoside and rutin; eupatorin (flavone) and
dihydroflavonols."?

Terpenoids Sesquiterpene lactones including euperfolin and
euperfolitin (germacranolides), eufoliatin (guianolide), eufolia-
torin (dilactone guaiane) and euperfolide.” Sesquiterpenes,
diterpenes (dendroidinic acid, hebeclinolide), triterpenes (a-
amyrin, dotriacontane) and sterols (sitosterol, stigmasterol).

Other constituents Volatile oil, resin, wax, tannic and gallic
acids, bitter glucoside, inulin, polysaccharides and sugars.

Food Use

Boneset is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Boneset is stated to possess diaphoretic and aperient properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for influenza, acute bronchitis,
nasopharyngeal catarrh, and specifically for influenza with deep
aching, and congestion of the respiratory mucosa.(C7°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Herb 1-2 g as an infusion three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 1-2 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Tincture 1-4 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Figure 1 Boneset (Eupatorium perfoliatum).

Figure 2 Boneset — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 106 -----
Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Immunostimulant activity (in vitro stimulation of granulocyte
phagocytic activity) has been demonstrated by high dilutions
(10°-°-10~’ g/100 mL) of various sesquiterpene lactones isolated
from E. perfoliatum.® In addition, immunostimulating actions
(granulocyte, macrophage and carbon clearance tests) have been
documented for polysaccharide fractions from E. perfoliatum.°>

An ethanol extract of the whole plant has exhibited weak anti-
inflammatory activity in rats.(“*” Many activities, including anti-
inflammatory activity, have been documented for flavonoid
compounds.

Clinical studies

None documented. Rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials
assessing the effects of boneset are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Contact dermatitis has been reported for Eupatorium species, but
not specifically for boneset (E. perfoliatum).°? Cytotoxic
properties have been documented for a related species, E.
cannabinum, and are attributed to the sesquiterpene lactone
eupatoriopicrin. This compound has not been documented as a
constituent of boneset. Hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs)
have been isolated from various Eupatorium species, although
none have been documented as constituents of boneset (E.
perfoliatum).”

Instances of allergic and anaphylactic reactions have been
associated with the sesquiterpene lactone constituents in German
chamomile, although no reactions specifically involving boneset
have been documented.

The US Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) has classified
boneset as a herb of undefined safety.(¢?”

Boneset

Contra-indications, Warnings

The allergenic potential of sesquiterpene lactones is well
recognised. Individuals with a known hypersensitivity to other
members of the Asteraceae family (e.g. chamomile, feverfew,
ragwort, tansy) should avoid using boneset. Individuals with
existing hypersensitivities/allergies should use boneset with
caution.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of boneset to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of boneset taken during
pregnancy has not been established. In view of the lack of toxicity
data and the possibility of constituents with allergenic activity, the
use of boneset during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Flavons. UK: Catarrh Mixture.

References

1 Herz W et al. Dihydroflavonols and other flavonoids of Eupatorium
species. Phytochemistry 1972; 11: 2859-2863.

2 Herz W et al. Sesquiterpene lactones of Eupatorium perfoliatum. ]
Org Chem 1977; 42: 2264-2271.

3. Wagner H. Immunostimulants from medicinal plants. In: Chang HM
et al, eds. Advances in Chinese Medicinal Materials Research.
Singapore: World Scientific, 1985: 159-170.

4 Wagner H et al. Immunostimulating polysaccharides (heteroglycans)
of higher plants. Arzneimittelforschung 1985; 35: 1069.

5 Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids. Environmental Health Criteria 80. Geneva:
World Health Organization, 1988.

----- PAGE 107 -----
- Borage

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited information is available on the constituents of borage.
No documented pharmacological data were located to
support the traditional uses, although the mucilage content
supports the use of borage as a demulcent. Interest has
focused on the volatile oil as a source of gamolenic acid.
Borage contains known toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids, although
at concentrations considerably lower than those found in
comfrey for which human toxicity has been documented.
However, it would seem wise to avoid excessive or prolonged
ingestion of borage. It is unclear whether borage oil, currently
available in food supplements, contains any pyrrolizidine
alkaloids.

Species (Family)

Borago officinalis L. (Boraginaceae)

Synonym(s)

Beebread, Bee Plant, Burrage, Starflower (oil)

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BP 2007 :
Martindale 35th edition'@*
Ph Eur 20078?

Legal Category (Licensed Product)

Borage is not included in the GSL.‘@*”

Alkaloids

lycopsamine

CH,
HOA 2a

intermedine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of borage.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22 and Gé4.

Alkaloids Pyrrolizidine-type. Lycopsamine, intermedine, acet-
yllycopsamine, acetylintermedine, amabiline, supinine and thesi-
nine (unsaturated).” Concentrations reported as 0.01% and 2-
10ppm for commercial dried samples. Alkaloid concentrations
reportedly the same for fresh and dried samples; fresh samples
revealed alkaloids as the free base in the roots and mainly as N-

oxides in the leaves.
Mucilages 11.1%. Yielding glucose, galactose and arabinose.
Oil Rich in fatty acids, in particular gamolenic acid.

Other constituents Acids (acetic, lactic, malic, silicic),
cyanogenetic compounds and tannins (up to 3%).

Food Use

Borage is occasionally used in salads and soups.

Herbal Use

Borage is stated to possess diaphoretic, expectorant, tonic, anti-
Traditionally,
borage has been used to treat many ailments including fevers,
coughs and depression. & ° Borage is also reputed to act as a
restorative agent on the adrenal cortex. Borage oil (starflower
oil) is used as an alternative source to evening primrose oil for
gamolenic acid.

inflammatory and_ galactogogue properties.

Figure 2 Borage (Borago officinalis).

----- PAGE 108 -----
Figure 3 Borage — dried drug substance (herb).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Infusion Two 5-mL spoonfuls of dried herb to one cup boiling
water three times daily.

Tincture 1—4mL three times daily.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Borage oil has been reported to attenuate cardiovascular reactivity
to stress in rats.

Clinical studies

The effect of borage seed oil on the cardiovascular reactivity of
humans to acute stress has been studied in 10 individuals, who
each received a total daily dose of 1.3g for 28 days. The
individuals were required to undertake an acute psychological task
requiring sensory intake and vigilance (Stroop colour test). Borage
oil was found to attenuate cardiovascular reactivity to stress,
indicated by a reduction in systolic blood pressure and heart rate
and by increased task performance. The specific mechanisms by
which borage exerts this effect were unknown, but a central
mechanism of action of the fatty acids was suggested in view of
the simultaneous reduction in heart rate and blood pressure.“

Borage

Side-effects, Toxicity
None documented. However, borage contains low concentrations
of unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids, which are known to be

hepatotoxic in both animals and humans (see Comfrey).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Evening primrose oil is recommended to be used with caution in
epileptic patients, especially in those with schizophrenia and/or
those taking phenothiazines (see Evening Primrose); on the basis
that borage oil, like evening primrose oil, also contains high
concentrations of gamolenic acid, borage oil should also be used
with caution in these patient groups. In view of the known toxic
pyrrolizidine alkaloid constituents, excessive or prolonged inges-
tion of borage should be avoided. In particular, infusions (e.g.
herbal teas) containing borage should be avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of borage to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

In view of the documented

Pregnancy and _ lactation
pyrrolizidine constituents and lack of toxicity data, borage should
not be used during pregnancy or lactation.

roprietary single-i
Chile: Dexol.

ingredient preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Chile: Celltech Gold. Italy: Sclerovis H. New Zealand: Mr
Nits. USA: Borage Oil; Omega-3 Complex; Omega-3 Gluco-
samine.

References

1 Luthry J e¢ al. Pyrrolizidin-Alkaloide in Arzneipflanzen der
Boraginaceen: Borago officinalis and Pulmonaria officinalis. Pharm
Acta Helv 1984; 59: 242-246.

2. Larsen KM et al. Unsaturated pyrrolizidines from Borage (Borage
officinalis) a common garden herb. J Nat Prod 1984; 47: 747-748.

3 Hoffman D. The Herb Users Guide, the Basic Skills of Medical
Herbalism. Wellingborough: Thorsons, 1987.

4 Mills DE. Dietary fatty acid supplementation alters stress reactivity
and performance in man. J Hum Hypertens 1989; 3: 111-116.

5 Mattock AR. Chemistry and Toxicology of Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids.
London: Academic Press, 1986.

----- PAGE 109 -----
- Broom

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of broom is reasonably well documented. The
pharmacological actions are primarily due to the alkaloid
constituents. Sparteine, the major alkaloid component, is a
cardiac depressant with actions similar to those of quinidine.
Although these actions support some of the documented
traditional herbal uses, there is a lack of rigorous clinical
research assessing the effects of broom. The intended uses of
broom are not suitable for self-medication.

Species (Family)

Cytisus scoparius (L.) Link

Synonym(s)

Hogweed, Sarothamnus scoparius (L.) Koch, Scoparius, Spartium
scoparium L.

Part(s) Used
Flowerhead

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'@*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Broom is not included in the GSL.“@?”

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G40, G41, G48, G62 and Gé4.

Alkaloids Quinolizidine-type. 0.8-1.5%. Sparteine 0.3-0.8%
(major component); minor alkaloids include cytisine (presence
disputed), genisteine (d-c-isosparteine), lupanine, oxysparteine
and sarothamine.

Alkaloids

H

no

H

(-)-sparteine

(+)-lupanine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of broom.

Amines Epinine, hydroxytyramine and tyramine.
Flavonoids Scoparin and vitexin.

Other constituents Amino acids, bitter principles, carotenoids,
fat, resin, sugars, tannin, wax and volatile oil.

Food Use

Broom is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that broom
can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted manner,
although there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity.(@'?

Herbal Use

Broom is stated to possess cardioactive, diuretic, peripheral
vasoconstrictor and antihaemorrhagic properties. It has been used
for cardiac dropsy, myocardial weakness, tachycardia, profuse

menstruation and specifically for functional palpitation with
lowered blood pressure.
possess emetic and cathartic properties.

(C2676) Broom is also reported to

(G41)

Figure 2 Broom (Cytisus scoparius).

Figure 3. Broom — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 110 -----
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried tops 1-2 as a decoction.'°”

Liquid extract 1-2mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol).'©?
Tincture 0.5-2.0mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol).'°”

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological actions of broom are primarily due to the
alkaloid constituents.

In vitro and animal studies

Sparteine is reported to exhibit pharmacological actions similar to
those of quinidine. Low doses administered to animals result in
tachycardia, whereas high doses cause bradycardia and may lead
to ventricular arrest. Sparteine has little effect on the central
nervous system (CNS), but peripherally, paralyses motor nerve
terminals and sympathetic ganglia as a result of a curare-like

action.‘

Clinical studies

None documented for broom. The major alkaloid constituent
sparteine is known to decrease the irritability and conductivity of
cardiac muscle and has been used to treat cardiac arrhyth-
mias,“““ restoring normal rhythm in previously arrhythmic
patients.” Sparteine is reported to have a quinidine-like action
rather than a digitalis-like action.'©” Sparteine is also stated to be
a powerful oxytocic drug, which was once used to stimulate
uterine contractions.

Broom

Side-effects, Toxicity

The alkaloid constituents in broom are toxic. Sparteine sulfate has
been reported to be a cardiac depressant and can also produce
respiratory arrest.'(“®® Symptoms of poisoning are characterised
by tachycardia with circulatory collapse, nausea, diarrhoea,
vertigo and stupor.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Broom is stated to be inappropriate for non-professional use.‘°?)

Its use is contra-indicated in individuals with high blood
ressure) or a cardiac disorder, because of the alkaloid
constituents.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
reparations of broom to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Sparteine is contra-indicated during
regnancy; therefore, broom should not be used during pregnancy
in view of its sparteine content.'“™ Sparteine is stated to be a
owerful oxytocic drug and is cardiotoxic. Broom should not be
taken during lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

France: Creme Rap.

----- PAGE 111 -----
= Buchu

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited chemical data are available for buchu. No scientific
evidence was found to justify the herbal uses, although
reputed diuretic and anti-inflammatory activities may be
attributable to the irritant nature of the volatile oil and the
flavonoid components, respectively. In view of the lack of
documented toxicity data, together with the presence of
pulegone in the volatile oil, excessive use of buchu should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Agathosma betulina (Berg.) Pillans (Rutaceae)

Synonym(s)

Barosma betulina, Folia Bucco, Hartogia betulina Berg., Round
Buchu, Short Buchu

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”)

Martindale 35th edition'**

Flavonoids

Rutinosyl-O.

OH O

diosmin (diosmetin-7-rutinoside)

Monoterpenes

OH
ra
° °
H
diosphenol (-)-pulegone
S
°
-—aN
(+)-menthone limonene

Figure 1 Selected constituents of buchu.

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL‘°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G22, G41 and G48.

Flavonoids Diosmetin, quercetin, diosmin, quercetin-3,7-diglu-
coside, rutin.

Volatile oils 1.0-3.5%. Over 100 identified compounds, including
diosphenol, limonene, menthone and pulegone as the major
components.

Other constituents Mucilage, resin. Coumarins have been
reported for many other Agathosma species.”

Food Use

Buchu is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category allows buchu to be
added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted manner, although
there is insufficient information available for an adequate

assessment of potential toxicity.C'? In the USA, buchu volatile

oil is approved for food use with concentrations usually up to
about 0.002% (15.4 ppm).“C1% 4)

Herbal Use

Buchu is stated to possess urinary antiseptic and diuretic
properties. It has been used for cystitis, urethritis, prostatitis,
and specifically for acute catarrhal cystitis.'C? 67% So

Fd

Figure 2 Buchu (Agathosma betulina).

----- PAGE 112 -----
Figure 3 Buchu - dried drug substance (leaf).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard reference texts are given below.
Dried leaf 1-2 g by infusion three times daily.“C%°”
Liquid extract 0.3-1.2 mL (1:1 in 90% alcohol).“0%°”

Tincture 2—4mL (1:5 in 60% alcohol).“C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for buchu. Diosmin has documented anti-
inflammatory activity against carrageenan-induced rat paw
oedema, at a dose of 600 mg/kg body weight.”

Clinical studies

None documented. Rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials
assessing the effects of buchu are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented for buchu. The volatile oil contains pulegone, a
known hepatotoxin (see Pennyroyal).(©? The oil may cause
gastrointestinal and renal irritation.

Buchu

Contra-indications, Warnings

Excessive doses of buchu should not be taken in view of the
potential toxicity of the volatile oil. It has been stated that buchu
should be avoided in kidney infections, although the scientific
basis for this is not clear.”

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of buchu to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of buchu has not been
established. In view of this, together with the potential toxicity
and irritant action of the volatile oil, the use of buchu during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Support; Serenoa Complex; Urinase; Uva-Ursi Complex.
Canada: Herbal Diuretic. Czech Republic: Epilobin. France:
Urophytum. New Zealand: De Witts Pills. South Africa:
Borstol Cough Remedy; Doans Backache Pills; Docrub.
Switzerland: Heparfelien; Urinex. UK: Antitis; Backache;
Backache Relief; Buchu Backache Compound Tablets; De
Witt's K & B Pills; Diuretabs; Fenneherb Cystaid; HRI Water
Balance; Kas-Bah; Roberts Black Willow Compound Tablets;
Skin Eruptions Mixture; Watershed. USA: Water Pill.

References

1 Campbell WE e¢ al. Coumarins of the Rutoideae: tribe Diosmeae.
Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 655-657.

2 Farnsworth NR, Cordell GA. A review of some biologically active
compounds isolated from plants as reported in the 1974-1975
literature. Lloydia 1976, 39: 420-455.

----- PAGE 113 -----
Burdock

erbal uses and there is a lack of rigorous clinical researc!
assessing the effects of burdock. Documented bitter
constituents, however, may explain the traditional use of
burdock as an orexigenic. In view of the lack of toxicity data,
excessive use of burdock should be avoided.

Species (Family)
Arctium lappa L.

Synonym(s)

Arctium majus Bernh., Bardanae Radix, Greater Burdock

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°®
BHP 1996”) ;
Martindale 35th edition'**?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6 and G75.

Acids Acetic acid, butyric acid, caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid,
gamma-guanidino-n-butyric acid, %-guanidino-n-isovaleric acid,
trans-2-hexenoic acid, isovaleric acid, lauric acid, linoleic acid,
linolenic acid, myristic acid, oleic acid, palmitic acid, propionic
acid, stearic acid and tiglic acid.‘

Aldehydes Acctaldehyde, benzaldehyde, butyraldehyde, caproic-
aldehyde, isovaleraldehyde, propionaldehyde and valeraldehyde.'?

Carbohydrates Inulin (up to 45-50%), mucilage, pectin and
sugars.

Polyacetylenes 0.001-0.002% dry weight. Fourteen identified
compounds include  1,11-tridecadiene-3,5,7,9-tetrayne (50%),
1,3,11-tridecatriene-5,7,9-triyne (30%) and 1-tridecen-3,5,7,9,11-
pentayne as the major components.”

Terpenoids Sesquiterpenes arctiol, B-eudesmol, fukinone, costus
acid, dehydrocostus lactone, arctiopicrin.”

Thiophenes — Arctinone-a, arctinone-b, arctinol-a, arctinol-b,
arctinal, arctic acid-b, arctic acid-c, methyl arctate-b and
arctinone-a acetate (sulfur-containing acetylenic compounds).'°”

Sesquiterpenes

arctiol

H

fukinone

le}
dehydrocostus lactone

Thiophenes

H3C—==

arctinone-a
arctinol
arctinal
arctic acid

-CH20H
-CHOHCH20H
-CHO

-COOH

Polyenes
ner SS cu (Geel cote
H H

trideca-1,11-diene-3,5,7,9-tetrayne
Lignan

HCO

CT

OCH3

R-O

‘OCH;

R
arctiin glucosyl
arctigenin H

Figure 1

B-eudesmol

O2H

costus acid

Polysaccharide

HO. oO

HO
Sd
inulin
(30-35 D-fructose residues)

Selected constituents of burdock.

----- PAGE 114 -----
Other constituents Fats (0.4-0.8%), fixed and volatile oils (0.07—

0.18%), bitters (lappatin), resin, phytosterols (sitosterol and

stigmasterol), tannin® and arctiin, arctigenin and other lig-
_ (9-12)

nans.

Other species Flavonol (kaempferol, quercetin) glycosides are
present in Arctium minus (Hill) Bernh.)

Food Use

Burdock is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
burdock can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.“@!

Herbal Use

Burdock is stated to possess diuretic and orexigenic properties. It
has been used for cutaneous eruptions, rheumatism, cystitis, gout,

anorexia nervosa, and specifically for eczema and psoriasis.‘
G6, G7, G8, G60)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried root 2-6g by infusion three times daily.'C”

Liquid extract 2-8 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”
Tincture 8-12 mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(@”)

Decoction 500 mL (1:20) per day.'°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The roots and leaves of burdock plants not yet flowering are stated
to possess diuretic, hypoglycaemic and antifurunculous proper-
ties.” A burdock extract (plant part not stated) was reported to
cause a sharp, long-lasting reduction in the blood sugar
concentration in rats, together with an increase in carbohydrate
tolerance and a reduction in toxicity.

The antimicrobial activity documented for burdock has been
attributed to the polyacetylene constituents, although only
traces of these compounds are found in the dried commercial

Figure 2 Burdock (Arctium lappa).

Burdock

herb.'C® Furthermore, arctiopicrin is stated to be a bitter with
antibiotic activity against Gram-positive bacteria.” Antibac-
terial activity against Gram-positive (e.g. Staphylococcus aureus,
Bacillus subtilis, Mycobacterium smegmatis) and Gram-negative
(Escherichia coli, Shigella flexneri, Shigella sonnei) bacteria has
been documented for burdock leaf and flower, whereas the root
was only found to be active towards Gram-negative strains.'!)
In vivo uterine stimulant activity has been reported.'@*”
Protection against mutagenic activity has also been documented
for burdock.!%'” Burdock reduced the mutagenicity to
Salmonella typhimurium (TA98, TA100) of mutagens both
requiring and not requiring $9 metabolic activation." A
lignan-like structure was proposed for the desmutagenic factor.)
In vivo studies have shown that fresh or boiled plant juice from
burdock may cause a significant reduction in DMBA-induced
chromosome aberrations."
Burdock has been reported to exhibit antitumour activity."'*
The addition of dietary fibre (5%) from burdock roots to the
diet of rats has been documented to provide protection against the
toxicity of various artificial food colours.”

)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of burdock
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

A single report of human poisoning initially associated with
burdock has been documented.°” The patient exhibited symp-
toms of atropine-like poisoning following the ingestion of a
commercially packaged burdock root tea. However, atropine is
not a constituent of burdock, and subsequent analysis indicated
that the tea was contaminated with a herbal source of solanaceous
alkaloids, possibly belladonna leaf. This report served to highlight
the problems which may arise with inadequate quality control of
herbal preparations.
The carcinogenicity of burdock was investigated in 12 rats fed
dried roots (33% of diet) for 120 days, followed by a normal diet
until 480 days.°" Ten of the 12 rats survived 480 days and no
tumours were detected. A urinary bladder papilloma and an
oligodendroglioma were observed in one rat, but these were
considered to have been induced spontaneously.

Burdock has been reported to exhibit antitumour properties
(see In vitro and animal studies).

----- PAGE 115 -----
Burdock

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
burdock to interact with other medicines administered concur-
rently, particularly those with similar or opposing effects, should
be considered. For example, there is limited evidence from
preclinical studies that burdock (not further specified) has
hypoglycaemic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation In vivo uterine stimulant action has
been reported.(@*”) In view of this, and the lack of toxicity data,

the use of burdock during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Cascade; Catarrh Mixture; GB Tablets; Gerard House Skin;
Gerard House Water Relief Tablets; HRI Clear Complexion;
Modern Herbals Water Retention; Napiers Skin Tablets;
Rheumatic Pain Remedy; Skin Cleansing; Skin Eruptions
Mixture; Tabritis; Tabritis Tablets; Water Naturtabs. USA:
Liver Formula Herbal Blend; Skin Hair Nails.

References

1 Obata S e¢ al. Studies on the components of the roots of Arctium
lappa L. Agric Biol Chem 1970; 34: A31.

2 Yamada Y e¢ al. y-Guanidino-n-butyric acid from Arctium lappa.
Phytochemistry 1975; 14: 582.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

Saleh NAM, Bohm BA. Flavonoids of Arctium minus (Compositae).
Experientia 1971; 27: 1494.

Schulte KE et al. Polyacetylenes in burdock root.
Arzneimittelforschung 1967; 17: 829-833.

Bever BO, Zahnd GR. Plants with oral hypoglycaemic action. O J
Crude Drug Res 1979; 17: 139-196.

Washino T et al. New sulfur-containing acetylenic compounds from
Arctium lappa. Agric Biol Chem 1986; 50: 263-269.

Washino T et al. Structures of lappaphen-a and lappaphen-b, new
guaianolides linked with a sulfur-containing acetylenic compound,
from Arctium lappa L. Agric Biol Chem 1987; 51: 1475-1480.
Nakabayashi T. Tannin of fruits and vegetables. III. Polyphenolic
compounds and phenol-oxidising enzymes of edible burdock. Nippon
Shokuhin Kogyo Gakkaishi 1968; 15: 199-206.

Morita K et al. Chemical nature of a desmutagenic factor from
burdock (A. lappa L.). Agric Biol Chem 1985; 49: 925-932.

Ichihara A e¢ al. Lappaol A and B, novel lignans from Arctium lappa
L. Tetrahedron Lett 1976; 44: 3961-3964.

Ichihara A et al. New sesquilignans from Arctium lappa L. The
structure of lappaol C, D and E. Agric Biol Chem 1977; 41: 1813—
1814.

Liu S et al. Isolation and identification of arctiin and arctigenin in
leaves of burdock (Arctium lappa L.) by polyamide column
chromotography in combination with HPLC-ESI/MS. Phytochemical
Anal 2005; 16: 86-89.

Lapinina LO, Sisoeva TE. Investigation of some plants to determine
their sugar lowering action. Farmatsevt Zh 1964; 19: 52-58.
Cappelletti EM et al. External antirheumatic and antineuralgic herbal
remedies in the traditional medicine of North-eastern Italy. J
Ethnopharmacol 1982; 6: 161-190.

Moskalenko SA. Preliminary screening of far-eastern ethnomedicinal
plants for antibacterial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15: 231-259.
Morita K et al. Desmutagenic factor isolated from burdock (Arctium
lappa L.). Mutat Res 1984; 129: 25-31.

Ito Y et al. Suppression of 7,12-dimethylbenz(a) anthracene-induced
chromosome aberrations in rat bone marrow cells by vegetable juices.
Mutat Res 1986; 172: 55-60.

Dombradi CA, Foldeak $. Anti-tumor activity of A. lappa ext. Tumori
1966; 52: 173-175.

Tsujita J et al. Comparison of protective activity of dietary fiber
against the toxicities of various food colors in rats. Nutr Rep Int 1979;
20: 635-642.

Bryson PD et al. Burdock root tea poisoning. Case report involving a
commercial preparation. JAMA 1978; 239: 2157-2158.

Hirono | et al. Safety examination of some edible plants, Part 2. J
Environ Pathol Toxicol 1977; 1: 72-74.

----- PAGE 116 -----
- Burnet

“Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of burnet herb does not appear to have been
studied, although data are available for the underground
plant parts. If present in the herb as well as the root, the
tannin constituents would support the reputed astringent and
antihaemorrhagic actions of burnet. In view of the lack of
toxicity data and the possible high tannin content of the herb,
excessive use of burnet should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Sanguisorba officinalis L. (Rosaceae)
Synonym(s)

Garden Burnet, Greater Burnet, Poterium officinale A. Gray,
Sanguisorba, Sanguisorba polygama F. Nyl

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983‘?

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL (Sanguisorba)'”

Figure 1

Burnet (Sanguisorba officinalis).

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G40.

All phytochemical data located refer to the underground plant
parts and not to the herb.

Flavonoids Flavones, unstable flavonol derivatives.

Saponins Ziyu glycosides I and II (major glycosides), pomolic
acid as aglycone (not tomentosolic acid as documented in earlier
work), sanguisorbin 2.5-4.0%.

Tannins Numerous compounds (condensed and hydrolysable)
have been isolated, including 3,3,4-tri-O-methylellagic acid.? ”

Other constituents Volatile oil, ascorbic acid (vitamin C) in the
fresh plant.

Food Use

Burnet is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Burnet is stated to possess astringent, antihaemorrhagic, styptic
and antihaemorrhoidal properties. It has been used for ulcerative
colitis, metrorrhagia, and specifically for acute diarrhoea.'C7 °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried herb 2-6 g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Liquid extract 2-6 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Tincture 2-8 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'©”

Figure 2 Burnet — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 117 -----
Burnet

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for burnet. The roots have been reported to

contain an antihaemorrhagic principle, 3,3,4-tri-O-methylellagic
id.2

acid.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of burnet
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of research assessing
the safety and toxicity profile of burnet.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. However, there is a lack of research assessing
the safety and toxicity profile of burnet.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of burnet to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of phytochemical,
pharmacological and toxicity data, the use of burnet during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Canada: Swiss Herb Cough Drops. Czech Republic: Tormen-
tan.

References

1 Yosioka I et al. Soil bacterial hydrolysis leading to genuine aglycone.
Ill. The structures of glycosides and genuine aglycone of Sanguisorbae
radix. Chem Pharm Bull 1971; 19: 1700-1707.

2. Kosuge T et al. Studies on antihemorrhagic substances in herbs
classified as hemostatics in Chinese medicine. II]. On the
antihemorrhagic principle in Sanguisorba officinalis L. Chem Pharm
Bull 1984; 32: 4478-4481.

3 Nonaka G-I et al. Tannins and related compounds. XVII.
Galloylhamameloses from Castanea crenata L. and Sanguisorba
officinalis L. Chem Pharm Bull 1984; 32: 483-489.

4 Nonaka G-I et al. A dimeric hydrolyzable tannin, sanguiin H-6 from
Sanguisorba officinalis L. Chem Pharm Bull 1982; 30: 2255-2257.

5S Tanaka T et al. Tannins and related compounds. XVI. Isolation and
characterization of six methyl glucoside gallates and a gallic acid
glucoside gallate from Sanguisorba officinalis L. Chem Pharm Bull
1984; 32: 117-121.

6 Tanaka T et al. 7-O-galloyl-(+)-catechin and 3-O-galloylprocyanidin
B-3 from Sanguisorba officinalis. Phytochemistry 1983; 22: 2575-2578.

----- PAGE 118 -----
- Butterbur

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of butterbur is well documented. There is
evidence from preclinical studies to indicate that the
eremophilane sesquiterpene constituents (e.g. petasin and
isopetasin), found in the petasin chemovar, are important for
activity. However, there are some conflicting reports and it is
not clear precisely which constituents are most active.
Furthermore, certain activities have been documented for the
furanoeremophilane sesquiterpenes found in the
furanopetasin chemovar of Petasites hybridus.

There is evidence from preclinical studies of the anti-
inflammatory, anti-allergic and antispasmodic properties of
butterbur extracts and/or their constituents, hence
supporting some of the traditional uses. Precise mechanisms
of action have not yet been elucidated, although inhibition of
leukotriene synthesis, phospholipase A activity and 5-
lipoxygenase translocation, and effects on intracellular
calcium ion concentrations have been documented in in vitro
studies. The implications of binding of certain butterbur
constituents at dopamine Dz, histamine H; and muscarinic
receptors, described following in vitro studies, require further
investigation.

There is a paucity of well-designed, randomised clinical
trials of butterbur extracts. Existing trials generally have
involved individuals with seasonal allergic rhinitis and
migraine and have tested the effects of only a small number
of herbal medicinal products containing butterbur extracts.
While most of these studies have reported beneficial effects
for butterbur extracts, methodologically rigorous
investigation of efficacy in allergic rhinitis and migraine
prophylaxis is limited and large, well-designed clinical trials
are required. Similarly, at present, there is insufficient
evidence from randomised clinical trials to support the use of
butterbur extracts in patients with asthma and bronchitis.

There is also only limited information on the safety of
butterbur extracts and further investigation in this area is
required. On the basis of small, randomised clinical trials,
certain butterbur extracts appear to be well-tolerated when
taken at recommended doses for relatively short periods
(clinical studies have involved ingestion for up to four
months); adverse events reported most frequently are
gastrointestinal symptoms. Chronic toxicity studies are
lacking, and there is a lack of clinical information on the safety
of long-term use. Against this background, butterbur should
not be used for long periods, nor at higher than
recommended doses (see below). Spontaneous reports of
liver damage associated with the use of a butterbur root
extract have been received in Germany. On the basis of this
information, the Swiss regulatory authority for medicines
revoked the licences for certain butterbur products marketed
in Switzerland.

No drug interactions have been reported for butterbur
extracts. Based on data from preclinical studies, there is a
theoretical possibility that butterbur extracts potentially could
interact with hypertensive and antihypertensive medicines,

leukotriene receptor antagonists and agonists/antagonists at
dopamine Dz, histamine H; and muscarinic M3 receptors.

Both chemotypes (petasin and furanopetasin) of P. hybridus
contain unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids, and these
compounds occur in low concentrations throughout all parts
of the plant.'® These constituents are known to be
hepatotoxic in humans, and have been shown to be
carcinogenic and mutagenic in preclinical studies (see
Comfrey). Several manufacturers of products containing
butterbur include in their manufacturing processes steps to
remove the unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids to
concentrations below the detectable limit (e.g. <35 parts per
billion). However, there remains the possibility that toxic
quantities of unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids may be
present in poorly processed products, and any products
which contain Petasites species as a result of botanical
misidentification or adulteration.

There is a view that butterbur is unsuitable for use as a tea
or infusion.% This is because the N-oxides of unsaturated
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, which can be formed from unsaturated
pyrrolizidine alkaloids during storage of plant material but
which can also be present in raw plant material, are more
water soluble than the parent compounds and are, therefore,
extracted more easily during preparations of herbal teas and
infusions.(¢'?

The dose of butterbur should be such that the daily intake
of unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids, including their N-
oxides, is not greater than 1 ,g.“C» The duration of use of
butterbur should not exceed a total of 4-6 weeks in a year.“©»

Species (Family)

Petasites hybridus (L.) P. Gaertn., B. Meyer et Scherb. (Asteraceae/
Compositae).

Synonym(s)

Blatterdock, Bogshorns, Bog rhubarb, Butterdock, Butterfly Dock,
Capdockin, Flapperdock, P. officinalis Moench, P. ovatus Hill, P.
sabaudus Beauv., P. vulgaris Desf., Umbrella Plant'‘C™

Part(s) Used

Aerial parts, leaf, rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
G3)

German Commission E (root and leaf).
. < (G85
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Butterbur is not on the GSL. There are no licensed products
containing butterbur available in the UK.

Constituents

Two chemovars of P. hybridus have been described, which differ
markedly in the profile of sesquiterpenes present in the root/

----- PAGE 119 -----
Butterbur

rhizome and leaf. The furanopetasin chemovar contains furanoer-
emophilane sesquiterpenes, whereas the petasin chemovar con-
tains esters of the eremophilane sesquiterpenes petasol, isopetasol
and neopetasol.'') The furanopetasin chemovar contains exclu-
sively furanoeremophilane sesquiterpenes: petasin sesquiterpenes
are not found in this chemovar.**) Eremophilanlactones have
been reported as constituents of the furanopetasin chemovar,\”
but it has been shown that they are produced by rearrangement of
9-hydroxy-furanoeremophilanes during storage of raw plant
material.

Both chemotypes contain unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids,
and these compounds occur throughout all parts of the plant.‘@!”)

Leaf

Alkaloids Pyrrolizidine type, mainly senecionine and integerri-
Content may vary from 0.02-1.50 parts per million
(ppm), or <0.1-3.9 or 27.7ppm (for leaves and leafstalks,
respectively).

mine.

Flavonoids Astragalin, isoquercitrin, quercetin.'©”
Sesquiterpenes Furanopetasin chemovar: furanoeremophilane
type, including 9-hydroxy-furanoeremophilanes and 9-oxo-fura-
noeremophilanes.” Petasin chemovar: eremophilane type, mainly
petasin and neopetasin (2.8 and 1.9 mg/g of dried plant material,
respectively), also isopetasin, and the sulfur-containing com-
pounds neo-S-petasin, S-petasin and iso-S-petasin (= S-isopetasin;
trace).

Other constituents Tannins, mucilage, volatile oil (about 0.1%),
triterpenoid saponins (traces).'°?

Rhizome, root

Alkaloids Pyrrolizidine type, mainly senecionine, its isomer
integerrimine and senkirkine."?) Concentration can vary from 2-
500 ppm."!? Values reported following specific investigations
include 5-90 ppm and 6-105 (mean 49.2) ppm (calculated as
senecionine) Aa
been reported as 11.3 and 25.8 ppm, respectively.')

concentrations of senecionine and senkirkine have

Sesquiterpenes Furanopetasin chemovar: furanoeremophilane
type,” mainly furanopetasin and 9-hydroxy-furanoeremophilane
(approximately 16-21% and 30-37%, respectively), as well as
furanoeremophilane, 2-senecioyl-furanopetasol, 2-tigloyl-furano-
petasol and 2-methylthioacryloyl-furanopetasol (6-10%). Peta-
sin chemovar: eremophilane type, mainly petasin (9.4, 7.0 and
7.0 mg/g of dried plant material for rhizomes, roots and runners,
respectively), also isopetasin, neopetasin, iso-S-petasin, neo-S-
petasin and S-petasin.") Minor compounds include 3-methylcro-
tonyl- and methacryloyl-esters of petasol, neopetasol, isopetasol,
3-desoxyneopetasol and 3-desoxyisopetasol.”

Volatile oil A mixture of at least 26 compounds of which 1-
nonene, 1-undecene, albene, furanoeremophilane and fukinano-
lide are major components; minor compounds include the novel
sesquiterpene hydrocarbons petasitene and pethybrene.

Quality of crude material and marketed products

As with other medicinal plants, the profile of constituents in
different parts of P hybridus can vary both qualitatively and
quantitatively depending on various factors, and this has
implications for safety and efficacy. The petasin content of the
underground parts of plants (petasin chemovar) grown in four

different locations in Switzerland ranged from 6.6-13.8 mg/g
across regions. Furthermore, although plants showed an
approximately similar relative distribution of the six main petasin
uiterpenes (petasin, isopetasin, neopetasin, iso-S-petasin, neo-
S-petasin and S-petasin), there were exceptions: for example, in
plants grown in the Krauchthal region, the content of S-petasin
was approximately half that of neo-S-petasin, whereas in plants
grown in the Chessiloch region, S-petasin content was greater
than that of neo-S-petasin. Raised temperatures and storage
conditions also affect the profile of constituents in P hybridus
(petasin chemovar) roots. Under moderate drying conditions
(40°C in the dark), isomerisation occurs: sesquiterpene esters with
petasol and neopetasol skeletons form the corresponding esters
with isopetasin skeletons.!) The isomerisation of neopetasin to
petasin occurs more readily than that of petasin to isopet;
(half-life for neopetasin and petasin: 49 and 205 days, respec-
tively). In the furanopetasin chemovar, 9-hydroxy-furanoeremo-
philanes rearrange to the corresponding eremophilanlactones
during drying and storage of raw plant material.

Some manufacturers of herbal medicinal products containing
butterbur state that the unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids are
removed from the product before it is released for sale." One
method used to achieve acceptably low concentrations (the
German Commission E advised that the maximum daily intake
is 1pg)'C? of these alkaloids is by multiple applications of a
method involving a cation-exchange resin;'”) other methods of
separating pyrrolizidine alkaloids from several plants, including P.
hybridus, containing these compounds have been described." A
different approach to achieving extremely low concentrations of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids is to cultivate clones of wild-type plants
previously selected for almost absence of these constituents.
Achievement of an initial step — in vitro propagation of wild-type
plants — in this approach has been documented."'®”

sin

Food Use

Butterbur is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Butterbur root has been used traditionally for the treatment of
fevers, wheezing and colds and as a diuretic and vermifuge.'?
It is also reputed to be a heart stimulant, cardiac tonic and
antispasmodic, and to promote menstruation. It has been used
externally for treating persistent sores and other skin problems.

Butterbur root was approved by the German Commission E for
use as supportive therapy for acute spastic pain in the urinary
tract, particularly if urinary stones were present.“ Modern-day
use of butterbur and clinical trials of products containing
butterbur have focused on its use in seasonal allergic rhinitis
and migraine prophylaxis.

Dosage

The German Commission E advised that the dose of butterbur
should be such that the daily intake of unsaturated pyrrolizidine
alkaloids, including their N-oxides, is not greater than 1 pg.'(@?)
The duration of use of butterbur should not exceed a total of 4-6
weeks in a year.)

As an antispasmodic and for other traditional uses

Dosages described in the herbal literature are typically prepara-
tions equivalent to 4.5—7 g dried butterbur root daily in the form
of an ethanolic or lipophilic extract.'(©>

----- PAGE 120 -----
Butterbur

Sesquiterpenes
Petasin chemovar

Eremophilanes

Act . Ack
° ° R

petasol neopetasol isopetasol OH

petasin neopetasin isopetasin angeloyl

S-petasin S-neopetasin Sisopetasin cis-3-thio-
methylacryloyl

Other esters include 3-methylcrotonoyl, methacryloyl, trans-3-thiomethylacroyl

poompes

3-desoxyneopetasol 3-desoxyisopetasol

Furanopetasin chemovar
Furanoeremophilanes

R! Re

furanoeremophilane H H
Vi 9-hydroxyeremophilane H OH
} a¢ furanopetasin ang OH
2 H RI 2-senecioylfuranopetasol sen OH
Re 2-tigloylfuranopetasol tig OH
2-methylthioacryloylpetasol mta OH

9-oxofuranoeremophilane H fe}

9-oxofuranopetasin ang O°

Eremophilanlactones

9-hydroxyturano- _dtying >=
eremophilanes storage
° R
H H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of butterbur.

Alkaloids

Esterifying acids of sesquiterpenes

° °
wy Ne \ \
N N

angelic acid tiglic acid intergerrimine
dA i
HO 4 HO
methylcrotonic acid isobutyric acid
0 sm °
H we H KAN 37
cis-thiomethy! trans-thiomethyl!
acrylic acid acrylic acid senkirkine

Figure 2 Selected constituents of butterbur. Figure 3 Selected constituents of butterbur.

----- PAGE 121 -----
Butterbur

Figure 4 Butterbur (Petasites hybridus).

Figure 6 Butterbur - dried drug substance (leaf)

Dosages of butterbur extract used in clinical trials have varied.
In trials involving adults with seasonal allergic rhinitis, one study
used a butterbur root extract (containing not less than 15%
petasins calculated as isopetasin; Petaforce) (D Martin, Bioforce
(UK) Ltd, personal communication, 10 June 2004) 50mg twice
daily for two weeks,?” whereas another study tested a butterbur
leaf extract (ZE-339) one tablet four times daily (equivalent to
32mg petasins daily) for two weeks.°” Trials of butterbur in
migraine prophylaxis have tested a carbon dioxide extract of
butterbur rhizome (Petadolex) at doses of 50 or 75 mg twice daily

(equivalent to at least 15 or 22.5 mg petasins daily, respectively) for
12 or 16 weeks.°**)

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological activities, including anti-inflammatory,
anti-allergic and antispasmodic effects, have been described for
butterbur root/rhizome and leaf following preclinical studies.
Extracts of butterbur have been tested clinically in patients with
seasonal and perennial allergic rhinitis (hayfever), bronchial
asthma and chronic obstructive bronchitis, and in prophylaxis
of migraine headaches. The precise chemical constituents
responsible for the documented effects of butterbur are not
clearly understood, although several preclinical studies have
shown that the petasin constituents, such as petasin and
isopetasin, are important for certain pharmacological activities.
These compounds may have several intracellular targets, and there
is some evidence that the stereoisomers may have different
affinities at these, even bringing about different effects.)
However, other in vitro studies have reported that petasin is
inactive,**) and activities for the furanoeremophilane and
eremophilanlactone constituents have been documented.?”

Published papers and texts often use the words root and
rhizome interchangeably, although this is not strictly correct. This
monograph uses terms exactly as published in the reference
material, since it is not possible to say otherwise with certainty
precisely which plant part was meant. Published reports also often
fail to state which chemovar of P. hybridus was used.

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics Petasins have been shown to be bioavailable
following studies in rabbits fed butterbur leaf extract (containing
50 mg petasin) twice daily for seven days; petasins were detected
by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) within the
low nanogram range.°”

Anti-allergic and anti-inflammatory properties Inhibition of
peptido-leukotriene (LT) biosynthesis in murine peritoneal
macrophages has been documented following in vitro experiments
using several different extracts of butterbur root and leaf.?57) A
petroleum ether extract of PR hybridus ground root showed the
greatest inhibitory activity of LT synthesis from mouse peritoneal
macrophages stimulated with calcium ionophore A23187
(10~° mol/L): 12.6, 95.1 and 100% inhibition at concentrations
of P. hybridus extract of 6.3, 31.0 and 94.0 g/mL, respectively (p
< 0.01 versus control).°°) By contrast, a pyrrolizidine alkaloid-
free extract showed no activity in this assay, and the addition of
the pyrrolizidine alkaloids senkirkine and senecionine to this
extract and to the macrophage-containing tissue culture system
also failed to result in inhibition of LT synthesis.°) A report of
this work does not describe the constituents of the pyrrolizidine
alkaloid-free extract, so the latter results for lack of activity are
difficult to interpret.

Further work involving fractions of the active PR. hybridus root
extract indicated that isopetasin and the oxopetasan esters (=
eremophilanlactones, the presence of these is due to rearrange-
ment of 9-hydroxy-furanoeremophilanes during drying and
storage as stated above) were important for activity: the content
of isopetasin and oxopetasan esters in the fractions correlated
with inhibition of LT synthesis in a concentration-dependent
manner.@) By contrast, petasin was not important for activity, but
appeared to reduce the activity of isopetasin in this assay.

----- PAGE 122 -----
Other in vitro studies, however, have reported that petasin is
one of the major active compounds of P. hybridus extract. Isolated
petasin and a standardised high-pressure carbon dioxide extract of
P. hybridus (containing 14.1% petasin; ZE-339, Zeller) inhibited
the synthesis of cysteinyl-LTs in eosinophils and LTB, in
neutrophils which had been primed with granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor and subsequently stimulated with
platelet-activating factor (PAF) or the anaphylatoxin CS5a.°”
Petasin, ZE-339 and the positive control zileuton (a 5-lipoxygenase
inhibitor) achieved similar inhibition of cysteinyl-LTs and LTB, in
eosinophils and neutrophils, respectively, in these models (ICso
(concentration for 50% inhibition) < 24 1g/mL in each case).

In other in vitro studies using a similar model of eosinophil
stimulation, ZE-339 showed greater inhibition of cysteinyl-LT
synth a fraction containing petasin, isopetasin and
neopetasin.°°) When each of these latter compounds was te:
separately in this model, all inhibited C5a- and PAF-induced
cysteinyl-LT synth in a concentration-dependent manner and
to the same extent as zileuton (positive control). However, the
release of eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) from eosinophils (a
measure of eosinophil degranulation) was inhibited by petasin,
but not by isopetasin, neopetasin or zileuton. Similarly, petasin,
but not isopetasin, neopetasin or zileuton, suppressed cytosolic
phospholipase A> activity, S-lipoxygenase translocation and PAF-
and CSa-induced increases in intracellular calcium ion concentra-
tions. These findings suggest that the different petasin constitu-
ents of butterbur may act upon different intracellular signalling
molecules.°” Extracts of PB. bybridus rhizomes with different
petasin and isopetasin contents (2.1 and 0.4, 0.2 and 0.1, 12.1 and
6.1, and 21.9 and 9.4% petasin and isopetasin respectively) are
weak inhibitors of cyclo-oxygenase 1 (COX-1) in vitro (ICso >
400 g/mL) and strong inhibitors of the inducible isoform COX-2
(ICs9 20 to 30.4tg/mL), apart from the extract with the lowest
petasin and isopetasin content (ICs 60.6 ptg/mL).° The former
three extracts also inhibited lipopolysaccharide-induced and,
therefore, COX-2-mediated prostaglandin E, release in primary
rat microglial cells in a concentration-dependent manner (ICso <
6 .g/mL); this effect was also independent of the petasin and
isopetasin contents. The extract containing petasin 12.1% and
isopetasin 6.1% completely inhibited COX-2 synthesis
glia at a concentration of 5 jig/mL whereas COX-1 synthesis was
unaffected. Overall, these findings suggest selective inhibition of
COX-2 and its expression.”

s than di

ed

in micro-

Gastroprotective effects A petroleum ether extract of P. hybridus
ground root protects against gastrointestinal damage induced by
ethanol and indometacin (indomethacin) in vivo.* P. hybridus
root extract 0.83, 2.5 and 7.5 mg/kg administered intragastrally to
fasted rats 30 minutes before intragastral administration of 1.5 mL
ethanol significantly reduced gastric mucosal damage in a dose-
dependent manner, compared with control (p < 0.05). In an
experiment involving normally fed rats, indometacin (8 mg/kg
orally) was administered with P. hybridus root extract (6.3, 12.5 or
25 mg/kg orally), cimetidine (50 mg/kg orally) or control, followed
by a second dose six hours later, and sacrifice after a further 16
hours. Compared with control, all doses of PR hybridus root
extract significantly inhibited indometacin-induced intestinal
damage (p < 0.05), and P. hybridus root extract 2 x 25 mg/kg
inhibited intestinal damage to a greater extent than did cimetidine
(p < 0.05).°8)

Other activities Extracts of butterbur rhizome from both petasin
and furanopetasin chemovars of P. hybridus have been reported to
inhibit the binding of radioactive ligands at dopamine D, and

Butterbur

histamine H, receptors to a similar extent. The greatest inhibition
was observed for extracts with the highest content (>60%) of
eremophilane constituents. For example, for a rhizome extract
from the petasin chemovar, mean (standard error of mean; SEM)
ICso values for inhibition of dopamine D2 and histamine H;
radioligand binding were 38 (3) and 155 (52), respectively.?
Fractions of the petasin chemovar extract inhibited radioligan:
binding in a concentration-dependent manner, with the highest
affinities displayed by the petasin and desoxyneopetasol fractions.
This was confirmed in assays with individual constituents in
which the lowest ICs values were determined for petasin ani
isopetasin. The furanopetasin chemovar constituents hydroxy-
furanoeremophilane and furanopetasin also inhibited radioligan:
binding, as did the eremophilanlactones eremophilanolide ani
hydroxy-eremophilanolide, albeit with markedly lower affinities
than the eremophilanes.°°

Petasin, isopetasin, S-petasin and iso-S-petasin, isolated from
Petasites formosanus, a species related to PR. hybridus, relaxed
histamine-, carbachol-, potassium chloride- and LTD,-induce:
precontractions of isolated guinea-pig trachea in a concentration-
dependent manner.” $-Petasin was more potent than petasin an
isopetasin for precontractions induced by all four reagents. S-
Petasin relaxed the precontractions induced by all four reagents in
manner, with ICso values of <10 mol/L, whereas
iso-S-petasin selectively relaxed precontractions induced by
carbachol and potassium chloride, with ICs values of aroun
10pmol/L for each. The reason for these differences in the
respective profiles of activity, and the influence of isomerisation
(S-petasin to iso-S-petasin) is not clear. The documented relaxant
effects of S-petasin and iso-S-petasin from P formosanus on
precontracted guinea-pig trachea may be due to antispasmodic
and antimuscarinic properties, respectively.°*) Following a study
using isolated guinea-pig atria, it has been reported that iso-S-
petasin may act preferentially on tracheal muscarinic M3
receptors, rather than cardiac My receptors.

Hypotensive activity has been documented for S-petasin and
iso-S-petasin isolated from P. formosanus. In rats, a dose-
dependent hypotensive effect occurred following intravenous
administration of S-petasin or iso-S-petasin (0.1-1.5 mg/kg body
weight for each); in vitro experiments indicated that these
compounds have a relaxant effect on precontracted rat aortic
ring segments and that this may be due in part to blockade of
calcium ion (Ca**) channels in vascular smooth muscle cells by S-
petasin and iso-S-petasin.°°*9

S-Petasin from P. formosanus has been shown to have negative
chronotropic activity in vivo. In anaesthetised rats, S-petasin (1.0-
1.5 mg/kg body weight, intravenously) induced bradycardia in a
dose-dependent manner within a few seconds of administration
and the effect persisted for up to 11 minutes after administra-
tion.°” The highest administered dose of $-petasin (1.5 mg/kg
body weight intravenously) evoked a
rate of approximately 25%. S-Petasin had a negative inotropic
effect in isolated rat atria and depressed the amplitude of
contraction of rat cardiac myocytes. Iso-S-petasin also depresses
cardiac contraction as demonstrated by in vitro studies involving
ventricular myocytes.°*) The mechanism for the observed negative
cardiac chronotropic and inotropic effects of S-petasin and iso-S-
petasin may be through inhibition of cardiac L-type voltage-
dependent Ca** channels.°7"**) Further work has shown that S-
petasin decreases the amplitude of L-type Ca™~
NG108-15 cells (a mouse neuroblastoma and rat glioma hybrid
cell Line) in a concentration-dependent manner (ICso = 11 fmol/
L).

a non-selective

maximal reduction in heart

currents in

----- PAGE 123 -----
Butterbur

Clinical studies

Several clinical trials of butterbur extracts have been conducted
and have involved individuals with, for example, seasonal and
perennial allergic rhinitis and migraine. While many of these
studies have reported beneficial effects with butterbur, rigorous
investigation of the efficacy of butterbur extracts is limited and
further large, well-designed clinical trials are required.

Pharmacokinetics There are limited pharmacokinetic data for
the constituents of butterbur extracts. The bioavailability of
petasin has been reported following a study involving healthy
volunteers who received a single dose of two (7 = 24) or four
tablets ( = 24) of butterbur leaf extract (ZE-339) orally; each
tablet contained 8 mg petasins.?” The time to maximal petasin
concentrations (tmax) Was around 1.6 hours in each group (mean
(standard deviation, SD): 1.62 (0.50) and 1.61 (0.93) hours for the
lower and higher dose groups, respectively), whereas the mean
(SD) half-life was 7.16 (4.61) and 7.62 (3.34) hours for the lower
and higher dose group, respectively. Maximal mean (SD) petasin
concentrations were 25.5 (14.8) and 58.1 (26.7) ng/mL for the
lower and higher dose groups, respectively°” In a proof-of-
principle study in which six patients with seasonal (7 = 4) and
perennial (1 = 2) allergic rhinitis each received butterbur extract
(ZE-339) three tablets twice daily, serum petasin concentrations
reached steady state after five days' treatment (mean (SD) 15.1
(2.3) ng/mL (A Brattstrém, Zeller AG, personal communication,
19 July 2004).

Another study described monitoring compliance by measuring
serum petasin concentrations using an enzyme-linked immuno-
sorbent assay,“ but these results were not reported.

Therapeutic effects

Seasonal and perennial allergic rhinitis In a randomised,
double-blind, double-dummy, parallel-group study involving
125 individuals with seasonal allergic rhinitis, the effects of a
carbon dioxide extract of butterbur leaf (ZE-339) one tablet
four times daily (equivalent to 32mg petasins daily) were
compared with those of the non-sedating antihistamine
cetirizine 10mg each evening. At the end of the two-week
study, butterbur recipients (7 = 61) achieved similar scores to
cetirizine recipients on the SF-36 (Short Form 36; a self-
assessment scale for medical and health outcomes), the

primary outcome measure.?" There were also no differences
between groups with respect to secondary outcome measures,
including the clinical global impre:
frequency of adverse events was similar in both groups (see
Side-effects, Toxicity).

The statistical power of the study only allowed the
conclusion to be drawn that butterbur was not inferior to
cetirizine (i.e. the study does not demonstrate equivalence of
the two preparations),
its choice of subjective outcome measures and interpreta-
tion.

A subsequent study used an objective outcome measure — the
adenosine monophosphate (AMP) nasal provocation test
(AMP is important in the pathway leading to the release of
allergic inflammatory mediators, such as histamine, cysteinyl
leukotrienes and prostaglandins) — to as the effects of
butterbur. In a randomised, double-blind, crossover trial, 20
individuals with seasonal allergic rhinitis ceased any existing
treatment for the condition (antihistamines and/or intranasal
corticosteroids) one week before starting treatment with
butterbur 50 mg (Petaforce; Bioforce), or placebo, twice daily

sion score. The overall

” and the study has been criticised for

for two weeks. No further details of the preparation were
provided in the report of the study, although Petaforce
marketed in the UK contains butterbur root extract 25mg
per capsule (containing not less than 15% petasins calculated
as isopetasin).

At the end of each treatment period, participants underwent
AMP challenge (described as two applications to each nostril
of a 400 mg/mL solution delivered via a pump actuator spray
device) and spontaneous recovery was monitored by measuring
peak nasal inspiratory flow (PNIF) at regular intervals over one
hour. Time to recovery was significantly attenuated and the
maximum fall in PNIF was significantly less in butterbur
recipients compared with placebo recipients (p = 0.028 and
0.036, respectively).?° The study design did not incorporate a
wash-out period between the two phases of the study, and it is
not clear whether there could have been any carry-over effect in
patients who received butterbur during the first phase of the
study and what influence, if any, this may have had on the
results.

In a randomised, double-blind, parallel group, controlled
trial, 330 individuals with seasonal allergic rhinitis and a
istory of seasonal allergic rhinitis for at least two seasons in
consecutive years, received a carbon dioxide extract of
utterbur leaves (ZE-339, tablets standardised for 8.0 mg total
petasins per tablet) one tablet three times daily (” = 110),
fexofenadine (Telfast) 180mg each morning (7 = 113), or
placebo (1 = 107), for two weeks; double dummy preparations
were used to achieve blinding.“ At the end of the study, both
utterbur extract and fexofenadine were superior to placebo
with respect to the primary outcome variable (the change in
evening total symptom scores, determined for the previous 12-
our period, from baseline values to the 2-week endpoint) (p <
0.001), and there was no statistically significant difference
tween the two active treatment groups (p = 0.37). With
respect to secondary outcome variables, responder rates were
significantly higher in the butterbur extract and fexofenadine
groups (p < 0.001 for both versus placebo), and there was no
statistically significant difference between the two active
treatment groups (p = 0.88). Outcomes of statistical
analyses for the other secondary outcome variables were not
reported. In a similar randomised, double-blind, parallel group
trial, 186 individuals with seasonal allergic rhinitis and a
history of seasonal allergic rhinitis for at least two seasons in
consecutive years, received a carbon dioxide extract of
butterbur leaves (ZE-339, tablets standardised for 8.0 mg total
petasins per tablet) one tablet three times daily (1 = 60), one
tablet twice daily (1 = 65), or placebo (1 = 61), for two weeks
to assess the relationship between dose and response. At the
end of the study, changes in symptom scores from baseline were
significantly greater for both butterbur groups when compared
with placebo (p < 0.001) and the change in symptom scores for
the higher-dose butterbur group was significantly greater than
that for the lower-dose butterbur group (p = 0.02). The effects
of butterbur extract (Petaforce) 50 mg twice daily in perennial
allergic rhinitis were compared with those of fexofenadine
180mg daily in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled, crossover study involving 16 individuals. Participants
stopped their existing treatment for allergic rhinitis
before starting their randomised treatment; treatments were
taken for one week, with a one-week wash-out period between
each randomised treatment. At the end of the study, the
maximum percentage fall from baseline values in PNIF after
nasal AMP challenge was significantly attenuated in the

one week

----- PAGE 124 -----
butterbur and fexofenadine groups, compared with the placebo
group (mean (SEM) for butterbur, fexofenadine and placebo:
34 (3), 39 (3) and 46 (3), respectively; p < 0.05).° The total
nasal symptom score, a secondary outcome measure, was also
significantly improved for the butterbur and fexofenadine
groups, compared with the placebo group (p < 0.05). This
study is limited in that the duration of treatment was short,
and the sample size calculation was not based on detecting
differences in nasal symptom scores, so a larger study is needed
to confirm the latter result.

Asthma and bronchitis At present, there is insufficient evidence

from well-designed randomised controlled trials to support the
efficacy of butterbur extracts in asthma and bronchitis.

In a randomised, double-blind, crossover study, 16 patients
with atopic asthma who had been stabilised on inhaled
corticosteroid therapy for at least three months before the
study received butterbur (Petaforce) 25mg twice daily (no
further details stated in the report although Petaforce marketed
in the UK contains not less than 15% petasins calculated as
isopetasin), or placebo, for one week.” Participants stopped
any treatment with long-acting B2-agonists one week before
and for the duration of the study. At the end of the study,
bronchial hyper-responsiveness in response to AMP bronchial
challenge was significantly improved in butterbur recipients
compared with placebo recipients (p < 0.05), and concentra-
tions of inflammatory markers (exhaled nitric oxide, serum
eosinophil cationic protein and peripheral blood eosinophi
count) were significantly suppressed in the butterbur group,
compared with the placebo group (p < 0.05 for each).?

In a preliminary trial, 80 individuals (aged 6-85 years) with
mild or moderate asthma received a lipophilic carbon dioxide
extract of butterbur rhizome (Petadolex; standardised to
contain at least 15% petasins) 50mg three times daily
(equivalent to 22.5 mg petasins daily; dose reduced for children
depending on age) for a minimum of two months following a
two-week run-in phase. A report of this study attributes several
improvements to administration of butterbur, including reduc-
tions in the number, duration and severity of asthma attacks,
increases in peak flow and forced expiratory volume in one
second (FEV), and reduced use of existing asthma medica-
tions.* However, such conclusions may be flawed because of
the design and methodological limitations of the study and
because no statistical analysis was undertaken.

Allergic skin reactions A randomised, double-blind, double-

dummy, controlled, crossover trial assessed the effects of
butterbur on the histamine and allergen cutaneous response in
20 atopic patients with asthma or allergic rhinitis and
sensitisation to at least one common household allergen,
such as house dust mite, on skin prick testing.” Participants
received butterbur (Petaforce) 50mg twice daily (no further
details given), fexofenadine 180mg daily, montelukast 10mg
daily, or placebo, for one week; existing treatment with
antihistamines and leukotriene receptor antagonists was
stopped one week before and for the duration of the study,
although existing treatment for asthma or allergic rhinitis was
continued. Each day, approximately two hours after taking the
first daily dose of study medication, each participant under-
went skin prick testing with the allergen that had previously
been shown to provoke the greatest response in that individual,
as well as with histamine (1.7mg/mL; no further details
reported) and 0.9% sodium chloride as control. Mean
histamine and allergen wheal and flare responses were

Butterbur

significantly attenuated by fexofenadine, compared with
1 (49)
placebo, but not by butterbur or montelukast.

Migraine prophylaxis The rationale for the use of butterbur in

migraine prophylaxis is centred around the understanding that
vasoconstrictive and neurogenic inflammatory processes are
involved in the generation of migraine headaches, and that
butterbur and certain of its isolated constituents have been
shown in preclinical studies to have anti-inflammatory proper-
ties.°?) However, at present, rigorous clinical investigation of
the effects of butterbur extracts in preventing migraine is
limited.

In a randomised, double-blind, parallel-group trial, 60
hospital outpatients with migraine (minimum of three attacks
per month for the three months prior to the study and a
minimum of two attacks in the four-week run-in phase)
received a carbon dioxide extract of P hbybridus rhizome

(Petadolex) two capsules twice daily (equivalent to 100mg
extract or 15mg petasins daily), or placebo, for 12 weeks.
None of the participants were previous users of the butterbur
extract.'”) Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the study were
in accordance with the International Headache Society guide-
lines. The frequency of migraine attacks in the last four
weeks of the study was significantly lower in the butterbur
group, compared with the placebo group: the mean (SD)
numbers of attacks during the month were 1.7 (0.9) and 2.6
(1.1), for the butterbur and placebo groups, respectively; p <
0.05). The number of days with migraine during the last four
weeks of the study also decreased significantly in the butterbur
group, compared with the placebo group (mean (SD) number
of days at baseline and weeks 8-12: 3.4 (1.6) and 1.7 (0.9)
us 3.0 (1.3) and 2.6 (1.2), for butterbur and placebo,
respectively; p < 0.05). There were no statistically significant
differences between the two groups in the duration and
intensity of migraine headaches at the end of the study.”

The study has several limitations which should be con-

ver:

sidered when interpreting the results. A sample size calculation
was not carried out, baseline characteristics (apart from age
and variables relating to migraine attacks) of participants were
not provided in a report of the study, so it is not clear if the
randomisation was successful (i.e. whether or not the two
groups were similar at baseline) and differences at baseline in
the frequency of migraine attacks are not considered in the
analysis. There are further flaws in the statistical analysis, for
example, the analysis was carried out only with those
participants who adhered to the protocol (i.e. an intention-
to-treat analysis was not carried out), efficacy parameters were
not defined a priori,°” the results are reported without 95%
confidence intervals and precise p-values are not provided.

Against this background, an independent re-analysis of the
data from this study was undertaken. Data entry from original
case report forms was completely repeated under the principles
of good clinical practice (which includes double data entry and
consistency checks), and all four primary efficacy criteria and
data from all three time points (four, eight and 12 weeks) were
evaluated equally weighted in an attempt to avoid bias by post-
hoc selections of efficacy criteria.°") All analyses were
undertaken with data from the intention-to-treat population
(ie. all patients who were randomised and took the study
medication at least once).

The new analysis confirmed the findings of the original
analysis and stated that all 12 primary efficacy criteria (number
of attacks, number of days with attacks, mean duration and

----- PAGE 125 -----
Butterbur

mean intensity of attacks at all three time points) were
significantly reduced in the butterbur group, compared with
the placebo group, and the most conservative analysis showed
that seven of these 12 variables were still statistically
significant.°"” However, the possibility of bias in this retro-
spective re-analysis cannot be excluded entirely, and other
methodological issues remain, such as the lack of a sample size
calculation.
A larger randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
of a butterbur extract for migraine prophylaxis has since been
conducted. In the trial, 245 patients with migraine (two of six
attacks per month for the three months prior to the study and
a minimum of two attacks in the four-week run-in phase; with
or without aura and meeting International Headache Society
criteria) received an extract of butterbur rhizome (Petadolex)
50mg twice daily, 75mg twice daily, or placebo, for 16
weeks.?» Overall, 202 participants completed the study (per-
protocol analysis) and 229 were included in the intention-to-
treat analysis. At the end of the study, the mean number of
migraine attacks was reduced by 45%, 32% and 28%,
compared with baseline values, for the butterbur extract
150mg daily, 100mg daily and placebo groups, respectively.
This finding was statistically significant for butterbur extract
150mg daily versus placebo (p = 0.005; intention-to-treat
analysis).°*) The proportion of 'responders' (proportion of
participants with > 50% reduction in mean attack frequency
per month relative to baseline) was significantly higher for the
butterbur 150mg group when compared with the placebo
group (p < 0.05), but there was no statistically significant
difference in this outcome for butterbur 100mg, compared
with placebo.
The effectiveness of a carbon-dioxide extract of P. hybridus
rhizome (Petadolex) at doses ranging from 50-150 mg,
depending on participant's age, were explored in 108 young
people (aged 6-17 years) with a history of migraine for at least
one year diagnosed according to International Headache
Society criteria, in a prospective, open-label, multi-centre,
four-month trial.°” At the end of the study, the frequency of
migraine attacks was reduced by 63%, compared with baseline
values, and 77% of participants experienced a reduction in the
frequency of migraine attacks of at least 50%. As this study did
not involve a control group, the effects cannot be attributed to
treatment with butterbur, and the hypothesis that butterbur
rhizome extract reduces the frequency of migraine attacks in
this patient population requires testing in rigorous randomised
controlled trials involving sufficient numbers of participants.

Side-effects, Toxicity

As with many herbal medicines, the safety of butterbur
preparations has not yet been adequately assessed: only limited
preclinical and clinical safety and toxicity data are available (see
below). One of the main issues regarding the clinical use of
butterbur extracts concerns the unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloid
constituents which are known to be hepatotoxic in humans, and
have been shown to be carcinogenic and mutagenic in preclinical
studies (see Comfrey). These alkaloids may be present in low
concentrations in all parts of the plant (see Constituents).
Several manufacturers of products containing butterbur include
in their manufacturing processes steps to remove the unsaturated
pyrrolizidine alkaloids to concentrations below the detectable
limit (e.g. <35 parts per billion).°*) However, there remains the
possibility that toxic quantities of unsaturated pyrrolizidine

alkaloids may be present in poorly processed products, and any
products which contain Petasites species as a result of botanical
misidentification or adulteration.

Butterbur is a member of the Asteraceae family, and members
of this family may cause allergic reactions in sensitive individuals,
especially those with an existing hypersensitivity to other
members of the Asteraceae/Compositae. No reports of allergic
reactions to butterbur were identified.

‘al data

Swissmedic, the competent authority for licensing medicines in
Switzerland, has revoked the licences for certain products
containing butterbur root extract following spontaneous reports
received in Germany of liver damage associated with their use.)
At the time of writing, the German authority had not taken any
regulatory action, but was monitoring the situation.

There is only limited information available for butterbur from
long-term postmarketing surveillance studies. Clinical trials
reported to date generally have involved only small numbers of
participants, mostly with allergic rhinitis or migraine who are
generally otherwise healthy, and have involved ingestion of
butterbur preparations for relatively short periods of time (up
to four months). Some clinical trials have not adequately reported
data on safety, and two randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trials involving individuals with seasonal allergic
rhinitis or asthma who received butterbur extracts and in which
participants continued to take their existing medication (inhaled
or intranasal ong-or short-acting 2-ago-
nists) 47"? ed or not reported data on
safety parameters at all.

In a randomised, double-blind, trial involving 125 individuals
with seasonal allergic rhinitis who received butterbur extract (ZE-
339) equivalent to 32 mg petasins daily, or cetirizine 10 mg daily,
for two weeks, the frequency of adverse events was similar in both
groups (proportions of butterbur and cetirizine recipients who
reported adverse events were 10% and 11%, respectively). Eight
of the 12 adverse events reported by cetirizine recipients and two
of the 10 adverse events reported by butterbur recipients were
classified as fatigue or drowsiness. Raised liver enzyme activity (no
further details provided) and pruritus were reported for one
butterbur recipient each, but not for cetirizine recipients.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
study, 20 patients with seasonal allergic rhinitis stopped taking
any existing treatment one week before receiving butterbur
(Petaforce) 50mg twice daily for two weeks (no further details
of the preparation were provided in a report of the study, although
Petaforce marketed in the UK contains not less than 15% petasins
calculated as isopetasin). At the end of the study, liver function
test values (blood concentrations of alanine aminotransferase
(ALT), bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and albumin) were
reported to be similar for butterbur and placebo groups,”
although no statistical analysis was carried out. Furthermore, this
study involved only small numbers of participants and was
conducted over a short time period and, therefore, cannot provide
adequate data on safety.

In a randomised, double-blind, parallel group, controlled trial
in which 330 individuals with seasonal allergic rhinitis received a
carbon dioxide extract of butterbur leaves (ZE-339, tablets
standardised for 8.0 mg total petasins per tablet) one tablet three
times daily (m = 110), fexofenadine (Telfast) 180 mg each morning
(n = 113), or placebo (n = 107), for two weeks, the frequency of
similar in all three groups (9.1, 7.1 and 6.5%

corticosteroids,

) have either not as:

adverse events was

----- PAGE 126 -----
for the butterbur, fexofenadine and placebo groups, respi
tively). between the three groups
with respect to changes in mean liver function test values at the
end of treatment from baseline values,“ although no statistical
analyses were reported. This finding is of limited value because of
the short treatment period. Furthermore, it would be more useful
to know whether or not liver function test values were raised in
any individual butterbur recipients, rather than reporting mean
values for the group.

Open, uncontrolled studies of butterbur extracts (ZE-339 and
Petadolex) in patients with seasonal and/or perennial allergic
rhinitis or asthma have reported that butterbur was well
tolerated,“°'*® although the design of these studies renders
them unsuitable for an adequate assessment of safety. In one of
these studies, in which participants (aged 6-85 years) with mild or
moderate asthma received a lipophilic carbon dioxide extract of
butterbur rhizome (Petadolex; standardised to contain at least
15% petasins) 50mg three times daily (reduced for children
depending on age) for a minimum of two months, seven
participants reported 11 adverse events.*) These included
abdominal pain, flatulence, sneezing, allergic conjunctivitis,
allergic rhinitis and halitosis (reported by children) and hair
loss, coughing, dyspnoea, difficulty exhaling and depression
(reported by adults). None of these was judged by the study
physician to be causally related to butterbur ingestion and none
led to withdrawal of participants from the study.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial invol-
ving 60 individuals with migraine who received a carbon dioxide
extract of P. hybridus rhizome (Petadolex) two capsules twice
daily (equivalent to 100mg extract daily), or placebo, for 12
weeks, no adverse events were reported for the butterbur group
and no statistically significant change:
reported for vital signs and physical examination results.°”
However, two butterbur recipients withdrew from the study, one
because of a suspected pregnancy; the other participant did not
provide a reason. An independent re-analysis of the data from this
trial added that, at the end of the study, three butterbur recipients
had liver function test (ALT, aspartate transaminase (AST)) values
which were higher than normal ranges and significantly higher
than baseline values, and that
erythrocyte count were significantly higher than baseline values
for the butterbur group, compared with the placebo group.”
These changes were not regarded as being clinically relevant,°”
although no numerical data were provided to support this
judgement.

In a larger randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial,
245 patients with migraine received an extract of butterbur
rhizome (Petadolex) 50mg twice daily, 75mg twice daily, or
placebo, for 16 weeks.?) Data from 230 participants were
included in a safety analysis. The most frequently reported adverse
events that were considered possibly related to treatment were
gastrointestinal symptoms (not specified), which occurred in 22,
26 and 7% of participants in the butterbur extract 75mg,
butterbur extract 50mg and placebo groups, respectively. There
were no statistically significant differences in the frequencies of
adverse events for the butterbur groups, compared with placebo,
except for belching. No differences in liver function test values
were observed between the three groups. 7

A review of safety data for a specific preparation of butterbur
rhizome — an extract (Petadolex) standardised to contain a
minimum of 15% petasins and processed to achieve a concentra-
tion of unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids of less than 0.08 ppm —
includes data from four postmarketing surveillance studies

4) :
» There were no differences

from baseline values were

ilirubin concentration and

Butterbur

involving a total of 188 patients (145 with migraine, including
50 children and adolescents aged 6-17 years). Adverse events
deemed to be possibly or probably causally related to ingestion of
the butterbur product included eructations (belching; n = 7), bad
taste/smell of the product (2) and skin rash (1).°°) However, it is
unclear why these four studies included such a small number of
participants: a single postmarketing surveillance study would
normally be expected to include many more participants.

The review also refers to 93 spontaneous suspected adverse drug
reaction (ADR) reports (75 of which originated from Germany,
where the manufacturer is located) received by the product
manufacturer from 1976 to the end of June 2002. In total, 27 of
these reports were determined to be possibly (1 = 19) or probably
(8) causally related to butterbur administration; the latter
included one case of reversible cholestatic hepatitis. The review
states an overall frequency of suspected ADRs, calculated on the
basis of sales figures and the total number of spontaneous ADR
reports received by the manufacturer. However, for several
reasons, these types of data should not be used to calculate
frequencies of suspected ADRs.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of spontaneous reports
of suspected adverse drug reactions from national pharmaco-
vigilance centres of over 70 countries worldwide. At the end of
2005, the WHO-UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of
10 reports, describing a total of 22 adverse reactions, for products
reported to contain P. hybridus only as the active ingredient.
Reactions reported included hepatic enzymes increased (n = 2),
hepatic necrosis (2), hepatitis (1), cholestatic hepatitis (1) and
hepatocellular damage (1) from three case reports. Nine of the
reports originated from Germany and one from Switzerland. In
six of the 10 reports, PR hybridus was the suspected drug.
(These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database held by
the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitor-
ing, Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at
least with respect to origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical
product caused the adverse reaction. Any information included in
this report does not represent the opinion of the World Health
Organization.)

sole

Preclinical data

There are limited data from animal toxicity studies for butterbur
preparations, although a_ review”) data from
unpublished toxicity studies. Acute toxicity studies in rats yielded
LDso values for a single-dose oral administration and single-dose
intraperitoneal administration of > 2.5 and approximately 1 g/kg
body weight, respectively. A chronic toxicity study in rats (” =
200) carried out over 26 weeks established a no adverse effect level
for the lower dose range tested (oral administration; no further
details provided).

Information on mutagenicity and genotoxicity of butterbur
is limited to summaries of unpublished data. An extract
of butterbur rhizome (Petadolex) produced a negative result in the
Ames test for mutagenicity using several strains of Salmonella
typhimurium.©” In an in vitro test for clastogenic activity in
which the butterbur extract was incubated with cultured human
peripheral lymphocytes, the mean number of chromosomal
aberrations was within the reference range of the negative
control.® This result was obtained irrespective of whether or
not the test included metabolic activation using a rat liver
postmitochondrial fraction. In contrast, mitomycin C and

summarises

extracts

----- PAGE 127 -----
Butterbur

cyclophosphamide, as positive controls, induced chromosomal
damage.

There is some evidence from preclinical studies that S-petasin,
a constituent of butterbur root, rhizome and leaf, has effects on
certain endocrine systems. In rats, S-petasin (10 pg/kg body
weight, intravenously) reduced basal plasma corticosterone
concentrations to a significantly greater extent than did control
at 30 minutes after administration (p < 0.05), although there
were no statistically significant differences between groups when
corticosterone concentrations were measured at one, two and
three hours after administration.°”) The same dose of S-petasin
also significantly reduced adrenocorticotrophin (ACTH)-induced
increases in plasma corticosterone concentrations at 30 minutes,
but not longer intervals, after administration, compared with
Similar effects were observed following in vitro
experiments: S-petasin significantly reduced basal, ACTH- and
forskolin (an adenylyl cyclase activator)-stimulated corticoster-
one release from rat adrenal gland cells (zona fasciculata
reticularis) in a concentration-dependent manner. Results of
further in vitro experiments suggested that the mechanism for
the observed effects is in part through inhibition by S-petasin of
the enzymes adenylyl cyclase (which catalyses the formation of
cyclic AMP), and cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage and 11f-

hydroxylase, which are important in the biosynthesis of
(59, 60)

control.

corticosterone.

S-Petasin (1 ttg/kg body weight, intravenously) administered as
a single dose to small numbers of adult male rats reduced basal
plasma testosterone concentrations, compared with control
(mean (SEM): 0.81 (0.06) and 1.31 (0.21) ng/mL for S-petasin
and control, respectively; p < 0.05).{°) Incubation of S-petasin
at concentrations of 0.14-14.4,1g/mL with rat testicular inter-
stitial cells led to a concentration-dependent inhibition of
testosterone release. S-Petasin also inhibited forskolin-, human
chorionic gonadotrophin- and androstenidione-induced stimula-
tion of testosterone secretion from rat testicular interstitial cells
im vitro.

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the known toxicity, the German Commission E
recommended that the maximum daily intake of unsaturated
pyrrolizidine alkaloids is 1 tg, and that the duration of use should
not exceed 4-6 weeks in a year.©> In Switzerland, there are
concerns regarding reports in Germany of hepatotoxicity
associated with the use of certain products containing butterbur
root extract (see Side-effects, Toxicity).

Drug interactions No reports of drug interactions with
butterbur extracts were identified. Certain constituents of
butterbur have been documented in preclinical studies to have
hypotensive activity and negative chronotropic and_ negative
inotropic effects. Against this background, and on a theoretical
basis, the possibility of interactions with hypertensive and
antihypertensive medicines should be considered. Likewise,
several constituents of butterbur have been documented to
displace the binding of ligands at dopamine D, and histamine
H, receptors, so there is a theoretical possibility of interactions
with medicinal agents acting at these receptors.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of safety data and
the possible hepatotoxic effects of poorly processed butterbur
extracts, the use of products containing butterbur is contra-
indicated in pregnancy and by breastfeeding women.

Tesalin.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Switzerland: Dragees aux figues avec du sene; Dragees pour la
detente nerveuse; Relaxane; Valverde Constipation dragees;
Valverde Detente dragees; Wala Pulmonium suc contre la toux.

References

1 Novotny L et al. Substances from Petasites officinalis Moench.
Tetrahedron Lett 1961; 20: 697-701.

2. Siegenthaler P, Neuenschwander M. Sesquiterpenes from Petasites
hybridus (furanopetasin chemovar): separation, isolation and
quantitation of compounds from fresh plant extracts. Pharm Acta
Helv 1997; 72: 57-67.

3 Debrunner B et al. Sesquiterpenes of Petasites hybridus (L.) G.M. et
Sch.: distribution of sesquiterpenes over plant organs. Pharm Acta
Helv 1995; 70: 167-173.

4 Novotny L et al. Contribution to the chemotaxonomy of some
European Petasites species. Phytochemistry 1966; 5: 1281-1287.

5 Siegenthaler P, Neuenschwander M. Analytic investigations of
sesquiterpenes of Petasites albus (L.) and Petasites hybridus
(furanopetasin chemovar). Pharm Acta Helv 1998; 72: 362-364.

6 Chizzola R. Distribution of the pyrrolizidine alkaloids senecionine
and integerrimine within the Petasites hybridus plant. Planta Med
1992; 58 (Suppl. Suppl.1): A693-A694.

7 Langer T et al. A competitive enzyme immunoassay for the
pyrrolizidine alkaloids of the senecionine type. Planta Med 1996; 62:
267-271.

8 Wildi E e¢ al. Quantitative analysis of petasin and pyrrolizidine
alkaloids in leaves and rhizomes of in situ grown Petasites hybridus
plants. Planta Med 1998; 64: 264-267.

9 Liithy J et al. Pyrrolizidin-Alkaloide in Petasites hybridus L. und P.
albus L. Pharm Acta Helv 1983; 58: 98-100.

10 Chizzola R. Distribution of pyrrolizidine alkaloids in crossing
progenies of Petasites hybridus. ] Herbs Spices Med Plants 2002; 9:
39-44,

11 Mroczek T et al. Simultaneous determination of N-oxides and free
bases of pyrrolizidine alkaloids by cation-exchange solid-phase
extraction and ion-pair high-performance liquid chromatography. J
Chromatogr A 2002; 949: 249-262.

12 Siegenthaler P, Neuenschwander M. Furanoeremophilane und
Eremophilanlaktone. Z Phytother 1994; 15: 270-271.

13 Saritas Y et al. Sesquiterpene constituents in Petasites hybridus.
Phytochemistry 2002; 59: 795-803.

14 Debrunner B et al. Sesquiterpenes of Petasites hybridus (L.) G.M. et
Sch.: influence of locations and seasons on sesquiterpene distribution.
Pharm Acta Helv 1995; 70: 315-323.

15 Debrunner B. Influence of temperature and storage on the stability of
some eremophilane esters in Petasites hybridus (L.) G.M. et Sch.
(petasin chemovar). Pharm Acta Helv 1998; 72: 364-365.

16 Anon. Safety concerns over butterbur. Pharm J 2002; 268: 126.

17. Mauz Ch et al. Methode zur Entfernung von Pyrrolizidin-Alkaloiden
aus Arzneipflanzenextrakten. Pharm Acta Helv 1985; 60: 256-259.

18 Wildi E et al. In vitro propagation of Petastites hybridus with high
petasin and low pyrrolizidine alkaloid content. Pharm Acta Helv
1998; 72: 371-373.

19 Tobyn G. Culpeper's Medicine. A Practice of Western Holistic
Medicine. Shaftesbury: Element, 1997.

20 Lee DKC et al. Butterbur, a herbal remedy, attenuates adenosine
monophosphate induced nasal responsiveness in seasonal allergic
rhinitis. Clin Exp Allergy 2003; 33: 882-886.

21 Schapowal A for the Petasites Study Group. Randomised controlled
trial of butterbur and cetirizine for treating seasonal allergic rhinitis.
BMJ 2002; 324: 1+.

----- PAGE 128 -----
22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

Grossmann M, Schmidramsl H. An extract of Petasites hybridus is
effective in the prophylaxis of migraine. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther
2000; 38: 430-435.

Lipton RB et al. Petasites hybridus root is an effective preventive
treatment for migraine. Neurology 2004; 63: 2240-2244.

Thomet OAR, Simon H-U. Petasins in the treatment of allergic
diseases: results of preclinical and clinical studies. Int Arch Allergy
Immunol 2002; 129: 108-112.

Bickel D et al. Identification and characterization of inhibitors of
peptido-leukotriene synthesis from Petasites hybridus. Planta Med
1994; 60: 318-322.

Berger D et al. Influence of Petasites hybridus on dopamine-D, and
histamine-H, receptors. Pharm Acta Helv 1998; 72: 373-375.
Brattstrém A. Mode of action and pharmacological data of Petasites
extract Ze 339. In: Chrubasik $, Roufogalis B, eds. Herbal Medicinal
Products for the Treatment of Pain. Lismore: Southern Cross
University Press, 2000.

Brune K et al. Gastro-protective effects by extracts of Petasites
hybridus: the role of inhibition of peptido-leukotriene synthesis.
Planta Med 1993; 59: 494-496.

Thomet OA et al. Role of petasin in the potential anti-inflammatory
activity of a plant extract of Petasites hybridus. Biochem Pharmacol
2001; 61: 1041-1047.

Thomet OA et al. Differential inhibition of inflammatory effector
functions by petasin, isopetasin and neopetasin in human eosinophils.
Clin Exp Allergy 2001; 31: 1310-1320.

Fiebich BL et al. Petasites hybridus extracts in vitro inhibit COX-2 and
PGE2 release by direct interaction with the enzyme and by preventing
p42/44 MAP kinase activation in rat primary microglial cells. Planta
Med 2005; 71: 12-19.

Ko W-C et al. Relaxant effects of petasins in isolated guinea pig
trachea and their structure-activity relationships. Planta Med 2000; 66:
650-652.

Ko W-C et al. Mechanisms of relaxant action of S-petasin and S-
isopetasin, sesquiterpenes of Petasites formosanus, in isolated guinea
pig trachea. Planta Med 2001, 67: 224-229.

Ko W-C et al. S-isopetasin, a sesquiterpene of Petasites formosanus,
allosterically antagonized carbachol in isolated guinea pig atria.
Planta Med 2002; 68: 652-655.

Wang G-J et al. Calcium channel blockade in vascular smooth muscle
cells: major hypotensive mechanism of S-petasin, a hypotensive
sesquiterpene from Petasites formosanus. ] Pharmacol Exp Ther 2001;
297: 240-246.

Wang G-J et al. Ca?* blocking effect of iso-S-petasin in rat aortic
smooth muscle cells. Eur J Pharmacol 2002; 445: 239-245.

Wang G-J et al. Calcium-antagonizing activity of S-petasin, a
hypotensive sesquiterpene from Petasites formosanus, on inotropic
and chronotropic responses in isolated rat atria and cardiac myocytes.
Naunyn-Schmeideberg's Arch Pharmacol 2004; 369: 322-329.

Esberg LB et al. Iso-S-petasin, a hypotensive sesquiterpene from
Petasites formosanus, depresses cardiac contraction and intracellular
Ca** transients in adult rat ventricular myocytes. J Pharm Pharmacol
2003; 55: 103-107.

Wu S-N et al. The mechanism of inhibitory actions of $-petasin, a
sesquiterpene of Petasites formosanus, on L-type calcium current in
NG108-15 neuronal cells. Planta Med 2003; 69: 118-124.

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S51

52

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

Butterbur

Thomet OAR et al. Anti-inflami
Petasites hybridus in allergic rhi
997-1006.

Schapowal A. Author's reply [letter]. BMJ 2002; 324: 1277.

Shuster S. Well designed experiments should have been used [letter].
BMJ 2002; 324: 1277.

McArthur CA, Arnott N. Trial does not show that there is no
difference between butterbur and cetirizine [letter]. BMJ 2002; 324:
1277.

Schapowal A, on behalf of study group. Treating intermittent allergic
rhinit prospective, randomized, placebo and antihistamine-
controlled study of butterbur extract Ze 339. Phytotherapy Res 2005;
19: 530-537.

Schapowal A, for the Petasites Study Group. Butterbur Ze339 for the
treatment of intermittent allergic rhinitis. Dose-dependent efficacy in
a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2004; 130: 1381-1386.

Lee DKC et al. A placebo-controlled evaluation of butterbur and
fexofenadine on objective and subjective outcomes in perennial allergic
rhinitis. Clin Exp Allergy 2004; 34: 646-649.

Lee DKC et al. Butterbur, a herbal remedy, confers complementary
anti-inflammatory activity in asthmatic patients receiving inhaled
corticosteroids. Clin Exp Allergy 2004; 34: 110-114.

Danesch U. Petasites hybridus (butterbur root) extract in the treatment
of asthma — an open trial. Altern Med Rev 2004; 9: 54-62.

Jackson CM et al. The effects of butterbur on the histamine and
allergen cutaneous response. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2004; 92:
250-254.

Tfelt-Hansen P et al. for the International Headache Society Clinical
Trials Subcommittee. Guidelines for controlled trials of drugs in
migraine, second edition. Cephalalgia 2000; 20: 765-786.

Diener HC et al. The first placebo-controlled trial of a special
butterbur root extract for the prevention of migraine: reanalysis of
efficacy criteria. Eur Neurol 2004; 51: 89-97.

Pothmann R, Danesch U. Migraine prevention in children and
adolescents: results of an open study with a special butterbur root
extract. Headache 2005; 45: 196-203.

Brattstrém A. A newly developed extract (Ze 339) from butterbur
(Petasites hybridus L.) is clinically efficient in allergic rhinitis (hay
fever). Phytomedicine 2003; 10 (Suppl. Suppl.IV): 50-52.

NN. Praparate aus Petasitesrhizom in der Schweiz vom Markt.
Deutsche Apotheker Zeitung 2004; 144: 64-66.

Danesch U, Rittinghausen R. Safety of a patented special butterbur
root extract for migraine prevention. Headache 2003; 43: 76-78.
Vigibase. WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre. (accessed January 13, 2006).

Koch V, Danesch U. Response to Fox and DeSousa [letter]. Headache
2001; 41: 325-326.

Danesch U, Rittinghausen R. Response from Danesch and
Rittinghausen [letter]. Headache 2003; 43: 822-823.

Chang L-L et al. Effects of S-petasin on corticosterone release in rats.
Chin ] Physiol 2002; 45: 137-142.

Chang L-L e¢ al. Effects of S-petasin on cyclic AMP production and
enzyme activity of P450scc in rat zona fasciculata-reticularis cells. Eur
J Pharmacol 2004; 489: 29-37.

Lin H et al. Inhibition of testosterone secretion by S-petasin in rat
testicular interstitial cells. Chin J Physiol 2000; 43: 99-103.

‘ory activity of an extract of
s. Int Immunopharmacol 2002; 2:

----- PAGE 129 -----
= Calamus

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The phytochemistry of calamus, especially the oil, is well
documentated. Three genotypes (diploid, triploid and
tetraploid) have been identified which are chemically distinct
with respect to the B-asarone content. Spasmolytic and anti-
ulcer effects documented for the oil support the traditional
herbal uses of calamus. In addition, bitter principles
documented as constituents may account for the use of the
root in anorexia. However, in view of the toxic properties
documented for the oil and associated with B-asarone, it has
been recommended that only fB-asarone-free calamus root
should be used in phytotherapy. Use of the oil is not
recommended due to its carcinogenic activity and its ability
to cause kidney damage, tremors and convulsions.“>®)
Studies carried out to investigate the mutagenic potential of
calamus have produced conflicting results.

Species (Family)
Acorus calamus L. (Acoraceae)

Various genetic species (7 = 12): diploid North American,
triploid European, tetraploid Asian, Eastern, Indian.
Synonym(s)

Sweet Flag
Part(s) Used

Rhizome

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General

References G19, G22, G41 and G58.

Amines
choline.

Dimethylamine, methylamine, trimethylamine and

Volatile oil 1.5-3.5%. B-Asarone content varies between genetic
species: 96% in tetraploid (Indian), 5% in triploid (European) and
0% in the diploid (North American) species." Other identified
components include calamenol (5%), calamene (4%), calamone
(1%), methyl eugenol (1%), eugenol (0.3%) and the sesquiter-
penes acolamone, acoragermacrone and isoacolamone. Consider-
able qualitative and quantitative differences have been reported
between the volatile oil from different genetic species, and
between the volatile fraction of an alcoholic extract and the
essential oil from the same variety (European).

Tannin 1.5%.

Other constituents Bitter principles (e.g. acorin), acoric and
palmitic acids, resin (2.5%), mucilage, starch (25-40%), sugars.

Food Use

The level of B-asarone permitted in foods is restricted to 0.1 mg/kg
in foods and beverages, 1 mg/kg in alcoholic beverages and in
foods containing Acorus calamus or Asarum europaeum.'%
Calamus is listed by the Council of Europe as a source of natural
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that
calamus can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted
manner, although there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity©'!® Previously, calamus
was classified as an ‘unsafe herb! by the US Food and Drugs
Administration (FDA),‘C?” and the use of the rhizome and its

derivatives (oil, extracts) was prohibited from use in human
food.'C4?

Herbal Use

Calamus is stated to act as a carminative, spasmolytic and
diaphoretic. Traditionally it has been indicated for acute and

Phenylpropanoids Sesquiterpenoids
H3CO. NN %,
°
H3CO OCH3
B-asarone fo)
acorone
“Ty
tn,
RO a
R
eugenol H
methyleugenol CH3 fe)
shyobunone

Figure 1 Selected constituents of calamus.

Figure 2 Calamus (Acorus calumus).

----- PAGE 130 -----
Figure 3. Calamus — dried drug substance (rhizome).

chronic dyspepsia, gastritis and gastric ulcer, intestinal colic and
anorexia.'°”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Rhizome 1-3¢ as an infusion three times daily.©”
Liquid extract 1-3 mL (1:1 in 60% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Tincture 2-4mL (1:5 in 60% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Numerous documented studies have concentrated on activities
associated with the oil.’ Unless specified, all of the following
actions refer to those exhibited by the oil.

Spasmolytic action in vitro versus various spasmogens in
different smooth muscle preparations including tracheal, intest-
inal, uterine, bronchial and vascular has been reported for
European and Indian varieties.°* In one study, activity was
associated with a lack of B-asarone, whereas oils with either low
or high concentrations of f-asarone have also exhibited
activity"? The pattern of spasmolytic activity has been
compared to that of papaverine, and a direct musculotropic
action has been proposed." Unlike papaverine, an acetylcholine-
like action has also been observed with low dilutions of the oil and
asarone.

Inhibition of monoamine oxidase activity and a stimulation of
p- and L-amino oxidase has been reported.) The mechanism for
this activity, involving serotonin and adrenaline, has been
disputed, and an alternative mechanism involving depression of
hypothalamic function has been proposed.”

Oil rich in B-asarone has been reported to reduce phenylbu-
tazone-induced ulcers in the rat by 560%, although no effect was
observed on stress- or ethanol-induced ulcers.) No spasmolytic
activity was reported for oil free from or containing only low
concentrations of B-asarone.

A sedative action and a potentiation of barbiturate effect
(increased sleeping time, reduction in body temperature) have
been described in a number of small animals (mice, rats, rabbits
and cats) following intravenous or intraperitoneal administration
of European (alcoholic and aqueous extracts) and Indian

Calamus

varieties.°) Dexamfetamine has been found to block the

potentiating action of the Indian variety on barbiturate sleeping
time. Potentiation of morphine activity has been reported for
the European variety.

The Indian oil has been reported to deplete serotonin and
noradrenaline in the rat brain following intraperitoneal adminis-
tration. The mechanism of action was suggested as similar to
that of reserpine, and a potentiation of the amfetamine-
detoxifying effect of reserpine has also been described.) In
contrast, the central action of the European variety has been
stated not to resemble that of reserpine. Anti-adrenergic activity
demonstrated by antagonism of dexamfetamine-induced agita-
tional symptoms has been reported for the Indian variety in
various small animals.”

Anticonvulsant, anti-arrhythmic (like quinidine) and hypoten-
sive (apparently not due to a nervous mechanism) activities in
small animals have also been reported for the Indian variety.”

a-Asarone, isolated from Asarum europaeum (Aristolochia-
ceae), has a local anaesthetic activity similar to that of
benzocaine."”

Weak antifungal activity has been documented for B-asarone'
and for the oil."°) Insecticidal and leech repellant properties have
been reported for the oil and may be synergised by synthetic pine
oil. Antibacterial activity primarily versus organisms respon-
sible for gut and throat infections has been documented,”
although a lack of antibacterial activity has also been reported.)

(11)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of calamus,
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-Effects, Toxicity©'? ©

Concerns over the toxicity of calamus centre around the volatile
oil and in particular on the B-asarone content. The level of B-
asarone in the oil varies considerably between the different genetic
species of calamus (see Constituents).

Feeding studies (rat) using the Indian oil (high B-asarone
concentration) have shown death, growth depression, hepatic and
heart abnormalities, and serous effusion in abdominal and/or
peritoneal cavities."*'* A two-year study involving diet supple-
mented with calamus oil at 0, 500, 1000, 2500 and 5000 ppm,
reported growth depression, and malignant duodenal tumours
after 59 weeks at all levels of dietary supplementation.>
Tumours of the same type were not noted in the controls.

Genotoxic activity (strong induction of chromo somal aberra-
tions, slight increase in the rate of sister chromatid exchanges) has
been exhibited by B-asarone in human lymphocyte cultures in the
presence of microsomal activation.) Mutagenic activity (Ames)
has been documented for root extracts, a tincture and B-asarone in
one (TA100) of the various Salmonella typhimurium strains
(TA98, 100, 1535, 1537, 1538) tested, but only in the presence of a
microsomal activation mix." Lack of mutagenicity has also been
reported for an organic extract, when tested in the above
Salmonella typhimurium strains (except TA1538) with and
without activation.”

Acute toxicities (LD59) quoted for the volatile oil from the
Indian variety (high B-asarone content) include 777 mg/kg (rat,
oral), >5 g/kg (guinea-pig, dermal), 221 mg/kg (rat, intraperito-
neal). The oleoresin is stated to be toxic at 400 and 800 mg/kg
(mouse, intraperitoneal). The LDso of asarone in mice is stated
to be 417 mg/kg (oral) and 310 mg/kg (intraperitoneal).

----- PAGE 131 -----
Calamus

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for calamus
and investigation of these aspects is required. Generally the oil is
considered to be non-irritant, non-sensitising and non-photo-
toxic.'°® However, bath preparations containing the oil have
reportedly caused erythema, and dermatitis has been reported in
hypersensitive individuals.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

The toxicity of calamus oil has been associated with the B-asarone
content.''® It has therefore been advised that only roots free from,
or with a low content of B-asarone should be used in human
phytotherapy."® In foods and beverages, the concentration of B-
asarone permitted in the final product is restricted (see Food use).

Use of the isolated oil is not recommended.'“*”“**) In general,
topical application of any undiluted volatile oil is not recom-
mended; external contact with calamus oil may cause an irritant
reaction in sensitive individuals.

Drug interactions None documentated. However, the potential
for preparations of calamus to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. For example, calamus has
amine constituents, and there is limited evidence from in vitro
studies that calamus has monamine oxidase inhibitory activity;
however, the clinical significance of this, if any, is not clear.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the toxic properties
associated with calamus, it should not be used during pregnancy
or lactation. It is not known whether f-asarone is excreted into the
breast milk.

Austria: Abdomilon N; Original Schwedenbitter. Czech
Republic: Dr Theiss Schwedenbitter; Eugastrin; Stomaran.
France: Jouvence de |'Abbe Soury. Germany: Abdomilon;

Tisane pour I'estomac; Urinex. UK: Pegina.

References

1

2

10

cae

12

13

14

1s

16

17

Stahl E, Keller K. Zur Klassifizierung handelsiiblicher Kalmusdrogen.
Planta Med 1981; 43: 128-140.

Keller K, Stahl E. Zusammensetzung des atherischen Oles von B-
asaronfreiem Kalmus. Planta Med 1983; 47: 71-74.

Mazza G. Gas chromatographic and mass spectrometric studies of the
constituents of the rhizome of calamus. I. The volatile constituents of
the essential oil. J Chromatogr 1985; 328: 179-194.

Mazza G. Gas chromatographic and mass spectrometric studies of the
constituents of the rhizome of calamus. II. The volatile constituents of
alcoholic extracts. J Chromatogr 1985; 328: 195— 206.

Opdyke DJL. Calamus oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1977; 15: 623-626.
Keller K et al. Spasmolytische wirkung des isoasaronfreien kalmus.
Planta Med 1985; 6-9.

Keller K et al. Pharmacological activity of calamus oil with different
amount of cis-isoasaron. Naunyn Schmiedeberg's Arch Pharmacol
1983; 324 (Suppl. Suppl.): R55.

Das PK e¢ al. Spasmolytic activity of asarone and essential oil of
Acorus calamus, Linn. Arch Int Pharmacodyn 1962; 135: 167-177.
Calamus. Lawrence Review of Natural Products. St Louis, MO: JB
Lippincott, 1989.

Gracza L. The active substances of Asarum europaeum. 16. The local
anaesthetic activity of the phenylpropanoids. Planta Med 1983; 48:
153-157.

Ohmoto T, Sung Y-I. Antimycotic substances in the crude drugs II.
Shoyakugaku Zasshi 1982; 36: 307-314.

Jain SR et al. Antibacterial evaluation of some indigenous volatile oils.
Planta Med 1974; 26: 196-199.

Taylor JM et al. Toxicity of oil of calamus (Jammu Variety). Toxicol
Appl Pharmacol 1967; 10: 405.

Gross MA et al. Carcinogenicity of oil of calamus. Proc Am Assoc
Cancer Res 1967; 8: 24.

Abel G. Chromosome damaging effect on human lymphocytes by B-
asarone. Planta Med 1987; 251-253.

Géggelmann W, Schimmer O. Mutagenicity testing of B-asarone and
commercial calamus drugs with Salmonella typhimurium. Mutat Res
1983; 121: 191-194.

Riazuddin § et al. Mutagenicity testing of some medicinal herbs.
Environ Mol Mutagen 1987; 10: 141-148.

----- PAGE 132 -----
Calendula

inflammatory effect is due to the triterpenoid constituents,
although flavonoids may contribute to the activity. The
reputed antispasmodic effect may be attributable to the
volatile oil fraction. In addition, immunostimulant activity has
been reported for high molecular weight polysaccharide
components. Clinical research assessing the effects of
calendula preparations is limited, and rigorous randomised
controlled clinical trials are required.

Species (Family)

Calendula officinalis L. (Asteraceae)

Synonym(s)
Gold-bloom, Marigold, Marybud, Pot Marigold

Part(s) Used

Flower

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'”
ESCOP 2003079

Martindale 35th edition\*»

Ph Eur 20078?

WHO volume 1 1999°%)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSL (external use only)'@*”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G48, G62 and G76.

Flavonoids Pharmacopoeial standard not less than 0.4%
flavonoids.“8S* Flavonol (isorhamnetin, quercetin) glycosides
including isoquercitrin, narcissin, neohesperidoside, and rutin.)

Polysaccharides Three polysaccharides PS-I, -II and —III have a
(1-3)-B-p-galactan backbone with short side chains at C-6,
comprising o-araban-(1—3)-araban, o-L-rhamnan-(1—3)-araban
or simple &-L-rhamnan moieties.)

Terpenoids Many components, including «- and f-amyrin,
lupeol, longispinogenin, oleanolic acid, arnidiol, brein, calendu-

ladiol, erythrodiol, faradiol, faradiol-3-myristic acid ester, far-
adiol-3-palmitic acid ester,°) helantriols Al, BO, Bl and B2,
lupeol, maniladiol, urs-12-en-3,16,21-triol, ursadiol; oleanolic
acid saponins including calendulosides C-H; campesterol,
cholesterol, sitosterol, stigmasterol and taraxasterol (sterols).

Volatile oils }Terpenoid components include menthone, iso-
menthone, caryophyllene and an epoxide and ketone derivative,
pedunculatine, %- and B-ionone, a B-ionone epoxide derivative,
dihydroactinidiolide.

Other constituents Bitter (loliolide),'” arvoside A (sesquiterpene
glycoside),'® carotenoid pigments” and calendulin (gum)."”’
Food Use

Calendula is not used in foods. Previously, calendula has been
listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).'°°

Herbal Use

Calendula is stated to possess antispasmodic, mild diaphoretic,
anti-inflammatory, anti-haemorrhagic, emmenagogue, vulnerary,

Saponins

R
faradiol-3-O-laurate laurate maniladiol-3-O-laurate laurate
faradiol-3-O-myristate myristate — maniladiol-3-O-myristate —_ myristate
faradiol-3-O-palmitate palmitate

Calendulosides
At Re

glucose (1-—4)—
galactose (1-—3)—
glucose (1-~4)—
galactose (1--3)—
galactose (1-~3) glucuronic acid
galactose (1-~4) ——glucuronic acid
glucose (1-~4)——glucuronic acid H
glucuronic acid H

glucuronic acid

glucuronic acid H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of calendula.

----- PAGE 133 -----
Calendula

styptic and antiseptic properties. Traditionally, it has been used to
treat gastric and duodenal ulcers, amenorrhoea, dysmenorrhoea
and epistaxis; crural ulcers, varicose veins, haemorrhoids, anal
eczema, proctitis, lymphadenoma, inflamed cutaneous lesions
(topically) and conjunctivitis (as an eye lotion). The German
Commission E approved internal and external use for inflamma-
tion of oral and pharyngeal mucosa and external use in treatment
of poorly healing sores.““?

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) and directions for
external use (where stated) for traditional uses recommended in
older and contemporary standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried florets 1-4 g by infusion three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 0.5-1.0mL (1:1 in 40% alcohol) three times
daily.'6”

Calendula Tincture (BPC 1934) 0.3-1.2 mL (1:5 in 90% alcohol)
three times daily.'C”

External use Tincture—liquid extract (1:1) in 40% alcohol or
tincture 1:5 in 90% alcohol. Apply to wounds as such and dilute
1:3 with water for compresses. Ointment 2.5%.'°)

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory, antibacterial and antiviral activities have been
reported for calendula.“”’ Weak anti-inflammatory activity in rats
(carrageenan-induced oedema) has been reported. 2) An
aqueous ethanolic extract had mild dose-dependent action in the
mouse croton oil test with 20% inhibition being reached at a dose
of 1200g/ear, whereas a carbon dioxide extract exhibited 70%
inhibition at the same concentration.” ') The activity was shown
to be due to the triterpenoids, the most active being a monoester

Figure 2 Calendula (Calendula officinalis).

of faradiol. Further separation of the triterpenoids has shown that
the three most active compounds in the croton oil mouse test are
faradiol-3-myristic acid ester, faradiol-3-palmitic acid ester and 4-
taraxosterol.)

A polysaccharide enriched extract showed strong concentra-
tion-dependent adhesive properties on porcine buccal membranes
ex vivo. Fluorescent labelled rhamnogalacturan indicated the
presence of polysaccharide layers on buccal membranes, leading to
the suggestion that irritated buccal membranes may be smoothed
by mucilage.

The formation of new blood vessels is an essential part of the
wound-healing process. Angiogenic activity has been shown for a
freeze-dried aqueous extract of calendula utilising the chick
chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay.\') The number of
microvessels in calendula-treated CAMs was significantly higher
than in the control (p < 0.0001). Furthermore, calendula-treated
CAMs were positive for the glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan (HA)
associated with neovascularisation. The presence of HA was not
demonstrated in control CAMs.

A combination of allantoin and calendula extract applied to
surgically induced skin wounds in rats has been reported to
stimulate physiological regeneration and epithelisation." This
effect was attributed to a more intensive metabolism of
glycoproteins, nucleoproteins and collagen proteins during the
regenerative period in the tissues.‘ Allantoin applied on its own
was found to exert a much weaker action."

A proprietary cream containing a combination of plant
extracts, including calendula, has been reported to be effective
in dextran and burn oedemas and in acute lymphoedema in rats.
Activity against lymphoedema was primarily attributed to an
enhancement of macrophage proteolytic activity’? Slight
increases in foot oedema were attributed to a vasodilatory action.
The trichomonacidal activity of calendula has been associated
with the essential oil terpenoid fraction.
An in vitro uterotonic effect has been described for calendula
extract on rabbit and guinea-pig preparations.''*)
Immunostimulant activity, assayed using granulocyte and
carbon clearance tests, of calendula extracts has been attributed
to polysaccharide fractions of high molecular weight.''”) Poly-
saccharides PS-I, -II and -III have immunostimulant activity at
concentrations of 10-° to 10° mg/mL, stimulating phagocytosis
of human granulocytes in vitro.” A dry 70% ethanolic extract
was not directly mitogenic, and was inhibitory in the mitogen-
induced lymphocyte assay, causing stimulation at concentrations
of 0.1-10 pg/mL, and inhibition at higher concentrations.”

Figure 3 Calendula — dried drug substance (flower).

----- PAGE 134 -----
A 70% methanolic extract of calendula was successively
extracted with ether, chloroform, ethyl acetate and n-butanol,
leaving a residual aqueous extract. Each of the five extracts were
concentrated and dissolved in 50% ethanol to produce 6% (w/v)
solutions which were assessed for activity on liposomal lipid
peroxidation induced by Fe** and ascorbic acid. The ether,
butanol and water extracts showed antioxidant activity.°”

The triterpenoid constituents of calendula are reported to be
effective as spermicides and as antiblastocyst and abortion
agents. ‘@>)

In vitro cytotoxic activity and in vivo antitumour activity
(against mouse Ehrlich carcinoma) have been documented for
calendula extracts.” The most active fraction in vivo (saponin-
rich) was not the most active in vitro.

A 70% aqueous ethanolic extract had marked antiviral activity
against influenza virus and herpes simplex virus.“ A dichlor-
omethane—methanol (1:1) extract exhibited potent anti-HIV
activity in an in vitro MTT/tetrazolium-based assay.”” Un-
infected Molt-4 cells were completely protected for up to 24 hours
from fusion and subsequent death caused by co-cultivation with
persistently infected U-937/HIV-1 cells. The organic extract
caused a significant concentration- and time-dependent reduction
of HIV-1 reverse transcriptase.”

In a study in mice fed for three weeks with a diet containing
either 0.1% or 0.4% of a calendula extract (containing 37% of
esters of the carotenoid lutein), mammary tumour cells were
infused into the mammary glands. Tumour latency increased, and
tumour growth was inhibited in a dose-dependent manner by
dietary lutein. In addition, dietary lutein was reported to enhance
lymphocyte proliferation.?»

Clinical studies

Clinical research assessing the effects of calendula preparations is
limited, and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

A proprietary cream preparation containing several plant
extracts, including calendula, has been reported to reduce pain
associated with postmastectomy lymphoedema, although there
was no significant clinical difference in the reduction of oedema
between controls and experimental groups.” Calendula tincture
20% has been used in the treatment of chronic suppurative
otitis,” and calendula extracts are used to accelerate healing and
to reduce inflammation.” However, the efficacy of calendula
preparations in these indications has not been assessed in
randomised controlled clinical trials. In an open, uncontrolled
pilot study, 30 patients with burns or scalds were treated three
times daily with a hydrogel containing 10% aqueous ethanolic
extract of calendula for 14 days.? Improvement was noted for
reddening, swelling, blistering, pain, soreness and heat sensitivity.
However, the methodological limitations of this study do not
allow any conclusions to be made on the effects of calendula.

Side-effects, To:

An aqueous extract of calendula had an LDso9 of 375 mg/kg
(intravenous administration) and an LDjo9 of 580 mg/kg (intra-
peritoneal administration) in mice.'°*?) Aqueous ethanolic
extracts (drug/extract ratio 1:1 and 0.5:1, 30% ethanol) had
LDso values of 45mg/mouse (subcutaneous administration) and
526 mg/100g in rat (intravenous administration). An aqueous
extract was not toxic following chronic administration to mice.
Six saponins at doses of 400 1g were non-mutagenic in the Ames
test using Salmonella typhimurium TA98 with and without S9

Calendula

activation mixture.'©*) In vitro cytotoxicity has been reported for

calendula extracts." Extracts have been reported to be non-
carcinogenic in rats and hamsters.'°*”)

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for calendula
and investigation of these aspects is required.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Calendula may cause an allergic reaction in sensitive individuals,
especially those with an existing hypersensitivity to other
members of the Asteraceae/Compositae.

Drug interactions None documentated. However, the potential
for preparations of calendula to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Calendula is traditionally reputed to
affect the menstrual cycle. An uterotonic effect (in vitro) has been
reported, and the triterpenoid constituents are reported to be
effective as spermatocides and as antiblastocyst and abortion
agents. In view of the lack of toxicity data, the use of calendula is
best avoided during pregnancy and lactation.

Hemorrogel. Germany: bioplant-Kamillenfluid; Cefawell;
Nephronorm med; Unguentum lymphaticum. Italy: Alkagin;
Babygella; Decon Ovuli; Lenirose; Nevril; Proctopure. Mexico:
Sanicut; Supranettes Naturalag. Portugal: Alkagin; Alkagin;
Alkagin; Cicaderma. South Africa: Heilsalbe; Oleam Rhinale
Nasal Oil; Wecesin. Spain: Banoftal; Menstrunat. Switzerland:
Gel a la consoude; Onguent aux herbes Keller; Urinex; Wala
Echinacea. UK: Calendula Nappy Change Cream; Massage
Balm with Calendula; Napiers Echinacea Tea. USA: Nasal-
Ease; Ultimate Antioxidant Formula. Venezuela: Biomicovo;
Supranettes.

References

1 Vidal-Ollivier E et al. Flavonol glycosides from Calendula officinalis
flowers. Planta Med 1989; 55: 73.

2 Varljen J et al. Structural analysis of a rhamnoarabinogalactan and
arabinogalactans with immuno-stimulating activity from Calendula
officinalis. Phytochemistry 1989; 28: 2379-2383.

3. Zitterl-Eglseer K et al. Anti-oedematous activities of the main
triterpendiol esters of marigold (Calendula officinalis L.). J
Ethnopharmacol 1997; 57: 139-144.

4 Pizza C et al. Plant metabolites. Triterpenoid saponins from
Calendula arvensis. ] Nat Prod 1987; 50: 927-931.

----- PAGE 135 -----
10

1

12

13

14

15

Calendula

Della Loggia R et al. The role of triterpenoids in the topical anti-
inflammatory activity of Calendula officinalis flowers. Planta Med
1994; 60: 516-520.

Gracza L. Oxygen-containing terpene derivatives from Calendula
officinalis. Planta Med 1987; 53: 227.

Willuhn G, Westhaus R-G. Loliolide (Calendin) from Calendula
officinalis. Planta Med 1987; 53: 304.

Pizza C, de Tommasi N. Plants metabolites. A new sesquiterpene
glycoside from Calendula arvensis. ] Nat Prod 1987; 50: 784-789.
Fleischner AM. Plant extracts: To accelerate healing and reduce
inflammation. Cosmet Toilet 1985; 100: 45.

Boucard-Maitre Y et al. Cytotoxic and antitumoral activity of
Calendula officinalis extracts. Pharmazie 1988; 43: 220.

Peyroux J e¢ al. Propriétés anti-oedémateuses et anti-hyperhémiantes
du Calendula officinalis L. Plant Méd Phytothér 1981; 15: 210-216.
Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

Della Loggia R e¢ al. Topical anti-inflammatory activity of Calendula
officinalis extracts. Planta Med 1990; 56: 658.

Schmidgall J et al. Evidence for bioadhesive effects of polysaccharides
and polysaccharide-containing herbs in a ex vivo bioadhesion assay on
buccal membranes. Planta Med 2000; 66: 48-53.

Patrick KFM et al. Induction of vascularisation by an aqueous extract
of the flowers of Calendula officinalis L. the European marigold.
Phytomedicine 1996; 3: 11-18.

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

Kioucek-Popova E et al. Influence of the physiological regeneration
and epithelization using fractions isolated from Calendula officinalis.
Acta Physiol Pharmacol Bulg 1982; 8: 63-67.

Casley-Smith JR, Casley-Smith JR. The effect of 'Unguentum
lymphaticum' on acute experimental lymphedema and other high-
protein edemas. Lymphology 1983; 16: 150-156.

Shipochliev T. Extracts from a group of medicinal plants enhancing
the uterine tonus. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 4: 94-98.

Wagner H et al. Immunostimulating polysaccharides (heteroglycans)
of higher plants. Arzneimittelforschung 1985; 35: 1069.

Amirghofran Z et al. Evaluation of the immunomodulatory effects of
five herbal plants. J Ethnopharmacol 2000; 72: 167-712.

Popovié M et al. Combined effects of plant extracts and xenobiotics
on liposomal lipid peroxidation. Part 1. Marigold extract-
ciprofloxacin/pyralene. Oxidation Commun 1999; 22: 487-494.
Kalvatchev Z et al. Anti-HIV activity of extracts from Calendula
officinalis flowers. Biomed Pharmacother 1997; 51: 176-180.

Chew BP et al. Effects of lutein from marigold extract on immunity
and growth of mammary tumors in mice. Anticancer Res 1996; 16:
3689-3694.

Shaparenko BA. On use of medicinal plants for treatment of patients
with chronic suppurative otitis. Zh Ushn Gorl Bolezn 1979; 39: 48-51.
Baranov von AP. Calendula — wie ist die wirksamkeit bei
verbrennungen und verbrithungen? Disch Apotheker Zeitung 1999;
139: 2135-2138.

----- PAGE 136 -----
= Capsicum

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Capsicum is commonly used in both foods and medicinal
products. The capsaicinoids are principally responsible for the
biological activity of capsicum. These pungent principles are
thought to stimulate and aid digestion and to act as a
counter-irritant when applied externally. Capsaicin has also
been used as a neurochemical tool for studying sensory
neurotransmission. Topical creams containing capsaicin
0.025% and 0.075% are licensed in the UK for symptomatic
relief of osteoarthritis, and post-herpetic neuralgia,
respectively. Capsicum oleoresin and capsaicin are
ingredients of a number of over-the-counter (OTC) topical
preparations for relief of pain in muscle, tendon and joints.
Conflicting reports have been documented concerning the
effect of capsicum on acid secretion and on ulcer healing.
Capsaicin-sensitive areas of the gastric and duodenal mucosa
are thought to provide protection against mucosal damage. It
has been suggested that this protection is lost if the sensory
fibres are desensitised. Whether oral consumption of
capsicum by humans can cause desensitisation is unclear. The
toxicity of capsicum extracts observed in animals is
considered to be due to the capsaicinoid components.
However, ingestion of capsicum in the diet is not thought to
represent a health risk. Capsicum should not be ingested in
doses greatly exceeding amounts normally used in foods.

Species (Family)

Capsicum spe (Solanaceae) including C. annum L., C.
baccatum L., C. chinense Jacq., C. frutescens L., C. pubescens

Ruiz & Pavon, C. minimum Roxb.

Synonym(s)
Cayenne, Chilli Pepper, Hot Pepper, Paprika, Red Pepper, Tabasco
Pepper

Part(s) Used

Fruit

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission E (Paprika’
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'08

USP29/NF24'0*°)

H,C\
H

HO

\@)

capsaicin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of capsicum.

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22 and G41.

Capsaicinoids Up to 1.5%, usually 0.11%. Major components
capsaicin (48.6%), 6,7-dihydrocapsaicin (36%), nordihydrocapsai-
cin (7.4%), homodihydrocapsaicin (2%) and homocapsaicin

(2%).

Volatile oils Trace. Over 125 components have been isolated with
d.

at least 24 characteri

Other constituents Carotenoid pigments (capsanthin, capsor-
ubin, carotene, lutein), proteins (12-15%), fats (9-17%), vitamins
including A and C.

Other plant parts The plant material contains solanidine,
solanine and solasodine (steroidal alkaloidal glycosides) and
scopoletin (coumarin).

Food Use

Capsicum (chilli) peppers are widely used as a spice. Capsicum is
listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of food
flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that capsicum
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.‘@!® Previously, capsicum has been stated to be GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).‘C*”

Figure 2 Capsicum (Capsicum annum).

----- PAGE 137 -----
Capsicum

Herbal Use

Capsicum is stated to possess stimulant, antispasmodic, carmi-
native, diaphoretic, counterirritant, antiseptic and rubefacient
properties.°*°7° Traditionally, it has been used for colic,
flatulent dyspepsia without inflammation, chronic laryngitis (as a
gargle), insufficiency of peripheral circulation and externally for
neuralgia including rheumatic pains and unbroken chilblains (as a
lotion/ointment). The German Commission E approved external
use for treatment of painful muscle spasms in shoulder, arm and

spine; arthritis, rheumatism, lumbago and chilblains.'C»

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Fruit 30-120 mg three times daily.”

Capsicum Tincture (BPC 1968) 0.3-1.0mL; capsaicin content
0.005-0.01%

Stronger Tincture of Capsicum (BPC 1934) 0.06-2.0 mL.

Oleoresin 0.6-2.0 mg.'°*

Oleoresin, internal 1.2 mg (maximum dose), 1.8 mg (maximum
daily dose).(”

Oleoresin, external 2.5% maximum strength.'@*”

Creams, ointments 0.02-0.05%.'*

Pharmacological Actions

Capsaicin has effects on nervous, cardiovascular, respiratory,
thermoregulatory and gastrointestinal systems.) Capsaicin has
been used as a neurochemical tool for studying sensory

neurotransmission."?

In vitro and animal studies

Infusion of capsaicin (200,1g/kg, by intravenous injection) has
been reported to evoke dose-dependent catecholamine secretion
(adrenaline, noradrenaline) from the adrenal medulla of pento-
barbitone-anaesthetised rats.)

The addition of capsaicin (0.014%) to a high-fat (30%) diet fed
to rats was found to reduce serum-triglyceride concentrations but
to have no effect on serum cholesterol or pre-f-lipoprotein

Figure 3. Capsicum — dried drug substance (fruit).

concentrations.°) Capsaicin was thought to stimulate lipid

mobilisation from adipose tissue. Lipid absorption was unaffected
by capsaicin supplementation.

Activities of two hepatic enzymes, glucose-6-phosphate dehy-
drogenase and adipose lipoprotein lipase, were elevated in rats
when capsaicin was added to the diet.°) Capsicum extracts fed
orally to hamsters have been reported to significantly decrease
epatic vitamin A concentrations. Serum vitamin A concentra-
tions were not affected.

Both the gastric and duodenal mucosae are thought to contain
capsaicin-sensitive’ areas which afford protection against acid-
and drug-induced ulcers when stimulated by hydrochloric acid or
by capsaicin itself. Stimulation causes an increase in mucosal
blood flow and/or vascular permeability, inhibits gastric motility,
and activates duodenal motility.’ Desensitisation of these areas,
using a regimen involving subcutaneous or oral administration of
capsaicin, is thought to remove the protection.”
capsaicin desensitisation was found to have little effect on
peripheral responses to stress (i.e. ulcer formation) but did
enhance central responses (increase in plasma corticosterone
concentration) in rats. The increase in plasma corticosterone
concentration observed in capsaicin-desensitised rats was similar
in stressed and non-stressed animals.”

Capsaicin was found to influence adrenal cortical activity
independently of the presence of a stress factor and may represent
a stressor in itself.'9 Capsaicin desensitisation was not found to
influence basal gastric acid secretion in non-stressed rats, but did
lower pentagastrin-stimulated gastric output. However, other
results have reported that capsaicin desensitisation does increase
acid secretion.

Capsicum (leaf and stem) has been reported to exhibit uterine
stimulant activity in animal studies.(@

Pharmacokinetic studies in rats have reported that capsaicin is
readily transported via the gastrointestinal tract and absorbed
through non-active transport into the portal vein.° Capsaicin is
partly hydrolysed during absorption and the majority is excreted
in the urine within 48 hours.” Dihydrocapsaicin-hydrolysing
enzyme is present in various organs of the rat but principally in
the gastrointestinal tract and the liver. The biotransformation
pathway of dihydrocapsaicin in the rat has been studied.”
Metabolites are mainly excreted as glucuronide conjugates in the
urine.

1

However,

Clinical studies

Ingestion of red chillies (10g in wheatmeal) by patients with
duodenal ulcers and by control patients does not have a significant
effect on acid or pepsin secretion, or on sodium, potassium and
chloride concentrations in the gastric aspirate."®) No apparent
change (qualitative or quantitative) in mucous and gastric mucosal
erosion was evident.'*) However, in contrast, capsicum has been
shown to increase acid concentration and DNA content (indicat-
ing exfoliation of epithelial cells) of gastric aspirates in both
control subjects and patients with duodenal ulcers." A study
involving 18 healthy volunteers suggested that chilli (20g in
200 mL water) protected against aspirin-induced gastroduodenal
mucosal injury, compared with control (water).

Capsicum is applied externally as a counter-irritant in many
preparations used for rheumatism, arthritis, neuralgia and
lumbago. Clinical studies of topical preparations containing
capsaicin have investigated its effectiveness in the treatment of
chronic post-herpetic neuralgia, shingles, diabetic neuropathy,
rhinopathy and neuropathic pain in cancer patients.“ A

----- PAGE 138 -----
systematic review of randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trials of topical capsaicin included 13 trials involving
patients with diabetic neuropathy, osteoarthritis, post-herpetic
neuralgia, postmastectomy pain and psoriasis." All the included
trials reported that capsaicin was superior to placebo. However,
the review drew cautious conclusions because blinding may have
been compromised by the irritant effects of capsaicin.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Capsicum contains pungent principles (capsaicinoids) that are
strongly irritant to mucosal membranes. Inhalation of paprika can
produce a form of allergic alveolitis.“@°”

Chronic administration of capsicum extract (0.5 fg capsaicin/
kg body weight) to hamsters has been reported to be toxic.
Treated animals did not survive beyond 17 months whereas all
untreated controls survived beyond this period. In addition, eye
abnormalities were observed in the treated animals. This effect
was attributed to the depletion of substance P in primary afferent
neurons by capsaicin, causing a loss of corneal pain sensation and
subsequently the loss of protective corneal reflexes.”

It is thought that metabolism of capsaicin and related analogues
may reduce their acute toxicity.” LDso values stated for capsaicin
in mice include 0.56 mg/kg (intravenous), 7.56 mg/kg (intraper-
itoneal), 9.00 mg/kg (subcutaneous) and 190 mg/kg (oral). In rats,
an intraperitoneal LDs9 of 10mg/kg has been reported for
capsaicin.” The toxicity of capsaicinoids has reportedly not
been ascribed to any one specific action but may be due to their
causing respiratory failure, bradycardia and hypotension.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Capsicum may cause gastrointestinal irritation, although it has
been stated that capsicum does not influence the healing of
duodenal ulcers and does not need to be avoided by patients with
this condition."

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of capsicum to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

There is limited evidence from preclinical studies that capsicum
can stimulate catecholamine release and that it can induce activity
of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and adipose lipoprotein
lipase in the liver. However, the clinical significance of this, if any
(particularly for topical preparations), is not known.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of capsicum during pregnancy, although it may cause
gastrointestinal irritation and should therefore be used with
caution. Doses should not greatly exceed amounts normally
ingested in foods. It is not known whether the pungent
components in capsicum are secreted into breast milk.

Capsicum

Medalginan. Russia: Efcamon (9¢dpkamon); Espol (2ctio.
South Africa: Muscle Rub; Tandpyndruppels. Spain: Dolokey;
Embrocacion Gras; Linimento Naion. Switzerland: Midalgan.
Thailand: Flatulence Gastulence; Meloids. UK: Allens Dry
Tickly Cough; Buttercup Syrup; Catarrh Mixture; Hactos;
Hansaplast Herbal Heat Plaster; Honey & Molasses; Indian
Brandee; Indian Brandee; Indigestion Relief; Jamaican Sarsa-
parilla; Kilkof; Life Drops; Rheumatic Pain Relief; Sanderson's
Throat Specific; Sanderson's Throat Specific; Vegetable Cough
Remover. USA: MSM with Glucosamine Creme; Throat Discs.
Venezuela: Ehrlich Balsamo.

References

1 Locock RA. Capsicum. Can Pharm J 1985; 118: 517-519.

2 Watanabe T et al. Capsaicin, a pungent principle of hot red pepper,
evokes catecholamine secretion from the adrenal medulla of
anesthetized rats. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1987; 142: 259-264.

3 Kawada T et al. Effects of capsaicin on lipid metabolism in rats fed a
high fat diet. J Nutr 1986; 116: 1272-1278.

4 Agrawal RC et al. Chilli extract treatment and induction of eye lesions
in hamsters. Toxicol Lett 1985; 28: 1-7.

5 Maggi CA et al. Capsaicin-sensitive mechanisms and experimentally
induced duodenal ulcers in rats. | Pharm Pharmacol 1987; 39: 559—
S61.

6 Dugani A, Glavin GB. Capsaicin effects on stress pathology and
gastric acid secretion in rats. Life Sci 1986; 39: 1531-1538.

7 Kawada T, Iwai K. In vivo and in vitro metabolism of
dihydrocapsaicin, a pungent principle of hot pepper in rats. Agric Biol
Chem 1985; 49: 441-448.

8 Pimparkar BND et al. Effects of commonly used spices on human
gastric secretion. J Assoc Physicians India 1972: 20: 901-910.

9 Yeoh KG et al. Chili protects against aspirin-induced gastroduodenal
mucosal injury in humans. Dig Dis Sci 1995; 40: 580-583.

10 Zhang WY et al. The effectiveness of topically applied capsaicin. Eur J
Clin Pharmacol 1994; 46: 517-522.

----- PAGE 139 -----
Cascara

been superseded by bulk-forming laxatives. However, the use
of non-standardised anthraquinone-containing preparations
should be avoided since their pharmacological effects will be
variable and unpredictable. In particular, the use of products
containing combinations of anthraquinone laxatives is not
advisable.

Species (Family)

Rhamnus purshiana DC. (Frangula purshiana (DC). A. Gray ex J.
C. Cooper) (Rhamnaceae)

Synonym(s)

Cascara Sagrada, Rhamni Purshianae Cortex, Rhamnus

Part(s) Used
Bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission EO
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'@*

Ph Eur 20078

USP29/NF24'68°

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6, G52, G59 and Gé2.

Anthracene glycosides Pharmacopoeial standard, not less than
8% hydroxyanthracene glycosides.“'°® Cascarosides A and B
are anthrone C- and O-glycosides being 8-O-B-p-glucosides of 10-
S-deoxyglucosyl aloe-emodin anthrone (aloin A) and of 10-R-
deoxyglucosyl aloe-emodin anthrone (aloin B), respectively.
Cascarosides C and D are the 8-O-B-p-glucosides of 10-(R)-(S)-
deoxyglucosyl chrysophanol anthrone (chrysaloin A and B,
respectively). Cascarosides E and F are the 8-O-B-p-glucosides
of 10-deoxyglucosyl emodin-9-anthrone. The cascarosides com-
prise 60-70% of the total hydroxyanthracene complex. Aloins A
and B, chrysaloins A and B account for 10-30% of the total
hydroxyanthracene complex. The remaining 10-20% is a mixture
of hydroxyanthracene O-glycosides including monoglucosides of
aloe-emodin, chrysophanol, emodin and physcion.

Other constituents Linoleic acid, myristic acid, syringic acid,
lipids, resin and tannin.

Food Use

Cascara is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N4). This category indicates that while
the use of cascara for flavouring purposes is recognised, it cannot
be classified into the categories N1, N2 or N3 because of
insufficient information.'©!® Previously, in the USA, cascara has
been approved for food use.'“*”

Herbal Use

Cascara is stated to possess mild purgative properties and has
been used for constipation. The German Commission E approved
use for treatment of constipation.'°®

Anthracene glycosides
oR' O OH

R! R? Re R*

cascaroside A $-D-glucose OH H B-D-glucose
cascaroside B f-D-glucose OH f-D-glucose H

cascaroside C f-D-glucose H H B-D-glucose
cascaroside D B-D-glucose H  -D-glucose H
OH O- OH
, CH2R'
RR?
R' Re Re
aloin A OH H B-D-glucose
aloin B OH -D-glucose H
(+)-11-desoxyaloin H H B-D-glucose

(-)-11-desoxyaloin H — B-D-glucose H

Anthraquinones

OH O OH
ALLA,
°

R' Re
emodin OH CH3
aloe emodin H CH2OH
chrysophanol H CH3
physcion OCH3 CHg3

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cascara.

----- PAGE 140 -----
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried bark 0.3-1g as a single daily dose."
Infusion 1.5-2.g of dried bark in 150 mL hot water.'©°®
Cascara Liquid Extract (BP 1980) 2-5 mL.

G3, G76)

Preparations Equivalent to 20-30 mg hydroxyanthracene deriva-
tives calculated as cascaroside A, daily.'C>°

Cascara is not recommended for use in children under 10 years
of age.'C

Pharmacological Actions

The laxative action of anthraquinone glycosides is well recognised
(see Senna). Cascara has a laxative action.{C4 97

Clinical studies
Studies involving elderly patients suggest that cascara treatment,

compared with placebo, leads to relief of constipation and
a

increased bowel movements.
Side-effects, Toxicity

The side-effects and toxicity documented for anthraquinone
glycosides are applicable (see Senna).

Figure 3 Cascara — dried drug substance (bark).

Cascara

Contra-indications, Warnings

Contra-indications and warnings described for antraquinone
glycosides are applicable (see Senna).

Cascara is contra-indicated for patients with intestinal
obstruction and stenosis, atony, inflamatory diseases of the colon
(e.g. Crohn's disease, colitis), appendicitis, abdominal pain of
unknown origin, severe dehydration states with water and
electrolyte depletion and in children under 10 years.'°” Cascara
should not be used over an extended period of time — use for more
than two weeks requires medical supervision.

Drug interactions Hypokalaemia (resulting from long-term
laxative abuse) potentiates the action of cardiac glycosides and
interacts with antiarrhythmic drugs or with drugs that induce
reversion to sinus rhythm (e.g. quinidine). Concomittant use of
cascara with other drugs inducing hypokalaemia (e.g. thiazide-
diuretics, andrenocorticosteroids, liquorice root) may aggravate
electrolyte imbalance.'°”

Pregnancy and lactation Cascara should not be used during
pregnancy and lactation.

Preparations

Proprietary single-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Natulax. France: Peristaltine. Germany: Legapas.
Portugal: Laxolen; Mucinum.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Bilidren; Cascara Sagrada Bouzen; Veracolate; Yuyo.
Australia: Colax; Colax; Peritone. Austria: Cascara-Salax;
Silberne. Belgium: Grains de Vals; Vethoine. Brazil: Bilifel;
Boldopeptan; Chofranina; Composto Emagrecedor; Emagrevit;
Eparema; Jurubileno; Pilulas De Witt's; Prisoventril; Solvobil;
Ventre Livre. Canada: Bicholate; Cholasyn II; Control; Doulax;
Herbal Laxative; Herbalax; Herborex; Laxaco; Laxative;
Mucinum. Chile: Bulgarolax. France: Dragees Fuca; Dragees
Vegetales Rex; Grains de Vals; Imegul; Mucinum a I'Extrait de
Cascara. Hong Kong: Mucinum Cascara. Italy: Amaro
Medicinale; Coladren; Confetti Lassativi CM; Critichol;
Digelax; Dis-Cinil Complex; Draverex; Eparema-Levul; Epar-
ema; Eupatol; Fave di Fuca; Grani di Vals; Hepatos B12;
Hepatos; Lassatina; Magisbile; Mepalax; Solvobil; Stimolfit.
Norway: Cosylan. South Africa: Moultons Herbal Extract.
Spain: Crislaxo; Lipograsil; Menabil Complex; Nico Hepato-
cyn; Pildoras Zeninas. Sweden: Emulax. Switzerland: Padma-
Lax; Padmed Laxan. Thailand: Flatulence Gastulence; Hemo-
lax; Veracolate. UK: Dual-Lax Extra Strong; Dual-Lax Normal
Strength; Jacksons Herbal Laxative; Laxative Tablets; Modern
Herbals Laxative; Modern Herbals Pile; Natural Herb Tablets;
Out-of-Sorts; Pileabs; Piletabs; Rhuaka; Skin Eruptions Mix-
ture. USA: Citrimax Plus with ChromeMate; Concentrated
Milk of Magnesia-Cascara. Venezuela: Gameral.

Reference

1 Petticrew M et al. Epidemiology of constipation in the general adult
population. Health Technol Assess 1997; 1: 1-52.

----- PAGE 141 -----
= Cassia

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Cassia is similar in composition to cinnamon and both are
widely used as flavouring agents in foods, and in
pharmaceutical and cosmetic preparations. Cassia oil is stated
to be inferior in flavour to cinnamon oil. The reputed herbal
uses of cassia have been attributed to the oil. Cassia contains
an irritant and sensitising principle in the oil,
cinnamaldehyde, and should not be used in amounts
generally exceeding those used in foods. It has been
recommended that the oil should never be applied topically.

Species (Family)

Cinnamomum cassia Pressl. (Lauraceae)

Synonym(s)

Cassia Bark, Cassia Lignea, Chinese Cinnamon, Cinnamomum
aromaticum Nees, Cinnamomum pseudomelastoma auct. non
Liao, False Cinnamon

Part(s) Used
Bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

Martindale 35th edition'°*”
PhEur 2007”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL (oil) ‘6?

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G41, G58, G59 and G62.
Phenylpropanoids
CHO
Za

HCO
OCH

cinnamaldehyde methyleugenol

Phenols
CHO
OH

salicylaldehyde

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cassia.

Volatile oils 1-2%. Mainly composed of cinnamaldehyde (75—
90%). Other major components include salicylaldehyde, methyl-
salicylaldehyde, and methyleugenol. Eugenol is reported to be
a oil contains no monoterpenoids or sesquiterpe-

absent. C
noids."

Other constituents Calcium oxalate, coumarin, mucilage (higher
content compared to cinnamon), resins, sugars and tannins
(condensed). Complex diterpenoids have been isolated from
cinnamomi cortex, for which C. cassia is used as a source.‘

Food Use

Cassia bark and oil are extensively used as food flavourings. A
temporary estimated acceptable daily intake of cinnamaldehyde is
700 g/kg body weight. Previously, cassia has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).“*?

Herbal Use

Cassia is stated to possess carminative, antispasmodic, anti-
emetic, antidiarrhoeal and antimicrobial properties. It has been
used for flatulent dyspepsia, flatulent colic, diarrhoea, the
common cold, and specifically for colic or dyspepsia with flatulent
distension and nausea.'©” Cassia bark is also documented to
possess astringent properties.(C4h 6% Carminative and antiseptic
properties are documented for the oil.(@*”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried bark 0.5-1g as an infusion three times daily.'©”?

Oil of cassia (BPC 1949) 0.05-0.2 mL three times daily.'°”

Figure 2 Cassia (Cinnamomum cassia).

----- PAGE 142 -----
Figure 3 Cassia — dried drug substance (bark).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-ulcerogenic properties have been described for two propionic
derivatives isolated from cassia.?) An in vivo study using rats
reported activity against a variety of ulcerogens including
serotonin, phenylbutazone, ethanol, water immersion and stress.
The compounds were thought to act by improving gastric blood
flow rather than by inhibiting gastric secretion.

Many pharmacological investigations have been carried out on
cinnamomi cortex (bark), for which sources include C. cassia
(cassia) and Cinnamomum zeylanicum (cinnamon). These studies
have either examined the volatile oil, in particular the major
constituent cinnamaldehyde, or parts excluding the oil."

Activities documented for cinnamaldehyde include CNS
stimulation (low dose), sedation (high dose), hypothermic and
antipyretic actions;‘*°* antibacterial and antifungal activity,
acceleration of catecholamine (mainly adrenaline) release from the
adrenal glands, weak papaverine-like action, increase in peripheral
blood flow, hypotension, bradycardia and hyperglycaemia have
also been reported.' However, these actions are of low potency
and, in addition, much of the cinnamaldehyde content of cassia is
thought to be lost by evaporation and auto-oxidation during
decoction of the crude drug. The contribution of cinnamaldehyde
to the overall therapeutic efficacy of cassia has, therefore, been
questioned.”

Actions observed for essential oil-free aqueous extracts have
been reported to be weak, and the only appreciable effects are
prolongation of barbiturate-induced sedation and a_ slight
reduction of acetic acid-induced writhing.”

In vivo inhibitory activity against complement formation has
been documented and attributed to the diterpenoid and condensed

Cassia

tannin constituents. Anti-inflammatory activity exhibited by the
Japanese plant Cinnamomum sieboldii Meisn (also used as a
source for cassia bark), has been attributed to a series of
condensed tannin constituents. Antiplatelet aggregation and
antithrombotic actions have also been reported. These actions,
together with the documented anti-inflammatory activity, are
thought to contribute to the suppression of thrombus formation
in certain diseases."

Antitumour activity has been described and the activity depends
on the plant source used.”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of cassia
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Allergic reactions, mainly contact sensitivity, to cassia oil and bark
have been reported.‘ °® Cinnamaldehyde in toothpastes and
perfumes has also been reported to cause contact sensitivity.“0*)
Cassia oil is stated to cause dermal and mucous membrane
irritation.°**) The irritant and sensitising properties of cassia oil
have been attributed to cinnamaldehyde.““® The dermal LDso
value for cassia oil is stated as 320 mg/kg body weight.‘

There is a lack of clinical safety data and toxicity data for cassia
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Contact with cassia bark or oil may cause an allergic reaction.
Cassia oil is stated to be one of the most hazardous oils and
should not be used on the skin in concentrations of more than
0.2% (08)

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of cassia to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of cassia during pregnancy, provided that amounts taken
do not exceed those generally used in foods. It is not known
whether the constituents of cassia are secreted into breast milk.

References

1 Hikino H. Oriental medicinal plants. In: Wagner H et al., eds.
Economic and Medicinal Plants, vol 1. London: Academic Press, 1985:
69-70.

2. Tanaka S e¢ al. Antiulcerogenic compounds isolated from Chinese
Cinnamon. Planta Med 1989; 55: 245-248.

----- PAGE 143 -----
= Cat’s Claw

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of cat’s claw is well documented. Reported
pharmacological activities are mainly associated with the
oxindole alkaloids and the quinovic acid glycosides.

The two species Uncaria tomentosa and U. guianensis may
be confused. In addition, there are two chemotypes of U.
tomentosa, one predominantly producing pentacyclic
oxindole alkaloids, and the other tetracyclic oxindole
alkaloids. Since the tetracyclic oxindole alkaloids have been
reported to antagonise the immunostimulant effect of the
pentacyclic oxindole alkaloids on human cells in vitro, it has
been stated that mixtures of the two chemotypes of cat’s claw
are unsuitable for therapeutic use unless certified to contain
less than 0.02% tetracyclic oxindole alkaloids.

Documented scientific evidence from in vitro and, to a
lesser extent, animal studies provides some supportive
evidence for some of the uses of cat’s claw. However, there is
a lack of clinical data, and well-designed clinical trials
involving adequate numbers of patients and using
standardised preparations manufactured from the
appropriate chemotype are necessary.

In view of the lack of toxicity and safety data, excessive use
of cat’s claw should be avoided. Individuals wishing to use
cat’s claw concurrently with conventional medicines should
first seek advice from an appropriate healthcare professional.

Species (Family)
Uncaria tomentosa (Willd. ex Schult.) DC., Uncaria guianensis
(Aubl.) Gmel. (Rubiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Life-giving Vine of Peru, Savéntaro, Ujia de gato

Part(s) Used

Roots, root bark, stem bark and leaves

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

None

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Cat's claw is not included in the GSL.'@”

Constituents

Alkaloids Both U. tomentosa and U. guianensis yield oxindole
alkaloids, including isorhynchophylline and rhynchophylline and
their N-oxides, mitraphylline and the indole alkaloids dihydro-
corynantheine, hirsutine and hirsuteine." Glucoalkaloids includ-
ing 3,4-dehydro-5-carboxystrictosidine, carboxystrictosidine and
lyaloside are also present. U. tomentosa also contains isomitra-
phylline, its N-oxide, dihydrocorynantheine N-oxide and hirsutine
N-oxide.)

There are two chemotypes of U. tomentosa which differ
markedly in their patterns of alkaloids present in the root bark;
in addition, the alkaloidal pattern of individual plants changes
2:3) One chemotype primarily contains the pentacyclic
oxindole alkaloids pteropodine, isopteropodine, mitraphylline,
isomitraphylline, uncarine F and speciophylline,“ whereas the
other chemotype primarily contains the tetrac
alkaloids rhynchophylline and isorhynchophylline."? Although a
particular plant may contain either tetracyclic or pentacyclic
oxindole alkaloids predominantly, both types of alkaloids can co-

with time.

ic oxindole

occur in the same plant.'>*

Other constituents Quinovic acid glycosides have been isolated
from both  species.~”) Polyhydroxylated  triterpenes"!? and
steroids (B-sitosterol, stigmasterol, campesterol)'!) occur in U.
tomentosa. An unidentified South American species of Uncaria
(presumably either U. guianensis or U. tomentosa) contains
polyphenols ((—)-epicatechin and procyanidins).

Food Use

Cat's claw is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Cat's claw is stated to possess anti-inflammatory, antiviral,
antioxidant, immunostimulating, antirheumatic and anticancer
properties.“ It is native to the Amazon and has been used
traditionally to treat gonorrhoea, dysentry, arthritis, rheumatism,
gastric ulcers and various tumours.'!”) It is also reputed to be a
contraceptive.

Dosage

None documented in standard herbal and pharmaceutical
reference texts.

Commercial products (tablets, capsules) contain varying
amounts of material, ranging from 25-300mg_ standardised
extract and from 400 mg to 5g of plant material.(©?”

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological activities have been documented for cat's
claw, including anti-inflammatory, antimutagenic, antitumour,
antioxidant and immunostimulating properties. '?)

In vitro and animal studies

Certain oxindole alkaloids isolated from U. tomentosa (isopter-
opodine, pteropodine, isomitraphylline, isorhynchophylline) have
been shown to enhance phagocytosis markedly in vitro.‘
Pentacyclic oxindole alkaloids from U. tomentosa have been
reported to induce the release of a lymphocyte proliferation-
regulating factor from human endothelial cells; tetracyclic
oxindole alkaloids were found to reduce the activity of pentacyclic
oxindole alkaloids on these cells in a concentration-dependent
manner.” !) Stem bark extracts of U. tomentosa have also been
shown to stimulate interleukin 1 (IL-1) and interleukin 6 (IL-6)
production in vitro in rat alveolar macrophages in a concentra-

----- PAGE 144 -----
R Configuration

dihydrocorynantheine ethyl normal
hirsutine ethyl pseudo
hirsuteine vinyl pseudo

R_ Configuration

rhynchophylline ethyl B, normal
isorhynchophylline ethyl! A, normal
corynoxeine vinyl B, normal
isocorynoxeine vinyl A, normal
COOH
N
ny &
H
sO-B-D-glucosy!
H”
SS
Hyco,0~ S~

3,4-dehydro-5-carboxy-strictosidine

a
sO-B-D-glucosyl

H,c0,07 S~
lyaloside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cat’s claw.

tion-dependent manner (range 0.025—0.1 mg/mL) and to potenti-
ate the production of IL-1 and IL-6 in lipopolysaccharide-
stimulated macrophages."

Extracts and fractions of U. tomentosa bark have shown no
mutagenic effect but demonstrated a protective antimutagenic
effect in vitro against 8-methoxypsoralen- and UVA-induced
photomutagenesis in Salmonella typhimurium TA102."7) This
antimutagenic activity may be due to an antioxidant effect of U.
tomentosa."

In vitro antioxidant activity of stem bark and root extracts of U.
tomentosa has been demonstrated in an assay using tert-
butylhydroperoxide-initiated chemoluminescence in rat liver
homogenates." Extracts also prevented free radical-mediated
DNA sugar damage.''*)

In vitro antitumour activity of water extracts of U. tomentosa
(C-Med-100) has been shown in a human leukaemic cell line (HL-

Cat’s Claw

H
CH

HsCO2
R

tetrahydroalstonine allo

akuammigine epiallo

Configuration

mitraphylline B, normal
isomitraphylline A, normal
pteropodine B, allo
isopteropodine A, allo
uncarine F B, epiallo
speciophylline A, epiallo

carboxystrictosidine

60) and a human Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed B
lymphoma cell line (Raji). The suppressive effect of U.
tomentosa extracts on tumour cell growth appear to be mediated
through induction of apoptosis."”) The pentacyclic oxindole
alkaloids uncarine C and uncarine E from U. guianensis have been
identified as cytotoxic and DNA-damaging agents in a yeast-based
assay.?° These alkaloids also showed moderate cytotoxicity to
several mammalian cell lines, including human lung carcinoma.”
In vitro, aqueous extracts of U. tomentosa bark appear to interact
with oestrogen receptor-binding sites.°”

Rhynchophylline has been reported to inhibit rat” and rabbit
platelet aggregation ex vivo.*) Studies in cats and dogs have
reported that rhynchophylline has a negative inotropic effect
which can contribute to a hypotensive effect.° Rhynchophylline
and isorhynchophylline have been reported to have negative
chronotropic and inotropic effects in isolated guinea-pig atria.°°)

----- PAGE 145 -----
Cat's Claw

Isorhynchophylline has been reported to have hypotensive effects
in rats and dogs.°

Trichloromethane/methanol and aqueous extracts of cat's claw
(U. tomentosa) bark have demonstrated anti-inflammatory activity
in the rat paw carrageenan-induced oedema test; a quinovic acid
glycoside was identified as one of the active principles.© An
aqueous extract of cat's claw (U. tomentosa) bark was reported to
protect against oxidant-induced stress in vitro and to attenuate
indometacin-induced chronic intestinal inflammation in rats.°”
Cat's claw extract was found to prevent the activation of the

Triterpenes

R! Re RS
quinovic acid glycosides Gic (3+1)-Fuc Gic H

Glc (3>1)-Fuc H
Glc (3+1)-Fuc Gie

(Gc = glucosyl; Fuc = fucosyl)

Procyanidins

OH OH
HO. OW ws
. ‘OH
OH
OH

"OH

“OH
OH
epicatechin

OH

cinchonainta BH
cinchonain 1b o-H

Figure 2 Selected constituents of cat’s claw.

Figure 3 Cat’s claw — dried drug substance (stem bark).

transcription factor NF-KB, which suggests a mechanism for the
anti-inflammatory activity of cat's claw.”

Quinovic acid glycosides have demonstrated antiviral activity in
in vitro tests against the RNA virus vesicular stomatitis virus.”
Two quinovic acid glycosides also demonstrated in vitro activity
against rhinovirus type 1B.”

Receptor-binding assays using dihydrocorynantheine isolated
from the branchlet and hook of Uncaria sinensis (and also found
in U. tomentosa) have shown that this alkaloid is a partial agonist
for serotonin receptors.?*)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of cat's
claw and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

A decoction of U. tomentosa bark ingested daily for 15 days by
a smoker decreased the mutagenicity induced in S. typhimurium
TA98 and TA100 by the subject's urine; urine from a non-smoker
who ingested the same regimen of U. tomentosa did not show any
mutagenic activity before, during or after treatment.''”

In an uncontrolled study, 13 HIV-positive individuals who
refused to receive other therapies ingested 20mg daily of an
extract of U. tomentosa root (containing 12 mg total pentacyclic
oxindole alkaloids per gram) for 2.2-5 months.” The total
leukocyte number in the group was unchanged, compared with
pretreatment values, whereas the relative and absolute lymphocyte
count increased significantly. No significant changes in T4/TS8 cell
ratios were observed.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for cat's claw and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

There has been an isolated report of acute renal failure in a
Peruvian woman with systemic lupus erythematosus who had
added a product containing cat's claw (one capsule four times
daily, obtained from a local herbal shop) to her regimen of
prednisone, atenolol, metolazone, furosemide and nifedipine.)
The patient had a serum creatinine concentration of 3.6 mg/dL
and was diagnosed with acute allergic interstitial nephritis. She
was advised to discontinue cat's claw and, one month later, her
renal function had improved (serum creatinine 2.7 mg/dL).

Data on the acute oral toxicity of U. tomentosa aqueous root
extract (containing 35 mg total pentacyclic oxindole alkaloids per
gram) in mice and four-week oral toxicity of an aqueous extract of
U. tomentosa root (containing 7.5 mg total oxindole alkaloids per
gram) in rats administered 1000 mg/kg/day have been sum-
marised.''?) The acute median LDsy to mice was found to be
greater than 16 g/kg body weight. In the study in rats, a slight but
statistically significant increase in the percentage of lymphocytes
and a decrease in the percentage of neutrophil granulocytes were
seen. In addition, an increase in the relative weight of the kidneys
in rats of both sexes was noted, although kidney histology was
normal.

In vitro, extracts of U. tomentosa have been shown to possess
antitumour activity and to stimulate production of the cytokines
IL-1 and IL-6, both of which are known to initiate a cascade of
defence activities of the immune system. Oxindole alkaloids from
U. tomentosa have been reported to enhance phago cytosis in vitro
(see Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

The in vitro toxicity of aqueous extracts of U. tomentosa has
been evaluated in bioassays using Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)
cells and bacterial cells (Photobacterium phosphoreum).° At the

----- PAGE 146 -----
concentrations used (10-100 mg/mL), the extracts did not show a
significant cytotoxic effect in CHO cells and demonstrated a non-
toxic effect in the bacterial cells used.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of cat's claw to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that cat's claw has immunostimulant
properties, and it is advised that extracts of the pentacyclic
chemotype of U. tomentosa should be avoided where there is a risk
of organ rejection in patients undergoing transplants; this includes
bone marrow transplants."

There is also limited evidence from preclinical studies that
rhynchophylline inhibits platelet aggregation°*?? and that
rhynchophylline** and isorhynchopylline*® have hypertensive
effects. However, the clinical significance of these, if any, is not
known.

It has been stated that mixtures of the two chemotypes of cat's
claw are unsuitable for therapeutic use unless certified to contain
less than 0.02% tetracyclic oxindole alkaloids.°”

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of cat's claw has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data, use of cat's claw
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided. In addition,
use in children (<3 years) is not advised.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
USA: Cran Support.

References

1 Hemingway SR, Phillipson JD. Alkaloids from South American
species of Uncaria (Rubiaceae). J Pharm Pharmacol 1974; 26 (Suppl.
Suppl.): P113.

2 Laus G, Keplinger D. Separation of stereoisomeric oxindole alkaloids
from Uncaria tomentosa by high performance liquid chromatography.
J Chromatogr 1994; 662: 243-249.

3 Laus G et al. Alkaloids of Peruvian Uncaria tomentosa.
Phytochemistry 1997; 45: 855-860.

4 Montenegro de Matta § et al. Alkaloids and procyanidins of an
Uncaria sp. from Peru. Il Farmaco-Ed Sci 1976; 31: 5227-5235.

5 Phillipson JD e¢ al. Alkaloids of Uncaria. Part V. Their occurrence and
chemotaxonomy. Lloydia 1978; 41: 503-570.

6 Cerri R et al. New quinovic acid glycosides from Uncaria tomentosa. ]
Nat Prod 1988; 51: 257-261.

7 Aquino R et al. Plant metabolites. Structure and in vitro antiviral
activity of quinovic acid glycosides from Uncaria tomentosa and
Guettarda platypoda. J Nat Prod 1989; 52: 679-685.

10

1

12

14

15

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

Cat’s Claw

Aquino R e¢ al. Plant metabolites. New compounds and anti-
inflammatory activity of Uncaria tomentosa. J] Nat Prod 1991; 54:
453-459.

Yepez AM et al. Quinovic acid glycosides from Uncaria guainensis.
Phytochemistry 1991; 30: 1635-1637.

Aquino R et al. New polyhydroxylated triterpenes from Uncaria
tomentosa. ] Nat Prod 1990; 53: 559-564.

Senatore A et al. Richerche fitochimiche e biologiche sull'Uncaria
tomentosa. Boll Soc It Biol Sper 1989; 65: 517-520.

Keplinger K et al. Uncaria tomentosa (Willd.) DC. — ethnomedicinal
use and new pharmacological, toxicological and botanical results. J
Ethnopharmacol 1999; 64: 23-34.

Reinhard K-H. Uncaria tomentosa (Willd.) D.C.: cat's claw, Uita de
gato, Savéntaro. J Alt Complement Med 1999; 5: 143-151.

Wagner H et al. Die alkaloide von Uncaria tomentosa und ihre
Phagozytose-steigernde Wirkung. Planta Med 1985; 51: 419-423.
Wurm M et al. Pentacyclic oxindole alkaloids from Uncaria tomentosa
induce human endothelial cells to release a lymphocyte-proliferation-
regulating factor. Planta Med 1998; 64: 701-704.

Lemaire | et al. Stimulation of interleukin-1 and -6 production in
alveolar macrophages by the Neotropical liana, Uncaria tomentosa
(Ufa de gato). J Ethnopharmacol 1999; 64: 109-115.

Rizzi R et al. Mutagenic and antimutagenic activities of Uncaria
tomentosa and its extracts. ] Ethnopharmacol 1993; 38: 63-77.
Desmarchelier C et al. Evaluation of the in vitro antioxidant activity
in extracts of Uncaria tomentosa (Willd.) DC. Phytother Res 1997; 11:
254-256.

Sheng Y et al. Induction of apoptosis and inhibition of proliferation in

human tumor cells treated with extracts of Uncaria tomentosa.
Anticancer Res 1998; 18: 3363-3368.

Lee KK et al. Bioactive indole alkaloids from the bark of Uncaria
guianensis. Planta Med 1999; 65: 759-760.

Salazar E, Jayme V. Depletion of specific binding sites for estrogen
receptor by Uncaria tomentosa. Proc Western Pharmacol Soc 1998; 41:
123-124.

Jin RM et al. Effect of rhynchophylline on platelet aggregation and
experimental thrombosis. Acta Pharm Sin 1991; 26: 246-249.

Chen C-X et al. Inhibitory effect of rhynchophylline on platelet
aggregation and thrombosis. Acta Pharmacol Sin 1992; 13: 126-130.
Zhang W, Liu G-X. Effects of rhynchophylline on myocardial
contractility in anesthetized dogs and cats. Acta Pharmacol Sin 1986;
7: 426-428.

Zhu Y et al. Negatively chronotropic and inotropic effects of
rhynchophylline and isorhynchophylline on isolated guinea pig atria.
Chin ] Pharmacol Toxicol 1993; 7: 117-121.

Shi JS et al. Hypotensive and hemodynamic effects of
isorhynchophylline in conscious rats and anesthetised dogs. Chin J
Pharmacol Toxicol 1989; 3: 205-210.

Sandoval-Chacon M et al. Antiinflammatory actions of cat's claw: the
role of NF-KB. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1998; 12: 1279-1289.
Kanatani H et al. The active principles of the branchlet and hook of
Uncaria sinensis Oliv. examined with a 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor
binding assay. J Pharm Pharmacol 1985; 37: 401-404.

Hilepo JN et al. Acute renal failure caused by ‘cat's claw' herbal
remedy in a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus. Nephron
1997; 77: 361.

Santa Maria A et al. Evaluation of the toxicity of Uncaria tomentosa
by bioassays in vitro. ] Ethnopharmacol 1997; 57: 183-187.

Laus G, Keplinger K. Radix Uncariae tomentosae (Willd.) DC. Z
Phytother 1997; 18: 122-126.

----- PAGE 147 -----
dependent effect and variable latent period in the report
cases, an idiosyncratic reaction may be the most plausible
explanation.

On the basis of the available evidence, and in view of the
intended uses for greater celandine, C. majus preparations
appear to have a negative benefit-harm profile. In May 2003,
the Complementary Medicines Evaluation Committee, which
advises the Australian Government's Therapeutic Goods
Administration, recommended that preparations of C. majus
for oral administration should include on their label
statements advising consumers to use such products only
under the supervision of a healthcare professional, to seek
advice from a healthcare professional before using the
product if the potential user has a history of liver disease, and
to stop using C. majus preparations if symptoms associated
with liver disease occur.

Celandine, Greater

licensed C. majus products available in the UK, so the quality
of commercially available products is not assured.

Species (Family)

Chelidonium majus L. (Papaveraceae)

Synonym(s)
Common celandine, garden celandine, swallow wort. Greater

celandine should not be confused with Lesser celandine (Ranun-
culus ficaria L., Ranunculaceae) which is unrelated.

Part(s) Used

Aerial parts (herb), collected at the time of flowering, root, latex
(juice/sap) from leaves, stems, roots.

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHMA 20030

BP 2007 (herb) ‘C8

Complete German Commission E ‘““*)
ESCOP 2003 ‘©7®)

Martindale 35th edition ‘©*

Ph Eur 2007 (aerial parts) ‘“*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Greater celandine is not on the GSL. Chelidonium majus is listed
in Parts 2 and 3 to the Medicines (Retail Sale or Supply of Herbal
Remedies) Order 1977 (Statutory Instrument 1977/2130) which
restricts its sale or supply to that by a registered pharmacist from
a registered pharmacy, or that by a herbal practitioner in response
to a one-to-one consultation, provided maximum daily dosage is
not exceeded.”

Constituents

The plant is particularly well known for the presence of alkaloids
which are located in laticiferous vessels. The latex is yellow-
orange due to the presence of benzophenanthridine and proto-
berberine alkaloids.

Aerial parts

Acids Chelidonic, malic, citric;"C” caffeic (0.4%), ferulic
(0.02%), p-coumaric (0.06%), gentisic and p-hydroxybenzoic
(traces, < 0.01%).

Hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives (-)-2-(E)-caffeoyl-p-glyceric
acid, (-)-4-(E)-caffeoyl-t-threonic acid, (-)-2-(E)-caffeoyl threonic
acid lactone, (++)-(E)-caffeoyl-L-malic acid).

----- PAGE 148 -----
Alkaloids Benzylisoquinoline type, 0.1-1%.'°”) More than 20
have been identified including benzophenanthridines (e.g. cheler-
ythrine, chelidonine, sanguinarine, isochelidonine), protoberber-
ines (e.g. berberine, coptisine, sylopine), protopines (e.g.
protopine).° 97

Others A saponin, carotenoids,”

cystatin), flavonoids. °””

a phytocytostatin (chelido-

Root

Alkaloids Benzylisoquinoline type, up to 3%,'°”) including
benzophenanthridines (e.g. chelerythrine, sanguinarine, chelido-
nine (0.2-0.4%)), protoberberines (e.g. coptisine),” protopines
(e.g. protopine, cryptopine, o-allocryptopine =B-homochelido-
nine (0.01-0.06%)).

Others Choline, histamine, tyramine, saponins, flavonol,
chelidoniol, vitamin C, carotene.

Sap (from leaves/roots)

Glycoproteins, including a lectin.”

In addition to the above, the alkaloids (-)-turkiyenine"™” and
(+)-norchelidonine" have been isolated from material compris-
ing the whole plant.

(10

Quality of plant material and commercial products

The European Pharmacopoeia defines greater celandine as
consisting of the dried aerial parts collected during flowering

Acids
fe)

HOOC fe) COOH
chelidonic acid

Caffeic acid esters

COOH
COOH HC—OH
We —OR HO—CH
desi bees

(-)-2-(E)-caffeoyl-
D-glyceric acid

(-)-4-(E)-caffeoyl-
L-+threonic acid

Oo. 0 COOH
IH |
R— vi
OR CH.
COOH
(-)-2-(E)-caffeoyl- (+)-(E)-caffeoyl-
L-threonic acid lactone L-malic acid

R= co—
HO U
HO

Figure 1 Selected constituents of greater celandine.

Celandine, Greater

Benzylisoquinoline alkaloids
Benzophenanthridines

be
O NL
R'O 7° ~CHs

OR? R' FR
sanguinarine —CH2,—
chelerythrine CH3 CH3

chelidonine

Protoberberines

coptisine —CH2,— stylopine
berberine CH3 CH3
Protopines

protopine

Figure 2 Selected constituents of greater celandine.

and containing not less than 0.6% of total alkaloids, expressed as
chelidonine and calculated with reference to the dried drug.“C*”
The alkaloids are found in both the aerial parts and the roots,
although there are differences in the total alkaloid content and the
relative proportions of the individual alkaloid constituents.”
The concentrations of the alkaloids chelerythrine, chelidonine,
coptisine and sanguinarine in the latex undergo daily variations,
reaching a maximum in the summer in the evening and in the
middle of the day in the winter.» The increases in concentration
during the day are probably due to light and temperature, and
decreases in concentration during the night are probably due to
catabolism rather than translocation."!» In contrast, the concen-
tration of berberine appears to be relatively stable.

Food Use

Greater celandine is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Greater celandine is stated to have antispasmodic, laxative,
diuretic and alterative properties.“°*°” It has been used
traditionally in Western countries in eczema and scurvy, as a
cholagogue, in jaundice, gall bladder and biliary diseases, and in
preparations intended to remove obstructions of the liver and gall
bladder.““* The German Commission E approved greater
celandine herb for use in spastic discomfort of the bile ducts
and gastrointestinal tract.'©*) Topical preparations of the roots
and aerial parts have been used in the treatment of piles.“ The
fresh latex has been used externally for the treatment of warts and

----- PAGE 149 -----
38, Celandine, Greater

other skin conditions, such as corns, Tinea infections, eczema,
(G66)
and tumours of the skin.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in older
standard herbal reference texts for the traditional uses are given
below.

Spastic discomfort of the bile ducts and gastrointestinal
tract

Aerial parts Daily dosage 2-5 g, equivalent to 12-30 mg total
alkaloids, calculated as chelidonine.'°”

Gall stones, gall bladder and biliary diseases

Aerial parts 1-2¢ dried herb three times daily.’ Modern
standard herbal reference texts recommend the following dosages
for oral administration (adults).

Figure 3. Greater celandine (Chelidonium majus).

Figure 4 Greater celandine — dried drug substance (herb).

Liver and gall bladder disorders, cramp-like pain of the
gall ducts and gastrointestinal tract

Liquid extract 1-2 mL of a 1:2 preparation daily or 1-2mL
of a 1: 1 preparation three times daily\©”

Tincture 2-4 mL of a 1: 5 preparation daily‘6 or 2-4 mL of a
1: 10 preparation three times daily.(@”

A clinical trial of a monopreparation containing greater
celandine (tablets containing 66-167.2mg dry extract (5.3-
7.5: 1), equivalent to 4mg total alkaloids calculated as chelido-
nine) tested the effects of two tablets taken three times daily
(equivalent to 24 mg total alkaloids, calculated as chelidonine) in
patients with functional epigastric complaints."

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological properties, including antispasmodic,
choleretic, anti-inflammatory, cytotoxic and antimicrobial activ-
ities, have been described for preparations of C. majus following
preclinical studies, providing some supporting evidence for the
traditional uses. However, there has been little rigorous clinical
investigation of C. majus and further studies are required to
determine its clinical efficacy and safety.

In-vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics No information on the pharmacokinetics of
constituents following ingestion of C. majus preparations was
found. However, there is a limited amount of data on the
pharmacokinetics of individual constituents found in C. majus. In
a randomised controlled experiment involving swine fed sangui-
narine and chelerythrine (isolated from Macleya cordata (Wild.),
Papaveraceae) in their feed (mean daily intake 0.1 or 5 mg/kg body
weight), or a standard diet, for 90 days, plasma concentrations of
the alkaloids remained constant during the study when assessed at
days 30, 60 and 90," although data to support this were not
provided in a report of the study. At the 90-day time point for both
groups of animals fed the alkaloids (i.e. 0.1 or Smg/kg body
weight daily), sanguinarine was detected in plasma, faeces and all
tissues tested (liver, gingival, tongue, stomach, intestine) with the
exception of muscle tissue. Mean (standard deviation, SD)
concentrations (ng/g) in plasma were 4 (1) and 108 (4) and in
faeces 1180 (72) and 16 110 (2604) for the low and high intakes of
alkaloids, respectively. Chelerythrine was detected in plasma (high
alkaloid intake only), faeces, liver, gingival and intestinal tissues.
Mean (standard deviation, SD) concentrations (ng/g) in plasma

Figure 5 Greater celandine — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 150 -----
were 24 (4) (not detected in low alkaloid intake group) and in
faeces 834 (120) and 8412 (1705) for the low and high intakes of
alkaloids, respectively. These results indicate that, in swine,
sanguinarine and chelerythrine are mostly excreted in the faeces
and that a small proportion is absorbed and retained to different
extents by different tissues."

Antispasmodic activity Antispasmodic activity has been
documented for an aqueous-methanolic extract of the flowering
aerial parts of C. majus and for the isolated constituents coptisine
and (+)-caffeoylmalic acid following in vitro experiments
involving isolated rat ileum.® The extract (containing 0.81%
alkaloids, 2.00% flavonoids, 1.20% hydroxycinnamic acid deriva-
tives and 0.06% (+)-caffeoylmalic acid) displayed a mean
(standard error of mean; SEM) antispasmodic activity of 12.7%
(4.0) relative to that of control (acetylcholine), whereas values for
coptisine at a concentration of 1.0 x 10° g/mL organ bath and
(+)-caffeoylmalic acid 2.5 x 10 g/mL organ bath were 16.5 (3.0)
and 6.9 (standard error = 2.6), respectively, indicating that these
two constituents contribute to the total antispasmodic activity of
the extract. A lower concentration of coptisine (0.5 x 107° g/mL
organ bath) did not exhibit any statistically significant anti-
spasmodic activity," although no p values for this, or any of the
other results, were given.

In isolated guinea-pig ileum, two hydroalcoholic (ethanol 70%
w/w) extracts of C. majus herb (at a concentration of 5 x 107 g/
mL organ bath for both) relaxed barium-chloride (10° g/mL)-
induced contractions: mean (SEM) per cent relaxation values were
53.5 (4.1) and 49.0 (3.7), for extracts one and two, respectively.”
The alkaloid content, determined by high-pressure liquid
chromatography, for extract one was chelidonine 0.38%, proto-
pine 0.41% and coptisine 0.32% and for extract two, 0.59%,
0.48% and 0.26%, respectively. Mean (SEM) per cent relaxation
values for the individual constituents chelidonine (both at a
concentration of 1 x 10~° g/mL organ bath) and protopine were
68.8 (11.2) and 54.8 (5.8), respectively, whereas coptisine (up to 3
x 10° g/mL) was ineffective. Values for papaverine hydrochloride
(1 x 10° g/mL) under the same conditions were 87.2 (7.4).
Further experiments using the two extracts and the individual
alkaloids produced concentration-dependent reductions in carba-
chol- and_ electric-field-induced contractions. Together, these
results indicate that the antispasmodic effects of C. majus herb
preparations comprise both musculotropic and neurotropic
mechanisms.”

In vitro studies have demonstrated effects of an extract of C.
majus herb and certain constituent alkaloids at GABAg receptors.
In radioreceptor assays, high concentrations (more than 160 tg/
assay) of a dry ethanolic extract of C. majus herb inhibited 50%
of specific 3H]-muscimol binding, whereas at lower concentra-
tions (around 90 g/assay), specific binding of 115% was
observed, indicating induction of positive co-operation." The
alkaloid content (mg/100mg dry extract) of the extract was
determined as: allocryptopine 0.076, chelerythrine 0.009, proto-
pine 0.465, sanguinarine 0.003 and stylopine 0.154. Further
binding studies indicated that the alkaloids allocryptopine,
stylopine and protopine are responsible for the positive coopera-
tive effect and that, of these, the effect is mainly due to protopine;
the content of chelerythrine and sanguinarine was considered to
be too low to account for the effect."®

The individual protopine-type alkaloids protopine, cryptopine
and allocryptopine (plant or synthetic source not stated)
enhance [*H]-GABA binding to rat brain synaptic membrane
receptors.”

Celandine, Greater

Analgesic activity Several in vitro experiments have proposed
mechanisms for analgesic activity for C. majus, although analge:
effects for C. majus preparations have yet to be demonstrated in
preclinical (animal) studi
explored which constituents of C. majus are involved in these
mechanisms.

The effects of C. majus on GABA receptors have also been
investigated with respect to determining analgesic activity. In
patch-clamp experiments using fresh periaqueductal grey (PAG)
neurons isolated from rats, an aqueous extract of Chelidonii
herba (C. majus, and other details of authentication and
preparation, not specified) applied every two minutes at
concentrations of over 0.3—10 mg/mL elicited chloride ion current
in a concentration-dependent manner.”°) This effect was inhibited
in a reversible manner by the GABA, receptor antagonist
bicuculline. Low concentrations of Chelidonii herba (0.03 and
0.1 mg/mL) inhibited GABA-activated chloride current; this effect
was abolished by the application of the opioid antagonist
naltrexone in a proportion of PAGs and potentiated by naltrexone
in other PAGs. As inhibition of the inhibitory influence of GABA
on neurons involved with descending antinociceptive pathways is a
mechanism of action of opioid analgesics, the inhibitory action of
Chelidonii herba on GABA may provide a mechanism for
analgesic activity?”

Further experiments using similar methods have demonstrated
that low concentrations (0.03 and 0.1mg/mL) of an aqueous
extract of Chelidonii herba (C. majus, and other details of
authentication and preparation, not specified) suppress glycine-
activated and increase glutamate-activated ion current in PAG
°) (Glycine is an inhibitory neurotransmitter and
glutamate an excitatory neurotransmitter, so these eff
suggestive of increased PAG neuronal excitability and activation of
antinociceptive pathways.) In these studies, the inhibitory effect of
Chelidonii herba on glycine-activated ion current was partially
abolished by naltrexone, and the effect on glutamate-activated ion
current was not affected by naltrexone.

Furthermore, to date, studies have not

neurons.

are

Choleretic activity A dry total extract (extraction solvent 70%
ethanol) of the aerial parts of C. majus harvested during flowering
(total alkaloid content 1.6%; caffeic acid esters 1.9%; after
hydrolysis: caffeic acid 1.1%, p-coumaric acid 0.11%, ferulic acid
0.02%) administered at a concentration of 10 mg/mL/minute for
30 minutes led to a statistically significant increase in bile flow in
isolated perfused rat liver, compared with control (p < 0.025).°?
There were no statistically significant increases in bile flow
following administration of a phenolic fraction (1 mg/mL/minute)
and an alkaloid fraction (0.4mg/mL/minute), separately and in
combination. This suggests that all components of the total
extract are necessary for activity, rather than a single constituent,
or group of constituents.

Anticancer activity There are some preliminary data suggesting
that C. majus herb extract may have preventive effects against
certain cancers, although this requires further research; there are
conflicting results regarding cytotoxic properties and antitumour
activity of C. majus preparations.

In an in vivo study, rats were given the carcinogenic agent N-
methyl-N’-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG; 200 mg/kg body
weight by gavage) and saturated sodium chloride solution (to
mimic a high-salt diet), or 0.9% saline, over three weeks, followed
by treatment with a water—methanol extract of C. majus herb (0.1
or 0.2% in the diet for 16 weeks), or no further treatment; animals
were killed at 20 weeks.?” At the end of the study, preneoplastic
pepsinogen-1-altered glands (PPAGs) in the pyloric mucosa of the

----- PAGE 151 -----
Celandine, Greater

stomach occurred in all groups of rats, but the mean number of
PPAGs was significantly lower in animals treated with 0.1% C.
majus herb extract, compared with animals treated with MNNG
and saturated sodium chloride alone (p < 0.02). However, there
was no statistically significant difference in the mean number of
PPAGs in animals treated with 0.2% C. majus herb extract,
compared with this control group. There were also no statistically
significant differences between any groups in the numbers of
animals with papilloma and squamous cell carcinoma lesions of
the forestomach.*)

An ethanol-water (1:1) dry extract of C. majus roots and
rhizomes was inactive in animal models of leukaemia (L-1210,
mice) and carcinosarcoma (Walker 256, rats).°") However, the
extract did exhibit cytotoxic activity in an assay utilising Eagle's
9KB carcinoma of the nasopharynx (EDs9 < 15 jtg/mL). Coptisine
chloride and a s
cytotoxic activity.** A polysaccharide fraction (CM-Ala) from a
water extract of C. majus ‘herbs' inhibited the proliferation of
several tumour cell lines in vitro. At a concentration of 100 g/mL,
CM-Ala showed over 50% cytotoxicity for the P815 and B16F10
cell lines.)

Sanguinarine intercalates with DNA,® and structure-activity
relationship studies with alkaloids of the protoberberine and
benzophenanthridine types have shown that intercalation is
influenced by substitutions on rings C and D of the alkaloid
molecules.?” The antiproliferative effects of C. majus have been
explored in vitro in studies using a rapidly multiplying human
keratinocyte cell line (HaCaT cells). C. majus herb dry extract
(containing 0.68% alkaloids, calculated as chelidonine) inhibited
HaCaT cell growth, determined by direct counting of cells, with
an ICso value of 1.9pumol/L. The alkaloids sanguinarine,
chelerythrine and chelidonine gave ICso values in the micromolar
range (0.2, 3.2 and 3.3mol/L, respectively). The potency of
sanguinarine was similar to that of the antipsoriatic agent
anthralin (ICso = 0.7 mol/L), whereas berberine showed a low
potency (ICs) = 30pmol/L).°* Further work (measurement of
lactate dehydrogenase release into the culture medium as an
indicator of plasma membrane damage) indicated that the
mechanism of action of C. majus extract was due to cytostatic,
rather than cytotoxic, activity.

A substantial amount of preclinical research has explored the
effects of a preparation (Ukrain) comprising a semi-synthetic
iophosphoric (triaziridide) derivative of the purified alkaloid
chelidonine isolated from C. majus. The molecule is reported to
be a trimer of chelidonine, with the alkaloid linked to thio-
phosphoric acid; the chemical name of this preparation has been
stated to be Tris{2{(SbS-(Sba,6B,12bc))-5b,6,7,12b, 13, 14-hexa-
hydro-13-methyl(1,3)-benzo-dioxolo(5,6-c)-1,3-dioxolo(4,5-i) phen-
anthridinium-6-ol} ethane-aminy]} phosphine-sulphide.6hydro-
chloride.” However, chemical analyses of Ukrain using a range
of techniques were unable to confirm the existence of the
proposed trimeric molecule and indicated that the preparations
tested simply contained a mixture of C. majus alkaloids, including
chelidonine.°°

‘ond, unnamed, alkaloid were also shown to have

ao

a

5

It has been reported that Ukrain has antitumour activity in
vitro against various cancer cell lines an
experimental models of cancer, as well as immunomodulatory
properties.° It has also been reported to induce cell cycle arrest
and apoptosis in human epidermoid cancer cell lines, but not in
normal human keratinocytes,°” and to protect normal human
fibroblasts, but not various types of human tumour cells, against
ionising radiation in in vitro experiments;°) radioprotective
effects have also been reported following in vivo (preclinical)

in vivo in several

(34)

studies. Other properties reported include effects on bone

35)

tissue in vivo (rats).'

Subsequent research in some of these areas has, however, failed
to replicate the findings. In vitro studies using normal,
transformed and malignant cell lines have shown that there was
no difference in the effects of Ukrain on cell growth, cell cycle
progression and morphology for the different cell lines, indicating
that there is no selective toxicity towards malignant cells.°° Other
in vitro research by the same authors has also raised doubts about
claims of a lack of adverse effects with Ukrain.°”
Immunomodulatory activity
protein-bound polysaccharide fractions from a water extract of C.
majus ‘herbs' for 5 days increased the lytic activity of spleen
lymphocytes to Yac-1 tumour cells from 0.9% to 30.0% and
34.2% for the fractions CM-Al and CM-Ala, respectively (p
values not given).? The optimal concentration for generation of
activated killer cells was 5 tig/mL for both fractions. Similarly,
peritoneal macrophages cultured with CM-Ala (10-100 pg/
mL) show increased cytotoxicity, compared wit!
determined by the degree of inhibition of radiolabelled thymidine
uptake by tumour cells. CM-Ala contains around 30% protein
and 70% carbohydrate.°°)

Further work suggested that CM-Ala may have a radio-
protective effect in vivo. In experiments involving mice given CM-
Ala 50 mg/kg intraperitoneally 24 hours before sublethal doses of
irradiation, platelet numbers were significantly increased in CM-

Incubation of spleen cells with

mous

control, as

Ala treated mice, compared with control, five days post-
irradiation, and white blood cell count was significantly increased
in CM-Ala treated mice, compared with control, nine days post-
irradiation (p < 0.001 and < 0.01, respectively), indicating
haematopoietic recovery.°* In other experiments involving mice
given lethal doses of irradiation (9 Gy), the survival rate for mice
treated with CM-Ala 50 or 100mg/kg intraperitoneally before
irradiation was 80% at 30 days post-irradiation, whereas all mice
in the control group were dead by day 15 post-irradiation.

Anti-inflammatory activity Various effects related to anti-
inflammatory activity have been documented for C. majus extract
and for certain alkaloids isolated from the plant.

In in vitro experiments using mouse peritoneal macrophages,
nitric oxide production was
treated with a water extract of C. majus dried ‘herbs! (plant part
not stated precisely) at concentrations of 0.01, 0.1 and 1 mg/mL
together with murine recombinant interferon-gamma (rIFN-y),
compared with treatment with rIFN-y alone (p < 0.05), indicating
a cooperative induction of NO production.” NO production in
mouse peritoneal macrophages induced by C. majus extract plus
rIFN-y was progr
amounts (p < 0.05 for 0.01 and 0.1mM, compared with control)
of N°-monomethyl-L-arginine (N°MMA) and by addition of the
antioxidant compound pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC) at a
concentration of 100M. Furthermore, incubation of mouse

ignificantly increased when cells were

ively inhibited by incubation with increasing

peritoneal macrophages with C. majus extract (1 mg/mL) plus
rIFN-y increased tumour-necrosis-factor-alpha (TNF-%) produc-
tion in a concentration-dependent manner; adding the nuclear
factor kappa B (NF-kB) inhibitor PDTC significantly decreased
the production of TNF-o, indicating that C. majus extract
TNF-« production via NF-KB activation.”
Anti-inflammatory activity has also been described for the
alkaloids sanguinarine and chelerythrine isolated from C. majus
root following studies involving the carrageenan-induced rat paw
oedema test. Greatest inhibition of oedema was observed with
subcutaneous (rather than oral) administration of sanguinarine

increas

----- PAGE 152 -----
(rather than chelerythrine) 5 and 10 mg/kg body weight, compared
th control (no p values stated).

An extract of C. majus herb and the alkaloids sanguinarine and
chelerythrine (isolated from C. majus root in this study) inhibited
5-lipoxygenase (S-LO) in isolated bovine polymorphonuclear
leukocytes (PMNL) with ICs values of 1.9, 0.4 and 0.8 mol/L,
respectively." Sanguinarine and chelerythrine also inhibited 12-
lipoxygenase (12-LO) obtained from mouse epidermis (ICs9 = 13
and 33mol/L, respectively), whereas C. majus herb extract
(170 pg extract/mL test solution) was inactive. Chelidonine was
inactive against both lipoxygenase enzymes (ICs9 = >100 pmol/L
for each). The enzymes 5-LO and 12-LO are involved with
leukotriene By and 12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid synthesis.

w

Antimicrobial activity A glycoprotein isolated from the juice of
C. majus leaves and roots is active against drug-resistant
staphylococci and enterococci in vitro.” Minimum bactericidal
concentration (MBC) values against several strains (including
clinical isolates) of methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus
(MSSA), methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), mupirocin-
resistant MRSA, aminoglycoside-resistant Enterococcus faecalis
and aminoglycoside-resistant E. faecium were 31-125, 31-250, 31-
125, 125-500 and 250-500 mg/L, respectively.

Chelerythrine and the quaternary benzophenanthridine alka-
loid fraction (containing chelerythrine and sanguinarine 7:3 with
traces of chelirubine) isolated from C. majus root were ineffective
in vitro against several Gram-negative bacterial strains, including
Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneu-
moniae.“ In contrast, substantial activity was observed in vitro
for the alkaloid fraction against Gram-positive bacteria, including
Staphylococcus aureus, beta-haemolytic streptococci and alpha-
haemolytic streptococci, and against Candida albicans (minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) values: 5, 10, 20 and Sig/mL,
respectively). MBC values for the alkaloid fraction against these
species were 40, 10, 40 and >160 ug/mL, respectively.

e findings are supported to some extent by those of other
In tests using the liquid dilution method, crude ethanolic
extracts of the aerial parts of C. majus were inactive against E.
coli, P. aeruginosa, Bacillus cereus, Salmonella enteritidis and
Candida albicans. In contrast, an ethanolic extract of C. majus
roots had MIC values of 15.63, 62.50 and 62.50mg dry plant
material/mL for B. cereus, S. enteritidis and C. albicans, but was

inactive against E. coli and P. aeruginosa.

Berberine chloride and chelerythrine chloride, isolated from
another plant species (Fagara zanthoxyloides, Rutaceae), have
activity against S. aureus, Bacillus subtilis, Streptococcus pneu-
moniae, E. coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, P. aeruginosa, Proteus sp.
and C. albicans.”

Antifungal activity in vitro has also been documented for C.
majus extracts against Fusarium strains. In liquid medium assays,
a methanolic extract of the whole plant harvested at the flowering
stage appeared to display the greatest antifungal activity: five days
after inoculation, growth of two Fusarium strains tested was
reduced to less than 40% of that seen with control, whereas this
was achieved for only one strain with an ethanolic extract and not
at all with an aqueous extract.” E oxysporum f. sp. cubense was
the strain most sensitive to the methanolic extract, and E solani
In contrast, F
culmorum was insensitive to all three extracts. Methanolic

was the most sensitive strain to all three extract

extracts of C. majus roots achieved greater inhibition of fungal
growth than did methanolic extracts of C. majus shoots: growth

Celandine, Greater

of E oxysporum f. sp. cubense, E oxysporum f. sp. melonis and FE
solani was reduced to less than 30% of that seen with control,
although growth of FE culmorum was unaffected.

Further experiments used alkaloids isolated from C. majus
roots and shoots: chelerythrine and sanguinarine were reported to
be active against both E solani and EF culmorum, berberine was
active against F solani, and chelidonine was inactive against both
strains. However, data supporting these statements were not
provided in the published report.

Antifungal activity against Cladosporium herbarum has been
described for the alkaloids chelidonine, dihydrochelerythrine and
dihydrosanguinarine isolated from a methanolic extract of C.
majus fresh root: minimum quantities of these compounds for
inhibition of growth of C. herbarum on thin-layer chromato-
graphy (TLC) plates were 10, 6 and 41g, respectively.

Other work has shown little variation in the antimycotic
activity of C. majus plant material collected during different
months. Ethanolic extracts of C. majus plants collected in late
July or early September were active against Candida pseudotro-
picalis, M. gypseum, T. mentagrophytes, M. canis and E.
floccosum (zone of inhibition from 21 to 30 or more millimetres
in diameter). Ethanolic extracts of C. majus plants collected in
early September were also active against C. albicans.

Antiviral activity In vitro activity against adenoviruses and
herpes simplex virus type I (HSV-1) has been documented for the
squeezed sap and a sodium chloride extract of the aerial parts of
C. majus.“” Subsequent bioassay-guided fractionation of extracts
of the aerial parts and the root of the plant produced several
fractions of which one in particular at a concentration of 35 ,g/
mL showed antiviral activity when incubated with cells infected
with adenovirus type 12. This fraction also showed virucidal
action against HSV-1, achieving 100% loss of virus infectivity
after 90 minutes! incubation, although adenoviruses types 5 and 12
were less sensitive, retaining 50% infectivity after 120 minutes!
incubation with the fraction.

An extract obtained from the 'green' parts of mature C. majus
plants was found to have inhibitory activity against cysteine, but
not serine, proteinases. The phytocystatin chelidocystatin, iso-
lated from the extract, inhibited the activity of the cysteine
proteinases cathepsin L, papain and cathepsin H (inhibition
constant, K; values: 5.6 x 10°'' mol/L, 1.1 x 10°!° mol/L and 7.5
x 10°? mol/L, respectively).

The pure compound chelidonine has weak inhibitory activity
(ICs9 around 200 pg/mL) against human immunodeficiency virus
type-1 reverse transcriptase (HIV-1 RT), whereas berberine
chloride has moderate inhibitory activity against this enzyme
(ICs9 = 100 g/mL). “*)

Other activities A liquid alcoholic extract of C. majus herb,
containing 0.64 mg/mL total alkaloids, calculated as chelidonine,
protected against indometacin-induced (10 mg/kg body weight)
gastric damage in a dose-dependent manner (2.5—10 mL/kg) when
administered orally one hour before indometacin to rats.” Doses
of C. majus herb extract of 5 and 10 mL/kg body weight afforded
over 50% protection against the development of ulcers, compared
with control.

Antioxidant activity, determined using the FRAP (ferric
reducing and antioxidant power) method, has been reported for
20% and 40% alcohol-water (type not stated) extracts of the

fresh aerial parts of C. majus collected in Hungary.°”

----- PAGE 153 -----
Celandine, Greater

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics No information relating to the clinical
pharmacokinetics of C. majus preparations was found.

Therapeutics Clinical investigation of C. majus preparations is
limited. The few clinical trials available have investigated the
effects of proprietary products containing C. majus, often in
combination with other herbal ingredients, in patients with
functional epigastric disorders. Further investigation of the
efficacy and effectiveness of C. majus preparations is required.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 60
patients with functional epigastric complaints, including cramp-
like pains in the biliary and gastrointestinal tracts, received
tablets containing C. majus extract (comprising 66.0 to 167.2 mg
native dry extract, equivalent to 4mg total alkaloids, calculated
as chelidonine), or placebo, at a dosage of two tablets three
At the end of the study, the
reduction in symptom score (one of the primary outcome
variables), assessed using the Zerssen list, was significantly
greater in the C. majus group, compared with the placebo group
(p = 0.003). Also, the physician's assessment of efficacy was that
18/30 patients in the treatment group were improved or
symptom-free, compared with 8/30 in the placebo group (p =
0.0038).

The effects of a combination preparation (Iberogast) containing
extract of C. majus herb (as well as extracts of bitter candy tuft,
chamomile flower, peppermint leaves, caraway fruit, liquorice
root, lemon balm leaves, angelica root and milk thistle fruit) were
investigated in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial involving 60 patients with functional dyspepsia.” Partici-
pants received Iberogast, a preparation similar to Iberogast but
lacking bitter candy tuft extract, or placebo, 20 drops three times
daily for four weeks. At the end of the study, participants who
received one of the two combination preparations, compared with
those in the placebo group, had a significant improvement in
gastrointestinal symptom scores, one of the primary outcome
variables (p < 0.001).

Another double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed the

times daily for six weeks.'')

effects of a combination preparation (Cholagogum F Nattermann)
containing dry extracts of C. majus and Curcuma longa in
patients with upper abdominal pain due to biliary system
dysfunction.” Participants received the herbal preparation (n =
39), or placebo (n = 37), one capsule three times daily for three
weeks. Capsules of the herbal preparation were standardised to
contain 4 mg total alkaloids calculated as chelidonine. During the
first week of treatment, reductions in the frequency of cramp-like
pain were reported for both the treatment and placebo groups,
although the difference between the groups was not statistically
significant (p = 0.069). There was, however, a. statistically
significant difference in the frequency of episodes of dull/hollow
pain between the treatment and placebo groups (p = 0.009).°”

A small number of other clinical investigations has explored the
effects of a preparation (Ukrain) comprising a semi-synthetic
thiophosphoric (triaziridide) derivative of the purified alkaloid
from C. majus (see Pharmacological
Actions). Most of these investigations, typically case series and
small studies of varying methodological quality, have involved
patients with different types of cancer, including lung cancer,°>)
Kaposi's sarcoma,” (54)
and children from are:
after the Chernobyl accident with recurrent bronchopulmonary
pathology.”

chelidonine isolated

. 56)
rectal or ovarian cancer, breast cancer,

s contaminated with radioactive material

stematic review of seven randomised controlled trials of
Ukrain in patients with different types of cancer found that all
included trials reported beneficial effects for Ukrain, but that as
most of the trials had methodological limitations, their re:
were not definitive and further investigation in the form of well-
designed randomised controlled trials is required.

In one study, a randomised, controlled trial involving 90
patients with pancreatic cancer, participants received gemcitabine
alone, Ukrain (NSC-631570) alone, or gemcitabine followed by
Ukrain.”) Survival rates after six months were reported to be 26,
65 and 74% for the gemcitabine, Ukrain, and gemcitabine plus
Ukrain groups, respectively (p < 0.01 for gemcitabine plus Ukrain
versus gemcitabine alone). A further study has assessed the effects
of Ukrain in patients with hepatitis C virus infection.

sults

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a limited amount of information relating to the safety
and toxicity of preparations of C. majus.

Clinical data

Only limited data relating to safety aspects of C. majus are
available from clinical trials. Such studies in any case are not
designed primarily to assess safety, and generally have the
statistical power only to detect common, acute adverse events.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
60 patients with functional epigastric complaints who received
tablets containing C. majus extract (comprising 66.0 to 167.2 mg
native dry extract, equivalent to 4 mg total alkaloids, calculated as
chelidonine), or placebo, at a dosage of two tablets three times
daily for six weeks reported a similar number of adverse events for
both groups (three and five for the C. majus preparation and
placebo, respectively).{' In another double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial, no adverse events occurred in patients (7 = 39) with
upper abdominal pain due to biliary system dysfunction who
received a preparation (Cholagogum F Nattermann) containing
dry extracts of C. majus and Curcuma longa one capsule
(standardised to contain 4mg total alkaloids calculated as
chelidonine) three times daily for three weeks.”

Hepatotoxicity Several case reports have described hepatotoxic
effects, including severe hepatitis, severe cholestasis and fibrosis,
associated with the use of preparations of C. majus.” One report
describes ten cases of acute hepatitis in women who had ingested
preparations containing C. majus extract for one to nine months
before the onset of symptoms of hepatotoxicity.” In all ten cases,
other common causes for hepatitis were excluded, and liver

function test values before intake of C. majus were normal for the
seven patien
concerned use of five different German manufacturers' prepara-
tions of C. majus, three of which formulations include only C.
majus extract as the active component; such preparations are
usually standardised for content of chelidonine. A mechanism for
C. majus induced hepatotoxicity has not been established,
although because of the apparent lack of a dose-dependent effect
and variable latent period in the reported cases, an idiosyncratic
reaction may be the most plausible explanation.”

Two further cases describe a 39-year-old woman and a 69-year-
old man who both presented with symptoms of acute hepatitis,
including dark brown urine and jaundice; laboratory tests revealed
that both patients had highly elevated liver function test values.»
The woman had been taking a preparation containing C. majus
for four weeks before the onset of symptoms, and the man had

s for whom these data were available. The ten cases

----- PAGE 154 -----
taken capsules containing C. majus (each capsule standardised for
4mg chelidonine) and Curcuma longa for six weeks before
symptom onset; other possible causes of hepatotoxicity were
excluded. Both patients recovered after stopping treatment with C.
majus.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide, including the UK. At the end of June 2005,
the WHO-UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 47
reports, describing a total of 147 adverse reactions, for products
containing C. majus only as the active ingredient (see Table 1). All
but one (Belgium) of these reports originated from Germany.

The specific products (manufacturer) associated with the
reactions were: Ardeycholan N (Ardeypharm), two reports;
Chol 4000 (Lichtenstein), six reports; Chol Sabona (Sabona),
two reports; Cholarist (Steiner), ten reports; Gallopas (Pascoe),
four reports; Panchelidon (Kanoldt), eight reports; Panchelidon N
(Boots Pharmaceuticals), ten reports; Siosol Febna (one report);
celandine/chelidonium extract (specific product not stated), four
reports. In seven cases, the patient concerned was taking other
medicines, although C. majus extract was the sole suspected drug
in five of these seven reports.

Six of the total number of reports provided information on
dechallenge; in all six cases, the reaction(s) had abated on
stopping C. majus extract. The outcomes for the 47 reports were
stated as: died (one report); not recovered (six reports); recovered
(ten reports); unknown (30 reports). (These data were obtained
from the Vigisearch database held by the WHO Collaborating
Centre for International Drug Monitoring, Uppsala, Sweden. The
information is not homogeneous at least with respect to origin or
likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information included in this report does not
represent the opinion of the World Health Organization.)

Table 1

Celandine, Greater

In May 2003, the Complementary Medicines Evaluation
Committee, which advises the Australian Government's Thera-
peutic Goods Administration, recommended that preparations of
C. majus for oral administration should include on their label
statements advising consumers to use such products only under
the supervision of a healthcare professional, to seek advice from a
healthcare professional before using the product if the potential
user has a history of liver disease, and to stop using C. majus
preparations if symptoms associated with liver disease occur.'°?
Healthcare professionals who identify suspected adverse drug
reactions associated with C. majus preparations should report
these using the appropriate spontaneous reporting form.

Other reactions Contact dermatitis has been reported in a 64-
year-old woman who had used C. majus juice externally to treat
warts. Within a few hours of applying the preparation, the
woman experienced severe itching and erythema, with papules, at
the application site. Six weeks later, the woman experienced the
same symptoms after applying the juice to a facial wart. In both
instances, the reaction resolved within a few days without
treatment. Subsequently, the woman displayed positive reactions
to patch testing with C. majus juice and to extracts of C. majus
branch, stem and root at concentrations of 0.1, 1 and 10 mg/
mL. A case report describing this reaction does not state the
source of the plant material and authentication and phytochem-
ical analysis of the materials do not appear to have been
undertaken.

Preclinical data

In vitro inhibition of rat liver alanine aminotransferase (ALT) has
been described for the benzophenanthridine alkaloids sanguinar-
ine and chelerythrine. Sanguinarine was a more powerful inhibitor
than was chelerythrine (IDso values: 3.4 x 10 °mol/L and 4.0 x
10 mol/L, respectively)."°” In other experiments, sanguinarine,
chelerythrine, berberine and coptisine inhibited oxygen uptake by

Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 47) of adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Chelidonium majus preparations
held in the Vigisearch database of the World Health Organization’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the period up to end of June 200.

5 (@, 64)

Central nervous system. Paraesthesia (1) 1
Foetal. Biliary atresia (1) 1
General. Asthenia (3); death (1); fatigue (2); malaise (1); necrosis ischaemic (1) 8
Gastrointestinal. Abdominal pain (4); diarrhoea (2); faeces, discoloured (3); mouth dry (1); nausea (6); 21
pancreatitis (1); tongue oedema (1); vomiting (3)

Liver-biliary. Bilirubinaemia (11); cholelithiasis (1); gamma-GT increased (6); hepatic enzymes increased 95
(13); hepatic failure (1); hepatic function abnormal (1); hepatitis (19); hepatitis, cholestatic (8); hepatitis,

viral (1); hepatocellular damage (4); jaundice (16); SGOT increased (7); SGPT increased (7)

Metabolic. Cholinesterase decreased (1); LDH increased (2); phosphatase alkaline, increased (5) 8
Psychiatric. Anorexia (1); insomnia (1); nervousness (2) 4
Respiratory. Dyspnoea (1); larynx oedema (1) 2
Skin. Pruritus (3); skin discoloration (1) 4
Urinary. Urine abnormal (3) 3
Total number of adverse drug reactions 147

Key: GT = glutamyl transferase; LDH = lactate dehydrogenase; SGO

serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (= aspartate transaminase/aspartate

aminotransferase); SGPT = serum glutamate pyruvate transaminase (= alanine transaminase/alanine aminotransferase)

*Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring, Uppsala,
Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse reaction. Any
information included in this report does not represent the opinion of the World Health Organization

----- PAGE 155 -----
Celandine, Greater

mitochondria obtained from mouse liver, whereas chelidonine had
virtually no effect.‘

In a randomised controlled experiment, swine were fed
sanguinarine and chelerythrine (isolated from Macleya cordata
(Wild.), Papaveraceae) in their feed (mean daily intake 0.1 or 5 mg/
kg body weight), or a standard diet, for 90 days (n = 3 per
group)."') At the 30-, 60- and 90-day assessments, there were no
statistically significant differences between the alkaloid-fed
groups and the control group with respect to the following
haematological and biochemical parameters: haemoglobin, hae-
matocrit, erythrocyte and leukocyte counts, total protein,
albumin, glucose, cholesterol, triacylglycerols, creatinine, urea,
total bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). However, at day
90, statistically significant differences were observed for ALT,
aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and gamma-glutamy] transfer-
ase (GGT) for the higher alkaloid intake group, compared with
control and, for GGT, for the lower alkaloid intake group (p <
0.05 for all).

There are conflicting results regarding possible cytotoxicity of
C. majus preparations (see Pharmacological Actions, In-vitro and
animal studies, Anticancer activity). Sanguinarine—intercalates
with DNA.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Greater celandine is contraindicated in patients with biliary
obstructions, existing or previous liver disease.‘©” In view of the
evidence of hepatotoxicity, use of C. majus extracts at dosages
higher than those recommended (see Dosage) and/or for longer
periods should be avoided. Monitoring of liver enzyme activity is
recommended for patients using C. majus preparations for longer
than four weeks.'°””

Drug interactions No interactions have been documented for C.
majus. However, in view of the documented pharmacological
effects, whether or not there is potential for clinically important
interactions with other medicines with similar or opposing effects
and used concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of C. majus has not been
established. In view of the lack of information on the use of C.
majus during pregnancy and lactation, its use should be avoided
during these periods.

References

1 Medicines Act 1968, Statutory Instrument 1977 No. 2130 (Retail Sale
or Supply of Herbal Remedies) Order, 1977.

2 Hahn R, Nahrstedt A. Hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives,
caffeoylmalic and new caffeoylaldonic acid esters, from Chelidonium
majus. Planta Med 1993; 59: 71-75.

3 De Rosa S$, Di Vincenzo G. Isochelidonine, a benzophenanthridine
alkaloid from Chelidonium majus. Phytochemistry 1992; 31: 1085—
1086.

4 Rogelj B et al. Chelidocystatin, a novel phytocystatin from
Chelidonium majus. Phytochemistry 1998; 49: 1645-1649.

5 Kim HK et al. Biological and phytochemical evaluation of plants. V:
isolation of two cytotoxic alkaloids from Chelidonium majus. J
Pharm Sci 1969; 58: 372-374.

6 Chang H-M, But PP-H (eds). Pharmacology and applications of
Chinese materia medica. Volume 1. Singapore: World Scientific
Publishing Co, 1986.

7 Fik E et al. New plant glycoprotein against methicillin resistant
Staphylococci and Enterococci. Acta Microbiologica Polonica 1997;
46: 325-327.

8 Fik E et al. Isolation and characterisation of glycoproteins from milky
juice levaes [sic] and roots of Chelidonium maius [sic] L. Herba Pol
1995; 41: 84-95.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

32

33

Fik E et al. Comparative biochemical analysis of lectin and nuclease
from Chelidonium majus L. Acta Biochim Pol 2000; 47: 413-420.
Kadan G et al. (—)-Turkiyenine, a new alkaloid from Chelidonium
majus. ] Nat Prod 1990; 53: 531-532.

Kadan G et al. (+)-Norchelidonine from Chelidonium majus. Planta
Med 1992; 58: 477.

Colombo ML, Bosisio E. Pharmacological activities of Chelidonium
majus L. (Papaveraceae). Pharm Res 1996; 33: 127-134.

Tome FE, Colombo ML. Distribution of alkaloids in Chelidonium
majus and factors affecting their accumulation. Phytochemistry 1995;
40: 37-39.

Ritter R et al. Clinical trial on standardised celandine extract in
patients with functional epigastric complaints: results of a placebo-
controlled double-blind trial. Complement Ther Med 1993; 1: 189-
193.

Kosina P et al. Sanguinarine and chelerythrine: assessment of safety on
pigs in ninety days feeding experiment. Food Chem Tox 2004; 42: 85-
91.

Boegge S et al. Reduction of ACh-induced contraction of rat isolated
ileum by coptisine, (+)-caffeoylmalic acid, Chelidonium majus, and
Corydalis lutea extracts. Planta Med 1996; 62: 173-174.

Hiller K-O et al. Antispasmodic and relaxant activity of chelidonine,
protopine, coptisine, and Chelidonium majus extracts on isolated
guinea-pig ileum. Planta Med 1998; 64: 758-760.

Haberlein H et al. Chelidonium majus L.: components with in vitro
affinity for the GABA, receptor. Positive cooperation of alkaloids.
Planta Med 1996; 62: 227-231.

Kardos J et al. Enhancement of y-aminobutyric acid receptor binding
by protopine-type alkaloids. Arzneim Forsch/Drug Res 1986; 36(1):
939-940.

Kim Y et al. Modulation of Chelidonii herba on GABA activated
chloride current in rat PAG neurons. Am J Chin Med 2001; 29: 265—
279.

Shin M-C et al. Modulation of Chelidonii herba on glycine-activated
and glutamate-activated ion currents in rat periaqueductal gray
neurons. Clin Chim Acta 2002; 337: 93-101.

Vahlensieck U et al. The effect of Chelidonium majus herb extract on
choleresis in the isolated perfused rat liver. Planta Med 1995; 61: 267—
271.

Kim DJ et al. Potential preventive effects of Chelidonium majis [sic] L.
(Papaveraceae) herb extract on glandular stomach tumor development
in rats treated with N-methyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine (MNNG)
and hypertonic sodium chloride. Cancer Lett 1997; 112: 203-208.
Kim HK et al. Biological and phytochemical evaluation of plants V:
isolation of two cytotoxic alkaloids from Chelidonium majus. J
Pharm Sci 1969; 58: 372-374.

Song J-Y et al. Immunomodulatory activity of protein-bound
polysaccharide extracted from Chelidonium majus. Arch Pharm Res
2002; 25: 158-164.

Smékal E et al. Interaction of benzophenanthridine alkaloid
sanguinarine with DNA. Stud Biophys 1984; 101: 125-132.

Smékal E, Kubova N. Alkaloids of protoberberine and
benzophenanthridine groups as intercalating drugs with DNA. Stud
Biophys 1984; 101: 121-123.

Vavretkova C et al. Benzophenanthridine alkaloids of Chelidonium
majus: Il. Potent inhibitory action against the growth of human
keratinocytes. Planta Med 1996; 62: 491-494.

Bruller W. Studies concerning the effect of Ukrain in vivo and in vitro.
Drugs Exp Clin Res 1992; 18 (Suppl. Suppl.): 13-16.

Panzer A et al. Chemical analyses of Ukrain™, a semi-synthetic
Chelidonium majus alkaloid derivative, fail to confirm its trimeric
structure. Cancer Lett 2000; 160: 237-241.

Jagiello-W6jtowicz E et al. Ukrain (NSC-631570) in experimental and
clinical studies: a review. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1998; 14: 213-219.
Roublevskaia IN et al. Induced G2/M arrest and apoptosis in human
epidermoid carcinoma cell lines by semisynthetic drug Ukrain.
Anticancer Res 2000; 20: 3163-3168.

Cordes N et al. Ukrain", an alkaloid thiophosphoric acid derivative
of Chelidonium majus L. protects human fibroblasts but not human
tumour cells in vitro against ionizing radiation. Int J Radiat Biol 2002;
78: 17-27.

----- PAGE 156 -----
34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S1

Boyko VN et al. Action of Ukrain, a cytostatic and
immunomodulating drug, on effects of irradiation. Drugs Exp Clin
Res 1996; 22: 167-171.

Jabloriski M. Ukrain (NSC-631570) influences on bone status: a
review. Drugs Exp Clin Res 2000; 26: 317-320.

Panzer A et al. Ukrain™, a semisynthetic Chelidonium majus alkaloid
derivative, acts by inhibition of tubulin polymerization in normal and
malignant cells. Cancer Lett 2000; 160: 149-157.

Panzer A et al. The antimitotic effects of Ukrain™, A Chelidonium
majus alkaloid derivative, are reversible in vitro. Cancer Lett 2000;
150: 85-92.

Song J-Y et al. Radiation protective effect of an extract from
Chelidonium majus. Int ] Hematol 2003; 78: 226-232.

Chung H-S e¢ al. Water extract isolated from Chelidonium majus
enhances nitric oxide and tumour necrosis factor-% production via

nuclear factor-«B activation in mouse peritoneal macrophages. ]
Pharm Pharmacol 2004; 56: 129-134.

Lenfeld J e¢ al. Antiinflammatory activity of quaternary
benzophenanthridine alkaloids from Chelidonium majus. Planta Med
1981; 43: 161-165.

Vavretkova C et al. Benzophenanthridine alkaloids of Chelidonium
majus: 1. Inhibition of S- and 12-lipoxygenase by a non-redox
mechanism. Planta Med 1996; 62: 397-401.

Kokoska L et al. Screening of some Siberian medicinal plants for
antimicrobial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 2002; 82: 51-53.

Odebiyi OO, Sofowara EA. Antimicrobial alkaloids from a

Nigerian chewing stick (Fagara zanthoxyloides). Planta Med 1979; 36:
204-207.

Matos OC et al. Sensitivity of Fusarium strains to Chelidonium majus
L. extracts. J Ethnopharmacol 1999; 66: 151-158.

Ma WG et al. Fungitoxic alkaloids from Hokkaido Papaveraceae.
Fitoterapia 2000; 71: 527-534.

Vukuiié I et al. Investigation of the antimycotic activities of
Chelidonium majus extract. Planta Med 1991; 57 (Suppl. Suppl.2):
1459.

Kéry A et al. Antiviral alkaloid in Chelidonium majus L. Acta Pharm
Hung 1987; 57: 19-25.

Tan GT et al. Evaluation of natural products as inhibitors of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase. ] Nat
Prod 1991; 54: 143-154.

Khayyal MT et al. Antiulcerogenic effect of some gastrointestinally
acting plant extracts and their combination. Argneim-Forsch/Drug
Res 2001; 51: 545-553.

Then M e¢ al. Examination on antioxidant activity in the greater
celandine (Chelidonium majus L.) extracts by FRAP method. Acta
Biol Szegediensis 2003; 47: 115-117.

Madisch A et al. Ein Phytotherapeutikum und seine modifizierte
Rezeptur bei funktioneller Dyspepsie. Ergebnisse einer doppelblinden
plazebokontrollierten Vergleichstudie. Z Gastroenterol 2001; 39: 511-
517.

52

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

Celandine, Greater

Niederau C, Gépfert E. Die Wirkung von Schéllkraut- und
Curcumawurzelstock-Extrakt auf Oberbauch-beschwerden infolge
funktioneller Stérungen des ableitenden Gallensystems. Ergebnisse
einer plazebokontrollierten Doppelblindstudie. Med Klinik 1999; 94:
425-430.

Staniszewski A et al. Lymphocyte subsets in patient with lung cancer
treated with thiophosphoric acid alkaloid derivatives from

Chelidonium majus L. (Ukrain). Drugs Exptl Clin Res 1992; 18
(Suppl. Suppl.): 63-67.

Nowicky JW et al. Evaluation of thiophosphoric acid alkaloid
derivatives from Chelidonium majus L. (“Ukrain”) an an
immunostimulant in patients with various carcinomas. Drugs Exptl
Clin Res 1991; 17: 139-143.

Voltchek IV et al. Potential therapeutic efficacy of Ukrain (NSC
631570) in AIDS patients with Kaposi's sarcoma. Drugs Exptl Clin
Res 1996; 22: 283-286.

Nowicky JW et al. Ukrain both as an anticancer and
immunoregulatory agent. Drugs Exptl Clin Res 1992; 18 (Suppl.
Suppl.): 51-54.

Zahriychuk O. Ukrain, a thiophosphoric acid derivative of alkaloids
of Chelidonium majus L., is effective in the treatment of recurrent
bronchopulmonary pathology in children from areas contaminated
after the Chernobyl accident. Int J Immunotherapy 2003; 19: 47-53.
Ernst E, Schmidt K. Ukrain — a new cancer cure? A systematic review
of randomised clinical trials. BMC Cancer 2005; 5: 69.

Gansuage F et al. NSC-631570 (Ukrain) in the palliative treatment of
pancreatic cancer. Results of a phase II trial. Langenbeck's Arch Surg
2002; 386: 570-574.

Sologub TV e¢ al. Efficacy and safety of the drug Ukrain in chronic
hepatits C patients. Int J Immunother 2003; 19: 55-59.

De Smet PAGM. Safety concerns about kava not unique. Lancet 2002;
360: 1336.

Benninger J et al. Acute hepatitis induced by Greater Celandine
(Chelidonium majus). Gastroenterology 1999; 117: 1234-1237.
Stickel F et al. Acute hepatitis induced by Greater Celandine
(Chelidonium majus). Scand J] Gastroenterol 2003; 5: 565-568.
Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre (accessed June 27, 2005).

Therapeutic Goods Administration. Greater celandine (Chelidonium
majus). Proposed labelling advisory statement for the herb greater
celandine (Chelidonium majus). http://www.tga.gov.au/docs/html/
celandine.htm (accessed 29 June 2005).

Etxenagusia MA et al. Contact dermatitis from Chelidonium majus
(greater celandine). Contact Dermatitis 2000; 43: 47.

Walterova D et al. Inhibition of liver alanine aminotransferase activity
by some benzophenanthridine alkaloids. J Med Chem 1981; 24: 1100-
1103.

Barreto MC et al. Inhibition of mouse liver respiration by
Chelidonium majus isoquinoline alkaloids. Tox Lett 2003; 146: 37-47.

----- PAGE 157 -----
Celery

the celery stems, especially diseased plant material. Limited
scientific evidence is available to justify the herbal uses of
celery, although bacteriostatic activity has been documented
for the oil. Celery fruit should be used cautiously in view of the
documented allergic reactions.

Species (Family)

Apium graveolens L. (Apiaceae/Umbelliferae)

Synonym(s)
Apii Fructus, Celery Fruit, Celery Seed, Smallage, Wild Celery

Part(s) Used

Fruit

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6, G48 and G58.

Flavonoids Apigenin, apiin, isoquercitrin and others.”

Coumarins — Apigravin, apiumetin, apiumoside, bergapten,
celerin, celereoside, isoimperatorin, isopimpinellin, osthenol,
rutaretin, seselin, umbelliferone and 8-hydroxy-5-methoxypsora-
len.

Low concentrations (not exceeding 1.3 ppm) of furanocoumar-
ins have been identified in commercial celery,‘ although
concentrations are reported to rise considerably in diseased
stems."

Volatile oils 2-3%. Many components including limonene (60%)
and selenine (10-15%), and various sesquiterpene alcohols (1—
3%), e.g. a-eudesmol and B-cudesmol, santalol.\'*'%) Phthalide
compounds, 3-2-butyl phthalide and sedanenolide, provide the
characteristic odour of the oil (presence of sedanolide and
sedanonic anhydride disputed). ')

Other constituents Choline ascorbate,\'® fatty acids (e.g linoleic,
myristic, myristicic, myristoleic, oleic, palmitic, palmitoleic,
petroselinic and stearic acids).

Volatile oil constituents
limonene (a monoterpene) -selinene (a sesquiterpene)

CH2CH2CH2CH3 CH2CH2CH2CH3
fe} oO
3-n-butylphthalide sedanenolide

je)
°
sedanolide
Coumarins
HO. NN
HgCO’ O° °
celerin
osthenol H
apigravin OCH
Rt R'
S VA S
OH oO o~ So ° a)
Re Re
Ri oR A! Re
celereoin OH H bergapten OCH, H
nodakenetin H H Haudhe
Ba H OH isoimperatorin fe) A H
isopimpinellin OCH; OCH3
8-hydroxy-5-methoxy- OCH; OH
psoralen
Figure 1 Selected constituents of celery.
Food Use

Celery is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that celery
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'“! Celery stem (not the fruit) is commonly used in
foods. Previously, celery seed has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).(6*”

----- PAGE 158 -----
Herbal Use

Celery is stated to possess antirheumatic, sedative, mild diuretic
and urinary antiseptic properties. It has been used for arthritis,
rheumatism, gout, urinary tract inflammation, and specifically for

(G2, G6, G7, G8, God
rheumatoid arthritis with mental depression."

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried fruits 0.5-2.0g as a decoction 1:5 three times daily.(©”

Liquid extract 0.3-1.2mL (1:1 in 60% alcohol) three times
daily.‘6”

Liquid Extract of Celery (BPC 1934) 0.3-1.2 mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

In mice, sedative and antispasmodic activities have been
documented for the phthalide constituents."”"°” Celery seed
oil has been reported to exhibit bacteriostatic activity against
Bacillus subtilis, Vibrio cholerae, Staphylococcus aureus, Staphy-
lococcus albus, Shigella dysenteriae, Corynebacterium diphther-
iae, Salmonella typhi, Streptococcus faecalis, Bacillus pumilus,
Streptococcus pyogenes and Pseudomonas solanacearum.” No
activity was observed against Escherichia coli, Sarcina lutea or
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Apigenin has exhibited potent antiplatelet activity in vitro,
inhibiting the aggregation of rabbit platelets induced by collagen,
ADP, arachidonic acid and platelet-activating factor (PAF), but
not that induced by thrombin or ionophore A23187.""

Studies with celery plant extracts have demonstrated anti-
inflammatory activity in the mouse ear test and against
carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema,"”) and a hypotensive effect

Figure 2 Celery (Apium graveolens).

Celery

(G4) Ty

in rabbits and dogs after intravenous administration.

addition, hypoglycaemic activity has been documented.'©?”
Celery juice has been reported to exhibit choleretic activity and

the phthalide constituents are stated to possess diuretic activity.)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of celery
fruit and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for celery fruit and further investigation of these
aspects is required.

Photosensitivity reactions have been reported as a result of
external contact with celery stems.?%7"°” These reactions have
been attributed to the furanocoumarin constituents which are
known to possess photosensitising properties."'’?”) The concen-
trations of these compounds are reported to increase considerably
in diseased celery stems.''"” It is thought that psoralen, the most
potent phototoxic furanocoumarin, acts as a transient precursor
for other furanocoumarins and does not accumulate in celery. !)

Instances of allergic and anaphylactic reactions to celery have
also been documented» following oral ingestion of the stems.

Celery allergy is reported to be mediated by IgE antibodies and an
association between pollen and celery allergy has been postulated,

Figure 3 Celery — dried drug substance (root).

Figure 4 Celery — dried drug substance (fruit).

----- PAGE 159 -----
Celery

although the common antigen has not been determined. Cross-
sensitivities to celery have been documented in patients with
existing allergies to dandelion and wild carrot.”

Acute LDso values (rats, by mouth; rabbits, dermal) have been
reported as greater than 5 g/kg body weight.°® Celery seed oil is
stated to be non-irritant, non-phototoxic and non-sensitising in
humans.°% 05®)

Contr.

indications, Warnings

Celery fruit contains phototoxic compounds, furanocoumarins,
which may cause photosensitive reactions. Celery fruit may
precipitate allergic reactions, particularly in individuals with
existing plant, pollen or food allergies. Diseased celery stems
(indicated by a browning of the stem) should not be ingested.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of celery to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Celery fruit is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle and to be abortifacient.“©*” Uterine stimulant
activity has been documented for the oil,‘©?*° and the use of
celery fruits is contra-indicated during pregnancy.'©*” This does
not refer to celery stems that are commonly ingested as a food,
although excessive consumption should be avoided. It is not
known whether constituents of celery fruit appear in breast milk.

Lifesystem Herbal Formula 1 Arthritic Aid. Canada: Herbal
Diuretic. India: Flexi-muy. Malaysia: Celery Plus. UK: Mixed
Vegetable Tablets; Modern Herbals Rheumatic Pain; Napiers
Backache Tea; Rheumatic Pain; Rheumatic Pain Tablets;
Sciatica Tablets; Vegetex.

References

1 Garg SK et al. Glucosides of Apium graveolens. Planta Med 1980; 38:
363-365.

2. Garg SK et al. Apiumetin — a new furanocoumarin from the seeds of
Apium graveolens. Phytochemistry 19783 17: 2135-2136.

3 Garg SK et al. Celerin, a new coumarin from Apium graveolens.
Planta Med 1980; 38: 186-188.

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

18

19

20

21

24

26

Garg SK et al. Minor phenolics of Apium graveolens seeds.
Phytochemistry 1979; 18: 352.

Dall'Acqua et al. Biosynthesis of O-alkylfurocoumarins. Planta Med
1975; 27: 343-348.

Garg SK et al. Apiumoside, a new furanocoumarin glucoside from the
seeds of Apium graveolens. Phytochemistry 1979; 18: 1764-1765.
Garg SK et al. Coumarins from Apium graveolens seeds.
Phytochemistry 1979; 18: 1580-1581.

Innocenti G et al. Investigations of the content of furocoumarins in
Apium graveolens and in Petroselinum sativum. Planta Med 1976, 29:
165-170.

Kar A, Jain SR. Investigations on the antibacterial activity of some
Indian indigenous aromatic plants. Flavour Industry 1971; February.
Beier RC et al. Hple analysis of linear furocoumarins (psoralens) in
healthy celery (Apium graveolens). Food Chem Toxicol 1983; 21: 163—
165.

Chaudhary SK et al. Increased furocoumarin content of celery during
storage. J Agric Food Chem 1985; 33: 1153-1157.

Fehr D. Untersuchung tiber aromastoffe von sellerie (Apiunt
graveolens L.). Pharmazie 1979; 34: 658-662.

Stahl E. Drug Analysis by Chromatography and Microscopy. Ann
Arbor, Michigan: Ann Arbor Science, 1973.

Bjeldanes LF, Kim I-S. Phthalide components of celery essential oil. J
Org Chem 1977; 42: 2333-2335.

Bos R et al. Composition of the volatile oils from the roots, leaves and
fruits of different taxa of Apium graveolens. Planta Med 1986; 52:
S31.

Kavalali G, Akcasu A. Isolation of choline ascorbate from Apium
graveolens. J] Nat Prod 1985; 48: 495.

Gijbels MJM et al. Phthalides in roots of Apium graveolens, A.
graveolens var. rapaceum. Bifora testiculata and Petroselinum crispum
var. tuberosum. Fitoterapia 1985; 56: 17-23.

Teng CM et al. Inhibition of platelet aggregation by apigenin from
Apium graveolens. Asia Pac ] Pharmacol 1988; 1: 85-89.

Lewis DA et al. The anti-inflammatory activity of celery Apium
graveolens L. (Fam. Umbelliferae). Int ] Crude Drug Res 1985; 23: 27—
32.

Berkley SF et al. Dermatitis in grocery workers associated with high
natural concentrations of furanocoumarins in celery. Ann Intern Med
1986; 105; 351-355.

Austad J, Kavli G. Phototoxic dermatitis caused by celery infected by
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. Contact Dermatitis 1983; 9: 448-451.
Ashwood-Smith MJ et al. Mechanisms of photosensitivity reactions to
diseased celery. BMJ 1985; 290: 1249.

Déchamp C et al. Choc anaphylactique au céleri et sensibilisation a
l'ambroisie et a l'armoise. Allergie croisée ou allergie concomitante?
Presse Med 1984; 13: 871-874.

Forsbeck M, Ros A-M. Anaphylactoid reaction to celery. Contact
Dermatitis 1979; 5: 191.

Pauli G et al. Celery sensitivity: clinical and immunological
correlations with pollen allergy. Clin Allergy 1985; 15: 273-279.
Opdyke DLJ. Celery seed oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12: 849-850.

----- PAGE 160 -----
- Centaury

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

There is little published information specifically concerning
Centaurium erythraea. Bitter components support the
traditional use of centaury as an appetite stimulant, although
it is said to be less active than comparable bitter herbs, such
as gentian. In view of the lack of pharmacological and
toxicological data, excessive use should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Centaurium erythraea Rafn. (Gentianaceae)

Synonym(s)
Centaurium minus auct., C.

umbellatum Gilib., Common Centaury, Erythraea centaurium
(L.) Pers. subsp. centaurium

minus auct. subsp. minus, C.

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission E!
ESCOP 2003
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 2007'0*?

G3)

G85)

lridoids

H H
O-Glucosyl O-Glucosyl

swertiamarin gentiopicrin

HOH2C
OH OR?

R! R?
sweroside H H

centapicrin m-hydroxybenzoyl acetyl

Figure 1 Selected constituents of centaury.

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Acids Phenolic. Protocatechuic, m- and_ p-hydroxybenzoic,
vanillic, syringic, p-coumaric, ferulic, sinapic and caffeic, hydro-
xyterephthalic and 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acids among others.

Alkaloids Pyridine-type. Traces of gentianine, gentianidine,
gentioflavine and others.

Monoterpenoids _Iridoids (bitters).""? Gentiopicroside (about
2%) as major, others include centapicrin, gentioflavoside, swero-
side and swertiamarin; intensely bitter m-hydroxybenzoylesters of
sweroside and catapicrin.

Triterpenoids Includes %- and B-amyrin, erythrodiol, crataegolic
acid, oleanolic acid and sitosterol.

Xanthones Highly methylated xanthones, including eustomin
and 8-demethyleustomin.

Other constituents Flavonoids, fatty acids, alkanes and waxes.

Food Use

Centaury is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
centaury can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.'©! Previously, the bitter properties of centaury
were utilised in alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages with
maximum permitted doses between 0.0002% and 0.0008%.‘*?)

Herbal Use

Centaury is reputed to act as a bitter, aromatic and stomachic.
Traditionally, it has been used for anorexia and dyspepsia.(C* ©”
G52)

Figure 2 Centaury (Centaurium erythraea).

----- PAGE 161 -----
Centaury

Figure 3 Centaury — dried drug substance (herb).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Herb 2-4g as an infusion three times daily.©”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.‘

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory activity has been documented in two rat
models; subchronic inflammation (air pouch granuloma and
polyarthritis) test, and the carrageenan rat paw oedema test
(19% compared to 45% with indometacin).“ Antipyretic activity
has also been exhibited by a centaury extract against experimen-
tally induced hyperthermia in rats, although pretreatment with
the extract did not prevent hyperthermia;) antipyretic activity is
stated to be due to the phenolic acid constituents.'“* In the same
study, no analgesic activity could be demonstrated in mice
(writhing syndrome and hotplate models). Gentiopicroside
(30 mg/kg/day intraperitoneally) inhibited tumour necrosis factor
(TNF) production in carbon tetrachloride-induced and bacillus
Calmette—Guérin/lipopolysaccharide-induced models of hepatic
injury in mice.‘@?)

In rats, anticholinesterase activity has been demonstrated for
swertiamarin in a dose-dependent manner following oral admin-
istration, demonstrated by inhibition of carbachol-induced
contraction of proximal colon.'°) In mice, gentianine has central
nervous system (CNS)-depressant activity at oral doses of 30 mg/
kg, demonstrated by inhibition of spontaneous movement and
prolonged hexobarbital-induced sleeping time.'©” Anti-ulcero-
genic and inhibitory gastric secretion in rats (100 mg/kg) have been
shown for gentianine.'“”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of centaury
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for centaury and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

An alcoholic extract of centaury (200 mL/plate) was antimuta-
genic in Salmonella typhimurium strains TA8 and TA100.'°

Contra-indications, Warnings

Centaury is contra-indicated for individuals with — peptic

ulcers,‘

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of centaury to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of centaury taken during
pregnancy has not been established. In view of the lack of toxicity
data, use of centaury during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Czech Republic: Nat Zemezluce.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Austria: Montana N; China-Eisenwein; Eryval; Magentee St
Severin; Mariazeller. Czech Republic: Naturland Grosser
Swedenbitter; Stomaran. France: Diacure; Tisane Hepatique
de Hoerdt. Germany: Amara-Tropfen; Canephron; Stullma-
ton. Russia: Canephron N (Kanecppon H); Herbion Drops for
the Stomach (Pep6uon 7Keayaounsie Karan); Original Grosser
Bittner Balsam (Opurmmaapneii Boapmoii Baansam Burrnepa).
South Africa: Amara; Clairo. Spain: Natusor Hepavesical;
Odisor. Switzerland: Gastrosan; Tisane pour l'estomac.

References

1 Van der Sluis WG, Labadie RP. Onderzok naar en van secoiridoid
glucosiden en zanthonen in het gescglacht Centaurium. Pharm Weekbl
1978; 113: 21-32.

2 Van der Sluis WG, Labadie RP. Secoiridoids and xanthones in the
genus Centaurium. Part 3. Decentapicrins A, B and C, new m-
hydroxybenzoyl esters of sweroside from Centaurium littorale. Planta
Med 1981; 41: 150-160.

3 Berkan T et al. Antiinflammatory, analgesic, and antipyretic effects of
an aqueous extract of Erythraea centaurium. Planta Med 1991; 57: 34—
37.

4 Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

----- PAGE 162 -----
y Cereus

Little phytochemical or pharmacological information has
been documented for cereus, although the presence of
tyramine, a cardiotonic amine, may support the traditional
use of cereus as a cardiac stimulant. Cardiac complaints are
not considered to be suitable for self-medication.

Species (Family)

Selenicereus grandiflorus (L.) Britt. & Rose (Cactaceae)

Synonym(s)

Cactus grandiflorus L., Cereus grandiflorus (L.) Mill., Night
Blooming Cereus

Part(s) Used

Stem

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Cereus is not included in the GSL.'“@*”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22 and G40.

Alkaloids Isoquinoline-type. Unidentified alkaloids.”

Amines ©
cactine.

Tyramine”’, hordenine,® previously referred to as

Flavonoids Rutin, kaempferitrin, hyperoside, isorhamnetin-3-B-
(galactosyl)-rutinoside.

Other constituents Resin

Food Use

Cereus is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Cereus is reputed to act as a cardiac stimulant and as a partial
substitute for digitalis, although there is no proof of its

Amines
tyramine hordenine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cereus.

therapeutic value. Cereus has been used in cases of dropsy and
various cardiac disorders.'@!® °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard reference texts are given below.

Liquid extract of cereus (BPC 1934) 0.06-0.6 mL.
Tincture of cereus (BPC 1934) 0.12-2.0 mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for cereus. Cereus is reported to contain a
cardiotonic amine, tyramine, which has positive inotropic activity.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of cereus
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety data and toxicity data for cereus
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

The fresh juice of cereus is irritant to the oral mucosa, causing
a burning sensation, nausea and vomiting. Diarrhoea has also
been reported following cereus consumption.'C~)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Cereus is stated to contain tyramine; on this basis, whether or

not it is appropriate for use by patients with cardiac disorders
should be considered.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of cereus to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. Cereus is stated to contain
tyramine;”
patients receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors should be
avoided.

until further information is available, its use in

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of cereus has not been
established. In view of the limited information available on cereus,
its use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

References

1 Brown SD et al. Cactus alkaloids. Phytochemistry 1968; 7: 2031-2036.

2 Wagner H, Grevel J. Neue herzwirksame drogen II, nachweis und
isolierung herzwirksamer amine durch ionenpaar-HPLC. Planta Med
1982; 44: 36-40.

3. Petershofer-Halbmayer H et al. Isolierung von Hordenin (Cactin) aus
Selenicereus grandiflorus (L.) Britt. & Rose und Selenicereus
pteranthus (Link & Otto) Britt. & Rose. Sci Pharm 1982; 50: 29-34.

----- PAGE 163 -----
research assessing the effects of German chamomile is
limited, and randomised controlled clinical trials are required
to establish the reported anti-inflammatory, wound-healing

and sedative effects. Toxicity studies to date have indicated

chamomile to be of low toxicity, although allergic reactions

are documented.

Species (Family)

Matricaria recutita L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)
Chamomilla recutita (L.) Rauschert, Hungarian Chamomile,

Matricaria Flowers, Scented Mayweed, Sweet False Chamomile,
Wild Chamomile

Part(s) Used
Flowerhead

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007 (Matricaria Flower) ‘°*)
Complete German Commission E ‘?)
ESCOP 2003'07

Martindale 35th edition'@*”

Ph Eur 2007 (Matricaria Flower)@*”)
USP29/NF24'89)

WHO volume 1 1999'¢®?)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLios?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G32.

Coumarins Umbelliferone and its methyl ether, heniarin.

Flavonoids  Apigenin, apigetrin, apiin, luteolin, quercetin,
quercimeritrin and rutin.

Volatile oils 0.24-1.9%. Pharmacopoeial standard not less than
4 mg/kg blue oil.'“** Main components are (—)-o-bisabolol (up to
50%) and chamazulene (1-15%). Others include (—)-0-
bisabolol oxide A and B, (—)-a-bisabolone oxide A, spiroethers
(e.g. cis- and trans-en-yn-dicycloether), sesquiterpenes (e.g.

Chamomile, German

anthecotulid), cadinene, farnesene, furfural, spathulenol and
proazulenes (e.g. matricarin and matricin).

Chamazulene is formed from matricin during steam distillation
of the oil. It varies in yield depending on the origin and age of the
flowers.”

Other constituents Amino acids, anthemic acid (bitter), choline,
polysaccharide, plant and fatty acids, tannin and_ triterpene
hydrocarbons (e.g. triacontane).

Sesquiterpenes
H OH OH
H
O°
(-)-a-bisabolol (-)-a-bisabolol oxide B

.sOH

chamazulene

spathulenol
Acetylenes
o—= ==
2 4
cis-enynedicycloether
0 = H
hd ==
trans-enynedicycloether
Coumarins Flavonoids
Sy
R
umbelliferone H

umbelliferone methyl ether CH3

OH O
apigenin-7-glucoside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of German chamomile.

----- PAGE 164 -----
Food Use

German chamomile is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that chamomile can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities,
with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.‘@'?
commonly used in herbal teas. Previously, German chamomile has
been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).'C*”

German chamomile is

Herbal Use

German chamomile is stated to possess carminative, antispasmo-
dic, mild sedative, anti-inflammatory, antiseptic and anticatarrhal
properties. G2 C4 66 G7, G8, G43, G52, G64) J
flatulent nervous dyspepsia, travel sickness, nasal catarrh, nervous
diarrhoea, restlessness and specifically for gastrointestinal dis-
turbance with associated nervous irritability in children. It has
been used topically for haemorrhoids, mastitis and leg ulcers.
German Commission E approved use for gastrointestinal spasms
and inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract and
externally for skin and mucous membrane inflammation and
bacterial skin diseases including oral cavity and gums. It is also
approved for inflammations and irritations of the respiratory tract
(by inhalation) and ano-genital inflammation (baths and irriga-
tion).{C®

has been used for

Figure 3. German chamomile - dried drug substance (flowerhead).

Chamomile, German 153

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

)

Dosage

Dried flowerheads 2-8 g as an infusion three times daily©”

Liquid extract 1-4 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A wide range of pharmacological activities has been documented
for German chamomile, including antibacterial, anti-inflamma-
tory, antispasmodic, anti-ulcer, antiviral and hypo-uraemic
activities.

Anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic activity Anti-allergic and
anti-inflammatory activities"?
chamomile. The azulene components of the volatile oil are
thought to contribute by inhibiting histamine release and they
have been reported to prevent allergic seizures in guinea-pigs.”
Aqueous alcoholic extracts inhibited 5-lipoxygenase and cyclo-
oxygenase activity, and oxidation of arachidonic acid, and a
supercritical carbon dioxide extract had ICs values of 6-25 jtg/mL
for these three activities.'©
included apigenin, chamazulene, cis-en-yn spiroether and (—)-c-
bisabolol.““*?) Matricin, the precursor to chamazulene, is
reported to be a more effective anti-inflammatory agent than
4) Anti-inflammatory activity has also been
documented for the sesquiterpene bisabolol compounds, with
greatest activity reported for (—)-a-bisabolol,'** and for cis-
spiroether.) Anti-inflammatory activity (rat paw carrageenan
test) has also been documented for a cis-spiroether against
dextran induced oedema; no activity was observed against oedema
induced by serotonin, histamine or bradykinin."° In addition,
s anti-inflammatory activity.

are well documented for German

°2) The active compounds identified

chamazulene.

flavonoids are known to poss:

Sedative activity Apigenin competitively inhibited binding of
flunitrazepam to the central benzodiazepine receptor, but lacked
activity at other receptors, including muscarinic, %-adrenorecep-
tor and GABA,.'©” High-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC) fractions of a methanol extract displaced flunitrazepam
from its receptors in rat cerebellum membranes and muscimol
from GABA receptors in rat cortical membranes, due to the
presence of GABA in the fractions. Prolongation of hexobarbital-
induced sleeping time and reduction in activity of mice have been
documented.)

Anti-ulcerogenic activity Anti-ulcerogenic activity in rats has
en reported for (—)-a-bisabolol; the development of ulcers
induced by indometacin, stress or ethanol was inhibited.”

Antimicrobial and antiviral activities German chamomile oil
as been reported to have antifungal activity and antibacterial
activity against Gram-positive bacteria.“©°” The coumarin
erniarin has antibacterial and antifungal activities in the
presence of UV light. Antibacterial activity has been documented
for the coumarin constituents.” An ethanolic extract of the entire
plant has been reported to inhibit the growth of poliovirus and
erpesvirus.

Antispasmodic activity Antispasmodic activity on the isolated
guinea-pig ileum has been documented for the flavonoid and
isabolol constituents.” Greatest activity was exhibited by the
flavonoids, especially apigenin which was found to be more than

----- PAGE 165 -----
Chamomile, German

three times as potent as papaverine.” (—)-o-Bisabolol activity was
found to be comparable to that of papaverine, while the total
volatile oil was considerably less active." Smooth muscle relaxant
properties have also been documented for a cis-spiroether.?*% !?

Enhancement of uterine tone in the guinea-pig and rabbit has
been reported for an aqueous extract at a concentration of 1-2 mg
extract/em?,")
Other activities High molecular weight polysaccharides with
immunostimulating activity have been isolated from German
chamomile.” The oil has been reported to increase bile secretion
and concentration of cholesterol in the bile, following the
administration of 0.1mL/kg by mouth to cats and dogs.) A
dose of 0.2 mL/kg was stated to exhibit hypotensive, and cardiac
and respiratory depressant properties.

The ability of the volatile oil to regenerate liver tissue in

partially hepatectomised rats has been attributed to the azulene
2)

constituents.
The volatile oil has been documented to reduce the serum
concentration of urea in rabbits with experimentally induced

uraemic conditions.”

Clinical studies

Rigorous clinical research assessing the effects of German
chamomile is limited and large randomised controlled clinical
trials are required.

Anti-inflammatory and wound-healing effects Clinical studies
investigating the anti-inflammatory effects and wound-healing
properties of German chamomile preparations have been
reviewed.“ A summary of this information is given below.
Many of the studies and reports mentioned below have important
methodological limitations (e.g. no control group, small numbers
of participants) and this should be considered when interpreting
the results.

A cream containing German chamomile extract was reported to
have effects equivalent to 0.25% hydrocortisone, and superior
effects to 0.1% diflucortolone and 5% bufexamax in inflamma-
tory dermatoses, as assessed in 161 patients. Studies involving
healthy volunteers who received German chamomile preparations
have reported that German chamomile ointment was superior to
0.1% hydrocortisone acetate in dermatitis, and German chamo-
mile cream (20 mg/g) reduced visual sores and redness of skin in
an adhesive-tape stripping test. A randomised, double-blind trial
involving 25 participants indicated that a cream containing an
aqueous alcoholic extract of German chamomile was more
effective than hydrocortisone against UVB-induced erythema.

In an open study involving 98 patients with cancer, an extract
preparation (containing 50mg a-bisabolol and 150-300mg
apigenin-7-glucoside/100 g) used three times daily was reported
to reduce oral mucositis caused either by irradiation or
chemotherapy. However, a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving 164 patients showed that a mouthwash containing
German chamomile did not decrease 5-fluorouracil-induced
stomatitis.

The healing effects of German chamomile ointment and
dexapanthenol 5% cream administered for six days were reported
to have comparable effects in a study involving 147 female patients
who underwent episiotomy during childbirth. A standardised
extract (50mg a-bisabolol and 3mg chamazulene/100 g) signifi-
cantly decreased weeping wound area and drying of wound in 14
patients following removal of tattoos. An ointment preparation

improved haemorrhage, itching, burning and oozing due to
haemorrhoids in a study involving 120 patients.

Sedative effects Oral administration of a German chamomile
extract was reported to induce a deep sleep in 10 of 12 patients
undergoing cardiac catheterisation.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety data and toxicity data for German
chamomile and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Reports of allergic reactions to chamomile are common,
although in the majority of cases the plant species is not
specified." Patients with an existing hypersensitivity to German
chamomile have demonstrated cross-sensitivities to other mem-
bers of the family Asteraceae/Compositae"® @!
celery (family Umbelliferae).“°? There are reports of anaphylac-
tic reactions to chamomile (spe unspecified)!” !® and in both
cases the individuals concerned had an existing hypersensitivity to
ragweed (member of Asteraceae/Compositae). The symptoms
they experienced included abdominal cramps, thickness of the
tongue and a tight sensation in the throat," angioedema of the
lips and eyes, diffuse pruritus, a full sensation of the ears,
generalised urticaria, upper airway obstruction, and pharyngeal
oedema."'”) Both patients made a full recovery following medical
treatment.

Allergic skin reactions have been documented following
external contact with German chamomile.” °°!) Consumption
of chamomile tea may exacerbate existing allergic conditions and
the use of a chamomile enema has been documented to cause
asthma and urticaria.(@?

The allergenic properties documented for chamomile have been
attributed to anthecotulid, a sesquiterpene lactone present in low
concentrations,'!) and to matricarin, a proazulene which has
produced positive patch tests in patients with an existing
sesquiterpene lactone hypersensitivity.'“> Sesquiterpene lactones
have been implicated in the allergenic activity of many plants,
especially those belonging to the Asteraceae/Compositae family
(see Feverfew). The prerequisite for allergenic activity is thought
to be an exocyclic a-methylene group.2”

The flowerheads contain anthemic acid, which is reported to act
as an emetic in large doses.'C”

The acute toxicity of chamomile oil (German and Roman) is
reported to be low." Oral and dermal LDso values in rabbits have
been documented as greater than 5 g/kg," and the application of
undiluted oil to the hairless backs of mice, to rabbit skin, and to
human skin was not found to produce any observable irritation.)
An LDspo value (mouse, by mouth) for German chamomile oil has
been documented as 2.5 mL/kg.''*) The acute oral toxicity of (—)-
a-bisabolol in mice and rats is reported to be low at
approximately 15 mL/kg.°” The subacute oral toxicity of (—)-o-
bisabolol has been estimated to be between 1.0 and 2.0 mL/kg in
rats and dogs.” An LDso value (mouse, intraperitoneal injection)
for cis-spiroether has been stated as 670 mg/kg.

) and also to

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the documented allergic reactions and cross-
itivities, German chamomile should be avoided by individuals
with a known hypersensitivity to any members of the Asteraceae/
Compositae family. In addition, German chamomile may
precipitate an allergic reaction or exacerbate existing symptoms
in susceptible individuals (e.g. asthmatics).

sel

----- PAGE 166 -----
The use of chamomile preparations for teething babies is not
recommended.

Drug interactions None documented. However the potential for
preparations of German chamomile to interact with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered (particularly
where oral preparations of German chamomile are used).
Coumarin compounds detected so far in German chamomile do
not possess the minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl
substituent and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)‘©*” for
anticoagulant activity.

Pregnancy and lactation German chamomile is reputed to
affect the menstrual cycle*” and extracts are reported to be
uterotonic.”*!) Teratogenicity studies in rats, rabbits and dogs
have been documented for (—)-a-bisabolol, with the oral toxic
dose stated as 1-3 mL/kg.°” A dose of 3mL/kg was found to
increase the number of fetuses reabsorbed and reduce the body
weight of live offspring.°?) (—)-o-Bisabolol administered orally
(250 and 500 mg/kg) to pregnant rats has been reported to have no
effect on the fetus.) There are insufficient data on the use of
German chamomile preparations during pregnancy and breast-
feasting, and excessive use (particularly oral preparations) should
be avoided during these periods.

UK: Culpeper After Dinner Tea; Napiers Monthly Calm Tea.
USA: Hot Flashex; Kavatrol; Laci Throat Care Soothing
Citrus; MSM with Glucosamine Creme.

References

1 Isaac O. Pharmacological investigations with compounds of
chamomile I. On the pharmacology of (—)-a-bisabolol and bisabolol
oxides (review). Planta Med 1979; 35: 118-124.

2 Mann C, Staba EJ. The chemistry, pharmacology, and commercial
formulations of chamomile. In: Craker LE, Simon JE, eds. Herbs,
Spices, and Medicinal Plants: Recent Advances in Botany,
Horticulture, and Pharmacology, vol 1. Arizona: Oryx Press, 1986:
235-280.

3 Tubaro A e¢ al. Evaluation of antiinflammatory activity of a
chamomile extract after topical application. Planta Med 1984; 50: 359.

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

Chamomile, German

Jakovlev V et al. Pharmacological investigations with compounds of
chamomile VI. Investigations on the antiphlogistic effects of
chamazulene and matricine. Planta Med 1983; 49: 67-73.

Jacovlev V et al. Pharmacological investigations with compounds of
chamomile II. New investigations on the antiphlogistic effects of (—)-
a-bisabolol and bisabolol oxides. Planta Med 1979; 35: 125-140.
Breinlich VJ, Scharnagel K. Pharmakologische Eigenschaften des EN-
IN-dicycloathers aus Matricaria chamomilla. Arzneimittelforschung
1968; 18: 429-431.

Szelenyi I et al. Pharmacological experiments with compounds of
chamomile III. Experimental studies of the ulcerprotective effect of
chamomile. Planta Med 1979; 35: 218-227.

Suganda AG et al. Effets inhibiteurs de quelques extraits bruts et semi
purifiés de plantes indigénes frangaises sur la multiplication de
l'herpesvirus humain 1 et du poliovirus humain 2 en culture cellulaire.
J Nat Prod 1983; 46: 626-632.

Achterrath-Tuckermann U e¢ al. Pharmacological investigations with
compounds of chamomile. V. Investigations on the spasmolytic effect
of compounds of chamomile and Kamillosan on the isolated guinea
pig ileum. Planta Med 1980; 39: 38-50.

Holz] J et al. Preparation of '*C-spiro ethers by chamomile and their
use by an investigation of absorption. Planta Med 1986; 52: 533.
Shipochliev T. Extracts from a group of medicinal plants enhancing
the uterine tonus. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 18: 94-98.

Wagner VH et al. Immunstimulierend wirkende polysaccharide
(heteroglykane) aus héheren pflanzen. Arzneimittelforschung 1985;
35: 1069.

Ikram M. Medicinal plants as hypocholesterolemic agents. /PMA
1980; 30: 278-282.

Grochulski VA, Borkowski B. Influence of chamomile oil on
experimental glomerulonephritis in rabbits. Planta Med 1972; 21:
289-292.

Hausen BM et al. The sensitizing capacity of Compositae plants.
Planta Med 1984; 50: 229-234.

Hausen BM. The sensitising capacity of Compositae plants. III. Test
results and cross-reactions in Compositae-sensitive patients.
Dermatologica 1979; 159: 1-11.

Casterline CL. Allergy to chamomile tea. JAMA 1980; 4: 330-331.
Benner MH, Lee HJ. Anaphylactic reaction to chamomile tea. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 1973; 52: 307-308.

Kettel WG. Allergy to Matricaria chamomilla. Contact Dermatitis
1987; 16: SO-S1.

Mitchell JC, Dupuis G. Allergic contact dermatitis from
sesquiterpenoids of the Compositae family of plants. Br J Derm 1971;
84: 139-150.

Opdyke DLJ. Chamomile oil German. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12:
851-852.

Habersang S et al. Pharmacological studies with compounds of
chamomile IV. Studies on toxicity of (—)-a-bisabolol. Planta Med
1979; 37: 115-123.

----- PAGE 167 -----
chemical compositions, many of the activities described for
German chamomile are thought to be applicable to Roman
chamomile and thus support the traditional herbal uses.
However, rigorous clinical research assessing the efficacy and
safety of preparations of Roman chamomile is required.
Roman chamomile is stated to be of low toxicity, although
allergic reactions (mainly contact dermatitis) have been
reported.

Species (Family)

Chamaemelum nobile (L.) All. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Anthemis nobilis L., Chamomile, ormenis nobilis (L.) J. Gay ex
Coss. & Germ.

Part(s) Used
Flowerhead

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

Martindale 35th edition'@*
Ph Eur 20078
USP29/NF24'68°

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and Gé.

Coumarins Scopoletin-7-glucoside.

Flavonoids Apigenin, luteolin, quercetin and their glycosides
(e.g. apiin, luteolin-7-glucoside and rutin).

Volatile oils 0.4-1.75%. Angelic and tiglic acid esters (85%);
others include 1,8-cineole, [-trans-pinocarveol, [-trans-pinocar-
vone, chamazulene, farnesol, nerolidol; germacranolide-type
sesquiterpene lactones (0.6%), including nobilin, 3-epinobilin,
1,10-epoxynobilin, 3-dehydronobilin; various alcohols including
amyl and isobutyl alcohols, anthemol.~ Chamazulene is formed
from a natural precursor during steam distillation of the oil, and
varies in yield depending on the origin and the age of flowers.”

Chamomile, Roman

Other constituents Anthemic acid (bitter), phenolic and fatty
acids, phytosterol, choline and inositol.

Food Use

Roman chamomile is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that Roman chamomile can be added to foodstuffs in small
quantities, with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.'©'® Chamomile is commonly
used as an ingredient of herbal teas. Previously, Roman chamomile
has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).‘“4?

Herbal Use

Roman chamomile is stated to possess carminative, anti-emetic,
antispasmodic, and sedative properties. It has been used for
dyspepsia, nausea and vomiting, anorexia, vomiting of pregnancy,
dysmenorrhoea, and specifically for flatulent dyspepsia associated

with mental stress.(C* 6% 67 C8: Go)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried flowerheads 1—4g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Liquid extract 1-4 mL (1:1 in 70% alcohol) three times daily.”

Volatile oil esters

H CH3
fe}

Sesquiterpenes

m-butylangelate
HC. CH3
‘alas
fe}
mbutyltigliate
Coumarins Flavonoids
Glucosyl-O fe) [e)
scopoletin-7-glucoside
(scopolin)
R
apigenin H
luteolin OH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of Roman chamomile.

----- PAGE 168 -----
Pharmacological Actions

German and Roman chamomile possess similar pharmacological
activities (see Chamomile, German for a fuller description of
documented pharmacological actions).

In vitro and animal studies

Few studies have been documented specifically for Roman
chamomile. The azulene compounds are reported to possess
anti-allergic and anti-inflammatory properties; their mechanism
of action is thought to involve inhibition of histamine release (see
Chamomile, German). The volatile oil has been documented as
having anti-inflammatory activity (carrageenan rat paw oedema
test), and antidiuretic and sedative effects following intraperito-

neal administration of doses up to 350mg/kg body weight to
(5)

rats.

The azulenes have been reported to stimulate liver regeneration
following oral, but not subcutaneous, administration.

The sesquiterpenoids nobilin, 1,10-epoxynobilin and 3-dehy-
dronobilin have demonstrated in vitro antitumour activity against
human cells.” The concentration of hydroxyisonobilin required
for cytotoxic activity is reported to be low enough to warrant
further investigations (EDs, 0.56ug/mL versus HeLa; EDso
1.23 ,tg/mL versus KB; arbitrary acceptable test level 4 g/mL).

Clinical studies

Clinical research ass

sing the effects of Roman chamomile is
limited, and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety data and toxicity data for Roman
chamomile and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Instances of allergic and anaphylactic reactions to chamomile
have been documented (see Chamomile, German) The allergenic
principles in chamomile are thought to be the sesquiterpene

Figure 2 Roman chamomile (Chamaemelum nobile).

Chamomile, Roman 157,

Roman chamomile yields nobilin, a sesquiterpene
lactone that is reported to be potentially allergenic.” However,
Roman chamomile oil has also been reported to be non-irritant
sitising to human skin.
indicated the oil to be either mildly or non-irritant, and to lack
any phototoxic effects.”

Large dos

emetic“ and this has been attributed to the anthemic acid
)

lactones.”

and non: Animal studies have

s of Roman chamomile are stated to act as an

content.

The acute toxicity of Roman chamomile in animals is reported
) Acute LDso values in rabbits (dermal) and
rats (by mouth) have been stated to exceed 5 g/kg.)

to be relatively low."!

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the documented allergic reactions and cross-sensitivities
(see Chamomile, German), Roman chamomile should be avoided
by individuals with a known hypersensitivity to any members of
the Asteraceae/Compositae family. In addition, Roman chamomile
may precipitate an allergic reaction or exacerbate existing
symptoms in susceptible individuals (e.g. asthmatics).

The use of chamomile preparations in teething babies
recommended.

is not

Drug interactions None documented. However the potential for
preparations of Roman chamomile to interact with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered (particularly
where oral preparations of Roman chamomile are used).
Coumarin compounds detected so far in Roman chamomile do
not possess the minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl
substituent and a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent) for antic-
oagulant activity.

Pregnancy and lactation Roman chamomile is reputed to be an
abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle.‘°* In view of this
and the potential for allergic reactions, the exce:
chamomile during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

ive use of Roman

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

UK: Summertime Tea Blend.

Figure 3 Roman chamomile - dried drug substance (flowerhead).

C

----- PAGE 169 -----
C

Chamomile, Roman

References

1 Mann C, Staba EJ. The chemistry, pharmacology, and commercial
formulations of chamomile. In: Craker LE, Simon JE, eds. Herbs,
Spices, and Medicinal Plants: Recent Advances in Botany,
Horticulture, and Pharmacology, vol 1. Arizona: Oryx Press, 1986:
235-280.

2 Opdyke DLJ. Chamomile oil roman. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974: 12:

853.

Casterline CL. Allergy to chamomile tea. JAMA 1980; 4: 330-331.
Hausen BM et al. The sensitizing capacity of Compositae plants.
Planta Med 1984; 50: 229-234.

Melegari M et al. Chemical characteristics and pharmacological
properties of the essential oils of Anthemis nobilis. Fitoterapia 1988;
59: 449-455,

Achterrath-Tuckermann U et al. Pharmacologisch Untersuchungen
von Kamillen-Inhaltestoffen. Planta Med 1980; 39: 38-50.

----- PAGE 170 -----
= Chaparral

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of chaparral is well studied and extensive
literature has been published on the principal lignan
component nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA). However,
little documented evidence is available to justify the herbal
uses of chaparral. In view of the concerns over the hepatic
toxicity, the use of chaparral as a herbal remedy cannot be
recommended.

Species (Family)

Larrea tridentata Cov. var. glutinosa Jepson (Zygophyllaceae)

Synonym(s)

Creosote Bush. L. tridentata (south-western USA and northern

Mexico) is now regarded as a separate species to Larrea divaricata
5 ee

Gay. (north-western Argentina).

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
85)

Martindale 35th edition

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Chaparral is not included in the GSL.“@*”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G22.

Amino acids Arginine, aspartine, cystine, glutamic acid, glycine,
isoleucine, leucine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, tyrosine and
valine.

Flavonoids More than 20 different compounds reported,
including isorhamnetin, kaempferol and quercetin and_ their
glycosidic and ether derivatives; gossypetin, herbacetin, and their

acetate derivatives;'"” two C-glucosyl flavones.

Lignans Major constituent nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA)
(up to 1.84%), norisoguaiacin, dihydroguaiaretic acid, partially

demethylated dihydroguaiaretic acid, 3’-demethoxyisoguaia-
<i (8-10)
cin.

Lignans

HO OH
NF
Hi a

HO. / « y OH

nordihydroguaiaretic acid

Figure 1 Selected constituents of chaparral.

Resins 20%. Phenolic constituents on external leaf surfaces of L.
divaricata and L. tridentata are reported to be identical, contain-
ing a number of flavone and flavonol glycosides, and two lignans
(including NDGA).

Volatile oils | Many identified terpene components include
calamene, eudesmol, limonene, %- and B-pinene, and 2-rossa-

(
lene"?

(12)

Other constituents Two pentacyclic triterpenes,"” saponins.

Other plant parts A cytotoxic naphthoquinone derivative,
larreantin, has been isolated from the roots.‘

Food Use

Chaparral is not used in foods, although a related species, Larrea
mexicana Moric., also termed creosote bush, is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category
N2). This category indicates that creosote bush can be added to
foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible limitation of an
active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final product.(@'® In the
USA, NDGA is no longer permitted to be used as an antioxidant
in foods following the results of toxicity studies in animals (see
Side-effects, Toxicity).

Herbal Use

Chaparral has been used for the treatment of arthritis, cancer,

venereal disease, tuberculosis, bowel cramps, rheumatism and

colds,'6&

Figure 2 Chaparral (Larrea tridentata).

C

----- PAGE 171 -----
Chaparral

Figure 3. Chaparral - dried drug substance (herb).

Dosage

None documented.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Amocebicidal action against Entamoeba histolytica has been
reported for a chaparral extract (0.01%). This action may be
attributable to the lignan constituents, which are documented as
both amoebicidal and fungicidal.” NDGA has been reported to
have antimicrobial activity against a number of organisms
including Penicillium spp., Salmonella spp., Streptococcus spp.,
Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa
and various other pathogens and moulds.'* !*

NDGA is an antioxidant, and has been
inhibition of hepatic microsomal enzyme function.

locumented to cause
(15-17)

Clinical studies

Medical interest in chaparral increased following claims that
ingestion of an aqueous infusion of the herb was associated with
regression of a malignant melanoma in the cheek of an 85-year-old
man.\!®) However, an isolated care report is not adequate scientific
evidence, results of a subsequent study that investigated the
antitumour action of chaparral, as a tea, were inconclusive.‘©%

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety data and toxicity data for
chaparral and further investigation of these aspects is required.
Acute hepatitis has been associated with chaparral inges-
tion"? Contact dermatitis to chaparral has been
reported.°**) Chaparral-induced toxic hepatitis has been
reported for two patients in different parts of the USA. The
adverse effects were attributed to ingestion of a herbal nutritional
supplement derived from the leaves of chaparral. Five cases of
serious poisoning in the USA and another three in Canada have
been linked to chaparral-containing products.?°* Some patients
have developed irreversible reno-hepatic failure. Initially, NDGA
was thought to have low toxicity: doses of up to 400 mg/kg body
weight by intramuscular injection had been administered to
humans for 5-6 months, with little or no toxicity reported.
Documented oral LDso values for NDGA include 4 ¢/kg (mouse),
5.5 g/kg (rat) and 830 mg/kg (guinea-pig)."' Results of chronic
feeding studies (two years, 0.25-1.0% of diet) in rats and mice

reported no abnormalities in histological tests of the liver, spleen
and kidney. Inflammatory caecal lesions and_ slight cystic
enlargement of lymph nodes near the caecum were observed in
rats at the 0.5% feeding level. At this point NDGA was considered
to be safe for food use. However, two later studies in rats (using
NDGA at up to 3% of the diet) reported the development of
cortical and medullary cysts in the kidney.’ On the basis of these
findings, NDGA was removed from GRAS (Generally Recognised
As Safe) status in the USA and is no longer permitted to be used
as an antioxidant in foods.’

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the reports of acute hepatitis associated with chaparral
ingestion, and the uncertainty regarding NDGA toxicity, con-
sumption should be avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However the potential for
preparations of chaparral to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Chaparral has amino acid
constituents and, therefore, may not be suitable for use by patients
receiving treatments with monoamine oxidase inhibitors.

Pregnancy and lactation In vitro utero activity has been
documented for chaparral.'©* In view of the concerns regarding
toxicity, chaparral should not be ingested during pregnancy or
lactation.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Proyeast.

References

1 Bernhard HO, Thiele K. Additional flavonoids from the leaves of
Larrea tridentata. Planta Med 1981; 41: 100-103.

2 Sakakibara M et al. 6,8-Di-C-glucosylflavones from Larrea tridentata
(Zygophyllaceae). Phytochemistry 1977; 16: 1113-1114.

3 Sakakibara M e¢ al. A new 8-hydroxyflavonol from Larrea tridentata.
Phytochemistry 1975; 14: 2097-2098.

4 Sakakibara M et al. New 8-hydroxyflavonols from Larrea tridenta.
Phytochemistry 1975; 14: 849-851.

5 Sakakibara M et al. Flavonoid methyl ethers on the external leaf
surface of Larrea tridentata and L. divaricata. Phytochemistry 1976;
15: 727-731.

6 Chirikdjian JJ. Isolation of kumatakenin and 4’ ,5-dihydroxy-3,3',7-
trimethoxyflavone from Larrea tridentata. Pharmazie 1974; 29: 292—
293.

7 Chirikdjian JJ. Flavonoids of Larrea tridentata. Z Naturforsch 1973;
28: 32-35.

8 Gisvold O, Thaker E. Lignans from Larrea divaricata. ] Pharm Sci
1974; 63: 1905-1907.

9 Fronczek FR et al. The molecular structure of 3/-
demethoxynorisoguaiacin triacetate from creosote bush (Larrea
tridentata). ] Nat Prod 1987; 50: 497-499.

10 Page JO. Determination of nordihydroguaiaretic acid in creosote bush.
Anal Chem 1955; 27: 1266-1268.

11 Bohnstedt CF, Mabry TJ. The volatile constituents of the genus Larrea
(Zygophyllaceae). Rev Latinoam Quim 1979; 10: 128-131.

12 Xue H-Z et al. 3-B-(3,4-Dihydroxycinnamoy!)-erythrodiol and 3B-(4-
hydroxycinnamoyl)-erythrodiol from Larrea tridentata.
Phytochemistry 1988; 27: 233-235.

13 Luo Z et al. Larreatin, a novel, cytotoxic naphthoquinone from Larrea
tridentata. ] Org Chem 1988; 53: 2183-2185.

14 Segura JJ et al. In-vitro amebicidal activity of Larrea tridentata. Bol
Estud Med Biol 1979; 30: 267-268.

----- PAGE 172 -----
15

16

17

18

Oliveto EP. Nordihydroguaiaretic acid. A naturally occurring
antioxidant. Chem Ind 1972: 677-679.

Burk D, Woods M. Hydrogen peroxide, catalase, glutathione
peroxidasequinones, nordihydroguaiaretic acid, and phosphopyridine
in relation to X-ray action on cancer cells. Radiation Res Suppl 1963;
3: 212-246.

Pardini RS e¢ al. Inhibition of mitochondrial electron transport by
nor-dihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA). Biochem Pharmacol 1970; 19:
2695-2699.

Smart CR e¢ al. An interesting observation on nordihydroguaiaretic
acid (NSC-4291; NDGA) and a patient with malignant melanoma—a
preliminary report. Cancer Chemother Rep Part 1 1969; 53: 147.

19

20

21

22

23

24

Chaparral

Katz M, Saibil F. Herbal hepatitis: subacute hepatic necrosis
secondary to chaparral leaf. J Clin Gastroenterol 1990; 12: 203-206.
Clark F, Reed R. Chaparral-induced toxic hepatitis — California and
Texas, 1992. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1992; 41: 812-814.

Gordon DW et al. Chaparral ingestion — the broadening spectrum of
liver injury caused by herbal medicines. JAMA 1995; 273: 489-490.
Leonforte JE Contact dermatitis from Larrea (creosote bush). J Am
Acad Dermatol 1986; 14: 202-207.

Shasky DR. Contact dermatitis from Larrea tridentata (creosote
bush). J Am Acad Dermatol 1986; 15: 302.

Anon. Toxic tea. Pharm J 1993; 250: 366.

C

----- PAGE 173 -----
7 Cinnamon

probably attributable to the volatile oil. The astringent
properties of tannins may account for the claimed
antidiarrhoeal action. However, rigorous clinical research
assessing the efficacy and safety of cinnamon preparations is
required. Cinnamon should not be used in amounts greatly
exceeding those used in foods.

Species (Family)

Jinnamomum zeylanicum Bl. (Lauraceae)
t+Cinnamomum loureirii Nees
+Cinnamomum burmanii (Nees) Bl.

Synonym(s)

*Ceylon Cinnamon, Cinnamomum verum J.S. Presl., True
Cinnamon

+Cinnamomum obtusifolium Nees var. loureirii Perr. & Eb.,
Saigon Cassia, Saigon Cinnamon

fBatavia Cassia, Batavia Cinnamon, Padang-Cassia, Panang
Cinnamon

Part(s) Used

Inner bark

Pharmacopo

BHP 1996”)

BP 20070

Complete German Commission EO)
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Ph Eur 20078

WHO volume 1 1999

| and Other Monographs

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G58, G59 and G62.

Tannins Condensed.

Volatile oils Up to 4%. Cinnamaldehyde (60-75%), benzalde-
hyde and cuminaldehyde; phenols (4-10%) including eugenol, and
methyleugenol, pinene, phellandrene, cymeme and caryophyllene
(hydrocarbons), eugenol acetate, cinnamyl acetate and benzyl
benzoate (esters), linalool (an alcohol). Of the various types of
cinnamon bark the oil of C. zeylanicum is stated to contain the
highest amount of eugenol. Cinnamon oil differs from the closely
related cassia oil in that the latter is reported to be devoid of
eugenol, monoterpenoids and sesquiterpenoids (see Cassia).

Other constituents Calcium oxalate, cinnzeylanin, cinnzeylanol,
coumarin, gum, mucilage, resins and sugars.

Other plant parts Cinnamon leaf oil contains much higher
concentrations of eugenol, from 80 to 96% depending on the
species. A cinnamon leaf oil of Chinese origin, Cinnamomum
japonicum Sieb., contains a high concentration of safrole (60%)
and only about 3% eugenol.

Food Use

Cinnamon is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
cinnamon can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.‘©'® It is commonly used as a spice in cooking,
although at levels much less than the stated therapeutic doses. The
acceptable daily intake of cinnamaldehyde has been temporarily
estimated as 700 t1g/kg body weight.‘C* Previously, cinnamon has
been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).(C*?

Herbal Use

Cinnamon is stated to possess antispasmodic, carminative,
orexigenic, antidiarrhoeal, antimicrobial, refrigerant and anthel-
mintic properties. It has been used for anorexia, intestinal colic,
infantile diarrhoea, common cold, influenza, and specifically for
flatulent colic, and dyspepsia with nausea.“ Cinnamon bark is
also stated to be astringent, and cinnamon oil is reported to
possess carminative and antiseptic properties.'C” C4» OC

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal and pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

Dried bark 0.5-1.0g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Phenylpropanes

CHO
fa
OCH; of
on a “oO
cinnamaldehyde — eugenol H safrole
methyleugenol CH3
CO2H
oa

trans-cinnamic acid

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cinnamon.

----- PAGE 174 -----
Liquid extract 0.5-1.0mL (1:1 in 70% alcohol) three times
daily.'C”

Tincture of Cinnamon (BPC 1949) 2-4mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Cinnamon oil has antifungal, antiviral, bactericidal and larvicidal
properties.'“4 A carbon dioxide extract of cinnamon bark
(0.1%) has been documented to suppress completely the growth
of numerous microorganisms including Escherichia coli, Staphy-
lococcus aureus and Candida albicans.'“*) (See Cassia for details
of the many pharmacological actions documented for cinnamal-
dehyde and cinnamomi cortex (cinnamon bark).)

Antiseptic and anaesthetic properties have been documented for
eugenol and two insecticidal compounds, cinnzeylanin and
cinnzeylanol, have been isolated.“ Tannins are known to
possess astringent properties.

Figure 2. Cinnamon (Cinnamomum zeylanicum).

Figure 3. Cinnamon - dried drug substance (inner bark).

Cinnamon

Weak tumour-promoting activity on the mouse skin and weak
cytotoxic activity against HeLa cells has been documented for
eugenol.(C4”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
cinnamon and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented for cinnamon bark. However, clinical safety
data and toxicity data for cinnamom are limited and further
investigation of these aspects is required. Cinnamon oil contains
cinnamaldehyde, an irritant and sensitising principle.'(°*® The
dermal LDso of the oil is reported to be 690 mg/kg body weight

(see Cassia). The accepted daily intake of eugenol is up to 2.5 mg/
kg.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Contact with cinnamon bark or oil may cause an_ allergic
reaction.“ Cinnamon oil is stated to be a dermal and mucous
membrane irritant, and a dermal sensitiser.“@** It is a hazardous
oil and should not be used on the skin.‘ The oil should not be
taken internally.

Drug interactions None documented.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of cinnamon during pregnancy and lactation, provided
that doses do not greatly exceed the amounts used in foods.

Paratonico. Czech Republic: Blahungstee N; Dr Theiss
Rheuma Creme; Dr Theiss Schwedenbitter; Magen- und
Darmtee N. France: Elixir Grez; Quintonine. Germany:
Amara-Pascoe; Gastrosecur; Klosterfrau Melisana; Melissen-
geist; Schwedentrunk Elixier; Sedovent. India: Carmicide.
Israel: Davilla. Italy: Biophase Shampoo; Dam. Russia:
Doppelherz Melissa (Aommeanrep. Meancca); Himcolin
(Xumkoaun). South Africa: Melissengeist; Rooilavental; Spir-
itus Contra Tussim Drops. Spain: Agua del Carmen;
Vigortonic. Switzerland: Odontal; Tisane pour les problemes
de prostate. Thailand: Meloids. UK: Melissa Comp.. Vene-
zuela: Aftil.

Reference

1 Wagner H, Wolff P (eds). New Natural Products and Plant Drugs with
Pharmacological, Biological or Therapeutical Activity. Berlin: Springer
Verlag, 1977.

C

----- PAGE 175 -----
- Clivers

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited chemical information is available for clivers. No
scientific evidence was found to support the herbal uses,
although documented tannin constituents may account for
the reputed mild astringent action. In view of the paucity of
toxicity data, excessive use of clivers should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Galium aparine L. (Rubiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Cleavers, Galium, Goosegrass

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Acids Caffeic acid, p-coumaric acid, gallic acid, p-hydroxyben-
zoic acid, salicylic acid and citric acid.)

Coumarins Unspecified. Scopoletin and umbelliferone reported
for related species Galium cruciata and Galium tauricum.”

Iridoids Asperuloside (rubichloric acid), monotropein.'>*

lridoids

fe}
Glucosyl-O a

asperuloside

Glucosyl-O nm

monotropeine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of clivers.

Tannins Unspecified; gallic acid is usually associated with
hydrolysable tannins.

Other constituents Alkanes (Cjy—C3,), flavonoids.

Other plant parts Anthraquinones have been documented for
the roots, but not for the aerial parts.'!

Food Use

Clivers is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Clivers is stated to possess diuretic and mild astringent properties.
It has been used for dysuria, lymphadenitis, psoriasis, and

specifically for enlarged lymph nodes.\6% 07 G86

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.'C%°”

Figure 3 Clivers — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 176 -----
Liquid extract
daily. ©

24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

Expressed juice 3-15 mL three times daily.C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for clivers. Asperuloside and monotropein have
been reported to elicit a mild laxative action in mice. The action
was stated to be approximately 15 times less potent than that of
senna, and of shorter duration.

Clinical studies

None documented. Tannins are known to possess astringent
activities.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented.

Contra-indications, Warnings

It has been stated that diabetics should only use the expressed
juice with caution'©* although no pharmacological data were
located to support this statement.

Drug interactions None documented. However the potential for
preparations of clivers to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Clivers

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of pharmacological
and toxicological information, the use of clivers during pregnancy
and lactation should be avoided.

Relief Tablets; HealthAid Boldo-Plus; Kas-Bah; Modern
Herbals Menopause; Modern Herbals Water Retention;
Napiers Breathe Easy Tea; Psorasolv; Sciargo; Skin Cleansing;
Tabritis; Tabritis Tablets; Water Naturtabs; Watershed.

References

1 Hegnauer R. Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen, vol 6. Basel and
Stuttgart: Birhauser Verlag, 1973: 158-159.

2 Borisov MI. Coumarins of the genus Asperula and Galium. Khim Prir
Soedin 1974; 10: 82.

3 Grimshaw J. Structure of asperuloside. Chem Ind 1961: 403-404.

4 Corrigan D et al. Iridoids and alkanes in twelve species of Galium and
Asperula. Phytochemistry 1978; 17: 1131-1133.

5 Buckova A et al. Contents of tannins in some species of the Asperula
and Galium genera. Acta Fac Pharm Univ Comeniana 1970; 19: 7-28.

6 Inouye H et al. Purgative activities of iridoid glucosides. Planta Med
1974; 25: 285-288.

----- PAGE 177 -----
- Clove

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The pharmacological properties documented for cloves are
associated with the volatile oil, in particular with eugenol
which has local anaesthetic action. However, rigorous clinical
research assessing the efficacy and safety of clove
preparations is required. Cloves should not be taken in doses
greatly exceeding those used in foods and caution should be
exerted in patients taking anticoagulant or antiplatelet
therapy.

Species (Family)

Syzygium aromaticum (L.) Merr. & Perry (Myrtaceae)

Synonym(s)

Caryophyllus aromaticus L., Eugenia aromatica (L.) Baill.,
Eugenia caryophyllata Thunb., Eugenia caryophyllus (Spreng.)
Bull. & Harr.

Part(s) Used

Clove (dried flowerbud), leaf, stem

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 20070

Complete German Commission E'°
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Ph Eur 2007'¢°?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G58.
Volatile oils Clove bud oil (15-18%) containing eugenol (80-
90%), eugenyl acetate (2-27%), B-caryophyllene (5-12%). Others
include methylsalicylate, methyleugenol, benzaldehyde, methyla-
myl ketone and o-ylangene.

Leaf oil (2%) containing eugenol 82-88%.

Phenylpropanes

OCH3
OH
eugenol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of clove.

Stem oil (4-6%) with eugenol 90-95%. A more comprehensive
listing is provided elsewhere. ‘©?”)

Other constituents Campesterol, carbohydrates, kaempferol,
lipids, oleanolic acid, rhamnetin, sitosterol, stigmasterol and
vitamins.

Food Use

Clove is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that clove
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.‘“'® Clove is commonly used in cooking, and as a
flavouring agent in food products. Previously, clove has been listed
as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).‘°*”

Herbal Use

Clove has been traditionally used as a carminative, anti-emetic,
toothache remedy and counter-irritant.C? “4h 6°

Clove oil is stated to be a carminative, occasionally used in the
G5) and is commonly used topically

treatment of flatulent colic
for symptomatic relief of toothache.'“*

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard pharmaceutical reference texts
are given below. In dentistry, clove oil is applied undiluted using a
plug of cottonwool soaked in the oil and applied to the cavity of
the tooth (see Contra-indications, Warnings).

Clove 120-300 mg.‘“*

Clove oil 0.05-0.2 mL.‘°*”

Figure 2 Clove (Syzygium aromaticum).

----- PAGE 178 -----
Figure 3 Clove - dried drug substance (flowerbud).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The anodyne and mild antiseptic properties documented for clove
oil have been attributed to eugenol.'“*” Clove oil is stated to
possess antihistaminic and antispasmodic properties.'C* Euge-
nol, eugenol acetate and methyl acetate are reported to exhibit
trypsin-potentiating activity.4

Antibacterial, hypoglycaemic and potent CNS-depressant
activities have been documented for Syzygium cuminii L., a
related species cultivated in India.”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of cloves
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, To

There is a lack of clinical safety data and toxicity data for clove oil
and further investigation of these aspects is required. Clove oil is
stated to be a dermal and mucous membrane irritant;‘C>”
dermatitis, cheilitis, and stomatitis have been reported for clove
oil.) The irritant nature of the oil can be attributed to the
eugenol content. Eugenol is also stated to have sensitising
properties.'°*)) An LDso (rat, by mouth) value for clove oil is

stated as 2.65 g/kg body weight.(C?”

contact

Clove

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented for the bud, leaf or stem. It is recommended
that clove oil should be used with caution orally and should not be
used on the skin.'©**) Repeated application of clove oil as a
toothache remedy may result in damage to the gingival tissue.“
In view of the irritant nature of the volatile oil, concentrated clove
oil is not suitable for internal use in doses larger than those
recommended.

There is limited evidence from in vitro investigations that
eugenol inhibits prostaglandin synthesis,” and coagulation
disorders have been reported following childhood ingestion of
clove oil.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of clove oil to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Eugenol, a major
consituent of clove oil, inhibits prostaglandin synthesis, although
the clinical relevance of this, if any, is unclear.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of clove during pregnancy or lactation, provided that doses
taken do not greatly exceed the amounts used in foods.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Austria: Mariazeller. Brazil: Balsamo Branco. Czech Republic:
Naturland Grosser Swedenbitter; Stomatosan. Germany:
Inconturina; Klosterfrau Melisana; Melissengeist. Italy: Bio-
phase Shampoo; Saugella Uomo. Portugal: Midro. Russia:
Doppelherz Melissa (Aormeasrepy Meancca); Maraslavin
(Mapacaasun); Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opurn-
naapnpiit Boapmoi Baapsam burruepa). South Africa: Clairo;
Melissengeist; Spiritus Contra Tussim Drops. Switzerland:
Odontal; Tisane pour les problemes de prostate. UK: Melissa
Comp.; Revitonil.

References

1. Chakraborty D et al. A new neuropsychopharmacological study of
Syzygium cumini. Planta Med 1986; 52: 139-143.

2 Rasheed A et al. Eugenol and prostaglandin biosynthesis. New Eng J
Med 1984; 310(1): 50-51.

3 Brown SA et al. Disseminated intravascular coagulation and
hepatocellular necrosis due to clove oil. Blood Coag Fibrinol 1992; 3
(5): 665-668.

4 Hartnoll G et al. Near fatal ingestion of oil of cloves. Arch Dis
Childhood 1993; 69(3): 392-393.

----- PAGE 179 -----
Cohosh, Black

unwell or experience new symptoms, particularly those
associated with liver disease, should be advised to stop taking
black cohosh and to consult their doctor. Patients with
previous or existing liver disorders should be advised not to
take black cohosh without first consulting their doctor. In
view of the lack of conclusive evidence for the efficacy of black
cohosh, and the serious nature of the potential harm, it is
extremely unlikely that the benefit-harm balance would be in
favour of such patients using black cohosh.

Use of black cohosh preparations at doses higher than
those recommended for therapeutic effects and/or for
excessive periods (exceeding three months)“°® should be
avoided until further information is available on the safety of
black cohosh with long-term use. In view of the documented
pharmacological actions of black cohosh preparations, the
potential for interactions with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Species (Family)

Cimicifuga racemosa (L.) Nutt. (Ranunculaceae)

Synonym(s)

Actaea racemosa L., A. monogyna Walter, Black Snakeroot,
Cimicifuga, Macrotys Actaea

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

AHP 2002”

BHC 1992'°®

BHP 19960”)

BHMA 2003

BPC 1934'6!

Complete German Commission EC?)
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'@**

WHO volume 1 (1999)'C°

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL‘C??

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G1 and G75.

Alkaloids Quinolizidine-type, including cytisine, N-methylcyti-
sine and other unidentified compounds.'°””

Flavonoids Formononetin (isoflavonoid),‘"”) although it was not
detected in 13 samples analysed.

Phenylpropanoids Phenylpropanoid esters cimiracemates A-D,
isoferulic and ferulic acids, methylcaffeate.

Terpenoids ‘Complex mixture of 9,19-cycloartenol-type

triterpene glycosides with either xylose or arabinose. The isolated
compounds include actein"’*''S® and related compounds
cimicifugoside (cimigoside), 26-deoxycimicifugoside, cimiacero-
side A, cimiracemosides A-H,''” ™) cimicifugosides H-3, H-4 and
H-6," cimigenol,(“%)_ 26-deoxyactein, 23-epi-26-deoxyactein
(revised structure proposed for 27-deoxyactein),"') cimiracemo-
sides I-P and thirteen other cimiracemosides: 25-anhydrocimi-
genol-3-O-B-p-xyloside, 25-anhydrocimigenol-3-O-c-L-
arabinoside, cimigenol-3-O-B-b-xyloside, cimigenol-3-O-a-L-ara-
binoside, 25-O-acetylcimigenin-3-O-B-p-xyloside, 25-O-acetyl-
cimigenol-3-O-a-L-arabinoside, 23-O-acetylshengmanol-3-O-c-L-
arabinoside, cimifugosides H-1 and H-2, 24-O-acetylshengma-
nol-o-arabinoside, 26-deoxycimicifugoside,"® '” and actaeaepox-
ide-3-O-B-D-xylopyranoside." Daucosterol-6’-lineolate. The
major triterpene glycosides of this complex mixture appear to
be cimicifugoside, actein, 23-epi-26-deoxyactein and cimiracemo-
sides A, C and F079)

----- PAGE 180 -----
Other constituents Acetic acid, butyric acid, formic, palmitic
and salicylic acids, hydroxycinnamic acid esters of fukiic and
piscidic acids (e.g. fukinolic acid, cimicifugic acids A, B, E, F),"”
glyceryl-L-palmitate."

Related species 23-epi-26-deoxyactein (formerly 27-deoxyactein)
is present in C. dahurica and C. foetida. The triterpenoid pattern

differs in seven species.?”

Quality of plant material and commercial products

As with other herbal medicinal products, there is variation in the
qualitative and quantitative composition of black cohosh crude
plant material and commercial black cohosh  root/rhizome
preparations.

Analysis of methanol extracts of black cohosh rhizomes using
thin-layer chromatography and fluorometry found the content of
formononetin to be in the range 3.1-3.5 g/g dry weight (detection
limit 0.08 parts per million). Contents of isoferulic acid and
total triterpene glycosides, analysed using other techniques, were
within the range 1.22-1.35 and 20.1-22.1mg/g dry weight,
respectively. By contrast, formononetin was not detected in any
of 13 samples of black cohosh root and rhizome collected in the
year 2000 from various locations in the Eastern United States of
America and extracted with 80% methanol, according to thin-
layer chromatographic and high-performance liquid chromato-
graphic techniques.” Similarly, formononetin and ononin (for-
mononetin-7-glucoside) were not detected in two commercial
products (Remifemin and CimiPure) available in the USA.
However, the method for determination of the limits of detection
used in this study, and the reliability of the results, have been
questioned.” Another analytical study of commercial prepara-
tions of black cohosh also did not detect formononetin in the
products tested, although other flavonoids were present."*!)

In another analytical study, a sample of black cohosh plant
material and six commercial products purchased from shops in
North Carolina, USA, and labelled as containing black cohosh,
were examined for content of 23-epi-26-deoxyactein and other
triterpene glycosides using LC/TIS-MS (liquid chromatography/
turbo-ion spray-mass spectrometry). The crude plant material,
extracted with chloroform—methanol (1: 1, v/v), contained 0.8 mg/
g 23-epi-26-deoxyactein (10.6% of total triterpene glycosides) and
had a total triterpene glycoside content of 7.2 mg/g.” The 23-epi-
26-deoxyactein and total triterpene glycoside contents of com-
mercial products varied, ranging from 0.1-0.4 mg/capsule and 1.3—
3.0 mg/capsule, respectively, for the three products formulated as
capsules, and were 0.3 mg/mL and 3.6mg/mL, respectively, for a
liquid extract, 0.1 mg/tablet and 0.4 mg/tablet, respectively, for a
tablet product, and 0.1 mg/tablet and 0.5 mg/tablet, respectively,
for a sublingual tablet product. The actual total triterpene
glycoside content also varied from that stated on the product
labels for the five products providing this information; in three
cases, the actual content was substantially higher than the
quantity stated on the labels (3.0, 1.6 mg/capsule and 3.6 mg/mL
versus 1.0, 1.0 mg/capsule and 2.0 mg/mL), and for the two other
products, was substantially lower than that stated on the labels
(0.38 and 0.45 versus one mg/tablet for both).

Contamination of C. racemosa products with other species,
such as C. foetida, C. dahurica and C. heracleifolia, has
occurred.) While some of these other species do contain 23-
epi-26-deoxyactein and certain other constituents of C. racemosa,
the phytochemical profile of different Cimicifuga species differs

qualitatively and quantitatively.

Cohosh, Black

Detailed descriptions of C. racemosa rhizome for use in
botanical, microscopic and macroscopic identification have been
published, along with qualitative and quantitative methods for the
assessment of C. racemosa rhizome raw material.'°!)

Food Use

Black cohosh is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Black cohosh is stated to poss
sedative and emmenagogue properties. It has been used for
intercostal myalgia, sciatica, whooping cough, chorea, tinnitus,
dysmenorrhoea, uterine colic, and specifically for muscular
rheumatism and rheumatoid arthritis.“C% C7 C* 2% Modern
use of black cohosh is focused on its use in treating peri- and
postmenopausal symptoms.

ss antirheumatic, antitussive,

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 40-200 mg daily.(©®

Liquid extract Ethanolic extracts equivalent to 40mg dried

rhizome/root daily.\C* ©
Alkaloids
R
cytisine H
N-methylcytisine CH3
Flavonoids
HO.
formononetin
Phenylpropanoids
° R°
SS (e)
fe}
R'O OH
OR? OH
R! R2 R?
cimiracemate A CH3 H H
cimiracemate B H CH3 H
cimiracemate C CH3 H OCH;
cimiracemate D H CH3 OCH;
Rt COOH HO. COOCH:
NN oan OCH
R2 Rt R? HO
ferulic acid OCH3 OH methyl caffeate
isoferulic acid OH OCH;

Figure 1 Selected constituents of black cohosh.

----- PAGE 181 -----
Cohosh, Black

Triterpenoids

actein OH
26-deoxyactein H

cimicifugoside OH
26-deoxycimicifugoside H

23-epi-26-deoxyactein

Figure 2 Selected constituents of black cohosh.

RO’ ¢
i. R

cimiracemoside J a-L-ara

cimiracemoside K  -D-xyl

23-0-acetylshengmanol- xyl
3-0-f-D-xylopyranoside

23-0-acetylshengmanol- ara
3-O-a-L-arabinopyranoside

Ac = acetyl, ara = arabinosyl, xyl = xylosyl

Figure 3 Selected constituents of black cohosh.

Tincture 0.4-2mL (1:10 in 60% ethanol) daily.®

Controlled clinical trials assessing black cohosh preparations
for the treatment of menopausal symptoms typically have used an
aqueous-isopropanolic standardised extract of black cohosh
rhizome (Remifemin; each 20 mg tablet contains 1 mg triterpene
glycosides, calculated as 27-deoxyactein (now known as 23-epi-26-

cimigenol

OAc sO

RO

cimiracemoside L 4-O-acetyl-w-L-ara
cimiracemoside M 4’-O-acetyl-f-D-xyl

RO 4
ms R
shengmanol-3-O- ara

a-L-arabinopyranoside
shengmanol-3-0- xyl
B-D-xylopyranoside

deoxyactein)) 40 mg twice daily for up to 24 weeks, or an aqueous-
ethanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome (Klimadynon/Meno-
fem/BNO-1055; not further specified) at doses equivalent to 40 mg
crude drug daily; treatment in clinical trials typically has been for
12 weeks.

----- PAGE 182 -----
Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Preclinical research with black cohosh preparations has focused
on exploring hormonal activity, and there are conflicting results
on this. Several other pharmacological activities, including anti-
inflammatory and analgesic activities, have been documented for
black cohosh extracts and/or their constituents. The triterpene
glycosides and flavonoids are considered to be important for
activity, although as a mechanism of action for black cohosh has
not been established, whether or not other known or as yet
undocumented constituents contribute to the observed effects is
unclear.

Hormonal activity There are conflicting results regarding
oestrogenic activity of black cohosh root/rhizome preparations.
There is evidence from older in vitro and in vivo studies that black
cohosh preparations have oestrogenic activity, although more
recent research has indicated a lack of oestrogenic activity,
antioestrogenic activity and, in some studies, antioestrogenic
activity and selective oestrogen receptor activity. A review of 15 in
vitro and 15 in vivo (animals) experiments assessing the effects of
different extracts and fractions of black cohosh material
concluded that C. racemosa does not have hormonal effects and
that it may act by a central mechanism,?» although data to
support the latter are limited at present. Further research using
well-characterised extracts is required to determine the precise
mechanism(s) of action of black cohosh rhizome. The following is
a summary of some of the preclinical
pharmacological effects of black cohosh extracts and their
constituent compounds.

A methanolic extract of the rhizome of black cohosh reduced
ing hormone (LH) in
ovariectomised rats, and exhibited a binding affinity to oestrogen
receptors in isolated rat uterus. In vivo, the activity of the
methanolic extract was significantly reduced following enzymatic
hydrolysis of glucosides present. Subsequent in vitro studies

research on the

the serum concentration of luteini

Figure 4

Black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa).

Cohosh, Black

isolated three compounds with endocrine activity, including an
isoflavone, formononetin. Formononetin was found to exhibit
competitive oestrogen receptor activity, but did not cause a
reduction in serum concentrations of LH.©

In ovariectomised rats, administration of a lipophilic extract of
black cohosh (140 mg by intraperitoneal injection for three days)
led to a significant reduction in serum LH concentrations,
compared with control (p < 0.01), whereas no effect was observed
with a hydrophilic extract (216mg intraperitoneally for three
days). Subsequent studies using fractions of the lipophilic
extract demonstrated that constituents inhibited LH secretion
and/or exhibited activity in an oestrogen receptor-binding assay.
Oestrogenic activity has been documented in vitro for fukinolic
acid, a hydroxycinnamic acid ester of fukiic acid, in oestrogen-
dependent MCF-7 cells (a breast cancer cell line)."?) Fukinolic
acid at concentrations of 5 x 10~’ mol/L and 5 x 10~* mol/L led
to significantly increased cell proliferation (mean (standard
deviation): +120 (6%) and +126 (5%), respectively), compared
with control. These ctfects were reported to be equivalent to those
of estradiol at 107 '° mol/L.

By contrast, in animal models of cancer, black cohosh extracts
have not demonstrated oestrogenic activity. An isopropanolic
extract of black cohosh rhizome administered by gavage at doses
of 0.71, 7.1 and 71.4 mg/kg body weight daily (estimated to be 1-,
10- and 100-fold times the therapeutic dose used in humans) for
six weeks did not stimulate growth of chemically induced breast
tumours in ovariectomised rats (tumours were induced five to nine
weeks before ovariectomy), whereas rats treated with mestrano
450 jtg/kg/day for six weeks had a significantly higher number of
tumours, compared with control (p < 0.01).° Similarly, in an
animal model of endometrial cancer, an isopropanolic extract of
black cohosh rhizome administered via animals' drinking water to
achieve a dose of 60mg herbal drug/kg body weight daily an

initiated on the same day as inoculation of animals with RUCA-I
(26)

rat endometrial adenocarcinoma cells,7 mean tumour mass after
five weeks was reported to be similar in black cohosh treate
animals and control animals, although no statistical tests were
reported to support this

Several in vitro studies using black cohosh preparations have
also described a lack of oestrogenic activity and inhibition, or lack
of promotion, of proliferation of breast cancer cells. A methano
extract of black cohosh rhizomes and roots did not demonstrate
oestrogenic activity in several assays, including binding affinity for
oestrogen receptors & and f, stimulation of pS2 mRNA expre:
in $30 cells ($30 is a subclone of an oestrogen receptor-negative

ion

Figure 5 Black cohosh — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 183 -----
Cohosh, Black

breas

cancer cell line), and induction of alkaline phosphatase in
an oestrogen receptor-positive endometrial adenocarcinoma cell
line,”

In studies using the oestrogen receptor-positive breast cancer
cell lines MCF-7 and T47D, hexane, ethyl acetate and aqueous
extracts of black cohosh dried roots and rhizomes (obtained from
crude plant material initially extracted with 80% methanol which
was then fractionated),’*) and phenolic esters from a 50%
ethanolic extract of black cohosh rhizomes” did not have
oestrogenic activity and did not lead to proliferation effects in
these cell lines. An ethyl acetate extract was found to be more
potent than hexane and water extracts in inhibiting growth of
MCEF-7 cells and oestrogen receptor-negative MDA-MB-453 cells,
with ICso values of 20 and 10 1g/mL, respectively.°”

In another in vitro study using oestrogen receptor-positive
breast cancer cells, black cohosh extract did not stimulate cancer
cell growth and, at a concentration of 2.5 tg/mL, led to a marked
inhibition of breast cancer cell proliferation.“ Inhibition of
MCF-7 cell proliferation has also been described for an
isopropanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome in vitro, and
further experiments indicated that the black cohosh extract at
certain dilutions enhanced the proliferation-inhibiting effect of
tamoxifen in the same system.°” Further work has suggested that
extracts of black cohosh root and rhizome activate caspase
enzymes and induce apoptosis in both MCF-7 oestrogen receptor-
positive breast cancer cells and MDA-MB-231 oestrogen receptor-
negative breast cancer cells.» Triterpene glycoside and cinnamic
acid ester fractions inhibited growth of MCF-7 cells with ICso
values of 59.3 and 26.1 |tg/mL, respectively, and induced apoptosis
at concentrations of 25 and 5jg/mL, respectively.° An ethyl
acetate fraction of black cohosh rhizome extract induced cell-cycle
arrest at the Gl and G2/M phases at concentrations of 30 and
60 g/mL, respectively, in MCF-7 cells.°°

Anti-oestrogenic activity and a lack of oestrogenic activity have
been described for ethanolic and isopropanolic extracts of black
cohosh rhizome (not further specified) in three experimental
systems. Oestradiol-induced stimulation of proliferation of MCF-
7 cells was inhibited by black cohosh extract at a concentration of
1ug/mL and, in two assays based on oestradiol-induced gene
expression, black cohosh extract at concentrations ranging from
100-1000 tg/mL suppressed gene expression.°°) An anti-oestro-
genic effect would require binding of constituents of black cohosh
to oestrogen receptors, yet previous research has found that a
methanol extract of black cohosh rhizomes and roots did not
display binding affinity for either & or B oestrogen receptors.?”

Other in vitro experiments have shown that an aqueous-ethanol
extract of black cohosh rhizomes inhibited the proliferation of
LNCaP (androgen-sensitive human prostate carcinoma) cells in a
concentration-dependent manner. A significant reduction in cell
growth was observed with the extract at concentrations over the
range 0.05-10 g/mL, when compared with control (p < 0.05 for
all).°9 An isopropanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome
activated caspase enzymes and induced apoptosis in both
androgen-sensitive LNCaP cells and androgen-insensitive PC-3
and DU-145 prostate cancer cells.°” ICs values for the extract
were 37.1, 53.2 and 62.7 g/mL for LNCaP, DU-145 and PC-3
cells, respectively.

Further work has suggested that black cohosh extract has
selective oestrogen receptor modifying effects. In ovariectomised
rats given an aqueous-ethanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome
or 17f-estradiol in their food for three months, uterine weight
increased significantly in the 17B-estradiol group, but not in
animals given black cohosh extract, compared with control (p <

0.05). Black cohosh extract and 17B-estradiol reduced the
extent of loss of bone mass from the metaphysis of the tibia,
compared with control, three months after ovariectomy (p < 0.05
for both versus control). Similar results were obtained from
another experiment in ovariectomised rats given a black cohosh
rhizome extract (Remifemin) in their diet (equivalent to 4500 pg/
kg body weight triterpene glycosides daily, calculated as 27-
deoxyactein (now known as 26-deoxyactein)) for 12 weeks. At the
end of the study, bone mineral density and a score for bone quality
significantly greater in the black cohosh and raloxifene (a
selective oestrogen receptor modulator; positive control) groups,
compared with those for the control group (p < 0.05 for both).°”
Bone-sparing effects have also been described for an aqueous-
ethanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome in orchidectomised rats
when given in the diet at a dose of around 133 mg extract daily for
three months.”

An alternative mechanism for the activity of black cohosh
extract, which does not involve oestrogenic pathways, has been
proposed (see Pharmacological Actions, Other Activities).

were

Anti-inflammatory and analgesic activities Anti-inflammatory
and analgesic activities have been described for constituents of
black cohosh following in vitro and in vivo studies (mice and
rats).

In vitro, caffeic acid, fukinolic acid and cimicifugic acids A, B,
E and F inhibited the activity of neutrophil elastase in a
concentration-dependent manner.“ (Raised plasma concentra-
tions of neutrophil elastase are a typical feature of active
inflammation. Neutrophil elastase contributes to the destruction
of basement membranes during inflammation.) Caffeic acid
inhibited the enzyme with an ICso of 16,1g/mL (93 mol/L),
whereas fukinolic acid had an ICso of 0.1 g/mL (0.23 mol/L),
relative to controls. Of the cimicifugic acids, A and B were the
strongest inhibitors of the enzyme, with ICso values of 2.2 pmol/L
and 11.4 mol/L, respectively.

Compared with controls, a methanol extract, a butanol-soluble
fraction and a water-soluble fraction obtained from Cimicifuga
rhizome inhibited carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema by 73-
76%, 80-84% and 46-54%, respectively, compared with controls,
30-120 minutes after injection of 0.1 mL carrageenan 1%.” The
same fractions (100 mg/kg by intraperitoneal injection), compared
with controls, demonstrated analgesic activity determined by
significant reductions in acetic acid-induced writhing in mice, and
the methanol extract and butanol-soluble fraction also displayed
analgesic activity in a tail-flick test (demonstrated by increased
latency time upon infrared light exposure). All three fractions
(40 g/mL) inhibited bradykinin and histamine receptor-mediated
contractions of guinea-pig ileum, and all inhibited lipopolysac-
charide-induced 6-keto prostaglandin F,, (PGF,,) formation in
macrophages. Incubation of macrophages with lipopolysaccharide
and the water-soluble fraction 10pg/mL almost completely
blocked (99% inhibition) lipopolysaccharide-induced 6-keto-
PGF,,, formation. Lipopolysaccharide-induced 6-keto-PGF,,, for-
mation in macrophages is related to selective expression of
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2). The inhibitory effects of fractions of
Cimicifuga rhizome in this model, and their inhibitory effects on
bradykinin and histamine receptor-mediated reactions are po
ble mechanisms for the observed anti-inflammatory and analg,
activities.

Other activities A mechanism for the activity of black cohosh
extract that does not involve oestrogenic pathways has been
described following in vitro experiments. In radioligand binding
studies, constituents of a 40% isopropanol extract of black

----- PAGE 184 -----
cohosh roots/rhizomes were found to bind to serotonin receptors,
particularly those of the S-HT,,, S-HTp and S-HT> subtypes.
Subsequent experiments showed that the isopropanol extract
inhibited the binding of [*H]-lysergic acid diethylamide to the
human 5-HT> receptor with an ICso value of 2.4p1g/mL, but
inhibited the binding of a ligand to the S-HT;, receptor with less
affinity (ICso 13.9g/mL). A methanol extract inhibited the
binding of ligands to these receptor subtypes with equal affinities
(ICso values: 2.5 and 2.2ug/mL for the 5S-HT,, and 5-HT>
subtypes, respectively). Further work indicated that a constituent
(s) of the methanol extract was a mixed competitive ligand for the
5-HT> receptor and behaved as a partial agonist.”

In vitro studies using rat aortic strips have investigated the
vasoactive effects of constituents of Cimicifuga species.“
Cimicifugic acid D and fukinolic acid (3 x 10°*mol/L) caused
a sustained relaxation of aortic strips precontracted with
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) in preparations with or without
endothelium. By contrast, cimicifugic acid C inversely caused a
weak contraction, and fukiic acid and cimicifugic acids A, B and E
showed no vasoactivity at the concentration tested.

Triterpene compounds in black cohosh have been shown to
possess hypocholesterolaemic activity in vivo, and an inhibitory
effect on phytohaemagglutin-induced proliferative response in
vitro. These activities were thought to be linked to molecular

characteris

ics between the identified triterpenes and intermedi-
ates in cholesterol biosynthesis.)

Triterpenoid constituents from several Cimicifuga species,
including actein from C. racemosa, have been investigated for
antimalarial activity using Plasmodium falciparum in vitro.“®
Cimicifugoside (isolated from C. simplex) and actein were among
the compounds with potent antiplasmodial activity (ECso
5.0 mol/L and 10.0 mol/L, respectively), although activity was
fold less than that of positive controls (quinine,
chloroquine and pyrimethamine).

Actein, isolated from black cohosh rhizome, has been reported
to exhibit anti-HIV activity in vitro (ECs) = 0.375 pg/mL).

The root of a related species, Cimicifuga dahurica, has been
reported to exhibit antibacterial activity towards Gram-positive
(Bacillus subtilis, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Staphylococcus
aureus), and Gram-negative (Escherichia coli, Shigella flexneri,
Shigella sonnei) organisms.**)

In ovariectomised rats, ethyl acetate-soluble fractions from the
rhizome of the related species Cimicifuga heracleifolia and C.
foetida administered orally at doses of 100 mg/kg/day for 42 days
led to a significant increase in bone mineral density of the lumbar

spine, compared with that in untreated ovariectomised control
(49)

two- to thre:

rats.

Clinical studies

Clinical trials of extracts of black cohosh preparations mainly
have investigated effects in women with peri- and/or postmeno-
pausal symptoms.

Pharmacokinetics Pharmacokinetic data for preparations of
black cohosh are extremely limited. In a phase I study involving
six perimenopausal women who ingested single doses (32, 64 or
128 mg) of a 70% ethanol extract of black cohosh (not further
specified), mercapturate conjugates of certain constituents of
black cohosh (fukinolic acid, fukiic acid, caffeic acid and
cimiracemate B) were not detected in urine samples collected
from participants over the following 24 hours (see also Side
Effects, Toxicity, Preclinical data).

Cohosh, Black

Menopausal symptoms In a randomised (2:1 to the active
treatment group), double-blind, controlled trial, 127 women aged
45-60 years who were in the peri or early menopausal period and
were experiencing climacteric disorders, including at least three
hot flushes per day during the six weeks prior to commencement
of the study, received capsules containing a 60% ethanol extract of
black cohosh rhizome (Cr-99, each capsule contained 6.5 mg
extract; drug to extract ratio, 4.5-8.5:1, equivalent to 29-55 mg
crude drug) one daily, or placebo, for 12 weeks." At the end of
the study, data from 122 participants were available for an
intention-to-treat analysis (7 = 81 and 41 for the black cohosh and
placebo groups, respectively). There were no statistically sig-
nificant differences between the two groups with respect to the
two primary outcome variables (weekly weighted score for hot
flushes, and the change in the Kupperman Menopausal Index
score, a tool which measures major menopausal symptoms).
Subgroup analysis of participants with a Kupperman Index score
of at least 20 at baseline showed that the Kupperman Index score
and the Menopause Rating Scale score were significantly improved
in black cohosh recipients, compared with placebo recipients (p =
0.018 and 0.009, respectively). However, as the study was not
designed primarily to assess the effects of black cohosh in women
with moderate to severe (rather than mild) symptoms, the
hypothesis that black cohosh is effective in women with moderate
or severe menopausal symptoms requires testing in further
randomised controlled trials involving sufficient numbers of
participants.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 80
women (mean (standard deviation) age: 51.2 (3.1) years) with
menopausal symptoms received standardised black cohosh extract
(Remifemin; each 20-mg tablet contained 1 mg triterpene glyco-
sides, calculated as 27-deoxyactein) 40 mg twice daily, conjugate
oestrogens 0.625 mg daily, or placebo, for 12 weeks.°”) At the en
of the study, somatic and psychological symptoms, measured by
the Kupperman Menopausal Index and the Hamilton Anxiety
Scale, had improved significantly only in women who receive
black cohosh, compared with those who received oestrogen or
placebo. Similarly, a significant increase in proliferation of vagina
epithelium was noted only in the black cohosh group. However,
there is a view that the dose of oestrogen used in the study was too
low to provide a useful comparison.

Another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled  tria
compared the effects of an aqueous-ethanolic extract of black
cohosh rhizome (Klimadynon/Menofem/BNO-1055), correspond-
ing to 40mg herbal drug daily for three months, with those of
conjugated oestrogens 0.6mg daily for three months, in
postmenopausal women (last menstrual bleed at least six months
ago) aged 40-60 years with serum FSH concentrations at least
25mU/mL and experiencing at least three hot flushes daily.
Initially, 97 women were randomised to one of the three study
groups, although the analysis included only 62 participants as two
women withdrew before any post-baseline data were collected and
data for 33 women were excluded as it was subsequently found
that they did not meet the inclusion criteria with respect to having
masked ovulatory or anovulatory cycles and oestrogen production
in fatty tissue.)

The results of the study showed that Menopause Rating Scale
scores (the primary outcome variable) were reduced in both the
black cohosh extract and conjugated oestrogen groups, compared
with baseline values, although neither of these reductions was
statistically significant when compared with the reduction
observed in the placebo group (p = 0.051 for both). It was
also reported that the black cohosh extract had no effect on

----- PAGE 185 -----
Cohosh, Black

endometrial thickness, whereas endometrial thickn

was sig-
nificantly increased, compared with placebo, in the conjugated
oestrogens group (p < 0.05). Black cohosh extract did have
beneficial effects on parameters relating to bone metabolism:
serum concentrations of bone-specific alkaline phosphatase
(indicating increased activity of osteoblast cells, which are
responsible for bone formation) were significantly increased in
the black cohosh group, but not in the conjugated oestrogens
group, compared with placebo. These findings were interpreted as
being indicative of selective oestrogen receptor modulatory effec
for black cohosh extract,» although this hypothesis requires
testing in further clinical studies.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
85 women with a history of breast cancer assessed the effects of
black cohosh (no details of extract provided) one tablet twice daily
for 60 days on the frequency and intensity of hot flushes.)
Participants were stratified according to whether or not they were
using tamoxifen. Both treatment and placebo groups reported
decreases in the number and intensity of hot flushes, compared
with baseline values. There were no statistically significant
differences between the two groups, and subgroup analysis of
tamoxifen users and non-users did not reveal any statistically
significant differences. Changes in other parameters measured
during the study (other menopausal symptoms, serum concentra-
tions of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and _luteinising
hormone (LH)) were also not statistically significant between
groups.

Another study specifically assessed the effects of black cohos
extract on gonadotrophin secretion. In a placebo-controlled trial
involving 110 women with menopausal symptoms, black cohos!
extract (Remifemin) two tablets daily for two months significantly
reduced serum LH concentrations, compared with placebo (p <
0.05).°" There was no significant difference betw
groups with respect to serum FSH concentrations.

The effects of an aqueous-isopropanolic extract of black cohos
rhizome (Remifemin) on menopausal symptoms were compared
with those of low-dose transdermal estradiol treatment in a
randomised controlled trial. In the study, 64 women wit!
menopausal status for at least six months, serum FSH concentra-
tions of > 30 mIU/L and experiencing at least five hot flushes per
day received the black cohosh extract 40mg daily for three
months, or transdermal estradiol patches 25 ug every seven days
for three months plus dihydrogesterone 10 mg daily for the last 12
days of the 3-month period of estradiol treatment.) At the end
of the study, the number of hot flushes experienced by women was
significantly reduced for both groups, compared with baseline
values (p < 0.001 for both) and there was no statistically
significant difference between groups, although details of
statistical tests for the latter were not provided in a report of
the study. There were no statistically significant changes in serum
FSH and LH concentrations in either group at the end of the study
(p > 0.05). The study has several methodological limitations, such
as lack of a placebo arm, and apparent lack of blinding (the use of
dummy patches and tablets was not mentioned), and the
equivalence of black cohosh extract with standard treatment for
menopausal symptoms requires further investigation.

In an open study, 60 women with at least one intact ovary who
had undergone hysterectomy and who were experiencing meno-
pausal symptoms were randomised to receive estriol (1 mg daily),
conjugated oestrogens (1.25mg daily), oestrogen—progestagen
sequential therapy (dose not specified), or black cohosh extract
(Remifemin) 40 mg twice daily, for 24 weeks. At the end of the
study, improvements in Kupperman Index scores were significantly

sn the two

lower, compared with baseline values, in all groups. There were no
statistically significant differences between groups.

Another open, controlled study involving women with meno-
pausal symptoms (1 = 60) assessed the effects of black cohosh
extract administered as a tincture (80 drops daily), compared with
oestrogen (0.625 mg daily) or diazepam (2 mg daily), over a 12-
week period.” Cytological responses (proliferation and matura-
tion of vaginal epithelial cells) were observed for participants in
the black cohosh and oestrogen groups, but not in the diazepam
group. For all three groups, improvements in neurovegetative and
psychological symptoms (e.g. self-assessed depression) were
reported.

Other studies of black cohosh extracts involving women wit!
menopausal symptoms lack control groups and, therefore, do not
provide an unbiased assessment of effects. Generally, these studies
report significant improvements in menopausal symptoms,
compared with baseline values, after at least four weeks'
treatment; some studies involved administration of black cohos

extract for up to 24 weeks,"

In a randomised, double-blind trial, 152 peri- and postmeno-
pausal women received an isopropanolic extract of black cohosh
rhizome (Remifemin) at a dose equivalent to 39 or 127 mg crud
drug daily for 24 weeks.© At the 12-week and 24-weel
endpoints, data from 149 and 116 participants, respectively, were
available for intention-to-treat analyses. Kupperman Index scores
decreased significantly in both the low- and high-dose groups,
compared with baseline values, and there was no statistically
significant difference between groups (p = 0.73). No statistically
significant differences were observed for either group in the degree
of vaginal cell proliferation, and serum concentrations of FSH,
LH, prolactin and 17B-oestradiol, compared with baseline values.
The results of this study provide some supporting clinical evidence
for a lack of oestrogenic activity of black cohosh extract, and raise
the possibility of tissue-selective effects,°” although the design of
this study (no placebo or oestrogen control groups) precludes
definitive conclusions.

e

Other conditions In an open trial, 136 women who had
undergone segmental or total mastectomy, radiation therapy and/
or adjuvant cancer chemotherapy were randomised to receive
tamoxifen 20mg orally daily for five years with (7 = 90) or
without (7 = 46) an aqueous-ethanolic extract of black cohosh
rhizome (BNO-1055), corresponding to 20mg herbal drug daily
for 12 months, to assess the effects of treatment with black cohosh
on hot flushes caused by tamoxifen. At the end of the study,
significantly fewer women in the tamoxifen plus black cohosh
extract group were experiencing severe hot flushes than were
women in the tamoxifen alone group (25% versus 74%) and more
women in the tamoxifen plus black cohosh extract group were not
experiencing hot flushes at all (47% versus 0%); proportions of
women experiencing hot flushes of moderate severity were similar
(29% versus 26%). The
groups was reported to be statistically significant (p < 0.01)
although as baseline values for the proportions of women in each
group experiencing hot flushes of different severities were not
reported, and as the study used an open-label design, it is not
possible to draw firm conclusions from this finding.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed
the prophylactic effects of a combination preparation (tablets
containing 75mg soy extract, standardised for 40% isoflavones,
50mg dong quai extract, standardised for 1% ligustilide, and
25 mg black cohosh extract, standardised for 8% triterpenes; not
further specified) in 49 women who experienced migraine attacks

ifference in outcome between the two
(60)
>

----- PAGE 186 -----
sociated with menstruation.'*”

as: Participants took one tablet
twice daily, or placebo, for 24 weeks. At the end of the study, the
mean number of menstrual migraine attacks was significantly
lower in the treatment group, compared with the placebo group (p
< 0.01). The contribution of black cohosh to the observed effect is
unclear in view of recent studies that have described a lack of
oestrogenic activity for black cohosh extracts. (There is evidence
of an association between oestrogen concentrations and menstrual
migraine attacl fe)

In a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial, 82 patients with
osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis received a proprietary
combination herbal preparation containing black cohosh 35 mg
(other ingredients: white willow bark, guaiacum resin, sarsaparilla
and poplar bark; Reumalex), or placebo, two tablets daily for two
months. At the end of the study, there was a small, but
statistically significant improvement in pain symptoms (as
assessed by the Arthritis Pain Scale) in the treatment group,
compared with the placebo group (p < 0.05).

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There are only limited clinical data on safety aspects of black
cohosh preparations from clinical trials and post-marketing
surveillance-type studie:

Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of black
cohosh preparations in women with menopausal symptoms have
reported that the frequency of adverse events was similar for the
black cohosh and placebo groups. Clinical trials, however, are
designed primarily to assess efficacy, not safety, and have the
statistical power only to detect common, acute adverse effects. In a
randomised, double-blind, controlled trial in which 127 women
aged 45-60 years in the peri- or early menopausal period received
capsules containing a 60% ethanol extract of black cohosh
rhizome (Cr-99, each capsule contained 6.5 mg extract; drug to
extract ratio, 4.5-8.5:1, equivalent to 29-55 mg crude drug) one
daily, or placebo, for 12 weeks, 20 and 23% of participants in the
black cohosh and placebo groups, respectively, reported adverse
S) In another randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial in which postmenopausal women received an
aqueous-ethanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome (BNO-1055),
corresponding to 40 mg herbal drug daily, conjugated oestrogens
0.6mg daily, or placebo, for three months, no serious adverse
events occurred and the frequency of mild or moderate non-
serious adverse events was stated to be similar in all three
groups.) Another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial involving women with menopausal symptoms (1 = 80) who
received standardised black cohosh extract (Remifemin) 40 mg
twice daily, conjugated oestrogens, or placebo, for 12 weeks
reported that non-specific adverse events, such as headaches, not
considered to be treatment-related, occurred in all three
groups.)

In a further randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial,
which involved 85 women with a history of breast cancer who
received black cohosh (no details of extract provided) one tablet
twice daily, or placebo, for 60 days, ten adverse events occurred in
the treatment group, compared with three in the placebo group.
Three events were considered serious (treatment group: hyster-
ectomy, recurrence of breast cancer; placebo group: appendect-
omy) all of which occurred in women who were also receiving
tamoxifen. Minor adverse events (including constipation, weight

events.

Cohosh, Black

gain, cramping, indigestion, vaginal bleeding) were not thought to
be treatment related.

Post-marketing surveillance studies involving over 2500 women
with menopausal symptoms have reported few serious adverse
events for black cohosh extracts, although these studies have been
of relatively short duration (up to 12 weeks) and have monitored
the effects of different black cohosh preparations. In view of this,
further, large, long-term drug monitoring studies of well-
characterised black cohosh extracts are required to provide data
on the safety of these preparations. In a post marketing
surveillance study involving 629 women with menopausal
symptoms who received standardised black cohosh extract as a
tincture (40 drops twice daily for 6-8 weeks, tolerability was rated
as 'good' in 93% of patients; mild, transient adverse events, such
as nausea, vomiting, headache and dizziness, were noted in 7% of
patients.) In a post-marketing surveillance study involving 2016
Hungarian women with menopausal symptoms who received an
isopropanolic extract of black cohosh rhizome (Remifemin) for up
to 12 weeks, 24% of participants found the treatment to be
ineffective, 16% did not attend a final assessment, and 12%
reported ‘unexpected adverse effects’. Overall, 35 participants
reported specific adverse effects, most commonly stiffening of the
extremeties (7 = 8), gastric pain (7) and allergic reactions (6).
Other adverse effects reported included breast tenderness,
bleeding disturbances (not further specified) and gastrointestinal
complaints. A report of the study indicates that the:
collected using postal questionnaires, although it is not clear how
questions regarding safety aspects were phrased, including
whether participants were asked to report adverse effects or
adverse events.

Systematic reviews, conducted during 2001 and 2002,"
information concerning safety aspects of black cohosh prepara-
tions have concluded that on the basis of the available limited
evidence, certain black cohosh preparations (i.e. those that have
been the subject of clinical investigations and/or have otherwise
been subject to safety monitoring) are well-tolerated when used
according to recommended dosage regimens.

e data were

(65,66) of

Hepatotoxicity Several case reports describe hepatoxic reactions
associated with the use of preparations containing black cohosh.
One report describes a 47-year-old woman who developed
jaundice and raised liver function test values one week after
eginning treatment with a product stated to contain black
cohosh for menopausal symptoms.” Biopsy confirmed severe
epatitis and the woman underwent liver transplantation. In a
‘ond case, a 43-year-old woman was reported to have taken a
combination herbal preparation containing black cohosh as well
as skullcap, valerian and five other herbal ingredients. The woman
developed jaundice ani
oth of these cases, descriptions of the products taken lack
important details, and it appears that samples of the products
were not available, therefore, analysis of the preparations
implicated was not undertaken. Causality in these cases has not
een established.

In a randomised controlled trial in which 64 menopausal
»propanolic extract of black cohosh
rhizome (Remifemin) 40 mg daily for three months, or low-dose
estradiol treatment (transdermal patches delivering 25g every
seven days for three months plus dihydrogesterone 10 mg daily for
the last 12 days of the 3-month period of estradiol treatment),
there were no statistically significant differences in liver function
test values (aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase

Ss

raised liver function test values.” For

women received an aqueous-

----- PAGE 187 -----
176 Cohosh, Black

concentrations) in the black cohosh group at the end of the study,
compared with baseline values.”

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide. To the end of the year 2005, the WHO-
UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 143 reports,
describing a total of 328 adverse reactions, for products reported
to contain C. racemosa only as the active ingredient (see Table
1).{69 This number may include the case reports described above.
Reports originated from several 13 different countries. The total
number of reports included 31 reports, originating from five
countries (18 reports originated from the UK), describing a total
of 46 reactions associated with liver and biliary system disorders
(see Table 1), including two cases of hepatic failure. Where the age
and gender of the cases were known (” = 30 reports), all were

Table 1

female and aged between 38 and 66 years. Where the outcome of
the case was documented (7 = 24 reports), ten cases recovered and
14 had not recovered. Causality had been ass
for these, a causal association with black cohosh use was
determined to be 'possible' in five cases and 'certain' in two cases.
(These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database held by
the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitor-
ing, Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at
least with respect to origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical
product caused the adverse reaction. Any information included in
this report does not represent the opinion of the World Health
Organization).

By March 2006, the UK's spontaneous reporting scheme for
suspected adverse drug reactions (ADRs) had received 21 reports
of suspected ADRs describing reactions in the liver associated
with the use of preparations containing black cohosh rhizome/
root; the total number of reports received in the UK for all

sed for seven cases;

Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 143) of suspected adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Cimicifuga racemosa

preparations held in the Vigisearch database of the World Health Organization’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the period up to end of 2005.@> 68)

System organ class. Adverse drug reaction name (number) Total
Body as a whole - general disorders. Including back pain (5); chest pain (3); malaise (3); pain (7) 40
Cardiovascular disorders, general. Including hypertension (5) 6
Central and peripheral nervous system disorders. Including convulsions (5); dizziness (3); headache (6) 17
Collagen disorders. 2
Endocrine disorders. 1
Gastrointestinal system disorders. Including abdominal pain (8); diarrhoea (5); dyspepsia (3); nausea (10) 44
Hearing and vestibular disorders. 1
Heart rate and rhythm disorders. Including tachycardia (3) 9
Liver and biliary system disorders. \ncluding hepatic function abnormal (13); hepatitis (12); jaundice (3); hepatic 46
enzymes increased (4); SGPT increased (4)

Metabolic and nutritional disorders. Including diabetes mellitus (3) 8
Musculo-skeletal system disorders. 4
Myo-endopericardial and valve disorders. 1
Neoplasm. Including breast, neoplasm benign female (3) 7
Platelet, bleeding and clotting disorders. 7
Psychiatric disorders. 15
Red blood cell disorders. 1
Reproductive disorders, female and male. Including menstrual disorder (3); breast enlargement (5); breast pain (4); 40
breast pain, female (6); post-menstrual bleeding (5)

Resistance mechanism disorders. 1
Respiratory system disorders. Including dyspnoea (5) 8
Skin and appendages disorders. Including angioedema (4); pruritus (7); rash (7); rash, erythematous (5) 35
Special senses other, disorders. 1
Urinary system disorders. Including face oedema (4); urinary tract infection (3) 15
Vascular (extracardiac) disorders.

Vision disorders.

White cell and res. disorders. Including granulocytopenia (3) 1
Other reactions described using terms not included in database 11
Total number of suspected adverse drug reactions 328

Specific reactions described where n = 3 or more

Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring, Uppsala,
Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse reaction. Any
information included in this report does not represent the opinion of the World Health Organization

----- PAGE 188 -----
1.) After ass

reactions associated with black cohosh was 3

ment, 14 reports were considered to support a relationship

between use of black cohosh rhizome and liver damage: hepatitis

(n = 4); abnormal liver function test values (9); jaundice (1). For

ten of these cases, black cohosh use was considered to have

‘probably’ led to liver damage. For a further six cases, the

relationship could not be assessed because of limited available

information.)

On the basis of these data, in July 2006, the UK Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) issued recom-
mendations that warnings should be added to preparations
containing black cohosh rhizome/root regarding the association
between such products and liver ADRs, and advised that
patients taking black cohosh preparations and who feel unwell
and/or experience new symptoms (particularly those indicative of
liver di:
previously experienced liver complaints or other serious health
conditions should not use black cohosh preparations without first
consulting their doctor.

The European Medicines Agency undertook a similar assess-
ment of reports originating within the European Union, and
issued the following advice:

e patients should stop taking preparations containing black
cohosh rhizome/root and consult their doctor immediately if
they experience signs and/or symptoms indicative of liver injury,
such as tiredness, loss of appetite, yellowing of the skin, and
eyes, severe upper stomach pain with nausea and vomiting, dark
urine

e healthcare professionals should ask patients about use of
preparations containing black cohosh rhizome/root."”?

-ase) should consult their doctor.” Individuals who have

Preclinical data

In an in vitro study in which a 70% ethanol extract of black
cohosh (not further specified) was incubated with GSH (glu-
tathione), NADPH and a preparation of rat liver microsomes, the
formation of eight electrophilic metabolites, including quinoid
metabolites of fukinolic acid, fukiic acid, caffeic acid and
cimiracemate B, was described.

In mice, LDso values for a black cohosh extract following
intragastric and intravenous administration have been found to be

7.7 and 1.1 g/kg body weight, respectively.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

There are reports of hepatotoxic reactions associated with the use
of black cohosh rhizome/root preparations. Patients should be
advised to stop taking black cohosh preparations, and to consult
their doctor if they experience symptoms that may indicate liver
injury.

Until further information is available, it is appropriate to advise
that black cohosh preparations should not be taken by individuals
with oestrogen-sensitive tumours, such as breast cancer. The
scientific basis for this statement is that there are conflicting

results from preclinical studies regarding oestrogenic activity of
black cohosh preparations. There is evidence from older in vitro
and in vivo studies that black cohosh preparations have
oestrogenic activity, although more recent research has indicated
a lack of oestrogenic activity and a small number of studies has
described selective oestrogen receptor activity or anti-oestrogenic
activity. On balance, preclinical research seems to indicate that
extracts of black cohosh root/rhizome do not have hormonal
effects, but further study is required to confirm this and to

Cohosh, Black

elucidate the mechanism(s) of action of black cohosh constituents.
Evidence from clinical studies is also unclear: some studies have
described effects for black cohosh preparations indicative of
oestrogenic activity, whereas in other studies such effects have not
been observed, or selective effects (e.g. effects on bone but not
uterine tissue) have been described.

There is concern that the use of herbal medicines with
oestrogenic activity by women with breast cancer might stimulate
the growth of breast cancer cells and interfere with the effects of
competitive oestrogen receptor antagonists such as tamoxifen”
(although, in general, preclinical studies have not observed breast
cancer cell proliferation and one in vitro study found that black
cohosh extract enhanced the proliferation inhibiting effect of
tamoxifen on breast cancer cells.°”) In a randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 85 women with a history
of breast cancer, one woman receiving both black cohosh and
tamoxifen experienced a recurrence of breast cancer, although it
was reported that the woman had an increase in carcinoembryonic
antigen concentration when she entered the trial (this had not
been reported to the referring physician).

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of black cohosh the potential for preparations of black
cohosh to interfere with other medicines administered concur-
rently, particularly those with similar or opposing effects, should
be considered.

In a randomised, crossover study, 12 healthy volunteers received
a black cohosh root extract (stated to be standardised for 0.2%
triterpene glycosides; not further specified) 1090 mg twice daily
for 28 days to assess effects on cytochrome P450 enzyme activity.
Presence of 27-deoxyactein (now known as 23-epi-26-deoxyac-
tein), actein and cimiracemoside was confirmed using reversed-
phase HPLC with light scattering detection. It was reported that
black cohosh extract significantly inhibited CYP2D6 activity, but
the extent of inhibition may not be clinically relevant.”

In vitro experiments using EMT6 mouse mammary tumour
cells have shown that black cohosh extracts at concentrations
equivalent to 2.5 times recommended therapeutic dos
the cytotoxicity of doxorubicin when the two substances were
added to the cell system.” In similar experiments, black cohosh
extracts also increased the cytotoxicity of docetaxel and decreased
the cytotoxicity of cisplatin. The clinical relevance of these
findings, particularly with respect to the effects of increased
doxorubicin sensitivity in bone marrow and myocardial cells, is
unknown.

es increased

Pregnancy and lactation There are insufficient data on the use
of black cohosh preparations during pregnancy and breastfeeding,
and the use of such preparations is contraindicated during these
periods.

There are conflicting data on oestrogenic activity of black
cohosh, including the effects of black cohosh preparations on
uterine tissue (see Pharmacological Actions).

There is an isolated report of a child born with no spontaneous
breathing and who subsequently experienced brain hypoxia and
seizures following the oral administration of black cohosh and
blue cohosh by a midwife in an attempt to induce labour in a
woman who had had an uneventful pregnancy.""® The report has
been criticised as it did not provide any further details of the dose
or formulation of the herbs, and as the authors of the report make
several assumptions about the clinical activity of the herbs on the
basis of studies in animals.”

7)

----- PAGE 189 -----
Cohosh, Black

Formula; Medinat Esten; PMT Cannella Proesten; Soy Forte
with Black Cohosh; Women's Formula Herbal Formula 3.

Austria: Remifemin plus. Canada: Natural HRT. Czech
Republic: Dr Theiss Rheuma Creme; Dr Theiss Schwedenbit-
ter. Germany: Remifemin plus. Italy: Climil Complex; Climil-
80; Hiperogyn. Singapore: Phytoestrin. UK: Gerard House
Reumalex; Modern Herbals Rheumatic Pain; St Johnswort
Compound; Vegetable Cough Remover; Vegetex. USA: Black
Cohosh; Estrocare; Hot Flashex; Menopause Relief; Meno-
pause Support; Natrol Complete Balance for Menopause AM/
PM Formula; Women's Menopause Formula.

References

1 Jarry H et al. Untersuchungen zur endokrinen wirksamkeit von
inhaltsstoffen aus Cimicifuga racemosa 2. In vitro-bindung von
inhaltsstoffen an éstrogenrezeptoren. Planta Med 1985; 51: 316-319.

2 Panossian A et al. Methods of phytochemical standardisation of
rhizoma Cimicifugae racemosae. Phytochemical Anal 2004; 15: 100-
108.

3. Kennelly EJ et al. Analysis of thirteen populations of black cohosh for
formononetin. Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 461-467.

4 Chen S-N et al. Cimiracemates A-D, phenylpropanoid esters from the
rhizomes of Cimicifuga racemosa. Phytochemistry 2002; 61: 409-413.

5 Jarry H, Harnischfeger G. Untersuchungen zur endokrinen
wirksamkeit von inhaltsstoffen aus Cimicifuga racemosa 1. Einfluss
auf die serum spiegel von hypophysenhormonen ovariektomierter
ratten. Planta Med 1985; 51: 46-49.

6 Linde H. Die inhaltsstoffe von Cimicifuga racemosa 2. Mitt.: zur
struktur des acteins. Arch Pharm 1967; 300: 885-892.

7 Linde H. Die inhaltsstoffe von Cimicifuga racemosa 3. Mitt.: iiber die
konstitution der ringe A, B and C des acteins. Arch Pharm 1967; 300:
982-992.

8 Linde H. Die inhaltsstoffe von Cimicifuga racemosa 4. Mitt.: actein:
der ring D und seitenkette. Arch Pharm 1968; 301: 120-138.

9 Linde H. Die inhaltsstoffe von Cimicifuga racemosa 5. Mitt.: 27-
desoxyacetylacteol. Arch Pharm 1968; 301: 335-341.

10 Radics L et al. Carbon-13 NMR spectra of some polycyclic
triterpenoids. Tetrahedron Lett 1975; 48: 4287-4290.

11 Chen S-N e¢ al. Isolation, structure elucidation, and absolute
configuration of 26-deoxyactein from Cimicifuga racemosa and
clarification of nomenclature associated with 27-deoxyactein. J Nat
Prod 2002; 65: 601-605.

12. Bedir E, Khan IA. Cimiracemoside A: a new cyclolanostanol xyloside
from the rhizome of Cimicifuga racemosa. Chem Pharm Bull 2000; 48:
425-427.

13. Shao Y et al. Triterpene glycosides from Cimicifuga racemosa. J Nat
Prod 2000; 63: 905-910.

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

24

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

Bedir E, Khan IA. A new cyclolanostanol arabinoside from the
rhizome of Cimicifuga racemosa. Pharmazie 2001; 56: 268-269.
Sakurai N et al. Studies on the Chinese crude drug 'Shoma.' X. Three
new trinor-9,19-cyclolanostanol xylosides, cimicifugosides H-3, H-4
and H-6, from Cimicifuga rhizome and transformation of
cimicifugoside H-1 into cimicifugosides H-2, H-3 and H-4. Chem
Pharm Bull 1995; 43: 1475-1482.

Chen S-N et al. Cimiracemosides I-P, new 9,19-cycloanostane
triterpene glycosides from Cimicifuga racemosa. ] Nat Prod 2002; 65:
1391-1397.

Hamburger M et al. Cycloartane glycosides from Cimicifuga
racemosa. Pharm Pharmacol Lett 2001; 2: 98-100.

Wende K et al. Actaeaepoxide 3-O-B-D-xylopyranoside, a new
cycloartane glycoside from the rhizomes of Actaea racemosa
(Cimicifuga racemosa). ] Nat Prod 2001; 64: 986-989.

Kruse SO et al. Fukiic and piscidic acid esters from the rhizome of
Cimicifuga racemosa and the in vitro estrogenic activity of fukinolic
acid. Planta Med 1999; 65: 763-764.

‘Wang H-K et al. LC/TIS-MS fingerprint profiling of Cimicifuga
species and analysis of 23-epi-26-deoxyactein in Cimicifuga racemosa
commercial products. J Agric Food Chem 2005; 53: 1379-1386.
Struck D et al. Flavones in extracts of Cimicifuga racemosa. Planta
Med 1997; 63: 289.

Halliday J. AHPA urges black cohosh, caffeine action. USA
Nutralngredients.com. http://www.nutraingredients-usa.com/news/
(accessed August 22, 2005).

Borrelli F e¢ al. Pharmacological effects of Cimicifuga racemosa. Life
Sci 2003; 73: 1215-1229.

Diiker E-M et al. Effects of extracts from Cimicifuga racemosa on
gonadotropin release in menopausal women and ovariectomized rats.
Planta Med 1991; 57: 420-424.

Freudenstein J et al. Lack of promotion of estrogen-dependent
mammary gland tumors in vivo by an isopropanolic Cimicifuga
racemosa extract. Cancer Res 2002; 62: 3448-3452.

Niélein T, Freudenstein J. Concomitant administration of an
isopropanolic extract of black cohosh and tamoxifen in the in vivo
tumor model of implanted RUCA-I rat endometrial adenocarcinoma
cells. Toxicol Lett 2004; 150: 271-275.

Liu J et al. Evaluation of estrogenic activity of plant extracts for the
potential treatment of menopausal symptoms. J Agric Food Chem
2001; 49: 2472-2479.

Lupu R et al. Black cohosh, a menopausal remedy, does not have
estrogenic activity and does not promote breast cancer cell growth. Int
J Oncology 2003; 23: 1407-1412.

Stromeier S et al. Phenolic esters from the rhizomes of Cimicifuga
racemosa do not cause proliferation effects in MCF-7 cells. Planta
Med 2005; 71: 495-500.

Einbond LS e¢ al. Growth inhibitory activity of extracts and purified
components of black cohosh on human breast cancer cells. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 2004; 83: 221-231.

Nesselhut T et al. Untersuchungen zur proliferativen Potenz von
Phytopharmaka mit éstrogenahnlicher Wirkung bei
Mammakarzinomzellen. Arch Gynecol Obstet 1993; 254: 817-818.
Bodinet C, Freudenstein J. Influence of Cimicifuga racemosa on the
proliferation of estrogen receptor-positive human breast cancer cells.
Breast Cancer Res Treat 2002; 76: 1-10.

Hostanska K et al. Cimicifuga racemosa extract inhibits proliferation
of estrogen receptor-positive and negative breast carcinoma cell lines
by induction of apoptosis. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2004; 84: 151-160.
Hostanska K et al. Evaluation of cell death caused by triterpene
glycosides and phenolic substances from Cimicifuga racemosa extract
in human MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Biol Pharm Bull 2004; 27: 1970-
1975.

Zierau O et al. Antiestrogenic activities of Cimicifuga racemosa
extracts. | Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 2002; 80: 125-130.

Jarry H et al. Cimicifuga racemosa extract BNO 1055 inhibits
proliferation of the human prostate cancer cell line LNCaP.
Phytomedicine 2005; 12: 178-182.

Hostanska K et al. Apoptosis of human prostate androgen-dependent
and -independent carcinoma cells induced by an isopropanolic extract
of black cohosh involves degradation of cytokeratin (CK) 18.
Anticancer Res 2005; 25: 139-148.

----- PAGE 190 -----
38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S1

52

53

54

5S

56

Seidlova-Wuttke D et al. Evidence for selective estrogen receptor
modulator activity in a black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa) extract:
comparison with estradiol-17B. Eur J Endocrinol 2003; 149: 351-362.
Niflein T, Freudenstein J. Effects of an isopropanolic extract of
Cimicifuga racemosa on urinary crosslinks and other parameters of
bone quality in an ovariectomized rat model of osteoporosis. J Bone
Miner Metab 2003; 21: 370-376.

Seidlova-Wuttke D et al. Effects of estradiol-17B, testosterone and a
black cohosh preparation on bone and prostate in orchidectomized
rats. Maturitas 2005; 51: 177-186.

Léser B et al. Inhibition of neutrophil elastase activity by cinnamic
acid derivatives from Cimicifuga racemosa. Planta Med 2000; 66: 751—
753.

Kim S-J, Kim M-S. Inhibitory effects of Cimicifugae rhizoma extracts
on histamine, bradykinin and COX-2 mediated inflammatory actions.
Phytother Res 2000; 14: 596-600.

Burdette JE e¢ al. Black cohosh acts as a mixed competitive ligand and
partial agonist of the serotonin receptor. ] Agric Food Chem 2003; 51:
5661-5670.

Noguchi M et al. Vasoactive effects of cimicifugic acids C and D, and
fukinolic acid in Cimicifuga rhizome. Biol Pharm Bull 1998; 21: 1163—
1168.

Resing K, Fitzgerald A. Crystal data for 15-o-acetylacerinol and two
related triterpenes isolated from Japanese Cimicifuga plants. ] Appl
Crystallogr 1978; 11: 58.

Takahara M e¢ al. Antimalarial activity and nucleoside transport
inhibitory activity of the triterpenic constituents of Cimicifuga spp.
Biol Pharm Bull 1998; 21: 823-828.

Sakurai N et al. Anti-AIDS agents. Part 57: actein, an anti-HIV
principle from the rhizome of Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh),
and the anti-HIV activity of related saponins. Bioorganic Med Chem
Lett 2004; 14: 1329-1332.

Moskalenko SA. Preliminary screening of Far-Eastern ethnomedicinal
plants for antibacterial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15: 231-259.
Li JX et al. Effects of Cimicifugae rhizoma on serum calcium and
phosphate levels in low calcium dietary rats and on bone mineral
density in ovariectomized rats. Phytomedicine 1996/97; 3: 379-385.
Johnson BM, van Breemen RB. In vitro formation of quinoid
metabolites of the dietary supplement Cimicifuga racemosa (black
cohosh). Chem Res Toxicol 2003; 16: 838-846.

Frei-Kleiner § et al. Cimicifuga racemosa dried ethanolic extract in
menopausal disorders: a double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial.
Maturitas 2005; 51: 397-404.

Stoll W. (Phytopharmacon influences atrophic vaginal epithelium:
double-blind study, Cimicifuga vs estrogenic substances).
Therapeuticon 1987; 1: 23-31.

Wuttke W et al. The Cimicifuga preparation BNO 1055 vs conjugated
estrogens in a double-blind placebo-controlled study: effects on
menopause symptoms and bone markers. Maturitas 2003; 44 (Suppl.
Suppl.1): S67-S77.

Jacobson JS et al. Randomized trial of black cohosh for the treatment
of hot flashes among women with a history of breast cancer. J Clin
Oncol 2001; 19: 2739-2745.

Nappi RE et al. Efficacy of Cimicifuga racemosa on climacteric
complaints: a randomized study versus low-dose transdermal
estradiol. Gynecol Endocrinol 2005; 20: 30-35.

Lehman-Willenbrock E, Riedel H-H. Klinische und endokrinologische
Untersuchungen zur Therapie ovarieller Ausfallserscheinungen nach

57

58

59

60

61

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

Cohosh, Black

Hysterektomie unter Belassung der Adnexe. Z Gyndkol 1988; 110:
611-618.

Warnecke G. Beeinflussung klimakterischer Beschwerden durch ein
Phytotherapeutikum. Erfolgreiche Therapie mit Cimicifuga-Mono
extrakt. Med Welt 1985; 36: 871-874.

Mahady G. Black cohosh (Actaea/Cimicifuga racemosa). Review of
the clinical data for safety and efficacy in menopausal symptoms.
Treat Endocrinol 2005; 4: 177-184.

Liske E et al. Physiological investigation of a unique extract of black
cohosh (Cimicifugae racemosae rhizoma): a 6-month clinical study
demonstrates no systemic estrogenic effect. J Women's Health
Gender-Based Med 2002; 11: 163-174.

Hernandez Mujioz G, Pluchino S. Cimicifuga racemosa for the
treatment of hot flushes in women surviving breast cancer. Maturitas
2003; 44 (Suppl. Suppl.1): $59-S65.

Burke BE et al. Randomized, controlled trial of phytoestrogen in the
prophylactic treatment of menstrual migraine. Biomed Pharmacother
2002; 56: 283-288.

SY et al. Effect of a proprietary herbal medicine on the relief of
chronic arthritic pain: a double-blind study. Br J Rheumatol 1996; 35:
874-878.

Stolze H. Der andere Weg, klimakterische Beschwerden zu behandeln.
Gyne 1982; 3: 14-16.

Vermes G et al. The effects of Remifemin™ on subjective symptoms of
menopause. Adv Ther 2005; 22: 148-154.

Huntley A, Ernst E. A systematic review of the safety of black cohosh.
Menopause 2003; 10: 58-64.

Low Dog T et al. Critical evaluation of the safety of Cimicifuga
racemosa in menopause symptom relief. Menopause 2003;10: 299-
313.

Whiting PW et al. Black cohosh and other herbal remedies associated
with acute hepatitis. Med J Aust 2002; 177: 440-443.

Vigibase. WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre (accessed January 20, 2006).

Black Cohosh. UK Public Assessment Report. Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, July 2006. Available at http://
www.mhra.gov.uk (accessed September 25, 2006).

Black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa) — risk of liver problems.
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, July 2006.
Available at http://www.mhra.gov.uk (accessed September 25, 2006).
EMEA public statement on herbal medicinal products containing
Cimicifugae racemosae rhizome (black cohosh, root) — serious hepatic
reactions. European Medicines Agency, 18 July 2006. Doe. Ref.:
EMEA/269259/2006.

Beuscher N. Cimicifuga racemosa L. Black cohosh. Z Phytother 1995;
16: 310-310.

Boyle FM. Adverse interaction of herbal medicine with breast cancer
treatment. Med J Aust 1997; 167: 286.

Gurley BJ et al. In vivo effects of goldenseal, kava kava, black cohosh,
and valerian on human cytochrome P450 1A2, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4/5
phenotypes. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2005; 77: 415-426.

Rockwell S e¢ al. Alteration of the effects of cancer therapy agents on
breast cancer cells by the herbal medicine black cohosh. Breast Cancer
Res Treat 2005; 90: 233-239.

Gunn TR, Wright IMR. The use of black and blue cohosh in labour.
N Z Med J 1996; 109: 410-411.

Baillie N, Rasmussen P. Black and blue cohosh in labour. N Z Med J
1997; 110: 20-21.

----- PAGE 191 -----
Cohosh, Blue

plant parts. In view of the potential toxicity associated with
blue cohosh, it should be used with caution. The potential for
preparations of blue cohosh to interfere with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. The use of blue
cohosh preparations during pregnancy and breastfeeding
should be avoided.

Species (Family)
Caulophyllum thalictroides (L.) Mich. (Berberidaceae)

Synonym(s)

Caulophyllum, Leontice thalictroides L., Papoose Root, Squaw
Root

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983'C”) ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22, G41 and G48.

Alkaloids — Quinolizidine and isoquinoline-types. Anagyrine,
baptifoline, magnoflorine, methylcytisine (caulophylline). Other
unidentified minor tertiary alkaloids.”

Saponins Caulosaponin and cauloside D yielding hederagenin on
hydrolysis.”

Other constituents
phytosterol and starch.

Citrullol, gum, resins, phosphoric acid,

Other Caulophyllum species A related species, C. robustum
Maxim., is rich in triterpene glycosides (caulosides A-G), most of
which possess hederagenin as their aglycone.

Food Use

Blue cohosh is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Blue cohosh is stated to possess antispasmodic, emmenagogue,
uterine tonic and antirheumatic properties. Traditionally, it has
been used for amenorrhoea, threatened miscarriage, false labour
pains, dysmenorrhoea, rheumatic pains, and specifically for
conditions associated with uterine atony.'C7 °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 0.3-1.0g as a decoction three times daily.(©”

Liquid extract 0.5-1.0mL (1:1 in 70% alcohol) three times
daily‘?
Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A blue cohosh extract exhibited stimulant properties on the
isolated guinea-pig uterus, although subsequent in vivo studies in
cats, dogs and rabbits demonstrated no uterine activity.

Alkaloids

anagyrine H
baptifoline OH

HCO.

HCO

magnoflorine

N-methylcytisine

Triterpenes

hederagenin (aglycone of several saponins)

Figure 1 Selected constituents of blue cohosh.

----- PAGE 192 -----
Antifertility actions documented in rats were reported to be
caused by inhibition of ovulation” and by interruption of
implantation.)

Smooth muscle stimulation has been documented for a
crystalline glycoside constituent on the uterus (i7 vitro), the small
intestine (in vitro), and the coronary blood vessels (in vivo) of
various small mammals. The glycoside was also reported to
cause erythrolysis and to be of an irritant nature. An earlier study
that used a crystalline glycoside identified as caulosaponin,
reported a variety of actions including an oxytocic effect on the
isolated rat uterus, constriction of coronary and carotid blood

vessels, a toxic action on cardiac muscle, and a spasmogenic
(6)

action on the isolated intestine.
Methylcytisine is stated to have a nicotinic-like action, causing

an elevation in blood pressure and stimulating both respiration
G60)

and intestinal motility.

Figure 2 Blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides).

Figure 3 Blue cohosh — dried drug substance (root).

Cohosh, Blue

An alcoholic extract of the aerial parts of blue cohosh produced
up to 55% inhibition of inflammation in the carrageenan rat paw
ot (7)
test.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of blue
cohosh and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for blue cohosh
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Powdered blue cohosh is stated to be irritant, especially to
“5)) The leaves and seeds are reported to
contain methylcytisine and some glycosides that can cause severe
stomach pains. Children have been poisoned by eating the bright
blue bitter-tasting seeds.‘“?? Caulosaponin is reported to be
cardiotoxic, causing constriction of coronary blood vessels, to
produce intestinal spasms, and to possess oxytocic properties.

There is an isolated report of tachycardia, diaphoresis, muscle
weakness and fasciculations in a 21-year-old woman who ingested
blue cohosh tincture in an attempt to induce an abortion. The
woman's symptoms, which resolved over the following 24 hours,
were considered to be consistent with those of nicotine toxicity.

mucous membranes."

Preclinical data

N-methylcytisine isolated from blue cohosh root material
demonstrated teratogenic activity in rat embryo culture, an in-
vitro system used to detect potential teratogens.) The clinical
significance of this finding has not been established.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Blue cohosh may irritate gastrointestinal conditions. It is not
known whether excessive doses of blue cohosh may cause a rise in
blood pressure, because of the methylcytisine content.

Drug interactions None documented. However, in view of the
limited information on the chemistry of blue cohosh, and
documented pharmacological actions, the potential for prepara-
tions of blue cohosh to interfere with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation There are insufficient data on the use
of blue cohosh preparations during pregnancy and breastfeeding,
and the use of blue cohosh should be avoided during these periods.

Blue cohosh is reputed to be an abortifacient and to affect the
menstrual cycle.”

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Dyzco; Lifesystem Herbal Formula 4 Women's
Formula; Women's Formula Herbal Formula 3.

----- PAGE 193 -----
Cohosh, Blue

References

1 Flom MS et al. Isolation and characterization of alkaloids from
Caulophyllum thalictroides. ] Pharm Sci 1967; 56: 1515-1517.

2. Strigina LI et al. Cauloside D a new triterpenoid glycoside from
Caulophyllum robustum. Maxim. Identification of cauloside A.
Phytochemistry 1976; 15: 1583-1586.

3. Pilcher JD et al. The action of various female remedies on the excised
uterus of the guinea-pig. Arch Intern Med 1916; 18: 557-583.

4 Chaudrasekhar K, Sarma GHR. Observations on the effect of low and
high doses of Caulophyllum on the ovaries and the consequential
changes in the uterus and thyroid in rats. J Reprod Fertil 1974; 38:
236-237.

5S Chaudrasekhar K, Raa Vishwanath C. Studies on the effect of

Caulophyllum on implantation in rats. J Reprod Fertil 1974; 38: 245—
246.

Ferguson HC, Edwards LD. A pharmacological study of a crystalline
glycoside of Caulophyllum thalictroides. ] Am Pharm Assoc 1954; 43:
16-21.

Benoit PS et al. Biological and phytochemical evaluation of plants
XIV. Anti-inflammatory evaluation of 163 species of plants. Lloydia
1976; 393: 160-171.

Rao RB, Hoffman RS. Nicotinic toxicity from tincture of blue cohosh
(Caulophyllum thalictroides) used as an abortifacient. Vet Hum
Toxicol 2002; 44: 221-222.

Kennelly EJ et al. Detecting potential teratogenic alkaloids from blue
cohosh rhizomes using an in vitro rat embryo culture. J Nat Prod
1999; 62: 1385-1389.

----- PAGE 194 -----
- Cola

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The principal active constituent in cola is caffeine. The
reputed herbal uses of cola can be attributed to the actions of
caffeine, and precautions associated with other xanthine-
containing beverages are applicable to cola.

Species (Family)

Cola nitida (Vent.) Schott & Endl. (Sterculiaceae)
*Cola acuminata (P. Beauv.) Schott & Endl.

Synonym(s)

Cola Seed, Guru Nut, Kola Nut
*Sterculia acuminata Beauv.

Part(s) Used

Cotyledon

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007'08)

Complete German Commission E'C»
Martindale 35th edition'©**

Ph Eur 2007°°8

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6 and Gé2.

Alkaloids Xanthine-types. Caffeine (0.6-3.0%), theobromine (up
to 0.1%).

Tannins Condensed type, catechins.

Other constituents Betaine, cellulose, enzyme, fats, a glucoside,
protein, red pigment and sugars.

Purines
O CHa
/
Ry N
N
xx )
ow *N N
CH3
R
caffeine CH3

theobromine H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cola.

Food Use

Cola is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of food
flavouring (cola and cola nut extract: category N4, with limits on
caffeine) (see Appendix 3).'°!” Cola is commonly used in foods.
Previously, cola has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised
As Safe).“04

Herbal Use

Cola is stated to poss CNS stimulant, thymoleptic, antide-
pressant, diuretic, cardioactive and antidiarrhoeal properties. It
has been used for depressive states, melancholy, atony, exhaustion,
dysentery, atonic diarrhoea, anorexia, migraine and specifically
for depressive states associated with general muscular weak-

ness,(G% G7. G8, G64)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal and pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

Figure 2. Cola (Cola nitida).

Figure 3 Cola — dried drug substance (cotyledon).

----- PAGE 195 -----
Cola

Powdered cotyledons 1-3 g as a decoction three times daily.C®

G7)

Liquid Extract of cola
alcohol).

Tincture of cola (BPC 1934) 14mL (1:5 in 60% alcohol).

(BPC 1949) 0.6-1.2mL (1:1 in 60%

Pharmacological Actions

The xanthine constituents, caffeine and theobromine, are the
active principles in cola. The pharmacological properties of
caffeine are well documented and include stimulation of the CNS,
respiratory system and skeletal muscle, cardiac stimulation,
coronary dilatation, smooth muscle relaxation and diuresis.'“*”

Cola-containing beverages are stated to provide active doses of
(G45)

caffeine.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Side-effects commonly associated with xanthine-containing bev-
erages include sleeplessness, anxiety, tremor, palpitations and
withdrawal headache.’

Contra-indications, Warnings

Consumption of cola should be restricted in individuals with
hypertension or cardiac disorders, because of the caffeine
content.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of cola to interact with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing effects,
should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation It is generally recommended that
caffeine consumption should be restricted during pregnancy,
although conflicting reports have been documented regarding the
association between birth defects and caffeine consumption. In
view of this, excessive consumption of cola during pregnancy
should be avoided. Caffeine is excreted in breast milk, but at
concentrations considered too low to represent a hazard to
breastfed infants.'“* However, as with all xanthine-containing
beverages, excessive consumption of cola by lactating mothers

should be avoided.

----- PAGE 196 -----
- Coltsfoot

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The majority of the traditional uses associated with coltsfoot
can be attributed to the mucilage content. However, coltsfoot
also contains toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids albeit at a low
concentration. The risk of exposure to low concentrations of
unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids is unclear although
hepatotoxicity following prolonged exposure has been
documented (see Comfrey). The regular or excessive
consumption of coltsfoot, especially in the form of herbal
teas, should therefore be avoided.

Species (Family)

Tussilago farfara L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Farfara

Part(s) Used

Flower, leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°)

BHP 19830”

Complete German Commission E'C»
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Alkaloids

I
CHg

senecionine senkirkine
Ox OCH
N ‘CH
tussilagine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of coltsfoot.

Acids Caffeic acid, caffeoyltartaric acid, ferulic acid, gallic acid,
p-hydroxybenzoic acid, and tannic acid (phenolic); malic acid and
tartaric acid (aliphatic).

Alkaloids Pyrrolizidine-type. Senkirkine 0.015% and senecionine
(minor) (unsaturated) and tussilagine (saturated).

Carbohydrates Mucilage (water-soluble polysaccharides) 7-8 %
yielding various sugars following hydrolysis (e.g. arabinose,
fructose, galactose, glucose, uronic acid and xylose); inulin
(polysaccharide).

Flavonoids
glycosides.”

Flavonols (e.g. kaempferol, quercetin) and their

Tannins Up to 17% (type unspecified).

Other constituents Bitter (glycoside), choline, paraffin (fatty
acid), phytosterols (sitosterol, stigmasterol, taraxasterol), triter-
pene (amyrin), tussilagone (sesquiterpene) and volatile oil.

Food Use

Coltsfoot is not commonly used as a food but it is listed by the
Council of Europe as a source of natural food flavouring (category
N4). This category indicates that although coltsfoot is permitted

for use as a food flavouring, there are insufficient data available
for an assessment of toxicity to be made.‘@!®
Herbal Use

Coltsfoot is stated to possess expectorant, antitussive, demulcent
and anticatarrhal properties. It has been used for asthma,
bronchitis, laryngitis and pertussis.(> 07 CO"

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Go)

Dried herb 0.6-2.0g by decoction three times daily.

Figure 2 Coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara).

----- PAGE 197 -----
Coltsfoot

Figure 3 Coltsfoot — dried drug substance (leaf).

Liquid extract 0.6-2.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'6”

Tincture 2-8 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.”

Syrup 2-8 mL (liquid extract 1:4 in syrup) three times daily.”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antibacterial activity has been documented for coltsfoot against
various Gram-negative bacteria including Staphylococcus aureus,
Proteus hauseri, Bordetella pertussis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa
and Proteus vulgaris.”

Anti-inflammatory activity comparable to that of indometacin,

determined in Selye's experimental chronic inflammation test, has
been attributed to water-soluble polysaccharides in coltsfoot."
Weak acute anti-inflammatory activity has been reported for
coltsfoot when tested against carrageenan-induced rat paw
oedema." ?)
Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is known to be involved in
various inflammatory, respiratory and cardiovascular disorders.
The aggregating action of PAF is known to be weaker if
intracellular concentrations of calcium are low. A sesquiterpene,
L-652469, isolated from coltsfoot buds has been reported to be a
weak inhibitor of both PAF receptor binding and calcium channel
blocker binding to membrane vesicles." This combination of
actions was found to effectively block PAF-induced platelet
aggregation. L-652469 was also found to be active orally,
inhibiting PAF-induced rat paw oedema.'') Interestingly, L-
652469 was reported to interact with the cardiac calcium channel
blocker receptor complex (dihydropyridine receptor), but was also
found to be a calcium channel blocker.‘

Tussilagine has been reported to be a potent cardiovascular and
respiratory stimulant.*'® Dose-dependent pressor activity fol-
lowing intravenous injection has been observed in the cat, rat and
dog." The pressor effect is stated to be similar to that of
dopamine, but without tachyphylaxis. A significant stimulation of
respiration was also observed.’ Cardiovascular and respiratory
effects are thought to be mediated by peripheral and central
mechanisms, respectively.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of coltsfoot
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for coltsfoot and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Coltsfoot has been reported to be phototoxic in guinea-pig
skin.

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids with an unsaturated pyrrolizidine
nucleus are known to be hepatotoxic in both animals and humans
(see Comfrey). Of the pyrrolizidine alkaloids documented for
coltsfoot, senecionine and senkirkine are unsaturated. Chronic
hepatotoxicity has been described in rats following the incorpora-
tion of coltsfoot into their diet at concentrations ranging from 4—-
33%." After 600 days, it was found that rats fed more than 4%
coltsfoot had developed hepatic tumours (haemangioendothelial
sarcoma) while none were observed in the control group.
Furthermore, histological changes associated with pyrrolizidine
alkaloid toxicity, such as centrilobular necrosis of the liver and
cirrhosis, were observed in many of the rats who had ingested
coltsfoot ad not developed tumours. The hepato-
toxicity of coltsfoot was attributed to senkirkine, which is present
at a concentration of only 0.015%, thus highlighting the dangers
associated with chronic exposure to low concentrations of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids.

Newborn rats have been found to be more susceptible than
weanlings to the hepatotoxic effects of senkirkine despite lacking
the hepatic microsomal enzymes required for the formation of the
toxic pyrrolic metabolites."'” Fatal hepatic veno-occlusive disease
has been documented in a newborn infant whose mother had
regularly consumed a herbal tea during pregnancy.'® Analysis of
the herbal tea revealed the presence of 10 different plants including
coltsfoot and a Senecio species (known source of pyrrolizidine
alkaloids, see Liferoot). The mother exhibited no signs of hepatic
damage, suggesting an increased sensitivity of the fetal liver to
pyrrolizidine alkaloid toxicity.

Pre-blooming coltsfoot flowers are reported to contain the
highest concentration of alkaloids. Considerable loss of both
senkirkine and senecionine has been observed upon prolonged
storage of the dried plant material.) Senkirkine and senecionine
are both easily extracted into hot water and, therefore, would
presumably be ingested in a herbal tea prepared from the fresh
plant.°) A cup of tea prepared from 10 g pre-blooming flowers has
been estimated to contain a maximum of 701g senecionine and
1.4mg senkirkine. Tea from the young leaves or mature plant
would presumably contain considerably lower concentrations of
alkaloids. These concentrations are not considered to represent
a health hazard compared to the known hepatotoxicity of
senecionine (intravenous LDsy 64mg/kg body weight, mice).°)
However, prolonged exposure to low concentrations of pyrrolizi-
dine alkaloids has resulted in hepatotoxicity (see Comfrey).

Tussilagine LDso (mice, intravenous injection) has been
determined as 28.9 mg/kg."

ut who

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the known pyrrolizidine alkaloid content, excessive or
prolonged ingestion should be avoided. In particular, herbal teas
containing coltsfoot should be avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of coltsfoot to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that tussilagine, a constituent of coltsfoot,

----- PAGE 198 -----
has pressor activity. However, the clinical significance of this, if
any, is not known.

Pregnancy and lactation Coltsfoot should not be taken during
pregnancy or lactation in view of the toxicity associated with the
pyrrolizidine alkaloid constituents. Coltsfoot is reputed to be an
abortifacient.

(G30)

Argentina: Arceligasol; Negacne. Czech Republic: Perospir;
Species Pectorales Planta. Italy: Lozione Same Urto. Spain:
Llantusil. UK: Antibron; Chesty Cough Relief.

References

1 Didry N et al. Phenolic compounds from Tussilago farfara. Ann
Pharm Fr 1980; 38: 237-241.

2 Culvenor CCJ et al. The occurrence of senkirkine in Tussilago farfara.
Aust J Chem 1976; 29: 229-230.

3 Rosberger DF et al. The occurrence of senecione in Tussilago farfara.
Mitt Geb Lebensm Hyg 1981; 72: 432-436.

4 Réder E et al. Tussilagine — a new pyrrolizidine alkaloid from
Tussilago farfara. Planta Med 1981; 41: 99-102.

5 Haaland E. Water-soluble polysaccharides from the leaves of
Tussilago farfara L. Acta Chem Scand 1969; 23: 2546-2548.

6 Yi-Ping L, Wang Y-M. Evaluation of tussilagone: a cardiovascular-
respiratory stimulant isolated from Chinese herbal medicine. Gen
Pharmacol 1988; 19: 261-263.

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

Coltsfoot

Didry N et al. Components and activity of Tussilago farfara. Ann
Pharm Fr 1982; 40: 75-80.

Didry N, Pinkas M. Antibacterial activity of fresh leaves of Tussilago
spp. Bull Soc Pharm (Lille) 1982; 38: 51-52.

leven M et al. Screening of higher plants for biological activities I.
Antimicrobial activity. Planta Med 1979; 36: 311-321.

Engalycheva E-I et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of polysaccharides
obtained from Tussilago farfara L. Farmatsiya 1982; 31: 37-40.
Benoit PS et al. Biological and phytochemical evaluation of plants.
XIV. Antiinflammatory evaluation of 163 species of plants. Lloydia
1976; 39: 160-171.

Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

Hwang S-B et al. L-652,469 — a dual receptor antagonist of platelet
activating factor and dihydropyridines from Tussilago farfara L. Eur ]
Pharmacol 1987; 141: 269-281.

Wang Y-M. Pharmacological studies of extracts of Tussilago farfara L.
Il Effects on the cardiovascular system. Acta Pharm Sin 1979; 5: 268—
276.

Masaki H et al. Primary skin irritation and phototoxicity of plants
extracts for cosmetic ingredients. J Soc Cosmet Chem Jpn 1984; 18:
47-49.

Hirono | et al. Carcinogenic activity of coltsfoot, Tussilago farfara L.
Gann 1976; 67: 125-129.

Schoental R. Hepatotoxic activity of retrorsine, senkirkine and
hydroxysenkirkine in newborn rats, and the role of epoxides in
carcinogenesis by pyrrolizidine alkaloids and aflatoxins. Nature 1970;
227: 401402.

Roulet M et al Hepatic veno-occlusive disease in newborn infant of a
woman drinking herbal tea. J Pediatr 1988; 112: 433-436.

----- PAGE 199 -----
= Comfrey

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Comfrey is characterised by its pyrrolizidine alkaloid
constituents. The hepatotoxicity of these compounds is well
known, and cases of human poisoning involving comfrey
have been documented. Human hepatotoxicity with
pyrrolizidine-containing plants is well documented,
particularly following the ingestion of Crotalaria, Heliotropium
and Senecio species. Comfrey has traditionally been used
topically for treating wounds. Percutaneous absorption of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids present in comfrey is reported to be
low, although application of comfrey preparations to the
broken skin should be avoided.

Licensed herbal products intended for internal use are not
permitted to contain comfrey. The inclusion of comfrey in
products intended for topical application is permitted,
provided the preparation is only applied to the unbroken skin
and that its use is restricted to ten days or less at any one time.

As a result of a 1993 report by the Committee on Toxicity
of Chemicals in Food to the Food Advisory Committee and
the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (UK), the
health food trade voluntarily withdrew all products, such as
tablets and capsules, and advice was issued that the root and
leaves should be labelled with warnings against ingestion. It
was considered that comfrey teas contained relatively low
concentrations of pyrrolizidine alkaloids and did not need any
warning labels.

Species (Family)

Symphytum officinale L. (Boraginaceae)

Synonym(s)
Symphytum Radix

Related species include Prickly Comfrey (Symphytum asperum),
Quaker and Russian Comfrey (Symphytum uplandicum, hybrid of
S. officinale x S. asperum)

Part(s) Used

Leaf, rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'¢

BHP 19960”)

Complete German Commission E'°
Martindale 35th edition'“*?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

(G37)

GSL (external use only)
Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Alkaloids Pyrrolizidine-type. 0.3%. Symphytine, symlandine,
echimidine, intermidine, lycopsamine, myoscorpine, acetyllycop-
samine, acetylintermidine, lasiocarpine, heliosupine, viridiflorine
and echiumine.''~

Carbohydrates Gum (arabinose, glucuronic acid, mannose,
rhamnose, xylose); mucilage (glucose, fructose).

Tannins Pyrocatechol-type. 2.4%.

Triterpenes Sitosterol and stigmasterol (phytosterols), steroidal
saponins and isobauerenol.

Other constituents Allantoin 0.75-2.55%, caffeic acid, carotene
0.63%, chlorogenic acid, choline, lithospermic acid, rosmarinic
acid and silicic acid.

Food Use

Comfrey is occasionally used as an ingredient of soups and salads.
It is listed by the Council of Europe as natural source of food
flavouring (category N4). This category indicates that although
comfrey is permitted for use as a food flavouring, insufficient data
are available to assess toxicity.“C'

Herbal Use

Comfrey is stated to possess vulnerary, cell-proliferant, astringent,
antihaemorrhagic and demulcent properties. It has been used for
colitis, gastric and duodenal ulcers, haematemesis, and has been

applied topically for ulcers, wounds and fractures.'C?O% °7C*

G49, G64)

Dosage

Dosages for oral (unless otherwise stated) administration (adults)
for traditional uses recommended in standard herbal reference
texts are given below. Note: internal use is no longer advised.

Alkaloids
0. oO
R'O CHs
HON-C—CR?
Yy 4 4
(CH R®
H3C  CHs
R! Re oR?
intermedine H H OH
echimidine angelyl OH
acetylechimidine acetyl H OH
lycopsamine H OH H
symphytine tiglyl OH H

acetylsymphytine acetyl OH H

H
On _UN
NH
LL
om NN
allantoin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of comfrey.

----- PAGE 200 -----
Figure 3 Comfrey — dried drug substance (leaf).

Dried root/rhizome 2-4 as a decoction three times daily.”

Root, liquid extract 24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.‘°”

Ointment symphytum root 10-15% root extractive in usual type
ointment basis applied topically three times daily.'©”

Dried leaf 2-8 g or by infusion three times daily.‘©”

Leaf, liquid extract 2-8mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.‘°”

Pharmacological Actions

The classical pharmacology of pyrrolizidine alkaloids is over-
shadowed by the well-recognised toxicity of this class of
compounds. Consequently, the majority of data documented for
comfrey involve toxicity. Many useful reviews have been published
on the toxicity of pyrrolizidine alkaloids in humans (see
below).0'»

In vitro and animal studies

Wound-healing and analgesic activities have been documented in
rats administered comfrey extract orally.” Percutaneous absorp-
tion of pyrrolizidine alkaloids obtained from comfrey is reported
to be low in rats, with minimal conversion of the pyrrolizidine
alkaloid N-oxides to the free pyrrolizidine alkaloids in the urine

Comfrey

(reduction of the N-oxides is required before they can be
metabolised into the reactive pyrrolic esters).'>'

Rosmarinic acid has been isolated from comfrey (S. officinale)
as the main constituent with anti-inflammatory
activity.’ Biological activity was determined by inhibition of
malonic dialdehyde formation in human platelets. Minor
components, chlorogenic and caffeic acids, were not found to
exhibit any significant activity. The pyrrolic esters have been
reported to possess mild antimuscarinic activity, which is more
pronounced in the non-hepatotoxic esters of saturated amino
alcohols."® Conversely, the free amino alcohols are reported to
exert indirect cholinomimetic action involving the release of
acetylcholine from postganglionic sites in the guinea-pig ileum."

Comfrey has been reported to stimulate the activity of the
hepatic drug-metabolising enzyme aminopyrine N-demethylase in
rats.)

A comfrey extract has been reported to enhance uterine tone in
vitro." The action of comfrey was reported to be weaker than
that exhibited by German chamomile, calendula and plantain, but
stronger than that shown by shepherd's purse, St. John's wort and
uva-ursi.

in vitro

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of comfrey

and rigorous randomised control
The antimuscarinic properties

ed clinical trials are required.
of certain pyrrolic esters have

been utilised. Two non-hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids,

sarracine and platyphylline, have
gastrointestinal hypermotility an

been used for the treatment of
peptic ulceration."

Side-effects, Toxicity

Two reports of human hepatotoxicity associated with the
ingestion of comfrey have been documented."??° One case
involved a 13-year-old boy who had been given a comfrey root
preparation in conjunction with acupuncture to treat Crohn's
disease. ”’ The boy was diagnosed with veno-occlusive disease of
the liver and the authors concluded comfrey to be the only
possible causal factor of the liver disease. The second case
involved a 49-year-old woman diagnosed with veno-occlusive
disease.°° She had been taking various food supplements
including a herbal tea and comfrey-pepsin pills. Pyrrolizidine
alkaloids were identified in both the tea (stated to contain
ginseng) and the comfrey-pepsin pills. The authors estimated that
over a period of six months the woman had ingested 85 mg of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, equivalent to 15 pg/kg body weight per
day. This report highlighted the potential toxicity associated with
chronic ingestion of relatively small amounts of pyrrolizidine
alkaloids.

The toxicity of pyrrolizidine alkaloids is well recognised.
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids with an unsaturated pyrrolizidine nucleus
are metabolised in the liver to toxic pyrrole metabolites. Acute

toxicity results in hepatic necrosis, whereas chronic toxicity
typically results in veno-occlusive disease characterised by the
presence of greatly enlarged liver cells."°!

Reports of human hepatotoxicity associated with pyrrolizidine
alkaloid ingestion have been documented. *!°7!%° Many of
these reports have resulted from crop (and subsequently flour and
bread) contamination with Crotalaria, Heliotropium and Senecio
species and from the use of pyrrolizidine-containing plants in
medicinal 'bush' teas. In addition, pyrrolizidine alkaloid poisoning
has been associated with the use of herbal teas in Europe and the
United States.2%?9*”

) The diagnosis of veno-occlusive disease in a

----- PAGE 201 -----
Comfrey

newborn infant who subsequently died highlights the suscept-
ibility of the fetus to pyrrolizidine alkaloid toxicity.°” In this case,
the mother had consumed a herbal tea as an expectorant during
pregnancy. The tea, which was purchased from a pharmacy in
Switzerland, was analysed and found to contain pyrrolizidine
alkaloids. The mother did not exhibit any signs of hepatotoxicity.

Interestingly, liver function tests in 29 chronic comfrey users
have been reported to show no abnormalities.°”

The hepatotoxicity of pyrrolizidine alkaloids is well documen-
ted in animals. In addition, carcinogenicity has been described
in rats fed a diet supplemented with comfrey.” The mutagenicity
of comfrey has been attributed to lasiocarpine,* which is known
to be mutagenic and carcinogenic. However, other workers have
reported a lack of mutagenic activity for comfrey following
assessment using direct bacterial test systems (Ames), host
mediated assay (Legator), liver microsomal assay and the
micronucleus technique.°**”

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the hepatotoxic properties documented for the
pyrrolizidine alkaloid constituents, comfrey should not be taken
internally. The topical application of comfrey-containing prepara-
tions to broken skin should be avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of comfrey to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of comfrey has not been
established. In view of the toxicity associated with the alkaloid
constituents, comfrey should not be taken during pregnancy or
lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Czech Republic: Dr Theiss Beinwell Salbe; Stomatosan.
Germany: Kytta-Balsam f; Rhus-Rheuma-Gel N. Israel:
Comfrey Plus. Switzerland: Gel a la consoude; Keppur;
Keppur; Kytta Baume. USA: MSM with Glucosamine Creme.

References

1 Culvenor CCJ et al. Structure and toxicity of the alkaloids of Russian
comfrey (Symphytum x uplandicum Nyman), a medicinal herb and
item of human diet. Experientia 1980; 36: 377-379.

2 Smith LW, Culvenor CCJ. Hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids. J Nat
Prod 1981; 44: 129-152.

3 Huizing HJ. Phytochemistry, systematics and biogenesis of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids of Symphytum taxa. Pharm Weekbl (Sci) 1987;
9: 185-187.

4 Mattocks AR. Toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids in comfrey. Lancet 1980;
ii: 1136-1137.

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

26

27

29

30

31

32

33

34

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Environmental Health Criteria 80. Geneva:
WHO, 1988.

Abbott PJ. Comfrey: assessing the low-dose health risk. Med J Aust
1988; 149: 678-682.

Awang DVC. Comfrey. Can Pharm J 1987; 120: 101-104.

McLean EK. The toxic actions of pyrrolizidine (Senecio) alkaloids.
Pharmacol Rev 1970; 22: 429-483.

Huxtable RJ. Herbal teas and toxins: novel aspects of pyrrolizidine
poisoning in the United States. Perspect Biol Med 1980; 24: 1-14.
Mattocks AR. Chemistry and Toxicology of Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids.
London: Academic Press, 1986.

Jadhav SJ et al. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: A review. J Food Sci Technol
1982; 19: 87-93.

Goldman RS et al. Wound healing and analgesic effect of crude
extracts of Symphytum officinale. Fitoterapia 1985; 6: 323-329.
Brauchli J et al. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids from Symphytum offinale L.
and their percutaneous absorption in rats. Experientia 1982; 38: 1085—
1087.

Brauchli J e¢ al. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids in Symphytum officinale L. and
their dermal absorption in rats. Experientia 1981; 37: 667.

Gracza L et al. Biochemical-pharmacological investigations of
medicinal agents of plant origin, I: Isolation of rosmarinic acid from
Symphytum officinale L. and its anti-inflammatory activity in an in-
vitro model. Arch Pharm (Weinheim) 1985; 318: 1090-1095.
Culvenor CCJ. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids: some aspects of the Australian
involvement. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1985; 6: 18-22.

Garrett BJ et al. Consumption of poisonous plants (Senecio jacobaea,
Symphytum officinale, Pteridium aquilinum, Hypericum perforatum)
by rats: Chronic toxicity, mineral metabolism, and hepatic drug-
metabolizing enzymes. Toxicol Lett 1982; 10: 183-188.

Shipochliev T. Extracts from a group of medicinal plants enhancing
the uterine tonus. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 18: 94-98.

Weston CFM e¢ al. Veno-occlusive disease of the liver secondary to
ingestion of comfrey. Br Med J 1987; 295: 183.

Ridker PM et al. Hepatic venocclusive disease associated with the
consumption of pyrrolizidine-containing dietary supplements.
Gastroenterology 1985; 88: 1050-1054.

Anderson C. Comfrey toxicity in perspective. Lancet 1981; i: 944.
Huxtable RJ et al. Toxicity of comfrey-pepsin preparations. N Engl ]
Med 1986; 315: 1095.

Furmanowa M et al. Mutagenic effects of aqueous extracts of
Symphytum officinale L. and of its alkaloidal fractions. J App! Toxicol
1983; 3: 127-130.

Ridker PM, McDermott WV. Comfrey herb tea and hepatic veno-
occlusive disease. Lancet 1989; i: 657-658.

Lyford CL et al. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease originating in
Ecuador. Gastroenterology 1976; 70: 105-108.

Kumana CR et al. Herbal tea induced hepatic veno-occlusive disease:
quantification of toxic alkaloid exposure in adults. Gut 1985; 26: 101—
104.

Stillman AE et al. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease due to pyrrolizidine
(Senecio) poisoning in Arizona. Gastroenterology 1977; 73: 349-352.
McGee JO'D et al. A case of veno-occlusive disease of the liver in
Britain associated with herbal tea consumption. J] Clin Pathol 1976;
29: 788-794.

Datta DV et al. Herbal medicines and veno-occlusive disease in India.
Postgrad Med J] 1978; 54: 511-515.

Roulet M et al. Hepatic veno-occlusive disease in newborn infant of a
woman drinking herbal tea. J Pediatr 1988; 112: 433-436.

Anderson PC, McLean AEM. Comfrey and liver damage. Hum
Toxicol 1989; 8: 55-74.

Hirono I et al. Carcinogenic activity of Symphytum officinale. J Natl
Cancer Inst 1978; 61: 865-869.

Lim-Sylianco CY et al. Mutagenicity studies of aqueous extracts from
leaves of comfrey (Symphytum officinale Linn). NRCP Res Bull 1977;
32: 178-191.

White RD e¢ al. An evaluation of acetone extracts from six plants in
the Ames mutagenicity test. Toxicol Lett 1983; 15: 23-31.

----- PAGE 202 -----
- Corn Silk

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited information is available on the constituents of corn
silk. Extracts have been reported to exhibit diuretic actions in
both humans and animals, thus justifying the reputed herbal
uses. However, no additional data were located to support
these reported actions. In view of the lack of toxicity data,
excessive use of corn silk should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Zea mays L. (Gramineae)

Synonym(s)

Stigma Maydis, Maize, Zea

Part(s) Used

Stigma, style

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°)
BHP 1996”)

Martindale 35th edition'@**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
SL.

Corn silk is not included in the G!

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Amines 0.05%. Type not specified, although hordenine is listed
for the genus Zea.

Fixed oils 1.85-2.25%. Contain glycerides of linoleic, oleic,
palmitic and stearic acids.

Saponins 3% (unspecified).
Tannins Up to 11.5-13% (unspecified).

Other constituents Allantoin, bitter glycosides (1%), cryptox-
anthin, cyanogenetic compound (unidentified), flavone (may-
sin), gum, phytosterols (e.g. sitosterol, stigmasterol), pigments,
resin, vitamins (C and K).

Flavonoids

/ OH O
a-rhamnosyl
maysin

O” HO

Figure 1 Selected constituents of corn silk.

Food Use

Corn silk is listed as a natural source of food flavouring (category
N2). This category indicates that corn silk can be added to
foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible limitation of an
active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final product.
i y, corn silk has been listed as GRAS (Generally
d As Safe).(C*) The fruits are classified as category
S16) Corn (maize) oil and

Recogni:
NI1 with no restriction on their use.
flour are commonly used in cooking.

Herbal Use

Corn silk is stated to possess diuretic and stone-reducing
properti itis, urethritis, nocturnal

enuresis, prostatitis, and specifically for acute or chronic
(G2, G6, G7, G8, G64)

s. It has been used for

inflammation of the urinary system.
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried style/stigma 4-8 g as an infusion three times daily.'C%°”

Liquid Extract of Maize Stigmas (BPC 1923) 4-8 mL.

Tincture 5-15 mL (1:5 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.'(C%°”

Figure 2 Corn silk (Zea mays).

----- PAGE 203 -----
Corn Silk

Figure 3 Corn silk — dried drug substance (stigma).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Corn silk is stated to possess cholagogue, diuretic, hypoglycaemic,
and hypotensive activities in laboratory animals. 4) Utilising
aqueous extracts, a methanol-insoluble fraction has been reported
to exhibit diuretic activity in rabbits,C*? and an_ isolated
crystalline component has been documented to have a hypotensive
action and to stimulate uterine contraction in rabbits. The latter
two actions were thought to involve a cholinergic mechanism. The
action of corn silk extract on experimental periodontolysis in
hamsters has been documented.

Cryptoxanthin is stated to possess vitamin A activity,"
tannins are known to possess astringent properties.

G48) and

Clinical studies
There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of corn silk
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.
It has been stated that an aqueous extract is strongly diuretic in
humans,“ and that clinical studies have indicated corn silk to
be effective in kidney and other diseases.“*? No further
information on human studies was located to support these
statements.

Side-effects, Toxi

ity
There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for corn silk and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Allergic reactions including contact dermatitis and urticaria
have been documented for corn silk, its pollen and for starch
derived from corn silk.(©°? Cornstarch is considered to be a
known allergen.(@°) The toxicity of a methanol-insoluble fraction
of an aqueous corn silk extract has been reported to be low in
rabbits. The effective intravenous dose for a diuretic action was
documented as 1.5 mg/kg body weight compared to the lethal
intravenous dose of 250mg/kg.“4? Corn silk contains an
unidentified toxic principle,” and is listed as being capable of
producing a cyanogenetic compound.”

Contra-indications, Warnings
Corn silk may cause an allergic reaction in susceptible individuals.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of corn silk to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that corn silk has hypoglycaemic and
hypotensive activity.

Pregnancy and lactation Corn silk has been documented to
stimulate uterine contractions in rabbits. In view of this, doses of
corn silk greatly exceeding amounts used in foods should not be
taken during pregnancy or lactation.

Preparations

Proprietary single-ingredient preparations
UK: Protat.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Spain: Diurinat; Renusor. UK: Elixir Damiana and Saw
Palmetto; Napiers Uva Ursi Tea; Roberts Black Willow
Compound Tablets. USA: Cran Support.

References

1 Seigler DS. Plants of the northeastern United States that produce
cyanogenic compounds. Economic Bot 1976; 30: 395-407.

2 Bever BO, Zahnd GR. Plants with oral hypoglycaemic action. Q J
Crude Drug Res 1979; 17: 139-196.

3. Hahn SJ. Pharmacological action of Maydis stigma. K’at'ollik Taehak
Uihakpu Nonmunjip 1973; 25: 127-141.

4 Chaput A et al. Action of Zea mays L. unsaponifiable titre extract on
experimental periodontolysis in hamsters. Med Hyg (Geneve) 1972;
30: 1470-1471.

----- PAGE 204 -----
y Couchgrass

“Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited chemical data are available for couchgrass and little
scientific evidence was located to justify the traditional herbal
uses. Agropyrene is regarded as the main active principle in
couchgrass on account of its antibiotic effect, although the
presence of agropyrene in the volatile oil has been disputed.
In view of the lack of toxicity data, excessive ingestion should
be avoided.

Species (Family)

Elymus repens (L.) Gould [Elytrigia repens (L.) Desv. Ex Nevski]
(Gramineae)

Synonym(s)

Agropyron, Agropyron repens Beauv., Dogs Grass, Quackgrass,
Triticum, Triticum repens L., Twitch, Twitchgrass

Part(s) Used

Rhizome

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)

BP 200708

Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'°8?

WHO volume 1 19990)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL (Agropyron)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G7.

Carbohydrates Fructose, glucose, inositol, mannitol, mucilagi-
nous substances (10%), pectin, triticin.

Cyanogenetic glycosides Unspecified.
Flavonoids Tricin and other unidentified flavonoids.
Saponins No details documented.

Volatile oils 0.05%. Agropyrene (95%). Presence of agropyrene
has been disputed,'” with the oil reported to consist mainly of the
monoterpenes carvacrol, ¢rans-anethole, carvone, _ thymol,
menthol, menthone and p-cymene and three sesquiterpenes.

Other constituents Fixed oil, vanillin glucoside.

Food Use

Couchgrass is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
couchgrass can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a

possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.'@' Previously, couchgrass has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).‘@*”

Herbal Use

Couchgrass is stated to possess diuretic properties. It has been
used for cystitis, urethritis, prostatitis, benign prostatic hyper-
trophy, renal calculus, lithuria, and specifically for cystitis with
irritation or inflammation of the urinary tract.(C 67°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome 4-8 g as an decoction three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 4-8 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.‘6”

Tincture 5-15 mL (1:5 in 40% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

In vitro and animal studies
Couchgrass is stated to exhibit diuretic and sedative activities in
rats and mice, respectively.'“*” Broad antibiotic activity has been
documented for agropyrene and its oxidation product.'“* An
ethanolic extract was found to exhibit only weak inhibition (14%)
of carrageenan-induced inflammation in the rat paw.”
Couchgrass has been reported to be phytotoxic with flavonoid
components implicated as the active constituents.)

Figure 1 Couchgrass (Elymus repens).

C

----- PAGE 205 -----
Couchgrass

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
couchgrass and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for couchgrass and further investigation of these
aspects is required. An unspecified cyanogenetic glycoside has
been reported as a constituent of couchgrass, although no further
details were located.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of couchgrass to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. The clinical relevance of
the reputed diuretic action is unclear.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the limited pharmacological
and toxicological data, the use of couchgrass during pregnancy
and lactation should be avoided.

Kelemata. Spain: Diurinat; Renusor. UK: Antitis; Fenneherb
Cystaid; Kas-Bah; Napiers Uva Ursi Tea. USA: Natural Herbal
‘Water Tablets.

References

1 Boesel R, Schilcher H. Composition of the essential oil of Agropyrum
repens rhizome. Planta Med 1989; 55: 399-400.

2 Mascolo N. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for anti-
inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-29.

3 Weston LA et al. Isolation, characterization and activity of phytotoxic
compounds from quackgrass [Agropyron repens (L.) Beauv.]. | Chem
Ecol 1987; 13: 403-421.

----- PAGE 206 -----
- Cowslip

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of cowslip is not well-documented and it is
unclear whether saponins reported as constituents of the
underground plant parts are also present in the flowers. Little
pharmacological information has been documented to justify
the herbal uses of cowslip. In view of the lack of toxicity data,
excessive use of cowslip should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Primula veris L. (Primulaceae)

Synonym(s)
Paigle, Peagle, Primula, Primula officinalis (L.) Hill.

Part(s) Used

Flower

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19830”
Complete German Commission E (Primrose flower)'©?)
ESCOP 1997'0

Martindale 35th edition'C®

)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G59.

Carbohydrates Arabinose, galactose, galacturonic acid, glucose,
rhamnose, xylose and water-soluble polysaccharide (6.2-6.6%).

Flavonoids  Apigenin, gossypetin, isorhamnetin, kaempferol,
luteolin and quercetin.

Phenols Glycosides primulaveroside (primulaverin) and prim-
veroside.

Quinones Primin and other quinone compounds.

Saponins Primula acid in sepals but saponins absent from other
parts of the flower.

Flavonoids

OH O

gossypetin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of cowslip.

Tannins Condensed (e.g. proanthocyanidin B2), pseudotannins
(e.g. epicatechin, epigallocatechin).“?

Other constituents Silicic acid and volatile oil (0.1-0.25%).

Other plant parts Saponins have been documented for the
underground parts. 'Primulic acid' is a collective term for the
saponin mixture.” Primulic acid A glycoside (5-10%) yields
primulagenin A as aglycone together with arabinose, galactose,
glucose, glucuronic acid, rhamnose and xylose.'>*) The saponin
content of the roots is stated to peak at two years.) After five
years of storage the saponin content was reported to have
decreased by 45%.

Food Use

Cowslip is not commonly used in foods. A related species,
Primula eliator, is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that Primula eliator can be added to foodstuffs, provided that the
concentration of coumarin does not exceed 2mg/kg.'“' Cou-
marins, however, are not documented as constituents of Primula
veris, the subject of this monograph.

Herbal Use

Cowslip is stated to possess sedative, antispasmodic, hypnotic,
mild diuretic, expectorant and mild aperient properties. It has
been used for insomnia, nervous excitability, hysteria and
specifically for anxiety states associated with restlessness and
irritability.(C* 970%

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried flowers 1-2 as an infusion three times daily.‘©”?

Liquid extract 1-2 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Figure 2 Cowslip (Primula veris).

----- PAGE 207 -----
Cowslip

Contra-indications, Warnings

Cowslip may cause an allergic reaction in sensitive individuals.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of cowslip to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that cowslip has hypo- and hypertensive
activity.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of cowslip has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data, use of cowslip
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Figure 3 Cowslip — dried drug substance (flowerhead).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The saponin fraction has been reported to cause an initial
hypotension followed by a long-lasting hypertension in anaes-
thetised animals.'®

In vitro, the saponins have been documented to inhibit
prostaglandin (PG) synthetase, but to a lesser extent than aspirin

Germany: Bronchicum Elixir $; Bronchicum; Bronchipret;
Brust- und Hustentee; Cardiodoron; Drosithym-N; Equisil
rs rn oan . : N; Expectysat N; Harzer Hustenloser; Heumann Bronchialtee
because of insignificant protein binding; to exhibit a slight anti- Gollibtiie Thy Kinder [mcalal Hleicmnaiy Biyizolbyomdltyion

inflammatory effect against carrageenan rat paw oedema; to
contract isolated rabbit ileum; and to possess analgesic and
antigranulation activity.

Flavonoid and tannin constituents have been documented for
cowslip. A variety of activities has been reported for flavonoids
including anti-inflammatory and antispasmodic effects. The
tannins are known to be astringent.

Sinuforton; Sinuforton; Sinupret; Solvopret; Tussiflorin Hus-
tensaft; Tussiflorin Hustentropfen; TUSSinfant N. Hong Kong:
Sinupret. Hungary: Sinupret. Netherlands: Bronchicum. Rus-
sia: Bronchicum  (Bponxuxym); — Bronchicum —_Husten
(Bpouxuxym Cupon or Kamas); Sinupret (Cunymper). South
Africa: Cardiodoron. Singapore: Sinupret. Switzerland: Demo-
Pectol; Kernosan Elixir; Pectoral N; Sinupret; Sirop pectoral
contre la toux $; Sirop $ contre la toux et la bronchite; Strath
Gouttes contre la toux; Strath Gouttes pour les veines; Strath
There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of cowslip Gouttes Rhumatisme; Tisane pectorale pour les enfants.
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required. Thailand: Sinupret; Solvopret TP. UK: Bio-Strath Willow
Formula; Onopordon Comp B.

Clinical studies

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for cowslip and References
further investigation of these aspects is required. ——_
Allergic contact reactions to related Prinuda species have been 1 Katl C et al. Die flavonoide in den bliiten von Primula officinalis,

documented; quinone compounds are stated to be the allergenic Planta Med 1981; 41: 96-99.
principles with primin described as a strong contact allergen. 2 Grecu L, Cucu V. Saponine aus Primula officinalis und Primula elatior.

bs saa en : Planta Med 1975; 27: 247-253.
Wo positive patch test reactions to cowslip have been recorded, " : .

oe (G51) . 3 Kartnig T, Ri CY. Diinnschichtchromatographische untersuchungen
although allergenicity was not proven. An LDso value (mice,
intraperitoneal injection) for the saponin fraction is documented
as 24.5 mg/kg body weight compared to a value of 9.5 mg/kg for
reparil (aescin). Haemolytic activity has been reported for the

an den zuckerkomponenten der saponine aus den wurzeln von Primula
veris und P. elatior. Planta Med 1973; 23: 379-380.

4 Grecu L, Cucu V, Primulic acid aglycone from the roots of Primula
officinalis. Farmacia (Bucharest) 1975; 23: 167-170.

saponins, and an aqueous extract of cowslip is stated to contain 5 Jentzsch K et al. Saponin level in the radix of Primula veris. Sci Pharm

saponins that are toxic to fish. Saponins are stated to be irritant to 1973: 41: 162-165.

the gastrointestinal tract. 6 Cebo B et al. Pharmacological properties of saponin fractions from
The toxicity of cowslip seems to be associated with the saponin Polish crude drugs. Herb Pol 1976; 22: 154-162.

constituents. However, these compounds have only been docu- 7 Hausen BM. On the occurrence of the contact allergen primin and

mented for the underground plant parts, and not for the flowers other quinoid compounds in species of the family of Primulaceae.

which are the main plant parts used in the UK. Arch Dermatol Res 1978; 261: 311-321.

----- PAGE 208 -----
Cranberry

suitably trained health care professional for advice.

There are several reports of an interaction between
cranberry juice and warfarin. Most reports have involved
increases in patients’ international normalised ratios (INR)
and/or bleeding episodes. It is not possible to indicate a safe
quantity or preparation of cranberry juice, and it is not known
whether or not other cranberry products might also interact
with warfarin. Patients taking warfarin should be advised to
avoid taking cranberry juice and other cranberry products
unless the health benefits are considered to outweigh the
risks. In view of the lack of conclusive evidence for the efficacy
of cranberry, and the serious nature of the potential harm, it is
extremely unlikely that the benefit-harm balance would be in
favour of such patients using cranberry.

Doses of cranberry greatly exceeding the amounts used in
foods should not be taken during pregnancy and lactation.

Species (Family)

*Vaccinium macrocarpon Aiton (Ericaceae)
Vaccinium oxycoccus L.

Synonym(s)

*Large Cranberry Oxycoccus macrocarpus (Aiton) Pursh. is the
species grown for commercial purposes."
}European Cranberry, Mossberry, Oxycoccus palustris Pursh.

Part(s) Used

Fruit (whole berries)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

AHPC?
Martindale 35th edition'“*”
USP29/NF24'C8°)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Cranberry is not included in the GSL.'C*”

Constituents

Acids Citric, malic, quinic and benzoic acids are present.”

Carbohydrates Fructose and oligosaccharides.
Phenolics Anthocyanins and proanthocyanidins.

Other constituents Trace glycoside has been isolated from V.
oxycoccus.” Cranberries are also a good source of fibre.
Cranberry juice cocktail contains more carbohydrate than do
products (i.e. soft or hard gelatin capsules) based on cranberry
powder (prepared from rapidly dried fruits), whereas the latter
contain more fibre.” Alkaloids (N-methylazatricyclo type) have
been isolated from the leaves.”

Food Use

Cranberries are commonly used in foods; cranberry juice
cocktail (containing approximately 25% cranberry juice) is widely
available.?*) Cranberry is listed by the Council of Europe as a
natural source of food flavouring (fruit: category N1) (see
Appendix 3).'¢'7

Herbal Use

Cranberry juice and crushed cranberries have a long history of use
in the treatment and prevention of urinary tract infections.)
Traditionally, cranberries have also been used for blood disorders,
stomach ailments, liver problems, vomiting, loss of appetite,

scurvy and in the preparation of wound dressings.”

Dosage

The doses used in clinical trials of cranberry for prevention of
urinary tract infections have been variable. One study used 300 mL
cranberry juice cocktail (containing 30% cranberry concentrate)
daily for six months.

Pharmacological Actions

Documented activity for cranberry is mainly of its use in the
prevention and treatment of urinary tract infections.”

Initially it was thought that the antibacterial effect of cranberry
juice was due to its ability to acidify urine and, therefore, to
inhibit bacterial growth. However, recent work has focused on the
effects of cranberry in inhibiting bacterial adherence and on
determining anti-adhesion agents in cranberry juice. Bacterial
adherence to mucosal surfaces is considered to be an important
step in the development of urinary tract infections; it is
facilitated by fimbriae (proteinaceous fibres on the bacterial cell

----- PAGE 209 -----
Cranberry

wall) which produce adhesins that attach to specific receptors on
uroepithelial cells.

In vitro and animal studies

In in vitro studies using human urinary tract isolates of
Escherichia coli, cranberry cocktail (which contains fructose and
vitamin C in addition to cranberry juice) inhibited bacterial
adherence to uroepithelial cells by 75% or more in over 60% of
the clinical isolates. In addition, urine from mice fed cranberry
juice significantly inhibited E. coli adherence to uroepithelial cells
when compared with urine from control mice.) However, these
studies did not define the bacteria tested in terms of the type of
fimbriae they might have expressed (specific fimbriae mediate
bacterial adherence to cells).

Irreversible inhibition of adherence of urinary isolates of E. coli
expressing type 1 and type P fimbriae has been demonstrated with
cranberry juice cocktail." It was thought that fructose might be
responsible for the inhibition of type 1 fimbriae”
unidentified high molecular weight substance responsible for type
P fimbriae inhibition.“ Further in vitro studies in which
cranberry juice was added to the growth medium of P-fimbriated
E. coli duplicated immediate inhibition of adherence, but also
showed the loss of fimbriae with cellular elongation after long-
term exposure; such changed bacteria are unable to adhere to
urothelium.”)

Proanthocyanidins extracted from cranberri
to inhibit the adherence of P-fimbriated E. coli to uroepithelial
cell surfaces at concentrations of 10-50 1g/mL, suggesting that
proanthocyanidins may be important for the stated effects of
cranberry in urinary tract infections.)

The effects of a high molecular weight constituent of cranberry
juice on adhesion of bacterial strains found in the human gingival
crevice have also been investigated.‘ A non-dialysable
derived from cranberry juice concentrate used at concentrations of
0.6-2.5 mg/mL reversed the interspecies adhesion of 58% of 84
bacterial pairs. Gram- negative dental plaque bacteria appeared to
be more sensitive to the inhibitory effects of the cranberry
constituent on adhesion."

Crude extracts of cranberry have been reported to exhibit
potential anticarcinogenic activity in vitro as demonstrated by
inhibition of the induction of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) by
the tumour promoter phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (TPA).
The greatest activity appeared to be in the polymeric proantho-
cyanidin fraction which had an ICs9 for ODC activity of 6.0 pg.
The anthocyanidin fraction and the ethyl acetate extract were
either inactive or relatively weak inhibitors of ODC activity.

A cranberry extract with a polyphenolic content of 1548 mg
gallic acid equivalents per litre inhibited low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) oxidation in vitro."

Cranberry juice has demonstrated marked in vitro antifungal
activity against Epidermophyton floccosum and against several
Microsporum and Trichophyton species, but had no effect against
Candida albicans." Benzoic acid and/or other low molecular
weight constituents of cranberry juice were reported to be
responsible for the fungistatic action.

and an

have been shown

material

Clinical studies

Clinical trials investigating the use of cranberries for the
prevention and treatment of urinary tract infections have been
subject to Cochrane systematic reviews; both of these systematic
reviews sought to include all randomised or quasi-randomised
controlled trials." !”

Prevention of urinary tract infections Seven trials were included
in a Cochrane s
urinary tract infections; six trials compared the effectiven
cranberry juice (or cranberry—lingonberry juice) versus placebo or
water and two trials compared cranberry tablets or capsules with
placebo.''®) Studies differed in the formulations of cranberry,
doses and treatment periods used.

In the two trials assessed as being of good methodological
quality, use of cranberry was associated with a statistically
significant reduction in the incidence of urinary tract infections
after 12 months (relative risk (95% confidence interval): 0.61
(0.40-0.91)). One of these trials involved the administration of
cranberry concentrate 7.5g daily (in SOmL) and the other
assessed the effects of cranberry concentrate (1:30) in tablet
form or in 250mL juice. Apart from these two trials, the
methodological quality of the trials was found to be poor and
the reliability of their results questionable. The concl
the review were that there was some evidence to support the
efficacy of cranberry juice for the prevention of urinary tract
infections in women with symptomatic urinary tract infections.
However, there was no clear evidence as to the quantity and
concentration of cranberry juice that should be consumed, or as
to the duration of treatment." In addition, rigorous rando-
mised controlled trials are required to determine the efficacy of
cranberry juice in other populations, including children and
older men and women.

The largest study of cranberry juice for the prevention of
urinary tract infections was a double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial involving 153 women (mean age 78.5 years) randomised to
receive 300mL cranberry juice cocktail (n = 72)
indistinguishable placebo (n = 81) daily for six months. The
odds of experiencing bacteriuria with pyuria were significantly
lower in cranberry-treated subjects than in those who received a
placebo beverage (p = 0.004). The validity of the results of this
trial have been questioned because of methodological short-

comings in the study design, particularly the method of
(20,21)

stematic review of cranberries for prevention of

oss of

sions of

or an

randomisation.

Several of the other studies included in the review are
summarised below. These also have methodological limitations,
for example, several controlled studies claiming to involve random
assignment to treatment?” either did not employ true
°3) or the method of randomisation was not

randomisation
stated.°?*)

A randomised, controlled, crossover study was conducted
involving 38 persons (mean age 81 years) who had had hospital
treatment and were waiting to be transferred to a nursing
home.) Subjects received cranberry juice (15mL) mixed with
water or water alone twice daily for four weeks before crossing
over to the alternative regimen. Seventeen participants completed
the study and, of the seven from whom data were suitable for
comparison, there were fewer occurrences of bacteriuria during
the period of treatment with cranberry juice.?”

The role of cranberry in the prevention of urinary tract
infections in younger women has been explored in a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial involving 19 non-
pregnant, sexually active women aged 18-45 years. Participants
received capsules containing 400 mg cranberry solids daily (exact
dose not stated) or placebo for three months before crossing over
to the alternative regimen. Ten subjects completed the six-month
study period. Of the 21 incidents of urinary tract infection
recorded among these participants, significantly fewer occurred
during periods of treatment with cranberry than with placebo (p
< 0.005).

----- PAGE 210 -----
A randomised, physician-blind, crossover study investigated the
efficacy of cranberry cocktail (30% cranberry concentrate) (15 mL/
kg/day) for six months in 40 children (age range 1.4-18 years,
mean age 9.35 years) with neuropathic bladder and managed by
clean intermittent catheterisation; water was used as a control.
No benefit was reported for cranberry compared with control.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial
of the effects of consumption of cranberry concentrate on the
prevention of bacteriuria and symptomatic urinary tract infection
has been carried out in children (7 = 15) with neurogenic bladder
receiving clean intermittent catheterisation.? Children drank
2oz of cranberry concentrate or placebo daily for three months
before changing to the alternative regimen. At the end of the study,
the number of urinary tract infections occurring under each
regimen was identical (7 = 3). There was no significant difference
between cranberry treatment and placebo with regard to the
number of collected urine samples testing positively for a
pathogen (75% of samples for both cranberry and placebo) (p =
0.97). It was concluded that cranberry concentrate had no effect
on the prevention of bacteriuria in the population studied.?

Treatment of urinary tract infections Although several trials
investigating the effectiveness of cranberry juice and cranberry
products for treating urinary tract infections were found, none of
these trials met all the inclusion criteria for systematic review.”
Two of the studies identified??” did report a beneficial effect

with cranberry products, although both contained methodological
19)

flaws and no firm conclusions can be drawn from these studies.
Thus, it was stated that there was no evidence to suggest that
cranberry juice or other cranberry products are effective in
treating urinary tract infections.”

Other studies Early s involving the administration of large
amounts of cranberry juice to human subjects reported reductions
in mean urinary pH values.?*” A crossover study involving eight
subjects with multiple sclerosis reported that administration of
cranberry juice and ascorbic acid was more effective than orange
juice and ascorbic acid in acidifying the urine. However, neither
treatment consistently maintained a urinary pH lower than 5.5,
the pH previously determined as necessary for maintaining
bacteriostatic urine.°” Inhibition of bacterial adherence (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies
observed with urine from 22 human subjects who had ingested
cranberry cocktail 1-3 hours previously’) Protection against
bacterial adhesion has also been reported in a study involving
urine collected from ten healthy male volunteers who had ingested
water, ascorbic acid (500 mg twice daily for 2.5 days) or cranberry
(400 mg three times daily for 2.5 days) supplements.°” Urine
samples were used to determine uropathogen adhesion to silicone
rubber in a parallel plate flow chamber; urine obtained after
ascorbic acid or cranberry supplementation reduced the initial
deposition rates and numbers of adherent E. coli and Enter-
ococcus faecalis, but not Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococ-
cus epidermidis or C. albicans.

Other preliminary studies have explored the use of cranberry
juice in reducing urine odours,” in improving peristomal skin
conditions in urostomy patients®* and in reducing mucus
production in patients who have undergone entero-uroplasty.°

The ingestion of cranberry juice by subjects with hypochlorhy-
dria due to omeprazole treatment or atrophic gastritis has been
shown to result in increased protein-bound vitamin By) absorp-
tion, although the clinical benefit of ingesting cranberry juice
along with a meal (i.e. with the buffering action of food) remains
to be determined. Possible mechanisms by which the ingestion

udi

has been

Cranberry

of an acidic drink such as cranberry juice could result in improved
protein-bound vitamin By) absorption include increased release of
vitamin By) from protein by direct action of acid on the vitamin
By-protein bond and a pH-sensitive bacterial binding activity of

vitamin By) that is altered in an acidic environment.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

A Cochrane systematic review of cranberry products for the
prevention of urinary tract infections reported that the drop-out
rates in the seven studies included were high (20-55%)."'® In one
of these studies, of 17 withdrawals during cranberry treatment (a
further two occurred during the control period), nine participants
gave the taste of cranberry as the reason for withdrawal.’

It has been claimed that ingesting large amounts of cranberry
juice may result in the formation of uric acid or oxalate stones
secondary to a constantly acidic urine and because of the high
oxalate content of cranberry juice.’ However, it has also been
stated that the role of cranberry juice as a urinary acidifier has not
been well established. The use of cranberry juice in preventing
the formation of stones which develop in alkaline urine, such as
those comprising magnesium ammonium phosphate and calcium
carbonate, has been described. °*)

Contra-indications, Warnings

The calorific content of cranberry juice should be borne in mind.
Patients with diabetes who wish to use cranberry juice should be
advised to use sugar-free preparations. Patients using cranberry
juice should be advised to drink sufficient fluids in order to ensure
adequate urine flow.“ Although a constituent of cranberry juice
has been reported to have potential for altering the subgingival
microbiota, some commercially available cranberry juice cocktails
may not be suitable for oral hygiene purposes because of their high
dextrose and fructose content.‘

Drug interactions There are several reports of an interaction
between cranberry juice and warfarin. By October 2004, the UK
Committee on Safety of Medicines had received 12 such reports, of
which eight involved increases in patients' international normal-
ised ratios (INR) and/or bleeding episodes, three involved unstable
INR and one a decrease in INR.” These reports include a death
in a man whose INR rose to over 50 six weeks after starting to
drink cranberry juice. The man experienced gastrointestinal and
pericardial haemorrhage and died.**) It is not possible to indicate
a safe quantity or preparation of cranberry juice, and it is not
known whether or not other cranberry products might also
interact with warfarin.

Against this background, patients taking warfarin should be
advised to avoid taking cranberry juice and other cranberry
products unless the health benefits are considered to outweigh the
risks.) In view of the lack of conclusive evidence for the efficacy
of cranberry, and the serious nature of the potential harm, it is
extremely unlikely that the benefit-harm balance would be in
favour of such patients using cranberry.

The mechanism for the interaction between cranberry consti-
tuents and warfarin is not known. The suggestion that it may
involve inhibition of the cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP2C9 (by
which warfarin is predominantly metabolised),°* requires
investigation.

While not a drug interaction, it is reasonable to provide the
following information here. Interference with dipstick tests for

----- PAGE 211 -----
Cranberry

glucose and haemoglobin in urine has been reported in a study
involving 28 patients who had drunk 100 or 150 mL of low-sugar
or regular cranberry juice daily for seven weeks; ascorbic acid
in cranberry juice was reported to be the component responsible
for interference resulting in negative test results.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of cranberry during pregnancy. Doses of cranberry greatly
exceeding the amounts used in foods should not be taken during
pregnancy and lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Bioglan Cranbiotic Super; Cranberry Complex;
Cranberry Complex; Extralife Uri-Care. Canada: Cran-C;
Prostease. Hong Kong: Prostease. USA: CranAssure; Cran-
berry; Cran Support; Calcium with Magnesium; My Defense.

References

1 Kingwatanakul P, Alon US. Cranberries and urinary tract infection.
Child Hosp Q 1996; 8: 69-72.

2 Hughes BG, Lawson LD. Nutritional content of cranberry products.
Am J Hosp Pharm 1989; 46: 1129.

3. Jankowski K, Paré JRJ. Trace glycoside from cranberries (Vaccinium
oxycoccus). | Nat Prod 1983; 46: 190-193.

4 Jankowski K. Alkaloids of cranberries V. Experientia 1973; 29: 1334—
1335.

5. Siciliano AA. Cranberry. Herbalgram 1996; 38: 51-54.

6 Avorn J et al. Reduction of bacteriuria and pyuria after ingestion of
cranberry juice. JAMA 1994; 271: 751-754.

7 Reid G, Sobel JD. Bacterial adherence in the pathogenesis of urinary
tract infection: a review. Rev Infect Dis 1987; 9: 470-487.

8 Beachey EH. Bacterial adherence: adhesin—receptor interactions
mediating the attachment of bacteria to mucosal surface. J Infect Dis
1981; 143: 325-345.

9 Sobota AE. Inhibition of bacterial adherence by cranberry juice:
potential use for the treatment of urinary tract infections. J Urol 1984;
131: 1013-1016.

10 Zafiri D et al. Inhibitory activity of cranberry juice on adherence of
type 1 and type P fimbriated Escherichia coli to eucaryotic cells.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1989; 33: 92-98.

11 Ofek I et al. Anti-Escherichia coli adhesin activity of cranberry and
blueberry juices. Adv Exp Med Biol 1996; 408: 179-183.

12 Ahuja S et al. Loss of fimbrial adhesion with the addition of
Vaccinium macrocarpon to the growth medium of P-fimbriated
Escherichia coli. J Urol 1998; 159: 559-562.

13 Howell AB et al. Inhibition of the adherence of P fimbriated
Escherichia coli to uroepithelial-cell surfaces by proanthocyanidin
extracts from cranberries. N Engl ] Med 1998; 339: 1085-1086.

14 Weiss El et al. Inhibiting interspecies coaggregation of plaque bacteria

with a cranberry juice constituent. J Am Dent Assoc 1998; 129: 1719—
1723.

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

24

26

27
28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

Bomser J et al. In vitro anticancer activity of fruit extracts from
Vaccinium species. Planta Med 1996; 62: 212-216.

Wilson T et al. Cranberry extract inhibits low density lipoprotein
oxidation. Life Sci 1998; 62: 381-386.

Swartz JH, Medrek TE, Antifungal properties of cranberry juice. Appl
Microbiol 1968; 16: 1524-1527.

Jepson RG et al. Cranberries for preventing urinary tract infections
(Cochrane Review). The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
2004, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD001321.pub3.

Jepson RG et al. Cranberries for treating urinary tract infections
(Cochrane Review). The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
1998, Issue 4. Art. No.: CD001322.

Hopkins WJ et al. Reduction of bacteriuria and pyuria using
cranberry juice (letter). JAMA 1994; 272: 589.

Katz LM. Reduction of bacteriuria and pyuria using cranberry juice
(letter). JAMA 1994; 272: 589.

Foda MM ef al. Efficacy of cranberry in prevention of urinary tract
infection in a susceptible pediatric population. Can J Urol 1995; 2: 98—
102.

Haverkorn MJ, Mandigers J. Reduction of bacteriuria and pyuria
using cranberry juice (letter). JAMA 1994; 272: 590.

Walker EB et al. Cranberry concentrate: UTI prophylaxis. J Family
Pract 1997; 45: 167-168.

Schlager TA et al. Effect of cranberry juice on bacteriuria in children
with neurogenic bladder receiving intermittent catheterization. ]
Pediatr 1999; 135: 698-702.

Papas PN et al. Cranberry juice in the treatment of urinary tract
infections. Southwest Med 1966; 47: 17-20.

Rogers J. Pass the cranberry juice. Nurs Times 1991; 87: 36-37.
Kahn HD et al. Effect of cranberry juice on urine. J Am Diet Assoc
1967; 51: 251-254.

Kinney AB, Blount M. Effect of cranberry juice on urinary pH. Nurs
Res 1979; 28: 287-290.

Schultz A. Efficacy of cranberry juice and ascorbic acid in acidifying
the urine in multiple sclerosis subjects. J Commun Health Nurs 1984;
1: 159-169.

Habash MB et al. The effect of water, ascorbic acid, and cranberry
derived supplementation on human urine and uropathogen adhesion
to silicone rubber. Can J Microbiol 1999; 45: 691-694.

DuGan CR, Cardaciotto PS. Reduction of ammoniacal urine odors by
sustained feeding of cranberry juice. J Psych Nurs 1966; 8: 467-470.
Tsukada K et al. Cranberry juice and its impact on peri-stomal skin
conditions for urostomy patients. Ostomy/Wound Manage 1994; 40:
60-67.

Rosenbaum TP et al. Cranberry juice helps the problem of mucus
production in entero-uroplasties. Neurol Urodynamics 1989; 8: 344—
345.

Saltzman JR et al. Effect of hypochlorhydria due to omeprazole
treatment or atrophic gastritis on protein-bound vitamin By
absorption. J Am Coll Nutr 1994; 13: 584-591.

Soloway MS, Smith RA. Cranberry juice as a urine acidifier. JAMA
1988; 260: 1465.

Anon. Interaction between warfarin and cranberry juice: new advice.
Curr Prob Pharmacovigilance 2004; 30: 10.

Anon. Possible interaction between warfarin and cranberry juice. Curr
Prob Pharmacovigilance 2003; 29: 8.

Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Herbal Safety
News. Cranberry. http://www.mhra.gov.uk (accessed January 9, 2006).
Kilbourn JP. Interference with dipstick tests for glucose and
hemoglobin in urine by ascorbic acid in cranberry juice. Clin Chem
1987; 33: 1297.

----- PAGE 212 -----
Damiana

herbal uses, and the reputation of damiana as an aphrodisiac
is unproven. In view of the lack of toxicity data and reported
cyanogenetic and arbutin constituents, excessive use of
damiana should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Turnera diffusa Willd. ex Schult. (Turneraceae)

Synonym(s)

Turnera aphrodisiaca Ward, T. diffusa var. aphrodisiaca (Ward)
Urb.

Part(s) Used

Leaf, stem

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920
BHP 1996'0”)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Carbohydrates Gum 13.5%, starch 6%, sugars.
Cyanogenetic glycosides Tetraphyllin B."?
Phenolic glycoside Arbutin (up to 0.7%).
Tannins 3.5%. Type unspecified.

Volatile oils 0.5-1.0%. At least 20 components including 1,8-
cineole (11%), p-cymene (2%), #- and B-pinene (2%), thymol, «-
copaene, 6-cadinene and calamene. The presence of 1,8-cineole
and p-cymene has been disputed.”

Other constituents Acids (fatty, plant), alkanes (e.g. hexacosa-
nol-1 and triacontane), damianin (7%) (a bitter principle), flavone
(gonzalitosin-1), B-sitosterol, resin (6.5%).

Food Use

Damiana is used in foods and is listed by the Council of Europe as
a natural source of food flavouring (category N2). This category
indicates that damiana can be added to foodstuffs in small
quantities with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.'“'® Previously in the USA,
damiana has been approved for food use.'“*”

Herbal Use

Damiana is stated to possess antidepressant, thymoleptic, mild
purgative, stomachic and reputedly aphrodisiac properties.” It

Phenolic glycosides
HOH2C

ae Ol
OH

arbutin

Monoterpenes

5 : OH

1,8-cineole p-cymene thymol

Sesquiterpenes

@-copaene

5-cadine

calamene
Cyanogenic glycoside

HOH2C.

HP\0

tetraphyllin B

Flavonoids
OCH;
HgCO. 0. O
So ‘OCH
OH O

gonzalitosin 1

Figure 1 Selected constituents of damiana.

----- PAGE 213 -----
Damiana

has been used for depression, nervous dyspepsia, atonic constipa-
tion, coital inadequacy, and specifically for anxiety neurosis with a
predominant sexual factor.(C% C7 CC)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard reference texts
are given below.

Dried leaf 24g as an infusion three times daily©%°?

Liquid Extract of Damiana (BPC 1934) 24mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Hypoglycaemic activity has been reported in mice following both
oral and intraperitoneal administration of damiana.°) An
ethanolic extract was stated to exhibit CNS-depressant activity
although no other experimental details were available.

Figure 3 Damiana - dried drug substance.

Antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus has been
documented for a mixed herbal preparation, with some of the
activity attributed to damiana.” The same herbal preparation was
also reported to inhibit acetylcholine-induced spasm of the
isolated guinea-pig ileum, although none of the antispasmodic
activity was attributed to damiana.”

Arbutin is stated to be responsible for the urinary antiseptic
properties (see Uva-Ursi). However, the arbutin content of
damiana is much less than that quoted for uva-ursi (0.7% and 5
to 18%, respectively).

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of damiana
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

A herbal preparation containing damiana as one of the
ingredients was reported to have a favourable effect on the
symptoms of irritable bladder associated with functional and
neurohormonal disorders, and on bacterial bladder infections.”
However, because of the methodological limitations of this study,
these effects cannot be attributed to damiana.

Side-effects, Toxi

ity
There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for damiana and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Tetanus-like convulsions and paroxysms resulting in symptoms
similar to those of rabies or strychnine poisoning have been
described in one individual following the ingestion of approxi-
mately 200g damiana extract; cyanide poisoning was considered
to be a possible cause. No other reported side-effects for damiana
were located.

High doses of arbutin (e.g. 1g) are considered to be toxic,
although the concentration of arbutin documented for damiana
(1g arbutin is equivalent to more than 100g plant material) is
probably too low to warrant concerns over safety.

Contra

dications, Warnings

Excessive use should be avoided because of the presence of
cyanogenetic glycosides and arbutin.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of damiana to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that damiana has hypoglycaemic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of damiana has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data and possible
cyanogenetic constituents, doses greatly exceeding amounts used
in foods should not be taken during pregnancy or lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Bioglan Mens Super Soy/Clover; Bioglan The Blue
One; Medinat Esten; Nevaton. Canada: Damiana-Sarsaparilla
Formula. Italy: Dam; Four-Ton. Malaysia: Total Man. Spain:
Energysor. UK: Daily Fatigue Relief; Damiana and Kola
Tablets; Elixir Damiana and Saw Palmetto; Regina Royal
Concorde; Strength; Strength Tablets; Supa-Tonic Tablets;
VitAmour; Zotrim. USA: Women's Menopause Formula.

----- PAGE 214 -----
1

2

3

References

Spencer KC, Siegler DS. Tetraphyllin B from Turnera diffusa. Planta
Med 1981; 43: 175-178.

Auterhoff H, Haufel H-P. Inhaltsstoffe der damiana-droge. Arch
Pharm 1968; 301: 537-544.

Dominguez XA, Hinojosa M. Mexican medicinal plants. XXVIII
Isolation of 5-hydroxy-7,3’ ,4/-trimethoxy-flavone from Turnera
diffusa. Planta Med 1976; 30: 68-71.

Damiana

Braun JK, Malone MH. Legal highs. Clin Toxicol 1978; 12: 1-31.
Pérez RM et al. A study of the hypoglycemic effect of some Mexican
plants. J Ethnopharmacol 1984; 12: 253-262.

Jiu J. A survey of some medical plants of Mexico for selected
biological activity. Lloydia 1966; 29: 250-259.

Westendorf J. Carito-In-vitro-Untersuchungen zum Nachweis
spasmolytischer und kontraktiler Einfliisse. Therapiewoche 1982; 32:
6291-6297.

----- PAGE 215 -----
Dandelion

leaf and root. Dandelion has also been used in foods for many
years. Animal studies indicate dandelion to be of low toxicity.
However, excessive ingestion of dandelion, particularly in
amounts exceeding those normally consumed in foods,
should be avoided.

Species (Family)
Taraxacum officinale Weber (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Lion's Tooth, Taraxacum palustre (Lyons) Lam & DC., Leonto-
don taraxacum L., Taraxacum

Part(s) Used
Leaf, root

Phenols

JOG
HO

p-hydroxyphenyl acetic acid

HO.
eS
OH 4

taraxacoside fe)

Triterpenes

R
taraxasterol H
arnidiol OH
Selected constituents of dandelion.

Figure 1

tetrahydroridentin B

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 19960”?

Complete German Commission EC”
ESCOP 2003”

Martindale 35th edition'**)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G64.

Acids and phenols Caffeic acid, p-hydroxyphenylacetic acid,
chlorogenic acid," cichoric acid, monocaffeoyl tartaric acids,”
taraxacoside, linoleic acid, linolenic acid, oleic acid and palmitic
acid.

Coumarins Cichoriin and aesculin.”
Flavonoids Luteolin-7-glucoside and luteolin-7-diglucosides.”)

Minerals Potassium 4.5% in leaf, 2.45% in root.)

Sesquiterpenes

OH O-Glucosyl

°

°
taraxacolide-
B-D-glucoside
Glucosyl-O. fe)

°
taraxinic acid
B-D-glucoside

w-taraxasterol H
faradiol OH

----- PAGE 216 -----
Resin Undefined bitter complex (taraxacin).

Terpenoids Sesquiterpene lactones taraxinic acid (germacrano-

lide) esterified with glucose, and eudesmanolides.”)

Vitamins Vitamin A 14000iu/100g leaf (compared with
11.000 iu/100 g carrots).

Other constituents Carotenoids, choline, inulin, pectin,
phytosterols (e.g. sitosterol, stigmasterol, taraxasterol, homotar-
axasterol), sugars (e.g. fructose, glucose, sucrose), triterpenes (e.g.
B-amyrin, taraxol, taraxerol).

Food Use

Dandelion is used as a food, mainly in salads and soups. The
roasted root and its extract have been used as a coffee

substitute."

S) Dandelion is listed by the Council of Europe as
a natural source of food flavouring (category N2). This category
indicates that dandelion can be added to foodstuffs in small
quantities, with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.''® Previously in the USA,
dandelion has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As
Safe) (C4)

Herbal Use

Dandelion is stated to po: diuretic, laxative, cholagogue and
antirheumatic properties. It has been used for cholecystitis,
gallstones, jaundice, atonic dyspepsia with constipation, muscular
rheumatism, oliguria, and specifically for cholecystitis and
dyspepsia. The German Commission E approved use of root and
herb for disturbance of bile flow, stimulation of diuresis, loss of
appetite and dyspepsia.'(“*) Root is used in combination with
celandine herb and artichoke for epigastric discomfort due to
functional disorders of the biliary system.'C?

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf 4-10 as an infusion three times daily,“ °”

Leaf, liquid extract 4-10 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.“C%

Leaf tincture 2-5 mL.”

Dandelion 205,

Leaf, fresh juice 510 mL.'‘°”

Dried root
daily.'C® G7)

2-8¢g or by infusion or decoction three times
Root, tincture
daily.'6%°?
Liquid Extract of Taraxacum (BPC 1949) 2-8 mL.
Juice of Taraxacum (BPC 1949) 4-8 mL.

5-10mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A diuretic effect in rats and mice has been documented for
dandelion extracts, following oral administration. Herb extracts
were found to produce greater diuresis than root extracts; a dose
of 50mL (equivalent to 2g dried herb/kg body weight) produced
an effect comparable to that of furosemide 80 mg/kg. By contrast,
no significant increases in urine volume or sodium excretion were
observed in mice following oral administration of either leaf or
root extracts, or of purified fractions.°) Similarly, oral and
intravenous administration of an ethanolic extract of dandelion

root failed to produce a diuretic effect in laboratory animals.”
Moderate anti-inflammatory activity against carrageenan-

induced rat paw oedema has been documented for a dandelion

root extract. An 80% ethanol extract of root (100 mg/kg orally)

Ai HLT

Wt? 3341S 19

1

Figure 3. Dandelion — dried drug substance (leaf).

Figure 2 Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale).

13 15

Figure 4 Dandelion — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 217 -----
Dandelion

inhibited oedema by 43% in the carrageenan-induced rat paw
oedema test at 3 hours.”

Bile secretion was doubled in dogs by a decoction of fresh root
(equivalent to 5g dried plant); similar activity has been observed
for rats,‘C)

Hypoglycaemic activity has been described in normal, but not
in diabetic rabbits, following oesophageal administration of
dandelion. Doses greater than 500 mg/kg produced a significant
blood glucose concentration which had returned to normal after
24 hours. The maximum decrease produced by a dose of 2 g/kg
was reported to be 65% of the effect produced by tolbutamide
500 mg/kg. Sulfonylureas (e.g. tolbutamide) act by stimulating
pancreatic beta-cells and a similar mechanism was proposed for
dandelion.

In vitro antitumour activity has been documented for an
aqueous extract of dandelion, given by intraperitoneal injection,
in the tumour systems ddY-Ehrlich and C3H/He-MM46." The
mechanism of action was thought to be similar to that of tumour
polysaccharides such as lentinan.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
dandelion and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for dandelion
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Contact allergic reactions to dandelion have been documen-
ted"! and animal studies have reported dandelion to have a
weak sensitising capacity.” Sesquiterpene lactones are thought to
be the allergenic principles in dandelion.“ These compounds
contain an exocyclic o&-methylene B-lactone moiety, which is
thought to be a prerequisite for allergenic activity of sesquiterpene
lactones.

The acute toxicity of dandelion appears to be low, with LD so
values (mice, intraperitoneal injection) estimated at 36.8 g/kg and
28.8 g/kg for the root and herb, respectively. No visible signs of
toxicity were observed in rabbits administered dandelion 3, 4, 5
and 6g/kg body weight by mouth for up to seven days.” In
addition, no behavioural changes were recorded.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Treatment with dandelion is contraindicated for patients with
occlusion of bile duct, gall bladder empyema and obstructive
ileus.“ Dandelion may precipitate an allergic reaction in
susceptible individuals, although no reports following the
ingestion of dandelion have been documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of dandelion to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that dandelion has diuretic and hypo-
glycaemic activities.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of dandelion during pregnancy, provided that doses do not
greatly exceed the amounts used in foods.

Hepatofalk. Italy: Varicofit. Malaysia: Dandelion Complex.
Russia: Tonsilgon N (Tousuaron H). South Africa: Amara.
Spain: Diurette. Switzerland: Boldocynara; Demonatur
Gouttes pour le foie et la bile; Gastrosan; Heparfelien; Strath
Gouttes pour les reins et la vessie; Tisane hepatique et biliaire.
UK: Adios; Aqualette; Aqualette; Backache; Boldex; Culpeper
DeTox Tea; Fenneherb Slim Aid; HealthAid Boldo-Plus;
Herbulax; HRI Water Balance; Napiers Slimming Tablets;
Natravene; Natural Herb Tablets; Nervous Dyspepsia Tablets;
Out-of-Sorts; Reducing (Slimming) Tablets; Rheumatic Pain;
Stomach Mixture; Uvacin; Uvacin; Weight Loss Aid; Wind &
Dyspepsia Relief. USA: Liver Formula Herbal Blend.

References

1 Clifford MN et al. The chlorogenic acids content of coffee substitutes.
Food Chem 1987; 24: 99-107.

2 Williams CA et al. Flavonoids, cinnamic acids and coumarins from the
different tissues and medicinal preparations of Taraxacum officinale.
Phytochem 1996; 42: 121-127.

3 Hook | e¢ al. Evaluation of dandelion for diuretic activity and
variation in potassium content. Int J Pharmacog 1993; 31: 29-34.

4 Hausen BM. Taraxinsaure-1/-O-B-p-glucopyranosid, das
kontaktallergen des l6wenzahns (Taraxacum officinale Wiggers).
Dermatosen 1982; 30: 51-53.

5 Hansel R et al. Sequiterpenlacton-B-b-glucopyranoside sowie ein
neues eudesmanolid aus Taraxacum officinale. Phytochem 1980; 19:
857-861.

6 Racz-Kotilla et al. The action of Taraxacum officinale extracts on the
body weight and diuresis of laboratory animals. Planta Med 1974; 26:
212-217.

7 Tita B et al. Taraxacum officinale W.: Pharmacological effect of
ethanol extract. Pharmacol Res 1993; 27: 23-24.

8 Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-29.

9 Akhtar MS et al. Effects of Portulaca oleracae (kulfa) and Taraxacum
officinale (dhudhal) in normoglycaemic and alloxan-treated
hyperglycaemic rabbits. J Pak Med Assoc 1985; 35: 207-210.

10 Baba K e¢ al. Antitumor activity of hot water extract of dandelion,
Taraxacum officinale — correlation between antitumor activity and
timing of administration. Yagugaku Zasshi 1981; 101: 538-543.

11 Hausen BM, Schulz KH. Allergische kontaktdermatitis durch
léwenzahn (Taraxacum officinale Wiggers). Dermatosen 1978; 26: 198.

12 Davies MG, Kersey PJW. Contact allergy to yarrow and dandelion.
Contact Dermatitis 1986; 14: 256-257.

----- PAGE 218 -----
Devil’s Claw

On the basis of randomised controlled trials involving
patients with arthritic and rheumatic disorders, devil’s claw
extracts appear to have a favourable short-term adverse effect
profile when taken in recommended doses. Mild, transient
gastrointestinal effects, such as diarrhoea and flatulence, may
occur. Chronic toxicity studies and clinical experience with
prolonged use are lacking, so the effects of long-term use are
not known. On this basis, and in view of the possible
cardioactivity of devil’s claw, devil’s claw should not be used
for long periods of time at doses higher than recommended.
Further studies involving large numbers of patients are
required.

Species (Family)

Harpagophytum procumbens (Burch.) DC. ex Meissn. (Pedalia-
ceae)

Synonym(s)

Harpagophytum, Harpagophytum burchelii Decne, Grapple
Plant, Wood Spider

Part(s) Used

Secondary root tuber

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%

BHMA 20030

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007'08)

Complete German Commission E'”
ESCOP 2003079

Martindale 35th edition'©**

Ph Eur 20078?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Devil's claw is not included in the GSL.'°?”

Constituents

See also General Reference G2.

Carbohydrates Fructose, galactose, glucose and myo-inositol
(monosaccharides), raffinose, stachyose (46%) and sucrose
(oligosaccharides) .\?

Diterpenes (+)-8,11,13-totaratriene-12,13-diol and (+)-8,11,13-
abietatrien-12-ol.”)

Iridoids Harpagoside (1-3%), harpagide, 8-p-coumaroylharpa-
gide, 8-feruloylharpagide, 8-cinnamylmyoporoside, 6’-O-p-cou-
maroylharpagide, 6'-p-coumaroylprocumbide, and pagoside.°~)
p-Coumaroyl esters occur as E and Z isomers.”

Phenylpropanoids Acteoside and isoacteoside, 6-O-acetylacteo-
side,* 2,6-O-diacetylacteoside.”

Other constituents Amino acids, flavonoids (e.g. kaempferol,
luteolin), triterpenoids, sterols,“4 97)

Other plant parts The flower, stem and ripe fruit are reported to
be devoid of harpagoside; the leaf contains traces of iridoids.®

Quality of plant material and commercial products

According to the British and European Pharmacopoeias, devil's

claw root consists of the cut and dried tuberous secondary roots
of H. procumbens DC. It contains not less than 1.2% of
harpagoside, calculated with reference to the dried drug.(@8" O*
As with other herbal medicinal products, there is variation in the
qualitative and quantitative composition of commercial devil!
claw root preparations.

Some commercial extracts of devil's claw root may have been
prepared not only from the roots of H. procumbens, but also from
the roots of H. zeyheri, which are similar macroscopically.)
However, the two species differ in the concentration of the
constituents harpagoside and 8-p-coumaroylharpagide. On this
basis it has been stated that the species can be distinguished
chemically by determining the ratio harpagoside : 8-p-coumaroyl-
harpagide. The ratio is stated to be near one for H. zeyheri and
between 20 and 38 for H. procumbens which has a low 8-p-
coumaroylharpagide content.’ While this ratio may be sufficient
for chemotaxonomic differentiation, it may not be adequate for
quality control.

Other studies have demonstrated that the harpagoside content
of several powdered dry extracts of devil's claw from different
manufacturers varies, and that each extract has a unique profile of
other constituents." The harpagoside content of commercial
extracts of H. procumbens has been reported to range from 0.8—
2.3%.

oe

----- PAGE 219 -----
Devil’s Claw

Food Use
Devil

claw is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Devil's claw is stated to possess anti-inflammatory, antirheumatic,
analgesic, sedative and diuretic properties. Traditionally, it has

Diterpenes
OH
no R! R?
14 > (+)-8,11,13-totaratriene OH isopropyl
eR “12,13-diol
(+)-8,11,13-abietatrien isopropyl H
-12-0l
Iridoids
OH OH
oO
ROW:
O-glucose R O-glucose
harpagoside trans-cinnamoy! procumbide
harpagide H
fe)
N OH
R? ‘OR®
Re R' Re R? Ri RS Re
8-p-coumaroylharpagide OH OH H OH H H
8-feruloylharpagide OH OH OCH; OH H H
8-cinnamoylmyoporoside H H H H OH H
6’-p-coumaroylharpagide OH OH H OH H — p-coumaroyl
fe) OH
0.
Os OH
HO’ OH
Ppagoside °
Figure 1 Selected constituents of devil’s claw.
Phenylpropanoids
OH
R906
R°0" OH
°
oR!
CHg (e)
HO.
ot OH R! R2 RS
acteoside H caffeoyl H
isoacteoside H H caffeoyl
6-O-acetyl-acteoside H caffeoyl acetyl
2,6-di-O-acetyl-acteoside acetyl caffeoyl acetyl

Figure 2 Selected constituents of devil’s claw.

been used as a stomachic and a bitter tonic, and for arthritis, gout,
myalgia, fibrositis, lumbago, pleurodynia and rheumatic disea-
se,(C? GCS, G32,G6) Modern use of devil's claw is focused on its
use in the treatment of rheumatic and arthritic conditions, and
low back pain.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in older
and more contemporary standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Painful arthrosis and tendonitis

1.5-3 g dried tuber as a decoction, three times daily; 1-3 g drug or
equivalent aqueous or hydroalcoholic extracts;‘” liquid extract

1-3 mL (1:1, 25% ethanol) three times daily.'C®

Figure 3 Devil’s claw (Harpagophytum procumbens).

Figure 4 Devil’s claw — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 220 -----
Loss of appetite or dyspepsia

Dried tuber 0.5 g as a decoction, three times daily.'°

Tincture 1 mL (1:5, 25% ethanol) three times daily.'C®

Clinical trials of devil's claw root extracts for the treatment of
low back pain typically have tested oral doses ranging from 2000-
4500 mg daily, in two or three divided doses (equivalent to less
than 30mg up to 100mg harpagoside daily, depending on the
particular extract), for four to 20 weeks.'* In a clinical trial in
osteoarthritis, participants received capsules containing powdered
cryoground devil's claw root 2610 mg daily for four months."

Pharmacological Actions

The active constituents of devil's claw are widely held to be the
iridoid glucosides although, of these, it has not been definitively
established whether harpagoside is the most important pharma-
cologically active constituent of the whole extract. Other
compounds present in the root may contribute to the pharmaco-
‘51 Tt has also been sugge:
that harpagogenin, formed by in vivo acid hydrolysis of
harpagoside, may have biological activity.”

ogical activities of devil's claw. ed

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics Transformation of the iridoids harpagide,
harpagoside and 8-O-(p-coumaroyl)-harpagide into the pyridine
monoterpene alkaloid aucubinine B, chemically or by human
intestinal bacteria in vitro, has been documented.'!* !”) However,
it is not known if aucubinine B is formed in vivo by intestinal
bacteria and, therefore, whether it contributes to the pharmaco-
ogical activity of devil's claw.”

Anti-inflammatory and analgesic activities Animal studies of
the anti-inflammatory and analgesic activities of devil's claw have
reported conflicting results. Activity appears to differ depending
on the route of administration of devil's claw, and the model of
inflammation, whether acute or subacute. Also, studies have
assessed the effects of different preparations of H. procumbens
(e.g. aqueous extracts and ethanolic extracts) and it is important
to consider this when interpreting the results.

In controlled experiments in rats, a 60% ethanol extract of H.
procumbens roots injected (compartment and site not specified) at
doses of 25, 50 and 100mg/kg body weight daily for four days
beginning five days after sub-plantar injection of Freund's
adjuvant produced a significantly greater antinociceptive response
in the hot-plate test and significantly reduced paw oedema than
did control (distilled water) on days 6-8 after induction of
experimental arthritis (p < 0.01 for all).°° Similar results were
obtained when administration of H. procumbens extract was
initiated 20 days after sub-plantar injection of Freund's adjuvant
and continued for 20 days, with tests for antinociceptive and anti-
inflammatory activity performed on four occasions during this
period.

Pretreatment with a dried aqueous extract of devil's claw root at
doses of 100mg/kg and above, administered intraperitoneally,
resulted in peripheral analgesic activity demonstrated by a

significant reduction in the number of writhings induced by
16}

acetic acid in mice.''® However, no effect was observed in the hot-
plate test, indicating a lack of central analgesic activity with
devil's claw extract.

The peripheral analgesic properties of intraperitoneal dried
aqueous extract of devil's claw have been confirmed in other

Devil’s Claw

s of 400 mg/kg and above. A subsequent series of
experiments found that administration of an aqueous extract of
H. procumbens root at doses of 200-800 mg/kg body weight
intraperitoneally resulted in significantly greater antinociceptive
effects than did control in both the hot-plate and acetic-acid
induced writhings tests in mice (p < 0.05 versus control) and, at a
dose of 400 or 800 mg/kg body weight, in a significant reduction in
egg-albumin induced hind-paw inflammation in rats, compared
with control (p < 0.05).

In contrast, other studies have reported that dried aqueous
extract of devil's claw administered orally had no effect on
carrageenan- or Mycobacterium butyricum- (Freund's adjuvant)
induced oedema in rat paw, whereas both indometacin and aspirin
isplayed significant anti-inflammatory activity.°??>
ried aqueous extract of devil's claw administered by intraper-
itoneal injection demonstrated significant activity in the carra-
geenan-induced oedema test in rats, an acute model of
inflammation." The effect on oedema was dose-dependent for
of devil's claw extract 100-400 mg/kg, and reached a
maximum three hours after carrageenan injection. Other studies
n rats have reported significant reductions in oedema using the
same model following pretreatment with intraperitoneal’? and

intraduodenal, but not oral, dried aqueous extract of devil's
(24)
aw.

studies for dos

However,

los

C

Anti-inflammatory activity of harpagoside has been demon-
strated in experimental models, including the croton oil-induced
granuloma pouch test, and for harpagogenin, the aglucone of
harpagoside, in the croton oil-induced granuloma pouch test and
in formalin-induced arthritis in rats.°°)

Studies have also reported peripheral analgesic and anti-
inflammatory properties for the related species Harpogophytum
zeyheri.°) Animal studies using aqueous extracts of devil's claw
have suggested that the extract may be inactivated by passage
through the acid environment of the stomach.''** One study
compared the anti-inflammatory activities of aqueous devil's claw
extract administered by different routes. Intraperitoneal and
intraduodenal administration led to a significant reduction in
the carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema test, but there was no
effect following oral administration.” In another study, aqueous
levil's claw extract pretreated with hydrochloric acid to mimic
acid conditions in the stomach showed no activity in pharmaco-
logical models of pain and inflammation."

A clear mechanism of action for the purported anti-inflamma-
tory effects of devil's claw has yet to be established. In vitro, devil's
claw (100 mg/mL) had no significant effect on prostaglandin (PG)
synthetase activity, whereas indometacin (316 ,1g/mL) and aspirin
(437 pg/mL) caused 50% inhibition of this enzyme.? In other in
vitro studies in human whole blood samples, devil's claw extracts
and fractions of extracts were tested for their effects
thromboxane B2 (TXB,) and leukotriene (LT) biosynthesis.
TXB, is an end-product of arachidonic acid metabolism by the
cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1) pathway. Inhibition appeared to be
lependent on the harpagoside content of the extracts or
fractions.°° An aqueous extract of H. procumbens inhibited

(26)

lipopolysaccharide-induced enhancement of cyclooxygenase-2
activity, resulting in suppression of PGE synthesis
experiments using the mouse fibroblast cell line L929.°” In the
same system, the extract inhibited inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS) mRNA expression, resulting in suppression of nitric oxide
production. Inhibition of iNOS expression by an aqueous extract
of H. procumbens roots, resulting in suppression of nitrite
production, has also been described following experiments in rat
renal mesangial cells. The effect was observed with a harpagoside-

in in-vitro

----- PAGE 221 -----
Devil’s Claw

free extract and with an extract containing a high concentration
(27%) of harpagoside, but not with extracts containing around
2% harpagoside, indicating that high concentrations of harpago-
side as well as other concentrations are necessary to bring about
the effect.°*)

Harpagoside (100,1mol/L), but not harpagide (100 mol/L),
inhibited calcium ionophore A23187-stimulated release of TXB»
from human platelets.” However, harpagoside and harpagide
had no significant inhibitory effect on calcium ionophore A23187-
stimulated release of PGE, and LTC, from mouse peritoneal
macrophages.)

Other preclinical studies have described effects for devil's claw
extracts and/or isolated constituents on other pathways involved
in inflammatory processes. In vitro inhibition of tumour-necrosis-
factor-a (TNF-«) synthesis in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated
human monocytes by a hydroalcoholic extract of devil's claw
(SteiHap 69) has also been documented.® Inhibitory activity
against human leukocyte elastase (a serine proteinase involved in
inflammatory processes) has been reported for an aqueous extract
of H. procumbens roots (drug to extract ratio 1.5-2.5:1) and the
isolated constituents 6’-O-acetylacteoside, isoacteoside, 8-p-cou-
maroylharpagide, pagoside and caffeic acid, with ICso values of
542, 47, 179, 179, 154 and 86 g/mL, respectively. The ICso values
for several other constituents, including acteoside and harpagoside
were higher than 300ug/mL (4). An ethanol extract of H.
procumbens significantly reduced IL-1B-induced production of
several matrix metalloproteinase enzymes (MMPs) in human
chondrocytes.°” (In inflammatory diseases, there is increased
production of cytokines such as IL-1 and TNF-a, which results
in an increased production of MMPs which breakdown the
extracellular cartilage matrix.)

Other activities Crude methanolic extracts of devil's claw have
been shown to be cardioactive in vitro and in vivo in animals. A
protective action against ventricular arrhythmias induced by
aconitine, calcium chloride and epinephrine (adrenaline)/chloro-
form has been reported for devil's claw given intraperitoneally or
added to the reperfusion medium.°?> The crude extract was
found to exhibit greater activity than pure harpagoside.°” In
isolated rabbit heart, low concentrations of a crude methanolic
extract had mild negative chronotropic and positive inotropic
effects,’ whereas high concentrations caused a marked negative
inotropic effect with reduction in coronary blood flow.°?) In
anaesthetised dogs, harpagoside administered orally by gavage
caused a decrease in mean aortic pressure and arterial and
pulmonary capillary pressure.)

In vitro, harpagoside has been shown to decrease the contractile
response of smooth muscle to acetylcholine and barium chloride
on guinea-pig ileum and rabbit jejunum. Harpagide was found to
increase this response at lower concentrations, but antagonised it
at higher concentrations.°* On the basis of these studies in
isolated smooth muscle, it was suggested that the constituents of

devil's claw may influence mechanisms regulating calcium
G5)

influx.

Methanolic extracts have also exhibited hypotensive properties
in normotensive rats, causing a decrease in arterial blood pressure
following oral doses of 300 mg/kg and 400 mg/kg body weight.)

Aqueous fractions derived from an extract of devil's claw root
(drug to extract ratio 2:1 containing 2.6% harpagoside) showed
antioxidant activity in an in-vitro assay based on ability to
scavenge 2,2'-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic —acid)-
derived radicals.°° However, harpagoside showed only weak
antioxidant activity. In mice, a methanol extract of H. procum-

bens root tubers applied topically to shaven skin 30 minutes before
application of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), a
stimulator of COX-2 expression, led to a significant reduction
in COX- 2 protein when assessed four hours after TPA adminis-
tration.°” The extract did not have any effect on TPA-induced
activation of nuclear factor-KB, but inhibited TPA-induced
activation of activator protein-1, which is involved in the
regulation of COX-2 in mouse skin. Overexpression of COX-2
is thought to be involved in tumour promotion.

Antidiabetic activity has been described for an aqueous extract
of H. procumbens root in in vivo experiments in rats with
streptozotocin-induced diabetes mellitus.? The extract signifi-
cantly reduced blood glucose concentrations in both fasted
normoglycaemic rats and fasted diabetic rats when administered
intraperitoneally at doses of 800 mg/kg body weight.

Two diterpene constituents ((+)-8,11,13-totaratriene-12,13-diol
and (+)-8,11,13-abietatrien-12-ol) isolated using bioassay-guided
fractionation from a petroleum ether extract of H. procumbens
root were found to be active against a chloroquine-sensitive (D10)
and a chloroquine-resistant (K1) strain of Plasmodium falciparum
in vitro (ICso < 1 pg/mL).

Devil's claw extracts possess weak antifungal activity against
Penicillium digitatum and Botrytis cinerea.°*

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics There is little published information on the
pharmacokinetics of devil's claw extracts in humans. A pharma-
cokinetic study involving a small number of healthy male
volunteers 3) measured plasma harpagoside concentrations
after oral administration of devil's claw extract (WS1531 contain-
harpagoside) 600, 1200 and 1800mg as film-coated
» Maximal plasma concentrations of harpagoside were
reached after 1.3-1.8 hours, and were 8.2ng/mL and 27.8 ng/mL
for doses of harpagoside of 108 and 162mg, respectively
(corresponding to 1200 and 1800mg devil's claw extract,
respectively). Other studies involving small numbers of healthy
male volunteers indicated that the half-life ranged between 3.7 and
6.4 hours. Other results suggested that there may be low oral
absorption or a considerable first-pass effect with devil's claw
extract, although this needs further investigation.°

n

Pharmacodynamics A _ study involving healthy volunteers
investigated the effects on eicosanoid production of orally
administered devil's claw (four 500-mg capsules of powder,
containing 3% glucoiridoids, daily for 21 days). No statistically
significant differences on PGE, TXB, 6-keto-PGF,,, and LTBy
were observed following the period of devil's claw administration,
compared with baseline values. By contrast, in a subsequent study
involving whole blood samples taken from healthy male
volunteers, a biphasic decrease in basal cysteinyl-leukotriene
(Cys-LT) biosynthesis, compared with baseline values, was
observed following oral administration of devil's claw extract
(WS1531 containing, Of harpagoside) 600, 1200 and 1800 mg as
film-coated tablets.”

Therapeutic activity The efficacy and effectiveness of devil's claw
have been investigated in around 20 clinical studies involving
patients with rheumatic and arthritic conditions, and low back
pain."!* These studies have involved different methodological
designs, including several uncontrolled studies, and different
preparations of devil's claw, including crude drug and aqueous
extracts. Evaluating the evidence is further complicated as
preparations tested in clinical trials typically have been standar-

----- PAGE 222 -----
dised for their harpagoside content and, although harpagoside is
believed to contribute to activity, it is not yet clear to what extent
and which other constituents are important. Therefore, at present,
there is insufficient evidence to draw definitive conclusions
regarding the efficacy of specific devil's claw preparations, and
because of the differences in the pharmaceutical quality of
individual preparations, general conclusions on efficacy cannot be
drawn.)

A systematic review of the quality of clinical trials involving
devil's claw found that although the results of some studies have
provided evidence for the effectiveness of certain devil's claw
preparations, the quality of evidence was not sufficient to support
the use of any of the available products.”

A systematic review of 12 controlled, randomised or quasi-
randomised trials of H. procumbens preparations in patients with
osteoarthritis (5 trials), low back pain (4 trials) and mixed pain
conditions (3 trials) found differing levels of evidence for the
ifferent H. procumbens preparations assessed. There was
evidence (from two trials involving a total of 325 participants)
that an aqueous extract of H. procumbens administered orally at a
dose equivalent to harpagoside 50 mg daily for four weeks was
iS
e

d

superior to placebo in reducing pain in patients with acute
»pisodes of chronic non-specific low-back pain.''*) There was also
vidence (from one trial for each) that the same extract
administered orally at a dose equivalent to harpagoside 100 mg
daily for four weeks was superior to placebo, and at a dose
equivalent to harpagoside 60mg daily for six weeks was not
inferior to rofecoxib 12.5 mg daily, in reducing pain in patients
ith acute episodes of chronic non-specific low-back pain. There
was evidence that powdered H. procumbens plant material at a
dose equivalent to 57 mg harpagoside daily for 16 weeks was not
inferior to diacerhein. Overall, however, the limited amount of
data and heterogeneous nature of the available studies, indicate
that further randomised controlled trials assessing well-charac-
terised H. procumbens preparations and involving sufficient
numbers of patients are required.
Several of the trials mentioned above are discussed in more

z

detail below.
A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving
118 patients with acute exacerbations of chronic low back pain
igated the effects of devil's claw extract 800 mg three times
daily (equivalent to 50mg harpagoside daily) for four weeks.“
There was no statistically significant difference between the devi
claw and placebo groups in the primary outcome measure —
consumption of the opioid analgesic tramadol over weeks 2-4 of
the study — among the 109 patients who completed the study. This
was an unusual choice of primary outcome measure as it gives no
direct indication of the degree of pain experienced by participants.
There was a trend towards improvement in a modified version of
the Arhus Low Back Pain Index (a measure of pain, disability and
physical impairment) for devil's claw recipients compared with
placebo recipients, although this did not reach statistical
significance. A greater proportion of patients in the devil's claw
group were pain-free at the end of the study, although this was
only a secondary outcome measure.

On the basis of these findings, a subsequent randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 197 patients with
exacerbations of low back pain tested the effects of two doses of
devil's claw (WS1531) extract against placebo.“ Participants
received devil's claw extract 600 mg or 1200 mg daily (equivalent to
50mg and 100 mg harpagoside daily, respectively), or placebo, for
four weeks. There was a statistically significant difference (p =
0.027) between devil's claw and placebo with respect to the

inves

Devil’s Claw

primary outcome measure — the number of patients who were
pain-free without tramadol for at least five days during the last
week of the study. However, numbers of patients who were pain-
free were low (3, 6 and 10 for placebo, devil's claw 600 mg daily
and devil's claw 1200 mg daily, respectively). Furthermore, this is a
non-standard outcome measure. Arhus Low Back Pain Index
scores improved significantly in all three groups, compared with
baseline values, although there was no statistically significant
difference between groups.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study
involving patients with non-specific low back pain, 65 participants
received devil's claw extract (LI-174, Rivoltan), or placebo, 480 mg
twice daily (equivalent to 24mg harpagoside daily) for four
weeks. There was a significant improvement (p < 0.001) in
visual analogue scale (VAS) s
claw group, but not the placebo group, compared with baseline
" treatment. Differences in VAS
scores between the two groups were statistically significant after
four weeks' treatment (p < 0.001). Significant differences between
the two groups in favour of devil's claw after four weeks’ treatment
were also observed with several other parameters, including
muscle stiffness and muscular ischaemic pain.

A small number of studies has compared the efficacy of devil's
claw with that of conventional pharmaceutical agents in the
treatment of low back pain. In a randomised, double-blind, pilot
trial, 88 participants with acute exacerbations of low back pain
received an aqueous extract of devil's claw (Doloteffin; drug to
5:1) 2400mg daily in three divided doses
(equivalent to 60mg harpagoside daily), or rofecoxib (Vioxx)
12.5mg daily for six weeks.“° At the end of this period,
compared with baseline values, there were improvements in Arhus
Low Back Pain Index scores, health assessment qu
in the numbers of pain-free patients for both
groups. There were no statistically significant differences between
groups for any of the outcome measures but, because the study
did not include sufficient numbers of patients, these findings do
not demonstrate clinical equivalence between the two treat-

‘ores for muscle pain in the devil's

values, after two and four weeks

extract ratio 1.5.

ionnaire

scores, and increase:

ments.“

A randomised, double-blind, pilot trial in which 88 participants
with acute exacerbations of low back pain received an aqueous
extract of devil's claw (Doloteffin), or rofecoxib (Vioxx) for six
weeks offered participants continuing treatment with devil's claw
aqueous extract two tablets three times daily for up to one year
after the six-week pilot study. Participants were not aware of their
initial study group (i.e. devil's claw extract or rofecoxib) until
towards the end of the one-year follow-up study.” In total, 38
and 35 participants who had previously received devil's claw and
rofecoxib, respectively, participated in the follow-up study, and
underwent assessment every six weeks. After 24 and 54 weeks, 53
and 43 participants, respectively, remained in the study. There were
no convincing differences between the two groups (i.e. those who
previously received devil's claw and those who received rofecoxib)
with respect to pain scores, use of additional analgesic medica-
tion, Arhus Index scores and health assessment questionnaire
scores.

Furthermore, the uncontrolled design of the follow-up study
would have precluded any definitive conclusions regarding
differences between the two groups.

A randomised, double-blind trial compared the efficacy of
devil's claw extract with that of diacerein in 122 patients with
osteoarthritis of the knee and_hip.''
powdered cryoground devil's claw (Harpadol) 2.61¢ daily, or
diacerein 100 mg daily, for four months.

Participants received

----- PAGE 223 -----
Devil’s Claw

VAS scores for spontaneous pains improved significantly in
both groups, compared with baseline values, and there were no
differences between devil's claw and diacerein with respect to VAS
scores. In a placebo-controlled study involving 89 patients with
rheumatic complaints, devil's claw recipients (who received
powdered crude drug 2 g daily for two months) showed significant
improvements in sensitivity to pain and in motility (as measured
by the finger-to-floor distance), compared with placebo recipi-
ents, 4®)

Several, open, uncontrolled, post-marketing surveillance stu-
dies“? have assessed the effects of devil's claw preparations in
patients with rheumatic and arthritic disorders, and back pain.
These studies typically have reported improvements in pain scores
at the end of the treatment period, compared with baseline values.
However, the design of these studies (i.e. no control group) does
not allow any concl
claw in these conditions as there are alternative explanations for
the observed effects.

Another study involved 45 patients with osteo- or rheumatoid
arthritis who received devil's claw root extract 2.46 g daily for two
weeks in addition to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
(NSAID) treatment, followed by devil's claw extract alone, for
four weeks. It was reported that there were no statistically
significant changes in pain intensity and duration of morning
stiffness during the period of treatment with devil's claw extract
alone. In subgroups of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and
those with osteoarthritis, small decreases were observed in
concentrations of C-reactive protein and creatinine, respectively.
The design of this study in terms of the treatment regimen
(NSAID followed by devil's claw extract without a wash-out
period), also precludes definitive conclusions about the effects of
devil's claw preparations.

sions to be drawn on the effects of devil's

Side-effects, Toxicity

The mechanism of action of devil's claw remains unclear, in
particular, whether it has significant effects on the mediators of
acute inflammation. Data from in vitro and clinical studies in this
regard do not yet give a clear picture (see Pharmacological
Actions, In vitro and animal studies and Clinical studies,
Pharmacodynamics). It has been stated that adverse effects
associated with the use of NSAIDs are unlikely to occur with
devil's claw, even during long-term treatment.'0% ©’ While there
are no documented reports of gastrointestinal bleeding or peptic
ulcer associated with the use of devil's claw, the latter statement
requires confirmation. Use of devil's claw in gastric and duodenal
ulcer is contraindicated, although this appears to be because of
the drug's bitter properties.'©"°

Clinical data

Randomised, placebo-controlled trials involving patients with

devil's claw (Doloteffin; drug to extract ratio 1.5-2.5:1) 2400 mg
daily in three divided doses (equivalent to 60mg harpagoside
daily), or rofecoxib (Vioxx) 12.5mg daily for six weeks.“ In
total, 28 (32%) participants (14 in each group) experienced
adverse events, most commonly gastrointestinal complaints (9 in
each group).

In a follow-up study, participants in the six-week pilot study
were offered continuing treatment with devil's claw aqueous
extract two tablets three times daily for up to one year.
Participants were not aware of their initial study group (
devil's claw extract or rofecoxib) until towards the end of the one-
year follow-up study.” In total, 38 and 35 participants who had
previously received devil's claw and_ rofecoxib, respectively,
participated in the follow-up study and, after 24 and 54 weeks,
a total of 53 and 43 participants, respectively, remained in the
study. Overall, 17 (23%) of the 73 participants in the follow-up
study experienced a total of 21 adverse events. Of these, the
causality for three events was classified (by a physician not
involved in the study) as ‘likely’ (one allergic skin reaction) or
‘possible’ (diarrhoea, acid 'hiccup') with respect to devil's claw
treatment. Five participants (7%) withdrew from the study
because of adverse events.

In a randomised, controlled trial comparing devil's claw extract
with diacerein in patients with osteoarthritis, numbers of patients
ending the study prematurely because of suspected adverse drug
reactions were 8 and 14 for devil's claw and diacerein recipients,
respectively." In total, 26 diacerein recipients and 16 dev
recipients reported one or more adverse events (p = 0.042). The
numbers of adverse events attributed to the treatment was
significantly lower for devil's claw than for diacerein (10 versus
21; p = 0.017). The most frequently reported adverse event,
diarrhoea, occurred in 8.1% and 26.7% of devil's claw and
diacerein recipients, respectively.

Several, open, uncontrolled studies,°! >?
the effects of devil's claw preparations in patients with arthritic
disorders and back pain, have reported data on adverse events. In
an open, uncontrolled, multicentre, surveillance study involving
patients with arthrosis of the hip or knee, 75 participants received
tablets containing an aqueous extract of the secondary tubers of
devil's claw (Doloteffin; drug extract ratio = 1.5-2.5:1) at a
dosage of two 400mg tablets three times daily (equivalent to
50 mg_ iridoidglyco: as harpagoside) for 12
During the study, four (5%) participants experienced
adverse events (dyspeptic complaints, 2; sensation of fullness, 1;
panic attack, 1), although none stopped treatment with devil's
claw. Causality was assessed as ‘possible’ for two of these events.
In a similar open, uncontrolled, multicentre study, 130 partici
pants with chronic non-radicular back pain received tablets
containing 480 mg devil's claw extract (LI-174; drug extract ratio
= 4.4-5: 1) at a dosage of one tablet twice daily for eight weeks.°”)
Overall, (10%) participants withdrew from the study for

claw

which have assessed

des, calculated

weeks.)

rheumatic and arthritic conditions who have received devil's claw

for four weeks have reported mil.

events were reported, although one
study because of tachycardia."
A small number of reports of ran

extracts or powdered drug at approximately recommended doses

, transient gastrointestinal

symptoms (such as diarrhoea, flatulence) in a small proportion
(less than 10%) of devil's claw recipients.

845) No serious adverse

patient withdrew from one

omi:

od trials comparing the

effects of devil's claw preparations with those of standard

pharmaceutical agents has included

randomised, double-blind, pilot trial,

data on adverse events. In a
88 participants with acute

exacerbations of low back pain received an aqueous extract of

various reasons, including no apparent improvement in
condition. No serious adverse events were reported, but

their
three

partipants reported minor adverse events (bloating, insomnia and
outbreaks of sweating). In a post-marketing surveillance study, 250
patients with non-specific low back pain or osteoarthritic pain of
the knee or hip received an aqueous extract of H. procumbens
(Doloteffin) at an oral dose equivalent to harpagoside 60 mg daily
in three divided doses for eight weeks in addition to any existing
treatment and/or additional analgesic medicines as required. Fifty
participants experienced adverse events; most commonly gastro-
intestinal complaints (1 = 22); two participants experienced
allergic skin reactions.” In 27 participants, the adverse event was

----- PAGE 224 -----
Devil’s Claw

considered by an independent investigator to be possibly (n = 11),
likely (15) or certainly (1) related to ingestion of devil's claw.

In another open, uncontrolled study, one patient withdrew after
four days' treatment with devil's claw aqueous extract 1.23 g daily
because of several symptoms, including frontal headache, tinnitus,
anorexia and loss of taste.°”

There is an isolated report of conjunctivitis, rhinitis and Thali AniitCars Guetaamn Comply letsbal Auiviiat
respiratory symptoms in a 50-year-old woman who hy ad experi- Formula; Lifesystem Herbal Formula 1 Arthritic Aid; Prost-1.
enced chronic occupational exposure to devil's daw. Czech iRejinellten Reinemmenidis; Ci, Feazen Aviarliyann,
Germany: Dr Wiemanns Rheumatonikum. Italy: Bodyguard;
Nevril; Pik Gel. Malaysia: Celery Plus. Spain: Dolosul;
Acute and subacute toxicity tests in rodents have demonstrated Natusor Harpagosinol.
low toxicity of devil's claw extracts. In a study in mice, the acute
oral lethal dose (LD) LDo and LDso were greater than 13.5 g/kg

Preclinical data

body weight.?) In rats, clinical, haematological and gross References
pathological findings were unremarkable following administration 1 Ziller KH, Franz G. Analysis of the water-soluble fraction from the
of devil's claw extract 7.5 g/kg by mouth for seven days. Hepatic roots of Harpagophytum procumbens. Planta Med 1979; 37: 340-348.

2. Clarkson C et al. In vitro antiplasmodial activity of abietana and
totarane diterpenes isolated from Harpagophytum procumbens
(Devil's claw). Planta Med 2003; 69: 720-724.

effects (liver weight, and concentrations of microsomal protein
and several liver enzymes) were not observed following oral

treatment with devil's claw extract 2 g/kg for seven days.“ Other Kikuchi T et al. New itidoid glucosides from Harpagophytum
studies in mice have reported acute oral acute intravenous LDo procumbens DC. Chem Pharm Bull 1983; 31: 2296-2301.

values of greater than 4.64g/kg and greater than 1g/kg, 4 Boje K et al. New and known iridoid- and phenylethanoid glycosides
respectively.°” For an extract containing harpagoside 85%, acute from Harpagophytum procumbens and their in vitro inhibition of
oral LDo, acute intravenous LDg and acute intravenous LDso human leukocyte elastase. Planta Med 2003; 69: 820-825.

values were greater than 4.64g/kg, 395 mg/kg and 511 mg/kg, 5. Seger C et al. LC-DAD-MS/SPE-NMR hyphenation. A tool for the
res ectively. 5”) analysis of pharmaceutically used plant extracts: identification of

isobaric iridoid glycoside regioisomers from Harpagophytum
sos . procumbens. Anal Chem 2005; 77: 878-885.15679357
Contra-indications, Warnings 6 Burger JEW et al. Iridoid and phenolic glycosides from

Harpagophytum procumbens. Phytochemistry 1987; 26: 1453-1457.

Devil's claw is stated to be contra-indicated in gastric and

duodenal ulcers,(S#©” and in gallstones should be used only 7 Munkombwe NM. Acetylated phenolic glycosides from

: Se wt BS} Harpagophytum procumbens. Phytochemistry 2003; 62: 1231—
after consultation with a physician. 1234.12648542
Drug interactions None have been described for devil's claw 8 Czygan FC, Krueger A. Pharmaceutical biological studies of the genus
preparations. However, on the basis of pharmacological evidence Harpagophytum. Part 3 Distribution of the iridoid glycoside

a : Bn a ; harpagoside in the different organs of Harpagophytum procumbens
of devil's claw's cardioactivity, the possibility of excessive doses and Harpagophytum zeyheri. Planta Med 1977; 31: 305-307
interfering with existing treatment for cardiac disorders or with 9 Baghdikian B ef al. An analytical study, anti-inflammatory and
hypo/hypertensive therapy should be considered. Inhibitory effects analgesic effects of Harpagophytum procumbens and Harpagophytum
on certain cytochrome P450 (CYP) drug metabolising enzymes zeyheri. Planta Med 1997; 63: 171-176.
have been documented for a devil's claw root extract (Bioforce) in 10 Eich J et al. HPLC analysis of iridoid compounds of Harpagophytum
vitro using a technique involving liquid chromatography-mass taxa: quality control of pharmaceutical drug material. Pharmac

spectrometry and automated online extraction.°*) Mean (stan-

dard deviation) ICso values for the devil's claw extract when tested

Pharmacol Lett 1998; 8: 75-78.
11 Chrubasik $ e¢ al. Zum Harpagosidehalt verschiedener
Trockenextraktpulver aus Harpagophytum procumbens. Forsch

in assays with individual CYP enzymes were 997 (23), 254 (17), Komplementiirmed 1996; 3: 6-11.
121 (8), 155 (9), 1044 (80) and 335 (14) for the CYPs 1A2, 2C8, 12 Chrubasik $ e¢ al. Zum Wirkstoffgehalt in Arzneimitteln
2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4, respectively. Harpagophytum procumbens. 1996, 3: 57-63.

13. Gagnier JJ et al. Harpagophytum procumbens for osteoarthritis and

Pregnancy and lactation It has been stated that devil's claw has low back pain: a systematic review. BMC Complementary and

oxytocic properties,” although the reference gives no further Alternative Medicine 2004; 4: 13.

details and the basis for this statement is not known. In addition, 14 Chantre P et al. Efficacy and tolerance of Harpagophytum

there is no further evidence to substantiate the statement. procumbens versus diacerhein in treatment of osteoarthritis.
However, given the lack of data on the effects of devil's claw Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 177-183.

taken during pregnancy and lactation, its use should be avoided 15 Wegener T. Devil's claw: from African traditional remedy to modern

analgesic and antiinflammatory. Herbalgram 2000; 50: 47-54.

16 Lanhers M-C et al. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects of an
aqueous extract of Harpagophytum procumbens. Planta Med 1992;
58: 117-123.

17. Vanhaelen M et al. Biological activity of Harpagophytum
procumbens. 1. Preparation and structure of Harpagogenin. J Pharm
Belg 1981 36: 38-42.

18 Baghdikian B et al. Two new pyridine monoterpene alkaloids by

Arthrosetten H; Arthrotabs; Bomarthros; Cefatec; Dolo- chemical conversion of a commercial extract of Harpagophytum

Arthrodynat; Dolo-Arthrosetten H; Doloteffin; flexi-loges; procumbens, J Nat Prod 1999; 62: 211-213, ;

Harpagoforte Asmedic; HarpagoMega; Harpagosan; Jucurba; 19 Baghdikian B et al. Formation of nitrogen-containing metabolites

a. . . 0A i from the main iridoids of Harpagophytum procumbens and H.
Matar hargo: ee Rheutermiebytos Se Rheuma;Sern,eRivoltan, zeyheri by human intestinal bacteria. Planta Med 1999; 65: 164-166.

during these periods.

----- PAGE 225 -----
20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

Devil’s Claw

Andersen ML. Evaluation of acute and chronic treatments with
Harpagophytum procumbens on Freund's adjuvant-induced arthritis
in rats. J Ethnopharmacol 2004; 91: 325-330.

Mahomed IM Analgesic, antiinflammatory and antidiabetic
properties of Harpagophytum procumbens DC (Pedaliaceae)
secondary root aqueous extract. Phytotherapy Res 2004; 18: 982-989.
McLeod DW et al. Investigations of Harpagophytum procumbens
(devil's claw) in the treatment of experimental inflammation and
arthritis in the rat. Br | Pharmacol 1979; 66: P140.

Whitehouse LW et al. Devil's claw (Harpagophytum procumbens): no
evidence for anti-inflammatory activity in the treatment of arthritic
disease. Can Med Assoc J 1983; 129: 249-251.

Soulimani R et al. The role of stomachal digestion on the
pharmacological activity of plant extracts, using as an example
extracts of Harpagophytum procumbens. Can J Physiol Pharmacol
1994; 72: 1532-1536.

Sticher O. Plant mono-, di- and sesquiterpenoids with
pharmacological and therapeutical activity. In: Wagner H, Wolff P,
eds. New Natural Products with Pharmacological, Biological or
Therapeutical Activity. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1977: 137-176.

Loew D et al. Investigations on the pharmacokinetic properties of
Harpagophytum extracts and their effects on eicosanoid biosynthesis
in vitro and ex vivo. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2001; 69: 356-364.

Jang MH. Harpagophytum procumbens suppresses
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated expressions of cyclooxygenase-2 and
inducible nitric oxide synthase in fibroblast cell line L929. J
Pharmacol Sci 2003; 93: 367-371.

Kaszkin M. Downregulation of iNOS expression in rat mesangial cells
by special extracts of Harpagophytum procumbens derives from
harpagoside-dependent and independent effects. Phytomedicine 2004;
11: 585-595.

Benito PB et al. Effects of some iridoids from plant origin on
arachidonic acid metabolism in cellular systems. Planta Med 2000; 66:
324-328.

Fiebich BL et al. Inhibition of TNF-a synthesis in LPS
primary human monocytes by Harpagophytum extract SteiHap 69.
Phytomedicine 2001; 8: 28-30.

Schulze-Tanzil G, Wirkung des Extraktes aus Harpagophytum
procumbens DC auf Matrix-Metalloproteinasen in menschlichen
Knorpelzellen in vitro. Arzneim Forsch 2004; 54: 213-220.

Circosta C et al. A drug used in traditional medicine: Harpagophytum
procumbens DC. Il. Cardiovascular activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1984;
11: 259-274,

Costa de Pasquale R et al. A drug used in traditional medicine:
Harpagophytum procumbens DC. Ill. Effects on hyperkinetic
ventricular arrhythmias by reperfusion. J Ethnopharmacol 1985; 13:
193-199.

Occhiuto F, De Pasquale A. Electrophysiological and haemodynamic
effects of some active principles of Harpagophytum procumbens DC
in the dog. Pharmacological Res 1990; 22: 72-73.

Occhiuto F et al. A drug used in traditional medicine: Harpagophytum
procumbens DC. IV. Effects on some isolated muscle preparations. J
Ethnopharmacol 1985; 13: 201-208.

Betancor-Fernandez A, Screening pharmaceutical preparations
containing extracts of turmeric rhizome, artichoke leaf, devil's claw
root and garlic or salmon oil for antioxidant capacity. J Pharm
Pharmacol 2003; 55: 981-986.

Kundu JK Inhibitory effects of the extracts of Sutherlandia frutescens
(L.) R. Br. and Harpagophytum procumbens DC. on phorbol ester-
induced COX-2 expression in mouse skin: AP-1 and CREB as
potential upstream targets. Cancer Lett 2005; 218: 21-31.

mulated

38

39

41

42

43

45

47

48

49

50

S1

52.

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

Guérin J-C, Réveillére H-P. Activité antifongique d'extraits végétaux a
usage thérapeutique. II. Etude de 40 extraits sur 9 souches fongiques.
Ann Pharmaceut Fr 1985; 43: 77-81.

Moussard C et al. A drug used in traditional medicine,
Harpagophytum procumbens: no evidence for NSAID-like effect on
whole blood eicosanoid production in human. Prostaglandins Leukot
Essent Fatty Acids 1992; 46: 283-286.

Wegener T, Wiedenbriick R. Die Teufelskralle (Harpagophytum
procumbens DC.)in der Therapie rheumatischer Erkrankungen. Z
Phytother 1998; 19: 284-294.

Chrubasik S$. Effectiveness of devil's claw for osteoarthritis.
Rheumatology 2002; 41: 1332-1333.

Chrubasik S$. The quality of clinical trials with Harpagophytum
procumbens. Phytomedicine 2003; 10 :613-623.

Chrubasik S et al. Effectiveness of Harpagophytum procumbens in
treatment of acute low back pain. Phytomedicine 1996; 3: 1-10.
Chrubasik $ eg al. Effectiveness of Harpagophytum extract WS 1531 in
the treatment of exacerbation of low back pain: a randomized,
placebo-controlled, double-blind study. Eur J Anaesthesiol 1999; 16:
118-129.

Gobel H et al. Harpagophytum extract LI 174 (Devil's claw) for
treating non-specific back pain. Effects on sensory, motor and vascular
muscle response. Schmerz 2001; 15: 10-18.

Chrubasik §. A randomized double-blind pilot study comparing

Doloteffin and Vioxx in the treatment of low back pain.
Rheumatology 2003; 42: 141-148.

Chrubasik S. A 1-year follow-up after a pilot study with Doloteffin for
low back pain. Phytomedicine 2005; 12: 1-9.

Lecomte A, Costa JP. Harpagophytum dans I'arthrose: étude en
double insu contre placebo. Le Magazine 1992; 27-30.

Pinget M, Lecomte A. Die Wirkung der 'Harpagophytum Arkocaps'
bei degenerativem Rheuma. Naturheilpraxis 1992; 50: 267-269.
Bélaiche P. Etude clinique de 630 cas d'arthrose traités par le nébulisat
aqueux d'Harpagophytum procumbens (Radix). Phytothérapy 1982; 1:
22-28.

Wegener T, Liipke NP. Treatment of patients with arthrosis of hip or

knee with an aqueous extract of devil's claw (Harpagophytum
procumbens DC.). Phytotherapy Res 2003; 17: 1165-1172.

Laudahn D, Walper A. Efficacy and tolerance of Harpagophytum
extract LI 174 in patients with chronic non-radicular back pain.
Phytotherapy Res 2001; 15: 621-624.

Chrubasik § Comparison of outcome measures during treatment with
the proprietary Harpagophytum extract Doloteffin in patients with
pain in the lower back, knee or hip. Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 181-194.
Szczepariski L. (Efficacy and tolerability of 'Pagosid' (Harpagophytum
procumbens root extract) in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and
osteoarthritis). Reumatologia 2000; 38: 67-73.

Grahame R, Robinson BY. Devil's claw (Harpagophytum
procumbens): pharmacological and clinical studies. Ann Rheum Dis
1981; 40: 632.

Altmeyer N et al. Conjonctivite, rhinite et asthme rythmés par
l'exposition professionelle a I'Harpagophytum. Arch Mal Prof Med
Trav Soc 1992; 53: 289-291.

Erdés A et al. Beitrag zur pharmakologie und toxikologie
verschiedener extrakte, sowie des harpagosids aus Harpagophytum
procumbens DC. Planta Med 1978; 34: 97-108.

Unger M, Frank A. Simultaneous determination of the inhibitory
potency of herbal extracts on the activity of six major cytochrome
P450 enzymes using liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry and
automated online extraction. Rapid Comm Mass Spectrometry 2004;
18: 2273-2281.

Abramowitz M. Toxic reactions to plant products sold in health food
stores. Med Lett Drugs Ther 1979; 21: 29-30.

----- PAGE 226 -----
- Drosera

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited chemical information is available for drosera.
Documented animal studies support some of the herbal uses.
Reported immunostimulant and immunosuppressant
activities may warrant further research into the
pharmacological activities of drosera. In view of the lack of
chemical and toxicity data, excessive use of drosera should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Drosera rotundifolia L. (Droserceae)

Synonym(s)

Round-leaved Sundew, Sundew

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19830”
Complete German Commission E (Sundew
Martindale 35th edition'**)

)(G9)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Drosera is not included in the GSL.'C*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Flavonoids Kaempferol, myricetin, quercetin and hyperoside.

Quinones Plumbagin,” hydroplumbagin glucoside) and rossoli-
side (7-methyl-hydrojuglone-4-glucoside).

Other constituents Carotenoids, plant acids (e.g. butyric acid,
citric acid, formic acid, gallic acid, malic acid, propionic acid),
resin, tannins (unspecified) and ascorbic acid (vitamin C).
Food Use

Drosera is not used in foods.

Quinones

R fe] fe}

Oy OO

OH O OH O
R

plumbagin H ramentaceone

ramentone OH (7-methyllugione}

Figure 1 Selected constituents of drosera.

Herbal Use

Drosera is stated to pos antispasmodic, demulcent and
expectorant properties. It has been used for bronchitis, asthma,
pertussis, tracheitis, gastric ulceration and specifically for asthma

and chronic bronchitis with peptic ulceration or gastritis.“C* ©”
G64)

S

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried plant 1-2g as an infusion three times daily.'C”

Liquid extract 0.5-2.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'©”

Tincture 0.5-1.0mL (1:5 in 60% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Drosera is reported to prevent acetylcholine- or histamine-induced
bronchospasm, and to relax acetylcholine- or barium chloride-
induced spasm of the isolated intestine. Drosera is stated to
possess antitussive properties and has been reported to prevent
coughing induced by excitation of the larynx nerve in the rabbit.
These antispasmodic actions have been attributed to the
naphthoquinone constituents.'@*)

Antimicrobial properties have also been documented for the
naphthoquinones.? In vivo, plumbagin is reported to exert a
broad spectrum of activity against Gram-positive and Gram-
negative bacteria, influenza viruses, pathogenic fungi, and
parasitic protozoa. In vitro, a plumbagin solution (1:50000)
was reported to exhibit activity against staphylococci, streptococci
and pneumococci (Gram-positive bacteria), but to lack activity
against Haemophilus pertussis (Gram-negative bacteria). Plum-
bagin administered orally to mice for five days, was found to be
ineffective against Lamblia muris and tuberculosis infection.

Figure 2. Drosera — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 227 -----
Drosera

Microsporum infections in guinea-pigs were treated successfully
by local applications of 0.25—0.5% solutions (in 40% alcohol) or
of 1% emulsions.

An aqueous drosera extract was reported to possess pepsin-like
activity.)

In vitro, drosera extracts and plumbagin, in concentrations of
0.01-1.0 mg/mL, have been documented to exert a cytotoxic or
immunosuppressive effect in human granulocytes and lympho-
cytes.°’ Lower concentrations were reported to exhibit immuno-
stimulating properties. Plumbagin possesses chemotherapeutic
Properties, but is irritant when administered at therapeutic
doses.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of drosera
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for drosera and further investigation of these aspects
is required. Plumbagin is stated to be an irritant principle” and
an LDso (mice, intraperitoneal injection) has been reported to be
15 mg/kg body weight.'C**)

Cytotoxic properties have been documented for drosera and
plumbagin (see Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal
studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of drosera to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of drosera has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data, the use of drosera
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

pectoral N; DemoTussil; Escotussin; Famel; Gouttes contre la
toux "S"; Makaphyt Gouttes antitussives; Makaphyt Sirop;
Nican; Pastilles bronchiques $ nouvelle formule; Pastilles
pectorales Demo N; Sirop pectoral contre la toux S$; Sirop S
contre la toux et la bronchite. Venezuela: Codebromil; Pi-
Fedrin.

References

1 Ayuga C et al. Contribucién al estudio de flavonoides en D.
rotundifolia L. An R Acad Farm 1985; 51: 321-326.

2 Wagner H et al. Immunological investigations of naphthoquinone-
containing plant extracts, isolated quinones and other cytostatic
compounds in cellular immunosystems. Phytochem Soc Eur Symp
1986; 43.

3 Vinkenborg J et al. De aanwezigheid van hydroplumbagin-glucoside in
Drosera rotundifolia. Pharm Weekbl 1969; 104: 45-49.

4 Sampara-Rumantir N. Rossoliside. Pharm Weekbl 1971; 106: 653-664.

5 Oliver-Bever B. Plants in Tropical West Africa. Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge, 1986: 129.

6 Vichkanova SA et al. Chemotherapeutic properties of plumbagin. In:
Aizenman BE, ed. Fitontsidy Mater Soveshch, 6th 1969. Kiev:
Naukova Dumka, 1972: 183-185.

----- PAGE 228 -----
- Echinacea

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of echinacea is well documented (see
Constituents). The three species are chemically dissimilar.
Echinacea purpurea and E. angustifolia both contain alkamides
as their major lipophilic constituents, but of differing
structural types. By contrast, the lipophilic fraction of E. pallida
is characterised by polyacetylenes and contains only very low
concentrations, if any, of alkamides. The alkene constituents
are stated to be susceptible to auto-oxidation, resulting in the
formation of artefacts during storage.¢”

Commercial echinacea samples and marketed echinacea
products may contain one or more of the three echinacea
species mentioned above. Analysis of commercial samples of
raw echinacea material and marketed echinacea products has
shown that in some cases the echinacea species assigned to
the sample or product was incorrect, and that the
pharmaceutical quality and labelling of some finished
products was inadequate (see Constituents, Quality of plant
material and commercial products). Users and potential users
of echinacea products should be made aware of the possible
differences between products and the implications of this for
efficacy and safety.

Evidence from in vitro and animal studies supports some of
the uses for echinacea, particularly the reputed
immunostimulant properties, although immunostimulant
activity has been disputed following one series of studies (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies,
Immunomodulatory activity). Reported pharmacological
activities have been documented for the polyene and high
molecular weight polysaccharide constituents, as well as the
alkamides and caffeic acid derivatives.

Several, but not all, clinical trials of echinacea preparations
have reported effects superior to those of placebo in the
prevention and treatment of upper respiratory tract infections
(URTIs). However, evidence of efficacy is not definitive as
studies have included different patient groups and tested
various different preparations and dosage regimens of
echinacea. As such, there is insufficient evidence to
recommend any specific echinacea products, or to advise on
optimal dose and treatment duration (see Clinical studies).
Further well-designed clinical trials using well-defined,
standardised preparations are necessary in order to establish
efficacy.

There is a lack of clinical research on the anti-inflammatory
and wound-healing properties of echinacea preparations
documented in vitro and in animal studies. Several other areas
of interest, related to the immunostimulant effects of
echinacea, such as prevention of recurrence of genital herpes
and other infections, and reduction of adverse effects
associated with antineoplastic treatment, also require further
clinical investigation.

Another area that requires further study is whether certain
groups of constituents, such as the polysaccharides, are active
after oral administration and, if so, what is the mechanism of
action since polysaccharides usually would be broken down

into simple inactive sugars. There is a lack of data on the
pharmacokinetics of echinacea preparations, although very
preliminary studies have reported transportation of
isobutylamides across Caco-2 cells, an in vitro model of
intestinal absorption, and detection of alkamides in blood
taken from healthy volunteers who ingested echinacea
preparations (see Clinical studies, Pharmacokinetics).

On the basis of the available (limited) safety data, which
come mostly from short-term clinical trials of echinacea
preparations for the prevention and treatment of URTIs in
otherwise generally healthy individuals, echinacea appears to
be well-tolerated. However, firm conclusions cannot be
drawn from these limited data, and further investigation is
required to establish the safety profile of different echinacea
preparations. At present, the main safety issues are the
possibility of allergic reactions, and concern about the use of
echinacea by patients with progressive systemic diseases,
such as tuberculosis, leukaemia, collagen disorders, multiple
sclerosis and other autoimmune diseases (see Side-effects,
Toxicity and Contra-indications, Warnings). In view of the
lack of toxicity data, excessive use of echinacea should be
avoided. In placebo-controlled trials of echinacea
preparations for the prophylaxis of URTIs, treatment was
taken typically for 8-12 weeks.

As with other herbal medicines, the potential for echinacea
preparations to interact with conventional medicines should
be considered. As E£. purpurea root can inhibit CYP1A2 and
selectively modulate CYP3A, echinacea should be used with
caution in patients receiving therapeutic agents with a narrow
therapeutic range and which are substrates for these CYP
enzymes.

Species (Family)

*Echinacea angustifolia DC. (Asteraceae/Compositae)
tEchinacea pallida (Nutt.) Nutt.

$Echinacea purpurea (L.) Moench

Synonym(s)

Black Sampson, Coneflower

*E. angustifolia var. strigosa

tRudbeckia pallida Nutt., Brauneria pallida (Nutt.) Britton, E.
angustifolia Hook. f.

$Rudbeckia purpurea L., sp., R. serotina (Nutt.) Sweet, R. hispida
Hoffm., E. intermedia Lindl., E. purpurea (L.) Moench var.
arkansana Stey., E. purpurea var. purpurea f. liggettii

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root. E. purpurea herb (aerial parts) is also used

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

AHP (E. purpurea root)‘

BHC 1992'°®
BHMA 20030
BHP 1996'@”)

----- PAGE 229 -----
Echinacea

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission E 19980?)
ESCOP 2003'07

Expanded German Commission E 2000'°*)
Martindale 35th edition'**?

Ph Eur 20078?

USP29/NF24'68°

WHO volume 1 1999'¢®?)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
SL(@?)

Constituents

Alkamides At least 20, mainly isobutylamides of straight-chain
fatty acids with olefinic and/or acetylenic bonds, e.g. isomeric
dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,10E/Z-tetraenoic isobutylamide, present in
the roots and aerial parts of Echinacea angustifolia and Echinacea
purpurea, but mainly absent from Echinacea pallida. Isobutyl-
amides from the roots of E. purpurea contain mainly 2,4-dienoic
units whilst those of E. angustifolia contain mainly 2-monoene
units.” The synthesis of the acetylenic amide N-(2-methylpro-
pyl)-2E-undecene-8,10-diynamide, a constituent of E. angustifolia
root, has been reported.” E. purpurea root reportedly contains
0.01-0.04% alkamides.'(°”

Phenylpropanoids Caffeic acid glycosides (e.g. echinacoside,®
verbascoside, caffeoylechinacoside), caffeic acid esters of quinic
acid (e.g. chlorogenic acid = 5-caffeoylquinic acid, isochlorogenic
acid = 3,4- and 3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid, cynarin = 1,3-
dicaffeoylquinic acid) and of tartaric acid (e.g. caftaric acid =
2-caffeoyltartaric acid, cichoric acid = 2,3-dicaffeoyltartaric
acid). Varying mixtures of caffeic acid derivatives are present
in the three species, with echinacoside being the major component
of the roots of E. angustifolia and E. pallida (0.5-1.0%),‘@”
and cichoric acid being a major component of E. purpurea roots
(0.14-2.05%)," and aerial parts (1.2-3.1%)."° Cynarin is
reportedly present in E. angustifolia root,” but not in the roots
of the other two species.

Polysaccharides Polysaccharides PS1 (a methylglucuronoarabi-
noxylan, mol. wt 35kDa),"'?) PS2 (an acidic rhamnoarabino-
galactan, mol. wt 450kDa) and a xyloglucan (mol. wt 79kDa)
have been isolated from E. purpurea herb. '*°) Polysacchar-
ides and glycoproteins are present in E. purpurea herb and E.
pallida root.” The pressed juice from the aerial parts of E.
purpurea (and the herbal medicinal product Echinacin prepared
from the juice) contain heterogeneous polysaccharides (mol. wt
<10kDa), inulin-type fractions (mol. wt 6kDa) and an acidic
highly branched arabinogalactan polysaccharide (mol. wt
70kDa)."') The pressed juice of E. purpurea aerial parts has
yielded an arabinogalactan-protein (AGP) comprising 83%
polysaccharide (galactose—arabinose 1.8: 1), uronic acids (4-5%)
and protein (7%) with high concentrations of serine, alanine and
hydroxyproline." The AGP (mol. wt 1.2 x 10°Da) has a highly
branched polysaccharide core of 3-, 6-, and 3,6-linked galactose
residues with terminal arabinose and glucuronic acid units."

Volatile oils E. pallida root (0.2-2.0%)'° mainly contains
polyenes and polyacetylenes including pentadeca-1,8Z-diene and a
range of ketoalkenes and ketoalkenynes (ketopolyacetylenes),
principally pentadeca-8Z-ene-2-one, pentadeca-8Z,11Z-diene-2-
one, pentadeca-8Z,13Z-diene-11-yne-2-one, _ tetradeca-8Z-ene-

(G52) These alkenes are unstable

11,13-diyne-2-one and others.
and readily oxidise to 8-hydroxy derivatives.©”) The alkenes of E.
pallida and E. purpurea root are distinctly different from those of
E. angustifolia which are mainly alkylketones. The volatile oil
from the aerial parts of the three species contains borneol, bornyl

acetate, germacrene D, caryophyllene and other components.°”
G52)

Other constituents A series of other constituents has been
reported including the saturated pyrrolizidine-type alkaloids
tussilagine and isotussilagine (0.006%) from E. angustifolia and
E. purpurea."® Flavonoids, including quercetin, kaempferol,
isorhamnetin and their glycosides” and also anthocyanins,
are present in the aerial parts of E. purpurea (0.48%).?) The
major flavonoid of the aerial parts of E. angustifolia has been
identified as patuletin-3-rutinoside,''”) and not rutin as previously
reported. Free phenolic acids, including p-coumaric, p-hydro-
xybenzoic and protocatechuic acids, have been isolated from the
aerial parts of E. angustifolia and E. purpurea.?" Other
miscellaneous compounds reported include betaine, fatty acids,
simple sugars, sterols and vanillin. The presence of 'melanin' in
material from cultured E. angustifolia plants has been
reported.°” Phytomelanin deposits are stated to be present in
the roots of E. pallida and E. angustifolia, but absent from E.
purpurea roots.(07>)

Quality of plant material and commercial products

Alkamide concentrations vary between species and between
different parts of the plant.??) Commercial root samples of E.
purpurea have been shown to vary in their alkamide content (0.12—
1.2%).") In Germany, 25 commercial echinacea preparations
were assayed for their alkamide (dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,10E/Z-tetra-
enoic acid isobutylamide) and cichoric acid contents.?” Some
products were highly concentrated, whereas others had no
detectable concentrations of alkamide or cichoric acid. Large
differences were observed between comparable products from
different manufacturers.

Several commercial echinacea products have performed poorly
in examinations of their quality. Of 25 commercial echinacea
products purchased in the USA only 14 (56%) passed assessments
for their quality.?> Six were inadequately labelled, three of them
not stating the species used, one not stating the plant part and two
liquid preparations had no concentrations given for their
echinacea content. The remaining 19 products were assessed for
their stated content of particular species and for claimed
concentrations of phenols. Twelve of these products were labelled
as containing only E. purpurea and two of them failed, as one
contained only 54% of the expected concentration of phenols and
the other had three times the accepted concentration of microbes
as set out in World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines. Two
products were allegedly prepared from E. angustifolia and both
failed, one having only one-third of the stated phenolic content
and the other having no detectable echinacoside. Five further
products allegedly containing a mixture of species were also
as:
detected. Analysis of 59 commercial products available in the
US revealed that 10% had no measurable echinacea content, 48%
were not consistent with their labels in respect of the species
present, and of 21 standardised preparations, 57% did not meet
the standards stated on their labels; often products did not contain
the species stated.

A fresh plant product of echinacea herb has been shown to
possess three times the amount of alkamide than a product

ed and one failed because echinacoside could not be

----- PAGE 230 -----
prepared from dried plants and tl
drying.°” The alkamide and
commercial preparations of E.
been shown to
respectively) 2° Ten commercial!

be variable

his has been attributed to loss on
cichoric acid contents of six
purpurea expressed juice have
(0.1-1.8mg/mL and 0.0-0.4%,

preparations of echinacea were

analysed for their betaine content and concentrations ranged from
0.04-0.64%

The concentrations of some constituents may be affected during
growing, drying or storage of the plant material. The yields of
some constituents are affected when plants are grown under
conditions of drought stress.°” Analysis of roots of E. angustifolia
dried at a range of temperatures between 23°C and 60°C indicated
that there were no significant changes in the alkamide content,
whereas 25% and 45% of the echinacoside content was lost at
30°C and 60°C, respectively?" By contrast, roots of E. purpurea
at —18°C in deep-freeze for 64 weeks were found to have lost 40%
of their alkamide content.°” An aqueous-alcoholic extract of E.

purpurea and its dried extract were stored at different tempera-
tures for seven months and then assayed for their alkamide and
phenylpropanoid content.°*) The amount of the major alkamide
(dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,10E/Z-tetraenoic acid isobutylamide) in the
liquid preparation was not significantly affected by storage at

Phenylpropanoids

HO
° OH
HO. fe}
\ Nad \ OH
©  €00H
cichoric acid (2,3-dicaffeoyltartaric acid)
(cafartic acid = 2-caffeoyltartaric acid)
oR*
3
Hooc OR
R! IR
Rt Re Re Rt
chlorogenic acid H H H caffeoyl
(5-caffeoylquinic acid)
isochlorogenic acid H caffeoyl caffeoyl H
(3,4-dicaffeoylquinic acid)
isochlorogenic acid H caffeoyl H caffeoyl
(3,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid)
cynarin caffeoyl caffeoyl H H
o R'OH2C
Hi
0. N o
2,
RO OH
HO’
HO’
1H
R' R?

echinacoside glucose (16) rhamnosyl (13)

rhamnosyl (1-3)

verbascoside H
caffeoyl- 6-caffeoylglucosyl (1> 6) —rhamnosyl (1>3)
echinacoside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of echinacea.

Echinacea

25°C and 40°C, whereas the cichoric acid content declined.
However, the reverse occurred for the dried extract when there was
a significant loss of alkamide at storage temperatures of 25°C and
40°C but no significant loss of cichoric acid content.

The effects of drying temperatures on the constituents of all
three echinacea species have been investigated.°” The results
showed that there was an increase in cichoric acid for E. purpurea
and E. pallida. Furthermore, increased moisture content resulted
in higher concentrations of echinacoside for E. angustifolia and E.
pallida and of chlorogenic acid in E. angustifolia. The poly-
saccharide contents were significantly decreased by raised
moisture levels in the roots of E. angustifolia and E. pallida.

The presence of colchicine in commercial echinacea products in
the USA has been reported,” although subsequent analysis of 17
commercial echinacea products purchased in pharmacies in
Chicago, USA, did not detect colchicine in any of the samples.°”

Detailed descriptions of E. purpurea root for use in botanical,
microscopic and macroscopic identification have been published,
along with qualitative and quantitative methods for the assess-
ment of E. purpurea root raw material.”

Herbal Use

Echinacea has a long history of medicinal use for a wide variety of
conditions, mainly infections, such as syphilis and septic wounds,
but also as an 'anti-toxin' for snakebites and blood poisoning.°*
©) ‘Traditionally, echinacea was known as an ‘anti-infective'
agent, and was indicated in bacterial and viral infections, mild
septicaemia, furunculosis (persistent recurring episodes of painful
nodules in the skin) and other skin conditions, including boils,
carbuncles and abscesses.“©% 97°) Other traditional uses
listed include naso-pharangeal catarrh, pyorrhoea (periodontitis)
and tonsillitis, and as supportive treatment for influenza-like
infections and recurrent infections of the respiratory tract and
lower urinary tract and, externally, for poorly healing superficial
wounds.'°%

Current interest in the medicinal use of echinacea is focused on
its immunostimulant (increasingly described as immunomodula-
tory) effects, particularly in the treatment and prevention of the
common cold, influenza and other upper respiratory tract
infections (see Pharmacological Actions; Clinical studies).

Dosage

In standard herbal reference texts

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in older
standard herbal reference texts'C®°”
indications; examples are given below.

are the same for several

E. angustifolia root and/or E. pallida root For various
indications, including chronic viral and bacterial infections, skin
complaints, prophylaxis of colds and influenza, mild septicaemia,

furunculosis, naso-pharyngeal catarrh, pyorrhoea and tonsillitis.

Dried root/rhizome 1¢ by infusion or decoction three times
daily.'CS”

Liquid extract 0.5-1.0mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily,°® or 0.25-1.0mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily.(6?

Tincture 2-5 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily, or 1-
2mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.”

----- PAGE 231 -----
Echinacea

In more recent texts

Dosages for oral administration (adults) described in more recent
texts are provided for more specific indications.

As adjuvant therapy and for prophylaxis of recurrent infections
of the upper respiratory tract (common colds); treatment should
not exceed eight weeks’ duration.'(C°)

E. pallida root Hydroethanolic extract corresponding to 900 mg
crude drug daily,"©* e.g, tincture (1:5 in 50% ethanol by volume)
from dry extract (7-11: 1 in 50% ethanol).‘©?

E. purpurea herb 6-9 mL expressed juice dailyC# 9)
E. purpurea root 3 x 60 drops of tincture (1:5 in 55% ethanol),
equivalent to 3 x 300mg crude drug daily.'(°

E. angustifolia root 1-3 g daily

Echinacea preparations (i.e. containing different echinacea
species and plant parts) and, therefore, dosage regimens tested
in clinical trials have varied widely (see Pharmacological Actions,
Clinical studies). Trials of echinacea preparations for the
prevention of upper respiratory tract infections have typically
involved an 8- or 12-week duration of treatment; trials of
echinacea preparations for the treatment of upper respiratory
tract infections typically involve administration of the study
medication for 6-10 days.

Alkamides

peer e

dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,102Z-tetraenoic acid isobutylamide

H
FA
Ew S A
°

undeca-2E-enoic-8,10-diyne acid isobutylamide

Polyenes

CH3
pentadeca-1,8Z-diene
fe)
HgC S CH;
pentadeca-8Z-ene-2-one
fe)
HgC SS CHs

ZA
pentadeca-8Z,11Z-diene-2-one

Figure 2 Selected constituents of echinacea.

Pharmacological Actions

There ie pharmacological
activities of Echinacea species based on in vitro and in vivo
(animal) studies. Research has focused on investigating the
immunomodulatory activity of echinacea preparations, although
other activities, such as antiviral, antifungal, anti-inflammatory
and antioxidant properties have also been explored. Effects on the
immune system may play a role in some of these other activities.

The pharmacological activities of echinacea preparations
cannot be attributed to a single constituent or group of
constituents. Rather, groups of constituents — the
alkamides, caffeic acid derivatives, polysaccharides and alkenes
— appear to contribute to activity.

However, it has been reported that following oral administra-
tion in man, alkamides are bioavailable, whereas caffeic acid
derivatives are not and, therefore, cannot contribute to activity
(see Clinical studies, Pharmacokinetics).°”

is a vast scientific literature on tl

several

In vitro and animal studies

Immunomodulatory activity Currently, there is a view that
immunomodulatory, rather than immunostimulatory, is the most
appropriate term to describe the immunological effects of
echinacea,” although 'immunostimulatory' is still used and is
ubiquitous in the earlier scientific literature on echinacea. It has

H3C S

pentadeca-8Z,13Z-diene-11-yne-2-one

fe)

HC SS

S
S

pentadeca-8Z-ene-11,13-diyne-2-one CH

----- PAGE 232 -----
been suggested that broad stimulation of the various highly
complex components of the immune sys
beneficial, since some immune responses are harmful.

The immunological effects of a wide range of echinacea
preparations comprising different species, plant parts and types
of extract, have been investigated extensively in vitro and in vivo.
Collectively, the data indicate that echinacea preparations do have
(9.4) although at
present there is no clear picture as to which specific preparations
have the greatest activity. A summary of some of the scientific
literature on the immunological effects of echinacea is given below.

Enhancement of macrophage function has been documented for
various preparations of echinacea in vitro and in vivo in studies
using a range of methods, such as the carbon clearance test and
measurement of cytokine production, as indicators of macrophage
activity?) In vitro experiments with human macrophages
found that fresh pressed juice and dried juice from the aerial parts
of E. purpurea stimulated production of cytokines, including
interleukin 1 (IL-1), IL-10, and tumour necrosis factor o%
(TNFa).

Other studies have reported that purified polysaccharides from
E. purpurea induced macrophage production of IL-1,“ and that
a polysaccharide arabinogalactan isolated from plant cell cultures
of E. purpurea induced TNFo and interferon B2 production by
murine macrophages.” Polysaccharides obtained from plant cell
cultures of E. purpurea have also been shown previously to have
immunological activity in vitro.“®) In another series of in vitro
experiments, E. purpurea induced macrophage activation (as
assessed by TNFa production) following simulated digestion
(incubation of echinacea with gastric fluid) in an attempt to mimic
effects following oral administration.“?) Other work has demon-
strated that E. purpurea dry root powder (containing 1.5% total
polyphenols, calculated as chlorogenic acid) increased the
resistance of splenic lymphocytes to apoptosis; splenic lympho-
cytes were obtained from mice administered the echinacea
preparation orally at dosages of 30 or 100mg/kg daily for 14
days.

In an in vitro study, peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) from healthy individuals and from patients with chronic
fatigue syndrome and acquired immune deficiency syndrome
(AIDS) incubated with increasing concentrations of extracts of E.
purpurea led to enhanced natural killer function of PBMCs.°? In
vivo, oral administration of E. purpurea root extract has been
reported to increase numbers of natural killer cells in normal,”
3) and ageing mice.°”

A subsequent in vivo study, conducted using a rigorous
randomised, double-blind design, assessed the effects of an
echinacea product (Nature's Resource, CVS Pharmacy, USA;
capsules containing echinacea aerial parts 1.05 g and cichoric acid
10.5 mg) in 16 ageing male rats.°° Animals received echinacea
(species and method of preparation were not stated although, as
aerial parts were used, the species may have been E. purpurea)
50 mg/kg body weight (equivalent to cichoric acid 0.5 mg/kg), or
placebo, orally as a bolus dose in peanut butter each morning for
eight weeks. Mean circulating total white cell counts were
significantly higher in echinacea-treated rats than in the control
group for the first two weeks (p < 0.05), although baseline counts
for the two groups and a precise p value or confidence intervals
were not given in a report of the study, and concentrations of IL-2
were significantly higher in echinacea-treated rats, compared with
the control group, for the last five weeks of the study (p < 0.05).
Differential white cell counts were significantly altered throughout
the 8-week study period in the echinacea group, compared with

effects on certain indices of immune function,

leukaemic,

Echinacea

the control group: proportions of lymphocytes and monocytes
increased while those of neutrophils and eosinophils decreased
with echinacea, compared with placebo. There were no changes
in the phagocytic activity of circulating leukocytes, as assessed by
ability to ingest latex particles, in either group during the study.

Other in vivo studies (rats) have shown that administration of
water-—ethanol extracts (100 tL twice daily by oral gavage for four
days) of E. purpurea roots and aerial parts containing defined
concentrations of cichoric acid, polysaccharides and alkamides
stimulated phagocytic activity of macrophages; activity was
increased with increasing concentrations of the three compo-
nents.°% Subsequently, an increase in lipopolysaccharide-stimu-
lated nitric oxide release was observed by macrophages obtained
from the spleens of rats previously treated with the echinacea
extracts. A similar set of experiments demonstrated stimulation of
alveolar macrophage function by alkamides administered to
healthy rats.”

A proprietary preparation containing E. purpurea root extract
and liquorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) root extract stimulated
phagocytosis in vitro and in vivo, as demonstrated by the carbon
clearance test, following oral administration to mice.°* The
combination product produced a greater immunostimulatory
effect in this test than did either extract tested alone. Another
combination preparation, comprising aqueous-ethanol extracts of
E. purpurea and E. pallida root, Baptisia tinctoria root and Thuja
occidentalis herb, administered orally via the diet or drinking
water to mice for seven days enhanced the antibody response to
sheep red blood cells.”

In contrast with the extensive body of research supporting the
immunostimulatory effects of echinacea preparations, some recent
work has reported a lack of effect. No evidence of natural killer
cell activity or antibody formation was found in studies involving
rats fed various preparations of echinacea, including an alcoholic
extract of E. purpurea root and an alcoholic extract of the roots of
E. angustifolia, E. purpurea and E. pallida, in their diet.‘

A concentration-dependent and cell-type specific de novo
synthesis of TNF-% mRNA in primary human CD14+ mono-
cytes/macrophages in vitro has been described for an E. purpurea
extract (Echinaforce, Bioforce).! The alkamide constituents
appeared to be responsible for this effect, at least in part,
mediated via the cyclic AMP and other pathways and involving
activation of NF-«B. Further experiments using these cells and an
anti-cannabinnoid-2 (CB2) polyclonal antibody and the CB2
antagonist SR-144528 resulted in inhibition of the induction of
TNF-x mRNA.

Antiviral activity Antiviral activity has been described for
various different preparations of echinacea following in vitro
studie
ments involving addition of glycoprotein-containing fractions
obtained from E. purpurea root to mouse spleen cell cultures.”
Interferon-% and -B produced by the cells were then tested for
activity against vesicular stomatitis virus. These glycoprotein-
containing fractions were also tested directly against herpes
simplex virus (HSV) and were reported to reduce the number of
plaques by up to 80%, although raw data were lacking and
statistical tests do not appear to have been carried out.

In other in vitro studies, the antiviral activity of an aqueous
solution of E. purpurea herb was tested against aciclovir-
susceptible and aciclovir-resistant strains of HSV-1 and HSV-
2.9) In aciclovir-susceptible strains of HSV-1 and HSV-2, median
EDso (effective dose) values for the echinacea preparation were
1: 100 (range 1:25 to 1:400) and 1:200 (range 1:50 to 1: 1600),

An ‘indirect’ antiviral effect was documented in experi-

----- PAGE 233 -----
Echinacea

respectively. Similarly, for aciclovir-resistant HSV-1 and HSV-2,
median EDso values (range) were 1:100 (1:50 to 1:400) and
1:200 (1:50 to 1: 3200), respectively.

An n-hexane extract of E. purpurea root, an ethanolic extract of
E. pallida var. sanguinea herb and the isolated constituent cichoric
acid were the most potent inhibitors of HSV-1 in in vitro studies
designed to assess light-activated antiviral activity“? The
minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) for these preparations
were 0.12, 0.026 and 0.045 mg/mL, respectively.

Other in vitro studies using mouse fibroblasts found that
preincubation with E. purpurea herb juice and methanolic and
aqueous extracts of E. purpurea root resulted in resistance to
influenza A2, herpes, and vesicular stomatitis virus infection for
24 hours.”

Antifungal and antibacterial activities Activity against several
yeast strains, including Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Candida
albicans, has been described for n-hexane extracts of E. purpurea
roots. Antifungal activity was observed under near ultraviolet
light irradiation and, in some cases, was also light independent.
The pure polyacetylenic compound trideca-1-ene-3,5,7,9,10-pen-
tayne, isolated from E. purpurea root extracts, demonstrated
marked light-mediated inhibition of growth of S. cerevisiae.
Anti-Candida activity for E. purpurea extracts has also been
described previously.“

In contrast, n-hexane extracts of the fresh roots of E. pallida
var. pallida and E. pallida var. angustifolia (identified according to
a revised taxonomy” showed no measurable inhibition of C.
albicans, but an amphotericin-B-resistant strain (D10) of C.
albicans and Tricophyton mentagrophytes were susceptible to E.
pallida var. pallida root extract in the presence of UV light.‘

Studies in mice have described a dose-dependent protective
effect for polysaccharide fractions from E. purpurea plant cell
cultures against lethal-dose infection with C. albicans and Listeria
monocytogenes when administered intravenously within less than
18 hours of the infection dose. A similar finding was reported
when such polysaccharide fractions were administered to
immunosuppressed mice both before and after lethal dose
infection with C. albicans and L. monocytogenes.”

Antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus has been
demonstrated for a multi-herbal preparation containing E.
purpurea root extract, although it was stated that the observed
antibacterial effects were most likely attributable to one of the
other ingredients, extract of onion.”

Anti-inflammatory activity In vivo anti-inflammatory activity
has been reported for a polysaccharide fraction (PSF) obtained
from E. angustifolia roots in the carrageenan-induced rat paw
oedema test and in the croton oil mouse ear test, with the PSF
administered intravenously and_ topically, respectively.” The
isolated PSF was twice as active as the total aqueous extract in
the carrageenan-induced oedema test, and about half as active as
indometacin in the croton oil test. An aqueous extract of E.
angustifolia roots was also reported to be more effective than
benzydamine (a topical non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug
(NSAID)) in the croton oil test.” Further work using fractions
of an aqueous extract of E. angustifolia roots administered
topically to mice in the croton oil test attributed the observed
anti-inflammatory activity mainly to intermediate and high
molecular weight fractions.”

Oral administration of higher (100mg/kg) but not lower
(30 mg/kg) doses of E. purpurea dry root powder (containing
1.5% total polyphenols, calculated as chlorogenic acid) inhibited

carrageenan-induced paw oedema in mice; the effect was stated to
be similar to that of indometacin 0.25 mg/kg, although this was
not tested statistically.” Further exploration suggested that the
observed effect may be due to downregulation of cyclooxygenase 2
(COX-2) expression by the echinacea preparation. In vitro
inhibition of cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1) and, to a lesser extent,
COX-2 has been described for alkamides isolated from E.
purpurea roots,”® and in vitro inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase (5-
LO) and cyclooxygenase (from sheep seminal microsomes) has

been reported for polyunsaturated alkamides from E. angustifolia
(77)

roots.

Inhibition of 5-LO has also been described for extracts of roots
of E. purpurea, E. pallida var. pallida and E. pallida var.
angustifolia (identified according to a revised taxonomy).'”
ICs values (tg root/mL assay volume) were 0.642, 1.08 and 0.444,
respectively, and corresponding alkamide concentrations in the
root of each species were 0.05%, trace, and 0.2%, respectively.)

Anti-inflammatory and cicatrising activities have been reported
for gel preparations containing echinacoside 0.4 mg and E. pallida

root extract 100 mg following studies in rats with experimental
78)

skin abrasions and excision wounds.'® These effects were
observed 48 and 72 hours after topical administration, and were
stated to be greater than those observed for E. purpurea root
extract and control. However, no statistical analysis was reported.

The wound-healing properties documented for echinacea have
been attributed in part to a polysaccharide fraction, which is
thought to inhibit the action of hyaluronidase.” Ethanol extracts
of E. purpurea roots and aerial parts have been reported to inhibit
fibroblast-induced collagen contraction, although the significance
of this activity for wound healing needs to be investigated.”
Other studies have documented a protective effect for echinaco-
side, isolated from E. angustifolia root, and other caffeoyl esters
against free radical-induced degradation of collagen, an experi-
mental model for skin damage caused by exposure to ultraviolet
light.@”

Other activities A long-chain alkene from E. angustifolia is
stated to po antitumour activity in vivo, inhibiting the
growth of Walker tumours in rats and lymphocytic leukaemia
(P388) in mice.°”

In an assay of the mosquitocidal activity of alkamides isolated
from dried E. purpurea roots, a mixture of dodeca-2E,4E,8Z, 10E-
tetraenoic acid isobutylamide and dodeca-2E,4Z,8Z,10Z-tetra-
enoic acid isobutylamide at a concentration of 100 ttg/mL achieved
87.5% mortality of Aedes aegyptii L. mosquito larvae within 15
minutes. Several other alkamides assayed also demonstrated

mosquitocidal activity, but required longer incubation periods
(76)

and were less effective.

Free radical-scavenging activity has been documented for
alcoholic extracts of the roots and leaves of E. purpurea, E.
angustifolia and E. pallida in vitro.

Dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,10E/Z-tetraenoic isobutylamides found in
Echinacea species (but isolated in this experiment from Echinacea
atrorubens root) were transported across Caco-2 monolayers, an
in vitro model for intestinal absorption, over a 6-hour period.)
Transport kinetics did not differ significantly following modi
tion of the model (by preincubation of Caco-2 cells with
lipopolysaccharide and phorbol 12-myristate-13-acetate) to mimic
inflammation.

A similar study explored the transport of 12 alkamides and 5
caffeic acid conjugates from a proprietary preparation of
echinacea (Echinacea Premium Liquid; MediHerb, Australia),
which contains a 60% ethanol/water extract of E. angustifolia

a-

----- PAGE 234 -----
root (200 mg/mL) and E. purpurea root (300 mg/mL). Almost
all of the caffeic acid conjugates permeated poorly through the
Caco-2 monolayers: their uptake was no better than that of
control (mannitol, which is poorly absorbed); only cinnamic acid
diffused readily (apparent permeability coefficient, P,,,, = 1 x
10° * cm/second). By contrast, both 2,4-diene and 2-ene alkamides
readily diffused through the monolayers, although P,,) values
varied (range: 3 x 10° to 3 x 10°*cm/second), depending on
structure. Saturated compounds and those with N-terminal
methylation had lower permeability coefficients. These findings
suggest that alkamides, but not caffeic acid conjugates, are likely

to cross the intestinal barrier and thus be bioavailable following
(84)

oral administration.

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics There are only limited data on the clinical
pharmacokinetics of echinacea preparations (see also Pharmaco-
logical Actions, In vitro and animal studies, Other activities). One
study reported that dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,10E/Z-tetraenoic acid iso-
butylamide (alkamide) was detectable in blood one hour after oral
administration of 65 mL of a concentrated ethanolic extract of E.
purpurea herb (containing 4.3 mg isobutylamides) on an empty
stomach to a single healthy volunteer.**

In a study involving nine healthy volunteers who ingested four
Echinacea Premium tablets (MediHerb, Australia; each tablet
contains E. angustifolia root extract 150mg, containing 2.0 mg
alkamides, and E. purpurea root extract 112.5 mg, containing
2.1mg alkamides) after a high-fat breakfast, alkamides were
detected in plasma obtained from blood samples taken 20 minutes
after ingestion and some alkamides were detectable for 12 hours
post echinacea ingestion. The mean (standard error of mean)
maximum plasma concentration (Cyax) for total alkamides was
336 (131), time to Cyyax Was 2.3 (0.5) hours and the area under the
plasma concentration time curve (AUC,) was 714 (181) pg
equivalent/h/L. Most alkamides found in echinacea were detected
in plasma. In contrast, caffeic acid conjugates could not be
detected and therefore were reported not to be bioavailable.®”

In a randomised, open, crossover study, in which 11 healthy
volunteers received a single oral dose of 2.5 mL of a 60% ethanolic
extract of E. angustifolia roots (containing 2.0 mg tetraene per
2.5mL) in the morning following an overnight fast, C,,,, for
tetraene (a polyene) was reported to be around 11 ng/mL.”

Therapeutic effects Clinical trials of preparations containing
echinacea have focused on testing effects in preventing and
treating the common cold and other upper respiratory tract
infections (URTIs); some preliminary studies have explored the
effects of echinacea in other infections, such as genital herpes, and
as an adjunctive treatment in cancer chemotherapy. The rationale
for the use of echinacea in these conditions is for its
immunomodulatory activity. Collectively, the findings of studies
of echinacea are difficult to interpret as studies have assessed
preparations containing different species of echinacea and/or
different plant parts of echinacea, administered as monoprepara-
tions or in combination with other herbal ingredients, and
products manufactured by different processes and with different
dosage forms. Hence, the different preparations tested will vary
quantitatively and qualitatively in their chemical composition (i.e.
will contain different profiles and concentrations of chemica
constituents).

Immunomodulatory activity One of the first systematic reviews
of studies of echinacea-containing preparations ass

Echinacea

evidence of their immunomodulatory effects.** The review
included 26 controlled clinical trials, of which six investigated
the treatment of URTIs and influenza-like syndromes, seven
explored the treatment of other infections, such as sinusitis,
bronchitis and candida, six studied the prophylaxis of URTIs
and influenza-like syndromes, four tested the reduction by
echinacea of adverse effects of antineoplastic treatment and
three explored the effects on immunological parameters in
patients with infections or malignancies.”

Most studies reported that echinacea-containing prepara-
tions were superior to placebo in the indications tested.
However, trials included in the review tested different species,
parts and preparations (e.g. pressed juice, extract) of echinacea
administered via different routes (including oral and parent-
eral) and with different dosage regimens. In addition, many
studies were of poor methodological quality (only eight
achieved more than 50% of the maximum
a ment of quality), several preparations tested included
other herbs in addition to echinacea, and the review included

core in an

trials involving patients with a range of conditions, so evidence
for the immunomodulatory activity of echinacea from this
review can only be considered tentative at best.

The same research group carried out another systematic
review of five of their randomised, placebo-controlled studies
(four were also conducted double-blind) which investigated the
immunomodulatory activity of preparations of echinacea in
healthy volunteers. Again, there were marked differences
between the preparations tested in the studies included in the
review: combination homeopathic preparations containing E.
angustifolia at potencies of D1 and D4 (which can be
considered to contain reasonable quantities of starting
material) for intravenous administration; ethanolic extracts
of E. purpurea root and E. pallida root for oral administration;
ethanolic extract of 95% E. purpurea herb and 5% E. purpurea
root. In two of the five studies, phagocytic activity of
polymorphonuclear neutrophil granulocytes (the primary out-
come measure) was significantly increased in the echinacea

groups, compared with the placebo groups, although no such
89)

effects were noted in the other studies."
Recent studies investigating the immunomodulatory activity
of echinacea species administered to healthy volunteers have
reported different findings. In a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial, compared with a placebo group,
volunteers who received extracts of E. purpurea and E.
angustifolia with or without the addition of an arabinoga-
lactan extracted from Larix occidentalis (larch) for four weeks
were found to have increased concentrations of complement
properdin (thought to be an indication of immune system
stimulation).°° Other small placebo-controlled studies have
reported stimulatory effects following 28 days' oral pretreat-
ment with pressed juice of E. purpurea on the exercise-induced
immune response in athletes,°") and of administration of
purified polysaccharides from cell cultures of E. purpurea to
healthy volunteers.°” By contrast, a double-blind, placebo-
controlled, crossover study involving 40 healthy volunteers
found that oral administration of freshly expressed juice of E.
purpurea herb, or placebo, for two weeks did not enhance
phagocytic activity of polymorphonuclear leukocytes or
monocytes, or affect TNFa and IL-1 production.)
Preliminary studies have assessed the effects of a combina-
tion preparation containing extracts of E. angustifolia,
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset) and Thuja occidentalis
(thuja) on cytokine production in patients who have undergone

----- PAGE 235 -----
Echinacea

curative surgery for various solid malignant tumours,” and
the immunostimulatory effects of a regimen comprising
intramuscular E. purpurea extract, low-dose intramuscular
cyclophosphamide and intravenous thymostimulin in patients
5) Tn another study, the
effects of a polysaccharide fraction of E. purpurea herb
obtained from cell cultures in reducing the adverse effects of
cancer chemotherapy were explored in patients with
advanced gastric cancer receiving palliative therapy with
etoposide, leucovorin and 5-fluorouracil.°° Although these
studies reported some positive findings with echinacea, no
firm conclusions can be drawn because of the nature of the
study designs, therefore further research in this area is
required.

with advanced colorectal cancer.

Upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs) Numerous studies

have explored the effects

of echinacea preparations in
preventing or treating the common cold and other URTIs.
Overall, several, but not all, studies have reported beneficial
effects for certain echinacea preparations, compared with
placebo, for the prevention and treatment of URTIs. However,
for the reasons given (see Pharmacological Actions, Therapeu-
tic effects), current consensus is that there is insufficient
evidence to recommend any specific echinacea preparations, or
to advise on optimal dose and treatment duration.

Prophylaxis A Cochrane systematic review included 16
randomised and quasi-randomised controlled trials —
involving a total of almost 3400 participants — of extracts
of echinacea for preventing (7 = 8) or treating (1 = 8)
URTIs."”) The eight 'prevention' trials comprised five which
were placebo-controlled (2 = 1272 participants), and which
largely were considered to be of adequate methodological
quality, and three (7 = 1139 participants) in which the
control group received no treatment. The five placebo-
controlled trials tested combination echinacea preparations
(1 = 2) or monopreparations of E. purpurea herb or root, or
E. angustifolia root (n = 3), administered orally typically for
8-12 weeks. Two of these studies reported a statistically
significant reduction in the incidence of URTIs in echinacea
recipients, compared with placebo recipients (odds ratios,
95% confidence interval (CI): 0.45, 0.22-0.92 and 0.27,
0.11-0.66). One of these studies also found that in
participants who did acquire infections, the duration was
significantly shorter in those who had received echinacea
compared with placebo recipients, although two other
studies reported no difference in this outcome.

The three other 'prevention' trials all involved children
and compared a combination preparation containing
extracts of E. angustifolia and E. pallida root, Baptisia
tinctoria root and Thuja occidentalis herb, as well as several
homeopathic dilutions, with no treatment. All three studies
reported that the frequency of infection was significantly
lower in the treatment compared with no treatment group
(pooled odds ratio 0.36; 95% CI 0.28-0.46), although the
methodological quality of all three studies was considered
inadequate.°”

An updated Cochrane review used more restrictive
inclusion criteria for trials (e.g. randomised controlled
trials only, trials assessing multi-herb products excluded),

such that the revised review included only five trials that
(98)

had been included in the earlier review, and 11 new trials.
Two of the 16 included trials involving children, and the
others, adults; 15 trials used a placebo control design, one

compared an echinacea preparation with another herbal
product and no treatment, three trials involved two
echinacea arms, and one involved comparisons with both
placebo and no treatment, thus the total number of
comparisons in the review was 22.

In contrast with the earlier review, only three compar-
isons (from two trials?!) investigated echinacea pre-
parations for the prevention of colds, and none of these
found statistically significant differences between the
echinacea and placebo groups with respect to proportion
of participants experiencing one or more colds.°® Details

(99, 100)

of the two prevention trials included in the review,
well as those of several excluded trials, are given below.
These trials did not show beneficial effects for echinacea
preparations, compared with placebo, on main outcome
measures,(101 10)

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involved 302 healthy volunteers recruited from military
institutions and an industrial plant who received an
ethanolic extract of E. purpurea root or E. angustifolia
root (drug: extract ratio, 1: 11 in 30% alcohol), or placebo,
50 drops twice daily on five days per week (Monday to
Friday) for 12 weeks.” In an intention-to-treat analysis (1
= 289), the proportion of participants who experienced at
least one URTI was 32% (95% CI: 23-41%) for E.
angustifolia recipients, 29% (95% CI: 20-38%) for E.
purpurea recipients, and 37% (95% CI: 27-47%) for
placebo recipients; these differences were not statistically
significant (p = 0.55). Similarly, there were no statistically
significant differences between groups in time to occurrence
of the first URTI (p = 0.49), or in the duration of infections
(p = 0.29), although it is possible that the study was not
large enough to detect differences. However, a greater
proportion of echinacea recipients believed they had
benefited from the study medication than did placebo
recipients (78%, 70% and 56% for E. angustifolia, E.
purpurea and placebo, respectively; p = 0.04).

In another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial, involving 109 individuals who had experienced more
than three colds or respiratory infections in the previous
year, a fluid extract of E. purpurea prepared from the aerial
parts of fresh flowering plants, administered at a dose of
4mL twice daily for eight weeks, had no statistically
significant effect compared with placebo on the incidence of
colds and URTIs (rate ratio for number of participants in
each group with at least one cold or URTI = 0.88, 95% CI:
0.60-1.22)."° Likewise, there was no statistically signifi-
cant difference between groups in the duration and severity
of occurring colds or URTIs.

Three further studies"! tested the effects of
echinacea for the prevention of colds due to experimental
rhinovirus infection. In one study, adult volunteers (m = 117
enrolled) with a serum titre of neutralising antibody to
rhinovirus of <1:4 received echinacea (300 mg) or placebo
three times daily for 14 days prior to and for five days after
challenge with rhinovirus (7 = 92 challenged due to study
withdrawals). It is not stated in a report of the study”
whether random allocation to study group was undertaken,
or whether participants were masked (blind) to treatment
allocation, although a blinding check before virus challenge
found that 30 (60%) of the 50 echinacea recipients and 19
(45%) of the 42 placebo recipients thought they were
receiving the ‘active’ treatment (p = 0.21).

----- PAGE 236 -----
The study did not provide evidence to suggest that
echinacea had effects over those of placebo: rhinovirus
infection occurred in 22 (44%) of echinacea recipients and
in 24 (57%) of placebo recipients (rate ratio = 0.77; p =
0.3), ‘clinical’ colds developed in 50% and 59% of echinacea
and placebo recipients, respectively (p = 0.77), and there
was no difference in mean total symptom scores (11.4, 95%
CI 3.9-18.9 and 13.6, 95% CI 7.5-19.7 for echinacea and
placebo, respectively). However, the study involved small
numbers of participants and a sample size calculation was
not reported, hence it is possible that the study was not
large enough to be able to detect a difference if one existed.
Additionally, information on the species of echinacea, plant
part used, type of preparation (e.g. extract) and route of
administration used was not provided in a report of this
study."!°) Tt was stated that the preparation contained
cichoric acid 0.16% and almost no echinacosides or
alkamides, but with this limited information, it is not
possible to say with certainty which species is likely to have
been used, although it may have been E. purpurea.

In a subsequent study" a randomised, double-blind
trial, 48 healthy adults received a preparation containing the
pressed juice of the aerial parts of E. purpurea in a 22%
alcohol base (EchinaGuard) 2.5mL three times daily, or
placebo, for seven days before and after inoculation with
rhinovirus (RV-39) by intranasal administration in two
inocula about 30 minutes apart (total dose: 0.25mL per
nostril). The proportions (95% confidence intervals (CI)) of
participants with laboratory evidence of infection (at least a
fourfold increase in RV-39 neutralising antibody titre and/or
recovery of rhinovirus on viral culture), the primary
outcome measure, were 92% (95% CI: 73-99) and 96%
(95% CI: 77-100) for echinacea recipients and placebo
recipients, respectively, and with clinical illness (presence of
a cold defined as a five-day total symptom score of five or
more and three successive days of rhinorrhea or partici-
pant's positive self-report of a cold) 58% (95% Cl: 37-78)
and 82% (95% Cl: 60-94) for the echinacea and placebo
groups, respectively (p = 0.114). Thus, the results indicate
that, in this study, echinacea was no more effective than
placebo in preventing rhinovirus infection. However, it is
possible that the study did not have sufficient statistical
power to detect a difference between the two groups.”

The lack of effect observed in these two studies raises the
question whether or not the durations of administration (14
and seven days in the respective studies?" !)) of echinacea
prior to experimental rhinovirus infection were sufficient.
On the other hand, the observed lack of effect may simply
be because the studies were not large enough to be able to
detect a difference between the treatment and placebo
groups.
The effects of three different extracts of E. angustifolia
root on the prevention and treatment of experimental
rhinovirus infections were assessed in a randomised,

double-blind, placebo controlled trial involving 437 young
healthy volunteers." In the 'prevention' phase of the study,
volunteers received one of the three echinacea extracts
1.5mL three times daily, or placebo, for 7 days before
challenge with 100 50% tissue culture infectious doses of
rhinovirus type 39 (asymptomatic participants only). The
chemical profile of the extracts was reported to be:
supercritical carbon dioxide extract, alkamides 74%,
polysaccharides not present; 60% ethanol extract, poly-

Echinacea

saccharides 49%, alkamides 2.3%, cynarin 0.16 mg/mL;
20% ethanol extract, polysaccharides 42%, alkamides
0.1%; echinacoside was not detected in any of the extracts.
At the end of the seven-day period, there were no
statistically significant differences between the echinacea
and placebo groups with respect to the proportion of
participants in each group who developed an infection
following rhinovirus challenge (p > 0.05 for all compar-
isons). Participants who were challenged with rhinovirus
remained in the study for a 'treatment' phase (see Clinical
studies, Treatment).

A further 'prevention' trial assessed the effects of a
combination preparation containing extracts of aerial parts
of E. purpurea and roots of E. angustifolia (Chizukit,
Hadas Corporation Limited, Israel) 50mg/mL, propolis
50mg/mL and vitamin C 10mg/mL in children. In this
randomised, double-blind study, 430 children aged one to
five years received 5mL of the preparation (7.5mL for
children aged four to five years), or placebo, twice daily for
12 weeks over a winter period. If a respiratory tract
infection (RTT) occurred, the dosage was increased to four
times daily for the duration of the episode. In total, 328
children completed the study. According to an efficacy
analysis, the total number of episodes of illness, the mean
number of episodes per child and the proportion of children
with one or more episodes of illness were all significantly
lower in the echinacea group, compared with the placebo
group (reductions of 55%, 50% and 43%, respectively; p <
0.001 for each).

The authors' justification for not carrying out an
intention-to-treat analysis was that all dropouts occurred
in the first week of the trial; however, this decision should
have been made a priori and not because of high dropout
5) Other methodological limitations of the study are
that baseline data, other than mean age, for the two groups
are lacking, so it is not possible to assess the success of
randomisation, and several, rather than one, primary
105) Additionally, there is a lack
of detail regarding the preparation studied (e.g. types of
extracts, content of active constituents).

rates.

outcomes were assessed.'

Treatment The earlier Cochrane systematic review described
above (see Clinical studies, Prophylaxis) included eight
randomised, placebo-controlled trials of echinacea prepara-
tions for the treatment of URTIs.°” These trials tested
three different combinations of echinacea extracts and two
monopreparations, taken orally typically for 6-10 days. Six
studies reported statistically significant beneficial effects for
echinacea recipients, compared with placebo recipients, on
outcome measures such as duration of illness or symptoms
(e.g. 'running nose’). However, heterogeneity of the studies
precluded any further summary of the results. In addition,
several of the studies had methodological flaws or their
methodological quality could not be determined due to a
lack of detail about the study designs in published reports.
For these reasons, although the majority of the studies
described reported positive results for echinacea prepara-
tions, it was not possible to recommend any _ specific

product for the treatment of the common cold and further
)

: (97
research was considered necessary.
An updated Cochrane review used more restrictive

inclusion criteria for trials (see Clinical studies, Prophy-

----- PAGE 237 -----
226 Echinacea

Table 1 Summary of recent trials of echinacea preparations in the prevention and treatment of the common cold and other URTIs

Ref

Prevention
trials

99

100

101

102

103

104

Study
design

R, DB,
PC

R, DB,
PC

DB, PC

R, DB,
PC

R, DB,
PC

R, DB,
PC

Participants; n

Healthy adults
from military/
industrial
organisations in
Germany; n = 302
enrolled, n = 289
ITT analysis

Adults from a
large general
practice in
Germany who had
>3 colds/URTIs in
the previous year;
n= 109 enrolled,
n= 108 treated,
ITT analysis

Healthy adults
from university
community in
USA; n= 117
enrolled, n = 92
treated, analysed

Healthy adults; n=
48 enrolled

Healthy young
adults from
university
community in
USA; n = 437
enrolled, n = 419
treated, n = 399
analysed; this
study included
both a prevention
and a treatment
phase

Children aged 1-5
years; n = 430
enrolled, n = 328
efficacy analysis

Treatment group(s) —_ Control
regimen; n group; n
(ITT analysis) (ITT analysis)

Ethanolic extract (DER Placebo

1:11 in 30% alcohol) of: (coloured

(a) Ep root (n = 99) or ethanolic

(b) Ea root (n= 100); 50 solution); n =
drops bd on 5 days/ 90

week for 12 weeks

Fluid extract of Ep herb Placebo
4mL bd for 8 weeks; n= (coloured

55 ethanolic
solution); n =
54

Echinacea (0.16% Placebo; n=

cichoric acid; species, 42
plant part not stated)

300 mg tds for 14 days
before rhinovirus

challenge and for 5 days
after; n= 50

Pressed juice of aerial Placebo; n=
parts of Ep in 22% 24

alcohol, 2.5 mL tds for 7

days before rhinovirus

inoculation and for 7

days afterwards; n = 24

(a) Carbon dioxide Ea Placebo; n =
root extract; (b) 60% 274 for
ethanol Ea root extract; prevention
or (c) 20% ethanol Ea__ phase; n = 109
root extract; 1.5 mL for treatment
three times daily for phase

each, for 7 days before

virus challenge and for

5 days after; n = 163

randomised for

prevention phase; n =

328 for treatment phase

Combination Placebo; n=
preparation containing 168
extracts of aerial parts of

Ep and roots of Ea, 5mL

(7.5 mL for 4-5 year-

olds) bd for 12 weeks; n

= 160

Primary outcome Results (primary outcome
measure(s) measure)

Time to first URTI No statistically significant difference
between groups: mean time (95%
Cl) in days to first URTI 69 (64-74),
66 (61-72) and 65 (59-70) for Ep, Ea
and placebo, respectively; p = 0.49

Investigator- No statistically significant differences
assessed between groups: mean number
incidence, severity colds/URTI per subject 0.78 and 0.93
of colds/URTI for Ep and placebo, respectively

(difference = 0.15; 95% Cl -0.12,
0.41, p = 0.33); severity of infections
(p = 0.15)

Incidence of colds No statistically significant differences
between groups: proportions with
rhinovirus infection = 44 and 57% for
echinacea and placebo, respectively
(p = 0.3); proportions with clinical
colds = 50 and 59% for echinacea
and placebo, respectively (p = 0.77)

Frequency of No statistically significant differences
rhinovirus between groups: proportions (95%
infection as Cl) with laboratory evidence of
assessed by rhinovirus infection = 92% (73-99)
laboratory and 96% (77-100) for Ep and
evidence; placebo, respectively (p value not

incidence of colds reported); proportions (95% Cl) with
clinical colds = 58 (37-78) and 82
(60-94) for Ep and placebo,
respectively (p = 0.114)

Proportions of No statistically significant differences
participants who __ between echinacea and placebo
developed clinical groups: difference with respect to
colds (prevention proportions of participants who
phase) and total developed clinical colds (prevention
symptom scores _ phase) and total symptom scores
(treatment phase) (treatment phase) (p > 0.05 for

both)
Several stated, Total number of episodes of illness,
including total mean number of episodes per child,
number of proportion of children with one or

episodes of illness, more episodes of illness were

mean number of _ significantly lower (reductions of 55,
episodes per child, 50 and 43%, respectively) in the Ep/
proportion of Ea group compared with the placebo
children with one group (p < 0.001)

or more episodes

of illness

table continues

----- PAGE 238 -----
Table 1 continued

Ref Study
design

Treatment

trials

106 R, DB,
PC

107 R, DB,
PC

108 R, DB,
PC

109 QR,
DB, PC

110 R, DB,
PC

111 R, DB,
PC

112 R, DB,
PC

Participants; n Treatment group(s) Control
regimen; n group; n
(ITT analysis) (ITT analysis)
University Capsules containing Placebo
students in USA — dried Ea root 123mg, __ (alfalfa
with colds of Ep root 62mg andEp 333mg); n=
recent onset; n= herb 62mg plus 73
148 enrolled, n= flavourings, 4 capsules 6
142 analysed (no times during first 24
post-enrolment hours of cold onset,
data available for then 4 capsules tds until
6 participants) symptoms resolved
(max 10 days); n= 69
Healthy adults Tablets containing Placebo; n=
‘prone’ to crude extract of:(a) Ep 64
common cold in 6.78mg herb (95%),
Sweden; n= 559 root (5%), n = 55; (b)
enrolled, n= 246 Ep 48.27 mg herb
who took study (95%), root (5%), n=
medication ITT 64; (c) Ep 29.6 mg root
analysis (100%), n = 63; 2
tablets tds at cold onset
until symptoms
resolved (max 7 days)
Adults with EC31J0 (pressed juice of Placebo; n =
symptoms of a Ep herb) 5mL bd for 10 39
cold in Germany; days; n = 41
n= 80 enrolled
and analysed
Adults with cold Tea comprising Ep and Placebo —
onset employed at Ea herb and extract of herbal tea
nursing home in — Ep root (equivalent to containing 7
USA; n= 95 1275 mg dried herb and _ herbal
root per tea bag); 5-6 _ ingredients,
cups of teaon day 1, __ including
titrating down to 1 cup peppermint
per day over next 5 leaf and
days; n= 48 ginger
rhizome; n=
47
Adults within 24 — Capsules containing Placebo
hours of first 100 mg freeze-dried
symptoms of a pressed juice of Ep; one
cold in USA; n= _ tds until symptoms
128 resolved or max imum
of 14 days)
Adults with history Echinilin (standardised Placebo; n =
of colds in Ep extract)10 x 4mL 69
Canada; n= 282, on day 1 then 4 x 4mL
of whom 128 for next 6 days; n= 59
contracted a cold
Children aged 2— Dried pressed juice of — Placebo; n=
11 years; n= 524 aerial parts of Ep in 261

enrolled syrup; n = 263

Primary outcome
measure(s)

Self-reported
duration, severity
of colds

Physician-assessed
reduction in
symptom index

Duration of illness
(full picture of
common cold
based on self-
reported
symptoms)

No primary
outcome stated;
measures included
self-reported
symptoms and
duration

Modified Jackson
method for
severity of
symptoms; time
to resolution of
symptoms

Change in total
daily symptom
scores (TDSS) for
7-day treatment
period, duration
of symptoms

Duration and
severity of
symptoms

Echinacea cr

Results (primary outcome
measure)

No statistically significant differences
between groups: difference (95% Cl)
in duration = -0.52 days (-1.09 to
0.22); global severity (numerical data
not shown)

Treatments a and b, but not
treatment c, significantly more
effective than placebo: mean (95%
Cl) relative reduction in symptoms =
58.7% (48.7, 68.7), 58.1% (47.7,
69.7), 46.1% (30.1, 62.1) and
33.6% (16.6, 50.6), for a, b, c and
placebo, respectively (p = 0.045,
0.027 and 0.133 for a, b and c versus
placebo, respectively)

Duration significantly shorter in
echinacea group compared with
placebo group (6 and 9 days,
respectively; p = 0.0112)

Self-reported mean (SD)
‘effectiveness score’ significantly
higher for echinacea compared with
placebo (4.125 (0.959) and 2.787
(0.954), respectively; p < 0.001) but
self-reported mean duration of
symptoms significantly longer (4.33
(0.930) and 2.34 (1.09), respectively;
p < 0.001)

No statistically significant differences
between groups for total symptom
scores, mean individual symptom
scores and duration of symptoms (p
range = 0.29-0.90, prange = 0.09-
0.93, p = 0.73, respectively)

Mean TDSS were significantly lower
for E recipients, compared with
placebo recipients (p < 0.05), but
there was no statistically significant
difference in duration of symptoms,
according to ITT analysis (n = 128) (p
> 0.05 for all symptoms)

No statistically significant differences
between groups for duration and
severity of symptoms (p = 0.89 and
0.69, respectively)

bd = twice daily; DB = double-blind; DER = drug:extract ratio; E = Echinacea; Ea = E. angustifolia; Ep = Echinacea purpurea; ITT = intention-to-treat; PC = placebo-
controlled; QR = quasi-randomised; R = randomised; tds = three times daily; URTIs = upper respiratory tract infections

----- PAGE 239 -----
Echinacea

19 comparisons) investigating echinacea preparations for
the treatment of colds.°*) Most of the included trials were
considered to be of 'reasonable to good quality'. However,
trials assessed a variety of different preparations of
echinacea, administered according to different dosage
regimens, and more than one trial was available only for
preparations of pressed juice obtained from the aerial parts
of E. purpurea. In these two placebo-controlled trials,
treatment was taken at the first signs of a cold; the number
of participants developing a full cold was significantly lower
in the echinacea group, whereas in the other trial, the
difference did not reach statistical significance.» Details of
eight trials included in the review (all are new trials
published since the earlier Cochrane review) are sum-
marised below. Collectively, the findings of available trials
are difficult to interpret because of the wide variations in
preparations tested; many marketed preparations of echi-
nacea have not been tested at all in clinical trials.°" Future
trials should report the chemical composition of the
echinacea material tested, and ideally assess the effects of
standardised preparations.

Several new trials of echinacea preparations in the
treatment of URTIs have been completed since the
Cochrane review (Table 1) and have reported conflicting
results, 071!)

The effects of capsules containing 100 mg freeze-dried
pressed juice of the aerial parts of E. purpurea, standardised
for 2.4% -1,2-p-fructofuranosides, were explored in a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial invol-
ving 128 adults enrolled into the study within 24 hours of
their first symptoms of a cold.‘'!° Participants ingested one
capsule three times daily until symptoms resolved, or for a
maximum of 14 days. At the end of the study, there were no
statistically significant differences between groups with
respect to time to resolution of symptoms, daily  self-
recorded symptom scores, and frequency of adverse events.
It is unclear why the preparation was standardised for
content of -1,2-p-fructofuranosides rather than, for
example, alkamides, and why content of other constituents
was not reported. Thus, it is difficult to interpret these
results in the context of the findings of other studies.

In a larger randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial, 282 adults with a history of two or more colds in the
previous year received a standardised preparation of
echinacea (Echinilin), or placebo, taken at the start of a
cold (ten 4-mL doses over day 1, then four 4-mL doses daily
for the next six days)."' The echinacea preparation
contained concentrated water-ethanol extracts of alka-
mides, cichoric acid and polysaccharides, obtained from
various parts (no further details provided) of freshly
harvested E. purpurea plants, and combined in 40% ethanol
to provide concentrations of 0.25, 2.5 and 25.5mg/mL,
respectively. At the end of the study, according to an
intention-to-treat analysis for the 128 participants who
contracted a cold, self-assessed mean total daily symptom
scores (TDSS; the primary efficacy parameter) were
significantly lower for echinacea recipients than for placebo
recipients (mean TDSS (95% CI) were 16.3 (13.6-19.0) and
19.9 (17.5-22.5), respectively for the echinacea and placebo
groups; p < 0.05).

A report of this study lacks several important details.
Numbers of participants initially randomised to the
echinacea and placebo groups, and demographic data (e.g.

mean age, gender etc) are not provided for the 282
participants who entered the study, so it is not possible to
judge whether or not the randomisation process was
successful in balancing the two groups with respect to
these variables. These data are reported for the intention-to-
treat analysis, and the placebo group has a markedly higher
proportion of females than does the echinacea group (75%
versus 54%, respectively). However, it is not possible to
establish whether the placebo group originally comprised a
greater proportion of females simply by chance through
randomisation, or whether a markedly greater proportion
of women in the placebo group perceived that they
contracted a cold. This imbalance, and the implications it
may have for the results, has not been considered adequately
in the analysi:

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, com-
munity-based trial involving 148 students with common
colds of recent onset, assessed the effects of capsules
containing unrefined E. purpurea herb (62mg), root
(62mg) and E. angustifolia root (123 mg). Analysis of
samples of the preparation by independent laboratories
found that they contained cichoric acid and alkamides
(0.5% to <1.0%), and echinoside, chlorogenic acid and
caffeoyltartaric acid (all >0.1% to <0.5%). Participants
took four capsules six times during the first 24 hours of the
onset of a cold, followed by four capsules three times daily
until symptoms resolved, or for up to 10 days. Among the
142 participants who completed the study, there was no
difference in the mean duration of cold symptoms (6.27
and 5.75 days for the echinacea and placebo groups,
respectively; difference: —0.52 days, 95% CI —1.09 to 0.22
days), even though the study had an adequate sample siz
with a sample size of 150 participants, the study would
have had 80% power to detect a benefit of two days'
duration.

Three different preparations and doses of E. purpurea
were tested in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial in healthy adults.{!°” The four arms of the
study were: 6.78mg E. purpurea crude extract, based on
95% herb and 5% root (Echinaforce); 48.27 mg E. purpurea
crude extract, based on 95% herb and 5% root; 29.60 mg E.
purpurea crude extract, based on root only; and placebo. In
total, 246 participants experienced symptoms typical of the
onset of a common cold and took their allocated study
medication two tablets three times daily until they felt
better, or for up to seven days. According to an intention-to-
treat anal. prepared from
both E. purpurea herb and root were significantly more
effective than E. purpurea root extract and placebo in
reducing symptoms as assessed by the investigator (the
primary outcome measure): the relative reductions in the
mean complaint index for these preparations were 58.7%
(95% CI 48.7-68.7; p = 0.045 versus placebo) and 58.1%
(95% CI 47.7-69.7; p = 0.027 versus placebo).!'”

Statistically significant effects for an extract of E.
purpurea herb (Echinacin) on median duration of illness
were reported in another randomised, double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled trial involving 80 adults who experienced
onset of a cold (median duration six and nine days for
echinacea and placebo, respectively; p = 0.0112).'°%
Participants started taking their allocated medication on
first experiencing symptoms, and continued treatment
(SmL twice daily) until symptoms resolved.

, the two echinacea extrac

----- PAGE 240 -----
A further placebo-controlled study involving adults with
early symptoms of a cold (7 = 95) explored the effects of a
combination preparation containing E. purpurea and E.
angustifolia herb and extract of E. purpurea root, as well as
lemongrass leaf and spearmint leaf as flavourings, for-
mulated as a tea." When prepared as directed, tea
prepared from one bag was stated to provide 31.5 mg of
phenolic compounds, calculated as caftaric acid, cichoric
acid, chlorogenic acid and echinacoside. The results
suggested a statistically significant difference between the
treatment and placebo groups in self-rated effectiveness —
mean (standard deviation, SD) effectiveness score 4.13
(0.96) and 2.78 (0.95) for echinacea tea and placebo,
respectively (p < 0.001) — although the mean (SD) duration
of symptoms was significantly longer in the echinacea
group, compared with the placebo group (4.33 (0.93) and
2.34 (1.09) for echinacea tea and placebo, respectively; p <
0.001). In addition, the study had several methodological
limitations. For example, although stated to be rando-
mised, the study did not involve true randomisation
(participants were allocated to groups alternately), the
‘placebo! tea contained low doses of several herbs
(peppermint leaf, sweet fennel seed, ginger rhizome, papaya
leaf, alfalfa leaf and cinnamon bark), and outcomes were
self-assessed only.
The effects of three different extracts of E. angustifolia
root on the prevention and treatment of experimental
rhinovirus infections were assessed in a randomised,
double-blind, placebo controlled trial involving 437 young
healthy volunteers."°” In the 'prevention' phase of the study
(see Clinical studies, Prophylaxis), volunteers received one
1.5mL three times daily, or
placebo, for 7 days before challenge with 100 50% ti
culture infectious doses of rhinovirus type 39 (asympto-
matic participants only). Participants who were challenged
with rhinovirus remained in the study for a 'treatment'
phase during which they continued with their initial
treatment allocation (i.e. one of the three echinacea extracts
or placebo) or, having received placebo during the
‘prevention’ phase, received one of the three echinacea
extracts during the treatment phase. Treatment was given
according to the same dosage regimen for five days after
virus challenge.

At the end of the study, there were no statistically
significant differences between the echinacea and placebo
groups with respect to total symptom scores and propor-
tions of participants who developed clinical colds.

The chemical profile of the extracts was reported to be:
supercritical carbon dioxide extract, alkamides 74%,
polysaccharides not present; 60% ethanol extract, poly-
saccharides 49%, alkamides 2.3%, cynarin 0.16 mg/mL;
20% ethanol extract, polysaccharides 42%, alkamides
0.1%; echinacoside was not detected in any of the extracts.
It remains possible that other constituents or combinations
of constituents have pharmacological effects," although
bioavailability would need to be demonstrated. The
alkamide constituents of E. angustifolia root and E.
purpurea root have been detected in plasma following

administration of an echinacea product to healthy volun-
86)

of the three echinacea extrac

ue

teers.

Two other studies have assessed the effects of echinacea
preparations in the treatment of URTIs in children. In a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 524

Echinacea

children aged two to eleven years received dried pressed
juice of the aerial parts of E. purpurea (harvested at
flowering) combined with syrup, or placebo (syrup only)
3.75mL (SmL for 6 to 11 year olds) twice daily during a
URTI and until all symptoms had resolved up to a
maximum of 10 days.'!?) Data were available for 707 of
759 (94%) URTIs that occurred during the study period;
370 and 337 of these occurred in the placebo and echinacea
groups, respectively. A significantly greater proportion of
children in the placebo group had more than one URTI,
when compared with the echinacea group (64.4% vs 52.3%
for placebo and echinacea, respectively; p = 0.015). There
were no statistically significant differences between groups
for the primary outcome measures duration (p = 0.89) and
severity of symptoms (P = 0.69) or for secondary outcome
measures, including peak severity of symptoms, number of
days of peak symptoms and number of days with fever (p >
0.08 for all). This study has been criticised, in particular,
because the preparation tested was not analysed to
determine its chemical composition; in response, the
authors stated that the constituent(s) responsible for the
putative clinical effects have not been definitively estab-
lished."!!) While this is indeed the case, it is nevertheless
important to describe the chemical composition of the
product tested (e.g. its alkamide and polysaccharide
content) so that the findings of the study can be considered
in the context of other research.

The effects of a preparation containing expressed juice
(80 mL/100 mL preparation) from freshly collected flowering
E. purpurea plants (Immunal, SIA International, Volgograd,
Russia) were compared with those of a preparation (SHA-
10, Swedish Herbal Institutue, Gothenburg, Sweden)
containing a standardised extract of Andrographis panicu-
lata (5.25mg andrographolide and deoxyandrographolide
per tablet) and extract of Eleutherococcus senticosus
(9.7mg per tablet) in a randomised, double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled trial involving 133 children aged four to
eleven years with uncomplicated URTI for whom treatment
could begin within 24 hours of the onset of symptoms.(!!>
The dosage regimens were 10 drops three times daily for the
echinacea preparation, and two tablets three times daily for
the A. paniculata preparation; the duration of treatment
was 10 days for both. The interventions were given in
addition to standard treatment (warm drinks, throat
gargles, nose drops and paracetamol 500mg three times
daily if required), and a control group received standard
treatment alone.

At the end of the study, A. paniculata recipients had
recovered more quickly than had participants in the other
two groups (p < 0.002), and the amount of nasal secretion
was significantly lower in the A. paniculata group,
compared with the echinacea group, from day five of the
study (p < 0.01)."')) This study, however, has several
methodological flaws: there was no pre-specified primary
outcome measure, and a sample size calculation does not
appear to have been carried out; the study was reported to
be double-blind, although it is not stated that placebo drops
and tablets were used; a doctor helped the children with
their self-assessment of symptoms, and it is not clear if and
how blinding was maintained throughout these interac-
tions; the study was focused on A. paniculata and analyses
comparing the echinacea and placebo groups were not
carried out.

----- PAGE 241 -----
Echinacea

Several trials of echinacea preparations in the prevention
of URTIs provide data on duration and severity of infections
occurring in participants (see Clinical studies, Prophylaxis).
While these data have some relevance to treatment, they
should not be grouped together, since the dosage regimens
are entirely different — in 'prevention' trials, participants
may have received study medication for several weeks or
more before experiencing an infection, whereas in 'treat-
ment’ trials, participants usually start study medication
immediately after the onset of symptoms.

Other infections A randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled, crossover trial assessed the effects of an extract of E.
purpurea herb (95%) and root (5%) (Echinaforce) on the
incidence and severity of recurrent genital herpes in 50 patients
who had not been exposed to aciclovir or similar medicines
within 14 days of enrollment into the study and who had had at
least four recurrences of genital herpes within the previous 12
months."'!® Study medication, or placebo, was taken orally
800 mg twice daily for six months. The study did not show any
significant difference between the two groups on the outcomes
measured (frequency and duration of recurrences, pain score,
CD4 cell count, neutrophil count), although there was a high
drop-out rate during the study.

A systematic review of studies exploring the immunomodu-
latory effects of echinacea-containing preparations included
seven controlled clinical trials in infections such as sinusitis,
bronchitis and candida (see Clinical studies, Immunomodula-
tory activity).

Side-effects, Toxicity

Frequency and type of adverse events Data on numbers of
participants experiencing adverse events were provided by several
studies included in a Cochrane systematic review of 16
quasi-randomised controlled trials of extracts
of echinacea for preventing or treating URTIs (see Clinical studies,
Prophylaxis, and Treatment).°°”) Four placebo-controlled 'preven-
tion’ trials of echinacea reported these data: in three trials,
involving a total of around 1000 participants, the frequency of
adverse events in the echinacea group was similar to that in the
corresponding placebo group; in one trial, adverse events did not
occur in either the echinacea or placebo groups. Three 'treatment'
trials provided adverse event data: in two studies, adverse events
were not observed in either the echinacea or the placebo groups,
and in one, numbers of patients experiencing adverse events in the
echinacea and placebo groups were similar (four and_ five,
respectively)?”

New clinical trials published since the Cochrane review also
report that there was no statistically significant difference in the
frequency of adverse events noted for echinacea preparations and
placebo."?"!” with the exception of one study which reported a
significantly higher frequency of rash in the echinacea group,
compared with the placebo group (7.1% vs 2.7% for echinacea
and placebo, respectively; p = 0.008).‘''? The updated Cochrane
review drew similar conclusions that data from the available
randomised controlled trials indicated that adverse effects or
events associated with the use of the echinacea preparations
assessed were infrequent, minor and similar to those noted for
placebo.”

Where adverse events were reported, most commonly these were
mild gastrointestinal symptoms,"0% 14 106 107116122) Another
review of clinical data, mostly from clinical trials, concluded

randomised an

that oral administration of the expressed juice of E. purpurea herb
is well-tolerated."'” The review included data from an unpub-
lished post-marketing surveillance study involving over 1200
individuals aged 2-20 years who used oral E. purpurea lozenges
for 4-6 weeks for URTIs, and which indicated that unpleasant
taste was the most frequently reported adverse event.

On the basis of these limited data, it seems that the risk of acute
adverse effects with echinacea is very small. However, it is not
possible to draw firm conclusions from these data for several
reasons — different echinacea preparations and regimens were
tested, different patient populations (adults, children) were
involved, and echinacea preparations were administered for only
a short time period, particularly in the ‘treatment’ trials.“'®) In
addition, since clinical trials usually have the statistical power only
to detect common, acute adverse effects and, as there is a lack of
data on the safety of the longer term use of echinacea
preparations, there is a need for further evaluation of the safety
of different echinacea preparations.

The low number of reports of suspected adverse reactions
associated with echinacea preparations set against estimates of the
high frequency of use of echinacea has been used as an argument
for the safety of echinacea.° However, this argument is flawed
since it fails to consider that under-reporting of suspected adverse

reactions associated with herbal medicines is likely at several
(119, G21

levels, ) and that in general reporting systems for herbal
medicines are not well-established. The use of sales data to
estimate the frequency of an adverse reaction can be misleading at
best and, in addition, the argument takes no account of the
differences in preparations of echinacea.

The UK Committee on Safety of Medicines (CSM) and
and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency
(MHRA) spontaneous reporting scheme (the 'yellow card' scheme)
for suspected adverse drug reactions (ADR) reporting received 34
reports describing 64 suspected ADRs associated with echinacea
preparations for the period 1 July 1963 to 1 June 2004 (see Table
2).29 For the majority of these cases, echinacea had been
administered orally; details of specific products, species of
echinacea, type of extract and other details are not available.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide, including the UK. To the end of the year
2004, the WHO-UMC had received a total of 259 reports,
describing a total of 537 adverse reactions, for products contain-
ing a single species of Echinacea.) The vast majority of these
reports describes reactions associated with E. purpurea, most
commonly (reaction listed 10 times or more): abdominal pain (7 =
10); angioedema (10); dyspnoea (18); nausea (14); pruritus (17);
rash (18); rash, erythematous (23); urticaria (23). (These data were
obtained from the Vigisearch database held by the WHO
Collaborating Centre for Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least
with respect to origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical
product caused the adverse reaction. Any information included in
this report does not represent the opinion of the World Health
Organization.)

Medicines

International

Allergic reactions

Echinacea species belong to the Asteraceae (Compositae, daisy)
family, members of which are known to cause allergic reactions.
Individuals with allergic tendencies, particularly those with

----- PAGE 242 -----
Echinacea 2

Table 2 Spontaneous reports of suspected adverse drug reactions associated with echinacea preparations submitted to the UK Committee on
Safety of Medicines/Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency for the period 01/07/1963 to 01/06/2004 (Adverse Drug Reactions

On-line Information Tracking 2004).“12

System organ class. Reaction names

Blood and lymphatic system disorders. Aplastic anaemia (1), coagulopathy (1), idiopathic thrombocytic purpura (1)
Cardiac disorders. Supraventricular tachycardia (1), ventricular arrhythmia NOS (1), palpitations (1)

Central and peripheral nervous system disorders. Including convulsions (5); dizziness (3); headache (6)

Endocrine disorders. Basedow’s disease (1)

Eye disorders. Blurred vision (1)

Gastrointestinal disorders. Faecal incontinence (1), irritable bowel syndrome (1), dysphagia (1), nausea (1), tongue oedema (1)

General disorders and administration site conditions. Rigors (1), drug interaction NOS (3), drug interaction potentiation (1), fatigue

(1), malaise (1), feeling abnormal (1)
Hepatobiliary disorders. Sclerosing cholangitis (1)

Infections and infestations. Parotitis (1)

Investigations. Blood pressure increased (1), INR increased (2), liver function test abnormal (1), weight increased (1)

Metabolism and nutrition disorders. Hyponatraemia (1)

Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders. Arthralgia (2), myalgia (1), muscle twitching (1)

Nervous system disorders. Central pontine myelinolysis (1), memory impairment (1), ataxia (1), abnormal co-ordination NOS (1),

Total

onus = = ww

o| pa] =| uw] =| =

loss of consciousness (1), burning sensation NOS (1), dysarthria (1), epilepsy NOS (1)

Psychiatric disorders. Agitation (1), panic reaction (1), confusional state (2), insomnia (1), sleep disorder NOS (1)
Renal and urinary disorders. Pollakiuria (1), urinary incontinence (1), haematuria (1)
Respiratory , thoracic and mediastinal disorders. Asthma NOS (1), dyspnoea (1), dry throat (1), pharyngolaryngeal pain (1)

Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders. Face oedema (1), urticaria NOS (3), erythema multiforme (1), erythema (1),

pruritus (1), rash NOS (1)
Vascular disorders. Flushing (1), hypertension NOS (1)
Total number of reactions

INR = international normalised ratio; NOS = not otherwise stated

known allergy to other members of the Asteraceae family (e.g.
chamomile) should be advised to avoid echinacea preparations
containing aerial parts.(0

Isolated spontaneous reports of suspected ADRs associated
with the use of echinacea preparations include allergic skin
reactions (see also Side-effects, Toxicity, Frequency and type of
adverse events).‘!!” In Australia, detailed a:
of allergic reactions temporally
(anaphylaxis, 2; acute asthma attack in an echinacea-naive
individual, 1; recurrent mild asthma, 1; macropapular rash, 1),
three of which reported positive rechallenge, revealed that three
patients had positive skin-prick test results for echinacea.‘ One
case report described a 37-year-old woman with atopy who
experienced anaphylaxis 30 minutes after ingesting several dietary
supplements (vitamins B,) and E, an iron preparation, ‘folate’,

ssment of five cases

associated with echinacea

vitamin B complex, a multivitamin preparation, zinc, antiox-
idants, a garlic and onion preparation, evening primrose oil) and
15 minutes after taking 5 mL of an echinacea preparation, stated
to be equivalent to E. angustifolia whole plant extract 3825 mg and
E. purpurea dried root 150 mg."'? The woman took prometha-
zine and was observed in an emergency department for 2 hours,
and her symptoms resolved without further treatment. Two weeks
later she gave a positive skin-prick test to the echinacea product,
but not to ‘crude’ extracts of the other supplements she had taken.
She had been taking echinacea for 2-3 years and had previously
taken the same product without experiencing any adverse effects.
A causal association in this case has been questioned."

oh Wn

64

Positive skin-prick test results for echinacea were also reported
for 20% of 100 echinacea-naive atopic individuals, and over 50%
of 26 Australian suspected ADR reports of hypersensitivity
associated with echinacea involved individuals with atopy.”
Echinacea has previously been reported to have produced positive

patch test reactions in four individuals with a previous history of
plane dermatitis.“©°” These reports raise hypotheses that require
testing in formal studies.

An isolated report describes a 41-year-old man who experienced
four episodes of erythema nodosum after using an echinacea
preparation at each onset of an influenza-like illness." The man
had been using echinacea intermittently for 18 months, as well as
loratadine on an as required basis and St John's wort for the
previous six months. Each episode of erythema nodosum
responded to conventional treatment including prednisone. The
man was advised to discontinue treatment with echinacea and,
after one year, had not experienced any further recurrences.
However, the report does not provide any details (species, plant
part, formulation, dosage regimen) of the echinacea preparation
involved and therefore is difficult to interpret. Causality has not
been established.

Other reactions

A case of hypokalaemic renal tubular acidosis due to Sjégren's
syndrome (a symptom complex of unknown aetiology, marked by
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, xerostamia, with or without lachrymal

----- PAGE 243 -----
Echinacea

and salivary gland enlargement, respectively, and presence of
ase, usually rheumatoid arthritis, but
sometime systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma or poly-
myositis) has been reported in a 36-year-old woman.‘ She was
stated to have begun taking echinacea, St. John's wort and kava
two weeks before becoming ill, but the report does not provide
any further
product(s), nor of the types of preparations, formulations, dosages
and routes of administration of any of the herbal medicines listed.
The woman was _hospitalise:
weakness and tests revealed she had a serum potassium ion
concentration of 1.3 mEq/L. She was given electrolyte replacement
for four days, after which the muscle weakness resolved, and was
started on hydroxychloroquine 200mg daily for ‘probable!
Sjégren's syndrome. The authors suggested that ingestion of
echinacea may have aggravated an autoimmune disorder, although
rechallenge with echinacea was not undertaken, and causality has
not been established.”

Another report describes a 49-year-old woman who presented
with a five-day history of numbness and weakness in her right
arm.” For the previous seven weeks she had received echinacea
comp 2mL mixed with 5mL of her venous blood intramuscularly
twice weekly to prevent infections and 'boost' her immune system.
The injection was stated to contain E. angustifolia D2 1.1mL,
Aconitum D4 0.3 mL and Lachesis (bushmaster snake venom) D8
0.3mL. (D nomenclature relates to a homeopathic dilution step;
D2 is equivalent to a 1 in 100 dilution, whereas D8 is equivalent to
a 1 in 100000000 dilution.)‘'2* The woman was admitted to
hospital with mild spastic paresis and fluctuating numbness of the
right arm and was described as having acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis; symptoms resolved after treatment with

connective tissue d

etails of the echinacea species contained in the

with severe generalised muscle

B

methylprednisolone 500 mg daily by intravenous infusion. Caus-
ality has not been established.

There is an isolated report of exacerbation of pre-existing
pemphigus vulgaris (a chronic, serious skin disorder characterized
by the development of easily ruptured blisters on skin and mucous
membranes) in a 55-year-old man who began taking an echinacea
product orally after developing an upper respiratory tract
infection.) Within a week, he developed blisters on his trunk,
head and oral mucosa; partial disease control was achieved after
discontinuing the product. It is possible that this exacerbation was
part of the natural course of disease, and causality in this case has
not been established. Furthermore, no further details of the
product, including species of echinacea, plant part, type of
preparation, and dosage were provided, and it is not stated
whether or not a sample of the product was retained. Without
verification that the product implicated did contain echinacea
material and was free of other ingredients or adulterants, this
report adds little to the debate on the safety of use of echinacea by
individuals with autoimmune disorders.

Toxicology

In general, animal studies with different preparations and
fractions of echinacea species have indicated low toxicity,“ In
acute toxicity studies involving polysaccharide fractions from E.
purpurea administered by intraperitoneal injection to small
numbers of mice, the LDso (lethal dose) for female mice was
2500 mg/kg.'°° Other acute toxicity studies using a preparation
comprising pressed juice from E. purpurea herb have provided
LDs5o values in mice of >30000 mg/kg and >10000 mg/kg for oral
and intravenous administration, respectively, and in rats of
>15 000 mg/kg and >5000 mg/kg or oral and intravenous admin-

istration, respectively.'3"'3?) Further experiments showed no

evidence of mutagenic activity in bacteria and mammalian cells
in vitro and in vivo in mice.

High concentrations of E. purpurea (8mg/mL) have been
reported to reduce sperm motility, sperm penetration of hamster
oocytes and to be associated with sperm DNA denaturation in
vitro; no such effects were observed with low concentra-
tions.{'> 54) These findings are difficult to interpret since there
is a lack of detail regarding the preparation of E. purpurea, and
their clinical relevance is questionable.

The pyrrolizidine alkaloids isotussilagine and tussilagine have
been documented for echinacea, although they possess a saturated
pyrrolizidine nucleus and are not thought to be toxic.

In vivo antitumour activity and in vitro stimulation of TNFa
secretion have been reported for echinacea. In addition to its
antitumour effects, TNF i:
and the manifestations of endotoxic shock.

stated to be a mediator of cachexia

Contra-indications, Warnings

It has been stated that echinacea is contra-indicated in patients
with progressive systemic diseases, such as tuberculosis, leukae-
mia and leukaemia-like diseases, collagen disorders, multiple
sclerosis and other autoimmune diseases."°*® In the UK, some
products also advise against use in AIDS and HIV infections. The
basis for these statements appears to be a theoretical one, based
on evidence that echinacea preparations have immunomodulatory
activity; there is an opposing view that echinacea is not harmful in
autoimmune diseases.‘ At present, there is a lack of reliable
clinical evidence to support these views, although in view of the
riousness of the conditions listed, it is appropriate to avoid use
in these disorders until further information is available.

Interactions There are no reported drug interactions for
echinacea, although on the basis of its documented immunomo-
dulatory activity, as a general precaution, echinacea should only
be used with caution in patients taking immunosuppressant drugs.

A study involving 12 healthy non-smoking volunteers assessed
the effects of E. purpurea root (Nature's Bounty, Bohemia, New
York, USA) on the activity of the cytochrome P450 enzymes
CYP1A2, CYP2C9 and CYP2D6 and CYP3A using caffeine,
tolbutamide, dextromethorphan and midazolam, respectively, as
probe drugs (i.e. substrates for the respective CYP enzymes).''*)
After a control phase in which volunteers received all of the probe
drugs orally (with the exception of midazolam which was given
intravenously and, later, orally), participants took E. purpurea
root 400 mg four times daily for eight days; the product was stated
to contain more than 1% phenols (caftaric acid, chlorogenic acid,
echinacoside and cichoric acid). On the sixth day, the probe drugs
were administered and blood and urine samples were collected as
during the control phase.

The clearance of caffeine after oral administration was reduced

significantly during echinacea administration compared with
values obtained during the control phase (mean (SD): 6.6 (3.8)
L/hour and 4.9 (2.3) L/hour for echinacea and control periods,
respectively; p = 0.049), although the half-life (ty,) of caffeine,
area under the curve (AUC) and maximum concentration (Cyyax)
were not significantly altered. Time to maximum concentration
(tmax) Was significantly increased for both caffeine and tolbuta-
mide during echinacea administration, compared with baseline
values (p = 0.015 and 0.004, respectively). Dextromethorphan
pharmacokinetics were unaltered during echinacea administration
in the 11 participants who were extensive metabolisers. The

----- PAGE 244 -----
clearance of midazolam following intravenous, but not oral,
administration was significantly increased during echinacea
administration, compared with baseline values (mean (SD): 43
(16) L/hour and 32 (7) L/hour, respectively; p = 0.003).

These findings suggest that E. purpurea root inhibits CYP1A2,
but not CYP2C9 and CYP2D6, and that CYP3A activity is
selectively modulated: intestinal CYP3A activity is inhibited and
hepatic CYP3A activity is induced. There are several possible
explanations for the selective effects of E. purpurea root on
CYP3A activity: the constituent(s) of echinacea responsible for
CYP3A inhibition may not be systemically available, thus avoiding
hepatic CYP3A_ inhibition; the constituent(s) of echinacea
responsible for CYP3A induction may be rapidly absorbed, thus
intestinal CYP3A induction is avoided; hepatic CYP3A may be
induced by a systemically formed metabolite of a constituent of
echinacea; CYP3A induction may involve tissue-specific activators
which are differentially influenced by constituents of echina-
cea.‘

In a subsequent, similar study, 12 healthy volunteers received
capsules containing a whole plant extract of E. purpurea
(containing cichoric acid 13.7 mg; chlorogenic acid and echinaco-
side were not detected by HPLC analysis) 800 mg twice daily for
28 days. Participants also received three other herbal products
(Citrus aurantium, Serenoa serrulata and Silybum marianum),
each administered separately for 28 days; the four herbal products
were administered in random sequence, with a 30-day wash-out
period between each, until each participant had received all four
herbal products. It was stated that there were no statistically
significant differences between serum ratios of probe drugs and
their respective metabolites obtained before and after administra-
tion of E. purpurea extract and, therefore, that the extract had no
significant effect on CYP1A2, CYP2D6, CYP2E1 or CYP3A4
activities. The authors' conclusions, however, included the caveat
that the effects of E. purpurea extract on CYP enzyme activity,
particularly that of CYP1A2 and CYP3A4, merit further
study, ‘3

The effects of echinacea products available in Canada on
inhibition of the human cytochrome P450 drug metabolising
enzyme CYP3A4 have been tested in vitro using a fluorometric
mitrotitre plate assay."” In the study, 10mL samples of
preparations of E. angustifolia roots, E. purpurea roots and
herb, and a 1:1 blend of E. angustifolia and E. purpurea
(plant parts not specified) were standardised to contain
ethanol 55% and used as stock solutions. Samples of serial
dilutions of these preparations, as well as different concentra-
tions of the pure compounds echinacoside and cichoric acid,
were assayed. The blend of E. angustifolia and E. purpurea,
and E. purpurea herb showed ‘moderate’ inhibition of
CYP3A4: median (95% CI) inhibitory concentration (ICs)
values (% of full strength preparation) were 6.73 (4.75, 10.09)
and 8.56 (5.95, 13.05), respectively. Echinacoside also showed
moderate inhibitory activity (median ICs9 values (95% CI) 6.29
(2.07, 71.56)), whereas cichoric acid showed low inhibitory
activity.”

A study in mice fed both melatonin and an extract of E.
purpurea root in their diet reported reduced numbers of
proliferating myeloid cells in the spleen and bone marrow.'**)

Further research is needed to determine whether these findings
are clinically important.

Pregnancy and lactation There is a lack of data on the safety of
echinacea preparations taken during pregnancy and lactation and,
given that the benefits of specific echinacea preparations have not

Echinacea

been established definitively, excessive use during these periods
should be avoided as a general precaution.

A cohort study compared numbers of live births, and
spontaneous and therapeutic abortions occurring among women
who had taken echinacea preparations during pregnancy (n = 206,
112 of whom took echinacea during the first trimester) with those
occurring among a control group of 206 women matched for
disease (URTI), maternal age and alcohol and cigarette use.‘??
The exposed group of women had telephoned a hospital teratogen
information service regarding the use of echinacea during
pregnancy; the unexposed group had also telephoned the service
for this reason, but subsequently did not use echinacea or used a
non-teratogenic antibiotic instead.

There were no statistically significant differences between the
two groups in assessed outcomes including number of live births,
spontaneous and therapeutic abortions, gestational age, birth
weight and rates of malformations. In the exposed group there
were six major and six minor malformations, compared with
seven major and seven minor malformations in the control
group.''*) The study has several limitations, particularly the small
sample size, meaning that the study would have the statistical
power only to detect common malformations, and self-report of
exposure, since it is possible that misclassification could have
occurred (e.g. exposed women reported as unexposed). In
addition, participants used a range of different preparations of
echinacea at different dosage regimens, so the study does not
provide adequate evidence for any specific preparation. Further
study is required to establish the safety profile of echinacea during
pregnancy.

Argentina: Parodontax Fluor; $SX-22. Australia: Andrographis
Complex; Andrographis Compound; Astragalus Complex;
Broncafect; Cats Claw Complex; Cold and Flu Relief; Cough
Relief; Digest; Echinacea 4000; Echinacea ACE + Zinc;
Echinacea Complex; Echinacea Lozenge; Euphrasia Complex;
Flavons; Galium Complex; Gartech; Herbal Cleanse; Herbal
Cold & Flu Relief; Lifesystem Herbal Plus Formula 8
Echinacea; Logicin Natural Lozenges; Odourless Garlic;
Proyeast; Sambucus Complex; Urgenin; Urinase. Austria:
Parodontax; Parodontax; Spasmo-Urgenin; Urgenin. Belgium:
Urgenin. Brazil: Malvatricin Natural Organic; Malvatricin
Natural; Parodontax. Canada: Bentasil Licorice with Echina-

----- PAGE 245 -----
Echinacea

esiston avec vitamine C; Esberitop; Gel a la consoude; Prosta-
Caps Chassot N; Spagymun; Spagyrom; Wala Echinacea.
Thailand: Spasmo-Urgenin. UK: AllerClear; Antifect; Catarrh
Tablets; Echinaboost; Echinacea; Goodypops; Hay Fever &
Sinus Relief; Hayfever & Sinus Relief; Héfels Echinacea and
Rosehip; Immune Insurance; Modern Herbals Cold &
Catarrh; Napiers Echinacea Tea; Revitonil; Sinotar; Sinus
and Hay Fever Tablets. USA: Echinacea Golden Seal; Laci
Throat Care Soothing Citrus; Laci Supplement Power Time;
Immune Support; TriMune.

References

1 Bauer R et al. Alkamides from the roots of Echinacea angustifolia.
Phytochemistry 1989; 28: 505-508.

2 Bauer R, Wagner H. Echinacea. In: Ein Handbuch fiir Arzte,
Apotheker und andere Naturwissenschaftler. Stuttgart:
Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft, 1990: 182.

3 Bauer R, Wagner H. Echinacea — Der Sonnenhut — Stand der
Forschung. Z Phytother 1988; 9: 151-159.

4 Bauer R, Remiger P. TLC and HPLC analysis of alkamides in
Echinacea drugs. Planta Med 1989; 55: 367-371.

5. Lienert D et al. Gas chromatography-mass spectral analysis of roots
of Echinacea species and classification by multivariate data analysis.
Phytochem Anal 1998; 9: 88-89.

6 Sloley BD et al. Comparison of chemical components and antioxidant
capacity of different Echinacea species. ] Pharm Pharmacol 2001; 53:
849-857.

7 Kraus GA, Bae J. Synthesis of N-(2-methylpropyl)-2E-undecene-8,10-
diynamide, a novel constituent of Echinacea angustifolia. Tetrahedron
Lett 2003; 44: 5505-5506.

8 Becker H et al. Structure of echinoside. Z Naturforsch 1982; 37c: 351-
353.

9 Pietta P, Mauri P, Bauer R. MEKC analysis of different species. Planta
Med 1998; 64: 649-652.

10 Wills RBH, Stuart DL. Alkylamide and cichoric acid levels in
Echinacea purpurea grown in Australia. Food Chem 1999; 67: 385—
388.

11 Niisslein B et al. Enzymatic degradation of cichoric acid in Echinacea
purpurea preparations. J Nat Prod 2000; 63: 1615-1618.

12 Proksch A, Wagner H. Structural analysis of a 4-O-
methylgluconoarabinoxylan with immunostimulating activity from
Echinacea purpurea. Phytochemistry 1987; 26: 1989-1993.

13 Wagner H et al. Immunostimulating action of polysaccharides
(heteroglycans) from higher plants. Arzneimittelforschung 1985; 35:
1069-1075.

14 Bauer R. Echinacea — Pharmazeutische qualitat und therapeutischer
wert. Z Phytother 1997; 18: 207-214.

15 Blaschek W et al. Echinacea — Polysaccharide. Z Phytother 1998; 19:
255-262.

16 Classen B et al. Characterisation of an arabinogalactan-protein
isolated from pressed juice of Echinacea purpurea by precipitation
with the B-glucosyl Yariv reagent. Carbohydrate Res 2000; 327: 497-
504.

17. Bauer R et al. TLC and HPLC analysis of Echinacea pallida and E.
angustifolia root. Planta Med 1988; 54: 426-430.

18 Réder E et al. Pyrrolizidine in Echinacea angustifolia DC und
Echinacea purpurea M. Arzneimittelforschung 1984; 124: 2316-2317.

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

41

42

43

45

Lin L et al. Patuetin-3-O-Rutinoside from the aerial parts of
Echinacea angustifolia. Pharm Biol 2002; 40: 92-95.

Bauer R et al. New alkamides from Echinacea angustifolia and E.
purpurea roots. Planta Med 1988; 563-564.

Glowniak K et al. Solid phase extraction and reversed-phase high-
performance liquid chromatography of free phenolic acids in some
Echinacea species. | Chromatogr A 1996; 730: 25-29.

Pugh N et al. Elusive immunostimulatory compound discovered in
Echinacea and other immune enhancing botanicals. International
Congress on Natural Product Research. Phoenix, Arizona, 2004: 44
[abstract].

Perry NB et al. Alkamide levels in Echinacea purpurea: a rapid
analytical method revealing differences among roots, rhizomes, stems,
leaves and flowers. Planta Med 1997; 63: 8-62.

Osowski S$ et al. Zur pharmazeutischen Vergleichbarkeit von
therapeutisch verwendeten Echinacea-Praparaten. Forsch
Komplementirmed Klass Naturheilk 2000; 7: 294-300.
ConsumerLab. Product review: Echinacea. [accessed September 23,
2003]

Gilroy CM et al. Echinacea and truth in labeling. Arch Intern Med
2003; 163: 699-704.

Tobler M et al. Characteristics of whole fresh plant extracts. Schweiz
Zschr GanzheitsMedizin 1994; 6: 257-266.

Bauer R. Standardization of Echinacea purpurea expressed juice with
reference to cichoric acid and alkalamides. J Herbs Spices Med Plants
1999; 6: 51-62.

Ganzera M et al. An improved method for the determination of
betaine in Echinacea products. Pharmazie 2001; 56: 552-553.

Gray DE e¢ al. Acute drought stress and plant age effects on
alkalamide and phenolic acid content in purple coneflower roots.
Planta Med 2003; 69: 50-55.

Kabganian R et al. Drying of Echinacea angustifolia roots. ] Herbs
Spices Med Plants 2002; 10: 11-19.

Perry NB et al. Alkamide levels in Echinacea purpurea: effects of
processing, drying and storage. Planta Med 2000; 66: 54-56.

Livesey J et al. Effect of temperature on stability of marker
constituents in Echinacea purpurea root formulations. Phytomedicine
1999; 6: 347-349.

Li TS, Wardle DA. Effects of root drying temperature and moisture
content on the levels of active ingredients in Echinacea roots. ] Herbs
Spices Med Plants 2001; 8: 15-22.

Petty HR et al. Identification of colchicine in placental blood from
patients using herbal medicines. Chem Res Toxicol 2001; 14: 1254-
1258.

Li Wet al. Evaluation of commercial ginkgo and echinacea dietary
supplements for colchicine using liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry. Chem Res Toxicol 2002; 15: 1174-1178.

Upton R (ed). Echinacea purpurea root. Echinacea purpurea (L.)
Moench. Standards of analysis, quality control, and therapeutics.
Scotts Valley: American Herbal Pharmacopoeia and Therapeutic
Compendium, 2004.

Hobbs C. Echinacea. A literature review. HerbalGram 1994; 30
(Suppl): 33-47.

Matthias A e¢ al. Echinacea — what constituents are therapeutically
important? International Congress on Natural Product Research.
Phoenix, Arizona, 2004: 43 [abstract].

Barrett B. Medicinal properties of Echinacea: a critical review.
Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 66-86.

Bauer R et al. [Pressaft aus dem Kraut von Echinacea purpurea: ein
allopathisches Phytoimmunstimulans]. Wien med Wschr 1999; 149:
185-189.

Schulte KE et al. Das Vorkommen von Polyacetylen-Verbindungen in
Echinacea purpurea Mnch. und Echinacea angustifolia DC.
Arzneimittelforschung 1967; 17: 825-829.

Bauer R et al. Immunologische in-vivo und in-vitro Untersuchungen
mit Echinacea Extracten. Arzneimittelforschung 1988; 38: 276-281.
Voémel T. Der einfluss eines pflanzelischen Immunostimulans auf die
Phagozytose von Erythozyten durch das retikulohistozytare System
der isoliert perfundierten Rattenleber. Arzneimittelforschung 1985; 35:
1437-1439.

Burger A et al. Echinacea-induced cytokine production by human
macrophages. Int J Immunopharmacol 1997; 19: 371-379.

----- PAGE 246 -----
46

47

48

49

50

S1

52

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

Stimpel M et al. Macrophage activation and induction of macrophage
cytotoxicity by purified polysaccharide fractions from the plant
Echinacea purpurea. Infect Immun 1984; 46: 845-849.

Luettig B et al. Macrophage activation by the polysaccharide
arabinogalactan isolated from plant cell cultures of Echinacea
purpurea. J] Natl Cancer Inst 1989; 81: 669-675.

Wagner H et al. Immunologically active polysaccharides of Echinacea
purpurea cell cultures. Phytochemistry 1988; 27: 119-126.

Rininger JA et al. Immunopharmacological activity of Echinacea
preparations following simulated digestion on murine macrophages
and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J Leukoc Biol 2000;
68: 503-510.

Di Carlo G et al. Modulation of apoptosis in mice treated with
Echinacea and St John's wort. Pharmacol Res 2003; 48: 273-277.
See DM et al. In vitro effects of echinacea and ginseng on natural
killer and antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity in healthy subjects and
chronic fatigue syndrome or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
patients. Immunopharmacology 1997; 35: 229-235.

Sun LZ-Y et al. The American coneflower: a prophylactic role
involving nonspecific immunity. J Altern Complement Med 1999; 5:
437-446.

Currier NL, Miller SC. Echinacea purpurea and melatonin augment
natural-killer cells in leukemic mice and prolong life span. J Altern
Complement Med 2001, 7: 241-251.

Currier NL, Miller SC. Natural killer cells from aging mice treated
with extracts from Echinacea purpurea are quantitatively and
functionally rejuvenated. Exp Gerontol 2000; 35: 627-639.

Cundell DR et al. The effect of aerial parts of Echinacea on the
circulating white cell levels and selected immune functions of the aging
male Sprague-Dawley rat. International Immunopharmacol 2003; 3:
1041-1048.

Goel V et al. Echinacea stimulates macrophage function in the lung
and spleen of normal rats. | Nutr Biochem 2002; 13: 487-492.

Goel V et al. Alkylamides of Echinacea purpurea stimulate alveolar
macrophage function in normal rats. Int Inmmunopharmacol 2002; 2:
381-387.

Wagner H, Jurcic K. Immunological studies of Revitonil”, a
phytopharmaceutical containing Echinacea purpurea and Glycyrrhiza
glabra root extract. Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 390-397.

Bodinet C, Freudenstein J. Effects of an orally applied aqueous-
ethanolic extract of a mixture of Thujae occidentalis herba, Baptisiae
tinctoriae radix, Echinaceae purpureae radix and Echinaceae pallidae
radix on antibody response against sheep red blood cells in mice.
Planta Med 1999; 65: 695-699.

South EH, Exon JH. Multiple immune functions in rats fed echinacea
extracts. Inmmunopharmacol Immunotoxicol 2001; 23: 411-421.
Gertsch J et al. Echinacea alkylamides modulate TNF-alpha gene
expression via cannabinoid receptor CB2 and multiple signal
transduction pathways. FEBS Lett 2004; 577: 563-569.

Bodinet C, Beuscher N. Antiviral and immunological activity of
glycoproteins from Echinacea purpurea radix. Planta Med 1991; 57
(Suppl 2): A33-34.

Thompson KD. Antiviral activity of Viracea" against acyclovir
susceptible and acyclovir resistant strains of herpes simplex virus.
Antiviral Res 1998; 39: 55-61.

Binns SE e¢ al. Antiviral activity of characterized extracts from
Echinacea spp. (Heliantheae: Asteraceae) against herpes simplex virus
(HSV-1). Planta Med 2002; 68: 780-783.

Wacker A, Hilbig W. Virus inhibition by Echinacea purpurea. Planta
Med 1978; 33: 89-102.

Binns SE et al. Light-mediated antifungal activity of Echinacea
extracts. Planta Med 2000; 66: 241-244.

Binns SE et al. A taxonomic revision of the genus Echinacea
(Helianthae; Asteraceae). Systematic Bot 2002; 27: 610-632.

Merali S e¢ al. Antifungal and anti-inflammatory activity of the genus
Echinacea. Pharmaceutical Biol 2003; 41: 412-420.

Roesler J et al. Application of purified polysaccharides from cell
cultures of the plant Echinacea purpurea to mice mediates protection
against systemic infection with Listeria monocytogenes and Candida
albicans. Int J Immunopharmacol 1991; 13: 27-37.

Steinmiiller C et al. Polysaccharides isolated from plant cell cultures of
Echinacea purpurea enhance the resistance of immunosuppressed mice

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

Echinacea

against systemic infection with Candida albicans and Listeria
monocytogenes. Int ] Immunopharmacol 1993; 15: 605-614.
Westendorf J. Carito" — in-vitro Untersuchungen zum Nachweiss
spasmolytischer und kontraktiler Einfliisse. Therapiewoche 1982; 32:
6291-6297.

Tubaro A et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of a polysaccharidic
fraction of Echinacea angustifolia. | Pharm Pharmacol 1987,
569.

Tragni E et al. Evidence from two classical irritation tests for an anti-
inflammatory action of a natural extract, echinacea B. Food Chem
Toxicol 1985; 23: 317-319.

Tragni E et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of Echinacea angustifolia
fractions separated on the basis of molecular weight. Pharmacol Res
Commun 1988; 20(Suppl V): 87-90.

Mattace Raso G et al. In-vivo and in-vitro anti-inflammatory effect of
Echinacea purpurea and Hypericum perforatum. ] Pharm Pharmacol
2002; 54: 1379-1383.

Clifford LJ et al. Bioactivity of alkamides isolated from Echinacea
purpurea (L.) Moench. Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 249-253.
Miiller-Jakic B e¢ al. In vitro inhibition of cyclooxygenase and S-
lipoxygenase by alkamides from Echinacea and Achillea species.
Planta Med 1994; 60: 37-40.

Speroni E e¢ al. Anti-inflammatory activity and cicatrizing activity of
Echinacea pallida Nutt. root extract. J Ethnopharmacol 2002; 79:
265-272.

Busing K. Hyaluronidasehemmung durch echinacin.
Arzneimittelforschung 1952; 2: 467-469.

Zoutewelle G, van Wijk R. Effects of Echinacea purpurea extracts on
fibroblast populated collagen lattice contraction. Phytother Res 1990;
4: 77-81.

Facino RM et al. Echinacoside and caffeoyl conjugates protect
collagen from free radical-induced degradation: a potential use of
Echinacea extracts in the prevention of skin photodamage. Planta
Med 1995; 61: 510-514.

Voaden DJ, Jacobson M. Tumour inhibitors. 3. Identification and
synthesis of an oncolytic hydrocarbon from American coneflower
roots. | Med Chem 1972; 15: 619-623.

Jager H et al. Transport of alkamides from Echinacea species through
Caco-2 monolayers. Planta Med 2002; 68: 469-471.

Matthias A et al. Permeability studies of alkylamides and caffeic acid
conjugates from Echinacea using a Caco-2 cell monolayer model. J
Clin Pharm Ther 2004; 29: 7-13.

Dietz B et al. Absorption of dodeca-2E,4E,8Z,10E/Z-tetraenoic acid
isobutylamides after oral application of Echinacea purpurea tincture.
Planta Med 2001; 67: 863-864.

Matthias A et al. Bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of alkylamides
from Echinacea. International Congress on Natural Product Research.
Phoenix, Arizona, 2004: p57, p133 [abstract].

Wolkart K et al. Pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of alkamides
from the roots of Echinacea angustifolia in humans after oral
application. International Congress on Natural Product Research.
Phoenix, Arizona, 2004: 44 [abstract].

Melchart D et al. Immunomodulation with Echinacea — a systematic
review of controlled clinical trials. Phytomedicine 1994; 1: 245-254.
Melchart D e¢ al. Results of five randomized studies on the
immunomodulatory activity of preparations of echinacea. J Altern
Complement Med 1995; 1: 145-160.

Kim LS et al. Immunological activity of larch arabinogalactan and
Echinacea: a preliminary, randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Altern Med Rev 2002; 7: 138-149.

Berg A et al. Influence of Echinacin (EC31) treatment on the exercise-
induced immune response in athletes. J Drug Assessment 1998; 1: 625—
638.

Roesler J et al. Application of purified polysaccharides from cell
cultures of the plant Echinacea purpurea to test subjects mediates
activation of the phagocyte system. Int J Immunopharmacol 1991; 13:
931-941.

Schwarz E et al. Oral administration of freshly expressed juice of
Echinacea purpurea herb fail to stimulate the nonspecific immune
response in healthy young men: results of a double-blind, placebo-
controlled crossover study. J Immunother 2002; 25: 413-420.

567—

----- PAGE 247 -----
Echinacea

94 Elsasser-Beile U et al. Cytokine production in leukocyte cultures
during therapy with echinacea extract. J Clin Lab Anal 1996; 10: 441-
445,

95 Lersch C et al. Nonspecific immunostimulation with low doses of
cyclophosphamide (LDCY), thymostimulin, and Echinacea purpurea
extracts (Echinacin) in patients with far advanced colorectal cancers:
preliminary results. Cancer Invest 1992; 10: 343-348.

96 Melchart D et al. Polysaccharides isolated from Echinacea purpurea
herba cell cultures to counteract undesired effects of chemotherapy — a
pilot study. Phytother Res 2002; 16: 138-142.

97  Melchart D et al. Echinacea for preventing and treating the common
cold (Cochrane review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 3, 2003.
Oxford: Update Software.

98 Linde K et al. Echinacea for preventing and treating the common cold
(Review). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2006, Issue 1.
Art. No.: CD000530.

99 Melchart D et al. Echinacea root extracts for the prevention of upper
respiratory tract infections. A double-blind, placebo-controlled,
randomized trial. Arch Kam Med 1998; 7: 541-545.

100 Grimm W, Miiller H-H. A randomized controlled trial of the effect of
fluid extract of Echinacea purpurea on the incidence and severity of
colds and respiratory infections. Am J] Med 1999; 106: 138-143.

101 Turner RB et al. Ineffectiveness of echinacea for prevention of
experimental rhinovirus colds. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000;
44: 1708-1709.

102 Sperber SJ et al. Echinacea purpurea for prevention of experimental
rhinovirus colds. Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38: 1367-1371.

103 Turner RB et al. An evaluation of Echinacea angustifolia in
experimental rhinovirus infection. N Engl ] Med 2005; 353: 341-348.

104 Cohen HA et al. Effectiveness of an herbal preparation containing
Echinacea, propolis, and vitamin C in preventing respiratory tract
infections in children. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, multicenter study. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2004; 158:
217-221.

105 Christakis DA, Lehmann HP. Can an herbal preparation of echinacea,
propolis, and vitamin C reduce respiratory illnesses in children? Arch
Pediatr Adolesc Med 2004; 158: 222-224.

106 Barrett BP et al. Treatment of the common cold with unrefined

echinacea. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Ann
Intern Med 2002; 137: 939-946.

107 Brinkeborn RM et al. Echinaforce” and other Echinacea fresh plant
preparations in the treatment of the common cold. A randomized,
placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. Phytomedicine 1999; 6:
1-S.

108 Schulten B et al. Efficacy of Echinacea purpurea in patients with a
common cold. A placebo-controlled, randomised, double-blind
clinical trial. Arzneimittelforschung 2001; 51: 563-568.

109 Lindenmuth GE, Lindenmuth EB. The efficacy of echinacea compound
herbal tea preparation on the severity and duration of upper
respiratory and flu symptoms: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study. J Altern Complement Med 2000; 6: 327-334.

110 Yale SH, Liu K. Echinacea purpurea therapy for the treatment of the
common cold: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical
trial. Arch Intern Med 2004; 164: 1237-1241.

111 Goel V et al. Efficacy of a standardized echinacea preparation
(Echinilin) for the treatment of the common cold: a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Pharm Ther 2004; 29:
75-83.

112 Taylor JA et al. Efficacy and safety of Echinacea in treating upper
respiratory tract infections in children. A randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2003; 290: 2824-2830.

113 Spasov AA et al. Comparative controlled study of Andrographis
paniculata fixed combination, Kan Jang" and an Echinacea
preparation as adjuvant in the treatment of uncomplicated respiratory
disease in children. Phytother Res 2004; 18: 47—

114 Firenzuoli F, Gori L. Echinacea for treating colds in children [letter].
JAMA 2004; 291: 1323-1324.

115 Taylor JA et al. Echinacea for treating colds in children [letter]. JAMA
2004; 291: 1324.

116 Vonau B et al. Does the extract of the plant Echinacea purpurea
influence the clinical course of recurrent genital herpes? Int ] STD
AIDS 2001; 12: 154-158.

117 Parnham MJ. Benefit-risk assessment of the squeezed sap of the
purple coneflower (Echinacea purpurea) for long-term oral
immunostimulation. Phytomedicine 1996; 3: 95-102.

118 Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (7). Colds. Pharm J 2002; 269: 716-718.

119 Barnes J et al. Different standards for reporting ADRs to herbal
remedies and conventional OTC medicines: face-to-face interviews
with 515 users of herbal remedies. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1998; 45: 496—
500.

120 Barnes J et al. Echinacea species (Echinacea angustifolia (DC.) Hell.,
Echinacea pallida (Nutt.) Nutt., Echinacea purpurea (L.) Moench): a
review of their chemistry, pharmacology and clinical properties. J
Pharm Pharmacol 2005; 57: 929-954.

121 Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre [accessed 3 February 2005].

122 Mullins RJ, Heddle R. Adverse reactions
the Australian experience. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2002; 88:
42-51.

123 Mullins RJ. Echinacea-associated anaphylaxis. Med J Aust 1998; 168:
170-171.

124 Myers SP, Wohlmuth H. Echinacea-associated anaphylaxis. Med J
Aust 1998; 168: 583.

125 Soon SL, Crawford RI. Recurrent erythema nodosum associated with
echinacea herbal therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol 2001; 44; 298-299.

126 Logan JL, Ahmed J. Critical hypokalemic renal tubular acidosis due
to Sjégren's syndrome: association with the purported immune
stimulant echinacea. Clin Rheumatol 2003; 22: 158-159.

127 Schwarz S et al. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis after parenteral
therapy with herbal extracts: a report of two cases. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry 2000; 69: 516-518.

128 Kayne SB. Homoeopathic Pharmacy. An Introduction and Handbook.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1997.

129 Lee AN, Werth VP. Activation of autoimmunity following use of
immunostimulatory herbal supplements. Arch Dermatol 2004; 140:
723-727.

130 Lenk M. Akute Toxizitat von verschieden Polysacchariden aus
Echinacea purpurea an der Maus. Z Phytother 1989; 10: 49-51.

131 Mengs U et al. Toxicity studies with Echinacin [abstract presented at
Third International Conference on Phytomedicine, Munich Germany,
October 2000]. Phytomedicine 2000; 2(Suppl): 32.

132 Mengs U et al. Toxicity of Echinacea purpurea. Acute, subacute and
genotoxicity studies. Arzneimittel Forschung 1991; 41: 1076-1081.

133 Ondrizek RR et al. An alternative medicine study of herbal effects on
the penetration of zona-free hamster oocytes and the integrity of
sperm deoxyribonucleic acid. Fertil Steril 1999; 71: 517-522.

134 Ondrizek RR et al. Inhibition of human sperm motility by specific
herbs used in alternative medicine. ] Assist Reprod Genet 1999; 16:
87-91.

135 Gorski JC et al. The effect of Echinacea (Echinacea purpurea root) on
cytochrome P450 activity in vivo. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004; 75: 89—
100.

136 Gurley BJ et al. In vivo assessment of botanical supplementation on
human cytochrome P450 phenotypes: Citrus aurantium, Echinacea
purpurea, milk thistle, and saw palmetto. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004;
76: 428-440.

137 Budzinski JW et al. An in vitro evaluation of human cytochrome P450
3A4 inhibition by selected commercial herbal extracts and tinctures.
Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 273-282.

138 Currier NL et al. Deleterious effects of Echinacea purpurea and
melatonin on myeloid cells in mouse spleen and bone marrow. J
Leukoc Biol 2001; 70: 274-276.

139 Gallo M et al. Pregnancy outcome following gestational exposure to
echinacea: a prospective controlled study. Arch Intern Med 2000; 160:
3141-3143.

ociated with echinacea:

----- PAGE 248 -----
Elder

- b
effects have been observed in in vivo studies, thus supporting
the herbal uses of elder. No documented studies in humans
were found. Potentially toxic compounds have been reported
for the bark (lectins) and the leaves (cyanogenetic
glycosides); the flowers are suitable for use as a herbal
remedy.

Species (Family)

Sambucus nigra L. (Caprifoliaceae)

Synonym(s)

Black Elder, European Elder, Sambucus
Sambucus canadensis L. refers to American Elder

Part(s) Used

Flower

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992)

BHP 1996”)

BP 200708

Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'°8?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
CSL”)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6, G41, G62 and G75.

Flavonoids Flavonols (kaempferol, quercetin), quercetin glyco-
sides (1.5-3.0%) including hyperoside, isoquercitrin and rutin.

Triterpenes x- and B-amyrin, oleanolic and ursolic acids.

Volatile oils 0.3%. 66% fatty acids (primarily linoleic, linolenic
and palmitic) and 7% alkanes (Cy, C21, C23 and Cs). Numerous
other constituent types have been identified including ethers and
oxides, ketones, aldehydes, alcohols and esters."

Other constituents Chlorogenic acid, tannin, mucilage, plasto-
cynin (protein), pectin and sugar.

Other plant parts Leaf Sambunigrin (0.042%), prunasin, zierin
and holocalin (cyanogenetic glycosides), choline, flavonoids
(rutin, quercetin), sterols (sitosterol, stigmasterol, campes-
terol), triterpenes (a- and B-amyrin palmitates, oleanolic and
ursolic acids), alkanes, fatty acids, tannins and others.'@*”)

Bark Lectin (mol. wt 140000) rich in asparagine/aspartic acid,
glutamine/glutamic acid, valine and leucine,“ phytohaemag-
glutinin, triterpenoids (o%-amyrenone, o&-amyrin, betulin,
oleanolic acid, B-sito sterol).

Food Use

Elder is listed by the Council of Europe as a source of natural food
flavouring (categories N1 and N2). Category N1 refers to the fruit
and indicates that there are no restrictions on quantities used.
Category N2 refers to the restrictions on the concentrations of
hydrocyanic acid that are permitted, namely 1 mg/kg in beverages
and foods, 1 mg/kg for every per cent proof of alcoholic beverages,
5 mg/kg in stone fruit juices, 25 mg/kg in confectionery and 50 mg/
kg in marzipan.’ Previously, the flowers have had a regulatory
status of GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).'C*

Herbal Use

Elder is stated to possess diaphoretic and anticatarrhal properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for influenza, colds, chronic nasal
catarrh with deafness and sinusitis.(“* Elder is also stated to act

as a diuretic, laxative and local anti-inflammatory agent.'°? °°
8, G41, G49, God)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried flower 2-4 g by infusion three times dailyC*°”

Liquid extract 24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily.C%

Phenylpropanoids

O°
O° ZA OH
HOOC. ‘OH
OH
OH OH

chlorogenic acid (5-caffeoylquinic acid)

Triterpenes

a-amyrin CHs
ursolic acid COOH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of elder.

----- PAGE 249 -----
238 Elder

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Elder is stated to possess diuretic and laxative properties.'“4”

Moderate (27%) anti-inflammatory action in carrageenan-
induced rat paw oedema has been documented for an elder
preparation given one hour before carrageenan (100 mg/kg, by
mouth).'” Indometacin as a control exhibited 45% inhibition at a
dose of 5mg/kg.

An infusion made from the flowers of elder, St John's wort herb
and root of soapwort (Saponaria officinalis) has exhibited
antiviral activity against influenza types A and B (in vivo and in
vitro) and herpes simplex virus type 1 (in vitro).

A diuretic effect in rats exceeding that exerted by theophylline
has been reported for elder. An infusion and extracts rich in
potassium and in flavonoids all caused diuresis. Greatest activity
was exerted by the combined potassium- and flavonoid-rich
extracts.

In vitro antispasmodic activity (rat ileum, rabbit/guinea-pig
intestine) and spasmogenic activity (rat uterus) have been reported
for lectins isolated from elder."

A lectin isolated from elder bark was found to be a lactose-
specific haemagglutinin with a slightly higher affinity for
erythrocytes from blood group A.“ Unlike many other plant
lectins, the lectin did not inhibit protein synthesis.“ The
carbohydrate-binding properties of a lectin isolated from elder
bark have been studied.”

Phytohaemagglutinins are biologically active extracts isolated
from various plants and represent a class of lectin. They are
associated with haemagglutination and mitogenic, antigenic and
immunosuppressant properties.” In vitro, phytohaemagglutinin
has been found to stimulate production of an interferon-like
substance in human leukocytes.'@*>

Hepatoprotective activity against carbon tetrachloride-induced
toxicity has been reported for triterpenes isolated from Sambucus
formosana Nakai.”

Figure 2. Elder (Sambucus nigra).

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research as
rigorous randomised controlled cl
Phytohaemagglutinin extracts have been used clinically to treat
drug-induced leucopenia and some types of anaemia.” The
blastogenic response of lymphocytes to phytohaemagglutinin has
been used extensively as a measure of immunocompetence.‘“*

ing the effects of elder and
inical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

No reported side-effects specifically for elder were located.
However, there is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for
elder and further investigation of these aspects is required. Human
poisoning has occurred with Sambucus species.) The roots,
stems and leaves and, much less so, the flowers and unripe berries,
are stated to contain a poisonous alkaloid and cyanogenic
glycoside causing nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea.''*) The flowers
and ripe fruit are stated to be edible without harm."'?)

The effects of a lectin isolated from elder bark on mammalian
embryonic and fetal development has been studied. The lectin
exerted mainly a toxic effect and, to a lesser degree, a teratogenic
effect when administered subcutaneously to pregnant mice. In
view of the high doses administered, the authors stated that the
results did not indicate a potential hazard to human fetuses
exposed to lectins.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Plant parts other than the flowers are reported to be poisonous
and should not be ingested. There is limited evidence from
preclinical studies that elder has a diuretic effect; the clinical
relevance of this, if any, is unclear.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of elder to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of elder taken during
pregnancy has not been established. In view of the lack of toxicity
data, the use of elder during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Figure 3 Elder — dried drug substance (flower).

----- PAGE 250 -----
Herbs; EP&C Essence; Hay Fever & Sinus Relief; Hayfever
Sinus Relief; Herb and Honey Cough Elixir; Life Drops; Lion
Cleansing Herbs; Lustys Herbalene; Modern Herbals Cold &
Catarrh; Sinotar; Summertime Tea Blend; Tabritis; Tabritis
Tablets. USA: Liquid Elderberry with Ester-C.

References

1 Toulemonde B, Richard HMJ. Volatile constituents of dry elder
(Sambucus nigra L.) flowers. J Agric Food Chem 1983; 31: 365-370.

10

cay

12

13

Elder

Scawen MD et al. The amino-acid sequence of plastocyanin from
Sambucus nigra L. (elder). Eur J] Biochem 1974; 44: 299-303.

Jensen SR, Nielsen BJ. Cyanogenic glucosides in Sambucus nigra L.
Acta Chem Scand 1973; 27: 2661-2685.

Broekaert WF et al. A lectin from elder (Sambucus nigra L.) bark.
Biochem J] 1984; 221: 163-169.

Paulo E. Effect of phytohaemagglutinin (PHA) from the bark of
Sambucus nigra on embryonic and foetal development in mice. Folia
Biol (Krakow) 1976; 24: 213-222.

Lawrie W et al. Triterpenoids in the bark of elder (Sambucus nigra).
Phytochemistry 1964; 3: 267-268.

Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28.

Serkedjieva J et al. Antiviral activity of the infusion (SHS-174) from
flowers of Sambucus nigra L., aerial parts of Hypericum perforatum
L., and roots of Saponaria officinalis L. against influenza and herpes
simplex viruses. Phytother Res 1990; 4: 97.

Rebuelta M et al. Etude de l'effet diurétique de différentes
préparations des fleurs du Sambucus nigra L. Plant Méd Phytothér
1983; 17: 173-181.

Richter A. Changes in the motor activity of smooth muscles of the rat
uterus in vitro as the effect of phytohaemagglutinins from Sambucus
nigra. Folia Biol 1973; 21: 33-48.

Shibuya N e¢ al. The elderberry (Sambucus nigra L.) bark lectin
recognizes the NeuSAc(«2-6)Gal/GalNAc sequence. J Biol Chem
1987; 262: 1596-1601.

Lin C-N, Tome W-P. Antihepatotoxic principles of Sambucus
formosana. Planta Med 1988; 54: 223-224.

Hardin JW, Arena JM, eds. Human Poisoning from Native and
Cultivated Plants, 2nd edn. North Carolina: Duke University Press,
1974.

----- PAGE 251 -----
Elecampane

e demulcent action of mucilage and reported in vivo
antispasmodic activity of the volatile oil support the
traditional uses of this remedy in coughs. In addition,
alantolactone has been utilised as an anthelmintic. A number
of interesting cardiovascular activities have been documented
for a related species, /. racemosa. Whether the constituents
responsible for these actions are also present in elecampane is
unclear. In view of the paucity of toxicity data for
elecampane, excessive or prolonged use should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Inula helenium L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Alant, Horseheal, Inula, Scabwort, Tu Mu Xiang, Yellow
Starwort

An elecampane extract has been referred to as helenin.
Alantolactone is also known as elecampane camphor, alant
camphor, helenin and inula camphor.'©*)

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'@*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G75.

Carbohydrates Inulin (up to 44%), mucilage.

Terpenoids {- and y-sitosterols, stigmasterol and damaradienol
(sterols), friedelin.

Volatile oils 1-4%. Mainly contains sesquiterpene lactones
including alantolactone, isoalantolactone and dihydroalantolac-
tone (eudesmanolides), alantic acid and azulene.

Other constituents Resin.

Food Use

Elecampane is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
elecampane can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a

possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.““'®

Previously in the USA, elecampane was only approved for use in
alcoholic beverages.'@*”

Herbal Use

Elecampane is stated to possess expectorant, antitussive, dia-
phoretic and bactericidal properties. Traditionally, it has been
used for bronchial/tracheal catarrh, cough associated with
pulmonary tuberculosis and dry irritating cough in children.‘C*
G6, G7, G8, G64)

Alantolactone has been used as an anthelmintic in the
treatment of roundworm, threadworm, hookworm and whip-

worm infection.'(C**

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Rhizome/root 1.5-4.0g as a decoction three times daily,'(C% °”

Liquid extract 1.5-4.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Elecampane infusion has exhibited a pronounced sedative effect in
mice.(“* Alantolactone has been reported to exhibit hypotensive,
hyperglycaemic (large doses) and hypoglycaemic (smaller doses)
actions in animals.'“*" Antibacterial properties have also been
documented. Alantolactone and isoalantolactone have been
reported to exhibit high bactericidal and fungicidal properties in
vitro?

The volatile oil has been reported to exert a potent smooth
muscle relaxant effect in vitro on guinea-pig ileal and tracheal
muscle.

Various activities have been documented for Inula racemosa: an
extract lowered plasma insulin and glucose concentrations in rats
75 minutes after oral administration,”
induced hyperglycaemia in rats,”) exhibited negative inotropic and
chronotropic effects on the frog heart,” and provided a
preventative and curative action against experimentally induced
myocardial infarction in rats. Pretreatment was found to be
most effective.”

Sesquiterpene lactones with antitumour activity have been
isolated from Helenium microcephalum.>*

counteracted adrenaline-

Clinical studies

There is a lack of rigorous clinical research assessing the effects of
elecampane and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Alantolactone has been used as an anthelmintic in the
treatment of roundworm, threadworm, hookworm and whip-

worm infection.'(C**

----- PAGE 252 -----
Sesquiterpenes

alantolactone

mnie}

germacrene-D-lactone

Monoterpenes

°

8,9-epoxy-10-isobutyryloxy-
thymol isobutyrate

Triterpenes

dammaranedio!

Polysaccharide

HO oO

HO

inulin
(30-35 D-fructose residues)

Figure 1 Selected constituents of elecampane.

Inula racemosa has been reported to prevent ST-segment
depression and T-wave inversion in patients with proven ischaemic
heart disease,” and to have a beneficial effect on angina
pectoris.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for elecampane
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Elecampane has been reported to cause allergic contact
dermatitis.“ Sensitising properties have been documented for
the volatile oil,{6°!%* and for alantolactone and isoalantolac-
tone.” In vitro cytotoxicty has been reported for alantolactone
and isoalantolactone.

Elecampane

isoalantolactone

Polyacetylene
HsG—C=C—C=C-C=C—C=C—C=C—C=Chy

H
C-13 polyacetylene

Contraindications, Warnings

Elecampane may cause an allergic reaction, particularly in
individuals with an existing allergy or sensitivity to other plants
in the Asteraceae family.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of elecampane to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that alantolactone, a constituent of
elecampane, has hypotensive and hypo- and hyperglycaemic
activities.

----- PAGE 253 -----
ey Elecampane

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Austria: Brust- und Hustentee St Severin. Czech Republic:
Species Cholagogae Planta. France: Mediflor Tisane Digestive
No 3; Mediflor Tisane Hepatique No 5. Germany: Klosterfrau
Melisana. Russia: Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opuru-
naapuptit Boapmoii Baansam Burruepa). South Africa: Won-
derkroonessens. Spain: Bronpul; Natusor Asmaten; Natusor
Broncopul. Switzerland: Hederix; Padmed Laxan. UK: Cat-
arrh-eeze; Cough-eeze; Horehound and Aniseed Cough
Mixture; Vegetable Cough Remover.

References

Figure 2. Elecampane (Inula helenium). 1 Reiter M, Brandt W. Relaxant effects on tracheal and ileal smooth
muscles of the guinea pig. Arzneimittelforschung 1985; 35: 408-414.

2. Tripathi YB et al. Assessment of the adrenergic beta-blocking activity
of Inula racemosa. ] Ethno pharmacol 1988; 23: 3-9.

3 Patel V et al. Effect of indigenous drug (puskarmula) on

experimentally induced myocardial infarction in rats. Act Nerv Super
(Praha) 1982; (Suppl 3): 387-394.

4 Sims D et al. Antitumor agents 37. The isolation and structural

elucidation of isohelenol, a new antileukemic sesquiterpene lactone,
and isohelenalin from Helenium microcephalum. J Nat Prod 1979; 42:
282-286.

5S Imakura Y et al. Antitumor agents XXXVI: Structural elucidation of
sesquiterpene lactones microhelenins-A, B, and C, microlenin acetate,
and plenolin from Helenium microcephalum. J Pharm Sci 1980; 69:
1044-1049.

6 Tripathi SN et al. Beneficial effect of Inula racemosa (pushkarmoola)
in angina pectoris: a preliminary report. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol
1984; 28: 73-75.

7 Stampf JL et al. The ser ng capacity of helenin and two of its

Figure 3 Elecampane — dried drug substance (rhizome). main constituents the sesquiterpene lactones alantolactone and

isoalantolactone: a comparison of epicutaneous and intradermal

sensitising methods in different strains of guinea pig. Contact

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of elecampane taken during Dermatitis 1982; 8: 16-24.
pregnancy has not been established. In view of the lack of toxicity Woerdenbag HI. In vitro cytotoxicity of sesquiterpene lactones from
data, the use of elecampane during pregnancy and lactation Eupatorium cannabinum L. and semi-synthetic derivatives from

should be avoided. eupatoriopicrin. Phytother Res 1988; 2: 109-114.

----- PAGE 254 -----
Ephedra

In view of the safety concerns regarding the use of ephedra
products, individuals wishing to use these products should be
advised to consult an appropriately trained health care
professional. Pharmacists and other health care professionals
should be aware that ephedra may be included in unlicensed
herbal products and food supplements under the name Ma
Huang. Such products will not include reference to ephedra
in the labelling.

Species (Family)

*Ephedra sinica Stapf (Ephedraceae)
E. equisetina Bunge

E. intermedia Shrenk ex Meyer
SE. gerardiana Wallich ex Meyer

E. major Host

Synonym(s)
*Cao Ma Huang, E. mahuang Liu
E. shennungiana Tang
Zhong Ma Huang
SE. gerardiana var. congesta C.Y. Cheng, Shan Ling Ma Huang
|E. scoparia Lange, E. nebrodensis Tineo ex Guss
Ephedra (and some other herbs) has also been referred to as
erbal ecstasy’.

Part(s) Used

Aerial parts

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition'*®
WHO volume 1 19990)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Ephedra is not included in the GSL.“©*”

Ephedra is included in Parts II and III of SI 2130." This allows
supply of ephedra (maximum dose of 600mg and a maximum
daily dose of 1800 mg) following a one-to-one consultation with a
practitioner.

Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are not included on the GSL.
Both are prescription-only medicines (POM), but can be supplied
through pharmacies at certain permitted doses, as follows.
Ephedrine for internal preparations: maximum dose 30mg,
maximum daily dose 60mg; nasal preparations, ephedrine 2%.
Pseudoephedrine hydrochloride for internal preparations: max-
imum dose 60 mg, maximum daily dose 240 mg; prolonged-release

preparations: maximum dose 120mg, maximum daily dose
240 mg. Pseudoephredine sulfate for internal preparations: max-
imum dose 60 mg, maximum daily dose 180 mg.

Constituents

Alkaloids 0.5-2.0%. Mainly (—)-ephedrine (30-90% in most
species, except E. intermedia) and (+)-pseudoephedrine, also (—)-
norephedrine, (+)-nor pseudoephedrine, (—)-methylephedrine
and (+)-methylpseudoephedrine. °°)

Volatile oil Mainly terpenoids (e.g. «&-terpineol, limonene,
tetramethylpyrazine, terpinen-4-ol, linalol).

Other constituents Tannins (catechin, gallic acid), ephedrans
(glycans) and acids (citric, malic, oxalic).

Roots

Alkaloids Ephedroxane, ephedradines A to D, feruloylhistamine
and maokonine.

Flavonoids A flavonoflavonol (ephedrannin A), bisflavonols
(mahuannins A to D).“

Food Use

Ephedra is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Ephedra has traditionally been used for the treatment of bronchial
asthma, hayfever, coughs and colds, fever, urticaria, enuresis,
narcolepsy, myasthenia gravis, chronic postural hypotension and
rheumatism, (32 G34 G36, G49, G54, G63, God)

It is stated to have vasoconstricting, bronchodilating and
central stimulating properties.‘ Modern interest in ephedra is
focused on its use in cough and bronchitis,@* and in nasal
congestion due to hayfever, allergic rhinitis, common cold and

Alkaloids

(-)-norephedrine H
(-)-ephedrine CH3

(+)-norpseudoephedrine H
(+)-pseudoephedrine CHg

Figure 1 Selected constituents of ephedra.

----- PAGE 255 -----
Ephedra

sinusitis.) There is also interest in the potential of ephedra as

an appetite suppressant.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Herb 1.2-2.3g cut herbs containing approximately 1.3% (13 mg/
g) total alkaloids.‘

Extract Adults: 15—30mg alkaloids (maximum daily dose
300 mg), calculated as ephedrine.‘

Tincture 6-8 mL (1:4) three times daily.“

In 1997, the US Food and Drugs Administration (FDA)
proposed restrictions on the use of ephedra. The FDA proposals
included a restriction on the maximum dose of ephedrine: 8 mg
taken every six hours to a maximum daily dose of 24mg for no
more than seven days.‘

Figure 3. Ephedra — dried drug substance (herb).

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological properties of ephedra are due to the
presence of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine and other ephedra
alkaloids (see Constituents). Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are
sympathomimetic agents that have direct and indirect effects on
both «- and B-adrenoceptors, as well as stimulating the central
nervous system (CNS).(¢#> 9?) Pseudoephedrine is stated to have
less pressor activity and fewer CNS effects than ephedrine.'“*”

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacological activities documented for ephedrine and/or
pseudoephedrine in vitro or in vivo (animals) include smooth
muscle relaxant, cardiovascular, anti-inflammatory, immuno-
modulatory, CNS stimulatory and antimicrobial effects. The
pharmacology of ephedra and its constituent alkaloids has been
reviewed."*°®)

Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine have been stated to have a
relaxant effect on bronchial smooth muscle in isolated rabbit lung
and bronchi.) Relaxant effects on gastrointestinal smooth muscle
have also been noted.“+®

Ephedrine has been shown to cause vasoconstriction and to
have hypertensive effects in several animal models.“*° Maoko-
nine, a constituent of ephedra root, has been reported to have
hypertensive effects in anaesthetised rats.’ By contrast, other
constituents of ephedra roots, such as ephedrannin A and
feruloylhistamine, have been reported to have hypotensive
activity"! An aqueous extract of ephedra and its alkaloid
fraction increased blood pressure, heart rate and blood glucose
concentration in anaesthetised dogs following intravenous admin-
istration.”

Anti-inflammatory activity has been documented for ephedrine
and pseudoephedrine in carrageenan-induced hind-paw oedema in
3) Oral administration of ephedrine and pseudoephedrine
also inhibited hind-paw oedema induced by histamine, serotonin,
bradykinin and prostaglandin E;. Crude extracts of ephedra have
been reported to inhibit complement in vitro." Further
investigation, using an aqueous extract of E. sinica leaves, showed
at the complement-inhibiting component of ephedra inhibited
the classical complement pathway in sera from several species,
including human, pig, guinea-pig, rat and rabbit."

In vitro antibacterial activity against several species, including
Staphylococcus aureus, has been reported.

In vitro studies have assessed the cytotoxicity of extracts of
ephedra prepared under various conditions (e.g. using ground or
unground material boiled for 0.5 or 2 hours) against a range of
cell lines, including a human hepatoblastoma cell line (HepG2), a
mouse neuroblastoma cell line (Neuro-2a) and a mouse fibro-
blastoma cell line.) Ephedrine and ephedra extracts prepared
from ground material appeared to be significantly more cytotoxic
in these cell lines than did preparations from unground material.
Also, Neuro-2a cells were more sensitive to ephedra extracts than
were the other cell lines tested. Findings of this in vitro work also
indicated that ephedra contains toxins other than ephedrine, as
ICso values were lower (i.e. indicating greater cytotoxicity) for
ephedra extracts than for ephedrine alone.

mice.

ao

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are readily
absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and are excreted, largely
unchanged, in the urine.'“* Small amounts of metabolites
following hepatic metabolism may be produced. The half-lives

----- PAGE 256 -----
of ephedrine and pseudoephedrine range from 3-6 hours and from
5-8 hours, respectively, depending on urinary pH.'(“*”

In a study involving 12 healthy volunteers aged 23-40 years,
four capsules of an ephedra product were administered twice, nine
hours apart. Each capsule contained ephedra 375 mg (E. sinica),
with a mean (standard deviation (SD)) ephedrine content of 4.84
(0.45) mg." The half-life was reported to be 5.2 hours, maximum
plasma concentration (Cy,ax) was 81.0ng/mL, the time to reach
Cmax (tmax) Was 3.9 hours, and clearance was 24.3 L/hour.

In a randomised, crossover study, 10 healthy volunteers received
ephedrine 25 mg or one of three ephedrine-containing nutritional
supplements on one day during different phases of the study, each
) Following single-dose
administration of ephedrine 25mg, mean (SD) half-life, Cyaxs
tmax and clearance were found to be 5.37 (1.67) hours, 86.5 (15.4)
ng/mL, 2.81 (1.35) hours and 28.5 (5.92) L/hour, respectively.

with a one-week wash-out period.”

Therapeutic effects The pharmacological properties of ephedrine
and pseudoephedrine in humans have been documented and
include cardiovascular, bronchodilator and CNS stimulant
effects, (43653)

Ephedrine is stated to raise blood pressure by increasing cardiac
output and also by peripheral vasoconstriction. Ephedrine relaxes
bronchial smooth muscle, reduces intestinal tone and motility,
relaxes the bladder wall and reduces the activity of the uterus.
Ephedrine is a CNS stimulant; this has led to its investigation for
use in assisting weight loss.

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
ephedra and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed
the effects of a herbal combination preparation which included
ephedra and other herbal ingredients.*’ In the study, 67
overweight to obese individuals (body mass index 29-35 kg/m”)
received the ephedra-containing preparation, or placebo, for eight
weeks. Among the 48 participants who completed the study (24 in
each group), a greater mean (SD) weight loss was noted for the
treatment group, compared with the placebo group (4.0 (3.4) kg
versus 0.8 (2.4) kg, respectively; p < 0.006).

Side-effects, Toxicity

The most common adverse effects of ephedrine and pseudoephe-
drine are tachycardia, anxiety, restlessness and insomnia.‘¢*
Tremor, dry mouth, impaired circulation to the extremities,
hypertension and cardiac arrhythmias may also occur with
ephedrine, and skin rashes and urinary retention have been
reported for pseudoephedrine.'“*? There are isolated reports of
hallucinations in children following use of pseudoephedrine.(“*)
There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for ephedra
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

In the US, adverse effects have been reported following self-
treatment with products containing ephedra alkaloids marketed
for several uses, including as an aid to weight loss, to increase
athletic performance, and as an alternative to illegal drugs of
abuse.(1? S49)
A review assessed 140 reports of adverse events related to the
use of products containing ephedra alkaloids, usually combined
th caffeine, submitted to the US FDA between June 1997 and
March 1999." The main reasons for use of these products were
weight loss (59%) and to increase athletic performance (16%); the
reason for use was unknown in 17% of cases. Thirty-one per cent
of cases (n = 43) were considered to be ‘definitely! or ‘probably!

w

Ephedra

related to the use of products containing ephedra alkaloids, and a
further 31% (n = 44) were judged to be ‘possibly! related; for 29
cases, insufficient information was available to assess causation,
and 24 ca:
products. In several cases, individuals were thought to be ingesting
up to 60mg ephedra alkaloids daily. Of the 87 cases where
causality was assessed, cardiovascular symptoms (mainly hyper-
tension, palpitations, tachycardia) were the most common adverse
events (47%). The most common CNS events were stroke (7 = 10)
and seizures (1 = 7). Where events were ‘definitely’ or ‘probably!
related (n = 43), clinical outcomes were death (three cases),
permanent impairment (seven) and ongoing treatment (four); a
full recovery occurred in 29 cases.”

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of a
herbal supplement containing ephedra (72 mg/day) and guarana
(240 mg/day), as well as other herbal ingredients, 23% (” = 8) of
participants in the treatment group withdrew from the study
because of adverse events (e.g. dry mouth, insomnia, headache)

that may have been treatment-related; there were no withdrawals
(18)

were deemed to be 'unrelated' to use of these

among placebo recipients.

There are isolated reports of myocarditis,~”
autoimmune hepatitis,” acute hepatitis,”
and psychiatric complications?”
ephedra-containing products. There is a report of sudden death
associated with ephedrine toxicity in a 23-year-old man.) Several
other reports also document psychosis and renal calculi following
chronic use or misuse of ephedrine.“@'*)

In a study involving 12 normotensive adults who ingested four
capsules each containing 375 mg powdered ephedra, followed by
four more capsules nine hours later, a statistically significant
increase in heart rate, compared with baseline values, was noted in
six participants, although effects on blood pressure were
variable."

» exacerbation of

nephrolithiasis?”
associated with the use of

Preclinical data

A study involving 47 dogs who were considered to have
accidentally ingested herbal products containing ephedra and
guarana reported that most dogs (80%) developed clinical signs of
toxicosis, within eight hours of ingestion, which persisted for up
to 48 hours.°% Hyperactivity, tremors, seizures and behaviour
changes were reported in 83% of dogs; other signs and symptoms

included vomiting, tachycardia and hyperthermia.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Ephedra is stated to be contra-indicated in coronary thrombosis,
diabetes, glaucoma, heart disease, hypertension, thyroid disease,
phaeochromocytoma and enlarged prostate.“
states that ephedrine (and, therefore, ephedrine-containing
products) should be used with caution in patients with diabetes,
ischaemic heart disease, hypertension, hyperthyoidism, renal
impairment and angle-closure glaucoma, and that in patients
with prostate enlargement, ephedrine may increase difficulty with
micturition.'°*) Tt has been recommended to redu
discontinue treatment if nervousness, tremor, sleeplessness, loss of
appetite or nausea occur with use of ephedra preparations.'(“)
There is a report of a professional sportsman who tested
positive for norpseudoephedrine after having consumed a liquid
herbal product listing ephedra as one of the 15 ingredients.”

) Another source

the dose or

Drug interactions
applicable.

Warnings documented for ephedrine are

----- PAGE 257 -----
Ephedra

Ephedrine-containing products should be avoided in patients

receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitors as concomitant treatment
may lead to a hypertensive crisis.'(“4) Ephedrine should also be
avoided or used with caution in patients undergoing anaesthesia
with cyclopropane, halothane or other volatile anaesthetics. There
may be an increased risk of arrhythmias in patients receiving
ephedrine together with cardiac glycosides, quinidine or tricyclic
antidepressants, and there is an increased risk of vasoconstrictor
or pressor effects in patients receiving ergot alkaloids or
oxytocin. '04)
Pregnancy and lactation There are no reliable data on the use
of ephedra during pregnancy and lactation. The safety of ephedra
during pregnancy and lactation has not been established and its
use should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
Canada: Herbal Cold Relief. Germany: Cefadrin.

References

1 Medicines Act 1968, Statutory Instrument 1977 No. 2130 (Retail Sale
of Supply of Herbal Remedies) Order, 1977.

2 Dewick P. Medicinal Natural Products. A Biosynthetic Approach.
Wiley: Chichester, 1997.

3 Miyazawa M et al. Volatile components of Ephedra sinica Stapf.
Flavour Fragrance J 1997; 12: 15-17.

4 Tang W, Eisenbrand G. Chinese Drugs of Plant Origin. Chemistry,
Pharmacology and Use in Traditional and Modern Medicine. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1992: 481-490.

5S Blumenthal M. Ephedra update: industry coalition asks FDA to adopt
national labeling guidelines on ephedra; offers co-operative research
with NIH. Herbal Gram 2000; 50: 64-65.

6 Chang H-M, But PP-H, eds. Pharmacology and Applications of
Chinese Materia Medica, vol 2. Singapore: World Scientific
Publishing, 1987: 1119-1124.

7 Kalix P. The pharmacology of psychoactive alkaloids from Ephedra
and Catha. J Ethnopharmacol 1991; 32: 201-208.

8 Bowman WC, Rand MJ. Textbook of Pharmacology, 2nd edn. Oxford:
Blackwell, 1980.

10

1

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

23

24

26

27

Tamada M et al. Maokonine, hypertensive principle of Ephedra roots.
Planta Med 1978; 34: 291-293.

Hikino H et al. Structure of feruloylhistamine, a hypotensive principle
of Ephedra roots. Planta Med 1983; 48: 108-110.

Hikino H et al. Structure of ephedrannin A, a hypotensive principle of
Ephedra roots. Tetrahedron Lett 1982; 23: 673-676.

Harada M, Nichimura M. Contribution of alkaloid fraction to
pressor and hyperglycemic effect of crude ephedra extract in dogs. J
Pharm Dyn 1981; 4: 691-699.

Kasahara Y et al. Antiinflammatory actions of ephedrines in acute
inflammations. Planta Med 1985; 51: 325-331.

Ling M et al. A component of the medicinal herb ephedra blocks
activation in the classical and alternative pathways of complement.
Clin Exp Immunol 1995; 102: 582-588.

Lee MK et al. Cytotoxicity assessment of Ma-huang (Ephedra) under
different conditions of preparation. Toxicol Sci 2000; 56: 424-430.
White LM et al. Pharmacokinetics and cardiovascular effects of ma-
huang (Ephedra sinica) in normotensive adults. J Clin Pharmacol
1997; 37: 116-122.

Gurley BJ et al. Ephedrine pharmacokinetics after the ingestion of
nutritional supplements containing Ephedra sinica (ma huang). Ther
Drug Monitoring 1998; 20: 439-445.

Boozer CN et al. An herbal supplement containing Ma-Huang-
Guarana for weight loss: a randomised, double-blind trial. Int J
Obesity 2001; 25: 316-324.

Haller CA, Benowitz NL. Adverse cardiovascular and central nervous
system events associated with dietary supplements containing ephedra
alkaloids. N Engl J Med 2000; 343: 1833-1838.

Zaacks SM et al. Hypersensitivity myocarditis associated with
ephedra use. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 1999; 37: 485-489.

Borum ML. Fulminant exacerbation of autoimmune hepatitis after
the use of Ma Huang. Am J Gastroenterol 2001; 96: 1654-1655.
Nadir A et al. Acute hepatitis associated with the use of a Chinese
herbal product, ma-huang. Am J Gastroenterol 1996; 91: 1436-1438.
Powell T et al. Ma-Huang strikes again: ephedrine nephrolithiasis. An
] Kidney Dis 1998; 32: 153-159.

Jacobs KM, Hirsch KA. Psychiatric complications of Ma-huang.
Psychosomatics 2000; 41: 58-62.

Theoharides TC. Sudden death of a healthy college student related to
ephedrine toxicity from a ma huang-containing drink. J Clin
Psychopharmacol 1997; 17: 437-439.

Ooms TG et al. Suspected caffeine and ephedrine toxicosis resulting
from ingestion of an herbal supplement containing guarana and ma
huang in dogs: 47 cases (1997-1999). ] Am Vet Med Assoc 2001; 218:
225-229.

Ros JJW et al. A case of positive doping associated with a botanical
food supplement. Pharm World Sci 1999; 21: 44.

----- PAGE 258 -----
u Eucalyptus

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Eucalyptus is characterised by its volatile oil components.
Antiseptic and expectorant properties have been attributed to
the oil, in particular to the principal component eucalyptol.
The undiluted oil is toxic if taken internally. Essential oils
should not be applied to the skin unless they are diluted with
a carrier vegetable oil.

Species (Family)
Eucalyptus globulus Labill. (Myrtaceae)

Synonym(s)

E. maidenii subsp. globulus (Labill.) Kirkp., Fevertree, Gum Tree,
Tasmanian Bluegum

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)

BP 200708

Complete German Commission E'C»
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'°8)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G75.

Flavonoids Eucalyptrin, hyperoside, quercetin, quercitrin and
rutin.

Volatile oils 0.5-3.5%. Eucalyptol (cineole) 70-85%. Others
include monoterpenes (e.g. %-pinene, B-pinene, d-limonene, p-
cymene, &-phellandrene, camphene, y-terpinene) and sesquiter-
penes (e.g. aromadendrene, alloaromadendrene, globulol, epiglo-
bulol, ledol, viridiflorol), aldehydes (e.g. myrtenal) and ketones
(e.g. carvone, pinocarvone).

Monoterpenes

oO

1,8-cineole
(eucalyptol)

Figure 1 Selected constituents of eucalyptus.

Other constituents Tannins and associated acids (e.g. gallic acid,
protocatechuic acid), caffeic acid, ferulic acids, gentisic acid,
resins and waxes.

Food Use

Eucalyptus is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (leaves, flowers and preparations: category N4,
with limits on eucalyptol) (see Appendix 3).'©'” Both eucalyptus
and eucalyptol (cineole) are used as flavouring agents in many
food products.“ Previously in the USA, eucalyptus was
approved for food use and eucalyptol was listed as a synthetic
flavouring agent.'@*

Herbal Use

Eucalyptus leaves and oil have been used as an antiseptic, febrifuge
and expectorant.

(G2, G41, God)

=
Figure 2 Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus).

Figure 3 Eucalyptus — dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 259 -----
Eucalyptus

Dosage

Dosages for oral (unless otherwise stated) administration (adults)
for traditional uses recommended in older standard reference texts
are given below.

Eucalyptol (cineole BPC 1973) 0.05-0.2 mL.
Eucalyptus Oil (BPC 1973) 0.05-0.2 mL.
Fluid extract 24g.

Oil for local application 30 mL oil to 500 mL lukewarm water.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Hypoglycaemic activity in rabbits has been documented for a
crude leaf extract rich in phenolic glycosides. Purification of the
extract resulted in a loss of activityC4? Expectorant and
antibacterial activities have been reported for eucalyptus oil and
for eucalyptol.'“4” Various Eucalyptus species have been shown to
possess antibacterial activity against both Gram-positive and
Gram-negative organisms. Gram-positive organisms were found
to be the most sensitive, particularly Bacillus subtilis and
Micrococcus glutamious.

In vitro antiviral activity against influenza type A has been
documented for quercitrin and hyperoside.‘@*?

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
eucalyptus and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Eucalyptus oil has been taken orally for catarrh, used as an
inhalation and applied as a rubefacient.(“**) A plant preparation

containing tinctures of various herbs including eucalyptus has
been used in the treatment of chronic suppurative otitis.”

Side-effects, To y

Externally, eucalyptus oil is stated to be generally non-toxic, non-
sensitising and non-phototoxic.“® Undiluted eucalyptus oil is
toxic and should not be taken internally. A dose of 3.5 mL has
proved fatal.'“*9) Symptoms of poisoning with eucalyptus oil
include epigastric burning, nausea and vomiting, dizziness,
ular weakness, miosis, a feeling of suffocation, cyanosis,
delirium and convulsions.

mu:

Contra-indications, Warnings
Eucalyptus oil should be diluted before internal or external use.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of eucalyptus to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that constituents of eucalyptus have
hypoglycaemic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation Eucalyptus oil should not be taken
internally during pregnancy or lactation.

References

1 Kumar A et al. Antibacterial properties of some Eucalpytus oils.
Fitoterapia 1988, 59: 141-144.

2 Shaparenko BA e¢ al. On use of medicinal plants for treatment of
patients with chronic suppurative otitis. Zh Ushn Gorl Bolezn 1979;
39: 48-51.

----- PAGE 260 -----
a Euphorbia

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

There is little published information concerning euphorbia,
although documented actions observed in animals support
the traditional herbal uses. There is a lack of information
concerning toxicity and excessive or prolonged ingestion
should be avoided.

Species (Family)
Chamaesyce hirta (L.) Millsp. (Euphorbiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Euphorbia capitata Lam., E. hirta L., Pillbearing Spurge, Snake-
weed

Part(s) Used

Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983‘?

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G41 and G48.

Flavonoids Leucocyanidin, quercetin, quercitrin and xanthor-
hamnin.

Terpenoids «- and B-Amyrin, taraxerol and esters, friedelin;
campesterol, sitosterol and stigmasterol (sterols).

Other constituents Choline, alkanes, inositol, phenolic acids
(e.g. ellagic, gallic, shikimic), sugars and resins.
Food Use

Euphorbia is not used in foods.

Herbal Use
Euphorbia is stated to be used for respiratory disorders, such as

asthma, bronchitis, catarrh and laryngeal spasm. It has also been

used for intestinal amoebiasis.'C7°™

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard reference texts are given below.

Herb 120-300 mg as an infusion.‘©”?
Liquid Extract of Euphorbia (BPC 1949) 0.12-0.3 mL.
Euphorbia Tincture (BPC 1923) 0.6-2.0 mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Euphorbia has been reported to have antispasmodic and
histamine-potentiating properties.“C*) Smooth muscle relaxing

Triterpenes

B-amyrin

taraxerol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of euphorbia.

Figure 2 Euphorbia (Chamaesyce hirta).

----- PAGE 261 -----
Euphorbia

Figure 3. Euphorbia — dried drug substance (herb).

and contracting activities have been exhibited by euphorbia in
vitro (guinea-pig ileum) and have been attributed to shikimic acid
and to choline, respectively.”

In vivo antitumour activities have been documented for
euphorbia.'(C*?

Antibacterial activity in vitro versus both Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria has been documented for euphorbia.”
Stem extracts were slightly more active than leaf extracts. In vitro
amoebicidal activity versus Entamoeba histolytica has been
reported for a euphorbia decoction.”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
euphorbia and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for euphorbia and further investigation of these
aspects is required. Carcinogenic properties in mice have been

reported for shikimic acid, although no mutagenic activity was
: G41
observed in the Ames assay.“

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of euphorbia to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of euphorbia has not been
established. Euphorbia has been reported to cause both contrac-
tion and relaxation of smooth muscle. In view of the lack of
pharmacological and toxicity data, the use of euphorbia during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Asa Tones; Euphorbia Complex; Procold; Sambucus
Complex. Canada: Sirop Cocillana Codeine. Hong Kong:
Cocillana Christo; Cocillana Compound; Cocillana Com-
pound; Cocillana Compound; Mefedra-N. UK: Antibron.

References

1 El-Naggar L et al. A note on the isolation and identification of two
pharmacologically active constituents of Euphorbia pilulifera. Lloydia
1978; 41: 73-75.

2 Ajao AO et al. Antibacterial activity of Euphorbia hirta. Fitoterapia
1985; 56: 165-167.

3. Basit N et al. In vitro effect of extracts of Euphorbia hirta Linn. on
Entamoeba histolytica. Riv Parasitol 1977; 38: 259-262.

----- PAGE 262 -----
associated with its use. Evening primrose oil may have the
potential to make manifest undiagnosed temporal lobe
epilepsy, especially in schizophrenic patients and/or those
who are already receiving known epileptogenic drugs, such as
phenothiazines (see Contra-indications, Warnings). Evening
primrose oil should be used with caution by such patients and
those with a history of epilepsy. In view of the lack of safety
data, evening primrose oil should not be taken during
pregnancy. As LA and gamolenic acid occur naturally in breast
milk, it is reasonable to expect that evening primrose oil can
be taken during breastfeeding, although whether or not
concentrations of LA and gamolenic acid in breast milk of
mothers ingesting high doses of evening primrose oil can
reach levels that may be harmful to the neonate should be
considered.

Species (Family)
Oenothera biennis L. (Onagraceae)
Synonym(s)

Common Evening Primrose, King's Cureall, Onagra biennis (L.)
Scop.

Part(s) Used
Seed oil

Evening Primrose

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BP 2007'¢8
Martindale 35th edition'“*”
Ph Eur 20078”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Evening primrose is not included in the GSL.‘“?” Gamolenic acid

is a prescription-only medicine. Product licences for the products
Epogam and Efamast (which contain gamolenic acid derived from
evening primrose oil) were withdrawn in the UK on 7 October,
2002.”

Constituents

Fixed oils 14%. cis-Linoleic acid (LA) 72% (65-80%), cis-
gammalinolenic acid (gamolenic acid, GLA) 2-16%, oleic acid
9%, palmitic acid 7% and stearic acid (3%).°-”

Food Use

Evening primrose root has been used as a vegetable with a peppery
flavour.) The seed oil has been used as a food supplement for
many years. LA and gamolenic acid are both essential fatty acids
(EFAs), with LA representing the main EFA in the diet, whilst
gamolenic acid is found in human milk, in oats and barley, and in
small amounts in a wide variety of common foods.”

Herbal Use

An infusion of the whole plant is reputed to have sedative and
astringent properties, and has traditionally been used for
asthmatic coughs, gastrointestinal disorders, whooping cough
and as a sedative painkiller.” Externally, poultices were reputed to
ease bruises and to speed wound-healing.”

Evening primrose oil (EPO) was licensed in the UK for the
treatment of atopic eczema, and cyclical and non-cyclical

Fatty acids

COOH

a-linolenic acid

COOH

linoleic acid

COOH

S
linolenic acid
Figure 1 Selected constituents of evening primrose.

----- PAGE 263 -----
252. Evening Primrose

mastalgia, but product licences for two products were withdrawn
in 2002 due to a lack of data sufficient to support efficacy in these
‘.258) Other conditions in which evening primrose oil
has been used include premenstrual syndrome, psoriasis, multiple

conditions.

sclerosis, hypercholesterolaemia, rheumatoid arthritis, Raynaud's
phenomenon, Sjégren's syndrome, postviral fatigue syndrome,
asthma and diabetic neuropathy.”

Dosage

Dosages recommended for previously licensed evening primrose
oil products in the UK are given below; doses were based on a
standardised gamolenic acid content of 8%. However, evening
primrose oil products licensed in the UK had their product
licences withdrawn in 2002 due to a lack of data sufficient to
support efficacy’ Thus, there is no evidence that the dosages
described below are efficacious in the conditions stated.

Atopic eczema: 6-8¢g daily (adults); 24g daily (children);
cyclical and non-cyclical mastalgia: 34 g daily. The manufacturer

advised that treatment for three months may be necessary before a
clinical response is observed.”

Pharmacological Actions

The actions of evening primrose oil are attributable to the
ential fatty acid content of the oil and to the involvement of

these compounds in prostaglandin biosynthetic pathways.°>”

In vitro and animal studies

Gamolenic acid and its metabolite dihomogamma-linolenic acid
(DGLA) are precursors of both the inflammatory prostaglandin
E, (PGE») series via arachidonic acid (AA), and of the less
inflammatory prostaglandin E; (PGE;) series. Actions attributed
to PGE; include anti-inflammatory, immunoregulatory and

vasodilatory properties, inhibition of platelet aggregation and
cholesterol biosynthesis, hypotension and elevation of cyclic AMP
(inhibits phospholipase A, see below).°

Dietary supplementation with gamolenic acid has been noted to
have a favourable effect on the DGLA: AA ratio. Although an
increase in arachidonic acid concentrations is also seen, this is
much smaller and less consistent compared with the increase
for DGLA."”) Contributory factors to this negative effect on
arachidonic acid are PGE, and 15-hydroxy-DGLA. The latter
inhibits conversion of arachidonic acid to inflammatory lip-
oxygenase metabolites including leukotrienes, whilst PGE;

en,

Figure 2 Evening primrose (Oenothera biennis).

inhibits the enzyme phospholipase A, which is required for the
mobilisation of arachidonic acid from phospholipid membrane
stores. In addition, DGLA desaturation to arachidonic acid is a
rate-limiting step in humans and proceeds very slowly.

Gamolenic acid is not normally obtained directly from dietary
sources and the body relies on metabolic conversion from dietary
LA. This conversion is readily saturable and is considered to be
the rate-limiting step in the production of gamolenic acid. A
reduced rate of LA conversion to gamolenic acid has been
observed in a number of clinical situations including ageing,
diabetes, cardiovascular disorders and high cholesterol concentra-
tions, high alcohol intake, viral infections, cancer, nutritional
deficits, atopic eczema and premenstrual syndrome.°~ Direct
dietary supplementation with gamolenic acid effectively bypasses
this rate-limiting conversion step and has a beneficial effect on the
ratio of inflammatory:non-inflammatory prostaglandin com-
pounds.

Gamolenic acid, administered as evening primros
prevent or reverse diabetic neuropathy in animal models.

Administration of gamolenic acid to animals has been reported
to prevent or attenuate renal damage. Gamolenic acid decreases
blood pressure and platelet aggregation in animals.) In vitro
studies have observed that malignant cells die following exposure
to gamolenic acid and related fatty acids at concentrations that
are non-lethal to normal cells. In vitro studies have shown
gamolenic acid to inhibit the growth of various human cancer cell
ines, and in vivo studies have described an inhibitory effect of
gamolenic acid on tumour growth.
Evening primrose oil represents a good source of both LA and,
more importantly, of gamolenic acid. There is a large body of
iterature on the biochemical rationale for the therapeutic uses of
evening primrose oil.) Alternative natural oil sources
blackcurrant or borage that offer a higher gamolenic acid yield
compared with that of evening primrose oil have been identified,
although th

biological effects as those observed for evening primrose oil."

oil, can

uch as

ese oils have not been found to exhibit the same

Clinical studies

There is a large body of literature on the effects of evening
primrose oil and gamolenic acid in various diseas
associated with low concentrations of gamolenic acid. For the
most part, the available data are inconclusive, and/or arise from
studies with methodological limitations. The efficacy of evening
primrose oil in these conditions, therefore, has not been

states

Figure 3 Evening primrose — dried drug substance (seed).

----- PAGE 264 -----
established and further, rigorous research is required. The
following is a summary of some of the clinical studies of evening
primrose oil and gamolenic acid.

Atopic eczema An inherited slow rate of 6-desaturation (LA to
gamolenic acid conversion) has been documented in_ this
condition. Normal or elevated concentrations of LA are
associated with reduced concentrations of their metabolites.
Some randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have
suggested gamolenic acid improves features of atopic eczema,
especially in itch.?*!°') However, two large trials have not

415) A review of the available evidence

shown evidence of benefit.
to support the efficacy of evening primrose oil preparations in
atopic eczema concluded that there were insufficient data, and
product licences for evening primrose preparations licensed in the
UK for atopic eczema were withdrawn in 2002.°*)

Cyclical/non-cyclical mastalgia and premenstrual syndrome
PGE, is thought to modulate the action of prolactin. Abnormal
concentrations may result in an excessive peripheral action of
prolactin.) The use of evening primrose oil for the treatment of
premenstrual syndrome has been rationalised on the grounds that
hypersensitivity to prolactin is due to low levels of PGE,.'® High
levels of linoleic acid and low levels of gamma-linolenic acid have
been observed for patients with premenstrual syndrome.

Several placebo-controlled studies in the older literature have
reported that gamolenic acid is better than placebo in the
treatment of premenstrual syndrome and/or breast pain.°>!”
However, conflicting results have been obtained from other clinical
studie: assessing the effects of
evening primrose oil preparations have concluded that there are no
reliable data on their efficacy in relieving symptoms of
premenstrual syndrome, including mastalgia,"®) and product
licences for evening primrose preparations licensed in the UK
for the treatement of mastalgia were withdrawn in 2002.7"

Authoritative reviews of studi

Diabetic neuropathy Diabetes has been associated with reduced
ability to desaturate essential fatty acids, with deficits resulting in
abnormal neuronal membrane structure. A double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial has described reversal of diabetic neuropathy by
gamolenic acid."

Multiple sclerosis The results of clinical trials on the use of
evening primrose oil for the treatment of multiple sclerosis are
contradictory.*> Patients with recent onset or le:
the disease are more likely to respond. Linoleic acid may have a
beneficial effect on the severity and duration of relapses and on
the progression of the disease.” It is suggested that linoleic acid is
involved in the immunosuppressive effect at the cellular level and
may be of use when combined with a low animal fat/high
polyunsaturated fat diet.

vere forms of

Rheumatoid arthritis A randomised, double-blind trial has
demonstrated a significant improvement in subjective symptoms
of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) (indicated by a reduction in required
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug treatment) in the active
group receiving evening primrose oil compared with the placebo
group. However, no objective changes were observed in any of the
biochemical indicators of RA.

Sjogren’s syndrome This disease is associated with the loss of
secretions from exocrine glands throughout the body, but
especially from the salivary and lacrimal glands. One of the
features of EFA deficiency is exocrine gland atrophy. Placebo-
controlled trials have shown a modest improvement in tear flow

Evening Primrose

together with relief of lethargy, a prominent feature of the
syndrome.)

Coronary heart disease Abnormal intake and metabolism of
EFAs (both 1-3 and 1-6) are thought to be important risk factors
for coronary heart disease (CHD), resulting in enhanced
cholesterol and_ triglyceride biosynthesis, enhanced platelet
aggregation and elevated blood pressure. Dietary supplementation
with foods or oils rich in LA (1-6) or in marine (n-3) EFAs have
significantly the risk of CHD, although it
is considered that an optimum balance between n-3 and n-6 EFAs
may well be important."* >” gamolenic acid has been reported to

decrease blood pressure and platelet aggregation in humans.)

been found to decre:

Renal disease Renal tissue is especially rich in EFAs, and
prostaglandins of the E series are believed to be important in
maintaining adequate renal blood flow. A single placebo-
controlled trial involving postrenal transplant patients demon-
strated better graft survival rate for the group receiving evening
primrose oil (45 patients) compared with the placebo group (44
patients).

Gastrointestinal disorders A double-blind placebo-controlled
crossover trial has indicated a beneficial effect of evening primrose
oil on irritable bowel syndrome exacerbated by premenstrual
syndrome. A beneficial effect superior to that of fish oil or
placebo has been reported for evening primrose oil in ulcerative
colitis.

Viral infections/postviral fatigue A single placebo-controlled
study has demonstrated significant beneficial effects in patients
with well-defined postviral fatigue (PVF) receiving evening
primrose oil compared with those receiving placebo. Symptoms
arrested were muscle weakness, aches and pains, lack of
concentration, exhaustion, memory loss, depression, dizziness
and vertigo.'>*

Endometriosis A _placebo-controlled trial has shown that
gamolenic acid in combination with eicosapentaenoic acid (n-3
EFA metabolite) reduced symptoms of endometriosis in 90%
women, whereas 90% of the placebo group reported no relief
from symptoms.)

Schizophrenia It is believed that EFAs, in particular PGE,,
antagonise the excessive central dopaminergic activity that is
thought to be a possible cause of schizophrenia. Low concentra-
tions of LA in plasma phospholipids have been observed in
populations of schizophrenics from Ireland, England, Scotland,
Japan and the USA. It is thought that a poor recovery rate from
the disease is associated with the presence of saturated fats in the
diet, but not with unsaturated fats. Various open and placebo-
controlled trials of gamolenic acid and DGLA supplementation
have reportedly produced mixed results. Administration of
evening primrose oil with co-factors known to be important in
EFA metabolism (zinc, pyridoxine, niacin and vitamin C)
enhanced the improvements in memory loss, schizophrenic
symptoms and tardive dyskinesia that were observed in evening

primrose oil-treated compared with placebo-treated patients.°~

Alcoholism Evening primrose oil has been documented to reduce
symptoms in the first three weeks of withdrawal, indicated by a
reduced requirement for tranquillisers, and to significantly
improve the rate of return to normal liver function. However, in
the longer term, evening primrose did not affect the relapse rate.)

Dementia Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia are
associated with low serum concentrations of EFAs. A single

----- PAGE 265 -----
24 Evening Primrose

Table 1 Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 187) of suspected
adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Oenothera
biennis preparations held in the Vigisearch database of the World
Health Organization’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the period up
to end of 2005.2”

jody as a whole — general
reaction (4); therapeutic response decreased (5);
condition aggravated (5); fatigue (4); fever (6); malaise
(7); pain (7); withdrawal syndrome (3)

isorders. Including allergic

Cardiovascular disorders, general. Including 5
hypertension (3)

Central and peripheral nervous system disorders. 84
Including convulsions (16); convulsions, aggravated (8);
dizziness (5); headache (27); paraesthesia (9)

Endocrine disorders. 2
Foetal disorders.

Gastrointestinal system disorders. Including abdominal 74
pain (18); constipation (3); diarrhoea (12); dyspepsia

(7); eructation (3); flatulence (5); nausea (19); vomiting

G)

Heart rate and rhythm disorders. 2

Liver and biliary system disorders. Including hepatic 11
function abnormal (4); hepatitis (3)

Metabolic and nutritional disorders. Including thirst (3); 15
weight decrease (3)

Musculo-skeletal system disorders. Including arthralgia 8
(3); myalgia (3)

Neoplasm. 2
Platelet, bleeding and clotting disorders. Including 13
purpura (3)

Psychiatric disorders. Including nervousness (4); 38
aggressive reaction (3); confusion (3)

Red blood cell disorders. 1
Reproductive disorders, female and male. Including 17

menorrhagia (4); menstrual disorder (3)

Resistance mechanism disorders. 1

Respiratory system disorders. Including bronchospasm, 18
aggravated (4); dyspnoea (4)

Skin and appendages disorders. Including acne (4); 96
alopecia (3); eczema (5); pruritus (11); skin exfoliation

(4); sweating increased (4); rash (9); rash, erythematous

(11); rash, macropapular (5); urticaria (16)

Urinary system disorders. Including face oedema (5) 13
Vascular (extracardiac) disorders. Including flushing (4) 6
Vision disorders. Including abnormal vision (4) 12
White cell and res. disorders. 1
Other reactions described using terms not included in 4
database

Total number of suspected adverse drug reactions 489

*Specific reactions described where n = 3 or more

‘Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database
held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to
origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information included in this report does not represent the
opinion of the World Health Organization

placebo-controlled trial in patients with Alzheimer's disease
reported improvements in cerebral function in the evening
primrose oil group compared with the placebo group.

Hyperactivity in children Hyperactive children tend to have
abnormal levels of essential fatty acids. No improvements in
behavioural patterns and no changes in blood fatty acids were
observed in one trial with evening primrose oil.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for evening
primrose and further investigation of these aspects is required.
Limited clinical data on safety aspects of evening primrose oil
preparations are available from clinical trials.

Evening primrose oil appears to be well tolerated when taken at
recommended dosages." Mild gastrointestinal effects, indiges-
tion, nausea and softening of stools and headache have
occasionally occurred.” It has been noted that there may be
an increased risk of temporal lobe epilepsy in schizophrenic
patients being treated with epileptogenic drugs such as phe-
3°) In cases of overdosage, symptoms of loose stools
and abdominal pain have been noted; no special treatment is
required. The two principal components in evening primrose oil
are LA and gamolenic acid. LA is commonly ingested as part of
the diet. It has been estimated that the concentration of gamolenic
acid provided by evening primrose oil is comparable to that
metabolised in the body from normal dietary LA.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide. To the end of the year 2005, the WHO-
UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 291 reports,
describing a total of 489 adverse reactions, for products reported
to contain Oenothera biennis only as the active ingredient (see
Table 1).°? Reports originated from 12 different countries. (These
data were obtained from the Vigisearch database held by the
WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least
with respect to origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical
product caused the adverse reaction. Any information included in
this report does not represent the opinion of the World Health
Organization.)

nothiazines

Preclinical data

Toxicity studies have indicated evening primrose oil to be non-
toxic.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Evening primrose oil may have the potential to make manifest
undiagnosed temporal lobe epilepsy, especially in schizophrenic
patients and/or those who are already receiving known epilepto-
genic drugs such as phenothiazines.” Evening primrose oil should
be used with caution by such patients and those with a history of
epilepsy.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of evening primrose oil, the potential for preparations of
evening primrose oil to interfere with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing

----- PAGE 266 -----
effects, should be considered. Evening primrose oil may increase
the risk of seizure in patients receiving phenothiazines.

Pregnancy and lactation Animal studies have indicated evening
primrose oil to be non-teratogenic."”) However, data on the safety
of evening primrose oil during human pregnancy are not available
and therefore patients should be advised not to take evening
primrose oil during pregnancy unless the potential benefits
outweigh the potential harms. In view of the lack of conclusive
evidence for the efficacy of evening primrose oil, it is unlikely that
the benefit-harm balance would be in favour of patients using
evening primrose oil.

Both LA and gamolenic acid are normally present in breast
milk (see Side-effects, Toxicity) and it has been calculated that a
breastfed infant receives a higher proportion (mg/kg) of LA and
gamolenic acid from human milk than from evening primrose oil
ingested by the breastfeeding mother. It is reasonable to assume,
therefore, that evening primrose oil may be taken while
breastfeeding, although whether or not concentrations of LA
and gamolenic acid in breast milk of mothers ingesting high doses
of evening primrose oil can reach levels that may be harmful to the
neonate should be considered.

Italy: Sclerovis H. UK: Boots Alternatives Premenstrual; Seven
Seas Evening Primrose Oil and Starflower Oil. USA: Evening
Primrose Oil; PMS Control.

References

1 Anon. Withdrawal of Epogam and Efamast. Curr Prob
Pharmacovigilance 2002; 28: 12.

2 Anon. What's new. Epogam and Efamast (gamolenic acid) —
withdrawal of marketing authorisations. www.mca.gov.uk/whatsnew/
epogam.html [accessed November 19, 2002]

3 Li Wan Po A. Evening primrose oil. Pharm J 1991; 246: 670-676.

ND

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

18

19

20

21

Evening Primrose

Barber HJ. Evening primrose oil: a panacea? Pharm J 1988; 240: 723-
725.

Horrobin DE. Gammalinolenic acid: an intermediate in essential fatty
acid metabolism with potential as an ethical pharmaceutical and as a
food. Rev Contenrp Pharmacother 1990; 1: 1-45.

Carter JP. Gamma-linolenic acid as a nutrient. Food Technol 1988; 72.
Briggs CJ. Evening primrose. Rev Pharm Can 1986; 119: 249-254.
Barnes J. Herbal therapeutics (9). Women's health. Pharm J 2003; 270:
16-18.

Anon. Data Sheet Compendium 1994-95, 1520-1. Efamast, Epogam,
Epogam Paediatric (Searle).

Lovell CR et al. Treatment of atopic eczema with evening primrose oil.
Lancet 1981; 1: 278.

Schalin-Karrila M et al. Evening primrose oil in the treatment of
atopic eczema: effect on clinical status, plasma phospholipid fatty
acids and circulating blood prostaglandins. Br J Dermatol 1987; 117:
11-19.

Wright S, Burton JL. Oral evening primrose seed oil improves atopic
eczema. Lancet 1982; ii: 1120-1122.

Stewart JCM et al. Treatment of severe and moderately severe atopic
dermatitis with evening primrose oil (Epogam); a multicentre study. J
Nutr Med 1991; 2: 9-15.

Bamford JTM et al. Atopic eczema unresponsive to evening primrose
oil (linolenic and gamma-linolenic acids). J Am Acad Dermatol 1985;
13: 959-965.

Berth-Jones J, Graham-Brown RAC. Placebo-controlled trial of
essential fatty acid supplementation in atopic dermatitis. Lancet 1993;
341: 1557-1560.

Brush MG. Efamol (evening primrose oil) in the treatment of the
premenstrual syndrome. In: Horrobin DK, ed. Clinical Uses for
Essential Fatty Acids. Buffalo, New York: Eden Press, 1982: 155.

Pye JK et al. Clinical experience of drug treatments for mastalgia.
Lancet 1985; ii: 373-377.

Bandolier. Evening primrose oil for premenstrual syndrome. www,jr2.
ox.ac.uk/bandolier/booth/alternat/AT058.html [accessed November
19, 2002]

Jamal GA et al. Gammac-linolenic acid in diabetic neuropathy. Lancet
1986; i: 1098.

Horrobin DE, Manku MS. How do polyunsaturated fatty acids lower
plasma cholesterol levels?. Lipids 1983; 18: 558-562.

Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre [accessed January 20, 2006]

----- PAGE 267 -----
Eyebright

uses, although tannin constituents would provide an
astringent effect. The use of home-made preparations for
ophthalmic purposes should be avoided. Little is known
regarding the toxicity of eyebright and, in view of the
reported presence of unidentified alkaloids, it should be used
with caution and excessive doses and prolonged treatment
should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Euphrasia officinalis L. (Scrophulariaceae)

Other Euphrasia species, including E. rostkoviana Hayne, are
used and these may differ in their chemical constituents. The
genus Euphrasia consists of around 450 Euphrasia species and
their wild hybrids and these are difficult to identify botanically.

Synonym(s)
Euphrasia

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983” ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
Eyebright is not included in the GSL.'‘C*”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G40 and G75.
Unless otherwise stated, constituents listed are for E. officinalis.

Acids Caffeic acid, ferulic acid.?

Alkaloids Unidentified tertiary alkaloids, choline, steam volatile
bases."

Amino acids Glycine, leucine and valine.

Flavonoids Four compounds (unidentified). Quercetin and rutin
stated to be absent." Quercetin, quercitrin and rutin have been
documented for E. rostkoviana.

Iridoids —Aucubin 0.05%. Additional glycosides have been
reported for related Euphrasia species including catalpol, euphro-
side, eurostoside, geniposide, ixoroside and mussaenoside for E.
rostkoviana.°

Phenethyl glycosides —Dehydroconiferyl alcohol-4-B-p-gluco-
side® and eukovoside (3,4-dihydroxy-4-phenethyl-O-a-L-rhamno-
side(13)-4-O-isoferuoyl-B-p- glucoside) from E. rostkoviana.

Tannins About 12%. Condensed and hydrolysable; gallic acid is
among the hydrolysis products.”

Volatile oils About 0.2%. Seven major and numerous minor
components, mainly unidentified; four of the major compounds
are thought to be aldehydes or ketones."

Other constituents Bitter principle, B-carotene, phytosterols
(e.g. B-sitosterol, stigmasterol),") resin, carbohydrates (e.g.
arabinose, glucose, galactose) and vitamin C.

Food Use

Eyebright is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that
eyebright can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted
manner, although there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity.'°!®

Herbal Use

Eyebright is stated to possess anticatarrhal, astringent and anti-
inflammatory properties. Traditionally it has been used for nasal
catarrh, sinusitis and specifically for conjunctivitis when applied
locally as an eye lotion.'6? 97 9°

Iridoids
HQ oy
SS
oO
HoH,c 4
2 O-Glucosy!
aucubin
CHO

H
O-Glucosyl
euphroside

Phenethylglycosides

co HOH2C,
Hef
S fe) OL
Pon
HO H3C7——O
HO
HO yg HO
eukovoside OH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of eyebright.

----- PAGE 268 -----
Eyebright

Figure 3 Eyebright — dried drug substance (herb).

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of eyebright to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of eyebright has not been
established. In view of the lack of pharmacological and toxicity
data, the use of eyebright during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

Proprietary single-ingredient preparations
UK: Snore Calm.

Figure 2 Eyebright (Euphrasia officinalis).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”
Tincture 2-6 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Pharmacological Actions Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Euphrasia Complex; Euphrasia Compound; Eye

Health Herbal Plus Formula 4; Lifesystem Herbal Plus
(1) Formula 5 Eye Relief; Sambucus Complex. Italy: Eulux; Iridil.
Malaysia: Eyebright Plus. Switzerland: Collypan; Oculosan;
Tendro. UK: Se-Power; Summertime Tea Blend; Vital Eyes.
USA: Eye Support Formula Herbal Blend.

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for eyebright. Caffeic acid is bacteriostatic,
and a purgative action in mice has been documented for iridoid
glycosides. The purgative action of aucubin is approximately
0.05 times the potency of sennosides, with onset of diarrhoea
stated to occur more than six hours after aucubin administra-
tion. Tannins are known to possess astringent properties.

Clinical studies
References

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of eyebright

and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required. 1 Harkiss KJ, Timmins P. Studies in the Scrophulariaceae Part VIII.

Phytochemical investigation of Euphrasia officinalis. Planta Med 1973;
23: 342-347.

Side-effects, Toxicity 2. Sticher O, Salama O. Iridoid glucosides from Euphrasia rostkoviana.
There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for eyebright and Planta Med 1981; 42: 122-123.

oO.

further investigation of these aspects is required. Information in

der literature states that doses of as little as 10-60 drops of

eyebright tincture could lead to adverse effects, including mental
confusion,

‘S22) although this requires confirmation.

Contra-indications, Warnings

TI

discouraged."

use of eyebright for ophthalmic application has been
G60)

3 Salama O et al. A lignan glucoside from Euphrasia rostkoviana.
Phytochemistry 1981; 20: 2003-2004.

4 Sticher O et al. Structure analysis of eukovoside, a new
phenylpropanoid glycoside from Euphrasia rostkoviana. Planta Med
1982; 45: 159.

5 Salama O, Sticher O. Iridoidglucoside von Euphrasia rostkoviana 4.

Mitteilung tiber Euphrasia-Glykoside. Planta Med 1983; 47: 90-94.
Inouye H et al. Purgative activities of iridoid glycosides. Planta Med
1974; 25: 285-288.

----- PAGE 269 -----
= False Unicorn

The chemistry of false unicorn is poorly documented and no
scientific evidence was located to justify the herbal uses. In
view of this and the lack of toxicity data, the use of false
unicorn should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Chamaelirium luteum (L.) A. Gray (Melanthiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Blazing Star, Chamaelirium carolianum Wild., Devil's-bit, Helo-
nias, Helonias dioica (Walter) Pursh., Helonias lutea (L.) Ker
Gawl., Starwort, Veratrum luteum L.

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”) ;
Martindale 35th edition'@®

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G40 and G48.

Limited chemical information is available on false unicorn. It is
stated to contain a steroidal saponin glycoside, chamaelirin, and
another glycoside helonin.

Food Use

False unicorn is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

False unicorn is stated to possess an action on the uterus.
Traditionally it has been used for ovarian dysmenorrhoea,
leucorrhoea and specifically for amenorrhoea. It is reported to

be useful for vomiting of pregnancy and threatened miscarria-
gels C8, G64)

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 1-2 as an infusion three times daily.(©”)

Liquid extract 1-2 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.‘

Tincture 2-5 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'©”

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of centaury
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for false unicorn
and further investigation of these aspects is required. It is stated

Figure 1 False unicorn (Chamaelirium luteum).

Figure 2 False unicorn — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 270 -----
that large doses of false unicorn may cause nausea and
vomiting.”

Contra-indications, Warnings
None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, in view of the
lack of phytochemical and pharmacological information for false
unicorn, the potential for preparations of false unicorn to interact
with other medicines administered concurrently, particularly those
with similar or opposing effects, should still be considered.

False Unicorn

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of false unicorn has not
been established. In view of the lack of phytochemical,
pharmacological and toxicity data, and its reputed action as a
uterine tonic, the use of false unicorn during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Australia: Nervatona Plus. UK: Period Pain Relief.

----- PAGE 271 -----
Fenugreek

y' y
effect on cholesterol metabolism, cholesterol absorption and
bile acid excretion by the saponin components. Toxicity
studies indicate fenugreek seeds to be relatively non-toxic,
although the presence of pharmacologically active
constituents would suggest that excessive ingestion is
inadvisable.

Species (Family)

Trigonella foenum-graecum L. (Leguminosae)
Synonym(s)

Bockshornsame

Steroids

H
CHs

diosgenin
yamogenin

f-D-glucose 1-8 p-p-glucose
1-2
a-L-rhamnose

Amino acids

°
N coo
sm
ve
CHs

trigonelline

Figure 1 Selected constituents of fenugreek.

Part(s) Used
Seed

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007°°*

Complete German Commission E'C?)
Martindale 35th edition'°*)

Ph Eur 2007°°8

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Alkaloids Pyridine-type. Gentianine, trigonelline (up to 0.13%),
choline (0.05%).

Proteins and amino acids Protein (23-25%) containing high
quantities of lysine and tryptophan. Free amino acids include 4-
hydroxyisoleucine (0.09%), histidine, lysine and arginine.

R!

2

foenugraecin

trigofoenoside A

----- PAGE 272 -----
Flavonoids Flavone (apigenin, luteolin) glycosides including
orientin and vitexin, quercetin (flavonol).

Saponins 0.6-1.7%. Glycosides yielding steroidal sapogenins
diosgenin and yamogenin (major), with tigogenin, neotigogenin,
gitogenin, neogitogenin, smilagenin, sarsasapogenin, yucca-
genin;‘ fenugreekine, a sapogenin-peptide ester involving dios-
genin and yamogenin;”) trigofoenosides A-G  (furostanol
glycosides).

Other constituents Coumarin,” lipids (5-8%),"® mucilaginous
fibre (50%), vitamins (including nicotinic acid) and minerals.

Food Use

Fenugreek is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
fenugreek can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.'(©!® Previously fenugreek extracts have been
permitted in foods at concentrations usually below 0.05%. In
addition, fenugreek has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).

Herbal Use

Fenugreek is stated to possess mucilaginous demulcent, laxative,
nutritive, expectorant and orexigenic properties, and has been
used topically as an emollient and vulnerary. Traditionally, it has
been used in the treatment of anorexia, dyspepsia, gastritis and
convalescence, and topically for furunculosis, myalgia, lympha-
denitis, gout, wounds and leg ulcers.{C% 670 6%

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

G49)

Seed 1-6g or equivalent three times daily.

Figure 2 Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum).

Fenugreek

Figure 3 Fenugreek — dried drug substance (seed).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Hypocholesterolaemic activity has been reported for fenugreek in
rats°°S*) and alloxan-diabetic dogs.” Activity has been
attributed to the fibre and saponin fractions, and not to lipid or
amino acid fractions."""'° Studies have reported a reduction in
cholesterol but not triglyceride concentrations,”’ or in both
cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations, but without signifi-
cant alterations in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and low-
density lipoprotein (LDL) concentrations."

Hypoglycaemic activity has been observed in rabbits, rats and
dogs, and attributed to the defatted seed fraction (DSF),
trigonelline, nicotinic acid and coumarin.7!? Oral administra-
tion of DSF reduced hyperglycaemia in four alloxan-diabetic dogs,
and reduced the response to an oral glucose tolerance test in eight
normal dogs, whereas the lipid fraction had no effect on serum
glucose and insulin concentrations. The high fibre content
(50%) of DSF was thought to contribute to its antidiabetic effect
although the initial rate of glucose absorption was not affected.)
Nicotinic acid and coumarin were reported to be the major
hypoglycaemic components of fenugreek seeds, following admin-
istration to normal and alloxan-diabetic rats.” The hypoglycae-
mic action exhibited by coumarin was still significant 24 hours
post administration.” In addition, a slight antidiuretic action was
noted for coumarin.” Trigonelline inhibited cortisone-induced
hyperglycaemia in rabbits if administered (250 mg/kg) concomi-
tantly or two hours before, but not two hours after, cortisone.’
In addition, trigonelline exhibited significant hypoglycaemic
activity in alloxan-diabetic rats (50 mg/kg), lasting 24 hours."”

A. stimulant action on the isolated uterus (guinea-pig),
especially during late pregnancy, has been noted for both aqueous
and alcoholic extracts.'“* An aqueous extract is stated to
increase the number of heart beats in the isolated mammalian
heart.“

In vitro antiviral activity against vaccinia virus has been
reported for fenugreekine, which also possesses cardiotonic,
hypoglycaemic, diuretic, antiphlogistic and antihypertensive
properties.

¢

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
fenugreek and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

----- PAGE 273 -----
Fenugreek

A transient hypoglycaemic effect was observed in 5 of 10
diabetic patients who received 500mg oral trigonelline whilst
fasting.” Increasing the dose did not increase this effect, and
500 mg ingested three times a day for five days did not alter the
diurnal blood glucose concentration.) Hypoglycaemic activity in
healthy individuals has been reported for whole seed extracts,
with slightly lesser activity exhibited by gum isolate, extracted
seeds and cooked seeds.''?) The addition of fenugreek to an oral
glucose tolerance test reduced serum glucose and_ insulin
concentrations. Chronic ingestion (21 days) of extracted seeds
(25g seeds daily incorporated into two meals) by non-insulin-
dependent diabetics improved plasma glucose and_ insulin
responses (no control group), and reduced 24-hour urinary
glucose concentrations.” Furthermore, in two diabetic insulin-
dependent subjects, daily administration of 25g fenugreek seed
powder reduced fasting plasma-glucose profile, glycosuria and
daily insulin requirements (56-20 units) after eight weeks. A
significant reduction in serum cholesterol concentrations in
diabetic patients was also noted.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for fenugreek and further investigation of these
aspects is required. Acute toxicity values (LDs9) documented for
fenugreek alcoholic seed extract are 5 g/kg (rat, oral) and 2 g/kg
(rabbit, dermal).' The alcoholic seed extract is reported to be
non-irritating and non-sensitising to human skin and non-
phototoxic (mice, pigs). Coumarin is a toxic seed compo-
nent.) Acute LDso (rat, oral) values per kilogram documented for
various seed constituents are 5g (trigonelline), 8.8g¢ (nicotinic
acid), 7.4g (nicotinamide) and 0.72 g (coumarin)."?

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of fenugreek to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical and preliminary clinical studies that fenugreek
has hypoglycaemic activity. Caution may be advisable in patients
receiving monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI), hormonal or
anticoagulant therapies in view of amine, steroidal saponin and
coumarin constituents, respectively, although their clinical sig-
nificance is unclear. Cardioactivity has been documented in vitro.
The absorption of drugs taken concomitantly with fenugreek may
be affected (high mucilaginous fibre content).

Pregnancy and lactation  Fenugreek is reputed to be
oxytocic'*” and in vitro uterine stimulant activity has been
documented. In view of this, and the documented pharmacolo-
gically active components, the use of fenugreek during pregnancy
and lactation in doses greatly exceeding those normally encoun-
tered in foods is not advisable.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Garlic and Horseradish + C Complex; Panax
Complex. India: Happy'tizer. Malaysia: Horseradish Plus.

References

1 Gupta RK et al. Minor steroidal sapogenins from fenugreek seeds,
Trigonella foenum-graecum. ] Nat Prod 1986; 49: 1153.

2 Ghosal S e¢ al. Fenugreekine, a new steroidal sapogenin-peptide ester
of Trigonella foenum-graecum. Phytochemistry 1974; 13: 2247-2251.

3 Gupta RK et al. Two furostanol saponins from Trigonella feonum-
graecum. Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 2205-2207.

4 Varshney IP et al. Saponins from Trigonella foenum-graecum leaves. ]
Nat Prod 1984; 47: 44-46.

5S Gupta RK et al. Furostanol glycosides from Trigonella foenum-
graccum seeds. Phytochemistry 19843 23: 2605-2607.

6 Gupta RK et al. Furostanol glycosides from Trigonella foenum-
graecum seeds. Phytochemistry 1985; 24: 2399-2401.

7 Shani J et al. Hypoglycaemic effect of Trigonella foenum graecum and
Lupinus termis (Leguminosae) seeds and their major alkaloids in
alloxan-diabetic and normal rats. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1974;
210: 27-37.

8 Ribes G et al. Hypocholesterolaemic and hypotriglyceridaemic effects
of subfractions from fenugreek seeds in alloxan diabetic dogs.
Phytother Res 1987; 1: 38-42.

9 Ribes G et al. Effects of fenugreek seeds on endocrine pancreatic
secretions in dogs. Ann Nutr Metab 1984; 28: 37-43.

10 Sharma RD. An evaluation of hypocholesterolemic factor of fenugreek
seeds (T. foenum graecum) in rats. Nutr Rep Int 1986; 33: 669-677.

11 Mishkinsky J et al. Hypoglycaemic effect of trigonelline. Lancet 1967;
2: 1311-1312.

12 Sharma RD. Effect of fenugreek seeds and leaves on blood glucose and
serum insulin responses in human subjects. Nutr Res 1986; 6: 1353-
1364.

13 Opdyke DLJ. Fenugreek absolute. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1978; 16
(Suppl. Suppl.): 755-756.

----- PAGE 274 -----
5 Feverfew

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Feverfew is characterised by the sesquiterpene lactone
constituents, in particular by parthenolide which is thought to
be the main active component. /n vitro studies provide some
evidence to support the reputation of feverfew as a herb used
to treat migraine and arthritis. Some clinical studies have
suggested that feverfew leaf preparations may be a useful
prophylactic remedy against migraine, although further
research is deemed necessary to establish the benefits. It has
been recommended that feverfew should only be used by
sufferers who have proved unresponsive to conventional
forms of migraine treatment. Those using feverfew as a
remedy for migraine should preferably do so under medical
supervision.

Results of a study that investigated the usefulness of
feverfew in treating rheumatoid arthritis were less
encouraging: feverfew provided no additional benefit when
added to existing non-steroidal anti-inflammatory treatment.
Feverfew products currently available are unlicensed and vary
in their recommended daily doses. Furthermore, variation
between the stated and actual amount of feverfew in
commercial products (based on their ability to inhibit platelet
secretion) has been reported.

Species (Family)

Tanacetum parthenium (L.) Schultz Bip. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)
Altamisa, Chrysanthemum parthenium (L.) Bernh., non (Lam.)

Gaterau, Leucanthemum parthenium (L.) Gren & Godron,
Pyrethrum parthenium (L.) Sm.

Part(s) Used

Leaf, aerial parts

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

ESCOP 2003'¢7"
Martindale 35th edition!
Ph Eur 20078?
USP29/NF24‘C80)

G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
L (637)

Feverfew is not included in the GS

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Terpenoids
guaianolides (GU) and eudesmanolides

Sesquiterpene lactones: germacranolides (GE),
(EU). The structural

feature common to all three types is an o-unsaturated y-lactone
moiety, and examples of each type include parthenolide, 3-B-
hydroxy-parthenolide, costunolide, 3-f-hydroxycostunolide, arte-
morin, 8-o-hydroxyestafiatin and chrysanthemonin (novel dimeric
nucleus) (GE); artecanin, chrysanthemin A (canin) and B
(stereoisomers), chrysanthemolide, partholide, two chlorine-con-
taining sesquiterpene lactones (GU); magnolialide, reynosin,
santamarine, 1-B-hydroxyarbusculin and 5-B-hydroxyreynosin
(EU).!-

Volatile oils (0.02-0.07%). Various monoterpene and se:
pene components (e.g. camphor, borneol, «%-pinene derivatives,
germacrene, farnesene and their esters).

Other constituents Pyrethrin, flavonoids, tannins (type unspe-
cified) and melatonin.

Food Use

Feverfew is not generally used in foods.

Herbal Use

Feverfew has traditionally been used in the treatment of migraine,
tinnitus, vertigo, arthritis, fever, menstrual disorders, difficulty
during labour, stomach ache, toothache and insect bites. Modern
use of feverfew is focused on its effects in the prevention and
treatment of migraine.'”®

Feverfew products currently available are unlicensed adn vary in

their recommended daily doses.”

Dosage

Limited information is available regarding the traditional dose of
feverfew. The doses (oral administration, adults) that have been
recommended for migraine prophylaxis are as follows.

Leaf (fresh) 2.5 leaves daily with or after food.

Sesquiterpenes

“ue

a
parthenolide H canin artecanin
3-f-hydroxy- OH

parthenolide

°

costunolide seco-tanapartholide A

Figure 1 Selected constituents of feverfew.

----- PAGE 275 -----
Feverfew

Leaf (freeze-dried) 50mg daily with or after food.

Aerial parts (dried) 50-200 mg daily; equivalent to 0.2-0.6 mg
parthenolide daily.(¢%

Clinical trials of feverfew for the prevention of migraine have
assessed the effects of, for example, 143 mg of a dried alcoholic
extract of feverfew daily (equivalent to 0.5 mg parthenolide),“
and capsules containing powdered feverfew leaf 50 mg daily,‘!' '?)
for one to six months.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Feverfew extracts have been documented to inhibit platelet
aggregation and prostaglandin, thromboxane and _ leukotriene
production, although feverfew has also been reported to have no
effect on cyclooxygenase (the mechanism by which non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs inhibit prostaglandin production).‘'*')
Instead, feverfew is thought to act by inhibiting the enzyme
phospholipase Az, which facilitates the release of arachidonic acid
from the phospholipid cellular membrane. '® The clinical
significance of this action has been questioned.” In addition, in
vitro experiments have shown that feverfew extracts inhibit the
interaction of human platelets with collagen substrates.‘!* '”)
Feverfew has been shown to inhibit granule secretion in blood
platelets and neutrophils, which has been associate;
aetiology of migraine and rheumatoid arthritis, respectively.
Feverfew was also found to inhibit the release of vitamin By-
binding protein from polymorphonuclear leukocytes, but to be
ineffective against platelet and polymorphonucleocyte secretion
induced by calcium ionophore A2318.°” Sesquiterpene lactone
constituents of feverfew containing an 4-methylene butyrolactone
unit are thought to be responsible for the antisecretory activity,”
Their inhibitory effect on platelet aggregation is thought to
involve neutralisation of sulfhydryl groups on specific enzymes of

with the
(20)

proteins that are necessary for platelet aggregation and secre-
tion.°?) A similar mode of action has been proposed for the
inhibitory action of feverfew on polymorphonuclocyte  secre-
°3) In addition, feverfew extracts have been reported to
produce a concentration-dependent inhibition of anti-IgE-induced
histamine release from mast cells.°* The authors concluded that
the mechanism of action of the feverfew extract was different to
that of both cromoglycate and quercetin.
Parthenolide markedly interfered with contractile and relaxant
mechanisms in blood vessels.'“*” An aqueous extract of feverfew

tion.

inhibited
G52)

administered intravenously — significantly
induced bronchoconstriction in guinea-pigs.

The presence of large numbers of lymphocytes and monocytes
in the syi novium is considered to be of significance in rheumatoid
arthritis.° Feverfew extract and parthenolide have been docu-
mented to inhibit mitogen-induced proliferation of human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells and mitogen-induced pros-
taglandin E (PGE ) production by synovial cells.” The feverfew
extract and parthenolide also proved to be cytotoxic to mitogen-
treated peripheral blood mononuclear cells and the authors
considered that this cytotoxicity was responsible for the actions
observed.*) In vitro studies using crude feverfew extracts and
parthenolide have documented other activities that may contribute
to the reported anti-inflammatory effects of feverfew. Pretreatment
of human synovial fibroblasts with feverfew extract and with
purified parthenolide inhibited cytokine-induced expr
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1)
reduction in T cell adhesion to the treated fibroblasts also
occurred. In other in vitro studies, parthenolide inhibited
lipopolysaccharide-induced interleukin-12 (IL-12) production by
mouse macrophages in a concentration-dependent manner.”
Parthenolide has also been shown to inhibit promoter activity of
the inducible nitric oxide synthase gene in a human monocyte cell
line, THP-1, in a concentration-dependent manner.) (Excess
nitric oxide production in inflammatory cells is thought to be a
causative factor in cellular injury in inflammatory disease.) Anti-
inflammatory activity of feverfew has also been attributed to the
presence of flavonoids, e.g. santonin.”)

Anti-inflammatory properties have also been documented for
feverfew extract and parthenolide in vivo. Oral administration of
feverfew extract (10, 20 and 40mg/kg) reduced carrageenan-
induced oedema in rat paw in a dose-dependent manner.°”
Intraperitoneal parthenolide (1 and 2 mg/kg) also demonstrated
anti-inflammatory effects in this model.

Parthenolide has been documented to have cytotoxic activity in
Eagle's 9KB carcinoma of the nasopharynx cell culture system, the
activity being associated with the presence of an o&-methylene-y-
lactone moiety in the molecule.°” In vitro, parthenolide has been
shown to inhibit growth of mouse fibrosarcoma (MN-11) and
human lymphoma (TK6) cell lines.” The effect appeared to be
reversible.

Antinociceptive properties have been reported for feverfew and
parthenolide in vivo. Oral administration of feverfew extract (10,
20 and 40 mg/kg) and intraperitoneal administration of parthe-

collagen-

ive

Figure 2 Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium).

Figure 3 Feverfew — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 276 -----
nolide (1 and 2 mg/kg) led to reductions in acetic acid-induced
writhing in mice.“

Antimicrobial properties against Gram-positive bacteria, yeasts
and filamentous fungi in vitro have been documented for
parthenolide.°*) Gram-negative bacteria were not affected.

Clinical studies

Migraine Several placebo-controlled clinical trials have assessed
the effects of preparations of feverfew in the prevention of
migraine.(!0-'> 34)

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involved
17 patients who had been successfully controlling their migraine
by eating raw feverfew leaves for at least three months.'!” Patients
either continued to receive feverfew (50mg daily) or were given
placebo for six periods of four weeks. The authors reported that
the placebo group experienced a significant increase in the
frequency and severity of headache. Those given feverfe
no change. It was suggested that the placebo group was in fact
suffering withdrawal symptoms from feverfew and a_ 'post-
feverfew syndrome' was described (see Side-effects, Toxicity).

Another study, a randomised double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover trial involved 72 adults who had experienced migraine
for more than two years and who had at least one attack per
month.° The only concurrent medication allowed was the oral
contraceptive pill. Patients completed a one-month, single-blind,
placebo run-in phase, followed by four months' administration of
placebo/active and four months! crossover. It was reported that
patients experienced a 24% reduction in the number of attacks
during feverfew treatment (one capsule daily; 70-114 mg feverfew
equivalent to 2.19 tg parthenolide) although the duration of each
individual attack was not significantly affected. Patients allocated
to the active and then placebo group did not experience the
withdrawal symptoms documented in another study,"'” although
patients involved in the previous study had used feverfew over a
longer period of time.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 57
patients received capsules of dried, powdered feverfew leaves
(parthenolide 0.2%) 100 mg daily for 60 days (open-label phase),
followed by randomisation to feverfew or placebo (ground
parsley) for 30 days then crossover to the other arm for 30
days.'?) There was no wash-out between crossover. At the end of
the open-label phase (i.e. during which all participants received
feverfew), there was a significant reduction in pain intensity and
symptoms, such as vomiting and sensitivity to light, compared
with baseline values (p < 0.001). At the end of the double-blind,
crossover phase, it was reported that pain intensity was
significantly lower during feverfew administration, compared
with placebo administration (p < 0.01).

Thus, these three studies reported bene!
as demonstrated by fewer and/or less severe migraine episodes
and/or reductions in pain intensity, compared with placebo.{')!7
* However, one double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
50 feverfew-naive patients who experienced migraine attacks at
least once a month reported no difference in the number of
migraine attacks between placebo recipients and participants who
received capsules containing a dried alcoholic extract of feverfew
equivalent to 0.5mg parthenolide daily for nine months.“
Another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
trial involving 20 patients with migraine assessed the effects of
feverfew 100 mg daily for two months on serotonin uptake and
platelet activity.“ This trial found no effect for feverfew in the
prevention of migraine attacks and also reported that feverfew

showed

icial effects for feverfew,

Feverfew

administration had no effect on the uptake of serotonin by
platelets.

The authors of a Cochrane systematic review of five
ed, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials (four studies
10°12.34) plus one another) concluded that
although some trials suggest that feverfew preparations are
superior to placebo in preventing migraine, further well-designed
clinical trials are required to establish the beneficial effects of
feverfew for migraine prophylaxis.°° Furthermore, the trials
included in the review as: d the effects of different feverfew
preparations (e.g. fresh or dried leaves), administered according to
ifferent dosage regimens (e.g. approximately 50-143 mg pow-
lered feverfew leaf daily for one to six months). Many other
marketed preparations of feverfew leaf have not been assessed at

randomis

nentioned above,

3

all in controlled clinical trials.

Rheumatoid arthritis A double-blind, placebo-controlled, non-
crossover trial studying the use of feverfew in rheumatoid arthritis
has also been documented.” Forty-one female patients with
inflammatory joint symptoms inadequately controlled by non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were given either one feverfew
capsule (70-86 mg equivalent to 2-3 mol parthenolide) daily, or
one placebo capsule, for six weeks. Current non-steroidal therapy
was maintained. It was concluded that patients in the trial had
experienced no additional benefit from feverfew.°” The authors

commented that while concomitant non-steroidal anti-inflamma-
tory drug therapy has been stated to reduce the effectiveness of
feverfew, the majority of rheumatoid arthriti
feverfew to supplement existing therapy.

sufferers will use

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical safety and toxicity data for feverfew is limited, and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have
documented the following adverse effects during feverfew admin-
istration, although most effects were also reported (sometimes
more frequently) during placebo administration: mouth ulcers
(reported more frequently during placebo administration in one
study), sore mouth, abdominal pain and indigestion, diar-
rhoea, flatulence, nausea, dizziness and skin rash.°!'* On
balance, adverse effects reported for feverfew are mild and
transient, are similar to those reported during placebo adminis-
tration and occur with a similar frequency.

A 'post-feverfew syndrome’ has been described on stopping
‘") (see Pharmacological Action, Clinical
such as nervousness, tension headaches,

feverfew administration’
studies) with symptom:
insomnia, stiffness/pain in joints and tiredness.

The onset of side-effe reported to vary, with
symptoms becoming apparent within the first week of treatment,
or appearing gradually over the first two months.

Sesquiterpene lactones that contain an o%-methylene butyrolac-
tone ring are known to cause allergic reactions.°* °°) Com-

pounds with this structure are present in feverfew and reports of
09-2

s with feverfew is

contact dermatitis have been documente No documented
allergic reactions following oral ingestion were located.

No chronic toxicity studies have been reported. However,
detailed haematological analys
whom had used feverfew for more than one year, did not show any
significant differences when compared with analysis of con-
trols.“ A human toxicity study has investigated whether the
sesquiterpene lactones in feverfew induce chromosomal or other
changes in normal human cells of individuals who have taken the

of 60 feverfew users, some of

----- PAGE 277 -----
Feverfew

herb.“ The study compared 30 chronic female feverfew users
(leaves, tablets or capsules taken daily for more than 11
consecutive months) with matched non-users. The results of
lymphocyte cultures established from blood samples taken over a
period of several months were stated to indicate that feverfew
affects neither the frequency of chromosomal aberrations nor the
frequency of sister chromatid exchanges in the circulating
peripheral lymphocytes.

Preclinical data

An LDso value for feverfew has not been estimated. No adverse
effects were reported for rats and guinea-pigs receiving feverfew at
doses 100 and 150 times the human daily dose, respectively.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Feverfew is contra-indicated in individuals with a known
hypersensitivity to other members of the family Compositae
(Asteraceae), such as chamomile, ragweed and yarrow. Feverfew
should not be ingested by individuals who develop a rash on
contact with the plant.

Feverfew should only be considered as a treatment for migraine
that has proved unresponsive to conventional forms of medication.
Although traditionally recommended as a remedy for rheumatic
conditions, self-medication with feverfew should not be under-
taken without first consulting a doctor.

Drug interactions None documented. However, in view of the
documented pharmacological actions of feverfew, the potential for
preparations of feverfew to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Feverfew is contra-indicated during
pregnancy. It is reputed to be an abortifacient and to affect the
menstrual cycle. It is documented to modify menstrual flow, cause
abortion in cattle and induce uterine contraction in full-term
women.‘

ustralia: Herbal Headache
Canada: Tanacet. UK: Tanacet.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Albizia Complex; Extralife Arthri-Care; Extralife
Migrai-Care; Guaiacum Complex.

References

1 Stefanovic M et al. Sesquiterpene lactones from the domestic plant
species Tanacetum parthenium L. (Compositae). J Serb Chem Soc
1985; 50: 435-441.

2 Bohlmann F, Zdero C. Sesquiterpene lactones and other constituents
from Tanacetum parthenium. Phytochemistry 1982: 21: 2543-2549.

3 Osawa T, Taylor D. Revised structure and stereochemistry of
chrysartemin B. Tetrahedron Lett 1977; 13: 1169-1172.

4 Hylands DM, Hylands PJ. New sesquiterpene lactones from feverfew.
Phytochem Soc Eur Symp 1986: 17.

5 Wagner H et al. New chlorine-containing sesquiterpene lactones from
Chrysanthemum parthenium. Planta Med 1988; 54: 171-172.

6 Murch SJ et al. Melatonin in feverfew and other medicinal plants.
Lancet 1997; 350: 1598-1599.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

33

Awang DVC. Feverfew fever — a headache for the consumer.
Herbalgram 1993; 29: 34-36.

Berry M. Feverfew. Pharm J 1994; 253: 806-808.

Baldwin CA et al. What pharmacists should know about feverfew.
Pharm J] 1987; 239: 237-238.

De Weerdt CJ, Bootsma HPR, Hendriks H. Herbal medicines in
migraine prevention. Randomized double-blind placebo-controlled
crossover trial of a feverfew preparation. Phytomedicine 1996; 3: 225—
230.

Johnson ES et al. Efficacy of feverfew as prophylactic treatment of
migraine. BM] 1985; 291: 569-573.

Palevitch D et al. Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) as a prophylactic
treatment for migraine: a double-blind placebo-controlled study.
Phytother Res 1997; 11: 508-511.

Collier HOJ et al. Extract of feverfew inhibits prostaglandin
biosynthesis. Lancet 1980; ii: 922-973.

Makheja AM, Bailey JM. The active principle in feverfew. Lancet
1981; ii, 1054.

Capasso F. The effect of an aqueous extract of Tanacetum parthenium
L. on arachidonic acid metabolism by rat peritoneal leucocytes. J
Pharm Pharmacol 1986; 38: 71-72.

Makheja AM, Bailey JM. A platelet phospholipase inhibitor from the
medicinal herb feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium). Prostaglandins
Leukot Med 1982: 8: 653-660.

Biggs MJ et al. Platelet aggregation in patients using feverfew for
migraine. Lancet 1982; ii: 776.

Loesche W et al. Feverfew — an antithrombotic drug? Folia Haematol
1988; 115: 181-184.

Groenewegen WA, Heptinstall S. Amounts of feverfew in commercial
preparations of the herb. Lancet 1986; i: 44-45.

Heptinstall S et al. Extracts of feverfew inhibit granule secretion in
blood platelets and polymorphonuclear leucocytes. Lancet 1985; i:
1071-1073.

Groenewegen WA et al. Compounds extracted from feverfew that have
anti-secretory activity contain an a-methylene butyrolactone unit. J
Pharm Pharmacol 1986; 38: 709-712.

Heptinstall S e¢ al. Extracts of feverfew may inhibit platelet behaviour
via neutralization of sulphydryl groups. J Pharm Pharmacol 1987; 39:
459-465.

Lésche W et al. Inhibition of the behaviour of human polynuclear
leukocytes by an extract of Chrysanthemum parthenium. Planta Med
1988; 54: 381-384.

Hayes NA, Foreman JC. The activity of compounds extracted from
feverfew on histamine release from rat mast cells. J Pharm Pharmacol
1987; 39: 466-470.

O'Neill LAJ e¢ al. Extracts of feverfew inhibit mitogen-induced human
peripheral blood mononuclear cell proliferation and cytokine
mediated responses: a cytotoxic effect. Br J Clin Pharmac 1987; 23:
81-83.

Piela-Smith TH, Liu X. Feverfew extracts and the sesquiterpene
lactone partenolide inhibit intercellular adhesion molecule-1
expression in human synovial fibroblasts. Cell Immunol 2001; 209:
89-96.

Kang BY et al. Inhibition of interleukin-12 production in
lipopolysaccharide-activated mouse macrophages by parthenolide, a
predominant sesquiterpene lactone in Tanacetum parthenium:
involvement of nuclear factor-kappa-B. Immunol Lett 2001; 77: 159-
163.

Fukuda K e¢ al. Inhibition by parthenolide of phorbol ester-induced
transcriptional activation of inducible nitric oxide synthase gene in a
human monocyte cell line THP-1. Biochem Pharmacol 2000; 60: 595—
600.

Williams CA et al. A biologically active lipophilic flavonol from
Tanacetum parthenium. Phytochemistry 1995; 38: 267-270.

Jain NK, Kulkarni SK. Antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory effects
of Tanacetum parthenium L. extract in mice and rats. J
Ethnopharmacol 1999; 68: 251-259.

Berry MI. Feverfew faces the future. Pharm J 1984; 232: 611-614.
Ross JJ et al. Low concentrations of the feverfew component
parthenolide inhibit in vitro growth of tumor lines in a cytostatic
fashion. Planta Med 1999; 65: 126-129.

Blakeman JP, Atkinson P. Antimicrobial properties and possible role in
host—pathogen interactions of parthenolide, a sesquiterpene lactone

----- PAGE 278 -----
34

35

36

37

38

isolated from glands of Chrysanthemum parthenium. Physiol Plant
Pathol 1979; 15: 183-192.

Murphy JJ e¢ al. Randomised double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of
feverfew in migraine prevention. Lancet 1988; ii: 189-192.

Kuritzky A et al. Feverfew in the treatment of migraine: its effects on
serotonin uptake and platelet activity. Neurology 1994; 44(Suppl 2):
A201.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Feverfew for preventing migraine (Review).
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2004, Issue 1. Art. No.
CD002286

Pattrick M et al. Feverfew in rheumatoid arthritis: a double blind,
placebo controlled study. Ann Rheum Dis 1989; 48: 547-549.
Rodriguez E et al. The role of sesquiterpene lactones in contact
hypersensitivity to some North and South American species of

39

40

41

42

2B
44

Feverfew

feverfew (Parthenium — Compositae). Contact Dermatitis 1977; 3:
155-162.

Burry J. Compositae dermatitis in South Australia: Contact dermatitis
from Chrysanthemum parthenium. Contact Dermatitis 1980; 6: 445.
Mitchell JC eg al. Allergic contact dermatitis caused by Artemisia and
Chrysanthemum species. The role of sesquiterpene lactones. J Invest
Dermatol 1971; 56: 98-101.

Schmidt RJ, Kingston T. Chrysanethemum dermatitis in South Wales;
diagnosis by patch testing with feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)
extract. Contact Dermatitis 1985; 13: 120-127.

Mensing H et al. Airborne contact dermatitis. Der Hautarzt 1985; 36:
398-402.

Johnson S. Feverfew. London: Sheldon Press, 1984.

Johnson ES et al. Investigation of possible genetoxic effects of feverfew
in migraine patients. Hum Toxicol 1987; 6: 533-534.

----- PAGE 279 -----
Figwort

evidence was located to justify the herbal uses. In view of the
lack of toxicity data and possible cardioactive properties,
excessive use of figwort should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Scrophularia nodosa L. (Scrophulariaceae)

Synonym(s)

Common Figwort, Scrophularia

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHP 19830”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Figwort is not included in the GSL.‘3”
Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G62.

Amino acids Alanine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, phenylalanine,
threonine, tyrosine and valine.”

Flavonoids Diosmetin, diosmin and acacetin rhamnoside.”
lridoids
OH

H
S

fe) A

H
HOCH?” 0-Glucose
aucubin

H

harpagoside

O-Glucose

Flavonoids

OH O

diosmetin
(luteolin-4’-methylether)
diosmin rutinose

Figure 1 Selected constituents of figwort.

Iridoids — Aucubin, acetylharpagide, harpagide, harpagoside,
isoharpagoside, procumbid and a catalpol glycoside.’ Figwort
is stated to have the same qualitative iridoid composition as devil's
claw, but about half the content of harpagoside.

Acids Various acids, including caffeic acid, cinnamic acid, ferulic
acid, sinapic acid and vanillic acid, present as both esters and
glycosides.”

Food Use

Figwort is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Figwort is stated to act as a dermatological agent and a mild
diuretic, and to increase myocardial contraction. Traditionally, it
has been used for chronic skin disease, and specifically for eczema,
psoriasis and pruritus.(C7°%

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 2-8 g by infusion.'(©”
Liquid extract 2-8 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol).‘©”

Tincture 2-4mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol).'©”

Figure 2 Figwort (Scrophularia nodosa).

----- PAGE 280 -----
Figure 3 Figwort — dried drug substance (herb).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The iridoid glycosides aucubin and catalpol have been documen-
ted to exert a purgative action in mice.'®) Cardioactive properties
and anti-inflammatory activity have been claimed for harpagide
and the other iridoid constituents (see Devil's Claw).‘@%”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of figwort
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required. The iridoids
are stated to be bitter principles.'C°

Side-effects, To y

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for figwort and further investigation of these aspects
is required.

Figwort

Contra-indications, Warnings

Figwort should be avoided in ventricular tachycardia."©”

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of figwort to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of figwort has not been
established. In view of the lack of pharmacological and toxicity
data, use of figwort during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

References

1 Toth Let al. Amino acids in Scrophulariaceae species. Bot Kozl 1977;
64: 43-52.

2° Marczal G et al. Flavonoids as biologically active agents and their
occurrence in the Scrophulariaceae family. Acta Pharm Hung 1974: 44
(Suppl. Suppl.): 83-90.

3 Swann K, Melville C. Iridoid content of some Scrophularia species. J
Pharm Pharmacol 1972; 24: 170P.

4 Swiatek L. Iridoid glycosides in the Scrophulariaceae family. Acta Pol
Pharm 1973; 30: 203-212.

5 Weinges K, Von der Eltz H. Natural products from medicinal plants.
XXIIL Iridoid glycosides from Scrophularia nodosa L. Justus Liebigs
Ann Chem 1978; 12: 1968-1973.

6 Swiatek L. Phenolic acids of underground parts of Scrophularia
nodosa. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm 1973; 25: 461-464.

7 Swiatek L. Pharmacobotanical investigations of some
Scrophulariaceae species. Diss Pharm Pharmacol 1970; 22: 321-328.

8 Inouye H et al. Purgative activities of iridoid glucosides. Planta Med
1974; 25:285— 288.

----- PAGE 281 -----
u Frangula

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of frangula is characterised by the
anthraquinone glycoside constituents. The laxative action of
these compounds is well recognised and supports the herbal
use of frangula as a laxative. The use of non-standardised
anthraquinone-containing preparations should be avoided,
since their pharmacological effect will be variable and
unpredictable. In particular, the use of products containing
combinations of anthraquinone laxatives should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Frangula alnus Mill. (Rhamnaceae)

Synonym(s)

Alder Buckthorn, Rhamnus frangula L., Frangula nigra Samp.

Part(s) Used
Bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission E (Buckthorn) ‘©
ESCOP 2003'07

EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monograph”
Martindale 35th edition'@*

Ph Eur 20078?

Anthraquinones
R°O le} OH

8
fe) R! Re
frangulin A a-L-rhamnose H
frangulin B B-D-apiose H
glucofrangulin A a-L-rhamnose B-D-glucose
glucofrangulin B B-D-apiose p-D-glucose
frangula emodin H H
physcion CH3 H
chrysophano!l (unsubstituted) H

Dihydroanthracenes
OH

fe} OH
H H

frangula emodin anthrone

CHs

Figure 1 Selected constituents of frangula.

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL‘°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6, G59 and G62.

Anthraquinones 3-7%. Frangulosides as major components
including frangulin A and B (emodin glycosides) and glucofran-
gulin A and B (emodin diglycosides); emodin derivatives including
emodin dianthrone and its monorhamnoside, palmidin C (see
Rhubarb) and its monorhamnoside, emodin glycoside; also
glycosides of chrysophanol and physcion, and various free
aglycones.

Other constituents Flavonoids and tannins.

Food Use

Frangula is
food flavouring (category N4). While this category recognises the
use of frangula as a flavouring agent, it indicates that there is
insufficient information available to classify it further into
categories N1, N2, or NBC!)

sted by the Council of Europe as a natural source of

Herbal Use

Frangula is stated to possess mild purgative properties and has
; iti sonetimation (G2s Gb: G7, G8, G64)
been used traditionally for constipation.

The European Medicines Agency Committee on Herbal
Medicinal Products (HMPC) has adopted a Community Herbal
monograph for frangula. The monograph includes indications for
short-term use of frangula in cases of occasional constipation.”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried bark 0.52.5 g.'°°

Figure 2 Frangula (Frangula alnus).

----- PAGE 282 -----
Figure 3 Frangula - dried drug substance (bark).

Liquid extract 2-5 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological activity of frangula can be attributed to the
anthraquinone glycoside constituents. The laxative action of these
compounds is well recognised (see Senna).

Side-effects, Toxicity

See Senna for side-effects and toxicity associated with anthraqui-
nones.'©7

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monograph for
frangula includes the following information." There are no
studies on single dose toxicity, on repeated dose toxicity, on
reproductive toxicity or on carcinogenicity. Different frangula
extracts were shown to be genotoxic in several in vitro systems
(bacterial mutation, chromosomal aberration and DNA-repair in
mammalian cells). No increases in mutations were observed in a
gene mutation assay with mammalian cells. For emodin, the main
laxative principle of frangula, signs of a genotoxic potential were
observed in several systems (bacteria and mammalian cells in
vitro). Other anthraquinone constituents also gave positive results
in limited experiments.

Contra-indications, Warnings
See Senna for contra-indications and warnings associated with
anthraquinones.

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monograph for
frangula states the following contra-indications and warnings."

Contra-indications Not to be used in cases of intestinal
obstruction and stenosis, atony, inflammatory colon diseases (e.g.
Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis), appendicitis, abdominal pain
of unknown origin, severe dehydration states with water and
electrolyte depletion.

Precautions As with all laxatives, frangula bark should not be
given when any undiagnosed acute or persistent abdominal
symptoms are present. If laxatives are needed every day, the cause
of the constipation should be investigated. Long-term use of
laxatives should be avoided. Use for more than two weeks requires
medical supervision. Chronic use may cause pigmentation of the
colon (pseudomelanosis coli) which is harmless and _ reversible
after drug discontinuation.

Frangula

Abuse, with diarrhoea and consequent fluid and electrolyte
losses, may cause: dependence, with possible need for increased
dosages, disturbance of the water and electrolyte (mainly
hypokalaemia) balance, an atonic colon with impaired function.
Intake of anthranoid containing laxatives exceeding short-term
use may result in an aggravation of constipation.

Hypokalaemia can result in cardiac and neuromuscular
dysfunction, especially if cardiac glycosides, diuretics or corticos-
teroids are taken. Chronic use may result in albuminuria and
haematuria.

In chronic constipation, stimulant laxatives are not an
acceptable alternative to a changed diet.

Interaction with other medicaments and other forms of
interaction. Hypokalaemia (resulting from long-term laxative
abuse) potentiates the action of cardiac glycosides and interacts
with antiarrhythmic drugs and drugs which induce reversion to
sinus rhythm (e.g. quinidine). Concomitant use with other drugs
inducing hypokalaemia (e.g. thiazide diuretics, adrenocorticoster-
oids and liquorice root) may enhance electrolyte imbalance.

Pregnancy and lactation The use of stimulant laxatives,
particularly unstandardised preparations, is not generally recom-
mended during pregnancy (see Senna).

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monograph for
frangula includes the following information on use during
pregnancy and lactation.

Pregnancy Frangula is not recommended during pregnancy.”
There are no reports of undesirable or damaging effects
during pregnancy and on the foetus when used at the
recommended dosage schedule. However, experimental data
concerning a genotoxic risk of several anthranoids, e.g. emodin
and physcion, and frangula extract are not counterbalanced by
sufficient studies to eliminate a possible risk.”

Lactation Frangula is not recommended during breast feeding, as
there are insufficient data on the excretion of its metabolites in
breast milk. Excretion of the active principles of frangula in
breast milk has not been investigated. However, small amounts
of active metabolites (e.g. rhein) from other anthranoids are
known to be excreted in breast milk. A laxative effect in
breastfed babies has not been reported.”

Preparations

Proprietary single-ingredient preparations

France: Depuratif des Alpes. Switzerland: Elixir frangulae
compositum.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Granocol; Normacol Plus. Austria: Artin; Gallesyn;
Gallesyn; Laxalpin; Laxolind; Mag Kottas Krauterexpress
Abfuhrtee; Mag Kottas May-Cur-Tee; Planta Lax; Waldheim
Abfuhrdragees mild. Belgium: Grains de Vals; Normacol Plus.
Canada: Constipation; Herbalax. Czech Republic: Abfuhr-
Heilkrautertee; Cholagol; Reduktan; The Salvat. Denmark:
Ferroplex-frangula. France: Dragees Fuca; Dragees Vegetales
Rex; Mediflor Tisane Antirhumatismale No 2; Mediflor
Tisane Circulation du Sang No 12. Germany: Abdomilon.
Hong Kong: Hepatofalk; Normacol Plus. Hungary: Cholagol.
India: Kanormal. Ireland: Normacol Plus. Israel: Encypalmed;
Rekiv. Italy: Draverex; Fave di Fuca; Lactolas; Neoform.

----- PAGE 283 -----
Frangula

Reference

1 European Medicines Agency. Committee on Herbal Medicinal
Products. Community Herbal Monograph on Rhamnus frangula L.,
Cortex. London, 26 October 2006. Doc Ref. EMEA/HMPC/76307/
2006

Normacol Plus.

----- PAGE 284 -----
Fucus

presumably attributable to the iodine content, although the
self-diagnosis and treatment of these conditions with a herbal
remedy is not suitable. There have been no documented
studies supporting the traditional use of kelp in rheumatic
conditions. In view of the iodine content and potential
accumulation of toxic elements, excessive ingestion of kelp is
inadvisable. Doubt over the quality of commercial seaweed
preparations has been reported.

Species (Family)

Fucus vesiculosus L. and other Fucus species (Fucaceae)

Synonym(s)

Black Tang, Bladderwrack, Kelp, Kelpware, Rockweed, Seawrack

Brown seaweeds refer to species of Fucus, Ascophyllum,
Laminaria and Macrocystis. 'Kelps' refer to species of Laminaria
and Macrocystis, although kelp is often used in reference to
species of Fucus.

Part(s) Used
Thallus (whole plant)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007 (kelp) '°*”
Martindale 35th edition’@*»
Ph Eur 2007 (kelp)‘C*?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Carbohydrates Polysaccharides: alginic acid (algin) as the major
component; fucoidan and laminarin (sulfated polysaccharide
esters).

lodine Content of various Laminaria species has been reported as
0.07-0.76% of dry weight.”

Other constituents Various vitamins and minerals, particularly
ascorbic acid (vitamin C) (0.013-0.077% of fresh material)”

Food Use

Seaweeds are commonly included in the diet of certain popula-
tions. The gelling properties of alginic acid, the major
polysaccharide in brown seaweeds, including fucus, are extensively
utilised in the dairy and baking industries to improve texture,
body and smoothness of products." Fucus is listed by the Council
of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category N2).
This category indicates that fucus can be added to foodstuffs in
small quantities, with a possible limitation of an active principle
(as yet unspecified) in the final product.'C!®

Herbal Use

Fucus is stated to possess antihypothyroid, anti-obesity and
antirheumatic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for

lymphadenoid goitre, myxoedema, obesity, arthritis and rheuma-
tism (G2 65.67, G8, Gos)

Polysaccharides
HOOC OH
° -Q Ho °
HO ) +o

HOOC OH fi

alginic acid (240 kD)
£1 4 linked mannuronic acid polymer

?
9° 9° o=s=o
o=s=o o=s=0 $
| | a CHg
cH, 9 cH, 9
° ° OH
OH ao oO
O° O°
n n
fucoidin (133 kD)
sulphated L-fucose
HOH CH,OH HOH
HO | Ho Q |Ho °
HO. ie} Le}
OH OH 1, OH
laminarin
B 1 3 linked glucose polymer
with branching

Figure 1 Selected constituents of fucus.

----- PAGE 285 -----
Fucus

Figure 2 Fucus (Fucus vesiculosus).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried thallus 5-10 g as an infusion three times daily.(C%°”

Liquid extract
daily'C°

48mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

Pharmacological Actions

There is a paucity of information documented specifically for
Fucus vesiculosus, although pharmacological activities are
recognised for individual constituents and other brown seaweed
spe

Alginic acid is a hydrophilic colloidal substance that swells to
approximately 25-35 times its original bulk in an alkaline
environment and as such exerts a bulk laxative action.” It is

es.

stated to compare favourably with the carboxylic type of cation
exchange resins. The colloidal properties of alginates have been
utilised in wound dressings and skin grafts.

Anticoagulant properties have been
seaweeds. The glucose polymer laminarin has been identified as
the anticoagulant principle in a Laminaria species. A fucoidan
fraction has been isolated from Fucus vesiculosus with 40-50%
blood anticoagulant activity of heparin.)

The iodine content of seaweeds is well recognised. The low
incidence of goitre amongst maritime people has been attributed
G4) Similarly, the

thought
)

jocumented for brown

to the inclusion of seaweeds in their diet.
traditional use of Fucus vesiculosus in 'slimming teas' i:
to be attributable to the effect of iodine on hypothyroidism.“

Extracts of various brown seaweeds including Ascophyllum
nodosum and Fucus vesiculosus have been reported to exhibit a
high in vitro inhibitory activity towards mammalian digestive
enzymes (0-amylase, trypsin and lipase) isolated from the porcine
pancreas. Activity was attributed to high molecular weight
(30.000-100 000) polyphenols.

Inhibitory effects of laminarin sulfate on lipidaemia and
atherosclerosis (in vivo, rabbit) have been partially attributed to
the in vitro inhibition of lipid synthesis observed in cultured chick
aortic cells.”

Hypotensive activity observed in rats intravenously adminis-
tered extracts of commercial seaweed (Laminaria species)
preparations has been attributed to their histamine content.
However, histamine concentrations varied considerably between

preparations, and authentic specimens of the Laminaria speci
were devoid of histamine.

Kelp extracts have antiviral activity and laminarin is reported
to have exhibited some tumour-inhibiting actions.”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of fucus
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for fucus
preparations and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Hyperthyroidism has been associated with the ingestion of kelp
and is attributable to the iodine content in the plant."!°'” Typical
symptoms of hyperthyroidism (weight loss, sweating, fatigue,
frequent soft stools) were exhibited by a 72-year-old woman
following ingestion of a commercial kelp product for six
months.” Laboratory tests confirmed the hyperthyroidism
although no pre-existing evidence of thyroid disease was found
and the condition resolved in six months following discontinua-
tion of the tablets. Analysis of the kelp tablets reported an iodine
content of 0.7 mg/tablet representing a daily intake of 2.8-4.2 mg
iodine." Clinically evident hyperthyroidism developed in an
otherwise healthy woman following the daily ingestion of six 200-
mg kelp tablets.") Symptoms gradually resolved on cessation of
therapy.

The association between halogen salts and acneiform eruptions
is well established.” Ingestion of kelp products has been
associated with the worsening of pre-existing acne and the
development of acneiform eruptions, which improved following
withdrawal of the tablets.'?)

The ability of marine plants to accumulate heavy metals and
other toxic elements is recognised, and the uptake of various
radioactive compounds by seaweeds has been reported." '*')
Fifteen samples of kelp-containing dietary supplements have been
analysed for their iodine and arsenic contents.’ The levels of
arsenic were low in all but one product. The iodine levels varied
widely, even between different samples of the same product, and in
some products the iodine levels were high in relation to safe daily
intake.

Brown algae (Ascophyllum nodosum and Fucus vesiculosus)
have been found to be capable of synthesising volatile halogenated
organic compounds (VHOCS).''%) VHOCs are considered to be
troublesome pollutants because land plants and animals have
difficulty in degrading the compounds which consequently persist
in terrestrial ecosystems.'') VHOCs released into the seawater
predominantly contain bromine with iodine-containing com-
pounds showing a slower rate of turnover. Concentration of
iron by brown seaweeds has been attributed to fucoidan, and
alginic acid exhibits a high specificity for the binding of
strontium." Elevated urinary arsenic concentrations (138 and
293 ttg/24 hour) in two female patients have been associated with
the ingestion of kelp tablets. Subsequent analysis of the arsenic
content of various kelp preparations revealed concentrations
ranging from 16 to 58 ug/g product.''” '®) The botanical source of
the kelp in the products was not stated."

Ascophyllum nodosum is commonly added to animal foodstuffs
as a source of vitamin and minerals, with beneficial results
reported for dairy cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry.) Feeding
studies using A. nodosum have highlighted an atypical toxic
response for rabbits compared with that of rats and pigs.‘'>!”)
Addition of A. nodosum to the diet of rabbits (at S—10%) caused a

----- PAGE 286 -----
severe drop in haemoglobin content, serum iron concentrations
and packed cell volume, leading to weight loss and death in two-
thirds of the animals.!» No differences in renal and liver function,
and in lipid metabolism were found between test and control
animals.) Similar, but much milder, toxicity has also been
observed in rabbits fed Fucus serratus.) Subsequent studies
incorporating A. nodosum into the feed of rats and pigs failed to
demonstrate the toxic effects observed in rabbits.” The toxic
components in A. nodosum have been reported to be non-
extractable with chloroform, ethanol, water and 20% sodium
carbonate solution, remaining in the insoluble residue.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

The iodine content in kelp may cause hyper- or hypothyroidism.
In view of this, ingestion of kelp preparations by children is
inadvisable. The iodine content in kelp has also been associated
with acneiform eruptions and aggravation of pre-existing acne. In
general, brown seaweeds are known to concentrate various heavy
metals and other toxic elements. Elevated urinary arsenic
concentrations have been traced to the ingestion of kelp tablets.
Prolonged ingestion of kelp may reduce gastrointestinal iron
absorption (binding properties of fucoidan), resulting in a slow
reduction in haemoglobin, packed cell volume and serum iron
concentrations. Prolonged ingestion may also affect absorption of
sodium and potassium ions (alginic acid) and cause diarrhoea.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of fucus to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. Because of its iodine content, fucus
should be used with caution in individuals receiving treatment for
existing abnormal thyroid function.

Pregnancy and lactation The safe use of kelp products during
pregnancy and lactation has not been established. In view of the
potential actions on the thyroid gland and possible contamination
with toxic elements, the use of kelp should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

UK: Fenneherb Slim Aid; Napiers Slimming Tablets; Reducing
(Slimming) Tablets.

Fucus

References

1 Wood CG. Seaweed extracts. A unique ocean resource. J Chem Ed
1974; 51: 449-452.

2. Algae as food for man. In: Chapman VJ, ed. Seaweeds and their Uses.
London: Methuen, 1970: 115.

3 Whistler RL, ed. Industrial Gums, 2nd edn. New York: Academic
Press, 1973: 13.

4 Burkholder PR. Drugs from the sea. Armed Forces Chem ] 1963; 17:
6, 8, 10, 12-16.

5 Doner LW. Fucoidan. In: Whistler RL, ed. Industrial Gums, 2nd edn.
New York: Academic Press, 1973: 115-121.

6 Barwell CJ et al. Inhibitors of mammalian digestive enzymes in some
species of marine brown algae. Br Phycol J 1983; 18: 200.

7 Murata K. Suppression of lipid synthesis in cultured aortic cells by
laminaran sulfate. J Atheroscl Res 1969; 10: 371-378.

8 Funayama $, Hikino H. Hypotensive principle of Laminaria and allied
seaweeds. Planta Med 1981; 41: 29-33.

9 Kathan RH. Kelp extracts as antiviral substances. Ann N Y Acad Sci
1965; 130: 390-397.

10. Shilo S, Hirsch HJ. lodine-induced hyperthyroidism in a patient with
a normal thyroid gland. Postgrad Med J 1986; 62: 661-662.

11 Smet PAGM de et al. Kelp in herbal medicines: hyperthyroidism. Ned
Tijdschr Geneeskd 1990; 134: 1058-1059.

12 Harrell BL, Rudolph AH. Kelp diet: A cause of acneiform eruption.
Arch Dermatol 1976; 112: 560.

13 Blunden G, Jones RT. Toxic effects of Ascophyllum nodosum as a
rabbit food additive. In: Food — Drugs from the Sea Proceedings 1972.
Washington: Marine Technology Society, 1972: 267-293.

14 Hodge VF et al. Rapid accumulation of plutonium and polonium on
giant brown algae. Health Phys 1974; 27: 29-35.

15 Norman JA et al. Human intake of arsenic and iodine from seaweed-
based food supplements and health foods available in the UK. Food
Additives Contaminants 1987; 5: 103-109.

16 Halocarbons. Natural pollution by algal seaweeds. Chem Br 1985:
513-514.

17 Walkiw O, Douglas DE. Health food supplements prepared from kelp
—a source of elevated urinary arsenic. Can Med Assoc J 1974; 111:
1301-1302.

18 Walkiw O, Douglas DE. Health food supplements prepared form
kelp —a source of elevated urinary arsenic. Clin Toxicol 1975; 8: 325—
331.

19 Jones RT et al. Effects of dietary Ascophyllum nodosum on blood
parameters of rats and pigs. Botanica Marina 1979; 22: 393-394.

----- PAGE 287 -----
Fumitory

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007°°*

Complete German Commission E'C?)
Martindale 35th edition'°*)

Ph Eur 2007°°8

of fumitory. Fumitory should not be used in home-made .

ophthalmic preparations. In view of the active constituents Legal Category (Licensed Products)
and the lack of safety data, excessive ingestion of fumitory GSL'@”)

should be avoided.

Constituents
Species (Family) The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Fumaria officinalis L. (Fumariaceae) References G2 and G6.

Alkaloids —Isoquinoline-type. Protopines including protopine
Synonym(s) (fumarine) as the major alkaloid and cryptopine,’” proto-
a berberines including aurotensine, stylopine, sinactine and N-
methylsinactine,®) spirobenzylisoquinolines including fumaritine,
fumaricine and fumariline,** benzophenanthridines including

sanguinarine, and indenobenzazepines including fumaritridine

Common Fumitory, Fumitory

Part(s) Used

Herb and fumaritrine.°”

Flavonoids Glycosides of quercetin including isoquercitrin, rutin
Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs and quercetrin-3,7-diglucoside-3-arabinoglucoside.*”
BHC 1992'°° Acids Chlorogenic, caffeic and fumaric acids.

om
OCH3

protopine OCH; OCH3 aurotensine

cryptopine O-CH2—O

fumariline fumaritine fumaricine

fe}
2N—CHg
fe} ©

‘Lo

sanguinarine
Figure 1 Selected constituents of fumitory.

----- PAGE 288 -----
Other constituents Bitter principles, mucilage and resin.

Food Use

Fumitory is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that
fumitory can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted
manner, although there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity.'C!®

Herbal Use

Fumitory is stated to possess weak diuretic and laxative properties
and to act as a cholagogue. Traditionally, it has been used to treat
cutaneous eruptions, conjunctivitis (as an eye lotion) and,
specifically, chronic eczema.(C* S% G7 G& Ge#)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Figure 3. Fumitory — dried drug substance (herb).

Fumitory
Herb 2-4¢ as an infusion three times daily,“C%°”

Liquid extract 24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily.C%

Tincture 1-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

In in vivo (rats) studies, preparations of the herb had no effect on
normal choloresis but modified bile flow that had been artificially
increased or decreased." Antispasmodic activity on smooth
muscle has been reported." Extracts inhibited formation of gall-
bladder calculi in animals.‘'?) The major alkaloid protopine has
antihistaminic,''” hypotensive, bradycardic and sedative activities
in small doses, whereas larger doses cause excitation and
“ Bactericidal activity against the Gram-positive
organisms Bacillus anthracis and Staphylococcus have been
reported."

convulsions.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of fumitory
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Clinical studies involving 105 patients with biliary disorders
claimed favourable results." However, the methodological
limitations of these studies do not allow the reported effects to
be attributed to administration of fumitory.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for fumitory and further investigation of these
aspects is required.

Contra-indications, Warnings
None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of fumitory to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of fumitory during
pregnancy and lactation has not been established. In view of
lack of pharmacological and toxicity data, the use of fumitory
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

roprietary single-ingredient preparations

Austria: Bilobene; Oddibil. Brazil: Oddibil. France: Oddibil.
Germany: Bilobene. Hungary: Bilobene.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Austria: Hepabene; Oddispasmol. Czech Republic: Hepabene.
France: Actibil; Bolcitol; Depuratif Parnel; Depuratum;
Schoum. Hungary: Hepabene. Italy: Soluzione Schoum.
Russia: Hepabene (lena6ene). Spain: Natusor Hepavesical;
Odisor; Solucion Schoum. UK: Echinacea; Skin Cleansing.

----- PAGE 289 -----
1

Fumitory

References

Sener B. Turkish species of Fumaria L. and their alkaloids. VII
Alkaloids from Fumaria officinalis L. and E. cilicica Hansskn. Gazi
Univ Eczacilik Fak Derg 1985; 2: 45-49.

Hermansson J, Sandberg F. Alkaloids of Fumaria officinalis. Acta
Pharm Suec 1973; 10: 520-522.

Mardirossian ZH et al. Alkaloids of Fumaria officinalis.
Phytochemistry 1983; 22: 759-761.

MacLean DB et al. Structure of three minor alkaloids of Fumaria
officinalis. Can ] Chem 1969; 47: 3593-3599.

Murav'eva DA et al. Isolation of fumaritine from Fumaria officinalis.
Khim Farm Zh 1974; 8: 32-34.

Forgacs P et al. Alcaloides des Papavéracées II: Composition chimique
de dix-sept especes de Fumaria. Plantes Med Phytother 1986; 20: 64—
81.

Forgacs P et al. Composition chimique des Fumariacées. Alcaloides de
quatorze especes de Fumaria. Plantes Med Phytother 1982; 16: 99-115.
Massa V et al. Sur les pigments phenoliques du Fumaria officinalis L.
Trav Soc Pharm Montpellier 1971; 31: 233-236.

10

1

12

13

14

15

Torck M et al. Flavonoids of Fumaria officinalis L. Ann Pharm Fr
1971; 29: 591-596.

Boucard M, Laubenheimer B. Action du nébulisat de fumeterre sur le
debit bilaire du rat. Therapie 1966; 21: 903-911.

Reynier M et al. Action du nébulisat de fumeterre officinal sur la
musculature lisse. Contribution a l'étude du mécanisme de son
activité thérapeutique. Trav Soc Pharm Montpellier 1977; 37: 85—
102.

Lagrange E, Aurousseau M. Effect of spray-dried product of Fumaria
officinalis on experimental gall bladder lithiasis in mice. Ann Pharm
Fr 1973; 31: 357-362.

Abdul Habib Dil. Activité anti-histaminique de la fumarine. Therapie
1973; 28: 767-774.

Preininger V. The pharmacology and toxicology of the papaveraceae
alkaloids. In: RHF Manske, ed. The Alkaloids XV. London: Academic
Press, 1975: 207-261.

Fiegel G. Die amphocholoretische Wirkung der Fumaria officinalis. Z
Allgemeinmed Landarzt 1971; 34: 1819-1820.

----- PAGE 290 -----
Garlic

secondary alliin metabolites, such as ajoene. However, it i:
unclear to what extent these secondary compounds are
formed in the body following the ingestion of garlic and
whether, therefore, these products exhibit the
pharmacological actions of fresh garlic.

Fermented garlic preparations are considered to be
practically devoid of the active sulfur-containing compounds.
Many ‘odourless’ garlic preparations are available: obviously
one should establish if these products are odourless due to the
formulation of the product or because they are devoid of the
odoriferous, active principles. Further randomised controlled
clinical trials with standardised preparations are required to
establish the true usefulness of garlic in reducing serum lipids,
blood pressure, platelet aggregation and exerting an
antimicrobial effect. Therapeutic doses of garlic should not be
given to those whose blood clots slowly and caution is
recommended for patients on anticoagulant therapy.

Species (Family)

Allium sativum L. (Alliaceae/Liliaceae)

Synonym(s)
Ajo, Allium

Part(s) Used
Bulb (clove)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'@”)

BP 2007'¢8

BPC 194961)

Complete German Commission E‘
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Ph Eur 2007°°8”

USP29/NF24'C8°)

WHO year volume 1'°°)

(G3)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL*?

Constituents

This material is compiled from several sources including
References 1-3 and General References G6 and G52.

Enzymes  Allinase, peroxidases, myrosinase and others (e.g.
catalases, superoxide dismutases, arginases, li pases) ..2°>)

Volatile oils 0.1-0.36%. Sulfur-containing compounds including
alliin, compounds produced enzymatically from alliin including
allicin (diallyl thiosulfinate), allylpropyl disulfide, diallyl dis-
ulfide, diallyl trisulfide; ajoene and vinyldithiines (secondary
products of alliin produced non-enzymatically from allicin); S-
allylmercaptocysteine (ASSC) and S-methylmercaptocysteine
(MSSC); terpenes include citral, geraniol, linalool, «- and p-
phellandrene.

Other constituents Proteins (e.g. glutamyl peptides), amino
acids (e.g. arginine, glutamic acid, asparagic acid, methionine,
threonine), minerals, vitamins, trace elements, lipids, prostaglan-
dins (Ay, D5, Es, Fy4s Fs).

Allicin and other sulfur-containing compounds are formed
from alliin by the enzyme alliinase when garlic is crushed or
chopped. (Alliin and alliinase are separated while the cells of a
garlic bulb are intact, but crushing and chopping damage the cells
of the bulb, allowing alliin and alliinase to come into contact with
each other.) It is considered that 1 mg alliin is equivalent to
0.45 mg allicin.©*” Commercial garlic preparations are often
standardised on content of sulfur-containing constituents, parti-
cularly to alliin, or on allicin yield.

Garlic powder contains not less than 0.45% allicin calculated
with reference to the dried drug.‘©**)

----- PAGE 291 -----
Garlic

Food Use

Garlic is used extensively as a food and as an ingredient in foods.
It is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of food
flavouring (category N1). This category indicates that there are no
restrictions on the use of garlic in foods.““"” Previously, garlic has
been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).‘C4?

Herbal Use

Garlic is stated to possess diaphoretic, expectorant, antispasmo-
dic, antiseptic, bacteriostatic, antiviral, hypotensive and anthel-
mintic properties, and to be a promoter of leukocytosis.
Traditionally, it has been used to treat chronic bronchitis,
respiratory catarrh, recurrent colds, whooping cough, bronchitic
asthma, influenza and chronic bronchitis.'C% 6% 3% 634 6%; G6)
Modern use of garlic and garlic preparations is focused on their
reputed antihypertensive, anti-atherogenic, antithrombotic, anti-
microbial, fibrinolytic, cancer preventive and_ lipid-lowering
effects.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal and older pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

Dried bulb 2-4¢ three times daily;‘©® fresh garlic 4 g daily.(@?
Tincture 2-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C®
Oil 0.03-0.12 mL three times daily.“©

Juice of Garlic (BPC 1949) 2-4mL.'C!)

Syrup of Garlic (BPC 1949) 2-8 mL.‘C!)

Clinical trials assessing the effects of garlic powder tablets on
various parameters, including total serum cholesterol concentra-
tions, triglyceride concentrations, blood pressure, platelet aggre-
gation, vascular resistance, fibrinolysis and measures of peripheral
arterial occlusive disease, have generally involved the administra-

Sulfur compounds °
i
9 s s
I Se NH> Aw 8s NF
ZN. cooH (B)-ajoene
alliin °
(S-allyl-L-cysteine i ‘
sulfoxide) BvV POS s° aN
(2-ajoene
allinase
i
Fw 8-H Aw ss F
allylsulfenic acid allicin
thioacrolein

Aw 8ss-~\F

diallyldisulfide s ZA
2-vinyl-4H- 3-vinyl-4H-
1,3-dithiin 1,2-dithiin

ows 8° SLAY,
diallyltrisulfide

Figure 1 Selected constituents of garlic.

tion of doses of 600-900mg daily for 424 weeks.(©°° For
prophylaxis of atherosclerosis, ESCOP (European Scientific Co-
operative on Phytotherapy) states a dosage 0.5-1.0g dried garlic
powder daily (approximately equivalent to alliin 6-10mg and
allicin 3-5 mg).'”)

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Many pharmacological properties have been documented for
garlic and its constituents in vitro and in vivo (animals), including
antihypertensive, lipid-lowering, anti-atherogenic, antithrombo-
tic, fibrinolytic, antioxidant, anticarcinogenic, antitumorigenic,
immunomodulatory and antimicrobial activities. The pharmaco-
logical properties of garlic are attributed mainly to its sulfur-
containing compounds. An extensive review of the pharmacolo-
gical properties of garlic and its constituents is beyond the scope
of this monograph, although many studies are summarised below.

Figure 3 Garlic — dried drug substance (bulb).

----- PAGE 292 -----
s of garlic and its constituents have
(3, 5-21, GS, G56)

The pharmacological activiti
been summarised in many reviews.

Pharmacokinetics The available literature on the metabolism
and pharmacokinetics of the constituents of garlic in animals has
been reviewed.'>!®)

In an ex vivo study, allicin showed a marked first-pass clearance
effect in isolated perfused rat liver. In rats, alliin and allicin were
administered orally at doses of 8mg/kg.°” Absorption of alliin
and allicin was complete after 10 minutes and 30-60 minutes,
respectively. The mean total urinary and faecal excretion of allicin
after 72 hours was 85.5% of the dose. No unchanged alliin or
allicin was detected in urine, suggesting rapid and extensive
metabolism of these constituents. Pharmacokinetic studies of
the garlic constituent S-allyl-L-cysteine administered orally to rats
at doses of 12.5, 25 and 50 mg/kg have reported bioavailability of
64%, 77% and 98%, respectively.°*) Peak plasma concentrations
of S-allyl-L-cysteine occurred at one hour, and the half-life of S-
allyl-t-cysteine was 2.33 hours following oral administration of
50 mg/kg to rats.

Anti-atherosclerotic and cholesterol- and _ lipid-lowering
effects The effects of garlic and its constituents on cholesterol
biosynthes in animal models of hypercholester-
olaemia are well documented.”

Several in vitro studies have shown that garlic and its sulfur-
containing constituents inhibit cholesterol biosynthesis in cultured
hepatocytes.?*7* In other in vitro studies, garlic extracts were
shown to inhibit fatty acid and triglyceride synthesis.°?*”
The step(s) in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway inhibited by
garlic, and the constituents of garlic causing inhibition have not
been definitively established. Several mechanisms of action for the
effects of garlic constituents on cholesterol and lipid synthesis
have been proposed, including inhibition of hydroxymethylglu-
taryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) reductase activity and other enzymes,
such as lanosterol-14-demethylase, involved in cholesterol bio-
synthesis." Other proposed mechanisms include reduction in
triacylglycerol biosynthesis via a reduction in tissue concentra-
tions of NADPH, increase in hydrolysis of triacylglycerols via
increased lipase activity and inactivation of enzymes involved in
lipid synthesis via an interaction with enzyme thiol groups.*3"
More recently, fresh garlic extract and the constituents S-
allylcysteine, diallyl trisulfide and diallyl disulfide were shown
to inhibit human squalene monooxygenase, an enzyme catalysing
a step in cholesterol biosynthesis.°” Another in vitro study
reported that S-allylcysteine, S-propylcysteine and S-ethylcysteine
inhibit triglyceride biosynthesis in part by decreasing de novo fatty
id synthesis via inhibition of fatty acid synthase.°”
The anti-atherogenic, anti-atherosclerotic and cholesterol- and
lipid-lowering effects of garlic and its constituents have been
documented in several animal models (e.g. rabbits, rats, chickens,
pigs) of atherosclerosis, hypercholesterolaemia and hyperlipidae-
mia. For example, a reduction in both blood and tissue lipid
concentrations in hypercholesterolaemic animals fed a diet
supplemented with dried garlic powder, garlic oil, or allicin has
® 33) Garlic has also been reported to reduce
hepatic triglyceride and cholesterol concentrations in rats, and to
reduce aortic lipid deposition and atheromatous lesions in rabbits
fed a high-fat diet.‘® Several studies have reported hypolipidaemic
effects for garlic oil following administration to rats and rabbits
fed a fat-rich diet to induce hyperlipidaemia.) Administration of
aged garlic extract to rabbits fed a 1% cholesterol-enriched diet
for six weeks reduced the surface area of the thoracic aorta
covered by fatty streaks (atherosclerosis) and significantly reduced

s in vitro an

ac

a

been documented.‘

Garlic

aortic arch cholesterol, although plasma cholesterol concentra-
tions were not reduced.“ Allicin administration has been
reported to reduce significantly the formation of fatty streaks in
mice fed a cholesterol-rich diet, compared with control mice (no
allicin treatment).°°

The cholesterol-lowering effect of garlic is thought to be dose-
related; proposed mechanisms of action include inhibition of lipid
synthesis )
An in vitro study reported that aged garlic extract may exert its
anti-atherogenic effects via inhibition of smooth muscle prolifera-
tion and phenotypic change, and by an effect on lipid accumula-
tion in the artery wall.°”

and increased excretion of neutral and acidic sterols.°*

Antithrombotic and fibrinolytic activities | Antithrombotic
activity is well documented for garlic in both in vitro and in
vivo (animal) 3) Antithrombotic effects have been
documented for fresh garlic, garlic powder and garlic oils."°)

Increased serum fibrinogen concentrations together with a
decrease in blood coagulation time and fibrinolytic activity are
associated with a high-fat diet and enhance thrombosis.‘ Garlic
has been shown to have a beneficial effect on all of these
parameters. Garlic has been shown to inhibit platelet aggrega-
tion®*?” caused by several inducers such as ADP, collagen,
arachidonic acid, adrenaline (epinephrine) and calcium ionophore
A23187.°*) Antiplatelet activity has been documented for garlic in
using human platelets.”

Several mechanisms have been proposed by which garlic is
thought to exert an anti-aggregatory action. These include
inhibition of thromboxane synthesis via cyclooxygenase and
lipoxygenase inhibition,” inhibition of membrane phospholipase
activity and incorporation of arachidonic acid into platelet
membrane phospholipids,” intraplatelet mobilisation of calcium
uptake and inhibition of calcium uptake into platelets.* Garlic
oil has been reported to reduce artificial surface adhesion of
platelets in vitro.“ Certain garlic constituents also affect
processes preceding platelet aggregation, such as activation of
platelets.

Garlic is thought to contain more than one inhibitor of platelet
aggregation and release; allicin is considered to be the major
inhibitor.” Other studies have investigated the role of ajoene (a
secondary degradation product of alliin) as an inhibitor of platelet
aggregation and release.°*?) Ajoene inhibits platelet aggregation
caused by various inducers.“*>
dependent and reversible both in vitro and in vivo.) It has been
suggested that this latter feature may be of clinical significance in
instances where a rapid inhibition of platelet aggregation is
required with subsequent reversal, such as chronic haemodialysis
and coronary bypass surgery.) It has been proposed that ajoene
exerts its anti-aggregatory effect by altering the platelet membrane
via an interaction with sulfhydryl groups.“ The inhibitory action
of ajoene on granule release from platelets is thought to involve
alteration of the microviscosity in the inner part of the plasma
membrane.” Ajoene is reported to synergistically potentiate the
anti-aggregatory action of prostacyclin, forskolin, indometacin
and dipyridamole,“* and to potentiate the inhibitory action of
prostaglandin I, (PGI) on platelet aggregation." Approximately
96% inhibition of prostaglandin synthetase and 100% inhibition
of lipoxygenase has been described for ajoene in vitro.“
Structure—activity investigations suggested that an allylic structure
in the open disulfide ring is required for activity.”

studies.

in vitro studi

) Its action is noted to be dose-

Antioxidant effects Antioxidant properties have been documen-
ted for garlic in vitro and in vivo (animals). Garlic constituents
inhibit the formation of free radicals, support endogenous radical-

----- PAGE 293 -----
Garlic

scavenging mechanisms, enhance cellu
(e.g. superoxide dismutase, catalase,

ar antioxidant enzymes
glutathione peroxidase),

protect low-density lipoprotein from oxidation by free radicals,
and inhibit the activation of the oxidant-induced transcription
factor nuclear factor kappa B (NF-KB). !®)

Garlic powder was reported to inhibit the production of
superoxide by phorbol ester-activated human granulocytes in vitro
(ICso 390 pg/mL), whereas alliin did not inhibit superoxide
production in this model. It was suggested that allicin may be the
constituent of garlic responsible for the observed oxygen-radical
scavenging properties. In vitro, aged garlic extract and S-
allylcysteine inhibited low-density lipoprotein oxidation and
protected pulmonary artery endothelial cells against injury
induced by oxidised low-density lipoprotein. In subsequent
studies using bovine pulmonary artery endothelial cells and
murine macrophages, it was shown that aged garlic extract
inhibited oxidised low-density lipoprotein-induced rele
peroxides.°" In vivo studies have reported reductions in liver
lipid peroxidation and inhibition of ethanol-induced mitochon-
drial lipid peroxidation in rats fed garlic oil.

The antioxidant properties are of interest in relation to the
antiarteriosclerotic, antihepatotoxic and anticancer effects of
garlic and its constituents. For example, oxidation of low-density
lipoprotein plays an important role in the initiation and
progression of atherosclerosis.

se. of

Antihypertensive effects Several studies involving animal models
(e.g. dogs, rats) of hypertension have reported hypotensive effects
of garlic preparations.” A hypotensive effect in dogs administered
garlic extract has been documented; prior administration of
antagonists to known endogenous hypotensive substances such as
histamine, acetylcholine, serotonin and kinins did not affect the
hypotensive effect.” Spontaneously hypertensive rats fed stan-
dardised dry garlic powder 1 mg/kg for nine months exhibited
lower blood pressure than control rats (150 versus 205mmHg,
respectively).°*) By contrast, an ethanolic extract of garlic (1-2. g
and 4-8 g daily) fed to spontaneously hypertensive rats did not
lead to a reduction in blood pressure.
Anticarcinogenic and antitumorigenic activities Many in vitro
and animal studies have documented anticancer activities of garlic
and its constituents.°!*') These studies indicate that allicin,
allicin-derived compounds and other compounds unrelated to
allicin contribute to the anticancer effects of garlic.

In several animal models, garlic has been shown to inhibit
carcinogenesis and to protect against the development of
experimentally induced tumours.* +!) For example, aged garlic
extract significantly inhibited the growth of Sarcoma-180 and LL/
2 lung carcinoma cells transplanted into mice. Garlic powder
and its constituents S-allylcysteine and diallyl disulfide inhibited
N-methyl-N-nitrosourea-induced mammary carcinogenesis in
rats, and fresh garlic (250 mg/kg orally, three times weekly)
suppressed 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide—induced carcinogenesis in rat
tongue.” Inhibition of benzo[a]pyrene-induced neoplasia of the
fore stomach and lung in female mice has been documented for
four allyl group-containing derivatives in garlic.°*
activity requirements underlined the importance of the unsatu-
rated allyl groups for activity. Saturated analogues containing
propyl instead of allyl groups were devoid of activity.

In vitro studies using human tumour cell lines have reported
that garlic powder and garlic extract inhibited the growth of a
human lymphatic leukaemia cell line (CCRF CEM) in a
concentration-dependent manner at concentrations down to
30 ptg/mL.°”) Also, a combination of garlic extract and garlic

Structure—

powder inhibited the growth of human hepatoma (HepG02) cells
and human colorectal carcinoma (Caco2) cells in a concentration-
dependent manner, although no activity was observed on these
tumour cell lines with garlic extract or powder alone.©) Synthetic
diallyl disulfide inhibited tumour cell growth in four human
‘6 Growth inhibition occurred regardless
of oestrogen receptor status.

Evidence indicates that there are several mechanisms by which
garlic and its constituents may exert anticancer effects, such as
inhibition of carcinogen formation, modulation of carcinogen
metabolism, inhibition of mutagenesis and genotoxicity, increased

breast cancer cell lines.

apoptosis and inhibition of angiogenesis.

Garlic has been shown to inhibit the synthesis of N-nitroso
compounds (there is a view that N-nitroso compounds are
possible carcinogens for humans). Also, in rats pretreated with
dimethylbenz[aJanthracene (DMBA) and fed a diet supplemented
with garlic powder, the occurrence of DNA adducts in mammary
tissue was significantly inhibited, compared with control.'°?
(DMBA initiates and promotes cancer, and alkylation of DNA is
thought to be an important step in carcinogenesis.) Dietary garlic
has also been shown to suppress the occurrence of DNA adducts
caused by N-nitroso compounds.’

Another possible explanation is that garlic constituents may
modify drug-metabolising enzymes, which would have the effect of
altering the bioactivation of carcinogens." Glutathione-S-
transferase activity has been shown to increase in rat and mouse
tissues after administration of garlic powder or its sulfur-
containing constituents.°?!'9) Certain garlic constituents, e.g.
diallyl sulfide, may depress the activity of some hepatic
cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, such as CYP2E1 and
CYP2A6,"> 4 '5:®) although other studies have shown that garlic
constituents induce the activity of other CYP enzymes. !? In
rats, the antimutagenic properties of sulfur-containing com-
pounds from garlic, e.g. diallyl disulfide and diallyl sulfide,
against the carcinogens styrene oxide and 4-nitroquinoline-1-
oxide and a benzo[a]pyrene compound have been shown to be
associated with induction of phase II enzymes.“

A study in mice with transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) of the

bladder reported that injection of liquid extract of garlic at the site
of tumour transplantation led to a significant reduction in the
incidence of TCC in this model. Furthermore, garlic extract
together with suicide-gene therapy significantly inhibited tumour
growth (as determined by evidence of apoptosis following
istomorphological and immunohistochemical studies) compared
with control (no gene therapy).
Effects of garlic constituents on the immune system have been
documented in vitro and in vivo; these effects may contribute, at
east in part, to the anticancer effects of garlic (see Pharmaco-
logical Actions, Immunomodulatory activity).

Immunomodulatory activity Immunostimulant activity has
been described for a high molecular weight protein fraction
obtained from an aged garlic extract.” The fraction was found to
strongly stimulate mice peritoneal macrophages in vitro, and to
stimulate carbon clearance in mice in vivo. It has been suggested

that garlic may suppress tumour cell growth by the stimulation of
55, 66, 67)

immunoresponder cells."

In vitro and/or in vivo (animal) studies have found that garlic
has several immune-enhancing effects, such as stimulation of
lymphocyte proliferation and macrophage phagocytosis, induc-
tion of macrophage- and lymphocyte-infiltration into trans-
planted tumours, and stimulation of interferon-y release.‘
Other effects on the immune system documented for garlic and/

----- PAGE 294 -----
or its constituents include increased natural killer cell activity and
increased interleukin-2 production by garlic fractions in vitro,
and increased numbers of antibody-forming cells in mice spleens
following administration of standardised garlic powder. Other
studies demonstrated that, in vitro, aged garlic extract, compared
with control, enhanced the proliferation of spleen cells in a
concentration-dependent manner, increased production of cyto-
kines (including interleukin-2 and tumour necrosis factor %) and
enhanced natural killer cell activity of a T cell fraction of mouse
splenic cells against YAC-1 after incubation for 24 hours.” Also,
compared with control, aged garlic extract significantly inhibite
the growth of sarcoma-180 and LL/2 lung carcinoma cells
transplanted into mice, and significant increases in natural killer
cell activity of spleen were observed in splenic cells from sarcoma-

bearing mice treated with aged garlic extract, compared with
(55, 69)

those from control mice.

Antimicrobial activity Antimicrobial activity (including anti-
bacterial, antiviral, antifungal, antiprotozoal and antiparasitic
activites) is well documented for garlic.” The in vitro
antimicrobial activity of garlic is considered to be mainly due to
allicin.)

In vitro studies have demonstrated that bacteria sensitive to
garlic include species from Staphylococcus, Escherichia, Proteus,
Salmonella, Providencia, Citrobacter, Klebsiella, Hafnia, Aero-
Vibrio and Bacillus genera.” In these studies,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa was found not to be sensitive to

monas,

garlic.” In vitro studies have also shown that allicin has
significant antibacterial activity against several species, including
Bacillus subtilis, Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus faecalis,
Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis, Salmonella typhi and Vibrio

(70)

cholerae.

In other in vitro studies, garlic oil and four diallyl sulfide
constituents, including diallyl disulfide, showed activity against
antibiotic-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneu-
moniae,” and against S. aureus, methicillin-resistant S. aureus,
Candida spp. and Aspergillus spp.”

Garlic has also been documented to inhibit growth in 30 strains
(consisting of 17 species) of mycobacteria, including Mycobacter-
ium tuberculosis.”*) In vitro, both aqueous garlic extract and
ethanolic garlic extract inhibited the growth of M. avium complex
(MAC) strains isolated from patients with or without acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).'”” Aqueous garlic extract at
concentrations of 2—Smg/mL inhibited the growth of clinical
isolates of Helicobacter pylori from patients with chronic gastritis
or duodenal ulcer.“ The minimum inhibitory concentration to
inhibit 90% of growth (MICo9) was 5 mg/mL. Sulfur-containing
compounds from garlic (diallyl sulfide and diallyl disulfide,

produced from alliin) were shown to decrease growth of H. pylori

isolates from patients with peptic ulcer.
that garlic inhibits bacterial cell growt!
RNA synthesis.”

Broad-spectrum activity against fungi
garlic including the genera Microsp:

) Tt has been proposed

by primarily inhibiting

has been documented for
orum, Epidermophyton,

Trichophyton, Rhodo torula, Torulopsis, Trichosporon, Crypto-
coccus neoformans and Candida, including Candida albicans.”

Garlic extract has been reported to be more effective than
nystatin against pathogenic yeasts, especially Candida albicans.”
Inhibition of lipid synthesis is thought to be an important factor
in the anticandidal activity of garlic, with a disulfide-containing
component such as allicin thought to be the main active
component.”® Garlic has been found to inhibit the growth and
toxin production of Aspergillus parasiticus.””

Garlic

Allicin produced from synthetic alliin with alliinase isolated
from garlic cloves inhibited the destruction of baby hamster
kidney cells by trophozoites of the protozoan parasite Entamoeba
histolytica in vitro.®° Allicin also inhibited the cysteine
proteinase activities of intact E. histolytica trophozoites. In vitro
activity against Giardia intestinalis has also been documented for
whole garlic extract (ICso 0.3mg/mL) and for several of its
constituents, particularly allyl alcohol and allyl mercaptan (ICs
7 g/mL and 37 pg/mL, respectively)”

In vitro antiviral activity against parainfluenza type 3, herpes
simplex type 1 and influenza B has been documented.“ *)
Activity was attributed to allicin or an allicin derivative. Garlic

was reported to be ineffective towards coxsackie B1 virus."

Antihepatotoxic effects Antihepatotoxic activity in vitro and in
vivo has been reported for garlic and its constituents.) Garlic
oil® and some of its constituents, namely alliin, $-allylmercap-
tocysteine (ASSC) and S-methylmercaptocysteine (MSSC) reduced
carbon tetrachloride (CCl4)- and galactosamine-induced hepato-
toxicity in vitro.°°) Other in vitro studies have shown that S-
allylcysteine, S-propylcysteine and S-allylmercaptocysteine neu-
tralised CCly-induced hepatotoxicity, and that S-allylcysteine and
S-allylmercaptocysteine prevent liver damage induced by hepato-
toxins in acute hepatitis in mice.‘ *®

An in vitro study in rat hepatocytes found that diallyl sulfide
(0.5 and 2mmol/L) and diallyl disulfide (0.5 and 1mmol/L)
protected against DNA damage induced by aflatoxin By,
) In this model, diallyl sulfide and
diallyl disulfide appeared to exert a hepatoprotective effect via
increased activity of glutathione-S-transferase and glutathione
peroxidase activity.

compared with control.”

Other activities Garlic oil and juice have been reported to protect
against isoprenaline-induced myocardial necrosis in rats.) Oral
administration of garlic extract 100, 200 or 400 mg/kg to rats given
oral lead acetate 5 mg/kg daily for six weeks was found to reduce
tissue lead concentrations, compared with those in control rats.)
A diet containing 2% aged garlic extract was reported to protect
against intestinal damage induced by oral methotrexate and 5-
fluorouracil administered to rats for 4-5 days, compared with a
control diet.”

A study in senescence-accelerated mice found that S-allylcys-
teine, present in aged garlic extract, administered in the diet for
eight months (40 mg/kg/diet daily) significantly attenuated the
decrease in the conditioned avoidance response, compared with a
diet lacking S-allylcysteine.”” It was suggested that the findings
indicate that dietary supplementation with S-allylcysteine may
reduce age-related learning disabilities and cognitive disorders in
senescence-accelerated mice.

Hypoglycaemic activity has been documented for an alcoholic
garlic extract following oral administration to rabbits (dose
equivalent to 50g dry garlic powder). Fifty-nine per cent activity
compared to that of 500mg tolbutamide was observed.”

Garlic has been documented to cause both smooth muscle

. . te 37,52,84) oe

relaxation and contraction. Garlic oil has been reported
to depress gastrointestinal movements induced by charcoal meal
and castor oil.‘°” In mice, garlic has also inhibited acetylcholine-
and PGE,-induced contraction of the rat gastric fundus, with the
most active components exhibiting the weakest antiplatelet
aggregatory activity.” Garlic has also elicited contractions on
the rat uterus and the guinea-pig ileum in vitro.°?) Both actions
were blocked by flufenamic acid, but not by atropine or
cyproheptadine, indicating a prostaglandin-like mode of action.

----- PAGE 295 -----
Garlic

In vitro, ajoene was found to inhibit the release of lipopoly-
prostaglandin E, in macrophages in a
concentration-dependent manner.» This effect was reported to
be due to inhibition of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) activity by
ajoene.

saccharide-induced

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics The available literature on the metabolism
and pharmacokinetics of the constituents of garlic in humans has
been reviewed.°°*°!®)

Addition of allicin to fresh whole blood results in conversion of
allicin to allyl mercaptan and other compounds produced from
allicin, such as diallyl trisulfide and ajoene, have also been shown
to form allyl mercaptan in blood.” Sulfur-containing compounds,
such as diallyl disulfide, diallyl sulfide, dimethyl sulfide and
mercapturic acids, have been isolated and identified in human
urine following the ingestion of garlic.°*?) A subsequent study
detected N-acetyl-S-allyl-t-cysteine (allylmercapturic acid) in the

involving patients with a range of disorders (such as hyperlipi-
daemia, coronary heart disease and hypertension) as well as
healthy volunteers, and compared garlic preparations (e.g. fresh
garlic, garlic oil, garlic extract, dried garlic powder) with garlic-
free diet, placebo or other agents (two studies
a_reserpine/diuretic combination as the comparator treat-
ment)."°?) This analysis reported a mean difference of
—0.77 mmol/L (95% confidence interval (CI) —0.65, —0.89) in
reduction of total serum cholesterol concentrations between garlic
recipients and those receiving placebo or a garlic-free diet (net
reduction over placebo: 12%). Analysis of data from the eight
trials that assessed garlic powder preparations indicated that
garlic powder administration significantly reduced serum trigly-
ceride concentrations, compared with placebo (net reduction:
13%). It was stated, however, that several trials had methodolo-
gical flaws, and that there was not enough evidence to recommend
garlic as an effective lipid-lowering agent for routine use. The
results of a subsequent randomised placebo-controlled trial
involving 115 patients with moderate hyperlipidaemia (which
showed no difference between garlic and_ placebo)!”

used bezafibrate or

were

urine of volunteers (7 = 6) who

ad ingested two garlic tablets

containing 100mg garlic extract (Kwai).° The mean (standard
deviation) elimination half-life of allylmercapturic acid was
estimated to be 6 (1.3) hours.

It has been reported that the flavour of human breast milk is

altered when lactating women consume foods containing sulfur-
containing compounds, such as garlic (see Contra-indications,
Warnings; Pregnancy and lactation).°” Also, garlic ingestion by
pregnant women significantly alters the odour of their amniotic
fluid (see Contra-indications, Warnings; Pregnancy and lacta-
tion),°® suggesting that the odorous components of garlic are
present. Evidence for this comes from a placebo-controlled study
involving 10 healthy pregnant women undergoing routine
amniocentesis. The odour of samples of amniotic fluid from
women who ingested capsules containing garlic extract was
judged to be 'stronger’ or more 'garlic-like' than that of samples
from women who had ingested placebo capsules.

Pharmacodynamics Several of the pharmacological activities
documented for garlic and its constituents in vitro and in vivo
(animals) have also been reported in clinical studies (see
Pharmacological Actions, Therapeutic effects).

1

included in a re-analysis
above.''?) This analysis s
reducing serum cholesterol

3) of the meta-analysis described

owed that the effect of garlic in
concentrations remained statistically

Numerous studies have ass
tion of garlic preparations in
not all, of these studies hav

essed the effects of the administra-
ypercholesterolaemia. Many, but
> documented the effects of garlic

administration in lowering serum cholesterol and triglyceride
concentrations. Clinical studies have also documented fibrinolytic
activity associated with garlic administration and effects on
platelet function.°? !

Therapeutic effects

Anti-atherosclerotic and cholesterol- and lipid- lowering
effects Numerous studies have investigated the effects of garlic
preparations in lowering raised serum cholesterol concentrations,
and the findings of these studies have been reviewed in several
meta-analyses, (1011)

A meta-analysis of five randomised, placebo-controlled trials
involving mostly patients with serum cholesterol concentrations
greater than 5.17mmol/L who received preparations of garlic
extract at doses of 600-1000 mg daily for 8-24 weeks reported
that garlic significantly reduced total serum cholesterol concen-
trations by about 9% (net reduction over placebo), compared with
placebo (p < 0.001)."°? Another meta-analysis included 16 trials

significant, compared with placebo, but that the size of the effect
was reduced.
Several randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials‘!
'8) have been published since the meta-analyses described above.
One of these studies''°* has been criticised for its choice of garlic
preparation."
Several of these trials‘ were included in the most recent
meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials of garlic preparations
involving patients with hypercholesterolaemia.“°) This meta-
analysis included 13 randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trials of garlic monopreparations involving 796 patients
with coronary heart disease (7 = 1 trial), hyperlipoproteinaemia
(2), hypercholesterolaemia (7), hypertension (1), familial hyperli-
pidaemia in children (1) and healthy volunteers (1). Ten of the
trials assessed the effects of a standardised garlic powder
preparation (Kwai) at doses of 600-900 mg daily for 8-24 weeks;
the other three trials tested garlic oil or spray dried powder. Ten
trials reported differences favouring garlic over placebo in the
reduction of total serum cholesterol concentrations, although
t
Si

105-107)

ese differences were statistically significant in only three
studies. Overall, meta-analysis indicated a significant difference
in the reduction of total cholesterol concentrations favouring
garlic over placebo (—0.41mmol/L; 95% CI —0.66mmol/L,
—0.15 mmol/L; p < 0.01), equivalent to a net reduction in total
cholesterol concentrations of 5.8%. It was stated that although
these findings indicated that garlic is more beneficial than
placebo in reducing serum cholesterol concentrations, the size of
the effect is small. Furthermore, several studies had methodolo-
gical limitations.”

Another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial has
been published since the meta-analysis described above. This
study assessed the effects of garlic powder (tablets) 500mg and
1000 mg daily, or placebo, for 12 weeks in 53 patients with
moderate hypercholesterolaemia (baseline low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol (LDL-C) 130-190 mg/dL)."") At the end of the study
there were no significant differences in the absolute mean change
in LDL-C between the three groups (mean (SD) values were: 0.0
(4.3) mg/dL, 1.4 (4.8) mg/dL and —10.1 (6.8) mg/dL for the
placebo, garlic powder 500 mg and garlic powder 1000 mg groups,
respectively).

cho.

----- PAGE 296 -----
Another meta-analysis, which aimed to summarise the evidence
for the effects of garlic on several cardiovascular-related factors,
considered 45 randomis
(19 Tr was reported that after one and three months,
garlic treatment may lead to small reductions in total cholestero
concentrations (0.03-0.45 mmol/L and 0.32-0.66 mmol/L, respec-
tively). However, no effect was noted for pooled six-month data.
Changes in cholesterol concentrations were paralleled by changes
in low-density lipoprotein and triglyceride concentrations.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial explored
the anti-atherosclerotic effect of garlic powder 900 mg daily for 48
months in 280 patients with advanced atherosclerotic plaques and
an established risk factor for arteriosclerosis (e.g. high systolic
blood pressure, hypercholesterolaemia, diabetes mellitus, smok-
ing)."'! It was reported that continuous garlic intake significantly
reduced the increase in arteriosclerotic plaque volume, compared
with placebo. However, the robustness of the findings of this study
is difficult to assess independently as no exact p-value is given.

d controlled trials of at least four weeks'

duration.

A Cochrane systematic review of gar

ic for the treatment of

peripheral arterial occ

usive disease identified only one eligible

randomised, placebo-controlled trial."!'?) The trial involved 78

participants with perip!

eral arterial occlusive disease (lower limb

atherosclerosis) who received garlic, or p
the end of the study, the difference in tl

acebo, for 12 weeks. At
¢ increase in pain-free

walking distance between the two groups was found to be
statistically non-significant.
An open study involved 101 healthy adults aged 50-80 years
who had taken a standardised garlic powder preparation at a dose
of at least 300 mg daily for at least two years and 101 age- and sex-
matched subjects."!')) Measures of the elastic properties of the
aorta were compared for the two groups. Pulse-wave velocity and
elastic vascular resistance were reported to be reduced signifi-
cantly in the garlic group, compared with the control group. These
findings suggest that long-term use of garlic powder to attenuate
age-related increases in aortic stiffness is worth further study.

Antithrombotic and fibrinolytic effects Several placebo-
controlled studies have documented fibrinolytic effects for garlic
preparations in clinical studies involving patients with coronary
heart disease, hyperlipidaemia and hypercholesterolaemia, and
healthy volunteer:
of ether-extracted garlic oil 20 mg daily for up to 90 days, whereas
several others involved the administration of garlic powder 600-
1500 mg daily for up to 28 days. Most, but not all, of these studies
reported significant increases in fibrinolytic activity in garlic
recipients, compared with placebo recipients.

An open, uncontrolled study explored the effects of garlic
consumption (one fresh chopped clove daily for 16 weeks) in eight
healthy male volunteers.''® After 16 weeks, garlic consumption
was reported to reduce significantly serum thromboxane B, and
cholesterol concentrations, compared with baseline values.

) Several studies involved the administration

Antioxidant effects Blood samples from 31 individuals who
participated in a randomised, placebo-controlled trial involving
115 patients with moderate hyperlipidaemia who received a
standardised garlic powder preparation 900mg daily for six
months (which showed no difference between garlic and
placebo)? were analysed to explore the effects of garlic
treatment on the resistance of low-density lipoprotein to
‘15) There were no significant differences between
garlic and placebo recipients in low-density lipoprotein composi-
tion. Thus, garlic administration did not reduce the susceptibility
of low-density lipoprotein to oxidation. This finding contrasts
with some of the results of a double-blind, placebo-controlled

oxidation.

Garlic

study involving 23 patients with coronary artery disease who
received a standardised garlic powder preparation (Kwai tablets)
300 mg three times daily, or placebo, for four weeks."''® The study
reported that garlic powder administration reduced the ather-
ogenicity of low-density lipoprotein. At the end of the study, the
ability of low-density lipoprotein to induce intracellular choles-
terol accumulation was decreased by 38%, compared with
baseline values. Decreases in the susceptibility of low-density
lipoprotein to oxidation and in low-density lipoprotein-stimulated
cell proliferation (an indicator of low-density lipoprotein
atherogenicity) were also documented.

The effects of standardised garlic powder tablets (Sapec; alliin
1.3%, allicin 0.6%) 900mg daily for two months on oxidative
stress status were explored in an open, uncontrolled study
involving 25 healthy volunteers.'''” At the end of the study, a
reduction in serum malondialdehyde concentrations was observed,
compared with baseline values. It was stated that this finding
indicates that standardised garlic powder may have antioxidant
activity in humans.

Antihypertensive effects A meta-analysis of randomised
controlled trials of garlic preparations assessed the evidence for
the effects of garlic on blood pressure."'!® Eight trials involving
415 participants were included in the review, all of which ha
tested the effects of an allicin-standardised garlic powder
preparation (Kwai tablets) at doses of 600-900 mg daily for 4-52
weeks. Overall, the absolute change in mean systolic bloo:
pressure was 7.7mmHg greater for the garlic group, compare
with the placebo group (95% CI 4.3-11.0). However, only three
trials specifically involved subjects with hypertension and, as
reported by other meta-analyses of trials of garlic preparations,
several trials had methodological limitations. Thus, it was state
that there was insufficient evidence to recommend § garlic
management of hypertension.

Another overview of trials reported that the effects of garlic
treatment on blood pressure are 'insignificant'."!

A Cochrane systematic review that aimed to assess the efficacy
of garlic preparations in preventing pre-eclampsia and_ its
complications found only one placebo-controlled trial.|!? The
study investigated the effects of a dry garlic powder preparation
800 mg daily (equivalent to 2000 ig allicin daily) taken orally for
eight weeks by 100 primigravid women at 28 to 32 weeks!
gestation and who were deemed to be at moderate risk for pre-
eclampsia. There was no statistically significant difference
between the garlic and placebo groups in gestational hypertension
or pre-eclampsia. Further, the trial was deemed to be of uncertain

quality as the method of random allocation to treatment group
19)

treatment for routine

was not describe

Anticancer effects The protective effects of garlic consumption
against various cancers (including colon, stomach, larynx, breast
and endometrial) have been explored in several epidemiological
studies, and their findings have been summarised. 2° Most, but
not all, of these studies suggest that garlic consumption may have
a protective effect, particularly against cancers of the gastro-
G20) However, the findings should be interpreted
cautiously, as bias and/or confounding cannot be excluded, and
there are other methodological issues, for example, most studies
did not distinguish between consumption of raw or cooked garlic.

intestinal tract.

Antimicrobial effects An epidemiological study comprising a
dietary interview and measurement of serum H. pylori antibodies
was conducted among 214 adults in a low-risk area of Shandong

----- PAGE 297 -----
Garlic

a2t

) The findings suggested a protective effect
of garlic consumption against H. pylori infection.

An open, uncontrolled study involving 34 patients with tinea
pedis explored the effectiveness of ajoene cream (0.4% w/w).‘??)
After seven days' treatment, complete cure of the infection was
recorded for 27 (79%) participants. The remaining seven patients
experienced complete cure after a further seven days' treatment.
All patients were evaluated for recurrence of infection 90 days
after the end of treatment; all found to be infection free as
determined by negative cultures for the fungus.

Province in China.

Other effects A reduction in blood sugar concentrations and an
increase in insulin have been observed following allylpropyl
disulfide administration to normal volunteers, whereas another
study reported that garlic exhibits hypoglycaemic actions in
diabetic patients but not in controls. It has also been reported
that garlic can prevent tolbutamide- and adrenaline-induced
hyperglycaemia.)

A randomised, placebo-controlled, crossover trial involving 100
Swedish participants working in a tick-endemic area found that
administration of garlic powder 1200 mg daily for eight weeks
resulted in fewer tick bites than did placebo administration."?”

An open, uncontrolled study involving 15 patients with
hepatopulmonary syndrome explored the effects of treatment
with capsules containing a standardised garlic powder preparation
for at least six months.''*4) Improvements in arterial oxygenation
and symptoms were documented for several participants. The
effects of garlic powder treatment in patients with hepatopul-
monary syndrome require further study.

Side-effects, Toxi

Clinical data

Garlic is generally considered to be non-toxic. !? Adverse
effects that have been documented in humans include a burning
sensation in the mouth and gastrointestinal tract, nausea,
diarrhoea and vomiting.”

A meta-analysis of 13 randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trials of garlic monopreparations, 10 of which assessed
the effects of a standardised garlic powder preparation (Kwai) at
doses of 600-900 mg daily for 8-24 weeks (see Pharmacological
Actions; Therapeutic effects) reported that few adverse events
(9) The frequency and
nature of adverse events reported for garlic were similar to those
for placebo. The most common adverse events reported were
'garlic breath’, body odour and gastrointestinal symptoms.

The allergenic potential of garlic is well recognised, and
allergens have been identified as diallyl disulfide, allylpropyl
sulfide and allicin (the latter may be an irritant). A garlic
antigen in the serum of affected patients has also been
identified.“ Cases of contact dermatitis resulting from occupa-

were documented in the included trials.

tional exposure to garlic have been reported." 77% A case of
garlic allergy associated with ingestion of raw or cooked garlic has
been documented."'”® There is an isolated report of multifaceted
dermatitis artefacta associated with local application of garlic by
a 19-year-old individual."?” Garlic burns following local
application of garlic have also been documented (see Contra-
indications, Warnings).(8° 8)

Garlic may enhance existing anticoagulant therapy; a potential
interaction between garlic and warfarin has been documented (see
Contra-indications, Warnings; Drug interactions) .{3% 8)
reports have suggested that garlic supplementation may increase
the risk of bleeding in patients undergoing surgery.‘C?”

Case

Preclinical data

Erratic pulse rates, abnormal ECGs, weight loss, lethargy and
weakness, soft faeces, dehydration and tender skin on fore- and
hindlimbs have been observed in spontaneously hypertensive rats
administered garlic extract at 0.25 and 0.5 mL/kg every 6 hours for
28 days.) The effects were most pronounced in animals

receiving doses two or three times a day. Conversely, acute
toxicity studies for garlic extract in mice and rats have reported
LDso values for various routes of administration (by mouth,
intraperitoneal injection, intravenous injection) as all greater than
30 mL/kg." Early studies, in 1944, reported LDso values for
allicin in mice as 120 mg/kg (subcutaneous injection) and 60 mg/kg
(intravenous injection)."*) Results of chronic toxicity studies are
stated to be conflicting.“ High doses are reported to cause
anaemia due to both decreased haemoglobin synthesis and
haemolysis.“ A chronic toxicity study in rats given a garlic
extract (2 g/kg) five times a week for six months, reported no toxic
symptoms.'!*”) High doses were found to decrease food consump-
tion slightly, but did not inhibit weight gain. There were no
significant differences in urinary, haematological or serological
examinations, and no toxic symptoms in histopathological
examinations. Genotoxicity studies using the micronucleus test
have reported both po (136

® and negative” findings. No
evidence of mutagenicity has been reported when assessed using
the Ames and Ree assay,‘

Slight cytotoxic signs have been observed at high doses in Hep2
and Chinese hamster embryo primary cultured cells.‘

tive

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the pharmacological actions documented for garlic,
there may be an increased risk of bleeding with use of garlic
supplements in patients undergoing surgery.“@?) Gastrointestinal
irritation may occur particularly if the clove is eaten raw by
individuals not accustomed to ingesting garlic.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of garlic, the potential for preparations of garlic to
interfere with other medicines administered concurrently, parti-
cularly those with similar (such as antiplatelet and anticoagulant
agents) or opposing effects, should be considered.

Other interactions A study involving healthy volunteers detected
N-acetyl-S-allyl-t-cysteine (allylmercapturic acid) in their urine
following ingestion of garlic tablets (see Clinical studies,
Pharmacokinetics)..°° As allylmereapturic acid is used as a
biomarker for monitoring human exposure to allylhalides and
ther chemicals leading to allylmercapturic acid excretion, it was
suggested that garlic consumption may interfere with and
confound this monitoring proc

fe

Pregnancy and lactation Garlic is reputed to act as an
abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle, and is also
reported to be utero-active.'@
been documented. (see Contra-indications, Warnings; Preg-

30) . . :
) In vitro uterine contraction has

nancy and lactation)

Studies have shown that consumption of garlic by lactating
women alters the odour of their breast milk and the suckling
behaviour of their infants.°” Further evidence for this comes from
a blinded, placebo-controlled study involving 30 nursing
women.'!**) The results indicated that infants who had no prior
exposure to garlic odour in their mothers' milk spent more time
breast feeding after their mothers ingested garlic capsules than did
infants whose mothers had repeatedly consumed garlic. Findings

----- PAGE 298 -----
from a placebo-controlled study involving 10 healthy pregnant
women undergoing routine amniocentesis indicate that the
odorous components of garlic can be found in amniotic fluid
following garlic consumption.”*) The odour of samples of
amniotic fluid from women who ingested capsules containing
garlic extract was judged to be 'stronger' or more 'garlic-like' than
that of samples from women who had ingested placebo capsules.
The effects of in utero exposure to garlic odour and on the
neonate's behaviour towards exposure to garlic-flavoured human
breast milk are not known.

There are no experimental or clinical reports on adverse effects
during pregnancy or lactation.(©’”) In view of this, doses of garlic

greatly exceeding amounts used in foods should not be taken
during pregnancy and lactation.

Kyolic 101; Kyolic 102; Kyolic 103; Kyolic 104; Kyolic 106.
France: Arterase. Germany: Ilja Rogoff; Lipidavit. Malaysia:
Echinacea Plus; Horseradish Plus; Total Man. Mexico:
Supravital. Switzerland: Allium Plus; Keli-med; Triallin. UK:
AllerClear; Antifect; Cardioace; Clogar; Fishogar; Hay Fever
& Sinus Relief; Hayfever & Sinus Relief; Héfels One-A-Day
Cardiomax; Héfels One-A-Day Garlic; Héfels One-A-Day
Garlic with Parsley; Héfels One-A-Day Ginger, Ginkgo and
Garlic; Lane's Sage and Garlic Catarrh Remedy; Napiers Cold
Tablets; Sinus and Hay Fever Tablets. USA: GarLife; Heart
Health.

References

1 Block E. The chemistry of garlic and onions. Sci Am 1985; 252: 114—
119.

2 Sendl A. Allium sativum and Allium ursinum: Part 1. Chemistry,
analysis, history, botany. Phytomedicine 1995; 4: 323-339.

3 Koch HP, Lawson LD, eds. Garlic. The Science and Therapeutic
Application of Allium sativum L. and Related Species, 2nd edn.
Baltimore, Maryland: Williams and Wilkins, 1996.

4 Al-Nagdy SA et al. Evidence for some prostaglandins in Allium
sativum extracts. Phytother Res 1988: 2: 196-197.

5 Ernst E. Cardiovascular effects of garlic (Allium sativum): a review.
Pharmatherapeutica 1987; 5: 83-89.

6 Lau BHS et al. Allium sativum (garlic) and atherosclerosis: a review.
Nutr Res 1983; 3: 119-128.

7 Adetumbi M, Lau BHS. Allium sativum (garlic) — a natural antibiotic.
Med Hypoth 1983; 12: 227-237.

8 Fulder S. Garlic and the prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cardiol
Pract 1989; 7: 30-35.

9 Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. A Textbook of Natural Medicine. Seattle,
WA: John Bastyr College Publications, 1985 (looseleaf).

10
1
12
13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36
37

Garlic

Hamon NW. Garlic and the genus Allium. Can Pharm J 1987; 120:
493-498.

Fenwick GR, Hanley AB. The genus Allium. CRC Crit Rev Food Sci
Nutr 1985; 22: 199-376 and 23: 1-73.

McElnay JC, Li Wan Po A. Garlic. Pharm J 1991; 246: 324-326.
Reuter HD. Allium sativum and Allium ursinum: Part 2.
Pharmacology and medicinal application. Phytomedicine 1995; 2: 73-
91.

Milner JA, Garlic: its anticarcinogenic and antitumorigenic
properties. Nutr Rev 1996; 54: S82-S86.

Lea MA. Organosulfur compounds and cancer. In: American Institute
for Cancer Research. Dietary Phytochemicals in Cancer Prevention
and Treatment. New York: Plenum Press, 1996.

Ali M e¢ al. Garlic and onions: their effect on eicosanoid metabolism
and its clinical relevance. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids
2000; 62: 55-73.

Yang CS et al. Mechanisms of inhibition of chemical toxicity and
carcinogenesis by diallyl sulfide (DAS) and related compounds from
garlic. J Nutr 2001; 131 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $1041-S1045.

Borek C. Antioxidant health effects of aged garlic extract. J Nutr
2001; 131 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $1010-S1015.

Yeh Y-Y, Liu L. Cholesterol-lowering effect of garlic extracts and
organosulfur compounds: human and animal studies. J Nutr 2001;
131 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $989-S993.

Le Bon A-M, Siess M-H. Organosulfur compounds from Allium and
the chemoprevention of cancer. Drug Metab Drug Interact 2001; 17:
51-79.

Afzal M et al. Garlic and its medicinal potential.
Inflammopharmacology 2000; 8: 123-148.

Lachmann G e¢ al. Untersuchungen zur Pharmakokinetik der mit 35S
markierten Knoblauchinhaltsstoffe Alliin, Allicin und Vinyldithiine.
Arzneimittelforschung 1994; 44: 734-743.

Nagae S et al. Pharmacokinetics of the garlic compound S-
allylcysteine. Planta Med 1994; 60: 214-217.

Qureshi AA et al. Inhibition of cholesterol and fatty acid biosynthesis
in liver enzymes and chicken hepatocytes by polar fractions of garlic.
Lipids 1983; 18: 343-348.

Gebhardt R. Multiple inhibitory effects of garlic extracts on
cholesterol biosynthesis in hepatocytes. Lipds 1993; 28: 613-619.
Gebhardt R et al. Inhibition of cholesterol biosyntheis by allicin and
ajoene in rat hepatocytes and Hep G2 cells. Biochim Biophys Acta
1994; 1213: 57-62.

Gebhardt R. Amplification of palmitate-induced inhibition of
cholesterol biosynthesis in cultured rat hepatocytes by garlic-derived
organosulfur compounds. Phytomedicine 1995; 2: 29-34.

Gebhardt R, Beck H. Differential inhibitory effects of garlic-derived
organosulfur compounds on cholesterol biosynthesis in primary rat
hepatocytes. Lipids 1996; 31: 1269-1276.

Yeh Y-Y, Yeh S-M. Garlic reduces plasma lipids by inhibiting hepatic
cholesterol and triacylglycerol synthesis. Lipids 1994; 29: 189-193.
Liu L, Yeh Y-Y. Water-soluble organosulfur compounds of garlic
inhibit fatty acid and triglyceride synthesis in cultured rat hepatocytes.
Lipids 2001; 36: 395-400.

Adoga GI. The mechanism of the hypolipidemic effect of garlic oil
extract in rats fed on high sucrose and alcohol diets. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 1987; 142: 1046-1052.

Gupta N, Porter TD. Garlic and garlic-derived compounds inhibit
human squalene monooxygenase. J Nutr 2001; 131: 1662-1667.
Kamanna VS, Chandrasekhara N. Effect of garlic (Allium sativum
Linn.) on serum lipoproteins and lipoprotein cholesterol levels in
Albino rats rendered hypercholesterolemic by feeding cholesterol.
Lipids 1982; 17: 483-488.

Campbell JH et al. Molecular basis by which garlic suppresses
atherosclerosis. J Nutr 2001; 131 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $1006-S1009.
Abramowitz D. Allicin-induced decrease in formation of fatty streaks
(atherosclerosis) in mice fed a cholesterol-rich diet. Coronary Artery
Dis 1999; 10: 515-519.

Boullin DJ. Garlic as a platelet inhibitor. Lancet 1981; i: 776-777.
Gaffen JD et al. The effect of garlic extracts on contractions of rat
gastric fundus and human platelet aggregation. J Pharm Pharmacol
1984; 36: 272-274.

----- PAGE 299 -----
38

39

40

41

42

43

45

46

47

48

49

50

S1

52

53

54

SS

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

Garlic

Srivastava KC, Winslows JB. Evidence for the mechanism by which
garlic inhibits platelet aggregation. Prostaglandins Leukot Med 1986;
22: 313-321.

Apitz-Castro A et al. Effects of garlic extract and of three pure
components isolated from it on human platelet aggregation,
arachidonate metabolism, release reaction and platelet ultrastructure.
Thromb Res 1983; 32: 155-169.

Wagner H et al. Effects of garlic constituents on arachidonate
metabolism. Planta Med 1987; 53: 305-306.

Sharma CP, Nirmala NV. Effects of garlic extract and of three pure
components isolated from it on human platelet aggregation,
arachidonate metabolism, release reaction and platelet ultrastructure
— comments. Thromb Res 1985; 37: 489-490.

Mohammad $F, Woodward SC. Characterization of a potent inhibitor
of platelet aggregation and release reaction isolated from Allium
sativum (garlic). Thromb Res 1986; 44: 793-806.

Symposium on the chemistry, pharmacology and medicinal
applications of garlic. Cardiol Pract 1989; 7: 1-15.

Srivastava KC, Tyagi OD. Effects of a garlic-derived principle (ajoene)
on aggregation and arachidonic acid metabolism in human blood
platelets. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1993; 49: 587-595.
Jamaluddin MP e¢ al. Ajoene inhibition of platelet aggregation:
possible mediation by a hemoprotein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
1988; 153: 479-486.

Block E et al. Antithrombotic organosulfur compounds from garlic:
structural, mechanistic, and synthetic studies. J Am Chem Soc 1986;
108: 7045-7055.

Rendu F et al. Ajoene, the antiplatelet compound derived from garlic,
specifically inhibits platelet release reaction by affecting the plasma
membrane internal microviscosity: Biochem Pharmacol 1989; 38:
1321-1328.

Apitz-Castro R et al. Ajoene. The antiplatelet principle of garlic,
synergistically potentiates the antiaggregatory action of prostacyclin,
forskolin, indomethacin and dypiridamole on human platelets.
Thromb Res 1986; 42: 303-311.

Siegers C-P et al. Effects of garlic preparations on superoxide
production by phorbol ester activated granulocytes. Phytomedicine
1999; 6: 13-16.

Ide N, Lau BHS. Garlic compounds protect vascular endothelial cells
from oxidised low density lipoprotein-induced injury. J Pharm
Pharmacol 1997; 49: 908-911.

Ide N, Lau BHS. Aged garlic extract attentuates intracellular oxidative
Phytomedicine 1999; 6: 125-131.

Rashid A, Khan HH. The mechanism of hypotensive effect of garlic
extract. J Pak Med Ass 1974; 35: 357-362.

Jacob J et al. Antihypertensive und Kardioprotektive Effekte von
Knoblaucherpulver (Allium sativum). Med Welt 1991; 42: 39-41.
Kiviranta J et al. Effects of onion and garlic extracts on spontaneously
hypertensive rats. Phytother Res 1989; 3: 132-135.

Kyo E et al. Immunomodulation and antitumour activities of aged
garlic extract. Phytomedicine 1998; 5: 259-267.

Schaffer EM et al. Garlic and associated allyl sulfur components
inhibit N-methyl-N-nitrosourea induced rat mammary carcinogenesis.
Cancer Lett 1996; 102: 199-204.

Balasenthil S$ e¢ al. Prevention of 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide-induced rat
tongue carcinogenesis by garlic. Fitoterapia 2001; 72: 524-531.
Sparnins VL et al. Effects of organosulfur compounds from garlic and
onions on benzo[a]pyrene-induced neoplasia and glutathione S-
transferase activity in the mouse. Carcinogenesis 1988; 9: 131-134.
Siegers C-P et al. The effects of garlic preparations against human
tumor cell proliferation. Phyto medicine 1999; 6: 7-11.

Nakagawa H et al. Growth inhibitory effects of diallyl disulphide on
human breast cancer cell lines. Carcinogenesis 2001; 22: 891-897.
Liu JZ et al. Inhibition of 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene induced
mammary tumours and DNA adducts by garlic powder.
Carcinogenesis 1992; 13: 1847-1851.

Lin X-Y et al. Dietary garlic suppresses DNA adducts caused by N-
nitroso compounds. Carcinogenesis 1994; 15: 349-352.

Fujita K-I, Kamataki T. Screening of organosulfur compounds as
inhibitors of human CYP2A6. Drug Metab Disposition 2001; 29: 983—
989.

stres

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

Guyonnet D e¢ al. Antimutagenic activity of organosulfur compounds
from Allium is associated with phase II enzyme induction. Mutat Res
Genet Toxicol Environ Mutagen 2001; 495: 135-145.

Moon D-G et al. Allium sativum potentiates suicide gene therapy for
murine transitional cell carcinoma. Nutr Cancer 2000; 38: 98-105.
Hirao Y et al. Activation of immunoresponder cells by the protein
fraction from aged garlic extract. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 161-164.
Lamm DL, Riggs DR. Enhanced immunocompetence by garlic: role in
bladder cancer and other malignancies. J Nutr 2001; 131 (Suppl.
Suppl.3): $1067-S1070.

Burger RA et al. Enhancement of in vitro human immune function by
Allium sativum L. (garlic) fractions. Int J Pharmacog 1993; 31: 169—
174.

Kyo E et al. Immunomodulatory effects of aged garlic extract. J Nutr
2001; 131 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $1075-S1079.

Ahsan M, Islam SN. Garlic: a broad spectrum antibacterial agent
effective against common pathogenic bacteria. Fitoterapia 1996; 67:
374-376.

Tsao S-M, Yin M-C. In vitro activity of garlic oil and four diallyl
sulphides against antibiotic-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Klebsiella pneumoniae. ] Antimicrob Chemother 2001; 47: 665-670.
Tsao S-M, Yin M-C. In vitro antimicrobial activity of four diallyl
sulphides occurring naturally in garlic and Chinese leek oils. J Med
Microbiol 2001; 50: 646-649.

Delaha ED, Garagusi VE. Inhibition of mycobacteria by garlic extract
(Allium sativum). Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1985; 27: 485-486.
Deshpande RG et al. Inhibition of Mycobacterium avium complex
isolates from AIDS patients by garlic (Allium sativum). J Antimicrob
Chemother 1993; 32: 623-626.

Cellini L et al. Inhibition of Helicobacter pylori by garlic extract
(Allium sativum). FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 1996; 13: 273-277.
Chung JG et al. Effects of garlic compounds diallyl sulfide and diallyl
disulfide on arylamine N-acetyltransferase activity in strains of
Helicobacter pylori from peptic ulcer patients. Am J] Chin Med 1998;
26: 353-364.

Feldberg RS et al. In vitro mechanism of inhibition of bacterial cell
growth by allicin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1988; 32: 1763-1768.
Adetumbi M et al. Allium sativum (garlic) inhibits lipid synthesis by
Candida albicans. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1986; 30: 499-501.
Graham HD, Graham EJF. Inhibition of Aspergillus parasiticus
growth and toxin production by garlic. J Food Safety 1987; 8: 101-108.
Ankri S e¢ al. Allicin from garlic strongly inhibits cysteine proteinases
and cytopathic effects of Entamoeba histolytica. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 1997; 41: 2286-2288.

Harris JC et al. The microaerophilic flagellate Giardia intestinalis:
Allium sativum (garlic) is an effective antigiardial. Microbiology 2000;
146: 3119-3127.

Hughes BG et al. Antiviral constituents from Allium sativum. Planta
Med 1989; 55: 114.

Tsai Y et al. Antiviral properties of garlic: In vitro effects on influenza
B, Herpes simplex and Coxsackie viruses. Planta Med 1985; 51: 460—
461.

Joshi DJ et al. Gastrointestinal actions of garlic oil. Phytother Res
1987; 1: 140-141.

Hikino H et al. Antihepatotoxic actions of Allium sativum bulbs.
Planta Med 1986; 52: 163-168.

Nakagawa S et al. Prevention of liver damage by aged garlic extract
and its components in mice. Phytother Res 1989; 3: 50-53.

Sheen L-Y et al. Effect of diallyl sulfide and diallyl disulfide, the active
principles of garlic, on the aflatoxin By-induced DNA damage in
primary rat hepatocytes. Toxicol Lett 2001; 122: 45-52.

Saxena KK et al. Effect of garlic pretreatment on isoprenaline-induced
myocardial necrosis in albino rats. Indian ] Physiol Pharmacol 1980;
24: 233-236.

Senapati SK et al. Effect of garlic (Allium sativum L.) extract on tissue
lead level in rats. J Ethnopharmacol 2001; 76: 229-232.

Horie T et al. Alleviation by garlic of antitumor drug-induced damage
to the intestine. J Nutr 2001; 131 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $1071-S1074.
Nishiyama N et al. Ameliorative effect of S-allylcysteine, a major
thioallyl constituent in aged garlic extract, on learning deficits in
senescence-accelerated mice. J Nutr 2001; 131 (Suppl. Suppl.3):
$1093-S1095.

----- PAGE 300 -----
92 Brahmachari HD, Augusti KT. Orally effective hypoglycaemic agents
from plants. J Pharm Pharmacol 1962; 14: 254-255.

93 Dirsch VM, Vollmar AM. Ajoene, a natural product with non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)-like properties? Biochem
Pharmacol 2001; 61: 587-593.

94 Koch HP. Metabolismus und pharmakokinetik der Inhaltsstoffe des
Knoblauchs: was Wissen wir dariiber? Z Phytother 1992; 13: 83-90.

95 Jandke J, Spiteller G. Unusual conjugates in biological profiles
originating from consumption of onions and garlic. | Chromatog
1987; 421: 1-8.

96 De Rooij BM et al. Urinary excretion of N-acetyl-S-allyl-L-cysteine
upon garlic consumption by human volunteers. Arch Toxicol 1996; 70:
635-639.

97 Mennella JA, Beauchamp GK. Maternal diet alters the sensory
qualities of human milk and the nursling's behavior. Pediatrics 1991;
88: 737-744.

98 Mennella JA et al Garlic ingestion by pregnant women alters the odor
of amniotic fluid. Chem Senses 1995; 20: 207-209.

99 Bordia A et al. Effect of garlic (Allium sativum) on blood lipids, blood
sugar, fibrinogen and fibrinolytic activity in patients with coronary
artery disease. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1998; 58:
257-263.

100 Steiner M, Lin RS. Changes in platelet function and susceptibility of
lipoproteins to oxidation associated with administration of aged garlic
extract. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1998; 31: 904-908.

101 Warshafsky S et al. Effect of garlic on total serum cholesterol. A meta-
analysis. Ann Intern Med 1993; 119: 599-605.

102 Silagy C, Neil A. Garlic as a lipid lowering agent — a meta-analysis. J
R Coll Phys Lond 1994; 28: 2-8.

103 Neil HAW et al. Garlic powder in the treatment of moderate
hyperlipidaemia: a controlled trial and meta-analysis. J R Coll Phys
Lond 1996; 30: 329-334.

104 Stevinson C et al. Garlic for treating hypercholesterolaemia. A meta-
analysis of randomized clinical trials. Ann Intern Med 2000; 133: 420—
429.

105 Berthold HK et al. Effect of a garlic oil preparation on serum
lipoproteins and cholesterol metabolism. A randomized controlled
trial. JAMA 1998; 279: 1900-1902.

106 Issacsohn JL e¢ al. Garlic powder and plasma lipids and lipoproteins.
A multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Arch Intern Med
1998; 158: 1189-1194.

107 Adler AJ, Holub BJ. Effect of garlic and fish-oil supplementation on
serum lipid and lipoprotein concentrations in hypercholesterolaemic
men. Am J Clin Nutr 1997; 65: 445-450.

108 Gardner CD et al. The effect of a garlic preparation on plasma lipid
levels in moderately hypercholesterolaemic adults. Atherosclerosis
2001; 154: 213-220.

109 Lawson LD. Effect of garlic on serum lipids. JAMA 1998; 280: 1568.

110 Ackermann RT et al. Garlic shows promise for improving some
cardiovascular risk factors. Arch Intern Med 2001; 161: 813-824.

111 Koscielny J et al. The anti-atherosclerotic effect of Allium sativum.
Atherosclerosis 1999; 144: 237-249.

112 Jepson RG et al. Garlic for peripheral arterial occlusive disease
(Cochrane review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 3, 2001. Oxford:
Update Software.

113 Breithaupt-Grégler K et al. Protective effect of chronic garlic intake on
elastic properties of aorta in the elderly. Circulation 1997; 96: 2649—
2655.

Garlic

114 Ali M, Thomson M. Consumption of a garlic clove a day could be
beneficial in preventing thrombosis. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent
Fatty Acids 1995; 53: 211-212.

115 Byrne DJ et al. A pilot study of garlic consumption shows no
significant effect on markers of oxidation or sub-fraction composition
of low-density lipoprotein including lipoprotein(a) after allowance for
non-compliance and the placebo effect. Clin Chim Acta 1999; 285: 21—
33.

116 Orekhov AN et al. Garlic powder tablets reduce atherogenicity of low
density lipoprotein. A placebo-controlled double-blind study. Nutr
Metab Cardiovasc Dis 1996; 6: 21-31.

117 Grune T et al. Influence of Allium sativum on oxidative stress status —
a clinical investigation. Phytomedicine 1996; 2: 205-207.

118 Silagy CA, Neil HAW. A meta-analysis of the effect of garlic on blood
pressure. J Hypertens 1994; 12: 463-468.

119 Meher S, Duley L. Garlic for preventing pre-eclampsia and its
complications (Review). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
2006, Issue 3. Art. No. CD006065.

120 Ernst E. Can Allium vegetables prevent cancer? Phytomedicine 1997;
4: 79-83.

121 You W-C et al. Helicobacter pylori infection, garlic intake and
precancerous lesions in a Chinese population at low risk of gastric
cancer. Int ] Epidemiol 1998; 27: 941-944.

122 Ledezma E et al. Efficacy of ajoene, an organosulphur compound from
garlic, in the short-term therapy of tinea pedis. Mycoses 1996; 39:
393-395.

123 Stjernberg L, Berglund J. Garlic as an insect repellant. JAMA 2000;
284: 831.

124 Abrams GA, Fallon MB. Treatment of hepatopulmonary syndrome
with Allium sativum L. (Garlic): a pilot trial. J Clin Gastroenterol
1998; 27: 232-235.

125 Nakagawa S et al. Acute toxicity test of garlic extract. J Toxicol Sci
1984; 9: 57-60.

126 Papageorgiou C et al. Allergic contact dermatitis to garlic (Allium
sativum L.) Identification of the allergens: The role of mono-, di-, and
trisulfides present in garlic. Arch Dermatol Res 1983; 275: 229-234.

127 Lautier R, Wendt V. Contact allergy to Alliaceae/case-report and
literature survey. Dermatosen 1985; 33: 213-215.

128 Asero R et al. A case of garlic allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;
101: 427-428.

129 Hallel-Halevy D et al. Multifaceted dermatitis caused by garlic. J Eur
Acad Dermatol Venereol 1997; 9: 185-187.

130 Farrell AM, Staughton RCD. Garlic burns mimicking herpes zoster.
Lancet 1996; 347: 1195S.

131 Rafaat M, Leung AKC. Garlic burns. Pediatr Dermatol 2000; 17: 475—
476.

132 Sunter W. Warfarin and garlic. Pharm J 1991; 246: 722.

133 Baxter K, ed. Drug Interactions, 7th edn. London: Pharmaceutical
Press, 2006.

134 Ruffin J, Hunter SA. An evaluation of the side-effects of garlic as an
antihypertensive agent. Cytobios 1983; 37: 85-89.

135 Sumiyoshi H et al. Chronic toxicity test of garlic extract in rats. J
Toxicol Sci 1984; 9: 61-75.

136 Yoshida S et al. Mutagenicity and cytotoxicity tests of garlic. | Toxicol
Sci 1984; 9: 77-86.

137 Abraham SK, Kesavan PC. Genotoxicity of garlic, turmeric and
asafoetida in mice. Mutat Res 1984; 136: 85-88.

138 Mennella JA, Beauchamp GK. The effects of repeated exposure to
garlic-flavoured milk on the nursling's behavior. Pediatr Res 1993; 34:
805-808.

----- PAGE 301 -----
Gentian

available on the other compounds present. The herbal uses o1
gentian are supported by the known properties of the bitter
principles present in the root. Excessive doses should be
avoided in view of the lack of toxicity data.

Species (Family)

Gentiana lutea L. (Gentianaceae)

Synonym(s)

Bitterwort, Bitter Root, Gentiana, Yellow Gentian
Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHC 1992'¢°

Iridoids

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007°°*

Complete German Commission EC?)
ESCOP 2003”
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 2007°°8

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL‘°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and Gé2.

Alkaloids Pyridine-type. Gentianine 0.6-0.8%, gentialutine.

Bitters Major component is secoiridoid glycoside gentiopicroside
(also known as gentiamarin and gentiopicrin) 2%, with lesser
amounts of amarogentin (0.01-0.04%) and swertiamarine.
Gentianose (a trisaccharide bitter principle). The glycosides

H
O-glucose O-glucose
gentiopicroside HOCH, swertiamarin
(gentiopicrin)
HO yg HO.
amarogentin
Xanthones
1 2
0. OR? a A
gentisin H CH3
isogentisin CH H
R'O
gentioside CH3 primeverosyl
fe} OH
Sugars
CH20H
per)

HO
O~oy,

gentianose

Figure 1 Selected constituents of gentian.

HO Ho
HO.
HO

°

HOH

O.

CH,OH

HO

----- PAGE 302 -----
amaropanin and amaroswerin are reported to be present in the
related species Gentiana pannonica, Gentiana punctata and
Gentiana purpurea, but are absent from Gentiana lutea.

Xanthones Gentisein, gentisin (gentianin), isogentisin and 1,3,7-
trimethoxyxanthone.

Other constituents Carbohydrates (e.g. gentiobiose, sucrose and
other common sugars), pectin, tannin (unspecified), triterpenes
(e.g. B-amyrin, lupeol) and volatile oil (trace).

Food Use

Gentian (root, herbs and preparations) is listed by the Council of
Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category N4, with
limits on xanthones) (see Appendix 3, Table 1).'S' Previously, in
the USA, gentian has been approved for food use.“C*?

Herbal Use

Gentian is stated to possess bitter, gastric stimulant, sialogogue
and cholagogue properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
anorexia, atonic dyspepsia, gastrointestinal atony, and specifically
for dyspepsia with anorexia. The German Commission E
approved use for digestive disorders such as loss of appetite,
fullness and flatulence.“ Gentian is used in combination with
angelica root and caraway fruit or with ginger and wormwood for
loss of appetite and peptic discomfort.'(°”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 0.6-2g as an infusion or decoction three
times daily.“°®

Tincture 1-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(©®

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The pharmacological activites of gentian root have been
©52) & summary of this information is provided below.

Root extracts have antifungal activity, and are reported to
stimulate phagocytic activity of human lymphocytes, indicating
immunostimulant activity.” Choleretic properties have been
documented for gentian,““*” and gentianine has been reported to
possess anti-inflammatory activity.°?”” The bitter principles
stimulate secretion of gastric juices and bile, thus aiding appetite
and digestion. Elevation of gastric secretion by up to 30% has
been reported following the administration of gentian tincture to
dogs. An infusion given orally to sheep as a single daily dose (5 g)
stimulated enzyme secretion in the small intestine. A root extract
(12 mg/kg/day) applied by gavage to rats for three days elevated
bronchosecretion. A standardised extract perfused into the
stomachs of anaesthetised rats increased gastric secretion in a
dose-dependent manner. Lower doses caused no changes in gastric
pH, whereas higher doses increased pH from 4.25 to 4.85. A dose
of 0.5 mL/kg did not affect the incidence of gastric ulceration in
rats.

reviewed.‘

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of gentian
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Gentian

In an open, uncontrolled study, a single dose of an alcoholic
extract of gentian (equivalent to 0.2g), given to 10 healthy
volunteers, was reported to result in a stimulation of gastric juice
secretion.”) Gall-bladder emptying was increased and prolonged
whilst protein and fat digestion was enhanced. Nineteen patients
with inflammatory conditions of the gastrointestinal tract (colitis,
Crohn's disease, non-specific inflammation) and elevated secre-
tory immunoglobulin A (IgA) concentrations and eight healthy
individuals were treated with gentian tincture (3 x 20 drops/day)
for eight days.‘C°?) IgA concentrations decreased in both
groups.'°?) However, the methodological limitations of these
studies do not allow the observed effects to be attributed to
administration of gentian.

Side-effects, To:

Extracts of gentian are considered to be non-toxic, and are
generally well-tolerated,(©” although clinical safety and toxicity
data for gentian are limited and further investigation of these
aspects is required.

Preclinical data

An acute oral LDs9 value in mice was reported to be 25 mL/kg of
extract (37% ethanol, bitterness value: 200 Swiss Pharmacopoeia
units/g), and was the same as that of 37% ethanol. Rabbits treated
with gentian extract (12.6 mg/day for three days) showed no toxic
or abnormal concentration of serum parameters, with the
exception of slightly higher erythrocyte concentrations in treated
animals. Gentian may occasionally cause headache in some
individuals.‘°? Mutagenic activity in the Ames test (Salmonella
typhimurium TA100 with S9 mix) has been documented for
gentian, with gentisin and isogentisin identified as mutagenic
components."” Gentian root 100g was reported to yield
approximately 100mg total mutagenic compounds, of which
gentisin and isogentisin comprised approximately 76 mg.”

(3)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Gentian is stated to be contra-indicated in individuals with high
blood pressure,“ although no rationale is given for this
statement, and in individuals with hyperacidity, gastric or

duodenal ulcers.(@?°)

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of gentian to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Gentian is reputed to affect the
» and it has been stated that gentian
should not be used in pregnancy.“°® In view of this and the
documented mutagenic activity, gentian is best avoided in
pregnancy and lactation.

menstrual. cycle,'C?* °

Germany: Enziagil Magenplus.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Calmo; Digest; Digestaid; Digestive Aid; Extralife
Sleep-Care; Pacifenity; Relaxaplex. Austria: Abdomilon N;
Brady's-Magentropfen; China-Eisenwein; Mariazeller; Mon-

----- PAGE 303 -----
G

Gentian

Wonderkroonessens. Singapore: Sinupret. Spain: Depurativo

References
1

Verotta L. Isolation and HPLC determination of the active principles
of Rosmarinus officinalis and Gentiana lutea. Fitoterapia 1985; 56:
25-29.

Glatzel vonH, Hackenberg K. Réntgenologische untersuchungen der
wirkungen von bittermitteln auf die verdauunogsorgane. Planta Med
1967; 15: 223-232.

Morimoto I et al. Mutagenic activities of gentisin and isogentisin from
Gentianae radix (Gentianaceae). Mutat Res 1983; 116: 103-117.

----- PAGE 304 -----
j Ginger

inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis, all of which require
further investigation. The use of ginger as a prophylactic
remedy against motion sickness is contentious. It seems likely
that ginger may act by a local action on the gastrointestinal
tract, rather than by a centrally mediated mechanism.

Species (Family)

Zingiber officinale Roscoe (Zingiberaceae)

Synonym(s)
Gan Jiang, Zingiber

Part(s) Used

Rhizome

Phenylpropanoids

CHO. Cl
(CHa)

HO
gingerols
[6]-gingerol

[8]-gingerol
[10]-gingerol

e2orpD

Sesquiterpenes
bag
(-)-zingiberene ar-curcumene
Sp
B-bisabolene
Figure 1 Selected constituents of ginger.

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'¢®

BHP 1996'@”)

BP 2007'¢8

BPC 19730)

ESCOP 2003'°79
Martindale 35th edition\@*”
Ph Eur 20078”
USP29/NF24'C8°)

WHO 1999 volume 16%?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
Reference 1 and General References G2 and G6.

Carbohydrates Starch (major constituent, up to 50%).

Lipids 6-8%. Free fatty acids (e.g. palmitic acid, oleic acid,
linoleic acid, caprylic acid, capric acid, lauric acid, myristic acid,
pentadecanoic acid, heptadecanoic acid, stearic acid, linolenic
acid, arachidic acid); triglycerides, phosphatidic acid, lecithins;
gingerglycolipids A, B and C.”

O°
CHz0O. CH.
. A™~ CH)"

HO

shogaols
[6]-shogaol
[8]-shogaol
[10}-shogaol

e2norps

#-sesquiphellandrene

----- PAGE 305 -----
Ginger

Oleo-resin Gingerol homologues (major, about 33%) including
derivatives with a methyl side-chain,” shogaol homologues
(dehydration products of gingerols), zingerone (degradation
product of gingerols), 1-dehydrogingerdione,®) 6-gingesulfonic
acid”) and volatile oils.

Volatile oils 1-3%. Complex, predominately hydrocarbons. B-
Bisabolene and zingiberene (major); other sesquiterpenes include
zingiberol, zingiberenol, ar-curcumene, f-sesquiphellandrene, B-
sesquiphellandrol (cis and trans); numerous monoterpene hydro-
carbons, alcohols and aldehydes (e.g. phellandrene, camphene,
geraniol, neral, linalool, d-nerol).

Other constituents Amino acids (e.g. arginine, aspartic acid,
cysteine, glycine, isoleucine, leucine, serine, threonine and valine),
protein (about 9%), resins, diterpenes (galanolactone),'°
(especially nicotinic acid (niacin) and vitamin A), minerals.)
The material contains not less than 4.5% of alcohol (90%)-

soluble extractive and not less than 10% of water-soluble
(G15)

vitamins

extractive.

Food Use

Ginger is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that ginger
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.““!® It is used widely in foods as a spice. Previously,
ginger has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As
Safe).“~"

Herbal Use

Ginger is stated to possess carminative, diaphoretic and
antispasmodic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for colic,
flatulent dyspepsia, and specifically for flatulent intestinal
colic.( 67 6% SG) Modern interest in ginger is focused on its
use in the prevention of nausea and vomiting, particularly motion
(travel) sickness, as a digestive aid, and as an adjunctive treatment
for inflammatory conditions, such as osteoarthritis and rheuma-
toid arthritis.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Figure 2 Ginger — dried drug substance (rhizome).

Anti-emetic

Powdered rhizome Single dose of 1-2g,'°® 30 minutes before
travel for prevention of motion sickness,“ or 0.5 g, two to four
times daily.‘C°

Other uses

Powdered rhizome 0.25-1g, three times daily.“©

Tincture 1.5-3 mL (1:5) three times daily,'® 1.7—5 mL daily.“C

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological activities, including anti-emetic, antith-
rombotic, antimicrobial, anticancer, antioxidant and anti-inflam-
matory properties, have been documented for preparations of
ginger in in vitro and/or animal studies. Also, ginger has been
reported to have hypoglycaemic, hypo- and hypertensive, cardiac,
prostaglandin and platelet aggregation inhibition, antihyper-
cholesterolaemic, cholagogic and stomachic properties.

Clinical studies have focused mainly on the effects of ginger in
the prevention of nausea and vomiting.

In vitro and animal studies

In vitro studies have demonstrated that constituents of ginger,
such as 6-, 8- and 10-gingerols and galanolactone, have

antiserotonergic activity.'°*

Anti-emetic activity and effects on gastrointestinal motility
The older literature contains examples of studies documenting the
antiemetic effects of ginger extract in vivo (e.g. dogs). Oral
administration of constituents of ginger (certain shogaols and
gingerols at doses of 100mg/kg body weight) inhibited emesis
induced by oral administration of copper sulfate in leopard and
ranid frogs." Emetic latency was reported to be prolonged by
over 150% by a trichloromethane extract of ginger at a dose of 1 g/
kg body weight.

The anti-emetic activity of ginger extracts has also been
assessed in dogs."'") Acetone and ethanolic extracts of ginger,
administered intragastrically at doses of 25, 50, 100 and 200 mg/
kg, protected against cisplatin-induced emesis (3 mg/kg adminis-
tered intravenously 30 minutes before ginger extract), compared
with control. However, ginger extracts were less effective in
preventing emesis than the 5-HT; receptor antagonist granisetron,
and were ineffective against apomorphine-induced emesis.

Compared with control, an acetone extract of ginger at doses of
200 and 500mg/kg administered orally reversed the delay in
gastric emptying induced by intraperitoneal cisplatin 10 mg/kg in
rats.) Ginger juice (2 and 4mL/kg) had a similar effect. A 50%
ethanolic extract of ginger also reversed the cisplatin-induced
delay in gastric emptying, although only at a dose of 500 mg/kg. In
mice, oral administration of an acetone extract of ginger (75 mg/
kg), 6-shogaol (2.5 mg/kg) and 6-, 8- and 10-gingerol (5 mg/kg)
enhanced the transportation of a charcoal meal, indicating
enhancement of gastrointestinal motility."'?)

Anti-ulcer activity The effect of ginger (acetone extract) and
zingiberene on hydrochloric acid/ethanol-induced gastric lesions
in rats has been examined.” 6-Gingerol and zingiberene, both
100 mg/kg body weight by mouth, significantly inhibited gastric
lesions by 54.5% and 53.6%, respectively. The total extract
inhibited lesions by 97.5% at 1g/kg. Oral administration of both

----- PAGE 306 -----
aqueous and methanol ginger extracts to rabbits has been
reported to reduce gastric secretions (gastric juice volume, acid
and pepsin output). Both extracts were found to be comparable
with cimetidine (50 mg/kg) with respect to gastric juice volume;
the aqueous extract was comparable with cimetidine and superior
to the methanol extract for pepsin output, and the methanol
extract superior to both the aqueous extract and comparable to
cimetidine for acid output. In rats, 6-gingerol, 6-shogaol and 6-
gingesulfonic acid at doses of 150mg/kg protected against
hydrochloric acid/ethanol-induced gastric lesions, compared with
6-Gingesulfonic acid 300 mg/kg provided almost 100%
protection against gastric lesions in this model. Other studies in
rats found that oral administration of an ethanolic extract of
ginger (S00 mg/kg) inhibited gastric lesions induced by ethanol
(80%), hydrochloric acid (0.6 mol/L), sodium hydroxide (0.2 mol/
L), and 25% sodium chloride, compared with control. The
same dose of extract protected against gastric mucosal damage
induced by the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
indometacin and aspirin in rats. In pylorus-ligated rats, oral
administration of acetone and ethanol extracts of ginger inhibited
gastric secretion."!”) These extracts, at doses of 62 mg/kg, also
protected against the development of stress-induced lesions,
although to a lesser extent than cimetidine.

control.)

Antiplatelet activity 6-Gingerol, 6- and 10-dehydrogingerdione,
6- and 10-gingerdione have been reported to be potent inhibitors
of prostaglandin biosynthesis (PG synthetase) in vitro, with the
latter four compounds stated to be more potent than indometa-
cin.) Concentration-dependent inhibition of platelet aggrega-
tion, in vitro, induced by ADP, adrenaline, collagen and
arachidonic acid has been described for an aqueous ginger
extract.!”) Ginger was also found to reduce platelet synthesis of
prostaglandin-endoperoxides, thromboxane and prostaglandins.
A good correlation was reported between concentrations of the
extract required to inhibit platelet aggregation and concentrations
necessary to inhibit platelet thromboxane synthesis.”

Anti-atherosclerotic and antioxidant activity Ginger oleo-
resin, by intragastric administration, has been reported to inhibit
elevation in serum and hepatic cholesterol concentrations in rats
by impairing cholesterol absorption.2” Antihypercholesterolae-
mic activity has also been documented for dried ginger rhizome
when given to both rats fed a cholesterol-rich diet and those with
existing hypercholesterolaemia.?" Fresh ginger juice was not
found to have an effect on serum cholesterol concentrations within
four hours of administration. In addition, serum cholesterol
concentrations were not greatly increased within four hours of
cholesterol administration.

An ethanol (50%) extract of ginger administered orally at a
dose of 500 mg/kg to hyperlipidaemic rabbits led to a significant
reduction in blood serum cholesterol concentrations, compared
with those in control rabbits.°? In a study in rabbits fed
cholesterol for 10 weeks, administration of an ethanolic extract of
ginger (200mg/kg orally) decreased raised serum and_ tissue
concentrations of cholesterol, serum triglycerides and serum
lipoproteins.?»

An ethanolic ginger extract, standardised to contain 40 mg/g
gingerols, shogaols and zingerone, and 90 mg/g total polyphenols,
was reported to inhibit low-density lipoprotein oxidation and to
reduce the development of atherosclerosi:
when compared with control. In rats fed a high-fat diet for 10
weeks, an aqueous preparation of ginger powder administered
orally at doses of 35 and 70mg/kg demonstrated antioxidant
activity, as measured by raised tissue concentrations of thiobarbi-

in atherosclerotic mice,

Ginger

turic acid reactive substances and hydroperoxides, and reduced
activities of superoxide dismutase and catalase.?)
The antioxidant activity of ginger constituents has been

. 26
documented in vitro.‘

Anti-inflammatory activity Constituents of ginger have been
shown to have anti-inflammatory activity in vitro. In a study in
intact human airway epithelial cells (A549 cells), 8-paradol and 8-
shogaol inhibited cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) enzyme activity in a
concentration-dependent manner (ICs) values ranged from 1 to
25mol/L).°” In other studies, an acetone extract of ginger
inhibited inflammation of the chorioallantoic membrane of
fertilised hen's eggs in a concentration-dependent manner.?*) In
another assay, the extract exhibited anti-inflammatory properties
by inhibiting the release of nitric oxide in a concentration-
dependent manner.?*) Ginger oil has demonstrated anti-inflam-
matory activity in a study in rats with severe chronic adjuvant
arthritis induced by injection of 0.05 mL of a suspension of dead
Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacilli.°? Ginger oil 33 mg/kg
administered orally for 26 days caused a significant suppression
of paw and joint swelling, compared with control (no ginger oil).

Several other studies describe anti-inflammatory activity for
ginger constituents.”

Antimicrobial activity In vitro activity against rhinovirus IB has
been reported for sesquiterpenes isolated from ginger rhizomes.”
The most active compound was f-sesquiphellandrene (ICso
0.44 mol/L). In vitro anthelmintic activity against Ascaridia galli
Schrank has been documented for the volatile oil of Zingiber
purpureum Roxb.®° Activity exceeding that of piperazine citrate
was exhibited by the oxygenated compounds fractionated from
the volatile oil.

Anticancer activity Extracts of ginger or constituents of ginger
have been shown to have cancer chemopreventive and cytotoxic or
cytostatic activity in vitro and in vivo (animals). Application of an
ethanolic extract of fresh ginger in a mouse skin tumorigenesis
model (SENCAR mice) resulted in significant inhibition of 12-O-
tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced induction of epi-
dermal ornithine decarboxylase, cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase
activities in a concentration-dependent manner."” Preapplication
of ginger extract also inhibited TPA-induced epidermal oedema
and hyperplasia. Application of ginger extract 30 minutes before
application of two tumour inducers to the skin of SENCAR mice
protected against skin tumour incidence, compared with control.
In another mouse model, topical application of 6-gingerol or 6-
paradol before application of tumour inducers attenuated skin
papillomagenesis."°”
chemopreventive potential of ginger and its constituents.

In vitro, incubation of 6-gingerol with human promyelocytic
leukaemia (HL-60) cells resulted in inhibitory effects on cell
viability and DNA synthesis.” Microscopic examination of the
incubated cells provided evidence of the induction of apoptosis by
6-gingerol.

Other studies also describe the cancer
(26)

Other activities In rats, the anxiolytic effects of pretreatment
with a combination preparation of standardised extracts of ginger
and Ginkgo biloba administered intragastrically at doses between
0.5 and 100 mg/kg were assessed in the elevated plus-maze test.°”
The combination was found to have an anxiolytic effect at lower
doses, but appeared to have an anxiogenic effect at higher doses.

A hypoglycaemic effect in both non-diabetic and alloxan-
induced diabetic rabbits and rats has been documented for fresh
ginger juice administered orally. The effect was stated to be
significant in the diabetic animals.°”

----- PAGE 307 -----
Ginger

The pharmacological actions of 6-shogaol and capsaicin have
been compared.“ Both compounds caused rapid hypotension
followed by a marked pressor response, bradycardia, and apnoea
in rats after intravenous administration. The pressor response was
thought to be a centrally acting mechanism. Contractile responses
in isolated guinea-pig trachea with both compounds, and positive
inotropic and chronotropic responses in isolated rat atria with 6-
shogaol were thought to involve the release of an unknown active
substance from nerve endings.“® A potent, positive inotropic
action on isolated guinea-pig atria has been documented and
gingerols were identified as the cardiotonic principles.°”

A cholagogic action in rats has been described for an acetone
extract of ginger administered intraduodenally.°*) 6-Gingerol and
10-gingerol were reported to be the active components, the former
more potent with a significant increase in bile secretion still
apparent four hours after administration.

Utero-activity has been described for a phenolic compound
isolated from Zingiber cassumunar Roxb.°” The compound was
found to exhibit a dose-related relaxant effect on the non-

pregnant rat uterus in situ; the uterine response from pregnant
rats was stated to vary with the stage of pregnancy, the post-
implantation period being the most sensitive. The compound was
thought to act by a similar mechanism to that of papaverine.”

Clinical studies

Clinical trials of ginger have focused mainly on its effects on the
prevention and treatment of nausea and vomiting of various
causes. Other clinical studies have assessed the effects of ginger
preparations on gastrointestinal motility and on platelet function,
and in vertigo and inflammatory conditions, such as osteo-

arthritis. Several of these studies are described below.

Nausea and vomiting and effects on gastrointestinal motility
Ginger has been reported to be effective as a prophylactic against
(44) Ingestion of powdered ginger root 1 g was found
to significantly reduce the tendency to vomit and experience cold
sweating in 40 naval cadets, compared with 39 cadets who received
placebo. Powdered ginger root 1.88 g has been reported to be
superior to dimenhydrinate 100 mg in preventing the gastrointest-
inal symptoms of motion sickness induced by a rotating chair.(*”)
However, a second study reported ginger (500 mg powdered, 1 ¢
powdered/fresh) to be ineffective in the prevention of motion
sickness induced by a rotating chair.“? The study concluded
hyoscine 600 fig and dexamfetamine 10 mg to be the most effective

combination, with dimenhydrinate 50 mg as the over-the-counter
(42)

seasickness.

motion sickness medication of choice.

A systematic review of six randomised controlled trials of
ginger preparations included three trials involving patients with
post-operative nausea and vomiting, and three further trials in
patients with seasickness (motion sickness), morning sickness
(emesis of pregnancy) and cancer chemotherapy-induced nausea
(one trial in each condition).“*’ Two of the three studies assessing

the effects of ginger in post-operative nausea and vomiting found
that ginger was more effective than placebo and as effective as
metoclopramide in reducing nausea. However, when the data from
the three studies were pooled, the difference between the ginger
and placebo groups was statistically non-significant.”

A randomised, double-blind, crossover trial involving women
with nausea of pregnancy assessed the effects of capsules of
powdered ginger root 250 mg, or placebo, administered orally four
times daily for four days.“ It was reported that symptom relief
was significantly greater during treatment with ginger than with
placebo, and that significantly more women stated a preference

for ginger treatment than for placebo (as later disclosed). A more
recent randomised, double-blind trial involving 70 women with
nausea and vomiting of pregnancy assessed the effectiven
capsules of powdered fresh ginger root 250 mg four times daily, or
placebo, for four days. At the end of the study, ginger recipients
had significantly lower scores for nausea and fewer vomiting
episodes than did the placebo group.

Studies involving healthy volunteers have investigated the effects
of ginger on gastric emptying as a possible mechanism for the
anti-emetic effects of ginger. A randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, involving 16 volunteers
assessed the effects of capsules containing powdered ginger 1g

for one week, followed by a one-week wash-out period before
(46)

oss of

crossover — trial

crossing over to the opposite arm of the study. Gastric
emptying was measured using a paracetamol absorption technique
by comparing the effects of ginger administration on mean and
peak plasma paracetamol concentrations. The results indicated
that the rate of absorption of oral paracetamol was not affected by
simultaneous ingestion of ginger. Another randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 12 healthy volunteers
assessed the effects of ginger rhizome extract on fasting and
postprandial gastroduodenal motility.” The results of this study
indicated that oral administration of ginger improved gastro-
duodenal motility in both the fasting state and after a test meal.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cro
involving eight healthy volunteers tested the effects of powdered
ginger root 1g on experimentally induced vertigo.) One hour
after ginger or placebo administration, participants’ vestibular
system was stimulated by water irrigation of the left ear. It was
reported that ginger significantly reduced vertigo, when compared
with placebo.

over trial

Other effects In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover trial involving 75 patients with osteoarthritis of the knee
or hip, the effects of capsules of ginger extract 170 mg three times
daily were compared with those of ibuprofen 400 mg three times
daily, or placebo, for three weeks with a one-week wash-out
period between each treatment period. At the end of the study,
data for the 56 evaluable participants indicated that there was no
strong evidence of an effect for ginger extract over that of placebo
on parameters of pain.

A reduction in joint pain and improvement in joint movement
in seven rheumatoid arthritis sufferers has been documented for
ginger, with a dual inhibition of cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase
pathways reported as a suggested mechanism of action.)
Patients took either fresh ginger in amounts ranging from 5-50 ¢
or powdered ginger 0.1-1.0 g daily.

A placebo-controlled study assessed the effects of two doses of
ginger powder (4¢ daily for three months, and 10g as a single
dose) on platelet aggregation and fibrinolytic activity in patients
with coronary artery disease (CAD). The results indicated that
long-term administration of ginger powder did not affect ADP-
and epinephrine (adrenaline)-induced platelet aggregation and
had no effects on fibrinolytic activity or fibrinogen concentra-
tions, compared with placebo administration. By contrast,
administration of a single dose of ginger powder to 10 patients
with CAD produced a significant reduction in platelet aggrega-
tion, compared with placebo administration (7 = 10 patients with
CAD).

In a study involving seven women, oral raw ginger 5 g reduced
thromboxane By concentrations in serum collected after clot-
ting,°” thus indicating a reduction in eicosanoid synthesis
(associated with platelet aggregation).

----- PAGE 308 -----
Ginger

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for ginger and further investigation of these aspects is
required. Ginger oil is stated to be non-irritating and non-
sensitising although dermatitis may be precipitated in hypersensi-
tive individuals. Phototoxicity is not considered to be of
significance.

Preclinical data

Ginger oil is stated to be of low toxicity’ with acute LDso
values (rat, by mouth; rabbit, dermal) reported to exceed 5 g/
kg.

Mutagenic activity has been documented for an ethanolic
ginger extract, gingerol and shogaol in Salmonella typhimurium
strains TA100 and TA1535 in the presence of metabolic activation
(S9 mix) but not in TA98 or TA1538 with or without $9 mix.”
Zingerone was found to be non-mutagenic in all four strains with
or without $9 mix, and was reported to suppress mutagenic
activity of gingerol and shogaol. Ginger juice has been reported to
exhibit antimutagenic activity, whereas mutagenic activity has
been described for 6-gingerol in the presence of known chemical References

One-A-Day Ginger, Ginkgo and Garlic; HRI Golden Seal
Digestive; Indian Brandee; Indigestion Relief; Napiers Diges-
tion Tablets; Napiers Monthly Calm Tea; Neo Baby Gripe
Mixture; Neo Gripe Mixture; Nervous Dyspepsia Tablets;
Traveleeze; Wind & Dyspepsia Relief; Zinopin. USA: Herbal
Energy; Heart Health; My Favorite Multiple; Liver Formula.
Venezuela: Jengimiel; Jengimiel.

mutagens."°” It was suggested that certain mutagens may activate 1 Denyer CV et al. Isolation of antirhinoviral sesquiterpenes from ginger
the mutagenic activity of 6-gingerol so that it is not suppressed by (Zingiber officinale). ] Nat Prod 1994; 57: 658-662.

antimutagenic components present in the juice. 2 Lawrence BM, Reynolds RJ. Major tropical spices — ginger (Zingiber

Cs . officinale Rosc.). Perf Flav 1984; 9: 1-40.
Contra-indications, Warnings 3. Yoshikawa M et al. 6-Gingesulfonic acid, a new anti-ulcer principle,
and gingerglycolipids A, B and C, three new

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological monoacyldigalactosylglycerols from Zingiberis rhizoma originating in
actions of ginger, the potential for preparations of ginger to Taiwan. Chem Pharm Bull 1992; 40: 2239-2241.

4 Chen C-C et al. Chromatographic analyses of gingerol compounds in
ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) extracted by liquid carbon dioxide.
J Chromatogr 1986; 360: 163-174.

interfere with other medicines administered concurrently, parti-
cularly those with similar or opposing effects, should be

considered. oo 5 Charles R et al. New gingerdione from the rhizomes of Zingiber
Ginger has been reported to possess both cardiotonic and officinale. Fitoterapia 2000; 71: 716-718.

antiplatelet activity in vitro and hypoglycaemic activity in in vivo 6 Huang Q et al. Anti-5-hydroxytryptamine3 effect of galanolactone,

studies. An oleo-resin component, 6-shogaol has been reported to diterpenoid isolated from ginger. Chem Pharm Bull 1991; 39: 397-399.

7 Langner E et al. Ginger: history and use. Adv Ther 1998; 15: 25-44.

8 Yamahara J et al. Active components of ginger exhibiting anti-
serotonergic action. Phytother Res 1989; 3: 70-71.

Pregnancy and lactation Ginger is reputed to be an 9 Chang H-M, But PP-H, eds. Pharmacology and Applications of

abortifacient(@ and utero-activity has been documented for a Chinese Materia Medica, vol 1. Singapore: World Scientific

related species. Doses of ginger that greatly exceed the amounts Publishing, 1986: 366-369.
P . sing 8s Y exe w 10 Kawai T e¢ al. Anti-emetic principles of Magnolia obovata bark and

used in foods should not be taken during pregnancy or lactation. Zingiber officinale rhizome. Planta Med 1994; 60: 17-20.

11 Sharma SS et al. Antiemetic activity of ginger (Zingiber officinale)
against cisplatin-induced emesis in dogs. J Ethnopharmacol 1997; 57:
93-96.

12 Sharma $S, Gupta YK. Reversal of cisplatin-induced delay in gastric
emptying in rats by ginger (Zingiber officinale). J Ethnopharmacol
1998; 62: 49-55.

13. Yamahara J et al. Gastrointestinal motility enhancing effect of ginger
and its active constituents. Chem Pharm Bull 1990; 38: 430-431.

14 Yamahara J et al. The anti-ulcer effect in rats of ginger constituents. J
Ethnopharmacol 1988; 23: 299-304.

15 Sakai K et al. Effect of extracts of Zingiberaceae herbs on gastric
secretion in rabbits. Chem Pharm Bull 1989; 37: 215-217.

16 Al-Yahya MA et al. Gastroprotective activity of ginger Zingiber
officinale Rosc., in albino rats. Am J Chin Med 1998; 17: 51-56.

17. Sertie JAA et al. Preventive anti-ulcer activity of the rhizome extract of

Feminine Herbal Complex; Ginkgo Plus Herbal Plus Formula Zingiber officinale. Fitoterapia 1992; 63: 55-59.

10; Herbal Cleanse; Herbal Digestive Formula; Lifesystem 18 Kiuchi F et al. Inhibitors of prostaglandin biosynthesis from ginger.

A 8 Chem Pharm Bull 1982; 30: 754-757.

Herbal Plus Formula 11 Ginkgo; PC Regulax; Peritone; PMS

. . . 19 Srivastava KC. Effects of aqueous extracts of onion, garlic and ginger
Support; SEMI) | Complex,) Trayelaides Austria: )Mariazeller, on platelet aggregation and metabolism of arachidonic acid in the

Brazil: Broncol. Canada: Cayenne Plus; Chase Kolik Gripe blood vascular system: in vitro study. Prostaglandins Leukot Med
1984; 13: 227-235.

affect blood pressure (initially decrease then increase) in vivo. The
clinical significance of these findings, if any, is unclear.

----- PAGE 309 -----
20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

Ginger

Gujral § et al. Effect of ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) oleorosin
on serum and hepatic cholesterol levels in cholesterol fed rats. Nutr
Rep Int 1974; 17: 183-189.

Giri J et al. Effect of ginger on serum cholesterol levels. Indian J Nutr
Diet 1984; 21: 433-436.

Sharma I et al. Hypolipidaemic and antiatherosclerotic effects of
Zingiber officinale in cholesterol fed rabbits. Phytother Res 1996; 10:
517-518.

Bhandari U et al. The protective action of ethanolic ginger (Zingiber
officinale) extract in cholesterol fed rabbits. J Ethnopharmacol 1998;
61: 167-171.

Fuhrman B e¢ al. Ginger extract consumption reduces plasma
cholesterol, inhibits LDL oxidation and attenuates development of
atherosclerosis in atherosclerotic, apolipoprotein E-deficient mice. J
Nutr 2000; 130: 1124-1131.

Jeyakumar SM et al. Antioxidant activity of ginger (Zingiber officinale
Rosc) in rats fed a high fat diet. Med Sci Res 1999; 27: 341-344.
Surh Y-J et al. Chemoprotective properties of some pungent
ingredients present in red pepper and ginger. Mutat Res 1998; 402:
259-267.

Tjendraputra E et al. Effect of ginger constituents and synthetic
analogues on cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme in intact cells. Bioorg Chem
2001; 29: 156-163.

Schuhbaum H et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of Zingiber officinale
extracts. Pharm Pharmacol Lett 2000; 2: 82-85.

Sharma JN et al. Suppressive effects of eugenol and ginger oil on
arthritic rats. Pharmacology 1994; 49: 314-318.

Taroeno et al. Anthelmintic activities of some hydrocarbons and
oxygenated compounds in the essential oil of Zingiber purpureum.
Planta Med 1989; 55: 105.

Katiyar SK et al. Inhibition of tumor promotion in SENCAR mouse
skin by ethanol extract of Zingiber officinale rhizome. Cancer Res
1996; 56: 1023-1030.

Surh Y-J e¢ al. Anti-tumor-promoting activities of selected pungent
phenolic substances in ginger. J Environ Pathol Toxicol Oncol 1999;
18: 131-139.

Lee E, Surh Y-J. Induction of apoptosis in HL-60 cells by pungent
vanilloids, [6]-gingerol and [6]-paradol. Cancer Lett 1998; 134: 163—
168.

Hasenohrl RU e¢ al. Anxiolytic-like effect of combined extracts of
Zingiber officinale and Ginkgo biloba in the elevated plus-maze.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1996; 53: 271-275.

Sharma M, Shukla S. Hypoglycaemic effect of ginger. J Res Ind Med
Yoga Homoeopath 1977; 12: 127-130.

Suekawa M et al. Pharmacological studies on ginger. V.
Pharmacological comparison between (6)-shogaol and capsaicin. Folia
Pharmac Jpn 1986; 88: 339-347.

37

38

39

41

42

43

47

48

49

50

S1

52.

53
54

5S

Shoji N et al. Cardiotonic principles of ginger (Zingiber officinale
Roscoe). J Pharm Sci 1982; 71: 1174-1175.

Yamahara J et al. Cholagogic effect of ginger and its active
constituents. J Ethnopharmacol 1985; 13: 217-225.

Kanjanapothi D e¢ al. A uterine relaxant compound from Zingiber
cassumunar. Planta Med 1987; 53: 329-332.
Grontved A et al. Ginger root against seasickness. A controlled trial
on the open sea. Acta Otolaryngol 1988; 105: 45-49.

Mowrey DB, Clayson DE. Motion sickness, ginger, and
psychophysics. Lancet 1982; i: 655-657.

Wood CD et al. Comparison of efficacy of ginger with various
antimotion sickness drugs. Clin Res Pract Drug Reg Affairs 1988; 6:
129-136.

Ernst E, Pittler MH. Efficacy of ginger for nausea and vomiting. A
systematic review of randomised clinical trials. Br J] Anaesthesia 2000;
84: 367-371.

Fischer-Rasmussen W et al. Ginger treatment of hyperemesis
gravidarum. Eur ] Obs Gyn Reprod Biol 1990; 38: 19-24.
Vutyavanich T e¢ al. Ginger for nausea and vomiting in pregnancy:
randomised, double-masked, placebo-controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol
2001; 97: 577-582.

Phillips S et al. Zingiber officinale does not affect gastric emptying
rate. A randomised, placebo-controlled, crossover trial. Anaesthesia
1993; 48: 393-395.

Micklefield GH et al. Effects of ginger on gastroduodenal motility. Int
J Clin Pharmacol Ther 1999; 37: 341-346.

Grontved A, Hentzer E. Vertigo-reducing effect of ginger root. A
controlled clinical study. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol 1986; 48: 282-286.
Bliddal H et al. A randomized, placebo-controlled, cross-over study of
ginger extracts and ibuprofen in osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis
Cartilage 2000; 8: 9-12.

Srivastava KC. Effect of onion and ginger consumption on platelet
thromboxane production in humans. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent
Fatty Acids 1989; 35: 183-185.

Srivastava K et al. Ginger and rheumatic disorders. Med Hypoth 1989;
29: 25-28.

Bordia A et al. Effect of ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.) and
fenugreek (Trigonella foenumgraecum L.) on blood lipids, blood sugar
and platelet aggregation in patients with coronary artery disease.
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1997; 56: 379-384.

Opdyke DLJ. Ginger oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12: 901-902.
Nagabhushan M et al. Mutagenicity of ginergol and shogaol and
antimutagenicity of zingerone in salmonella/microsome assay. Cancer
Lett 1987; 36: 221-233.

Nakamura H, Yamamoto T. Mutagen and anti-mutagen in ginger,
Zingiber officinale. Mutat Res 1982; 103: 119-126.

----- PAGE 310 -----
Ginkgo

disorders unless the potential benefits outweigh the poten
harms. In view of the lack of conclusive evidence for the
efficacy of ginkgo leaf in the various conditions for which it is
used, and the serious nature of the potential harm, it is
extremely unlikely that the benefit-harm balance would be in
favour of such patients using ginkgo leaf preparations.

In view of the documented pharmacological actions of
ginkgo, the potential for preparations of ginkgo leaf to
interfere with other medicines administered concurrently,
particularly those with similar (such as anticoagulant and
antiplatelet agents) or opposing effects, should be
considered.

Ginkgo should not be used during pregnancy and
breastfeeding. In view of the intended uses of ginkgo and the
documented pharmacological actions of ginkgo, it is not
suitable for self-treatment.

Species (Family)
Ginkgo biloba L. (Ginkgoaceae)

Synonym(s)
Fossil Tree, Kew Tree, Maidenhair Tree, Yin Xing (whole plant),

Yin Xing Ye (leaves), Bai Guo (seeds), Salisburia adiantifolia Sm.,
S. biloba (L.) Hoffmans

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

AHPC?

BHP 1996'@”)

BP 2007'¢8

Complete German Commission E‘
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Ph Eur 2007'08)

USP29/NF24'C8°)

WHO volume 1 1999°%)

(G3)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
Ginkgo is not included in the GSL.'°?”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
References 1 and 2.

Leaf

Amino acids 6-Hydroxykynurenic acid (2-carboxy-4-one-6-
hydroxyquinoline), a metabolite of tryptophan.

Flavonoids Dimeric flavones (e.g. amentoflavone, bilobetin,

ginkgetin, isoginkgetin, sciadopitysin); flavonols (e.g. quercetin,

kaempferol) and their glycosides” and coumaroyl esters.

Proanthocyanidins Terpenoids Sesquiterpenes (e.g. bilobalide),
diterpenes (e.g. ginkgolides A, B, C, J, M, which are unique
cage molecules,*”°** and triterpenes (e.g, sterols).

Other constituents Benzoic acid, ginkgolic acids, 2-hexenal,

polyprenols (e.g. __ di-trans-poly-cis-octadecaprenol), sugars,
waxes,!) a peptide.

Seeds

Alkaloids Ginkgotoxin (4-O-methylpyridoxine).'”

Amino acids Cyanogenetic glycosides Ginkgolic acids.
Ginkbilobin.(”

Quality of plant material and commercial products

According to the British and European Pharmacopoeias, ginkgo
consists of the dried leaves of Ginkgo biloba L. It contains not less
than 0.5% of flavonoids expressed as flavone glycosides (M, 757)
and calculated with reference to the dried drug.

----- PAGE 311 -----
Ginkgo

Standardised extracts of G. biloba leaves are standardised on
the content of ginkgo flavonoid glycosides (22-27%; determined
as quercetin, kaempferol and isorhamnetin), and terpene lactones
(S-7%; comprising around 2.8-3.4% ginkgolides A, B and C, and
2.6-3.2% bilobalide, and less than 5 ppm ginkgolic acids).(C>

As with other herbal medicinal products, there is variation in
the qualitative and quantitative composition of ginkgo leaf crude
plant material and commercial ginkgo leaf preparations.

An analytical study of 27 products containing ginkgo leaf
available in the USA including 24 products that were stated to be
‘standardised’. For 17 of these, the content of ginkgo flavonoid
glycosides and/or terpene lactones was greater than the stated
amount. Also, only seven products contained ginkgolic acids at a
concentration of < 500 parts per million (ppm); the concentration
of ginkgolic acids in nine products was > 25000 ppm. Differences
in pharmaceutical quality between different ginkgo leaf products
lead to varying in vitro dissolution and in vivo bioavailability (see
Pharmacological Actions, Pharmacokinetics).

Food Use

Ginkgo biloba is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Ginkgo has a long history of medicinal use, dating back to
2800 Bc. Traditional Chinese medicine used the seeds (kernel/nuts)

Diterpenes

R?
ginkgolide A OH H H
ginkgolide B OH OH
ginkgolide C OH OH
ginkgolide J OH H
ginkgolide M H OH

Flavonoids

OH O R
kaempferol H
quercetin OH

Amino acids
le}

HO.
N COOH
H

6-hydroxykynurenic acid

Figure 1 Selected constituents of ginkgo.

for therapeutic purposes. The seed is used in China as an
antitussive, expectorant and anti-asthmatic, and in bladder
inflammation.“ ''°° In China, the leaves of Ginkgo biloba
were also used in asthma and in cardiovascular disorders,”
although the leaves have little history of traditional use in the
West. Today, standardised concentrated extracts of G. biloba
leaves are marketed in several European countries, and are used in
cognitive deficiency, intermittent claudication (generally resulting
from peripheral arterial occlusive disease), and vertigo and

tinnitus of vascular origin (see Pharmacological Actions, Clinical
ctidiae) (G3: G32, G56, G63)
studies).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Cognitive deficiency

Leaf extract
divided doses.

120-240 mg dry extract orally in two or three
(G3)

Peripheral arterial occlusive disease and vertigo/tinnitus

Leaf extract
divided doses.

120-160 mg dry extract orally in two or three
(G3)

°

we 9

‘oO OH
bilobalide

amentoflavone

----- PAGE 312 -----
Figure 2 Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba).

ye BMWS 6 n eB 8

Figure 3 Ginkgo — dried drug substance (leaf).

Clinical trials of standardised extracts of G. biloba leaves (EGb-
761, Willmar Schwabe GmbH and LI-1370, Lichtwer Pharma
GmbH) in patients with cognitive deficiency have generally used
oral doses ranging from 120-240 mg daily, usually for 8-12 weeks,
although some studies have continued treatment for up to 24 or 52
5° Clinical trials in peripheral arterial occlusive disease
used oral doses of 120-160 mg extract daily for 3-6 months.'°*?

weeks.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

There is a vast literature describing basic scientific research
relating to the effects of ginkgo. Several pharmacological activities
have been documented for ginkgo leaf extracts and/or their
constituents. These include effects on behaviour, learning and
memory, cardiovascular activities, effects on blood flow and
antioxidant activity. The most important active principles of
ginkgo extract include the ginkgo flavonoid glycosides and the
terpene lactones." Ginkgo has been described as having
polyvalent action, i.e. the combined activity of several of its
constituents is likely to be responsible for its effects."

The pharmacological activities of ginkgo have been
18,9,15-17) and other texts bring together several studies
in specific areas, e.g. neuroprotective effects."®’ A summary of
some of the literature on the in vitro and in vivo (animals) effects
of ginkgo leaf is given below.

reviewed, '

Ginkgo 301

Effects on behaviour, learning and memory The effects of a
standardised extract of ginkgo leaf (EGb-761) on learning and
memory, and on behaviour in relation to ageing and in recovery
from brain injury, have been well studied.“ Animal models (rats
and mice) designed to test aspects of learning and memory (e.g.
acquisition and retention) have documented improvements in
animals treated with oral, intraperitoneal or subcutaneous EGb-
761, compared with controls.) Studies involving rats reported
improvements in acquisition and retention in older (24-month-
old), but not younger (eight-month-old) rats. Other experiments
involving rats of different ages have found that older rats (12- and
18-months old) showed improved performance in an eight-arm
radial maze test following oral administration of EGb-761 30 or
60 mg/kg/day, whereas performance was stable among young rats
(eight weeks old) following EGb-761 administration.""”) EGb-761
200 mg/kg administered orally to rats aged more than 26 months
old led to significant improvements in aspects of cognitive
behaviour.” In-vivo studies have also shown that oral adminis-
tration of EGb-761 (50 or 100 mg/kg/day for three weeks) to rats
prevented the short-term memory-impairing effects of scopola-
mine administered intraperitoneally (0.125 mg/kg).

The anxiolytic effects of a range of doses (0.01-10 mg/kg) of
combination preparations containing different mixture ratios of
standardised extracts of ginkgo leaf and ginger root have been
tested in rats using the elevated plus-maze test.?° Compared with
controls, rats treated with the combination preparation (mixture
ratio of ginger extract to ginkgo extract, 2.5:1; Img/kg,
intragastrically) spent increased amounts of time in the open
arms of the maze, whereas the behaviour of rats treated with
preparations of a mixture ratio of 1:1 and 1:2.5 did not change.

Several studies have reported that treatment with EGb-761,
compared with control, aids recovery of function following brain
injury, as demonstrated by behavioural tests in rats who had
undergone bilateral frontal lobotomy or septohippocampal deaf-
ferentation, and in rat models of cortical hemiplegia.”

It has been suggested that the effects of EGb-761 in the
experimental animal models described above may involve aspects
of neuronal plasticity, e.g. neuronal regeneration." Studies in
rats have investigated, for example, the effects of EGb-761
administration on expression of neurotrophins and apolipopro-
tein E, and on behavioural recovery, following entorhinal cortex
lesions, and on regeneration of primary olfactory neurons
following olfactory bulbectomy. Research investigating the effects
of EGb-761 on neuronal plasticity has been summarised. !*?))

Cardiovascular and haemorheological activities Studies
investigating the molecular mechanisms that may contribute to
the vasoregulatory (vasodilatation and vasoconstriction) effects of
standardised ginkgo leaf extract (EGb-761) have been
described.” In vitro experiments using isolated rabbit aorta
suggested that possible mechanisms include effects on cyclic-GMP
phosphodiesterase, prostaglandin I, and nitric oxide (NO). Ex
vivo studies using isolated guinea-pig heart showed that EGb-761
led to a concentration-dependent increase in coronary blood flow.
In studies involving isolated rat heart and in anaesthetised rabbits,
EGb-761 administration has been reported to protect against
myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion injury; the antioxidant and
free-radical scavenging effects of EGb-761 (see Pharmacological
Actions, Antioxidant activity) may be important in this regard.)
One study using isolated rat hearts suggested that the cardiopro-
tective effects were due to the terpenoid constituents of EGb-761,
and that the mechanism was independent of direct free radical-
scavenging activity.*? An in vitro study with endothelial cells

G

----- PAGE 313 -----
Ginkgo

suggested that the anti-ischaemic activity of EGb-761 may be due
partly to the effects of the constituent bilobalide in protecting
mitochondrial activity.”

The effects of ginkgo leaf extract have been studied in normal
rats and those with ischaemic brain damage with middle cerebral
artery occlusion. Oral administration of ginkgo extract 100 mg/
kg was reported to increase cerebral blood flow in normal rats,
but the increase was less marked in rats with cerebral artery
occlusion.

In-vitro studies using human blood cells have documented
effects of EGb-761 on several haemorheological parameters.»
For example, in vitro, EGb-761 normalised changes in erythrocyte
viscosity and in the viscoelastic properties of the erythrocyte
membrane induced by standard metabolic challenge (pH 6.8;
380 mosmol/L) in six human blood
experiments, EGb-761 protected against hydrogen peroxide-
induced damage in human erythrocytes. In studies using blood
from patients with circulatory disorders, incubation with EGb-761
was reported to decrease erythrocyte aggregation. In vitro
experiments using human neutrophils have found that EGb-761
at a concentration of 10,mol/L inhibits release of hydrogen
peroxide from these cells. The effects of EGb-761 on inhibition of
human platelet aggregation elicited by substances such as
thrombin and collagen have been documented." A study using
blood donated by healthy volunteers (7 = 35) reported that a
standardised extract of ginkgo leaf inhibited ADP- and collagen-
induced platelet aggregation in platelet-rich plasma, gel-filtered
platelets and in whole blood in a concentration-dependent
manner.”

onors. In other in vitro

Platelet-activating factor antagonism Ginkgolides have been
reported to competitively inhibit the binding of platelet-activating
factor (PAF) to its membrane receptor. 7”

Ginkgolide B antagonises thrombus formation induced by PAF
and, in guinea-pigs, it also induces a rapid curative thrombolysis.
A protective effect is exerted by ginkgolides on PAF-induced
bronchoconstriction and airway hyperactivity in immunoanaphy-
laxis and in antigen-induced bronchial provocation tests. Oral or
intravenous injection of ginkgolide B antagonises cardiovascular
impairments and bronchoconstriction induced by PAF. Ginkgolide
B does not appear to interfere with cyclooxygenase, but at an
earlier step involving PAF receptors and phospholipase activation.
Eosinophil infiltration occurs in asthma and in allergic reactions,
the number of eosinophils increasing during late phase. Since PAF
is a potent activator of eosinophil function, it has been argued that
ginkgolide B may interfere with the late-phase response.”

Pre-administration of ginkgolide B (1-5 mg/kg, intravenous) to
rats has been reported to reduce PAF-induced decreases in
diastolic and systolic arterial blood pressure in anaesthetised
normotensive rats; this effect has also been reported in this animal

model when ginkgolide B is administered shortly after PAF
15)

administration."

Ginkgolide B has also been documented to have some beneficial
effects in endotoxic shock; PAF is believed by some to be
implicated in shock states. In anaesthetised guinea-pigs, intrave-
nous administration of ginkgolide B (1 or 6mg/kg) prior to
injection of Salmonella typhimurium endotoxin reduced the initial
rapid decrease in blood pressure, and intravenous administration
of ginkgolide B during the prolonged phase of shock (1 hour after
endotoxin administration) immediately and dose dependently
reversed the decrease in blood pressure." Other studies have
found that ginkgolide B reduced arterial blood pressure in the

secondary, but not the early, phase following administration of

2 LS
Escherichia coli endotoxin."

Antioxidant activity The free radical-scavenging effects and
antioxidant activity of EGb-761 in vitro are well documented.)
EGb-761 scavenges several reactive oxygen species, including
hydroxyl, superoxide and peroxyl radicals.‘'>7*7?
bellar neurons and cerebellar granule cells, ginkgo extract was
reported to protect against oxidative stress induced by hydrogen
peroxide, another reactive oxygen species.°°*" In cultures of rat
hippocampal cells, incubation with EGb-761 protected against cell
death induced by B-amyloid, protected against toxicity induced by
hydrogen peroxide, and blocked B-amyloid-induced events, such
as accumulation of reactive oxygen species.” Bilobalide has also
been documented to protect neurons against oxidative stress
induced by reactive oxygen species in vitro.°>) Experiments in

gerbils have suggested that the neuroprotective effects of gingko
)

) In rat cere-

extract may be due to inhibition of nitric oxide formation."

Other studies which have described neuroprotective effects of
EGb-761 have suggested that antioxidant activity may be
involved."'9 In vitro, a standardised ginkgo leaf extract was
found to inhibit photo-induced formation of cholesterol oxides in
a concentration-dependent manner.°°)

Antioxidant activity has been documented for EGb-761 in vivo.
In rats, treatment with EGb-761 increased the concentrations of
circulating and cellular polyunsaturated fatty acids, and reduced
erythrocyte cell lysis induced by hydrogen peroxide.°% Also in
rats, oral administration of EGb-761 was reported to increase
activity of the enzymes catalase and superoxide dismutase in the
hippocampus, striatum and substantia nigrum.” Other data
collected in this study suggested a decrease in lipid peroxidation in
rat hippocampus in EGb-761-treated rats. In another study in rats,
EGb-761 (200 mg/kg/day for four weeks) protected against carbon
tetrachloride-induced (1.5 mL/kg) liver damage, as determined by
malondialdehyde concentrations (a breakdown product of lipid
peroxidation).°*)

Other activities In-vivo studies have suggested that EGb-761 may
protect against chemically induced carcinogenesis. In mice, oral
administration of EGb-761 (150mg/kg daily for two weeks),
compared with control, was reported to reduce tumour multi-
plicity; however, the inhibitory effect was not statistically
significant.” It was also reported that EGb-761-treatment
reduced the cardiotoxicity of doxorubicin.

EGb-761 and ginkgolide B have been shown to inhibit
peripheral-type benzodiazepine receptor (PBR) expression and
cell proliferation in the human breast cancer cell line MDA-231,
which is known to be rich in PBR.“ By contrast, the proliferation
of MCF-7 breast cancer cells, which are low in PBR, was not
affected.

In rats, oral administration of standardised ginkgo leaf extract
300 mg/kg was shown to ameliorate nephrotoxicity induced by
administration of gentamicin 80 mg/kg."

In-vitro studies have shown that ginkgolic acids have cytotoxic
activity.” Incubation of a human keratinocyte cell line with a

preparation of ginkgolic acids (containing 99% ginkgolic acids) at
concentrations of > 30mg/L for 18 hours increased the
proportion of apoptotic cells from around 6% to around 80%.)

Mean (95% confidence interval) ICso values for ginkgolic acids
and a standardised ginkgolic-acid-free (< Sppm) extract of ginkgo
leaf (EGb-761) for human keratinocyte cells and rhesus monkey
kidney tubular epithelial cells, respectively, were: ginkgolic acids,
21.8 mg/L (20.6-23.0) and 4.6 mg/L (3.7—5.6), respectively; ginkgo
extract, 889 mg/L (859-938) and 1481 mg/L (1439-1523), respec-

----- PAGE 314 -----
tively.“ The ginkgolic acid mixture (containing five alkylphenols
at concentrations of 47%, 43% and 3% for three compounds) was
obtained from the heptane-soluble fraction of a 60% w/w acetone
extract of G. biloba leaf.

Oestrogenic activity in vitro has been documented for a G.
biloba leaf extract (Meditec Korea Pharm. Co Ltd, Korea; not
further specified) and several of its flavonoid constituents. In
competitive radiolabelled ligand binding assays, ginkgo leaf
extract and the flavonoid constituents quercetin, kaempferol and
isorhamnetin bound to both oestrogen receptor (ER) ER-alpha
and ER-beta receptors, although they showed a greater affinity for
ER-beta receptors. At certain concentrations, ginkgo extract and
the flavonoid constituents induced the proliferation of ER-positive
MCF-7 human breast cancer cells; this effect was blocked by
incubation with tamoxifen.” The clinical relevance of these
findings has not been established.

Aqueous extracts of dried ginkgo leaves have been reported to
inhibit. monoamine oxidases (MAO) A and B.A study
investigating the effects of bilobalide on gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA) concentrations and on glutamic acid decarboxylase
activity in mouse brain found that GABA concentrations and
glutamic acid decarboxylase activity were significantly higher in
animals treated orally with bilobalide 30 mg/kg daily for four
days.“ However, there were no differences between treated and
control mice with regard to glutamate concentrations.

Several in-vivo studies have documented adaptive effects for
EGb-761.°”

A peptide isolated from the leaves of Ginkgo biloba has been
reported to have antifungal activity against several fungi,
including Pellicularia sasakii and Alternaria alternata.

Three long-chain phenols, anacardic acid, bilobol and cardanol,
isolated from seeds of G. biloba are active against Sarcoma 180
ascites in mice.”

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics The pharmacokinetics of constituents of
standardised extracts of ginkgo leaf are reasonably well
documented." '7**S?) Mean bioavailabilities of ginkgolide A,
ginkgolide B and bilobalide following oral administration of
ginkgo extract 120mg to fasting healthy volunteers were 80%,
88% and 79%, respectively. Food intake increased the time taken
to reach peak concentration (suggesting slower absorption), but
did not affect bioavailability.“ °'*
ginkgolides A and B and bilobalide observed in fasting volunteers
ranged from 16.5 to 33.3ng/mL, and from 11.5 to 21.1 ng/mL in
volunteers who had consumed food.”

Maximum plasma concentrations of total ginkgolides A and B
and bilobalide following oral administration of a ginkgo leaf
extract (Ginkgoselect) and a phospholipid complex of ginkgo leaf
(Ginkgoselect Phytosome), both providing 9.6mg total terpene
lactones, were 85.0 and 181.8 |tg/mL, for ginkgo extract and the
phospholipid complex, respectively.”
concentration were 120 minutes and 180-240 minutes for ginkgo
extract and the phospholipid complex, respectively, whereas the
mean elimination half-life of each of the terpene lactones
investigated was within the range 120-180 minutes.

In a randomised, crossover study, 12 healthy individuals
received ginkgo leaf extract 40mg twice daily and 80mg once
daily for 7 days, with a wash-out period of 21 days between the
different dosage regimens. It was reported that the twice-daily
dosage regimen, compared with the once-daily regimen, resulted
in a significantly longer half-life and mean residence time for

Peak concentrations of

Times to maximum

Ginkgo

ginkgolide B, although the maximum plasma concentration was
higher with the once-daily dosage regimen. Time to maximum
plasma concentration for ginkgolide B was 2.3 hours for
administration of ginkgo leaf extract according to either dosage
regimen. In another study involving healthy individuals given a
single oral dose of ginkgo leaf extract, mean values for the
absorption rate constant, elimination rate constant, absorption
half-life, elimination half-life and time to maximum plasma
concentration for the flavonoid constituents quercetin an
kaempferol were 0.61 and 0.55 per hour, 0.37 and 0.30 per hour,
1.51 and 1.56 hours, 2.17 and 2.76 hours, and 2.30 and 2.68 hours,
respectively. °!)

Urinary excretion of ginkgolides A and B, and bilobalide, is
around 70%, 50% and 30%, respectively, of the dose administere
orally(C'®)

Different ginkgo leaf extracts have different in-vitro dissolution
rates resulting in differences in bioavailability in humans.'')

Therapeutic effects Most clinical trials of ginkgo have explore
its effects in the treatment of cognitive deficiency or cerebra
insufficiency,°* °° a term used to de:
symptoms thought to arise from an age-related reduction in
cerebral blood flow. These symptoms include forgetfulness, poor
concentration, poor perception, debilitation, dizziness, fatigue,
sleep disturbances, listlessness, depressed mood, headache, moo:
swings, rest] , anxiety, hearing loss and disorienta-
tion.°* °%® Several studies have tested the effects of standardis

ribe a collection of

ness, tinnit

ginkgo leaf extracts on cognitive function in patients with
Alzheimei (3) and/or multi-infarct dementia.°* Both
are conditions which share several symptoms (e.g. memory
impairment) with cerebral insufficiency. Several other trials have
explored the effects of ginkgo extracts on cognitive ability in
individuals with no history of significant cognitive impairment. A

few studies have explored the effects of ginkgo on tinnitus
(55)

disease’

alone.
Clinical research with ginkgo extracts has also focused on
effects in improving pain-free walking distance in patients with
intermittent claudication/peripheral arterial occlusive disease.
S59 Other studies have explored the effects of ginkgo in patients
with chronic venous insufficiency, antidepressant-related sexual
dysfunction, seasonal affective disorder (SAD), and symptoms of
depres:
Almost all clinical trials of ginkgo have investigated the effects
of the standardised ginkgo leaf extracts EGb-761 and LI-1370.

ion.

Cognitive deficiency, dementia in Alzheimer’s disease, multi-
infarct dementia A Cochrane systematic review of studies
assessing G. biloba leaf preparations in cognitive impairment and
dementia included 33 randomised, double-blind, controlled
trials.” All but one of the included studies investigated the
effects of standardised ginkgo leaf extracts EGb-761 and LI-1370
at oral doses ranging from 80-600 mg daily and typically 200 mg
daily. The study that did not use either of these preparations
assessed an ethanolic extract of ginkgo leaves (drug-to-extract
ratio 4:1, standardised for total flavone glycosides 0.20 mg/mL
and total ginkgolides 0.34 mg/mL) at doses lower than those used
in the other 32 studies.

Meta-analyses showed that ginkgo at doses less than 200 mg
daily for less than 12 weeks, compared with placebo, was
associated with benefits in clinical global improvement as assessed
by physicians: odds ratio (OR; 95% confidence interval (CI))
15.32 (5.90-39.80; p < 0.0001); a similar result was found for
ginkgo > 200 mg daily for 24 weeks (OR 2.16, 95% CI 1.11-4.20;
p = 0.02). Significant improvements in cognition, assessed using

----- PAGE 315 -----
Ginkgo

various scales, were also found for ginkgo (any dose) at 12, 24 and
52 weeks, when compared with placebo (p = 0.0008, 0.03 and <
0.01 for 12, 24 and 52 weeks, respectively), and significant
improvements in ability to perform activities of daily living were
seen with ginkgo (doses < 200 mg daily), compared with placebo,
at 12, 24 and 52 weeks (p < 0.01, p = 0.05 and p < 0.01,
respectively). The conclusions of the review were that there is
some evidence of improvements in cognition and function
associated with treatment with a standardised extract of ginkgo
leaf. However, many of the early trials included in the review had
methodological limitations, and the three most recent trials
showed inconsistent results. There is a need for a large rigorous
randomised, placebo-controlled trial to establish the benefits of
ginkgo in cognitive impairment.°”
A review of controlled clinical trials of ginkgo in patients wit
cerebral insufficiency identified 40 studies.°” Generally, trials
tested oral doses of standardised extracts of ginkgo leaf of 120 mg

iS.

y

daily administered for at least four to six weeks. Most trial
reported significant results or positive (but not. statistical
significant) trends in favour of ginkgo, compared with control.
However, it was reported that most trials were of poor
methodological quality; only eight studies were considered to be
well-conducted. All of these eight studies reported statistically
significant results for ginkgo, compared with placebo. Never-
theless, further randomised, double-blind, controlled trials
involving larger numbers of patients were deemed necessary.”
Many controlled studies of the ginkgo extracts EGb-761 and LI-
1370 were conducted before new guidelines for testing the efficacy
of nootropic drugs were developed.'C™ Details of two studies that
did meet the methodological criteria described in the guidelines
(both of which were included in the Cochrane systematic review
described above) are given below.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, after a
four-week placebo run-in period, 216 patients with mild-to-
moderate primary degenerative dementia of the Alzheimer type,
or multi-infarct dementia, received standardised ginkgo leaf
extract (EGb-761) 120mg orally twice daily, or placebo, for 24
weeks." At the end of the study, data for 156 patients were
eligible for analysis. There were significantly more responders to
treatment (defined as a response to at least two of the three
primary outcome measures — a psychopathological assessment, an
assessment of cognitive performance and a behavioural as:
of activities of daily life) in the ginkgo group, compared with the
placebo group (28% versus 10% of ginkgo and placebo recipients,
respectively; p = 0.005). The difference was also statistically
significant in an intention-to-treat analysis (23% versus 10% of
ginkgo and placebo recipients, respectively; p = 0.005).

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involved
327 patients with mild-to-severe dementia related to Alzheimer's
disease or multi-infarct dementia.) Participants received stan-
dardised ginkgo leaf extract (EGb-761) 40 mg orally three times
daily (1 = 166), or placebo (n = 161), for 52 weeks, and underwent
a battery of a ments at 12, 26 and 52 weeks. The primary
outcome measures were the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale

sment

Cognitive Subscale (Adas-Cog), the Geriatric Evaluation by
Relative's Rating Instrument (GERRI) and the Clinical Global
Impression of Change (CGIC). In an intention-to-treat analysis (1
= 309), ginkgo recipients scored significantly better than did
placebo recipients on the Adas-Cog and the GERRI (p = 0.04 and
p = 0.004, respectively). A slight worsening on the CGIC was
observed for both groups. The average end-points for the
intention-to-treat analysis were 38.6 and 34.6 weeks for the
ginkgo and placebo groups, respectively.

Another systematic review of randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trials assessing the effects of standardised
ginkgo leaf extracts on cognitive function in patients with
Alzheimer's disease, characterised according to recognised cri-
teria, included four studies.°*) These involved oral administration
of ginkgo extract 120 or 240mg daily for 12-26 weeks, and
involved a total of 212 patients each in the ginkgo and placebo
groups. A meta-analysis of the results of the four studies indicated
a modest effect for ginkgo, compared with placebo (difference of
3% on the Adas-Cog).

Another systematic review included nine randomised, double-

blind, placebo-controlled trials of standardised ginkgo leaf
extracts in patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type and/or
multi-infarct dementia.“ The review included two studies
described above.**) Studies generally involved the administra-
tion of oral doses of ginkgo extract 120 or 240 mg daily for 6-12
weeks, although two studies involved a 24-week"* or 52-week'”)
administration period. One study involved the administration of
intravenous infusions of ginkgo extract 200mg four times per
week for four weeks. It was reported that, overall, the studies
provided evidence to support the efficacy of standardised ginkgo
leaf extracts in the symptomatic treatment of dementia. However,
methodological limitations of several of the included studies (e.g.
poorly defined inclusion and exclusion criteria and method of
randomisation, treatment period less than six months, small
sample sizes) were also emphasised. It was concluded that further
studies are required to establish the benefits of ginkgo
dementia.°”
The study included in the Cochrane review described above that
did not assess the effects of EGb-761 or LI-1370 assessed the
effects of an alcohol/water extract of fresh leaves of ginkgo (drug
extract ratio 1:4; total flavonoid glycosides 0.20mg/mL, total
ginkgolides 0.34 mg/mL) in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial involving patients with age-related impairment of
memory and/or concentration. Participants received undiluted
ginkgo extract (7 = 77), diluted ginkgo extract (1:1 with placebo)
(n = 82), or placebo (7 = 82), 40 drops (1.9 mL) three times daily
for 24 weeks. At the end of the treatment period, a check for
blinding indicated that participants were unable to identify the
treatment they received. There were no statistically significant
differences between the three groups in subjective perceptions of
memory and concentration, and in the following objective
measures: the Expended Mental Control Test (a measure of
attention and concentration), and Rey test parts 1 and 2 (which
measure short-term memory and learning curve, and long-term
memory and recognition, respectively). However, a significant
difference between groups was observed in the Benton test of
visual retention-revised (a measure of short-term visual memory)
— increases in baseline scores of 18%, 26% and 11% were
recorded for the high-dose ginkgo, low-dose ginkgo and placebo
groups, respectively (p = 0.0076).°”

n

Cognitive enhancement in healthy volunteers Ginkgo has been
tested for its cognitive enhancing effects in healthy (i.e. cognitively
intact) individuals in addition to investigations into its effects in
patients with cognitive deficiency.

A systematic review of double-blind, placebo-controlled trials
sing the effects of preparations of G. biloba leaf on cognitive
function in healthy individuals included nine such trials.‘°!) The
trials were considered to be of good methodological quality. The
review found no evidence of substantial or consistent effects for
ginkgo, compared with placebo, on objective measures of
cognitive function. Several of the studies included in the review,

as:

----- PAGE 316 -----
as well as new trials published since, and those sing
combination preparations containing G. biloba leaf extract, are
summarised below.

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over study, 20
healthy volunteers aged 19-24 years received a standardised
extract of ginkgo leaf (GK501) at doses of 120mg, 240mg and
360 mg.'°”) A battery of tests used to assess cognitive performance
was carried out immediately before and at 1, 2.5, 4 and 6 hours
after ginkgo administration. It was reported that with doses of
ginkgo extract of 240 and 360mg, there was a statistically
significant improvement in 'speed of attention’ (a measure of
reaction time) from 2.5 hours up to 6 hours (the last measurement
point) after ginkgo administration.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
study, eight healthy female volunteers (mean age 32 years) were
given a standardised extract of G. biloba leaf at doses of 120, 240
and 600 mg.°» One hour after treatment, volunteers undertook a

series of psychological tests. Memory was found to be signifi-
cantly improved with G. biloba leaf 600mg, compared with
placebo.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial
involving 31 volunteers aged 30-59 years tested the effects of a
standardised extract of ginkgo leaf (LI-1370) 50mg three times
daily, 100 mg three times daily, 120 mg each morning, 240 mg each
morning, and placebo, each taken for two days followed by a
wash-out period of at least five days. A battery of tests to as:
memory and cognitive and psychomotor performance was carried
out 30 minutes before ginkgo administration and then hourly for
12 hours. It was reported that there was a ‘marginally significant!
effect of treatment, compared with placebo, in a test assessing
short-term memory, although the p-value given for this was
greater than 0.05 (p = 0.053). Post-hoc analyses suggested that
ginkgo extract 120mg each morning was associated with better
performance in this test than other doses of ginkgo extract
(including ginkgo extract 50mg three times daily) and placebo.
There were no statistically significant effects of treatment on
immediate and delayed word recall and choice reaction time.

In two separate randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
studies, healthy individuals received a single 120mg dose of
ginkgo leaf extract (LI-1370), or placebo (n = 52) or ginkgo leaf
extract 120mg daily, or placebo, for six weeks (1 = 40) before
undergoing tests to assess cognitive function.'°’) Single-dose
ginkgo extract significantly improved performance in tests of
attention (p < 0.05), when compared with placebo, but no
significant improvements were observed following longer-term
administration. Similarly, in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study involving healthy individuals who received ginkgo
leaf extract (mean dose 185 mg/day, determined subsequently
when the preparation was found to contain only 65% of the
content stated) for 13 weeks, no improvements were observed in
alleviation of post-prandial state decrement ('post-lunch dip') and
chemosensory function with ginkgo, compared with placebo.
In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study involving 15
healthy individuals, G. biloba leaf extract 360 mg as a single oral
dose had significant effects on certain aspects of electroencepha-
logram recordings, such as reductions in frontal theta and beta
activity, when compared with placebo.” These findings suggest
that G. biloba leaf extract can directly modulate cerebroelectrical
activity. (67)

Other studies have assessed the effects of a combination
preparation of G. biloba leaf and Panax ginseng on cognitive
function in healthy younger individuals. In a double-blind,
placebo-controlled, crossover study, 20 healthy individuals

S

Ginkgo

received single doses of G. biloba leaf extract (GK501) 120, 240
and 360mg, or placebo, and a combination of G. biloba leaf
extract and P. ginseng root extract at doses of 120 and 200, 240
and 400, and 360 and 600mg, respectively, or placebo.'°*
Statistically significant improvements in one cognitive perfor-
mance test (serial threes) were observed with all three ginkgo
doses, compared with placebo (p < 0.05 for each), but there were
no statistically significant improvements in other tests. Following
administration of the combination preparation, there were
statistically significant improvements in certain tests at certain
timepoints, but these results were not consistent for all doses
tested and across all timepoints measured in the study.

Other studies have assessed the cognitive-enhancing effects of
ginkgo extracts in older volunteers. In a randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial, 48 cognitively intact individuals
aged over 55 years received a standardised ginkgo leaf extract
(EGb-761) 60 mg three times daily, or placebo, for six weeks.” A
battery of neuropsychological tests was carried out before
treatment and at the end of the study. Ginkgo extract recipients
experienced a significant improvement in tests assessing speed of
processing abilities, compared with placebo recipients (p < 0.03).
However, no statistically significant differences between the
ginkgo extract and placebo groups were evident for tests assessing
memory.

In a questionnaire survey, the effects of administration of a
standardised ginkgo leaf extract (LI-1370) 120 mg daily for four
months on the activities of daily living were assessed in volunteers
aged 32-97 years (mean (SD) 68.9 (8.4) years). Volunteers were
recruited via a magazine editorial. Of 8557 initial respondents,
5028 were eligible for the survey. In total, 1000 volunteers (who
were not currently using any ginkgo products) were said to be
randomly allocated to receive ginkgo extract; all other respon-
dents were allocated to the no-treatment control group, unless
they had stated that they only wished to receive ginkgo. It was
reported that ginkgo extract recipients achieved significantly
better scores than the control group on a scale assessing ability to
perform activities of daily living, self-assessment of ability to
cope, and visual analogue scales for mood and sleep. However, for
several reasons, the results of this study should be interpreted
cautiously. For example, the study was carried out by post,
therefore investigators did not meet participants at any time, the
study was not truly randomised, the study was open, the control
group did not receive placebo tablets, and there was no check on
compliance.

At the end of the study, 1570 individuals continued in a follow-
up study in which they selected whether or not to receive ginkgo
treatment.” After six months, data collected using a postal
questionnaire indicated that there were statistically significant
differences between groups (individuals received ginkgo or no
treatment during the initial four-month study, and ginkgo or no
treatment during the six-month follow-up study, creating four
groups) in scores for activities of daily living and mood; benefits
were associated with longer use of ginkgo. The design of this
study, however, does not allow definitive conclusions to be drawn.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel
group trial in which 64 healthy volunteers with neurasthenic
complaints received a combination preparation containing G.
biloba \eaf extract and P. ginseng root extract at doses of 30 and
50mg, respectively, 60 and 100mg, respectively, and 120 and
200mg, respectively, or placebo, twice daily, for 12 weeks,
participants in the higher-dose ginkgo-ginseng group, compared
with the placebo group, achieved significantly higher scores in
tests designed to assess cognitive function (p = 0.008).

----- PAGE 317 -----
Ginkgo

In contrast, several other studies assessing the effects of
combination preparations containing G. biloba leaf extract and
other herbal ingredients on cognitive function have reported no
statistically significant effects.

The effects of a combination preparation of G. biloba and P.
ginseng on memory were assessed in a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, multicentre, parallel group trial involving 256
healthy volunteers aged 38 to 67 years (mean (SD), 56 (7)
years).”» Participants received a preparation containing G. biloba
leaf extract 60 mg and P. ginseng root extract 100 mg, twice daily,
120 and 200 mg, respectively, once daily, or placebo, for 12 weeks.
Assessments were undertaken at weeks 4, 8, 12 and 14 of the study.
At the end of the study, the primary outcome variable the Quality
of Memory Index was significantly improved in the treatment
group, compared with the placebo group (p = 0.026). No
statistically significant effects were seen with respect to the
secondary outcome variables power and continuity of attention,
and speed of memory processes.”

A lack of effect for a combination preparation containing G.
biloba leaf extract and P. ginseng (Gincosan), administered at
doses of 120 and 200 mg daily, respectively, for 12 weeks, was also
reported following a randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial involving 57 post-menopausal women. A rando-
mised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 85 healthy
individuals aged 19 to 68 years (mean age 41.8 years) found no
statistically significant effects on cognitive function for a
combination preparation containing G. biloba leaf extract and
Bacopa monniera, when compared with placebo.”

Tinnitus and hearing loss Tinnitus and hearing loss are two of
the symptoms of dementia.“ ed the
effects of ginkgo on these conditions alone.

A meta-analysis of randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trials of G. biloba leaf preparations for tinnitus included
six such trials involving a total of 1318 participants.” Four
studies involved oral administration of tablets of ginkgo leaf
extract at doses of 30 to 150 mg daily typically for 12 weeks, one
study used a liquid preparation of ginkgo leaf and one study
involved administration of a ginkgo leaf preparation 200mg by
intravenous infusion followed by oral administration of 80mg
twice daily for 12 weeks. The review did not find any statistically
significant difference between ginkgo and placebo with respect to
the proportion of participants experiencing benefit.9 A
Cochrane systematic review of G. biloba for tinnitus used stricter

°®) Several studies have as

inclusion criteria and hence included only two trials.”” The
conclusions of the review were that the limited evidence available
did not demonstrate that G. biloba leaf was effective for the
treatment of tinnitus.

A new randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
assessing G. biloba in tinnitus has been published since the
Cochrane review. This trial was included in the broader review
described above. In the study, 66 adults with tinnitus as their
only or main presenting complaint to a general otolaryngology
outpatient clinic received a sustained-release G. biloba leaf
preparation 120mg daily, or placebo, for 12 weeks. Among the
60 individuals who completed the study, there were no statistically
significant improvements in the primary outcome measures
(Tinnitus Handicap Inventory, Glasgow Health Status Inventory,
average hearing threshold) for the ginkgo group, compared with
the placebo group (p > 0.1 for each).

A previous systematic review of randomised, controlled trials of
ginkgo extracts in tinnitus included five studies — four studies

compared ginkgo extracts with placebo, and one study compared
ginkgo extract with conventional drugs. Three trials tested the
standardised ginkgo leaf extract EGb-761; full details of other
extracts tested in the other studies are not given in the review. The
review concluded that, overall, the studies identified provided
evidence to support ginkgo extracts as a treatment for tinnitus,
but that further investigation was required to fully establish the
benefits. Typically, at least two of the studies had methodological
flaws.

Two of the reviews described above included a double-blind,
controlled trial that tested the effects of a standardised ginkgo leaf
extract (LI-1370) 50 mg, or placebo, three times daily for 12 weeks
in 1121 individuals, aged 18-70 years, with tinnitus who were
otherwise healthy.® Participants were recruited via advertise-
ments placed in the UK national press and in a British Tinnitus
Association's publication. The main outcome measure was
participants’ self-assessment of tinnitus (loudness and ‘how
troublesome’) before, during and after treatment, carried out via
postal questionnaires and telephone calls. Participants were paired
where possible (489 pairs, i.e. 978 of 1121 participants were
matched) and then randomly allocated to active or placebo. At the
end of the study, the results indicated that ginkgo extract (LI-1370)
50mg three times daily was 'no more effective than placebo in
treating tinnitus'."" The design of this study has been criticised.
For example, participants did not have face-to-face contact with
an investigator at any time during the study.”

In a randomised, controlled trial, 28 patients with untreated
sudden loss of hearing received intravenous infusions of 6%
hydroxyethyl starch (HES), or intravenous and oral ginkgo extract,
for 10 days.®” There were no statistically significant differences
between the two groups in improvements in hearing. Further
studies involving larger numbers of participants are required.”

Peripheral arterial occlusive disease/intermittent claudication
The effects of standardised extracts of ginkgo have been
investigated in patients with Fontaine stage II peripheral arterial
>. This condition is characterised by the onset of
pain, as a result of oxygen deficit in the leg muscles, on walking
distances greater than around 30-300 metres.(@°® The rationale
for using ginkgo in this condition is for its effects in improving
blood flow.

A meta-analysis of randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trials of ginkgo extract for the treatment of intermittent
claudication included eight studies that assessed effects on walking
°9 The trials involved a total of 415 patients who
received a standardised extract of ginkgo leaf at doses of 120 or
160 mg daily, or placebo, for 6, 12 (one trial each) or 24 weeks.
The pooled results from all trials indicated a. statistically
significant increase in pain-free walking distance for ginkgo-
treated patients, compared with placebo recipients (weighted
mean difference (WMD): 34 metres; 95% confidence intervals
(CI): 26-43 metres). A similar result was obtained when results for
the six studies of good methodological quality were pooled
(WMD: 37 metres; 95% Cl: 26-47 metres). It is questionable
whether the extent of these increases in pain-free walking distance
is clinically relevant.

occlusive di

2a

distance.

Chronic venous insufficiency and venous ulcers A randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed the protective
effects of a combination preparation (Ginkgor Forte) containing
a standardised extract of ginkgo (2.3%), troxerutine (48.85%) and
heptaminol (48.85%) against venous wall injury in 48 female
patients with chronic venous insufficiency.) Ginkgor Forte

----- PAGE 318 -----
625 mg daily, or placebo, was given for four weeks. In total, 42
patients completed the study, but only 28 were included in the
final analysis because of protocol violations. Circulating endothe-
lial cell (CEC) count was used as a measure of injury to the
vascular endothelium (CEC counts are raised in patients with
chronic venous insufficiency)“ After four weeks’ treatment,
CEC counts decreased significantly in both the treatment and
placebo groups (by 14.5% and 8.4%, respectively), compared with
baseline values (p = 0.0021 and p = 0.0146, respectively). The
mean change in CEC count after four weeks' treatment was
reported to be significantly greater for the treatment group,
compared with the placebo group (p = 0.039).

In another double-blind trial, 213 patients with chronic venous
or mixed ulcers located at the malleolus (rounded protuberance
on ankle joint) received ginkgo extract 160 mg daily, or placebo,
together with standard care (elastic stockings, local dressings and
cleansing of ulcers) for 12 weeks." At the end of the study, ginkgo
extract recipients, compared with placebo recipients, showed a
significant reduction in ulcer area.

Asthma, PAF antagonism Intradermal injections of PAF induce
a biphasic inflammatory response similar to that observed in
sensitised individuals subjected to moderate doses of allergen. A
single dose of a mixture of ginkgolides has been reported to
antagonise this response.“ Oral administration of ginkgolides
resulted in a reduction of eosinophil infiltration in atopic patients
given intracutaneous injections of PAE)

In a randomised, double-blind, crossover study, 80 and 120 mg
capsules containing a standardised mixture of ginkgolides A, B
and C (ratio of 40:40:20) were given as a single oral dose two
hours before challenge by intradermal PAF/histamine. Both dos
ranges inhibited flare which was maximal
Within 15-30 minutes wheal volume was reduced, with the
greatest effect being observed for the higher dose treatments. The
protection was still present eight hours after oral dosing. Similar
inhibition of PAF was observed for platelet aggregation with
single oral doses of 80 and 120 mg extract which were given two
hours before blood withdrawal. The ginkgolide mixture given
orally also blocked PAF-induced airway hyper-responsiveness.
Antagonism of the effects of PAF by a standardised mixture of
ginkgolides was assessed in a double-blind, placebo-controlled
crossover study in six healthy subjects aged 25-35 years.**) Wheal
and flare responses to PAF examined two hours after ingestion of
80 mg and 120 mg of ginkgolide mixture were inhibited in a dose-
related manner. Both doses significantly inhibited PAF-induce
platelet aggregation in platelet-rich plasma.*?)
A randomised, double-blind, crossover study involved patients
with atopic asthma who were challenged with their specific dust
or pollen antigen. After 6.5 hours, participants were subjected
to a provocation test with acetylcholine so that the treatment of
later stages of an asthma attack could
ginkgolide standardised extract, 40mg three times daily, or
placebo, were given during the three days before the test and a
final single dose of 120 mg of extract was given two hours before
the challenge. The results suggested that ginkgolides were effective
in both the early phase and the late phase of airway
hyperactivity.

A study involving six patients with a history of exercise-induced
asthma assessed the effects of a specific PAF antagonist (BN
52063, a standardised mixture of ginkgolides A, B and C, ratio of
40:40:20) on the response to isocapnic hyperventilation with dry
cold air.“* Participants were randomised to receive BN 52063
240 mg orally two hours before cold air challenge, 2.4mg by

after five minutes.

e assessed. Mixed

Ginkgo

metered dose inhaler 30 minutes before cold air challenge, or
placebo. It was reported that oral BN 52063 did not reduce
bronchoconstriction during challenge. A significant increase in
airways resistance was observed after inhalation of BN 52063. In
another study, six patients with a history of exercise-induced
asthma received BN 52063 120mg orally twice daily, 1mg by
spinhaler three times daily, or placebo, for three days, then, on the
test day, 240 mg orally three hours before exercise challenge, 5 mg
by spinhaler one hour before challenge, or placebo, respectively.
With oral treatment, the prolonged reduction in peak expiratory
flow was significantly attenuated (p < 0.05).°

Antidepressant-related sexual dysfunction Two randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have assessed the effects of
ginkgo leaf preparations on sexual function in individuals with
antidepressant-related sexual dysfunction. One study involved
administration of ginkgo leaf extract (120 mg daily for weeks one
to two, 160 mg daily for weeks three to four and 240 mg daily for
weeks five to eight; n = 37 participants),'*”) and another study
240 mg daily for 12 weeks (n = 24).°° Neither of the
s found statistically significant differenc
between participants in the ginkgo and placebo groups.

Two open, uncontrolled studies have explored the effects of
ginkgo extract in sexual dysfunction associated with treatment
with antidepressant drugs.°” *®)

involve:

studi s in sexual function

Acute ischaemic stroke A Cochrane systematic review of
randomised or quasi-randomised controlled trials assessing the
effects of G. biloba leaf preparations in acute ischaemic stroke
identified 14 such studies of which ten, involving a total of 792
participants, provided outcome data.) Meta-analysis of the nine
trials that used a dichotomous outcome variable (improvement or
no improvement in neurological deficit) showed a_ higher
proportion of ginkgo recipients experienced neurological improve-
ment than did placebo recipients (odds ratio, 95% Cl: 2.66, 1.79-
3.94; p < 0.00001). However, all of these trials were deemed to be
of poor methodological quality. The one trial that was of good
methodological quality used a continous scale for outcome; this
showed no statistically significant improvement in neurological
deficit for ginkgo recipients compared with placebo recipients
(weighted mean difference (fixed effects model), 95% CI: 0.81,
—8.9-10.52). The conclusions of the review were that there is no
evidence from high-quality clinical trials to support the use of G.

biloba extract in the treatment of patients with acute ischaemic
(89)

stroke.

Visual disorders A Cochrane review of the effects of ginkgo
extract in age-related macular degeneration identified one
d, controlled trial involving 20 patients.°° The study
design did not include blinding of the assessment of outcome. The
review concluded that the effects of ginkgo extract in preventing
progression of age-related macular degeneration had not yet been
adequately assessed.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial
involving 27 participants with bilateral visual field damage
resulting from normal tension glaucoma assessed the effects of
oral administration of a standardised ginkgo leaf extract
(flavonoid glycosides 24%, terpene lactones 6%) 40mg three
times daily for four weeks.°! The trial reported statistically
significant improvements in visual field indi with ginkgo
treatment, compared with baseline values, but did not report
statistical analyses comparing ginkgo with placebo.

randomi

Other conditions Several randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trials have assessed the effects of ginkgo leaf prepara-

----- PAGE 319 -----
Ginkgo

tions in preventing acute mountain sickness, and have reported
conflicting results. In a four-arm study in which 614 participants
received a standardised ginkgo leaf extract (flavonoid glycosi
24%, terpene lactones 6%) 120mg twice daily, acetazolamide
250mg, both agents, or placebo, for three to four doses before
ascent, ginkgo was no better than placebo in preventing acute
mountain sickness among the 487 participant who completed the
trial (incidence for ginkgo, acetozolamide, ginkgo plus acetazola-
mide, and placebo: 35, 12, 14 and 34%, respectively).°” A similar
study also found no statistically significant differences in outcomes
between ginkgo (120 mg twice daily for five days before mountain
ascent) and placebo recipients.”*) In contrast, in a randomis
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 26 individuals who
received ginkgo leaf extract 60mg, or placebo, three times daily
starting 24 hours before rapid mountain ascent a significantly
lower proportion of ginkgo recipients compared with placebo
recipients developed severe acute mountain sickness (17% vers’
64%, respectively; p = 0.021), although there was no statistically
significant difference between the ginkgo and placebo groups in
ss (58.3% versus 92.9%
for ginkgo and placebo, respectively; p = 0.07).° The study,
however, involved only small numbers of participants and it is
possible that it did not have sufficient statistical power to detect a
difference between the two groups if one existed.

In a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial, 27 patients with
seasonal affective disorder (SAD) received standardised extract of
ginkgo leaf (Bio-Biloba, containing flavone glycosides 24mg and
terpene lactones 6 mg) one tablet twice daily (7 = 15), or placebo
(n = 12), for 10 weeks or until development of depression
requiring treatment. All participants began the trial during
October to December; a
and on termination of study medication. Six of the 15 ginkgo
recipients and two of the 12 placebo recipients terminated the
study treatment because of emerging symptoms of SAD (‘winter
depression’). It was reported that this difference between groups
was not statistically significant, according to Fisher's exact test.
Also, there were no statistically significant differences between
groups on the Montgomery—Asberg Depression Rating Scale, the
ATYP scale (for symptoms of hypersomnia, hyperphagia and
carbohydrate craving) and on self-assessed symptoms (energy,
tiredness, appetite, carbohydrate craving, depressed mood). The
results of this study cannot be considered definitive because of the
small sample size of the study and other limitations.°”

A placebo-controlled trial involving 165 women with pre-
menstrual syndrome explored the effects of standardised ginkgo
leaf extract (EGb-761) 160 mg daily, or placebo, taken from day 16
of the menstrual cycle to day 5 of the following cycle, for two
cyeles.°® Both groups experienced improvements in symptoms,
compared with baseline values, although ginkgo recipients,
compared with placebo recipients, were reported to experience
significantly greater improvements in breast tenderness (as
evaluated by the physician).

The effects of ginkgo extract have been explored in patients
with schizophrenia. The rationale for this is based on the theory
that excess free radical formation may occur in patients with
schizophrenia, since superoxide dismutase (SOD) concentrations
have been reported to be higher in certain tissues in such patients.
(SOD is an enzyme that detoxifies superoxide radicals.) In a
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 82 inpatients with chronic
schizophrenia (illness for at least five years) were ‘divided
randomly’ to receive haloperidol 0.25 mg/kg daily, with or without
ginkgo extract 360 mg daily, for 12 weeks.°” At the end of the

2S

overall incidence of acute mountain sickne:

ments were carried out at baseline

&

study, mean SOD concentrations (expressed as ng/mL haemoglo-
bin) were reported to be significantly lower, compared with
baseline values, for ginkgo recipients (mean (SD): 815.8 (697.8)
and 596.7 (148.3), respectively; p = 0.021). In participants who
received haloperidol only, mean (SD) SOD concentrations fell
from 780.4 (605.4) at baseline to 617.6 (189.7) at the end of the
study, although this decrease was reported to be statistically non-
significant. A between-group comparison was not reported. Mean
(SD) SOD concentrations in a group of 30 age- and sex-matched
healthy volunteers were 515.8 (70.4).”)

The effects of a preparation comprising Ginkgo biloba dimeric
flavonoids in a 1:2 complex with phosphatidylcholine (GBDF-
Phytosome) on the microcirculation of the skin have been
investigated using various techniques including, infrared photo-
pulse plethysmography, laser doppler flowmetry, high-perfor-
mance contact thermography and computerised videothermogra-
phy.”® In a controlled study, small numbers of healthy individuals
and volunteers with acrocyanosis or cellulitis were treated with
0.5 mL of a cream (oil-in-water emulsion) containing 3% GBDF-
Phytosome or an oil-in-water emulsion of 2% phosphatidylcho-
line (control). Participants who received the GBDF-Phytosome
preparation were reported to experience significant increases in
capillary blood flow and skin temperature, compared with
baseline values, whereas no significant changes were observed
for the control group. No between-group comparisons were
reported.) These preliminary findings suggest that the effects of
this preparation on skin microcirculation may deserve further
investigation.

The effects of ginkgo have been assessed in Raynaud's disease.
In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial under-
taken in wintertime, 22 participants (mostly women) aged 18 to 52
years and with primary Raynaud's disease (i.e. without associated
connective tissue disease) received a standardised (not further
specified) G. biloba leaf extract (Seredrin, Health Perception Ltd,
UK) 120mg, or placebo, three times daily for ten weeks. Data
from three participants were excluded from the analysis for
legitimate reasons. Analysis of data from the remaining 19
participants showed that ginkgo treatment, compared with
placebo, was associated with a greater reduction in the mean
number of attacks of Raynaud's disease per week (mean (standard
deviation) number of attacks before and after treatment,
respectively: ginkgo, 13.2 (16.5) and 5.8 (8.3); placebo, 14.6
(10.7) and 10.7 (12.3); p = 0.000005). No statistically
significant differences between the two groups were observed for

haemorheological parameters, including mean fibrinogen plasma
concentrations and platelet aggregation.

Ginkgo has been investigated for its effects in treating vitiligo;
the rationale for this is centred around the antioxidant (oxidative
stress is now thought to be involved in pathogenesis of vitiligo)
and anti-inflammatory properties of ginkgo.” In a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 52 patients with slow-
spreading vitiligo received G. biloba leaf extract 40 mg (standar-
dised for flavonoid glycosides 9.6 mg; Ginkocer, Ranbaxy, India)
three times daily. Treatment was continued where response was
considered adequate (arrest of disease progression in participants
with unstable disease, and some repigmentation in existing
lesions) for up to six months. Data from 47 participants were
included in the analysis; a report of the study does not describe
adequately why or when five participants withdrew from the
study. Cessation of active progression of depigmentation occurred
in a greater proportion of ginkgo recipients than placebo
recipients (p = 0.006).

----- PAGE 320 -----
A preliminary study explored the effects of ginkgo in the
treatment of cocaine dependence, the rationale for this being that
chronic cocaine use is associated with cognitive deficits and that
the use of nootropic agents, such as ginkgo, may improve cognitive
function and reduce the frequency of relapse.''°? In a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 44 cocaine-dependent
individuals aged 18 to 60 years received a standardised ginkgo
leaf extract (EGb-761) 120mg, or placebo, twice daily for eight
weeks; a third arm of the study received piracetam 2.4¢ twice
daily. At the end of the study, there were no statistically significant
differences between the ginkgo and placebo groups with respect to
any of the outcome measures assessed, including physician-
assessed clinical global impression scores, Addiction Severity
Index scores, urine toxicology screens and treatment retention.°”)
As the study involved only small numbers of participants and as a
sample size calculation was not performed, it is possible that the
study did not have sufficient statistical power to be able to detect a
difference between the groups if one existed.

In a study involving patients with end-stage renal disease who
had been undergoing peritoneal dialysis for at least six months,
participants were randomised to receive ginkgo leaf extract
(Ginexin, SK Pharmaceuticals, Korea; not further specified)
160 mg daily for eight weeks, or no treatment.” At the end of
the study, ginkgo treatment was associated with a statistically
significant reduction in plasma D-dimer concentrations (a marker
of intravascular coagulation), compared with baseline values,”
although no statistical comparison with the no-treatment control
group was reported. No statistically significant changes in other
haemostatic factors, including plasma fibrinogen concentrations,
international normalised ratio (INR), von Willebrand's factor and
albumin were observed following ginkgo treatment, compared
with baseline values, although again, no statistical comparisons
with the no-treatment control group were reported. The
hypothesis that ginkgo treatment improves the coagulation profile
without changing other haemostatic factors in patients with end-
stage renal disease who undergo peritoneal dialysis requires
testing in rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials.

A phase II (open, uncontrolled) study explored the effects of
standardised ginkgo leaf extract (EGb-761) given in combination
with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in 44 patients with advanced progres-
sive colorectal cancer who had previously received 5-FU."° The
rationale for including ginkgo extract in the regimen was based on
its reputed ability to increase local blood flow. Thus, it was
hypothesised that ginkgo extract might 'enhance local tumour
blood flow and thus improve the distribution of 5-FU'. In the
study, participants received ginkgo extract 350 mg in 250 mL saline
intravenously over 30 minutes on days 1-6, and 5-FU 500 mg/m? in
250 mL saline intravenously over 30 minutes on days 2-6. The
regimen was repeated every three weeks until recurrence of
tumour progression. Data from 32 patients who had received at
least two courses of treatment were eligible for analysis. Of these
patients, 69% experienced progression of disease, 25% experi-
enced no change, and 6.3% (2 = 2) were in partial remission. (°”

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Clinical data on safety aspects of G. biloba leaf preparations are
available from several sources, including clinical trials, post-
marketing surveillance-type studies and spontaneous reports of
suspected adverse drug reactions. Available data indicate that
standardised extracts of ginkgo leaf are well tolerated when used

Ginkgo

(52, G21)

at recommended doses and according to other guidance.
However, there are reports of bleeding associated with the use of
ginkgo leaf preparations (see Side-effects, Toxicity; Haemor-
rhage).

A Cochrane systematic review of studies assessing G. biloba leaf
preparations in cognitive impairment and dementia included 33
randomised, double-blind, controlled trials.°” All but one of the
included studies investigated the effects of standardised ginkgo
leaf extracts EGb-761 and LI-1370 at oral doses ranging from 80-
600 mg daily and typically 200 mg daily. The study that did not use
either of these preparations assessed an ethanolic extract of
ginkgo leaves (drug-to-extract ratio 4:1, standardised for total
flavone glycosides 0.20 mg/mL and total ginkgolides 0.34 mg/mL)
at doses lower than those used in the other 32 studies. Meta-
analyses showed that there were no statistically significant
ifferences between ginkgo (any dose) treatment and placebo in
the proportion of trial participants experiencing adverse events,
and the numbers of participants withdrawing from the
A systematic review of nine randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trials of standardised ginkgo leaf extracts in patients
with dementia of the Alzheimer type and/or multi-infarct
lementia concluded that, overall, the frequency of adverse effects
reported for ginkgo was not markedly different than that for
placebo. The largest trial included in this review involved 327
patients with mild-to-severe dementia related to Alzheimer's

isease or multi-infarct dementia who received standardised
ginkgo leaf extract (EGb-761) 40 mg orally three times daily (
= 166), or placebo (n = 161), for 52 weeks.” It was reported that
there was no statistically significant differences between ginkgo
and placebo in the number of participants reporting adverse
events, or in the frequency and severity of adverse events. Of 188
adverse events reported during the study, 97 were reported by
ginkgo recipients and 91 by placebo recipients. However, clinical
trials generally only have the statistical power to detect common,
acute adverse effects.

Similar findings were reported in another systematic review/
meta-analysis which included eight randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trials of ginkgo extract for the treatment of
intermittent claudication, involving a total of 415 patients who
received standardised extract of ginkgo leaf at doses of 120 or
160 mg daily, or placebo, for up to 24 weeks. Five of the eight
studies included reported (rarely) mild, transient adverse events
occurring in ginkgo recipients; the remaining three studies,
comprising almost 50% of the total number of patients, did not
report any adverse events.

A postmarketing surveillance study involving 10 815 patients
a standardised extract (LI-1370) of ginkgo leaf
reported that the frequency of adverse effects was 1.7%.'0%
Adverse effects reported with standardised extracts of ginkgo leaf
are generally mild, and include nausea, headache, gastrointestinal

upset and diarrhoea; allergic skin reactions occur rarely.!!0hC?">
G56)

who receive:

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide. To the end of the year 2005, the WHO-
UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 594 reports,
describing a total of 1178 adverse reactions, for products reported
to contain G. biloba only as the active ingredient (see Table 1).
This number may include case reports described below. Reports
originated from 23 different countries. The total number of
reactions (i.e. not individual cases; one case may describe several

----- PAGE 321 -----
310 Ginkgo

Table 1 Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 594) of suspected

adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Ginkgo
biloba preparations held in the Vigisearch database of the World

Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the period up

to end of 2005. !

System organ class.
Adverse drug reaction name (number)

Application site disorders.

Body as a whole - general disorders. Including allergic
reaction (4); asthenia (6); back pain (5); fatigue (8); fever
(22); hyperpyrexia (4); malaise (13); pain (3); pallor (3);
rigors (28); syncope (4); therapeutic response decreased

G)

Cardiovascular disorders, general. Including hypertension
(15); hypotension (8); hypotension, postural (4);
circulatory failure (13)

Central and peripheral nervous system disorders. Including
ataxia (5); coma (5); convulsions (11); convulsions, grand
mal (3); dizziness (21); headache (35); neuropathy (3);
paraesthesia (9); paralysis (3); tremor (3); vertigo (10)

Collagen disorders.
Endocrine disorders.
Foetal disorders.

Gastrointestinal system disorders. Including abdominal
pain (19); diarrhoea (33); dyspepsia (9); flatulence (3);
gastrointestinal haemorrhage (4); gastric ulcer,
haemorrhagic (3); haematemesis (4); melaena (4); nausea
(37); vomiting (30)

Hearing and vestibular disorders. Including tinnitus (4)
Heart rate and rhythm disorders. Including arrhythmia (5);
bradycardia (5); palpitation (4); tachycardia (15)

Liver and biliary system disorders. Including gamma-GT
increased (6); hepatic function abnormal (4); hepatic
cirrhosis (4); hepatitis (11); hepatocellular damage (4);
bilirubinaemia (3); jaundice (6); hepatic enzymes
increased (10); SGOT increased (7); SGPT increased (14)

Metabolic and nutritional disorders. Including acidosis (3);
hyponatraemia (7)

Musculo-skeletal system disorders. Including arthralgia
(11); myalgia (4); skeletal pain (3)

Myo-endo pericardial and valve disorders.
Neonatal and infancy disorders.
Neoplasm.

Platelet, bleeding and clotting disorders. Including
haematoma (6); haemorrhage NOS (4); prothrombin
decreased (8); prothrombin increased (4); purpura (19);
purpura thrombocytopenic (3); thrombocytopenia (10)

Psychiatric disorders. Including aggressive reaction (5);
agitation (5); amnesia (3); anxiety (3); anorexia (5);
confusion (17); depression (8); hallucination (10);
insomnia (8); somnolence (3)

Red blood cell disorders. Including anaemia (10);
pancytopenia (3)

Reproductive disorders, female and male.

Resistance mechanism disorders.

Respiratory system disorders. Including dyspnoea (8);
epistaxis (9)

Total

130

48

137

166

73

58

18

Table 1 continued

System organ class. Total
Adverse drug reaction name (number)

Skin and appendages disorders. Including angioedema 165
(8); bullous eruption (3); eczema (7); epidermal necrolysis

(3); erythema multiforme (4); Stevens-Johnson syndrome

(6); photosensitivity reaction (5); pruritus (28); rash (13);

rash, erythematous (34); rash, maculopapular (5); rash,
psoriaform (3); sweating increased (8); urticaria (15)

Special senses other, disorders. 1
Urinary system disorders. Including face oedema (4) 16
Vascular (extracardiac) disorders. Including cerebral 36

haemorrhage (7); cerebrovascular disorder (3);
haemorrhage, intracranial (5); flushing (6)

Vision disorders. Including conjunctivitis (5); vision 26
abnormal (10)

White cell and res disorders. Including agranulocytosis (5); 25
leucopenia (6); leukocytosis (11)

Other reactions described using terms not included in 30
database
Total number of suspected adverse drug reactions 1178

Specific reactions described where n = 3 or more

Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database
held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to
origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information included in this report does not represent the
opinion of the World Health Organization

reactions) included 58 reactions associated with platelet, bleeding
and clotting disorders (see Table 1); other reactions include
gastrointestinal haemorrhage, haematemesis and melaena (n = 4
each), bloody diarrhoea (1), haemorrhagic gastric ulcer (3),
epistaxis (9), haemoptysis (2), post-operative haemorrhage (3),
cerebral, subarachnoid or intracranial haemorrhage (13), cerebral
infarction or cerebrovascular disorder (5) and ocular or retinal
haemorrhage (3). (These data were obtained from the Vigisearch
database held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International
Drug Monitoring, Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not
homogeneous at least with respect to origin or likelihood that the
pharmaceutical product caused the adverse reaction. Any
information included in this report does not represent the opinion
of the World Health Organization.)

Haemorrhage_ Reports of bleeding and associated disorders
included in the WHO-UMC's Vigisearch database are disc
above. There are several case reports in the literature of bleeding
associated with ingestion of Ginkgo biloba extracts. A systematic
review of published case reports describing bleeding associated
with ginkgo use identified 15 published case reports (including a
new report published in the same paper by the authors of the
systematic review). Most of the cases involved serious adverse

sed

effects, including intracranial bleeding (1 = 8 episodes, two
required surgical evacuation, two patients experienced permanent
neurologic defects, and one patient died), and ocular bleeding (n =
4, all returned to baseline vision although one patient required
surgery).{!° Where stated, the duration ginkgo exposure before
onset of the adverse event varied from less than two weeks'
exposure for the two cases of spontaneous hyphema, less than two
months' exposure for two cases of intracranial bleeding, and more
than six months' exposure for eight other cases. In most cases,
there were other risk factors for bleeding, including clinical risk
factors and use of other medicines known to increase the risk of
bleeding.“° In addition, most of the case reports do not

----- PAGE 322 -----
adequately describe the ginkgo preparation implicated and,
typically, in the rare cases that a sample of the product is
available, no chemical analysis of the product is undertaken. Since
most of the reports originate from countries where ginkgo
products are sold as unlicensed dietary supplements, the
possibility that poor or variable pharmaceutical quality of
products plays a role in these cases cannot be ruled out.

Reports identified by the review include those describing a 70-
year-old man who experienced spontaneous bleeding from the iris
into the anterior chamber of the eye one week after he began taking
standardised ginkgo extract 80mg daily;"!? a 61-year-old man
who had taken ginkgo extract 120mg or 160mg daily for six
months who experienced a subarachnoid haemorrhage;‘'™ a 33-
year-old woman who began experiencing increasingly severe
headaches, as well as double vision and nausea and vomiting,
over several months, and who had been consuming standardised
ginkgo extract 120mg daily for two years; a 59-year-old man
who experienced vitreous haemorrhage after undergoing a liver
transplant and who had been consuming a ginkgo product before
and during his operation and subsequent recovery period;\!!” a 34-
year-old man who experienced post-operative bleeding following a
laparoscopic cholecystectomy and who had been taking two ginkgo
tablets daily (not further specified);"'” a 56-year-old man who
experienced a cerebral haemorrhage and who had been taking
ginkgo leaf extract 40 mg three times daily for 18 months;"!!’ a 65-
year-old woman who experienced retrobulbar haemorrhage and
who had been taking ginkgo leaf extract 40 mg three times daily for
two years."'!) A causal relationship between ginkgo ingestion and
bleeding in these cases has not been definitively established.

A new report published since the systematic review describes a
77-year-old woman who experienced persistent post-operative
bleeding from the wound after undergoing a total hip arthro-
plasty.‘'' Four weeks post-operatively it was found that the
woman had been taking ginkgo leaf extract (not further specified)
120 mg daily. Ginkgo use was stopped and the patient's wound
healed within ten weeks.

Other effects There is a report of acute myoglobinuria in a 29-
year-old man who was a regular weight-trainer and who had been
taking a combination preparation containing extracts of ginkgo
(200mg), guarana (Paullinia cupana, 500mg) and kava (Piper
methysticum, 100 mg).\'') The man was admitted to an intensive
care unit with severe muscle pain and blood creatine kinase and
myoglobin concentrations of 100 500IU/L (normal values: 0-195)
and 10000ng/mL (normal values: 0-90), respectively. Signs and
symptoms subsided within six weeks. The relevance, if any, of
ginkgo ingestion to the man's condition, is unclear.

Contact or ingestion of the fruit pulp has produced severe
allergic reactions including erythema, oedema, blisters and
itching.*” The seed contains the toxin 4-O-methylpyridoxine
which is reported to be responsible for 'gin-nan' food poisoning in
Japan and China." The main symptoms are convulsion and loss
of consciousness and lethality is estimated in about 27% of cases
in Japan, infants being particularly vulnerable.

Contra-indications, War

gs

In view of the intended uses of ginkgo and the documented
pharmacological actions of ginkgo, it is not suitable for self-
treatment.

There are reports of haemorrhagic reactions associated with the
use of ginkgo leaf preparations. Until further information is
available, it is reasonable to advise that ginkgo should not be used
in patients with previous or existing bleeding disorders unless the

Ginkgo

potential benefits outweigh the potential harms. In view of the
lack of conclusive evidence for the efficacy of ginkgo leaf in the
various conditions for which it is used, and the serious nature of
the potential harm, it is extremely unlikely that the benefit-harm
balance would be in favour of such patients using ginkgo leaf
preparations. Oestrogenic activity in vitro has been documented
for a G. biloba leaf extract.“ The clinical relevance of this
finding has not been established.

The fruit pulp has produced severe allergic reactions and should
not be handled or ingested. The seed causes severe adverse effects
when ingested.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of ginkgo the potential for preparations of ginkgo leaf to
interfere with other medicines administered concurrently, particu-
larly those with similar or opposing effects, should be considered.
In particular, ginkgo extract should only be used with caution in
patients taking anticoagulant and/or antiplatelet agents.

Inhibition of the activity of certain human cytochrome P450
(CYP) drug metabolising enzymes, particularly CYP2C9 and, to a
lesser extent CYP1A2, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4, has been described
for a standardised extract of ginkgo leaf (EGb-761) in in-vitro
studies,"' and other in vitro experiments have reported
moderate inhibition of CYP3A4 and CYP2C9 activity by G.
biloba and/or its isolated constituents."'”'!® A flavonoid fraction
and most of its subfractions showed strong inhibition of the CYP
enzymes CYP2C9, CYPIA2, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4 (ICsp < 40 tig/
mL), whereas a terpenoid fraction inhibited activity of CYP2C9
only."'® The flavonol aglycones kaempferol, quercetin, apigenin
and others, but not the terpene lactone and flavonoid glycoside
constituents of ginkgo leaf, were found to be potent inhibitors of
CYP1A2 and CYP3A."")

An in vivo (rats) study found that a standardised extract of
ginkgo leaf (EGb-761) 100 mg/kg body weight administered orally
for four days was associated with increased CYP P450 enzymes in
the liver and increased the metabolism of endogenous steroids.”
The latter finding, however, has not been confirmed in drug
interactions studies involving healthy volunteers. A standardised
extract of ginkgo leaf (EGb-761) administered orally at a dose of
240 mg daily for 28 days,'”° and a ginkgo leaf extract 240mg
daily for 14 days,? had no statistically significant effects,
compared with baseline values, on the profile of endogenous
steroids in healthy individuals."?° '?”

Other drug interaction studies involving healthy individuals
report conflicting results with respect to the inhibition or induction
of CYP enzymes by ingestion of ginkgo leaf preparations. Studies
have found that ginkgo leaf extract was associated with certain
changes in the pharmacokinetics of nifedipine,” and omepra-
zole,"?» but not digoxin,'' donepezil,“?*) and warfarin.

In a drug-interaction study involving 12 healthy individuals,
administration of a standardised extract of ginkgo leaf (EGb-761)
administered orally at a dose of 120 mg twice daily for 14 days was
not associated with any statistically significant changes, compared
with baseline values, in the pharmacokinetics of the probe CYP
2D6 substrate dextromethorphan; ginkgo administration was
associated with a statistically significant change, compared with
baseline values, in the area under the plasma concentration time
curve for the CYP3A4 substrate alprazolam, but as there was no
statistically significant change in the elimination half-life of
alprazolam, it is unlikely that ginkgo had an inductive effect on
cyp3a4.°?

Pregnancy and lactation No studies appear to have been
reported on the effects of G. biloba leaf extracts or ginkgolides

----- PAGE 323 -----
Ginkgo

in pregnant or lactating women. In view of the many

References
pharmacological actions documented and the lack of toxicity

Van Beek TA et al. Ginkgo biloba L. Fitoterapia 1998; 69: 195-244.

an

data, use of ginkgo during pregnancy and breastfeeding should 2 Van Beek TA, ed. Ginkgo. The Genus Ginkgoaceae. Amsterdam:

be avoided.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

Harwood Academic Publishers, 1998.

Victoire C et al. Isolation of flavonoid glycosides from Ginkgo biloba
leaves. Planta Med 1988; 54: 245-247.

Schenne A, Holzl J. 6-Hydroxykynurensaure, die erste N- haltige
Verbindung aus den Blattern von Ginkgo biloba. Planta Med 1986, 52:
235-236.

Nasr C, et al. 2-Quinoline carboxylic acid-4,6-dihydroxy from Ginkgo
biloba. Paper presented at the Phytochemical Society of Europe
Symposium: Biologically Active Natural Products, Lausanne, 1986, p.
9.

Briancon-Scheid F e¢ al. HPLC separation and quantitative
determination of biflavones in leaves from Ginkgo biloba. Planta Med
1983; 49: 204-220.

Vanhaelen M, Vanhaelen-Fastre R. Kaempferol-3-O-B-glucoside
(astragalin) from Ginkgo biloba. Fitoterapia 1988; 59: S11.

Braquet P. The ginkgolides: potent platelet-activating factor
antagonists isolated from Ginkgo biloba L.: Chemistry, pharmacology
and clinical applications. Drugs of the Future 1987; 12: 643-699.
Anonymous. Extract of Ginkgo biloba (EGb-761). Presse Med 1986;
15: 1438-1598.

Huang X et al. Characteristics and antifungal activity of a chitin
binding protein from Ginkgo biloba. FEBS 2000; 478: 123-126.
Wada K et al. Studies on the constitution of edible medicinal plants. 1.
Isolation and identification of 4-O-methylpyridoxine, toxic principle
from the seed of Ginkgo biloba L. Chem Pharm Bull 1988; 36: 1779-
1782.

Wang H, Ng TB. Ginkbilobin, a novel antifungal protein from Ginkgo
biloba seeds with sequence similarity to embryo-abundant protein.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000; 279: 407-411.

Kressmann S. Pharmaceutical quality of different Ginkgo biloba
brands. J Pharm Pharmacol 2002; 54: 661-669.

Kressmann § et al. Influence of pharmaceutical quality on the
bioavailability of active components from Ginkgo biloba preparations.
J Pharm Pharmacol 2002; 45(11): 1507-1514.

DeFeudis FV. Ginkgo biloba. From Chemistry to Clinic. Wiesbaden,
Germany: Ullstein Medical, 1998.

Clostre FE, De Feudis FV, eds. Cardiovascular Effects of Ginkgo biloba
Extract (EGb761). Advances in Ginkgo biloba Extract Research, vol 3.
Paris: Elsevier, 1994: 1-162.

17 Reuter HD. Ginkgo biloba — botany, constituents, pharmacology and
clinical trials. Br J Phytother 1995/6; 4: 3-20.
18 Christen Y, ed. Ginkgo biloba Extract (EGb-761) as a Neuroprotective
Agent: From Basic Studies to Clinical Trials. Advances in Ginkgo
biloba Extract Research, vol 8. Paris: Elsevier, 2001.
19 Winter JC. The effects of an extract of Ginkgo biloba, EGb-761, on
cognitive behaviour and longevity in the rat. Physiol Behav 1998; 63:
425-433.
20 Hasenérhl RU e¢ al. Dissociation between anxiolytic and hypomnestic
effects for combined extracts of Zingiber officinale and Ginkgo
biloba, as opposed to diazepam. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1998; 59:
527-535.
tive Solaire; Traumed. 2 Gi b 8 21 Christen Y et al., eds. Effects of Ginkgo biloba Extract (EGb-761) on
Gincosan; Mentania; Sebium AKN. Czech Republic: Ginco- Neuronal Plasticity. Advances in Ginkgo biloba Extract Research, vol
san; Ginkor Fort. France: Ginkor Fort; Ginkor; Parogencyl 5. Paris: Elsevier, 1996. . | |
. a . 22 Papadopoulos V et al. Adaptive Effects of Ginkgo biloba Extract
prevention gencives; Photoderm Flush. Germany: Perivar. a! : .
. . (EGb-761). Advances in Ginkgo biloba Extract Research, vol 6. Paris:
Hong Kong: Flavo-C; Ginkor Fort. Hungary: Ginkor Fort. Elsevier, 1997
Italy: Angioton; Forticrin; Ginkoba Active; Ginkoftal; Gin- 23 Liebgott T e¢ al. Complementary cardioprotective effects of flavonoid
koret; Memoactive,; Memorandum; Pik Gel; Pulsalux; Varico- metabolites and terpenoid constituents of Ginkgo biloba extract
fit; Vasobrain Plus; Vasobrain; Vasopt; Vertiginkgo. Malaysia: (EGb-761) during ischemia and reperfusion. Basic Res Cardiol 2000;
Ginkor Fort; Total Man. Russia: Ginkor Fort (Cmm«op @opt); 95: 368-377. ; oo ,
Ginkor Gel (Tunxop Teas). Singapore: Ginkgo-PS. Switzerland: 24 Janssens D et al. Protection by bilobalide of the ischaemia-induced
. , 4 a alterations of the mitochondrial respiratory activity. Fund Clin
Allium Plus; Arterosan Plus; Capsules-vital; Gincosan; Trial- Pharmacol 2000; 14: 193-201
lin. Thailand: Ginkor Fort. UK: Actimind; Boots Alternatives 25 Zhang WR et al. Protective effect of Ginkgo extract on rat brain with
Sharp Mind; [-Sight; Nature's Garden; ProBrain; Rutin transient middle cerebral artery occlusion. Neurol Res 2000; 22: 517—
Compound Tablets. USA: Dorofen; Gentaplex; Healthy Eyes; S21.
Mental Clarity. 26 Dutta-Roy AK e¢ al. Inhibitory effect of Ginkgo biloba extract on

human platelet aggregation. Platelets 1999; 10: 298-305.

----- PAGE 324 -----
27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S1

52

53

54

Hosford D, et al. Natural antagonists of platelet-activating factor.
Phytother Res 1988; 2: 1-17.

Maitra I et al. Peroxyl radical scavenging activity of Ginkgo biloba
extract EGb-761. Biochem Pharmacol 1995; 49: 1649-1655.

Lee S-L et al. Superoxide scavenging effect of Ginkgo biloba extract on
serotonin-induced mitogenesis. Biochem Pharmacol 1998; 56: 527—
533.

Oyama Y et al. Ginkgo biloba extract protects brain neurons against
oxidative stress induced by hydrogen peroxide. Brain Res 1996; 712:
349-352.

Wei T et al. Hydrogen peroxide-induced oxidative damage and
apoptosis in cerebellar granule cells: protection by Ginkgo biloba
extract. Pharmacol Res 2000; 41: 427-433.

Bastianetto § et al. The ginkgo biloba extract (EGb-761) protects
hippocampal neurons against cell death induced by B-amyloid. Eur J
Neurosci 2000; 12: 1882-1890.

Zhou L-J, Zhu X-Z. Reactive oxygen species-induced apoptosis in
PC12 cells and protective effect of bilobalide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther
2000; 293: 982-988.

Calapai G et al. Neuroprotective effects of Ginkgo biloba extract in
brain ischaemia are mediated by inhibition of nitric oxide synthesis.
Life Sci 2000; 67: 2673-2683.

Rasetti MF et al. Extracts of Ginkgo biloba L. leaves and Vaccinium
myrtillus L. fruits prevent photo-induced oxidation of low density
lipoprotein cholesterol. Phytomedicine 1996/97; 3: 335-338.

Drieu K et al. Effect of the extract of Ginkgo biloba (EGb-761) on the
circulating and cellular profiles of polyunsaturated fatty acids:
correlation with the anti-oxidant properties of the extract.
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2000; 63: 293-300.

Bridi R et al. The antioxidant activity of standardized extract of
Ginkgo biloba (EGb-761) in rats. Phytother Res 2001; 15: 449-451.
Bahcecioglu IH et al. Protective effect of Ginkgo biloba extract on
CCly-induced liver damage. Hepatol Res 1999; 15: 215-224.

Agha AM et al. Chemopreventive effect of Ginkgo biloba extract
against benzo(a)pyrene-induced fore stomach carcinogenesis in mice:
amelioration of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity. J Exp Clin Cancer Res
2001; 20: 39-50.

Papadopoulos V et al. Drug-induced inhibition of the peripheral-type
benzodiazepine receptor expression and cell proliferation in human
breast cancer cells. Anticancer Res 2000; 20: 2835-2848.

Naidu MUR et al. Ginkgo biloba extract ameliorates gentamicin-
induced nephrotoxicity in rats. Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 191-197.
Siegers CP. Cytotoxicity of alkylphenols from Ginkgo biloba.
Phytomedicine 1999; 6: 281-283.

Hecker H et al. In vitro evaluation of the cytotoxic potential of
alkylphenols from Ginkgo biloba L. Toxicology 2002; 177: 167-177.
Oh SM, Chung KH. Estrogenic activities of Ginkgo biloba extracts.
Life Sci 2004; 74: 1325-1335.

White HL et al. Extracts of Ginkgo biloba leaves inhibit monoamine
oxidase. Life Sci 1996; 58: 1315-1321.

Sasaki K et al. Effects of bilobalide on gamma-aminobutyric acid
levels and glutamic acid decarboxylase in mouse brain. Eur J
Pharmacol 1999; 367: 165-173.

Itokawa H et al. Antitumour principles from Ginkgo biloba L. Chem
Pharm Bull 1987; 35: 3016-3020.

Biber A. Pharmacokinetics of Ginkgo biloba extracts.
Pharmacopsychiatry 2003; 36 (Suppl. Suppl.1):$32-37.

Mauri P et al. Liquid chromatographic/atmospheric pressure chemical
ionization mass spectrometry of terpene lactones in plasma of
volunteers dosed with Ginkgo biloba L. extracts. Rapid Comm Mass
Spec 2001; 15(12): 929-934.

Drago F et al. Pharmacokinetics and bioavailability of a Ginkgo biloba
extract. J Ocular Pharmacol Ther 2002; 18(2): 197-202.

Wang FM et al. Disposition of quercetin and kaempferol in human
following an oral administration of Ginkgo biloba extract tablets. Eur
J Drug Metab Pharmacokinetics 2003; 28(3): 173-177.

Kleijnen J, Knipschild P. Ginkgo biloba for cerebral insufficiency. Br J
Clin Pharmacol 1992; 34: 352-358.

Oken BS et al. The efficacy of Ginkgo biloba on cognitive function in
Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol 1998; 55: 1409-1415.

Ernst E, Pittler MH. Ginkgo biloba for dementia. A systematic review
of double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. Clin Drug Invest 1999; 17:
301-308.

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

Ginkgo

Ernst E, Stevinson C. Ginkgo biloba for tinnitus: a review. Clin
Otolaryngol 1999; 24: 164-167.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Ginkgo biloba extract for the treatment of
intermittent claudication: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am ]
Med 2000; 108: 276-281.

Birks J, Grimley Evans J. Ginkgo biloba for cognitive impairment and
dementia. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2002, Issue
4. Art. No. CD003120.

Kanowski S et al. Proof of efficacy of the Ginkgo biloba special extract
EGb-761 in outpatients suffering from mild to moderate primary
degenerative dementia of the Alzheimer type or multi-infarct
dementia. Pharmacopsychiatry 1996; 29: 47-56.

Le Bars P et al. A placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomized trial
of an extract of Ginkgo biloba for dementia. JAMA 1997; 278: 1327—
1332.

Brautigam MRH et al. Treatment of age-related memory complaints
with Ginkgo biloba extract: a randomized double blind placebo-
controlled study. Phytomedicine 1998; 5: 425-434.

Canter PH, Ernst E. Ginkgo biloba: a smart drug? A systematic
review of controlled trials of the cognitive effects of ginkgo biloba
extracts in healthy people. Psychopharmacology Bull 2002; 36(3): 108-
123.

Kennedy DO et al. The dose-dependent cognitive effects of acute
administration of Ginkgo biloba to healthy young volunteers.
Psychopharmacology 2000; 151: 416-423.

Subhan Z, Hindmarsh I. The psychopharmacological effects of
Ginkgo biloba extract in normal healthy volunteers. Int J Clin
Pharmacol Res 1984; 4: 89-93.

Rigney U et al. The effects of acute doses of standardized Ginkgo
biloba extract on memory and psychomotor performance in
volunteers. Phytother Res 1999; 13: 408-415.

Elsabagh S e¢ al. Differential cognitive effects of Ginkgo biloba after
acute and chronic treatment in healthy young volunteers.
Psychopharmacology 2005; 179: 437-446.

Mattes R, Pawlik MK. Effects of Ginkgo biloba on alertness and
chemosensory function in healthy adults. Human Psychopharmacol
2004; 19: 81-90.

Kennedy DO et al. Electroencephalograph effects of single doses of
Ginkgo biloba and Panax ginseng in healthy young volunteers.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2003; 75: 701-709.

Scholey AB, Kennedy DO. Acute, dose-dependent cognitive effects of
Ginkgo biloba, Panax ginseng and their combination in healthy young
volunteers: differential interactions with cognitive demand. Hum
Psychopharmacol Clin Exp 2002; 17: 3544.

Mix JA, Crews WD. An examination of the efficacy of Ginkgo biloba
extract EGb-761 on the neuropsychological functioning of cognitively
intact older adults. J Altern Complement Med 2000; 6: 219-229.
Cockle SM et al. The effects of Ginkgo biloba extract (LI-1370)
supplementation on activities of daily living in free living older
volunteers: a questionnaire survey. Hum Psychopharmacol 2000; 15:
227-235.

Trick L et al. The effects of Ginkgo biloba extract (LI-1370)
supplementation and discontinuation on activities of daily living and
mood in free living older volunteers. Phytotherapy Res 2004; 18: 531—
537.

Wesnes KA et al. The cognitive, subjective, and physical effects of a
Ginkgo biloba/Panax ginseng combination in healthy volunteers with
neurasthenic complaints. Psychopharmacol Bull 1997; 33(4): 677-683.
Wesnes KA et al. The memory enhancing effects of a Ginkgo biloba/
Panax ginseng combination in healthy middle-aged volunteers.
Psychopharmacology 2000; 152: 353-361.

Hartley DE et al. Gincosan (a combination of Ginkgo biloba and
Panax ginseng): the effects on mood and cognition of 6 and 12 weeks'
treatment in post-menopausal women. Nutritional Neurosci 2004; 7:
325-333.

Nathan PJ et al. Effects of a combined extract of Ginkgo biloba and
Bacopa monniera on cognitive function in healthy humans. Human
Psychopharmacol 2004; 19: 91-96.

Rejali D et al. Ginkgo biloba does not benefit patients with tinnitus: a
randomized placebo-controlled double-blind trial and meta-analys
of randomized trials. Clin Otolaryngol 2004; 29: 226-231.

----- PAGE 325 -----
Ginkgo

77 Hilton M, Stuart E. Ginkgo biloba for tinnitus. The Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2004, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD003852.
pub2.

78 Drew S, Davies E. Effectiveness of Ginkgo biloba in treating tinnitus:
double blind, placebo controlled trial. BMJ 2001; 322: 73-75.

79 Ernst E. Marketing studies and scientific research must be distinct.
BMJ 2001, 322: 1249.

80 Bukovics K et al. Vergleich von Ginkgo biloba und 6% HES 200/0,5 in
der Behandlung des akuten Horsturzes. J Pharmakol Ther 1999; 2: 48—
56.

81 Janssens D e¢ al. Increase in circulating endothelial cells in patients
with primary chronic venous insufficiency: protective effect of Ginkor
Fort in a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J
Cardiovasc Pharmacol 1999; 33: 7-11.

82. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. A Textbook of Natural Medicine. Seattle,
WA: John Bastyr College Publications, 1985 (looseleaf).

83 Chung KE Effect of a ginkgolide mixture (BN 52063) in antagonising
skin and platelet responses to platelet activating factor in man. Lancet
1987; i: 248-251.

84 Wilkens JH et al. Effects of a PAF-antagonist (BN 52063) on
bronchoconstriction and platelet activation during exercise-induced
asthma. Br J Clin Pharmacol 1990; 29: 85-91.

85 Kang BJ et al. A placebo-controlled, double-blind trial of Ginkgo
biloba for antidepressant-induced sexual dysfunction. Human
Psychopharmacol 2002; 17: 279-284.

86 Wheatley D. Triple-blind, placebo-controlled trial of Ginkgo biloba in
sexual dysfunction due to antidepressant drugs. Human
Psychopharmacol 2004; 19: 545-548.

87 Cohen AJ, Bartlik B. Ginkgo biloba for antidepressant-induced sexual
dysfunction. J Sex Marital Ther 1998; 24: 139-143.

88 Wheatley D. Ginkgo biloba in the treatment of sexual dysfunction due
to antidepressant drugs. Hum Psychopharmacol 1999; 14: 511-513.

89 Zeng X et al. Ginkgo biloba for acute ischaemic stroke. The Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 2005, Issue 4. Art. No. CD003691.
pub2.

90 Evans JR. Ginkgo biloba extract for age-related macular degeneration
(Cochrane review). In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 3, 2001. Oxford:
Update Software, 2001.

91 Quaranta L et al. Effect of Ginkgo biloba extract on preexisting visual
field damage in normal tension glaucoma. Ophthalmology 2003; 110:
359-364.

92 Gertsch JH et al. on behalf of the Prevention of High Altitude Illness
Trial Research Group. Randomised, double-blind, placebo controlled
comparison of ginkgo biloba and acetazolamide for prevention of
acute mountain sickness among Himalayan trekkers: the prevention of
high altitude illness trial (PHAIT). BMJ 2004; 328: 797.

93 Chow Tet al. Ginkgo biloba and acetazolamide prophylaxis for acute
mountain sickness. Arch Intern Med 2005; 165: 296-301.

94 Gertsch JH et al. Ginkgo biloba for the prevention of severe acute
mountain sickness (AMS) starting one day before rapid ascent. High
Alt Med Biol 2002; 3(1): 29-37.

95 Lingjaerde O et al. Can winter depression be prevented by Ginkgo
biloba extract? A placebo-controlled trial. Acta Psychiatr Scand 1999;
100: 62-66.

96 Tamborini A, Taurelle R. Rev Fr Gynecol Obstet 1993; 88: 147. Cited
by Bone K. Treatment of congestive symptoms of premenstrual
syndrome with ginkgo. Br ] Phytother 1995/96; 4: 46.

97 Zhang XY et al. The effect of extract of Ginkgo biloba added to
haloperidol on superoxide dismutase in inpatients with chronic
schizophrenia. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2001; 21: 85-88.

98 Bombardelli E et al. Activity of phospholipid-complex of Ginkgo
biloba dimeric flavonoids on the skin microcirculation. Fitoterapia
1996; 67: 265-273.

99 Muir AH. et al. The use of Ginkgo biloba in Raynaud's disease: a
double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Vascular Med 2002; 7: 265-267.

100 Parsad D et al. Effectiveness of oral Ginkgo biloba in treating limited,
slowly spreading vitiligo. Clin Exp Dermatol 2003; 28: 285-287.

101 Kampman K et al. A pilot trial of piracetam and Ginkgo biloba for the
treatment of cocaine dependence. Addictive Behav 2003; 28: 437-448.

102 Kim SH et al. Effects of Ginkgo biloba on haemostatic factors and
inflammation in chronic peritoneal dialysis patients. Phytotherapy Res
2005; 19: 546-548.

103 Hauns B et al. Phase II study of combined 5-fluorouracil/Ginkgo
biloba extract (GBE 761 ONC) therapy in 5-fluorouracil pretreated
patients with advanced colorectal cancer. Phytother Res 2001; 15: 34~
38.

104 DeFeudis FV, Safety of EGb-761-containing products. In: DeFeudis FV,
ed. Ginkgo biloba Extract (EGb-761). Pharmacological Activities and
Clinical Applications. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1991.

105 Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre [accessed January 20, 2006].

106 Bent S et al. Spontaneous bleeding associated with Ginkgo biloba. A
case report and systematic review of the literature. J Gen Intern Med
2005; 20: 657-661.

107 Rosenblatt M, Mindel J. Spontaneous hyphema associated with
ingestion of Ginkgo biloba extract. N Engl ] Med 1997; 336: 1108.

108 Vale S. Subarachnoid haemorrhage associated with Ginkgo biloba.
Lancet 1998; 352: 36.

109 Rowin J, Lewis SL. Spontaneous bilateral subdural hematomas
associated with chronic Ginkgo biloba ingestion. Neurology 1996; 46:
1775-1776.

110 Hauser D e¢ al. Bleeding complications precipitated by unrecognized
Ginkgo biloba use after liver transplantation. Transpl Int 2002; 15:
377-379.

111 Fessenden JM et al. Ginkgo biloba: a case report of herbal medicine
and bleeding postoperatively from a laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
American Surg 2001; 67: 33-35.

112 Benjamin J et al. A case of cerebral haemorrhage — can Ginkgo biloba
be implicated? Postgrad Med J 2001; 77: 112-113.

113 Fong KCS, Kinnear PE. Retrobulbar haemorrhage associated with
chronic Ginkgo biloba ingestion. Postgrad Med J 2003; 79: 531-532.

114 Bebbington A e¢ al. Persistent bleeding after total hip arthroplasy
caused by herbal self-medication. J Arthroplasty 2005; 20(1): 125-126.

115 Donadio Vet al. Myoglobinuria after ingestion of extracts of guarana,
Ginkgo biloba and kava. Neurol Sci 2000; 21: 124.

116 Gaudineau C et al. Inhibition of human P450 enzymes by multiple
constituents of the Ginkgo biloba extract. Biochem Biophys Res
Comm 2004; 318: 1072-1078.

117 Yale SH, Glurich I. Analysis of the inhibitory potential of Ginkgo
biloba, Echinacea purpurea, and Serenoa repens on the metabolic
activity of cytochrome P450 3A4, 2D6, and 2C9. J Alt Comp Med
2005; 11(3): 433-439.

118 He N, Edeki T. The inhibitory effects of herbal components on
CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 catalytic activites in human liver microsomes.
Am J] Therapeut 2004; 11(3): 206-212.

119 Von Moltke LL et al. Inhibition of human cytochromes P450 by
components of Ginkgo biloba. ] Pharm Pharmacol 2004; 56(8): 1039—
1044.

120 Chatterjee SS et al. Influence of the Ginkgo extract EGb-761 on rat
liver cytochrome P450 and steroid metabolism and excretion in rats
and man. J Pharm Pharmacol 2005; 57(5): 641-650.

121 Markowitz JS et al. Effect of Ginkgo biloba extract on plasma steroid
concentrations in healthy volunteers: a pilot study. Pharmacotherapy
2005; 25(10): 1337-1340.

122 Yoshioka M et al. Studies on interactions between functional foods or
dietary supplements and medicines. IV. Effects of Ginkgo biloba leaf
extract on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of nifedipine
in healthy volunteers. Biol Pharm Bull 2004; 27(12): 2006-2009.

123 Yin OQ et al. Pharmacogenetics and herb-drug interactions:
experience with Ginkgo biloba and omeprazole. Pharmacogenetics
2004; 14(12): 841-850.

124 Mauro VF et al. Impact of Ginkgo biloba on the pharmacokinetics of
digoxin. Am ] Therapeut 2003; 10: 247-251.

125 Yasui-Furokori N et al. The effects of Ginkgo biloba extracts on the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of donepezil. J Clin
Pharmacol 2004; 44(5): 538-542.

126 Jiang X et al. Effect of ginkgo and ginger on the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of warfarin in healthy subjects. Br J Clin
Pharmacol 2005; 59: 425-432.

127 Markowitz JS et al. Multiple-dose administration of Ginkgo biloba
did not affect cytochrome P-450 2D6 or 344 activity in normal
volunteers. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2003; 23(6): 576-581.

----- PAGE 326 -----
h
results difficult. At present there is insufficient evidence to
support definitely the efficacy of specific E. senticosus
preparations in the various indications for which it is used
and/or has been tested.

Similarly, there are only limited clinical data on safety
aspects of E£. senticosus preparations. The clinical trials of E.
senticosus root preparations available have typically involved
only very small numbers of patients and been of short
duration, so have the statistical power only to detect very
common, acute adverse effects. Rigorous investigation of
safety aspects of well-characterised E. senticosus root
preparations administered orally at different dosages,
including the effects of long-term treatment, is required.

In view of the many pharmacological actions documented
for ginseng, and the lack of safety and toxicity data, the use of
E. senticosus during both pregnancy and breastfeeding should
be avoided.

Species (Family)
Eleutherococcus senticosus (Rupr. & Maxim.) Maxim. (Araliaceae)
Synonym(s)

Acanthopanax senticosus (Rupr. & Maxim.) Maxim., Devil's
Shrub, Eleuthero, Hedera senticosa Rupr. & Maxim., Siberian
Ginseng, Touch-Me-Not, Wild Pepper

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°®

BHMA 2003‘

BHP 1996'@”)

BP 2007'¢8

Complete German Commission E‘
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Ph Eur 2007'°8)

WHO volume 2°”

(G3)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Eleutherococcus ginseng is not included in the GSL.'‘@”

Constituents

Carbohydrates Polysaccharides (glycans); some have been
referred to as eleutherans." Galactose, methyl-a-p-galactose
(eleutheroside C), glucose, maltose, sucrose.

Coumarins _Isofraxidin-7-glucoside (eleutheroside By), 7-ethyl-
umbelliferone.”

Lignans (—)-Syringaresinol-4’,4’”-di-O-B-p-glucopyranoside
(eleutheroside E), episyringaresinol-4/’-O-B-p-glucopyranoside
(eleutheroside E), 7SR,8RS-dihydrodehydroconiferyl alcohol,
dehydrodiconiferyl alcohol, 7,8-trans-diconiferylalcohol-4-O-B-D-
glucopyranoside, meso-secoisolariciresinol, (—)-syringaresinol-4-
O-B-p-glucopyranoside,” sesamin.

Phenylpropanoids Syringin (cleutheroside B), coniferyl alcohol,
coniferyl aldehyde, 5'-O-caffeoylquinic acid (chlorogenic acid),
1',5'-O-dicaffeoylquinic acid, 4! ,5’-O-dicaffeoylquinic acid.

Triterpenoids Daucosterol (eleutheroside A), f-hederin
(eleutheroside K),'°°°® 3B-{O-B-p-glucopyranosyl-(1+3)-O-B-
p-galactopyranosyl-(1—4)-[O-a-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1—2) ]-O-
B-p-glucuronopyranosy]}-16a-hydroxy-13B,28-epoxyoleanane,")
3B-{O-a-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1—4)-O-a-L-rhamnopyranosyl-
(1—4)-[O-a-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1—2) ]-O-B-p-glucopyranosyl-
(1—x)-O-B-b-glucuronopyranosy]}-160-hydroxy-13f,28-epoxy-
oleanane.

Essential oil 0.8%. Individual components not documented.

Other parts of the plant

Stem (—)-Sesamin, isofraxidin, syringaresinol, eleutheroside B,
eleutheroside E, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, isovanillin.®

Leaves Flavonoids, including hyperin (quercetin-3-O-B-galacto-
side), quercetin, quercitrin, rutin,” and four 3,4-seco-lupan-type
triterpenoids."

----- PAGE 327 -----
Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

Quality of plant material and commercial products

According to the British and European Pharmacopoeias, Eleuther-
ococcus ginseng consists of the whole or cut, dried, underground
organs of E. senticosus (Rupr. Et Maxim.) Maxim, (C8) 68)
Eleutherosides A to G are present in roots at concentrations of
0.6-0.9% and in stems at concentrations of 0.6-1.5%. An
HPLC method for determining the eleutheroside content of E.
senticosus roots, which involves the use of ferulic acid rather than
eleutherosides B and E (which are very expensive) as an external
standard, has been developed and validated.) Methods pre-
viously reported for the isolation and quantitative analysis of E.
senticosus root material include centrifugal partition chromato-
graphy with HPLC,” and reversed-phase HPLC."!

As with other herbal medicinal products, there is variation in
the qualitative and quantitative composition of commercial
eleutherococcus preparations. Analysis of 25 'ginseng’ products

Carbohydrates
OH CH.OH CH;O.
O°
HO: glc-O"
Hi
° OCH;

methyl-a-D-galactose
(eleutheroside C)

Lignans
OCH;
OH
H
ro
. OCH;
Hi oH
CHO. Po
H
glc-O
OCH;
(+)-syringaresinol
-O-B-D-glucoside
(eleutheroside E)
Phenylpropanoids
OR*,
oR?
Hooc—17-3#—~_/,
oR' OR?
R'

5-O-caffeoylquinic acid H
(chlorogenic acid)
1,5-O-dicaffeoylquinic acid caffeoyl
3,5-O-dicaffeoylquinic acid H
4,5-O-dicaffeoylquinic acid H

R'O. R*
‘S coniferylalcohol
RO coniferylaldehyde
Bs caffeic acid
syringin

(eleutheroside B)

Figure 1 Selected constituents of Eleutherococcus ginseng.

available for purchase from a health-food store in the USA
included 11 products labelled as containing E. senticosus. All 11
products contained the correct species, as determined by LC-MS/
MS (liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry) analysis identify-
ing the presence of eleutherosides B and E and absence of
ginsenosides (apart from the two products which were labelled as
also containing Panax ginseng). However, there was wide variation
between products in the content of these eleutherosides, as
determined by HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatogra-
phy). In products containing powdered E.  senticosus,
eleutheroside B and E content per 100g of product ranged from
0.009-0.155% and from 0.032-1.122%, respectively, thus total
eleutheroside content (B plus E) varied 43-fold between products.
With liquid preparations, there was a 200-fold variation in total (B
plus E) eleutheroside content between products (0.003—0.551%
per 100g product). For the six products which provided

Coumarins

S

[e) [e)
ICH

isofraxidin-7-glucoside
(eleuthroside B1)

Hive
CHO. "
gic-O"
OCH;
episyringaresinol-
4”-O-B-D-glucoside
(eleutheroside E2)
Re R® Rt
H H caffeoyl
H H caffeoyl
caffeoyl H caffeoyl
H caffeoyl —_caffeoyl
R' Re Re R*
CH3 H H CH20OH
CH; =H H CHO
H H H COOH
CH3 glucosyl) OCH; CH,0H

----- PAGE 328 -----
Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

Triterpenes

OH arabinose

O°
HO °
daucosterol P
(eleutheroside A) CH3 fe)
HO
OH
OH

rhamnose

f-hederin
(eleutheroside K)

R! = O-f-D-glc-(1— 3)-0-A-gal

R? = a-L-rha

R! = O-w-L-tha-(1— 4)-O-a-L-rha-(1— 4)-
[O-a-L-rha-(1— 2)]-f-D-gle

R?=H

gic = glucopyranosyl, gal = galactopyranosyl, rha = rhamnosyl

Figure 2 Selected constituents of Eleutherococcus ginseng.

quantitative information on the product label, the actual
eleutheroside content varied from 12-328% of that stated on
the label. Earlier work involving analysis of commercial products
purchased in the USA and Canada found that the eleutheroside B
concentrations in E. senticosus capsules, powder and liquid
preparations varied from 0.01-0.03% w/w, 0.01-1.00% wiw, and
0.03-0.13 mg/mL, respectively, and that eleutheroside E concen-
trations varied from 0.04-0.16% w/w, 0.06—-0.66% w/w, and 0.01—
1.62 mg/mL, respectively."'?)

Food Use

Eleutherococcus ginseng is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Eleutherococcus ginseng does not have a traditional herbal use in
the UK, although it has been used for many years in the former
Soviet Union. Like Panax ginseng, Eleutherococcus ginseng is
claimed to be an adaptogen in that it increases the body's
resistance to stress and builds up general vitality.“C% °C

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in older
standard herbal reference texts are the same for several traditional
uses. Dry root 0.6-3g daily for up to one month has been
recommended.'(C% “”) Russian studies in healthy human subjects
have involved the administration of an ethanolic extract in doses
ranging from 2-16mL one to three times daily, for up to 60
consecutive days.

Clinical trials of E. senticosus have assessed the effects of
different preparations administered orally according to different

dosage regimens. A rigorous trial involving individuals with
chronic fatigue investigated the effects of a standardised extract of
E. senticosus root providing 2.24 mg eleutherosides (B and E) daily
for two months." Studies conducted in Russia and involving
healthy human subjects have involved the administration of an
ethanolic extract (not further specified) at doses ranging from 2—
16mL one to three times daily, orally, for up to 60 consecutive
days.) Doses administered to non-healthy individuals ranged
from 0.5-6.0 mL given one to three times daily for up to 35 days.
In both groups, multiple dosing regimens were separated by an
extract-free period of two to three weeks.)

Figure 3 Eleutherococcus ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus).

----- PAGE 329 -----
Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

Figure 4 Eleutherococcus ginseng — dried drug substance (root).

Pharmacological Actions

The so-called adaptogenic properties of eleutherococcus were first
extensively investigated in the countries of the former USSR.
Pharmacological studies on extracts of eleutherococcus started in
the 1950s. The majority of the early literature on eleutherococcus
has been published in Russian and therefore difficulty is
encountered in obtaining translations. A review of the literature
up to the early 1980s describes the chemistry and toxicity of
eleutherococcus and documents results of in vitro, in vivo and
human studies involving the oral administration of an ethanolic
extract. More recently, the concept of adaptogens as it relates to
chemical
reviewed." Preparations of eleutherococcus root and/or their
isolated constituents have been reported to have several properties
in vitro and/or in vivo, including anticancer, antiviral, hypogly-
caemic and immunomodulant activities, although robust evidence
of these effects from clinical studies is generally lacking.

eleutherococcus and __ its constituents has been

In vitro and animal studies

The following represents a summary of the results of preclinical
studies investigating the effects of eleutherococcus. It draws on
‘) as well as on more recent papers
published in English. Used here, 'ginseng' refers to eleutherococcus
unless indicated otherwise.

data included in a review

Antiviral and antibacterial activities In vitro antiviral activity
against RNA-type viruses (human rhinovirus, respiratory syncy-
tial virus and influenza A virus) has been demonstrated with an
ethanolic extract of ginseng root. No effect was noted in cells
infected with DNA-type viruses (adenovirus 5 and herpes simplex
type 1 virus).

Hypoglycaemic activity Hypoglycaemic activity has been
documented both in normal animals and in those with induced
hyperglycaemia (rabbit, mouse), but with little effect on alloxan-
induced hyperglycaemia (rat).>'®) Hypoglycaemic activity (mice,
intraperitoneal injection) of an aqueous ginseng extract has been
attributed to polysaccharide components termed eleutherans A—
G.

Central nervous system effects Sedative actions (rat, mouse),
CNS-stimulant effects (intravenous/subcutaneous injection, rab-
bit), and a decrease/increase in barbiturate sleeping time has been
reported using an aqueous extract of ginseng root.°?”

Immunostimulant, antitoxic actions Numerous in vitro and in
vivo studies have examined the immunomodulatory effects of
ginseng. Oral administration of eleutherococcus root prepared as
a decoction inhibited mast-cell dependent anaphylaxis in mice.°”
Similar results were obtained using the same animal model for a
water extract of ginseng obtained from cell culture.?” An ethanol
extract of E. senticosus root inhibited the release of interleukin
(IL)-4, IL-5, and IL-12 from human peripheral blood lymphocytes
in in vitro experiments using human whole blood.*» The release
of IL-6 was stimulated by higher concentrations of the ginseng
preparation and inhibited with lower concentrations, suggesting
that ginseng root has immunomodulatory rather than immuno-
suppressive or immunostimulant activity?
experiments using human peripheral blood, lower concentrations
of an ethanol extract of ginseng root enhanced the proliferation of
human lymphocytes, whereas higher concentrations had an
antiproliferative effect.”

In contrast to the findings described above, in-vitro studies
using mouse macrophages found that an aqueous extract of
ginseng root did not stimulate the expression of a range of
cytokines investigated.?” Increased resistance to induced lister-
iosis infection (mouse, rabbit) with prophylactic ginseng admin-
istration and
administration, stimulation of specific antiviral immunity (gui-
nea-pig, mouse), regulation of complement titre and lysozyme
activity post immunisation have been documented.” In vitro, a
combination preparation containing E.
(11.6 mg, standardised for eleutheroside E 1mg) and Androgra-
phis paniculata extract (plant parts not specified) enhanced
phytohaemagglutin-induced proliferation of human peripheral
blood lymphocytes, whereas the preparation inhibited the
spontaneous proliferation of human peripheral blood lympho-
cytes.°9)

Immunomodulatory effects have been reported for polysacchar-
ide components isolated from E. senticosus (plane part not
stated),°” and from cell culture of E. senticosus.°*) Polysacchar-
ide administration (100 mg/kg for six days) stimulated phagocytic
activity in mice and (following repeated administration of 40 mg/
kg) suppressed propogation of human tubercular bacillus in two
animal models.°” Polysaccharide isolated from cell culture
increased the proliferation and differentiation of B-cells and
increased the cytokine production of macrophages in vitro.°®)
Immunostimulant activity in vitro (using granulocyte, carbon
clearance and lymphocyte-transformation tests) has been docu-

mented for other high molecular weight polysaccharide compo-
(29, 30)

In other in-vitro

reduced — resistance with — simultaneous

senticosus extract

nents.

Effects on overall performance A _ beneficial action on
parameters indicative of stress or on overall work capacity in
mice has been reported for eleutherococcus root bark," although
a lack of adaptogenic response has also been shown in mice
receiving ginseng infusions." In one study, mice receiving a
commercial concentrated extract of ginseng exhibited significantly
more aggressive behaviour.” Ginseng is claimed to result in a
more economical utilisation of glycogen and high-energy phos-
phorus compounds, and in a more intense metabolism of lactic
and pyruvic acids during stress.°) The adaptogenic effect of
ginseng may involve regulation of energy, nucleic acid, and protein
metabolism in tissues." It may also be that ginseng limits the
binding of stress hormones to their receptors by inhibiting
catechol-O-methyltransferase.) These hypotheses requires test-
ing in order to elucidate possible mechanisms of action for
constituents of ginseng root.

----- PAGE 330 -----
Cardiovascular activity 3,4-Dihydroxybenzoic acid (DBA) has
been identified as an anti-aggregatory component in Eleuther-
ococcus ginseng.) Compared with aspirin, activity of DBA was
comparable to collagen- and ADP-induced platelet aggregation,
but less potent versus arachidonic acid-induced platelet aggrega-
tion." Ginseng root also showed an endothelium-dependent
vasorelaxant effect in vitro. Depending on the vessel size, this was
mediated either by nitrous oxide or endothelium-derived hyper-
polarising factor.°>

Effect on reproductive capacity Ginseng has been reported to
improve the reproductive capacity of bulls and cows, and to have
no adverse effects on the various blood parameters (haemoglobin,
total plasma protein, albumin and globulin, protein coefficient)
measured. A preparation of ginseng root increased the motility
of human sperm in vitro.°°

Anticancer and cytotoxic effects An aqueous extract of ginseng
root showed additive antiproliferative effects with cytarabine in
vitro against leukaemia cells.°” In in-vitro experiments using
human peripheral blood, an ethanol extract of ginseng root
displayed cytotoxic activity against human lymphocytes when
applied to the system at a high concentration.?”

Steroidal activity Gonadotrophic activity in immature male mice
(intraperitoneal injection), oestrogenic activity in immature
female mice, and an anabolic effect in immature rats (intraper-
itoneal injection) has been reported.)

Other activities An aqueous extract of ginseng root administered
orally to rats for 30 days (100 or 200 mg/kg body weight daily)
before intravenous administration of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) led
to reductions in LPS-induced increase:
tions and lipid peroxidation, and reduced concentrations of
indicators of renal dysfunction.°* An aqueous extract of ginseng
cell culture was found to reduce weight gain, serum LDL
cholesterol concentrations and triglyceride accumulation in obese
mice.*) Ginseng root stimulated erythropoiesis during paradox-
ical sleep deprivation in mice by modulation of brain neuro-
transmitters.

Other actions documented for ginseng include an increase in
catecholamine concentrations in the brain, adrenal gland and
urine, and a variable effect on induced hypothermia (rabbit, rat,
mouse).

in nitric oxide concentra-

Other parts of the plant

Several of the activities described above for eleutherococcus root
have also been described for other parts of the plant, such as leaves
and stem bark.

The antibacterial activity of three compounds isolated by
methanolic extraction from the dried leaves of ginseng was tested
against various Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
Chiisanogenin, but not hyperin or chiisanoside, demonstrated
moderate antibacterial activity against Bacillus subtilis, Staphy-
lococcus epidermidis, S. aureus, Proteus vulgaris and Salmonella
typhimurium, with minimum inhibitory concentrations ranging
from 50-100 jg/ml.4?

Oral administration of eleutherococcus stem prepared as a
decoction inhibited mast-cell dependent anaphylaxis in mice.” A
beneficial action on parameters indicative of stress or on overall
work capacity in rats has been reported for phenolic compounds
isolated from eleutherococcus stem bark.)

Preparations of other parts of the plant and/or their isolated
constituents have also been reported to have certain cardiovascular

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

efffects. The triterpenoid chiisanogenin from the leaves of E.
senticosus has been shown to be 50 times as potent as aspirin in
inhibiting U46619-induced platelet aggregation and 10-20 times
as potent in inhibiting adrenaline- and arachidonic acid-induced
aggregation.“ An aqueous extract of ginseng stem bark
protected against the effects of transient focal cerebral ischaemia
in rats, an effect apparently mediated by microglial activation and
inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2.%) An increase in lipoprotein
lipase activity was observed in adipocytes cultured with an
aqueous extract of dried ginseng leaves.

Aqueous or alcoholic extracts of the stem of ginseng have
shown hepatoprotective” ** (47)

» and antioxidant properties” in
vivo. Anti-inflammatory and antinociceptive effects were noted
with an ethyl acetate extract of ginseng stem bark in rats: these
were attributed to the in vivo conversion of liriodendrin to
syringaresinol.“ Preparations of other parts of the plant and/or
their isolated constituents have been reported to have certain
anticancer effec

s. Fractionated glycoproteins from an aqueous
extract of ginseng stem bark inhibited lung metastasis in mice
both prophylactically and therapeutically. This effect was
mediated by activation of macrophages and natural killer (NK)
5) In studies using a stem bark extract, sesamin was

identified as the component with antitumour activity in vitro in
2)

cells.‘

human stomach cancer cells.

Ethanol-induced apoptosis
(SK-N-MC) was inhibited by an aqueous extract of ginseng (plant
part not stated) in vitro. In rats, an ethanolic extract of ginseng
stem bark and one of its components, sesamin, showed
cytoprotective properties against Parkinson's disease induced by

1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) or rote-
(54, 55)

in a human neuroblastoma cell line

none.

Clinical studies

Clinical trials of E. senticosus preparations have focused on
assessing effects related to the reputed adaptogenic properties of
this herbal medicinal product, although rigorous clinical investi-
gations are limited. Studies have tested different E. senticosus
preparations, including combination herbal preparations contain-
ing E. senticosus, which vary qualitatively and quantitatively in
their phytochemical composition. Furthermore, different prepara-
tions have been administered according to different dosage
regimens, and to different study populations (e.g. healthy
volunteers, older patients with hypertension), making interpreta-
tion of the results difficult.

A large body of clinical re: as been published in the
Russian literature, making ac difficult,“ although considera-
tion of a review of some of this work indicates that these clinical
trials are unlikely to meet contemporary standards in terms of
their design, analysis and reporting. Therefore, at present there is
insufficient evidence to support definitively the efficacy of specific
E. senticosus preparations in the various indications for which it is
used and/or has been tested. Details of clinical trials of E.
senticosus preparations published in the English literature are
summarised below.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, trial, 96
individuals with chronic fatigue (unexplained fatigue of at least
six months' duration and a Rand Vitality Index score of 12 or less)
recruited using newspaper adverstisements and via chronic fatigue
syndrome (CFS) support groups, received capsules containing a
standardised extract of E. senticosus root providing 2.24mg
eleutherosides (B and E) daily, or placebo, for two months."!) At
the end of the study, Rand Vitality Index scores had improved in

earch

----- PAGE 331 -----
Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

both groups and there were no statistically significant differenc:
between groups (p > 0.05). Sub-group analy: suggested that
there was a treatment effect depending on duration and severity of
fatigue at baseline, but this requires testing in larger randomised
controlled trials. In a two-month, open-label extension to the
initial study, all remaining participants received E. senticosus,
although they were still unaware of their initial treatment
allocation and the likely time to onset of action of E. senticosus.
During this phase, participants who received placebo during
months one and two showed a statistical gnificant improve-
ment in mean Rand Vitality Index score when assessed at month
four, compared with month two (p = 0.02), whereas participants
who had received E. senticosus during months one and two, did
not show any statistically significant improvements in Rand
Vitality Index scores during the open-label phase of the study.\'?)

Another randomised, double-blind, controlled trial a: sed the
effects of an E. senticosus dry extract (Centofiori, Italy; not
further specified) 300mg daily (x = 10), or placebo, for eight
weeks on quality of life in 20 participants aged 65 years or more
with hypertension and who were undergoing treatment with
digitalis (not further specified). After four weeks! treatment,
improvements in the social functioning and mental compartment
summary scores (p < 0.05 for both) of the SF-36 general health
status questionnaire were observed, but at the eight-week
endpoint, there were no statistically significant differences
between groups. The study, however, has several methodological
limitations, including the small sample size and lack of a priori
hypotheses for sub-group analys Participants in the E.
senticosus group were more likely than those in the placebo
group to state that they had received verum (70% versus 20%); p
< 0.05), so it is possible that unblinding occurred during the study,
and this may have biased the results towards a more positive effect
for E. senticosus. Also, total SF-36 scores were not reported, and it
is possible that there was no statistically significant difference
between these at the four-week assessment, thus a placebo
response in both groups cannot be ruled out. A report of the study
states that no statistically significant differences in blood pressure
control and serum digoxin concentrations were
although supporting data were not provided.

Several clinical trials have explored the reputed adaptogenic
effects of E. senticosus preparations in athletes. A placebo-
controlled trial involved ten groups each comprising three male
endurance athletes matched for training duration and frequency.
Participants (7 = 30) were assessed for steroidal hormone indices
of stress and lymphocyte subset counts before and after six weeks!
treatment with a 35% ethanolic extract of E. senticosus root 8 mL
daily (equivalent to 4g dried root), a 60% ethanolic extract of
Panax ginseng root 4mL daily (equivalent to 2g dried root), or
placebo.) Participants were randomly assigned to treatment
within groups of three. Six groups of three completed the study,
although data from laboratory tests of blood samples were
available for only five groups of three athletes. At the end of the
study, E. senticosus recipients had a significantly greater decrease
in the testosterone to cortisol ratio, than did placebo recipients (p
< 0.05); this appeared to be due to increased cortisol concentra-
tions (which would suggest increased, rather than decreased,
stress), rather than decreased testosterone concentrations. There
were no significant differences between the three groups in any of
the lymphocyte parameters measured, such as lymphocyte count,
CD3+ cell, natural killer cell and B-cell CD20+ counts (p > 0.05
for all).©” It is not clear whether the observed change in
testosterone to cortisol ratio in E. senticosus recipients represents
a genuine effect, or whether it is a spurious finding, and the effects

<

observed,

of E. senticosus on steroid hormone concentrations require
further investigation.

In another double-blind, controlled trial, 20 highly trained
distance runners received a 30-40% ethanol extract of E.
senticosus (not further specified) 60 drops daily, or placebo, for
six weeks. Participants were matched by sex, body weight and ten-
kilometre race pace and then randomly assigned as matched pairs
to one of the treatment groups.°* During the study, participants
undertook five 15-minute trials of a submaximal treadmill run (at
their ten-kilometre race pace) and one maximal treadmill run (i.e.
to exhaustion; Ty,ax). Data available for eight matched pairs did
not show any statistically significant differences between groups
in heart rate, oxygen consumption (VOz), expired minute volume
(VE), VE/VOs:, respiratory exchange rate, Tax, serum lactate
concentrations and participants’ rating of perceived exertion.
However, because of the small sample size, the study lacked the
statistical power to detect any differences between the two
groups.°"

Significant improvements in maximal oxygen uptake and
oxygen pulse (p < 0.05 for both, compared with a no-treatment
control group), and in total work capacity and maximum
exhaustion time (p < 0.05, compared with placebo and a no-
treatment control group) were observed with an ethanolic extract
of E. senticosus 2 mL twice daily (1 mL contained 0.53 mg syringin
(eleutheroside B) and 0.12mg_ syringaresinol diglucoside
(eleutheroside E)) in a single-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-
over study involving six healthy male athletes who underwent a
series of physical exercises.°” However, the methodological
limitations of the study (small sample size, no apparent random
allocation to treatment, single-blind nature of assessments)
preclude definitive conclusions.

A small number of other studies has assessed the effects of E.
senticosus in healthy, young, non-athlete volunteers. In a
randomised, double-blind, controlled trial, 45 volunt
E. senticosus (Fon Wan Blu Giuliani, Milan, Italy; not further
specified) two 'vials' daily for 30 days, and undertook the Stroop
Colour-Word test as a challenge stressor before and after
‘© A report of the study describes statistically
significant reductions in test-induced increases in systolic blood
pressure and heart rate after E. senticosus treatment, compared
with baseline values. However, the study is flawed as no statistical
comparisons were reported for the E. senticosus group compared
with the placebo group.

A further study in 50 healthy volunteers compared the effects of
a 35% ethanol extract of E. senticosus roots (Taigutan; 1 g extract
equivalent to 1g root, not further specified) 25 drops three times
daily for 30 days (2 = 35) with those of Echinacin (containing 80g
Echinacea purpurea herb fresh juice in 100g final product) 40
drops three times daily for 30 days (2 = 15).'°? Blood samples
taken from participants before and after treatment were subjected
t Statistically significant reductions in
concentrations of triglycerides, total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol
and free fatty acids, an increase in polymorphonuclear leukocyte
phagocytic activity, and increases in other components related to
cellular defence were described following E. senticosus treatment,
compared with baseline values (p < 0.05 for each), but not
following treatment with the echinacea preparation. In a second
phase of the study, 20 of the participants were randomly selected
to also undertake assessment of physical fitness before and after
treatment. Statistically significant increases in oxygen consump-
tion during maximal effort and in exhaled volume were described
following E. senticosus treatment, compared with baseline values
(p < 0.01 for each), but not in other parameters of physical fitness

rs received

treatment.

» biochemical tests.

----- PAGE 332 -----
nor for any of these parameters following treatment with the
echinacea preparation. However, this study is also flawed as no
statistical comparisons were reported for the E. senticosus group
compared with the echinacea group, the study did not include a
placebo arm, and no corrections were made for multiple statistical
tests.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial invol-
ving 93 individuals with herpes, a greater proportion of recipients
of a standardised extract of E. senticosus root (400 mg daily for
six months) experienced improvements in the frequency, severity
and duration of episodes of herpes, than did placebo recipients
(75% versus 34%; p = 0.0002 for each).'

Immunomodulatory activity has been documented for an
ethanolic extract of E. senticocus 30-40 mL extract (eleutheroside
B 0.2% w/v) daily in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving healthy volunteers. A significant increase in the total
lymphocyte count, particularly in the T lymphocyte cell count,
was observed for ginseng recipients, compared with placebo
recipients. Specificity of action on the lymphocytes was confirmed
by the fact that neither granulocyte nor monocyte counts were
significantly altered.

Several other double-blind, placebo-controlled trials, some of
which involved random allocation to treatment, have investigated
the effects of combination herbal preparations containing E.
senticosus as well as Andrographis paniculata with or without
other herbal ingredients (Schizandra chinensis and Glycyrrhiza
glabra) in the treatment of upper respiratory tract infections*°
and in patients with Familial Mediterranean fever. Another
study assessed the effects of a combination preparation containing
E. senticosus root extract, Adhatoda vasica leaf extract and
Echinacea purpurea extract (plant part not specified).” Reports
of these studies have claimed beneficial effects for the combination
preparations, compared with placebo, on the various outcome
measures assessed. However, the lack of randomisation in several
of these studies, and the lack of critical analysis of the results by
the authors, indicate that further research is required to confirm
or refute these findings. A meta-analysis of the trials of a
preparation containing standardised extracts of E. senticosus root
and A. paniculata herb concluded that there was evidence that the
combination was effective in relieving symptoms of acute upper

respiratory tract infections, but that further research was required
(68)

before firm recommendations could be made.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over
trial involving 24 healthy volunteers who received a preparation of
E. senticosus root 625mg twice daily, a standardised Ginkgo
biloba preparation equivalent to 28.2 mg flavonoid glycosides and
7.2 mg terpene lactones daily, a vitamin preparation, or placebo,
for three months, selective memory was significantly improved in
E. senticosus recipients compared with placebo recipients at the
end of the study (p < 0.02)‘

Several other studies involving small numbers of participants
have assessed the effects of a preparation of the leaves of E.
senticosus (Endurox™) which contain ciwujianosides, a series of
triterpenoid glycosides chemically distinct from the eleutherosides.
One uncontrolled, open-label study”
on parameters of physical endurance, compared with baseline
values, in eight men who had taken a preparation containing
800 mg E. senticosus leaf extract for two weeks, but three other
studies with more rigorous designs (randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, crossover trials) found no effects for E.
senticosus leaf extract at doses of 800 or 1200 mg taken orally
for seven to ten days.”'"”» The latter three studies included only
ten or fewer participants, so it is possible that they lacked the

reported beneficial effects

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

statistical power to detect any differences between the treatment
and placebo groups. The available evidence indicates that E.
senticosus leaf extract administered according to the dosage
regimens tested has no beneficial effects on perfomance during

exercise lasting up to two hours.'”

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There are only limited clinical data on safety aspects of E.
senticosus preparations. No  post-marketing surveillance-type
studies were identified, and there are only a small number of
clinical trials of E. senticosus, the majority of which are of poor
methodological quality. Trials have assessed the effects of different
E. senticosus preparations, including combination herbal pre-
parations containing E. senticosus, which vary qualitatively and
quantitatively in their phytochemical composition. Furthermore,
different preparations have been administered according to
different dosage regimens, and to different study populations
(e.g. healthy volunteers, older patients with hypertension),
making interpretation of the results difficult. The clinical trials
of E. senticosus root preparations available have typically involved
only very small numbers of patients and been of short duration,
so have the statistical power only to detect very common, acute
adverse effects. Rigorous investigation of safety aspects of well-
characterised E. senticosus root preparations administered orally
at different dosages, including the effects of long-term treatment,
is required.

In a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial in which 96
individuals with chronic fatigue received capsules containing a
standardised extract of E. senticosus root providing 2.24mg
eleutherosides (B and E) daily, or placebo, the proportions of
participants experiencing adverse effects were 24% and 28% for
the E. senticosus and placebo groups, respectively.) After one
month's treatment, adverse effects reported by the greatest
proportions of E. senticosus and placebo recipients were headache
(10% and 8%, respectively), breast tenderness (7% and 3%,
respectively) and nervousness (7% and 3%, respectively). There
were no statistically significant differences in changes in mean
systolic and diastolic blood pressure measurements. The fre-
quency of adverse effects was reported to be lower for both groups
during the second month of treatment.

Other studies, which involved only small numbers of partici-
pants and which had other methodological flaws, have provided
conflicting data on the effects of E. senticosus root preparations
on blood pressure measurements. One randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial of an E. senticosus dry extract 300mg
daily for eight weeks study involved 20 participants aged 65 years
or more with hypertension and who were undergoing treatment
with digitalis (not further specified); it was stated that no
statistically significant differences in blood pressure control and
serum digoxin concentrations were observed, although supporting
data were not provided. Further study of the effects of well-
characterised preparations of E. senticosus root extracts on blood
pressure in different patient groups is required.

Several other clinical trial reports either did not provide any
data on frequency and type of adverse effects, or stated that no
adverse effects occurred during the study.

Preclinical data

Results of various animal toxicity studies have indicated ginseng
to be non-toxic. Many species have been exposed to extracts

----- PAGE 333 -----
Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

including mice, rats, rabbits, dogs, minks, deer, lambs, and
piglets.” Documented acute oral LDso9 values for various
preparations include: 23 mL/kg and 14.5 g/kg (mice), and greater
than 20mL/kg (dogs) for a 33% ethanolic extract; '® 31 g/kg
(mice) for the powdered root; greater than 3 g/kg (mice) for an
aqueous extract (equivalent to 25g dried roots/kg)."'*) No deaths
occurred in mice administered single 3 g/kg doses of a freeze-dried
aqueous extract.°”) Symptoms observed in dogs receiving 7.1 mL/
kg doses of an ethanolic extract (sedation, ataxia, loss of righting
reflex, hypopnoea, tremors, increased salivation and vomiting)
were attributed to the ethanol content of the extract. A chronic
toxicity study reported no toxic manifestations or deaths in rats
fed 5 mL/kg of an ethanolic extract for 320 days."

Teratogenicity studies in male and female rats, pregnant minks,
rabbits and lambs have reported no abnormalities in the offspring
and no adverse effects in the animals administered the extracts.
Premature death in parent female rabbits fed 13.5 mL/kg ethanolic
extract daily was attributed to ethanol intoxication.”

Mutagenicity studies using Salmonella typhimurium TA100
and TA98, and the micronucleus test in mice have reported no
activity for ginseng.”*) Differences in various serum biochemical
parameters have been reported between test (ginseng) and control
groups. Parameters affected included alkaline phosphatase and
gamma-glutamyl transferase enzymes (increased), serum trigly-
cerides (decreased), and creatinine and blood urea nitrogen
(increased). No pathological changes were found in rats
receiving a ginseng extract.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

The Russian literature on E. senticosus includes several contra-
indications and warnings with respect to its use, although the
scientific basis and evidence for many of these statements is not
clear, and some contradict recent research. These Russian
recommendations include the advice that ginseng should be
avoided by premenopausal women, healthy individuals aged less
than 40 years, and individuals who are highly energetic, nervous,
tense, hysteric, manic or schizophrenic,” which at least appear
to conflict with clinical research on the effects of E. senticosus
preparations when taken by athletes (i.e. highly energetic
individuals). It is also advised that E. senticosus should not be
taken with stimulants, including coffee, antipsychotic drugs or
during treatment with hormones, and that individuals considered
suitable to use ginseng should abstain from alcoholic beverages,
sexual activity, bitter substances and spicy foods during ginseng

6 It is also stated that E. senticosus is unsuitable for
(5)

us
individuals with high blood pressure (180/90 mmHg or greater).
In general, and in view of the lack of safety data, it is appropriate
to advise against the long-term or otherwise excessive use of
ginseng. Some clinical studies involving long-term administration
of ginseng have involved ginseng-free periods of 2-3 weeks every
30-60 days.

Drug interactions In view of the constituents of E. senticosus,
and the pharmacological actions of E. senticosus preparations and
their isolated constituents described following preclinical and, to a
lesser extent, clinical studies, the potential for preparations of E.
senticosus to interfere with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with anticoagulant, hypoglycae-
mic and/or hypo/hypertensive activity, should be considered.

A study involving healthy volunteers (7 = 12) who received a
preparation containing a standardised extract of E. senticosus
root in addition to ground root material (one 485 mg capsule,

containing approximately 2mg_ eleutheroside B and 4mg
eleutheroside E, twice daily for 14 days) found that, at the end
of the study, there were no statistically significant differences in
the pharmacokinetic parameters of the cytochrome P4503A4
probe substrate dextromethorphan and of the CYP2D6 probe
substrate alprazolam, when compared with baseline values. These
findings suggest that this E. senticosus preparation administered
according to this dosage regimen does not affect CYP3A4 and
CYP2D6 activity.”

There is an isolated report of raised serum digoxin
concentrations in a 74-year-old man who had been taking
digoxin for over ten years to control atrial fibrillation. His serum
digoxin concentration had been stable during this time in the
range 0.9 to 2.2nmol/L, but at a routine check-up (day 0) was
found to be 5.2nmol/L and remained high for a further two
weeks despite reductions in digoxin dose and, on day 10,
cessation of digoxin treatment.® On day 26, the patient revealed
he had been taking ‘Siberian ginseng! capsules since the previous
summer (duration of use not specified but was at least two
months) and stopped taking the product that day. His serum
digoxin concentration returned to within the normal therapeutic
range by day 33 (seven days after stopping the ginseng product),
and digoxin treatment was restarted. A positive rechallenge was
reported during which the patient's serum digoxin concentration
rose to 3.2nmol/L 52 days after re-starting the ginseng product.
Positive dechallenge occurred again with the serum digoxin
concentration falling to 1.2nmol/L six days after stopping
ginseng treatment. It is not stated in the report whether the
patient took the same or a different ginseng product during the
second episode of use, and no analysis of the product(s)
concerned was carried out. For this reason, the validity of the
report has been questioned.”

Some interference with a serum digoxin immunoassay (the
fluorescence polarisation immunoassay) has been reported in vitro
and in vivo (mice), leading to artificially raised measurements. °°”)

Pregnancy and lactation Teratogenicity studies in various
animal species have not reported any teratogenic effects for
ginseng. However, in view of the many pharmacological actions
documented for ginseng, the use of ginseng during both pregnancy
and lactation should be avoided. It is unknown whether the

pharmacologically active constituents in ginseng are secreted in
the breast milk.

okokk; Konstitutin. UK: Elagen.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Sigmafem. Australia: Astragalus Complex; Bacopa
Complex; Bioglan Ginsynergy; Gingo A; Ginkgo Biloba Plus;
Medinat Esten; Tyroseng. Spain: Energysor; Natusor Low
Blood Pressure; Tonimax. USA: Energy Support; Menopause
Support.

References

1 Yun-Choi HS e¢ al. Potential inhibitors of platelet aggregation from
plant sources, III. J Nat Prod 1987; 50: 1059-1064.

----- PAGE 334 -----
9

10

cel

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

Makarieva TN et al. Lignans from Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Siberian ginseng). Pharm Sci 1997; 3: 525-527.

Li XC et al. A new lignan glycoside from Eleutherococcus senticosus.
Planta Med 2001; 67: 776-778.

Tolonen A et al. Identification of isomeric dicaffeoylquinic acids from
Eleutherococcus senticosus using HPLC-ESI/TOF/MS and 'H-NMR
methods. Phytochem Anal 2002; 13: 316-328.

Farnsworth NR e¢ al. Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus):
Current status as an adaptogen. In: Wagner H et al., eds. Economics
and Medicinal Plant Research, vol 1, London: Academic Press, 1985:
155-209.

Phillipson JD, Anderson LA. Ginseng — quality, safety and efficacy?
Pharm J] 1984; 232: 161-165.

Segiet-Kujawa E, Kaloga M. Triterpenoid saponins of Eleutherococcus
senticosus roots. ] Nat Prod 1991; 54: 1044-1048.

Ryu J et al. A benzenoid from the stem of Acanthopanax senticosus.
Arch Pharm Res 2004; 27: 912-914 .

Chen M et al. Analysis of flavonoid constituents from leaves of
Acanthopanax senticosus Harms by electrospray tandem mass
spectrometry. Rapid Comm Mass Spectrom 2002; 16: 264-271.

Park SY et al. New 3,4-seco-lupane-type triterpene glycosides from
Acanthopanax senticosus forma inermis. ] Nat Prod 2000; 63: 1630-
1633.

Apers S et al. Quality control of roots of Eleutherococcus senticosus
by HPLC. Phytochem Anal 2005; 16: 55-60.

Slacanin I et al. The isolation of Eleutherococcus senticosus
constituents by centrifugal partition chromatography and their
quantitative determination by high-performance liquid
chromatography. Phytochem Anal 1991; 2: 137-142.

Yat PN et al. An improved extraction procedure for the rapid,
quantitative high-performance liquid chromatographic estimation of
the main eleutherosides (B and E) in Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Eleuthero). Phytochem Anal 1998; 9: 291-295.

Harkey MR et al. Variability in commercial ginseng products: an
analysis of 25 preparations. Am J Clin Nut 2001; 73: 1101-1106.
Hartz AJ et al. Randomized controlled trial of Siberian ginseng for
chronic fatigue. Psychological Med 2004; 34: 51-61.

Davydov M, Krikorian AD. Eleutherococcus senticosus (Rupr. &
Maxim.) Maxim. (Araliaceae) as an adaptogen: a close look. J
Ethnopharmacol 2000; 72: 345-393.

Glatthaar-Saalmiiller B et al. Antiviral activity of an extract derived
from roots of Eleutherococcus senticosus. Antiviral Res 2001; 50: 223—
228.

Medon PJ et al. Hypoglycaemic effect and toxicity of Eleutherococcus
senticosus following acute and chronic administration in mice. Acta
Pharmacol Sin 1981; 2: 281-285.

Hikino H et al. Isolation and hypoglycaemic activity of eleutherans A,
B, C, D, E, F, and G: Glycans of Eleutherococcus senticosus roots. J
Nat Prod 1986; 49: 293-297.

Medon PJ et al. Effects of Eleutherococcus senticosus extracts on
hexobarbital metabolism in vivo and in vitro. J] Ethnopharmacol 1984;
10: 235-241.

Yi JM et al. Acanthopanax senticosus root inhibits mast cell-
dependent anaphylaxis. Clinica Chimica Acta 2001; 312: 163-168.
Jeong HJ et al. Inhibitory effects of mast cell-mediated allergic
reactions by cell cultured Siberian ginseng. Immunopharmacol
Immunotoxicol 2001; 23: 107-117.

Schmolz MW et al. The synthesis of Rantes, G-CSF, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6,
IL-12 and IL-13 in human whole-blood cultures is modulated by an
extract from Eleutherococcus senticosus L. roots. Phytother Res 2001;
15: 268-270.

Borchers ATet al. Comparative effects of three species of ginseng on
human peripheral blood lymphocyte proliferative responses. Int J
Immunother 1998; XIV: 143-152.

Wang H e¢ al. Asian and Siberian ginseng as a potential modulator of
immune function: an in vitro cytokine study using mouse
macrophages. Clinica Chimica Acta 2003; 327: 123128.

Panossian A et al. Effect of andrographolide and Kan Jang — fixed
combination of extract SHW-10 and extract SHE-3 - on proliferation
of human lymphocytes, production of cytokines and immune
activation markers in the whole blood cells culture. Phytomedicine
2002; 9: 598-605.

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S51

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

Shen ML et al.. Immunopharmacological effects of polysaccharides
from Acanthopanax senticosus on experimental animals. Int J
Immunopharmacol 1991; 13: 549-554.

Han SB et al. Toll-like receptor-mediated activation of B cells and
macrophages by polysaccharide isolated from cell culture of
Acanthopanax senticosus. Int Immunopharmacol 2003; 3: 1301-1312.
Wagner H e¢ al. Immunstimulierend wirkende Polysaccharide
(heteroglykane) aus hoheren Pflanzen. Arzneimittelforschung 1985;
35: 1069.

Wagner H. Immunostimulants from medicinal plants. In: Chang HM
et al., eds. Advances in Chinese Medicinal Materials Research.
Singapore: World Scientific, 1985: 159.

Kimura Y, Sumiyoshi M. Effects of various Eleutherococcus senticosus
cortex on swimming time, natural killer activity and corticosterone
level in forced swimming stressed mice. ] Ethnopharmacol 2004; 95:
447-453.

Lewis WH et al. No adaptogen response of mice to ginseng and
Eleutherococcus infusions. J Ethnopharmacol 1983; 8: 209-214.
Martinez B, Staba EJ. The physiological effects of Aralia, Panax and
Eleutherococcus on exercised rats. Jpn J] Pharmacol 1984; 35: 79-85.
Gaffney BT et al. Panax ginseng and Eleutherococcus senticosus may
exaggerate an already existing biphasic response to stress via
inhibition of enzymes which limit the binding of stress hormones to
their receptors. Medical Hypotheses 2001; 56: 567-572.

Kwan CY et al. Vascular effects of Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus
senticosus): endothelium-dependent NO- and EDHF-mediated
relaxation depending on vessel size. Naumyn Schmiedebergs Arch
Pharmacol 2004; 369: 473-480.

Liu J et al. Effects of several Chinese herbal aqueous extracts on
human sperm motility in vitro. Andrologia 2004; 36: 78-83.

Hacker B, Medon PJ. Cytotoxic effects of Eleutherococcus senticosus
aqueous extracts in combination with N°-(A?-isopentenyl)-adenosine
and 1-f-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine against L1210 leukemia cells. J
Pharm Sci 1984; 73: 270-272.

Yokozawa T et al. Protective effects of Acanthopanax Radix extract
against endotoxemia induced by lipopolysaccharide. Phytotherapy Res
2003; 17: 353-357.

Cha YS et al. Acanthopanax senticosus extract prepared from
cultured cells decreases adiposity and obesity indices in CS7BL/6]
mice fed a high fat diet. ] Med Food 2004; 7: 422-429.

Provalova NV et al. Mechanisms underling the effects of adaptogens
on erythropoiesis during paradoxical sleep deprivation. Bull Exp Biol
Med 2002; 133: 428-432.

Lee S$ et al.. Antibacterial compounds from the leaves of
Acanthopanax senticosus. Arch Pharm Res 2003; 26: 40-42.

Yi JM et al. Effect of Acanthopanax senticosus stem on mast cell-
dependent anaphylaxis. J Ethnopharmacol 2002; 79: 347-352.
Nishibe S et al. Phenolic compounds from stem bark of Acanthopanax
senticosus and their pharmacological effect in chronic swimming
stressed rats. Chem Pharm Bull 1990; 38: 1763-1765.

Jin JL et al. Platelet anti-aggregating triterpenoids from the leaves of
Acanthopanax senticosus and the fruits of A. sessiliflorus. Planta Med
2004; 70: 564-566.

Bu Y e¢ al. Siberian ginseng reduces infarct volume in transient focal
cerebral ischaemia in Sprague-Dawley rats. Phytother Res 2005; 19:
1167-1169.

Yang JY et al. Effect of Acanthopanax senticosus on lipoprotein lipase
in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Phytother Res 2004; 18: 160-163.

Lee S et al. Anti-oxidant activities of Acanthopanax senticosus stems
and their lignan components. Arch Pharm Res 2004; 27: 106-110.
Park EJ, et al. Water-soluble polysaccharide from Eleutherococcus
senticosus stems attenuates fulminant hepatic failure induced by D-
galactosamine and lipopolysaccharide in mice. Basic Clin Pharmacol
Toxicol 2004; 94: 298-304.

Jung HJ et al. In vivo anti-inflammatory and antinociceptive effects of
liriodendrin isolated from the stem bark of Acanthopanax senticocus.
Planta Med 2003; 69: 610-616.

Yoon TJ et al. Anti-metastatic activity of Acanthopanax senticosus
extract and its possible immunological mechanism of action. ]
Ethnopharmacol 2004; 93: 247-253.

Ha ES et al. Anti-metastatic activity of glycoprotein fractionated from
Acanthopanax senticosus, involvement of NK-cell and macrophage
activation. Arch Pharm Res 2004; 27: 217-224.

----- PAGE 335 -----
52

53

54

SS

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

Ginseng, Eleutherococcus

Hibasami H et al. Induction of apoptosis by Acanthopanax senticosus
HARMS and its component, sesamin in human stomach cancer
KATO III cells. Oncol Rep 2000; 7: 1213-1216.

Jang MH et al. Protective effect of Acanthopanax senticosus against
ethanol-induced apoptosis of human neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-
MC. Am J Chinese Med 2003; 31: 379-388.

Fujikawa T et al. Acanthopanax senticosus Harms as a prophylactic
for MTMP-induced Parkinson's disease in rats. J Ethnopharmacol
2005; 97: 375-381.

Fujikawa T et al.. Effect of sesamin in Acanthopanax senticosus
HARMS on behavioral dysfunction in rotenone-induced parkinsonian
rats. Biol Pharm Bull 2005; 28: 169-172.

Cicero AFG et al.. Effects of Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus
senticosus Maxim.) on elderly quality of life: a randomized clinical
trial. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 2004; 9 (Suppl. Suppl.): 69-73.

Gaffney BT et al. The effects of Eleutherococcus senticosus and Panax
ginseng on steroidal hormone indices of stress and lymphocyte subset
numbers in endurance athletes. Life Sciences 2001; 70: 431-442.
Dowling EA et al. Effect of Eleutherococcus senticosus on
submaximal and maximal exercise performance. Med Sci Sports
Exercise 1996; 28: 482-489.

Asano K et al. Effect of Eleutherococcus senticosus extract on human
physical working capacity. Planta Med 1986; 52: 175.

Facchinetti F et al.. Eleutherococcus senticosus reduces cardiovascular
stress response in healthy subjects: a randomized, placebo-controlled
trial. Stress Health 2002; 18: 11-17.

Szolomicki S et al. The influence of active components of
Eleutherococcus senticosus on cellular defence and physical fitness in
man. Phytotherapy Res 2000; 14: 30-35.

Williams M. Immunoprotection against herpes simplex type II
infection by eleutherococcus root extract. Int J Alt Conrp Med 1995;
13: 9-12.

Bohn B et al. Flow-cytometric studies with Eleutherococcus senticosus
extract as an immunomodulatory agent. Arzneimittelforschung 1987;
37: 1193-1196.

Melchior J et al. Double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot and phase III
study of activity of standardized Andrographis paniculata herba Nees
extract fixed combination (Kan Jang) in the treatment of
uncomplicated upper-respiratory tract infection. Phytomedicine 2000;
7: 341-350.

Gabrielan ES et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled study of
Andrographis paniculata fixed combination Kan Jang in the treatment
of acute upper respiratory tract infections including sinusitis.
Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 589-597.

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

78

79

80

Amaryan G et al. Double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized, pilot
clinical trial of ImmunoGuard" —a standardized fixed combination of
Andrographis paniculata Nees, with Eleutherococcus senticosus
Maxim, Schizandra chinensis Bail. and Glycyrrhiza glabra L. extracts
in patients with familial Mediterranean fever. Phytomedicine 2003; 10:
271-285.

Narimanian M et al. Randomized trial of a fixed combination of
herbal extracts containing Adhatoda vasica, Echinacea purpurea and
Eleutherococcus senticosus in patients with upper respiratory tract
infections. Phytomedicine 2005; 12: 539-547.

Poolsup N et al. Andrographis paniculata in the symptomatic
treatment of uncomplicated upper respiratory tract infection: a
systematic review of randomized controlled trials. C Clin Pharm Ther
2004; 29: 37-45.

Winther K et al. Russian root (Siberian ginseng) improves cognitive
functions in middle-aged people, whereas Ginkgo biloba seems
effective only in the elderly. J Neurol Sci 1997; 150: $90.

Wu YN et al. Effect of ciwujia (Radix acanthopanacis senticosus)
preparation on human stamina. J Hyg Res 1996; 25: 57-61.
Cheuvront SN e¢ al. Effect of Endurox’ on metabolic responses to
submaximal exercise. Int J Sport Nut 1999; 9: 434-442.

Plowman SA et al. The effects of Endurox on the physiological
responses to stair-stepping exercise. Res Q Exercise Sport 1999; 70:
385-388.

Eschbach LC The effect of Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus
senticosus) on substrate utilization and performance during prolonged
cycling. Int J Sport Nut Exercise Metab 2000; 10: 444-451.

Goulet EDB, Dionne IJ. Assessement of the effects of Eleutherococcus
senticosus on endurance performance. Int ] Sport Nut Exercise Metab
2000; 14: 75-83.

Hirosue T et al. Mutagenicity and subacute toxicity of Acanthopanax
senticosus extracts in rats. J Food Hyg Soc Jpn 1986; 27: 380-386.
Baldwin CA et al. What pharmacists should know about ginseng.
Pharm J] 1986; 237: 583.

Donovan JL et al. Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus)
effects on CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 activity in normal volunteers. Drug
Metabolism Disposition 2003; 31: 519-522.

McRae S. Elevated serum digoxin levels in a patient taking digoxin
and Siberian ginseng. Can Med Ass J 1996; 155: 293-295.

Awang DVC. Siberian ginseng toxicity may be case of mistaken
identity. Can Med Ass J 1996; 155: 1237.

Dasgupta A. Effect of Asian and Siberian ginseng on serum digoxin
measurement by five digoxin immunoasays. Am J] Clin Pathol 2003;
119: 298-303.

----- PAGE 336 -----
Ginseng, Panax

aspects of Panax species preparations. Clinical trials of Pan
species root preparations typically have involved small
numbers of patients and been of short duration, so have the
statistical power only to detect very common, acute adverse
effects. The available evidence suggests that preparations of
Panax species root are well-tolerated when used for limited
periods of time at recommended doses. Rigorous
investigation of safety aspects of well-characterised Panax
species root preparations administered orally at different
dosages, including the effects of long-term treatment, is
required. In view of the many pharmacological actions
documented, the potential for preparations of Panax species
to interfere with other medicines administered concurrently,
particularly those with similar or opposing effects, should be
considered. In general, and in view of the lack of safety data, it
is appropriate to advise against the long-term or otherwise
excessive use of Panax species.

The use of Panax species during both pregnancy and
breastfeeding should be avoided.

Species (Family)
Various Panax species (Araliaceae) including:
*Panax ginseng Meyer
tPanax quinquefolius L.
+Panax notoginseng (Burk.) Chen ex C.Y. Wu
This monograph focuses on P. ginseng, although some
information on other Panax species is also included.

Synonym(s)

*P. quinquefolius var. coreensis Sieb., P. schin-seng T. Nees, P.
schin-seng var. coraiensis T. Nees, P. versus Oken, Ren Shen, Asian
Ginseng, Chinese Ginseng, Korean Ginseng, Oriental Ginseng
+P. quinquefolius var. americanus Raf., P. quinquefolius var.
obovatus Raf., P. cuneataus Raf., P. americanus var. elatus Raf.,
American Ginseng

$Aralia quinquifolia var. notoginseng (Burk.), P. pseudoginseng
var. notoginseng (Burk.) Hoo & Tseng, San Qi, Sanchi Ginseng,
Tienchi Ginseng

Part(s) Used

Root. White ginseng represents the peeled and sun-dried root
whilst red ginseng is unpeeled, steamed and dried.

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'¢®

BHP 1996'@”)

BP 2007'°*)

Complete German Commission E‘
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Ph Eur 2007'08)

USP29/NF24'C8°)

(G3)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and Gé.

Terpenoids Complex mixture of compounds (ginsenosides or
panaxosides) involves three aglycone structural types — two
tetracyclic dammarane-type sapogenins (protopanaxadiol and
protopanaxatriol) and a pentacyclic triterpene oleanolic acid-
type. Different naming conventions have been used for these
compounds. In Japan, they are known as ginsenosides and are
represented by Rx where 'x' indicates a particular saponin. For
example, R,, Ry, Re, Ra, Rei. In Russia, the saponins are
referred to as panaxosides and are represented as panaxoside X
where 'X' can be A-F. The suffixes in the two systems are not
equivalent and thus panaxoside A does not equal R, but Rg.”
The saponin content varies between different Panax species. For
example, in P. ginseng the major ginsenosides are Ry.;, R. and Ry.
whereas in P. quinquefolis Ry. is the only major ginsenoside."’

----- PAGE 337 -----
Ginseng, Panax

Other constituents Volatile oil (trace) mainly consisting of
sesquiterpenes including panacene, limonene, terpineol, eucalyp-
tol, o-phellandrene and citral,”’ sesquiterpene alcohols including
the panasinsanols A and B, and ginsenol,* polyacetylenes,*®
sterols, polysaccharides (mainly pectins and glucans), starch (8—
32%), B-amylase, free sugars, vitamins (B,, Bz, Bia, panthotenic
acid, biotin), choline (0.1-0.2%), fats, minerals.

The sesquiterpene alcohols are stated to be characteristic
components of Panax ginseng in that they are absent from the
volatile oils of other Panax species.”

Quality of plant material and commercial products

According to the British and European Pharmacopoeias, Panax
ginseng consists of the whole or cut dried root, designated as
white ginseng, treated with steam and then dried, designated red
ginseng, of Panax ginseng C.A.Meyer.'($8'°% As with other
herbal medicinal products, there is variation in the qualitative and
quantitative composition of crude plant material obtained from
Panax species and commercial Panax ginseng preparations and
those derived from other Panax species.

Thirty seven commercial samples of root from P. ginseng (n =
22), P. quinquefolius (n = 10) and P. notoginseng (n = 5) obtained
from herbal outlets in Taiwan were analysed to determine their
respective chemical profiles.” The saponin content of P
notoginseng and P. quinquefolius was higher than that of P.
ginseng, although statistical analyses to support this were not

Sterols

Rb,
1
R'O Rb2
Re
20 S-protopanaxadiol
R'=R2=H i
OR?

OH
H

Ginsenoside

performed. Mean total saponin (Ry1, Ry-2, Re Ray Res Re Ry)
contents for P. notoginseng, P. quinquefolius wild, P. quinquefolius
cultivated, P. ginseng white, and P. ginseng red were 118.7, 58.0,
43.1, 5.2 and 5.9mg/g, respectively. Variations in total saponin
content within species and types of ginseng were also found: P.
notoginseng 23.8-30.7, P. quinquefolius wild 8.7-24.0, P. quinque-
folius cultivated 8.4-19.5, P. ginseng white 3.5-9.0, and P. ginseng
red 3.9-7.2 mg/g.) In another analytical study, the saponin
content of 47 samples of ginseng obtained from 12 Panax taxa was
examined using reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromato-
graphy. Material from P. ginseng was found to have the lowest
total saponin content (5.8-15.6 mg/g).

Analysis using gas chromatography (GC) and GC-mass
spectrometry of best-selling commercial preparations of Panax
species purchased from pharmacies and health-food stores in
European countries, Argentina, Canada, China and the USA
found variations in their saponin content: P. ginseng, pure root
preparations, 1.9-8.1% (mn = 14); P. ginseng, extract preparations,
4.9-13.3% (n = 20); P. quinquefolius, 5.2% (n = 1); P. notoginseng,
7.5% (n = 1).

Analysis of 25 'ginseng' products available for purchase from a
health-food store in the USA included eight products labelled as
containing Panax ginseng, four labelled as containing P. quinque-
folius, one labelled as containing P. notoginseng, and three labelled
as containing mixtures of different species.” All of the products
labelled as containing Panax species contained ginsenosides,
although total ginsenoside content varied: monopreparations of

R! R?

p-D-Gic 2. g.p-Gic| p-D-Gle +*- ¢-0-Gle

1

B-D-Gic 8+ g.p-Gic} a-t-Ara + g.0.Gic

1-2

p-D-Gle 2+ g.p-Gic} a-t-At +8 p.p-Gic
p-D-Gle +%, .p-Gic} f-D-Gie

Ginsenoside Re
Re | a-L-Rha sees B-D-Glc| B-D-Gle

HO rt | #0-Glc 2+ ¢.0-Gle| 4
or' Rg; | A-D-Gle -D-Gie

20 S-protopanaxatriol © Rgp | «-t-Rha+®. g.p.Glc| H

Rl=R=H

Glc = glucose, Ara = arabinose, Arf = arabinofuranoside, Rha = rhamnose

Triterpenes

oleanolic acid

Figure 1 Selected constituents of Panax ginseng.

----- PAGE 338 -----
powdered P. ginseng, 0.29-3.36mg/100g product (n = 6);
monopreparations of powdered P. quinquefolius, 1.24-2.91 mg/
100g product (2 = 2); monopreparation of powdered P.
notoginseng, 4.27 mg/100 g product (m = 1); liquid monoprepara-
tions of P. ginseng, 0.44-0.69 mg/100 mL product (” = 2); liquid
monopreparations of P  quinquefolius, 0.78-1.30 mg/100 mL
product (m = 2). Of the 16 products containing Panax species,
seven were labelled as containing a specific concentration of
ginsenosides, yet the actual content deviated from the labelled
amount, containing 18.0-136.8% of the amount stated on the
label.” All but one of these products contained a lower
concentration of ginsenosides than the labelled amount.

In 2005, the USA Department of the Interior Fish and Wildlife
Service determined that wild P. quinquefolius root must be at least
ten years old and have four 'prongs' or leaves before it can be
legally exported from the USA.) This decision extended the
previous five-year minimum age limit determined by the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
(CITES).

Food Use

Ginseng (P. ginseng) is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that ginseng can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.(@!®

Herbal Use

Ginseng (P. ginseng) is stated to possess thymoleptic, sedative,
demulcent and stomachic properties, and is reputed to be an
aphrodisiac. Traditionally, it has been used for neurasthenia,
neuralgia, insomnia, hypotonia, and specifically for depressive
states associated with sexual inadequacy.(C* 0% S% 6

P. ginseng and other Panax species have been used traditionally
in Chinese medicine for many thousands of years. Uses include as
a stimulant, tonic, diuretic and stomachic,“> but typically the
different species have different clinical uses. Traditionally, use has
been divided into two categories: short-term — to improve
stamina, concentration, healing process, stress resistance, vigi-
lance and work efficiency in healthy individuals, and long-term —
to improve well-being in debilitated and degenerative conditions
especially those associated with old age.

Dosage

Traditionally, dosage recommendations differ for short-term use
by healthy individuals and long-term use by elderly or debilitated
persons.

Short-term (for younger and healthy individuals) 0.5-1.0g
root daily, as two divided doses, for a course generally lasting 15—
20 days and with a treatment-free period of approximately two
weeks between consecutive courses. Doses are recommended to be
taken in the morning, two hours before a meal, and in the evening,
not less than two hours after a meal.

Long-term (for older individuals and those with poor health)
0.4-0.8 g root daily. Doses may be taken continuously.”

In China, doses used traditionally and currently are typically 3—
9g root powder daily taken as a decoction."'?

Dosages used in clinical trials vary depending on the Panax
species, type of preparation and indication under investigation.
Several studies have assessed the effects of a standardised extract

Ginseng, Panax

Figure 2 Panax ginseng — dried drug substance (root).

of P. ginseng root (G115) at doses of 100-400 mg daily for 4-12
weeks.

Pharmacological Actions

In the 1950s, early studies on ginseng reported its ability to
improve both physical endurance and mental ability in animals
and humans.'” In addition, the 'tonic' properties of ginseng were
confirmed by the observation that doses taken for a prolonged
period of time increased the overall well-being of an individual,
measured by various parameters such as appetite, sleep and
absence of moodiness, resulting in an increased work efficiency.”
Since then, numerous studies have investigated the complex
pharmacology of ginseng in both animals and humans. The
saponin glycosides (ginsenosides/panaxosides) are generally
recognised as the main active constituents in ginseng, although
pharmacological activities have also been associated with non-
saponin components.

The following sections on preclinical and clinical studies are
intended to give an indication of the type of research that has been
published for ginseng rather than to provide a comprehensive
bibliography of ginseng research papers.

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics There are only limited data on the
pharmacokinetics of the constituents of P. ginseng. Ginsenosides
R,-1, Rp-1 and Ry2 have been detected in the gastrointestinal tract
of rats following oral administration of P. ginseng root, although
absorption rates are low.‘'**?

Corticosteroid-like activity Many of the activities exhibited by
Panax ginseng have been compared with corticosteroid-like
actions and results of endocrinological studies have suggested
that the ginsenosides may primarily augment adrenal steroidogen-
esis via an indirect action on the pituitary gland.°”’ Ginsenosides
have increased adrenal cAMP in intact but not in hypophysecto-
mised rats and dexamethasone, a synthetic glucocorticoid that

----- PAGE 339 -----
Ginseng, Panax

provides positive feedback at the level of the pituitary gland, has
blocked the effect of ginsenosides on pituitary corticotrophin and
°) Hormones produced by the
pituitary and adrenal glands are known to play a significant role in
the adaptation capabilities of the body. Working capacity is one
of the indices used to measure adaptation ability and ginseng has
been shown to increase the working capacity of rats following
single (132%) and seven-day (179%) administration (intraperito-
neal). Furthermore, seven-day administration of ginseng decreased
the reduction seen in working capacity when the pituitary—
adrenocortical system is blocked by prior administration of
ydrocortisone.?

adrenal corticosterone secretion.

Hypoglycaemic activity Hypoglycaemic activity has been
documented for ginseng and attributed to both saponin and
polysaccharide constituents. In vitro studies using isolated rat
pancreatic islets have shown that ginsenosides promote an insulin
release which is independent of extracellular calcium and which
utilises a different mechanism to that of glucose.?” In addition, in
vivo studies in rats have reported that a P. ginseng extract
increases the number of insulin receptors in bone marrow and
reduces the number of glucocorticoid receptors in rat brain
homogenate.” Both of these actions are thought to contribute to
the antidiabetic action of P ginseng, in view of the known
diabetogenic action of adrenal corticoids and the knowledge that
the number of insulin receptors generally decreases with
ageing.)

Hypoglycaemic activity observed in both normal and alloxan-
induced hyperglycaemic mice administered P ginseng or P.
quinquefolium (intraperitoneal) has also been attributed to non-
saponin but uncharacterised principles?*~” or to glycan (poly-
saccharide) components.°° > Glycans isolated from Korean or
Chinese P ginseng (A-E) were found to pos: stronger
ypoglycaemic activity than those isolated from Japanese P.
ginseng (Q-U).°” Proposed mechanisms of action have included
elevated plasma insulin concentration due to an increase of insulin

secretion from pancreatic islets, and enhancement of insulin
sensitivity.” However, these mechanisms do not explain the total
ypoglycaemic activity that has been exhibited by the poly-
saccharides and further mechanisms are under investigation.°””
The effect of panaxans A and B from P. ginseng roots on the
activities of key enzymes participating in carbohydrate metabo-
ism has been studied.°?) DPG-3-2, a non-saponin component,
as been shown to stimulate insulin biosynthesis in pancreatic
preparations from various hyperglycaemic (but not normoglycae-
mic) animals; ginsenosides Ry; and R,_; were found to decrease
islet insulin concentrations to an undetectable level.°”

Cardiovascular activity Individual saponins from P. notoginseng
have been reported to have different actions on cardiac
haemodynamics.°° For instance R,, Rg and total flower
saponins have increased cardiac performance whilst Rj, and total
leaf saponins have decreased it; calcium antagonist activity has
been reported for Ry, but not for R,; Ry but not R, has produced a
protective effect on experimental myocardial infarction in
rabbits.°° Negative chronotropic and inotropic effects in vitro
have been observed for ginseng saponins and a mechanism of
action similar to that of verapamil has been suggested.° In vitro
studies on the isolated rabbit heart have reported an increase in
coronary blood flow together with a positive inotropic effect.°”
Anti-arrhythmic action on aconitine and barium chloride (rat)
and adrenaline (rabbit)-induced arrhythmias, and prolongation of
RR, PR and QT, intervals (rat), have been documented for
saponins R.., and Rg; from P. notoginseng. The mode of action

was thought to be similar to that of amiodarone.°* Ginsenosides
(i.p.) have been reported to protect mice against metabolic
disturbances and myocardial damage associated with conditions
of severe anoxia.)

P. notoginseng has produced a marked hypotensive response
together with bradycardia following intravenous administration to
rats. The dose-related effect was blocked by many antagonists
suggesting multi-site activity.°”) Higher doses were found to cause
vasoconstriction rather than vasodilation in renal, mesenteric and
femoral arteries.°”

The total ginseng saponin fraction (Panax species not specified)
has been reported to be devoid of haemolytic activity. However,
individual ginsenosides have been found to exhibit either
haemolytic or protective activities. Protective ginsenosides include
R., Ry.2 and R,, whereas haemolytic saponins have included Ry,
Ry and R¢.° The number and position of sugars attached to the
sapogenin moiety was thought to determine activity.“ Haemo-
static activity has also been documented.”

Oral administration of P. ginseng to rats fed a high cholesterol
diet reduced serum cholesterol and triglycerides, increased high-
density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, decreased platelet adhe-
siveness, and decreased fatty changes to the liver.” P. ginseng has
also been reported to reduce blood coagulation and enhance
fibrinolysis.“ Panaxynol and the ginsenosides R., Rga and Ry»
have been documented as the main antiplatelet components in P.
ginseng inhibiting aggregation, release reaction and thromboxane
formation in vitro.“ Anti-inflammatory activity and inhibition
of thromboxane B, have previously been described for panax-
ynol.8) Anticomplementary activity in vitro (human serum) has
been documented for P. ginseng polysaccharides with highest
activity observed in strongly acidic polysaccharide fractions.”

Effects on neurotransmitters Studies in rats have shown that a
standardised P. ginseng extract (G115) inhibits the development of
morphine tolerance and physical dependence, of a decre
hepatic glutathione concentrations, and of dopamine receptor
sensitivity without antagonising morphine analgesia, as _pre-
viously documented for the individual saponins.“ The inhibition
of tolerance was thought to be associated with a reduction in
morphinone production, a toxic metabolite which irreversibly
blocks the opiate receptor sites, and with the activation of
morphinone-glutathione conjugation, a detoxication process. The
mechanism of inhibition of physical dependence was unclear but
thought to be associated with changed ratios of adrenaline,
noradrenaline, dopamine and serotonin in the brain.”

A total ginsenoside fraction has been reported to inhibit the
uptake of various neurotransmitters into rat brain synaptosomes
in descending order of gamma-aminobutyrate and noradrenaline,
dopamine, glutamate and serotonin.“*”’ The fraction containing
ginsenoside Rg was most effective. Uptake of metabolic substrates
2-deoxy-p-glucose and leucine was only slightly affected and
therefore it was proposed that the P. ginseng extracts were acting
centrally rather than locally as surface active agents.

Studies in rats have indicated that the increase in dopaminergic
receptors in the brain observed under conditions of stress is
prevented by pretreatment with P. ginseng.®

se in

Hepatoprotective activity Antoxidant and detoxifying activities
have been documented.” Protection against carbon tetrachlor-
ide- and galactosamine-induced hepatotoxicity has been observed
in cultured rat hepatocytes for specific ginsenosides (oleanolic

“1 series) (49°59) i ses
acid and dammarane series). However, at higher doses
certain ginsenosides from both series were found to exhibit
simultaneous cytotoxic activity.

----- PAGE 340 -----
Cytotoxic and antitumour activity Cytotoxic activity (EDso
0.5 g/mL) versus L1210 has been documented for polyacetylenes
isolated from P. ginseng root.°*®*" The antitumour effect of
ginseng polysaccharides in tumour-bearing mice has been
associated with an immunological mechanism of action.°)
Ginseng polysaccharides have been reported to increase the
lifespan of tumour-bearing mice and to inhibit the growth of
tumour cells in vivo, although cytocidal action was not seen in
vitro.» Antitumour activity in vitro versus several tumour cell
lines has been documented for a polyacetylene, panaxytriol, from
P ginseng.»

Antiviral activity Antiviral activity (versus Semliki forest virus;
34-40% protection) has been documented for P. ginseng extract
(G115, Pharmaton) administered orally to rats.°* The extract
also enhanced the level of protection afforded by 6-MFA, an
interferon-inducing agent of fungal origin.” P. ginseng has been
found to induce in vitro and in vivo production of interferon and
to augment the natural killer and antibody dependent cytotoxic
activities in human peripheral lymphocytes.°* > In addition, P.
ginseng enhances the antibody-forming cell response to sheep red

blood cells in mice and stimulates cell mediated immunity both in
(54, 55)

vitro and in vivo. ) In view of these observations, it has been
proposed that the antiviral activity of P ginseng may be

immunologically mediated.

Clinical studies

Clinical trials of preparations of P ginseng and other Panax
species have focused on assessing effects related to the reputed
adaptogenic properties of this herbal medicinal product, although
rigorous clinical investigations are limited. Studies have tested
different Panax species preparations, including combination
herbal preparations containing P. ginseng, which vary qualitatively
and quantitatively in their phytochemical composition. Further-
more, different preparations have been administered according to
different dosage regimens, and to different study populations
making interpretation of the results difficult. A large body of
clinical research has been published in the Chinese and other
Asian literature, making access difficult, although many of these
studies are unlikely to meet contemporary Western standards in
terms of their design, analysis and reporting.’ Therefore, at
present there is insufficient evidence to support definitively the
efficacy of specific Panax species preparations in the various
indications for which they are used and/or have been tested.

Details of several clinical trials of ginseng (Panax spp.) prepara-
tions published in the English literature are summarised below.

Effects on physical performance Several studies have found that
preparations of P. ginseng do not improve physical performance in
healthy adults. In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial, 38 healthy adults received an aqueous extract of P. ginseng
(G115, Pharmaton SA, Lugano, Switzerland) 200 mg twice daily
for eight weeks.°°
testing before and after the intervention; recovery from exercise
was also monitored. At the end of the study, data from 27
participants were available for analysis. No statistically significant
differences in physical performance and heart rate recovery were
detected between the ginseng and placebo groups.°° Similar
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies have found
that treatment with P. ginseng root extract (G115) 200 mg daily for
eight weeks had no statistically significant effects on maximal
work performance, oxygen uptake during resting, exercise and
recovery, respiratory exchange ratio, minute ventilation, heart rate

Participants underwent exhaustive exercise

Ginseng, Panax

and blood lactic acid concentrations in 19 healthy adult females (p
> 0.05 for each),°” and no effect on oxygen consumption,
respiratory exchange ratio, minute ventilation, heart rate, blood
lactic acid concentrations and perceived exertion in 36 healthy
adult males who received P. ginseng root extract (G115) 200 or
400 mg daily for eight weeks.°*) In a further randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 28 healthy adults,
administration of P ginseng root extract (not further specified)
200 mg daily for three weeks had no statistically significant effects
on maximal exercise capacity, total exercise time, work load,
plasma
perceived exertion.” As all of these studies involved only smal
numbers of participants it is possible that they did not have
sufficient statistical power to detect a difference between the
treatment and placebo groups if one exists.

actate concentrations, haematocrit, heart rate an

Effects on cognitive performance Several studies have examine:
the effects of preparations of P. ginseng root, typically the
commercial product G115, alone, or in combination with other
herbal ingredients, on cognitive performance. Generally, these
studies have involved healthy volunteers, and trials evaluating the
effects of P. ginseng root preparations on patients with impaire
cognitive function are lacking. Further research examining the
effects of acute and longer-term administration of preparations of
P. ginseng and other Panax species in both healthy individuals ani
patients with impaired cognitive function are required. In a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study involving 15
healthy individuals, P ginseng root extract (G115) 200mg as a
single oral dose had significant effects on certain aspects of
electroencephalogram recordings, such as reductions in fronta
theta and beta activity, when compared with placebo.) These
findings suggest that P. ginseng root extract can directly modulate
cerebroelectrical activity.(°”

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study, 30
healthy individuals received capsules containing P. ginseng extract
(G115) 200 or 400 mg as a single dose before undergoing a battery
of tests designed to assess cognitive performance. A statistically
significant improvement in one test of cognitive performance
(serial sevens) was observed with the lower ginseng dose,
compared with placebo, but no statistically significant difference
was observed with the higher dose, and there were no statistically
significant differences in other tests of cognitive performance for
‘© There was a statistically significant improvement in
scores for mental fatigue for both doses when measured after the
third battery of tests, but this finding was not consistent when
measured at other timepoints.

In another double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study, 28
healthy individuals received single doses of P. ginseng root extract
(G115) 200 mg, an ethanolic extract of guarana (Paullinia cupana)
75mg, both herbal preparations, or placebo, with a one-week
wash-out period between each; participants undertook a battery
of cognitive performance tests before and after treatments.’
Administration of P. ginseng root extract, compared with placebo,
led to statistically significant improvements in some (e.g. speed of
attention, speed of memory, secondary memory) but not all (e.g.
accuracy of attention, working memory, Bond-Lader mood scales)
tests of cognitive performance, although improvements were not
observed at every timepoint measured after administration. In
some tests, administration of both ginseng and guarana led to
greater improvements than did ginseng alone.) In. similar
experiments, 20 healthy individuals received single doses of P.
ginseng root extract (G115) 200, 400, 600 mg, or placebo, and a
combination of P. ginseng root extract and Ginkgo biloba leaf

either dose.

----- PAGE 341 -----
Ginseng, Panax

extract at doses of 200 and 120, 400 and 240, 600 and 360 mg,
respectively, or placebo." Statistically significant improvements
in one cognitive performance test (serial sevens) were observed
with administration of P. ginseng root extract 400 mg, compared
with placebo, but reduced performance in this test was seen
following administration of the 200mg dose. Following admin-
istration of the combination preparation, statistically significant
improvements in certain tests at certain timepoints, but these
results were not consistent for all doses tested and across all
timepoints measured in the study.

The effects of the same combination preparation of P. ginseng
and G. biloba on memory were assesse: d, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre, parallel group trial invol-
ving 256 healthy volunteers aged 38-67 years (mean (SD), 56 (7)
years). Participants received a preparation containing P. ginseng
root extract and G. biloba leaf extract 100 and 60 mg, respectively,

in a randomis

blinded, placebo-controlled, crossover trial involving non-diabetic
individuals, no effect on post-prandial glycaemia was observed
following oral administration 40 minutes before glucose challenge
of 6g of the same commercial P. quinquefolius preparation, but
obtained from a different batch.” This conflicting result may be
due to the lower ginsenoside content of the latter product
(containing protopanaxadiols Ry; 0.65%, Ry-2 0.02%, R. 0.11%,
Rg 0.12%, and protopanaxatriols R,.1 0.08%, R. 0.67%).
Other similar studies involving non-diabetic individuals have
reported different and less consistent results for preparations of P.
ginseng. In two randomised, single-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover studies, 11 individuals received capsules containing
500mg three-year-old powdered whole root of P ginseng
(containing protopanaxadiols Ry; 0.18%, Ry2 0.09%, Re
0.07%, Rg 0.02%, and protopanaxatriols R,., 0.16%, R, 0.17%
and R,¢ 0.12%) at a single dose of 1, 2, 3, 6 and 9g 40 minutes

twice daily, 200 an
for 12 weeks. Ass'
14 of the study. At
variable the Quality
in the treatment grc
0.026). No statistica'

ssments were undertaken at weel

120 mg, respectively, once daily, or placebo,
s 4, 8, 12 and
the end of the study, the primary outcome
of Memory Index was significantly improved
yup, compared with the placebo group (p =
ly significant effects were seen with respect to

before glucose challenge.” No statistical
were observed for the treatment versus p!
more, when results for all P. ginseng grou
hour plasma glucose concentration was

ly significant differences
lacebo groups. Further-
ups were pooled, the 2-
igher in the P. ginseng

group than in the placebo group. These findings are in contrast to

effects observed for P. quinquefolius, an

could be explained by

the secondary outcome variables power and continuity of
attention, and speed of memory processes.'°

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel
group trial, 64 healthy volunteers with neurasthenic complaints
received a combination preparation containing P. ginseng root
extract and G. biloba leaf extract at doses of 50 and 30mg,
respectively, 100 and 60mg, respectively, 200 and 120mg,
respectively, or placebo, twice daily, for 12 weeks. At the end
of the study, participants in the higher-dose ginseng—ginkgo group,
compared with the placebo group, achieved significantly higher
scores in tests designed to assess cognitive function (p = 0.008).

Hypoglycaemic activity Most studies investigating hypoglycae-
mic activity of ginseng preparations have a: ed effects in
healthy (non-diabetic) individuals. In a randomised, single-blind
(the study may have been conducted double-blind but this was not
specifically stated), placebo-controlled, crossover trial, nine
individuals with type-2 diabetes mellitus (mean (standard
deviation, SD) glycosylated haemoglobin HbA,. 0.08 (0.005);
reference range for well-controlled type-2 diabetes mellitus, 0.065—
0.075) received a capsule containing 'American' ginseng (P.
quinquefolius, containing protopanaxadiols Ry; 1.53%, Rp2
0.06%, R. 0.24%, Rg 0.44%, and protopanaxatriols R,; 0.1%,
R. 0.83%" Chai-Na-Ta Corp, British Columbia, Canada) as a
single dose both 40 minutes before a 25g oral glucose challenge
and, on a separate occasion, at the same time as the oral glucose
challenge.‘ Incremental glycaemia at 45 minutes was signifi-
cantly lower following ginseng treatment with either regimen (i.e.
given with or before glucose challenge) than it was following
placebo administration (p < 0.05 for both). In similar experiments
involving non-diabetic individuals, a statistically significant
reduction in incremental glycaemia was only observe
ginseng was administered 40 minutes before glucose challenge.
Further experiments in non-diabetic individuals indicated that the
effect on postprandial glycaemia was not dose-dependent as
glucose tolerance was similar following administration of doses of
ginseng ranging from 1-9g.°7 However, the effect of P.
quinquefolius was time-dependent as reductions in postprandial
glycaemia were observed only with administration of PR. quinque-
folius 40, 80 and 120 minutes," but not 0, 10 and 20 minutes,
before glucose challenge.” In another similar randomised,

when
(68)

differences in the ginsenoside content of preparations derived
from the two species.”

In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study in which
30 non-diabetic individuals received capsules containing P. ginseng

extract (G115) 200 or 400 mg as a single dose before undergoing a
(62)

battery of tests designed to assess cognitive performance,

statistically significant reductions in blood glucose concentrations
occurred for both doses of ginseng at all measured post-treatment
timepoints (p < 0.01 for all).

Immunomodulatory activity In a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial, 38 healthy adults received an aqueous
extract of P. ginseng (G115, Pharmaton SA, Lugano, Switzerland)
200mg twice daily for eight weeks.“ Participants underwent
exhaustive exercise testing before and after the intervention in
order to effect immunosuppression. At the end of the study, data
from 27 participants were available for analysis. No statistically
significant differences in secretory immunoglobulin A (IgA; the

primary immunoglobulin contained in secretions of the mucosal
immune system) parameters were detected between the P. ginseng
and placebo groups, indicating that the P. ginseng preparation had
no effect on mucosal immunity.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
60 healthy individuals assessed the effects of two different extracts
of P. ginseng on immune parameters.” Participants received an
aqueous extract of P. ginseng (not further specified) 100mg, a
standardised extract of P ginseng (G115) 100mg, or placebo,
twice daily for eight weeks. Analysis of participants’ blood
samples taken before and after four and eight weeks of treatment
indicated that both extracts had statistically significant effects on
various immune parameters, compared with baseline values,”
although from a report of the study, it is not clear whether or not
these changes were statistically significant when compared with
values for the placebo group.

Cancer prevention A small number of epidemiological studies
have explored the effects of ginseng use on prevention of cancer. A
case-control study involving all cases of newly diagnosed cancer
during a one-year time period at a major hospital cancer centre in
Korea included 905 cases and 905 age, sex and date of admission
matched controls.) Of the 905 cases, 62% had a history of
'ginseng’ (not further specified) use (determined by face-to-face

----- PAGE 342 -----
interviews using a structured questionnaire), compared with 75%
in the control group (p < 0.01). The odds ratio (95% confidence
interval) (OR; 95% CI) for cancer in relation to ginseng intake
was 0.56 (0.45 to 0.69). This study was subsequently extended to
include a total of 1987 case-control pairs.” Ginseng users had a
lower risk of cancer, compared with non-users (OR 0.50; 95% CI
0.44 to 0.58); ORs (95% CI) for being diagnosed with cancer
differed for use of different types of ginseng; the lowest being for
fresh ginseng extract 0.37 (0.29 to 0.46), white ginseng powder
0.30 (0.22 to 0.41) and red ginseng extract 0.20 (0.08 to 0.50). No
decrease in risk was seen with use of fresh ginseng slices, fresh
ginseng juice and white ginseng tea: OR (95% CI), 0.79 (0.63—
1.01), 0.71 (0.49-1.03), 0.69 (0.45-1.07), respectively:(74) ORs
were lowest for ovarian (0.15), larynx (0.18), oesophageal (0.20)
and panceatic (0.22) cancers.

The questionnaire used in the case-control studies described
above was used to determine ginseng use in a cohort study
involving 4634 people aged over 40 years.” In this study, 54.7%
of cancer cases had a history of ginseng use, compared with 71.2%
of individuals without cancer. The relative risk (RR; 95% CI) for
cancer was reduced with ginseng intake (0.40, 0.28-0.56; p <
0.05). When evaluted by intake of type of ginseng, the RR was
significantly reduced with ginseng extract (0.31, 0.13-0.74) and
multiple combinations of ginseng preparations (0.34, 0.20-0.53),
but not for other types of ginseng.) The available evidence for
the cancer preventive effect of ginseng preparations in humans is
inconclusive, and further methodologically rigorous research is
required.”

Quality of life The effects of different preparations of P. ginseng
root on quality-of-life measures have been asssessed in several
randomised, controlled trials involving different participant
groups, including healthy individuals, post-menopausal women
and patients with diabetes. A systematic review of trials published
by the end of the year 2002 included nine studies, of which eight
involved a placebo control group, four involved the administration
of monopreparations of P. ginseng root, and five involved
combination preparations of P. ginseng and vitamins/minerals.”
The review did not provide details of the specific P ginseng
preparations tested in the trials, only that doses ranged from 80-
400 mg daily and that studies lasted from two to nine months.
These variations in products tested, together with differences in
study design, outcome measures evaluated, and participant groups
involved, make overall interpretation of the results difficult and, to
some extent, invalid. All but one of the included studies reported
improvement in at least one quality-of-life measure, or a subscale,
but there were conflicting findings. In essence, at present, evidence
of a beneficial effect for P ginseng on quality-of-life measures is
inconclusive. Further research is needed to establish the effects, if
any, of preparations of P. ginseng root and other Panax species on
quality of life. Furthermore, results of trials should be considered
in the context of the chemical profile of individual preparations,
since this is likely to differ qualitatively and quantitatively between
products. One of the studies included in the review described
above found that P. ginseng root extract (G115) 200 or 400 mg
daily for eight weeks had no statistically significant effects on
psychological well-being, as assessed using the Positive Affect
Negative Affect Scale, in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial involving 83 healthy younger adults (mean age 26
years) (”?)

Other effects The effects of an aqueous extract of P. ginseng roots
on blood alcohol clearance were assessed in an open study
involving 14 healthy men aged 25-35 years; each participant

Ginseng, Panax

served as his own control. Participants consumed a single dose
of alcohol (25% ethanol 72g per 65kg body weight) over 45
minutes with and without P ginseng root extract 3 g/kg body
weight. Blood samples taken 40 minutes after the end of the
period of alcohol ingestion showed blood alcohol concentrations
of 0.18% and 0.11% for the control and treatment periods,
respectively (p < 0.001). The design of this study does not allow
the observed effects to be attributed to ginseng administration,
and the hypothesis that P. ginseng increases blood alcohol
clearance requires testing in methodologically rigorous rando-
mised, controlled trials.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There are only limited clinical data on safety aspects of
preparations of P. ginseng and other Panax species. There is a
lack of formal post-marketing surveillance-type studies, and
existing pharmacoepidemiological studies typically have assessed
potential benefits and not risks of harm(s). There is a substantial
number of placebo-controlled clinical trials of preparations of P.
ginseng and other Panax species, although many of these have
methodological limitations, including lack of randomisation and/
or double-blinding. Trials have assessed the effects of different
preparations, including combination herbal preparations contain-
ing different Panax species, which vary qualitatively and
quantitatively in their phytochemical composition. Furthermore,
different preparations have been administered according to
different dosage regimens, and to different study populations
(e.g. healthy volunteers, patients with hypertension), making
interpretation of the results difficult. The clinical trials of Panax
species root preparations available typically have involved small
numbers of patients and been of short duration (typically four to
12 weeks), so have the statistical power only to detect very
common, acute adverse effects. Rigorous investigation of safety
aspects of correctly identified, well-characterised Panax species
root preparations administered orally at different dosages,
including the effects of long-term treatment, is required.

A systematic review of data available up to May 2001 relating to
adverse events of monopreparations of P. ginseng preparations
identified 48 placebo-controlled trials, 14 trials with an active
control group, and 20 uncontrolled studies." Of these, 42 trials
involved healthy individuals and athletes, and the remainder
involved older individuals, postmenopausal women or patients
with hypertension, respiratory diseases, hepatitis, erectile dys-
function. Thirteen placebo-controlled studies provided sufficiently
detailed information on reported adverse events. Six of these
studies, mostly involving healthy individuals, had assessed the
effects of a P. ginseng root extract (G115) typically at a dose of
200 mg daily for three to 16 weeks, although one study lasted for
two years. Five other placebo-controlled studies assessed the
effects of red P. ginseng root taken for around two to 12 weeks
(one study involved administration for one year), and in two other
studies, the species and type of ginseng were not clearly specified.
Adverse events reported generally were similar in type and
frequency to those reported for the placebo groups.*!) Nine
placebo-controlled trials, four of which assessed a P. ginseng root
extract (G115), stated that no adverse events occurred during the
study period.

Placebo-controlled trials of P. ginseng publishe
systematic review was conducted, and placebo-controlled trials
assessing the effects of preparations of P. quinquefolius, typically

since the

----- PAGE 343 -----
Ginseng, Panax

have not provided detailed information on the occurrence of
adverse events. One study stated that there was no difference in
symptoms, mostly gastrointestinal adverse events, between the P.
quinquefolius and placebo groups reported during the study,”
whereas another study assessing P. quinquefolius stated that no
adverse effects occurred during the study.’

The systematic review also identified publications describing 27
case reports associated with the use of 'ginseng’, although for 22
reports no information was provided on the type (i.e. red or white
P. ginseng), preparation and dosage of P. ginseng ingested, and it is
unlikely that any chemical analysis of the products ingested was
undertaken. Four cases of agranulocytosis initially attributed to
use of P. ginseng-containing products, were later attributed to
ingredients (aminopyrine and phenylbutazone)
detected in the products.*” For many of the cases, there were
other factors, including concurrent medications and
treatment effects, that could explain the observed effects. The
cases included six reports of mastalgia, two of post-menopausal
vaginal bleeding and one of metrorrhagia (uterine bleeding at
irregular intervals, usually for prolonged period of time) in
women who had ingested or applied (one case of vaginal bleeding
was associated with use of a ‘ginseng’ face cream“) ‘ginseng!
products. Several of the reports describe positive dechallenge and/
or rechallenge. Most of these reports, however, are from the older
literature and involved the use of unlicensed, poorly described
products; a causal association with Panax species has not been
established, and the relevance of these reports to products
marketed currently is not clear. Two cases of mania have also
been described. One involved a 35-year-old woman with depressive
illness who was stabilised on treatment with lithium and
amitriptyline and who stopped lithium treatment and began
taking ginseng (not further specified).“ The second report
described a 26-year-old-man with no history of psychiatric illness
who experienced a manic episode two months after starting
treatment with red P. ginseng root 500 to 750 mg daily on five days
per week. Analysis of the product found no evidence of notable

undeclared

ation of

contaminants.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide. A systematic review of information available
up to May 2001 relating to adverse effects associated with P.
ginseng summarised reports from the WHO-UMC database
describing a total of 168 adverse reactions associated with
monopreparations of ginseng.°") However, this number of reports
relates to unspecified 'ginseng' preparations, not necessarily
preparations of P. ginseng. To the end of the year 2005, the
WHO-UMC's database contained only nine reports, describing a
total of 20 adverse reactions, for monopreparations specified as P.
ginseng.®

In a phase 1 study involving healthy males aged 18-35 years
who received an extract of P ginseng root (21.4mg/mL;
standardised for ginsenosides 10.5%) 20mL twice daily for ten
days, no adverse effects on fertility parameters, including volume
of ejaculate, number of spermatozoids per millilitre, and
proportions of active, inactive, normokinetic, dyskinetic and
akinetic spermatozoids, were observed, compared with baseline
values. °9

In 1979, two studies referred to a ‘ginseng abuse syndrome!
(GAS) which emphasised that most side-effects documented for
'ginseng' were associated with the ingestion of large doses together
with other psychomotor stimulants, including tea and coffee. GAS

was defined as diarrhoea, hypertension, nervousness, skin
eruptions and _ sleepless other symptoms occasionally
observed included amenorrhoea, decreased appetite, depression,

87,88) However, these two

euphoria, hypotension and oedema.’
studies have been widely criticised over the variety of ginseng and
other preparations used, and over the lack of authentication of the
ginseng species ingested.(!

A review of the Russian literature describes symptoms of
overdose as those exhibited by individuals allergic to ginseng,
namely palpitations, insomnia and pruritus, together with heart
pain, decrease in sexual potency, vomiting, haemorrhagic
diathesis, headache and epistaxis, and that ingestion of very large
doses has been reported to be fatal." The primary publications
upon which these statements are based have not been used here, so
the quality of the reports, including their descriptions of the
ginseng preparations implicated, has not been

ed here.

Preclinical data

Results documented for toxicity studies carried out in a number of
animal species using standardised extracts (SE) indicate P. ginseng
to be of low toxicity. °*

Single doses of up to 2 g SE have been administered to mice and
rats with no toxic effects observed.°” LDso values (p.o.) in mice
and rats have been estimated at 2 g/kg and greater than 5 g/kg."®”)
In addition, LDso values (i.p., mice) have been estimated for
individual ginsenosides as 305mg/kg (Ry.2), 324mg/kg (Ra),
405 mg/kg (R.), 410mg/kg (R.), 1110 mg/kg (Ry), 1250 mg/kg
(Rg-1), and 1340 mg/kg (Rg); an LDspo (i.v., mice) of 3806 mg/kg has
been estimated for the saponins R..; and Rg.°”

Doses of approximately 720 mg of a P. ginseng extract (G115)
have been administered orally to rats for 20 days with no
toxicological effects documented.°”

Daily doses of up to 15mg G115/kg body weight have been
administered orally to dogs for 90 days with no toxic effects
documented. An initial increase in excitability which disappeared
after two to three weeks was the only observation reported in rats
fed 200 mg G115/kg body weight for 25 weeks.”

P. quinquefolius has been reported to be devoid of mutagenic
potential when investigated versus Salmonella typhimurium strain

M677.)

Contra-indications, Warnings

The older literature includes statements that the use of P. ginseng
is contra-indicated during acute illness, haemorrhage and during
the acute period of coronary thrombosis,‘ and it has been
recommended that P. ginseng should be avoided by individuals
who are highly energetic, nervous, tense, hysteric,
schizophrenic, and that P ginseng should not be taken with
stimulants, including coffee, antipsychotic drugs or during
treatment with hormones." ©” The scientific basis and evidence
for many of these statements is not clear. However, in view of their
documented pharmacological activities, Panax species prepara-
tions should be used with caution in patients with diabetes and
cardiovascular disorders. In general, and in view of the lack of
safety data, it is appropriate to advise against the long-term or
otherwise excessive use of Panax species.

manic or

Drug interactions In view of the pharmacological actions of
Panax species preparations and their isolated constituents
described following preclinical and, to a lesser extent, clinical
studies, the potential for preparations of Panax species to interfere
with other medicines administered concurrently, particularly those

----- PAGE 344 -----
with anticoagulant, hypoglycaemic and/or cardiovascular activity,
should be considered.

Two cases of a suspected interaction between ‘ginseng’ and
phenelzine have been documented. One report described insom-
nia, headache and tremulousness in a 64-year-old woman who
began taking a 'ginseng' tea in addition to her existing phenelzine
treatment; the woman previously had used 'ginseng' tea alone
without experiencing any adverse effects,°*) and three years after
the first epidsode of concurrent use of phenelzine and ‘ginseng!
tea, the woman ingested 'ginseng' capsules and experienced similar
symptoms." A second report described a 42-year-old woman for
whom treatment with phenelzine was initiated because of major
depressive illness. The woman was also receiving triazolam and
lorazepam and began self-treatment with unspecified preparations
of ginseng and bee pollen.” She experienced headaches,
irritability and visual hallucinations. A causal relationship with
use of Panax species in these cases cannot be established.

There is an isolated case report of a suspected interaction
between P. ginseng and warfarin involving a 47-year-old-man with
an aortic heart valve who was receiving warfarin for thrombo-
prophylaxis. Two weeks after the man began treatment with a P.
ginseng root extract (Ginsana), his international normalised ratio
(INR) fell to 1.5, having previously been stable for nine
months.°* On stopping use of the P. ginseng preparation, his
INR returned to within the target range.

In a randomised, open-label, crossover study, 12 healthy male
individuals received a single dose of warfarin 25 mg alone or after
seven days' treatment with capsules containing P ginseng root
(containing extract equivalent to 500mg root; standardised for
ginsenosides 8.93 mg, as ginsenoside R,;) two or three times
daily.°” There were no statistically significant differences in area
under the plasma-concentration time curve (AUC), elimination
half-life (t,/:), total clearance, volume of distribution, maximal
plasma concentration (Cy,ax) and time to maximal concentration
for either R-warfarin or S-warfarin when warfarin was taken
following P. ginseng treatment, compared with values for ingestion
of warfarin alone. There were also no statistically significant
differences in protein binding of R- and S-warfarin, or in warfarin
pharmacodynamics as assessed using INR values, following P.
ginseng administration. By contrast, another drug interaction
study involving healthy volunteers found that a preparation of P.
quinquefolius root reduced the anticoagulant effect of warfarin. In
a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 20 healthy
individuals received powdered root of P. quinquefolius (containing
Ry-1 1.93%, Ry-2 0.20%, Re 0.61%, Ra 0.42%, Re 1.68% and Ry 1
0.35%) 1g twice daily, or placebo, for three weeks; treatment was
taken for a total of three weeks, beginning four days after oral
administration of warfarin 5 mg daily for three days, concurrently
with a second three-day period of warfarin administration, and
for four days after the second period of warfarin exposure.
There was a significantly greater reduction in the magnitude of the
INR, the primary outcome measure, in the P. quinquefolius group,
compared with that in the placebo group (p = 0.0012).

The contrasting findings for P. ginseng root and P. quinquefolius
root preparations could be explained by differences in their
chemical composition, particularly ginsenoside content. The
effects of different Panax species preparations on warfarin
pharmacokinetics in patients receiving warfarin treatment or
prophylaxis require investigation.

In another drug interaction study involving healthy individuals
(n = 20), participants received a P. ginseng root extract
preparation (Ginsana, Pharmaton, Connecticut, USA; standar-
dised for ginsenosides 4%) 100mg twice daily for 14 days.°

Ginseng, Panax

Data collected over a one-week period before P ginseng
administration provided a within-subject control group. At the
end of the study, there were no statistically significant changes in
the 6-B-hydroxycortisol: cortisol ratio following P ginseng
administration, compared with baseline values, suggesting that
P. ginseng did not induce CYP3A enzyme activity.'°" By contrast,
in in vitro experiments, a P. ginseng root extract (G115;
standardised for 4% ginsenosides) and a P. quinquefolius root
extract (standardised for 10% total ginsenosides) both inhibited
CYPIA1, CYP1A2 and CYPIBI1 activities in a concentration-
dependent manner." P. quinquefolius root extract was 45-fold
more potent than P ginseng root extract in inhibiting CYP1A2.
The ginsenosides Ry_1, Ry_2, Re, Ra, Re, Re and Ry, added to the
system either individually or as a mixture, at concentrations
reflecting those at which the ginseng extracts caused inhibition,
did not affect CYP1A and B enzyme activities. These findings led
to the suggestion that other ginsenosides could be responsible for
the inhibitory effects on the CYP enzymes investigated, or that the
effects could be due to other compounds, such as tannins, as these

were not removed from the extracts.”

Pregnancy and lactation No fetal abnormalities have been
observed in rats and rabbits administered a standardised P. ginseng
extract (40 mg/kg, p.o.) from day 1 to day 15 of pregnancy.” P
ginseng has also been fed to two successive generations of rats in
doses of up to 15mg G115/kg body weight/day (equivalent to
approximately 2700mg P. ginseng extract) with no teratogenic
effects observed.” However, the safety of P. ginseng during
pregnancy has not been established in humans and therefore its
use should be avoided. Similarly, there are no published data
concerning the secretion of pharmacologically active constituents
from P. ginseng into the breast milk and use of P. ginseng during
lactation is therefore best avoided. However, a more recent study
which investigated the effect of ginsenoside R,; on the
development of rat embryos during organogenesis in vitro found
that median total morphological scores were significantly lower
for embryos exposed to ginsenoside Ry; at concentrations of
30 pg/mL, compared with those for control embryos (p <
0.05)."°) The clinical relevance of these findings is not known.
The effects of ginsenoside Ry; and other ginsenosides, including
the possibility of additive effects, on embryogensis requires further
investigation.

The safety of P ginseng during pregnancy has not been
established in humans. Similarly, there are no published data
concerning the secretion of pharmacologically active constituents
from P. ginseng into the breast milk. In view of the lack of safety
data and the findings described above, and until further
information is available, the use of P. ginseng preparations during
pregnancy and breastfeeding should be avoided.

Herbal Stress Relief. Austria: Ginsana. Belgium: Ginsana.
Brazil: Ginsana; Ginsex. Canada: Ginsana. Czech Republic:
Ginsana. France: Gerimax Tonique. Germany: Ardey-aktiv;
Coriosta Vitaltonikum N; Ginsana; Hevert-Aktivon Mono; IL
HWA; Orgaplasma. Italy: Ginsana. Malaysia: Ginsana.
Mexico: Raigin; Rutying; Sanjin Royal Jelly. Portugal: Ginsana.
Russia: Gerimax Ginseng (fepumaxc 7Kenpurenn); Ginsana
(Tuncana). Singapore: Ginsana. Spain: Bio Star. Switzerland:

----- PAGE 345 -----
Ginseng, Panax

b US;
Adult Citrex Multivitamin + Ginseng + Omega 3; Total Man.
Russia: Doppelherz Ginseng Aktiv (Aonmeaprepy, 7Kenpmen
Axrus); Doppelherz Vitalotonik (Aommeanrepu Buraaorouun).
South Africa: Activex 40 Plus. Singapore: Gin-Vita. Spain:
Energysor; Redseng Polivit; Ton Was; Vigortonic. Switzerland:
Biovital Ginseng; Burgerstein TopVital; Geri; Gincosan;
Imuvit; Supradyn Vital 50+; Triallin. Thailand: Imugins;
Imuvit; Multilim RG; Revitan. UK: Actimind; Red Kooga
Co-Q-10 and Ginseng; Regina Royal Concorde; Seven Seas
Ginseng; Vitegin Capsules; Wellman. USA: Energy Support;
Mental Clarity.

References

1 Baldwin CA et al. What pharmacists should know about ginseng.
Pharm J] 1986; 237: 583-586.

2 Chung BS. Studies on the components of Korean ginseng (II) On the
composition of ginseng essential oils. Kor J Pharmacog 1976; 7: 41-44.

3 Iwabuchi H et al. Studies on the sesquiterpenoids of Panax ginseng C.
A. Meyer II. Chem Pharm Bull 1989; 37: 509-510.

4 Iwabuchi H et al. Studies on the sesquiterpenoids of Panax ginseng C.
A. Meyer II. Isolation and structure determination of ginsenol, a novel
sesquiterpene alcohol. Chem Pharm Bull 1988; 36: 2447-2451.

5 Ahn B-Z et al. Acetylpanaxydol and panaxydolchlorohydrin, two new
poly-ynes from Korean ginseng with cytotoxic activity against L1210
cells. Arch Pharm (Weinheim) 1989; 322: 223-226.

6 Fujimoto Y, Satoh M. A new cytotoxic chlorine-containing
polyacetylene from the callus of Panax ginseng. Chem Pharm Bull
1988; 36: 4206-4208.

7 Gao Q-Pet al. Chemical properties and anti-complementary activities
of polysaccharide fractions from roots and leaves of Panax ginseng.
Planta Med 1989; 55: 9-12.

8 Yamasaki K et al. Purification and characterization of B-amylase from
ginseng. Chem Pharm Bull 1989; 37: 973-978.

9 Chuang WC et al. A comparative study on commercial samples of
ginseng radix. Planta Med 1995; 61: 459-465.

10 Zhu S et al. Comparative study on triterpene saponins of Ginseng
drugs. Planta Med 2004; 70(7): 666-677.

11 Cui JE. Identification and quantification of ginsenosides in various
commercial ginseng preparations. Eur J Pharm Sci 1995; 3: 77-85.

12 Harkey MR et al. Variability in commercial ginseng products: an
analysis of 25 preparations. Am J Clin Nutr 2001; 73: 1101-1106.

13. United States Department of the Interior Fish and Wildlife Service.
Convention permit applications for wild American ginseng harvested
in 2005. August 3, 2005.

14 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora. Notification to the Parties. No. 2000/018. Geneva, 29
February 2000.

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

24

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

Baranov Al. Medicinal uses of ginseng and related plants in the Soviet
Union: recent trends in the Soviet literature. J Ethnopharmacol 1982;
6: 339-353.

Dharmananada S. The nature of ginseng. Traditional use, modern
research and the question of dosage. HerbalGram 2002; 54: 34-51.
Brekhman II. Panax ginseng-1. Med Sci Service 1967; 4: 17-26.
Takino Y et al. Studies on the absorption, distribution, excretion and
metabolism of ginseng saponins. I. Quantitative analysis of
ginsenoside Rgl in rats. Chem Pharm Bull 1982; 30(6): 2196-2201.
Odani T et al. Studies on the absorption, distribution, excretion and
metabolism of ginseng saponins. III. The absorption, distribution and
excretion of ginsenoside Rb1 in rats. Chem Pharm Bull 1983; 31(3):
1059-1066.

Odani T et al. Studies on the absorption, distribution, excretion and
metabolism of ginseng saponins. IV. Decompostion of ginsenoside
Rgl and -Rb1 in the digestive tract of rats. Chem Pharm Bull 1983; 31
(10); 3691-3697.

Karikura M et al. Studies on the absorption, distribution, excretion
and metabolism of ginseng saponins. V. The decomposition products
of ginsenoside Rb2 in the large intestine of rats. Chem Pharm Bull
1990; 38(10): 2859-2861.

Li TB et al. Effects of ginsenosides, lectins and Momordica charantia
insulin-like peptide on corticosterone production by isolated rat
adrenal cells. J Ethnopharmacol 1987; 21: 21-29.

Filaretov AA et al. Role of pituitary-adrenocortical system in body
adaptation abilities. Exp Clin Endocrinol 1988; 92: 129-136.
Guodong L, Zhonggi L. Effects of ginseng saponins on insulin release
from isolated pancreatic islets of rats. Chin J Integr Trad Western
Med 1987; 7: 326.

Yushu H, Yuzhen C. The effect of Panax ginseng extract (GS) on
insulin and corticosteroid receptors. J Trad Chin Med 1988; 8: 293—
295.

Kimura M et al. Pharmacological sequential trials for the
fractionation of components with hypoglycemic activity in alloxan
diabetic mice from Ginseng radix. J Pharm Dyn 1981, 4: 402-409.
Waki I et al. Effects of a hypoglycemic component of Ginseng radix on
insulin biosynthesis in normal and diabetic animals. | Pharm Dyn
1982; 5: 547-554.

Avakian EV et al. Effect of Panax ginseng extract on energy
metabolism during exercise in rats. Planta Med 1984; 50: 151-154.
Suzuki Y, Hikino H. Mechanisms of hypoglycemic activity of
panaxans A and B, glycans of Panax ginseng roots: effects on the key
enzymes of glucose metabolism in the liver of mice. Phytother Res
1989; 3: 15-19.

Oshima Y et al. Isolation and hypoglycemic activity of quinquefolans
A, B, and C, glycans of Panax quinquefolium roots. J Nat Prod 1987;
50: 188-190.

Konno C, Hikino H. Isolation and hypoglycemic activity of panaxans
M,N, O and P, glycans of Panax ginseng roots. Int ] Crude Drug Res
1987; 25: 53-56.

Suzuki Y, Hikino H. Mechanisms of hypoglycemic activity of
panaxans A and B, glycans of Panax ginseng roots: effects of plasma
level, secretion, sensitivity and binding of insulin in mice. Phytother
Res 1989; 3: 20-24.

Konno C et al. Isolation and hypoglycaemic activity of panaxans A, B,
C, D and E, glycans of Panax ginseng roots. Planta Med 1984; 50: 434—
436.

Konno C et al. Isolation and hypoglycaemic activity of panaxans Q, R,
S, T and U, glycans of Panax ginseng roots. J Ethnopharmacol 1985;
14: 69-74.

Manren R et al. Calcium antagonistic action of saponins from Panax
notoginseng (sanqi-ginseng). J Trad Chin Med 1987; 7: 127-130.

Wu J-X, Chen J-X. Negative chronotropic and inotropic effects of
Panax saponins. Acta Pharmacol Sin 1988; 9: 409-412.

Lei X-L et al. Cardiovascular pharmacology of Panax notoginseng
(Burk) EH. Chen and Salvia militiorrhiza. Am ] Chin Med 1986; 14:
145-152.

Li XJ, Zhang BH. Studies on the antiarrhythmic effects of panaxatriol
saponins (PTS) isolated from Panax notoginseng. Acta Pharm Sin
1988; 23: 168-173.

Yunxiang F, Xiu C. Effects of ginsenosides on myocardial lactic acid,
cyclic nucleotides and ultrastructural myocardial changes of anoxia on
mice. Chin J Integr Trad Western Med 1987; 7: 326.

----- PAGE 346 -----
40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S1

52

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

Namba T e¢ al. Fundamental studies on the evaluation of the crude
drugs. (I). Hemolytic and its protective activity of ginseng saponins.
Planta Med 1974, 28: 28-38.

Kosuge T et al. Studies on antihemorrhagic principles in the crude
drugs for hemostatics. I. On hemostatic activities of the crude drugs
for hemostatics. Yakugaku Zasshi [J Pharm Soc Jpn] 1981; 101: 501-
503.

Yamamoto M, Kumagai M. Anti-atherogenic action of Panax ginseng
in rats and in patients with hyperlipidemia. Planta Med 1982; 45: 149-
166.

Kuo S-C et al. Antiplatelet components in Panax ginseng. Planta Med
1990; 56: 164-167.

Kim H-S et al. Antinarcotic effects of the standardized ginseng extract
G115 on morphine. Planta Med 1990; 56: 158-163.

Tsang D et al. Ginseng saponins: Influence on neurotransmitter
uptake in rat brain synaptosomes. Planta Med 1985; 51: 221-224.
Kobayashi § et al. Inhibitory actions of phospholipase Ay and
saponins including ginsenoside Rb, and glycyrrhizin on the formation
of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor clusters on cultured mouse
myotubes. Phytother Res 1990; 4: 106-111.

Tsang D e¢ al. Ginenoside modulates K* stimulated noradrenaline
release from rat cerebral cortex slices. Planta Med 1986; 52: 266-268.
Saksena AK et al. Effect of Withania somnifera and Panax ginseng on
dopaminergic receptors in rat brain during stress. Planta Med 1989;
SS: 9S.

Nakagawa S et al. Cytoprotective activity of components of garlic,
ginseng and ciuwjia on hepatocyte injury induced by carbon
tetrachloride in vitro. Hiroshima ] Med Sci 1985; 34: 303-309.
Hikino H et al. Antihepatotoxic actions of ginsenosides from Panax
ginseng roots. Planta Med 1985; 51: 62-64.

Ahn B-Z, Kim SI. Heptadeca-1,8¢-dien-4,6-diin-3,10-diol, ein weiteres,
gegen 11210 — Zellen cytotoxisches Wirkprinzip aus der Koreanischen
Ginsengwurzel. Planta Med 1988; 54: 183.

Qian B-C et al. Effects of ginseng polysaccharides on tumor and
immunological function in tumor-bearing mice. Acta Pharmacol Sin
1987; 8: 277-288.

Matsunaga H et al. Studies on the panaxytriol of Panax ginseng C.A.
Meyer. Isolation, determination and antitumor activity. Chem Pharm
Bull 1989; 37: 1279-1281.

Singh VK et al. Combined treatment of mice with Panax ginseng
extract and interferon inducer. Planta Med 1983; 47: 235-236.

Singh VK e¢ al. Immunomodulatory activity of Panax ginseng extract.
Planta Med 1984; 50: 462-465.

Engels HJ et al. Effects of ginseng on secretory IgA, performance, and
recovery from interval exercise. Med Sci Sports Exercise 2003; 35(4):
690-696.

Engels HJ et al. Failure of chronic ginseng supplementation to affect
work performance and energy metabolism in healthy adult females.
Nutrition Res 1996; 16(8): 1295-1305.

Engels HJ, Wirth JC. No ergogenic effects of ginseng (Panax ginseng
C.A.Meyer) during graded maximal aerobic exercise. J Am Diet Assoc
1997; 97: 1110-1115.

Allen JD et al. Ginseng supplementation does not enhance healthy
young adults’ peak aerobic exercise performance. J Am Coll Nut 1998;
17(5): 462-466.

Kennedy DO, Scholey AB. Ginseng: potential for the enhancement of
cognitive performance and mood. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2003; 75:
687-700.

Kennedy DO et al. Electroencephalograph effects of single doses of
Ginkgo biloba and Panax ginseng in healthy young volunteers.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2003; 75: 701-709.

Reay JL et al. Single doses of Panax ginseng (G115) reduce blood
glucose levels and improve cognitive performance during sustained
mental activity. J Psychopharmacol 2005; 19(4): 357-365.

Kennedy DO et al. Improved cognitive performance in human
volunteers following administration of guarana (Paullinia cupana)
extract: comparison and interaction with Panax ginseng. Pharmacol
Biochem Behav 2004; 79: 401-411.

Scholey AB, Kennedy DO. Acute, dose-dependent cognitive effects of
Ginkgo biloba, Panax ginseng and their combination in healthy young
volunteers: differential interactions with cognitive demand. Hum
Psychopharmacol Clin Exp 2002; 17: 35-44.

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

Ginseng, Panax

Wesnes KA et al. The memory enhancing effects of a Ginkgo biloba/
Panax ginseng combination in healthy middle-aged volunteers.
Psychopharmacology 2000; 152: 353-361.

Wesnes KA et al. The cognitive, subjective, and physical effects of a
Ginkgo biloba/Panax ginseng combination in healthy volunteers with
neurasthenic complaints. Psychopharmacol Bull 1997; 33(4): 677-683.
Sievenpiper JL et al. Variable effects of American ginseng: a batch of
American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius L.) with a depressed
ginsenoside profile does not affect postprandial glycemia. Eur J Clin
Nut 2003; 57: 243-248.

Vuksan V et al. American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius L.) reduces
postprandial glycemia in nondiabetic subjects and subjects with type 2
diabetes mellitus. Arch Intern Med 2000; 160: 1009-1013.

Vuksan V et al. American ginseng improves glycemia in individuals

with normal glucose tolerance: effect of dose and time escalation. J
Am Coll Nut 2000; 19(6): 738-744.

Vuksan V et al. American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius L.) attenuates
postprandial glycemia in a time-dependent but not dose-dependent
manner in healthy individuals. Am J Clin Nutr 2001; 73: 753-758.
Sievenpiper JL et al. Null and opposing effects of Asian ginseng
(Panax ginseng C.A.Meyer) on acute glycemia: results of two acute
dose escalation studies. | Am Coll Nutr 2003; 22(6): 524-532.
Scaglione F e¢ al. Immunomodulatory effects of two extracts of Panax
ginseng C.A.Meyer. Drugs Exptl Clin Res 1990; 16(10): 537-542.
Yun TK, Choi SY. A case-control study of ginseng intake and cancer.
Int ] Epidemiol 1990; 19(4): 871-876.

Yun TK, Choi SY. Preventive effect of ginseng intake against various
human cancers: a case-control study on 1987 pairs. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 1995; 4(4): 401-408.

Yun TK, Choi SY. Non-organ specific cancer prevention of ginseng: a
prospective study in Korea. Int ] Epidemiol 1998; 27: 359-364.

Yun TK Panax ginseng — a non-organ-specific cancer preventive.
Lancet Oncol 2001; 2: 49-55.

Shin HR et al. The cancer-preventive potential of Panax ginseng: a
review of human and experimental evidence. Cancer Causes Control
2000; 11: 565-576.

Coleman CI et al. The effects of Panax ginseng on quality of life. J
Clin Pharm Ther 2003; 28: 5-15.

Cardinal BJ, Engels H-J. Ginseng does not enhance psychological well-
being in healthy young adults: results of a double-blind, placebo-
controlled, randomized clinical trial. J Ant Diet Assoc 2001; 101: 655—
660.

Lee FC et al. Effects of Panax ginseng on blood alcohol clearance in
man. Clin Exp Pharmac Physiol 1987; 14: 543-546.

Coon JT, Ernst E. Panax ginseng. A systematic review of adverse
effects and drug interactions. Drug Safety 2002; 25(5): 323-344.
Hopkins MP et al. Ginseng face cream and unexplained vaginal
bleeding. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988; 159: 1121-1122.
Gonzalez-Seijo JC et al. Manic episode and ginseng: report of a
possible case. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1995; 15: 447-448.

Engelberg D et al. A case of ginseng-induced mania. J Clin
Psychopharmacol 2001; 21(5): 535-537.

Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions database, Uppsala Monitoring
Centre [accessed January 24, 2006].

Mkrtchyan A et al. A phase I clinical study of Andrographis
paniculata fixed combination Kan Jang™ versus ginseng and valerian
on the semen quality of healthy male subjects. Phytomedicine 2005;
12: 403-409.

Siegel RK. Ginseng abuse syndrome — problems with the panacea.
JAMA 1979; 241: 1614-1615.

Siegel RK. Ginseng and high blood pressure. JAMA 1980; 243: 3.
Berté E. Toxicological investigation of the standardized ginseng extract
G115 after unique administration [LDso]. Manufacturer's data, on file.
1982, pp. 1-12.

Hess FG et al. Reproduction study in rats of ginseng extract G115.
Food Chem Toxicol 1982; 20: 189-192.

Hess FG et al. Effects of subchronic feeding of ginseng extract G115 in
beagle dogs. Food Chem Toxicol 1983; 21: 95-97.

Trabucchi E. Toxicological and pharmacological investigation of
Geriatric Pharmaton. Manufacturer's data on file. 1971, pp. 1-22.
Savel J. Toxicological report on Geriatric Pharmaton. Manufacturer's
data on file. 1971, pp. 1-31.

----- PAGE 347 -----
94

95

96

97

98

99

Ginseng, Panax

Chang YS et al. Evaluation of the mutagenic potential of American
ginseng (Panax quinquefolius). Planta Med 1986; 52: 338.

Shader RI, Greenblatt DJ. Phenelzine and the dream machine:
ramblings and reflections [abstract]. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1985; 5:
65.

Shader RI et al. Bees, ginseng and MAOIs revisited. J Clin
Psychopharmacol 1988; 8: 235.

Jones BD et al. Interaction of ginseng with phenelzine. J Clin
Psychopharmacol 1987; 7: 201-202.

Janetzky K, Morreale AP. Probable interaction between warfarin and
ginseng. Am J Health Syst Pharm 1997; 54: 692-693.

Jiang X et al. Effect of St John's wort and ginseng on the

pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of warfarin in healthy
subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 57(5): 592-599.

100 Yuan CS et al. American ginseng reduces warfarin's effect in healthy
patients. A randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 2004; 141:
23-27.

101 Anderson GD e¢ al. Drug interaction potential of soy extract and
Panax ginseng. J Clin Pharmacol 2003; 43: 643-648.

102 Chang TKH et al. In vitro effect of standardized ginseng extracts and
individual ginsenosides on the catalytic activity of human CYP1A1,
CYPI1A2, and CYP1B1. Drug Metab Disp 2002; 30: 378-384.

103 Chan LY et al. An in-vitro study of ginsenoside Rb1-induced
teratogenicity using a whole rat embryo model. Human Reproduction
2003; 18(10): 2166-2168.

----- PAGE 348 -----
- Golden Seal

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Golden seal is characterised by the isoquinoline alkaloid
constituents. These compounds, primarily hydrastine and
berberine, represent the main active components of golden
seal. Several activities have been documented for the alkaloid
constituents and many of these support the traditional herbal
uses of the root. However, rigorous clinical investigations of
efficacy and safety are limited. In view of the pharmacological
properties of the alkaloid constituents, excessive use of
golden seal should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Hydrastis canadensis L. (Ranunculaceae)

Synonym(s)

Xanthorhiza simplicissima Marsh., Yellow Root

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

AHPC?

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Martindale 35th edition\*»
Ph Eur 20078?
USP29/NF24‘C80)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSLiC*?

Alkaloids

OCH;

OCH;

canadine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of golden seal.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6, G40 and G62.

Alkaloids Isoquinoline-type. 2.5-6.0%. Hydrastine (major, 1.5—
4.0%), berberine (0.5-6.0%), berberastine (2-3%), and canadine
(1%), with lesser amounts of related alkaloids including candaline
and canadaline.''~)

Other constituents Chlorogenic acid, carbohydrates, fatty acids
(75% saturated, 25% unsaturated), volatile oil (trace), resin,
meconin (meconinic acid lactone).

Food Use

Golden seal is not used in foods, although it is reported to be used
in herbal teas.(“*? The concentration of berberine permitted in
foods is limited to 0.1mg/kg, and 10mg/kg in alcoholic
beverages.“@!

Herbal Use

Golden seal is stated to be a stimulant to involuntary muscle, and
to possess stomachic, oxytocic, antihaemorrhagic and laxative
properties. Traditionally it has been used for digestive disorders,
gastritis, peptic ulceration, colitis, anorexia, upper respiratory
catarrh, menorrhagia, post-partum haemorrhage, dysmenor-
rhoea, topically for eczema, pruritus, otorrhoea, catarrhal deaf-
ness and tinnitus, conjunctivitis, and specifically for atonic
dyspepsia with hepatic symptoms.'©% 97 °®)

Figure 2 Golden seal (Hydrastis canadensis).

----- PAGE 349 -----
Golden Seal

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome 0.5-1.0 g as a decoction three times daily'C*°”

Liquid extract of Hydrastis (BPC 1949) 0.3-1.0 mL.
Tincture of Hydrastis (BPC 1949) 24mL.

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological activity of golden seal is attributed to the
isoquinoline alkaloid constituents, primarily hydrastine and
berberine,*** which are reported to have similar properties.(“*?
Antibiotic, immunostimulant, anticonvulsant, sedative, hypoten-
sive, uterotonic, choleretic and carminative activities have been
described for berberine.”

In vitro and animal studies

Limited work has been documented for golden seal, although the
pharmacology of berberine and hydrastine is well studied.

The total alkaloid fraction of golden seal has been reported to
exhibit anticonvulsant activity in smooth muscle preparations
(e.g. mouse intestine, uterus). However, in vitro, canadine is
reported to exhibit uterine stimulation in guinea-pig and rabbit
tissues. Berberine, canadine and hydrastine are all stated to
exhibit utero-activity.(@”

Berberine and hydrastine have produced a hypotensive effect in
laboratory animals following intravenous administration.” °*
High doses of hydrastine are documented to produce an increase
in blood pressure.” In vitro, berberine has been reported to
decrease the anticoagulant action of heparin in canine and human
blood.”

Berberine is reported to exert a stimulant action on the heart
and to increase coronary blood flow, although higher doses are
stated to inhibit cardiac activity.”

Antimuscarinic and antihistamine actions have been documen-
ted for berberine.”

In rats, berberine has exhibited antipyretic activity three times
as effective as aspirin.

Berberine potentiated barbiturate sleeping time, but did not
exhibit any analgesic or tranquillising effects.”

A broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity against bacteria,
fungi, and protozoa has been reported for berberine. Sensitive

Figure 3 Golden seal — dried drug substance (rhizome, root).

organisms include Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp.,
Chlamydia aureus, Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Salmonella
typhi, Diplococcus pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Shi-
gella dysenteriae, Trichomonas vaginalis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae,
Neisseria meningitidis, Treponema pallidum, Giardia lamblia and
Leishmania donovani.” Berberine is reported to be effective
against diarrhoeas caused by enterotoxins such as Vibrio cholerae
and Escherichia coli.” In vivo and in vitro studies in hamsters
and rats have reported significant activity for berberine against
Entamoeba histolytica.

Anticancer activity has been reported for berberine in B1, KB
and PS tumour systems.'©”” In addition, berberine sulfate was
found to inhibit the action of teleocidin, a known tumour
promoter, on the formation of mouse skin tumours initiated with
7,12-dimethylbenz{a]anthracene.”’

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of golden
seal and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required. Berberine is stated to be effective in the treatment of
acute diarrhoea on the basis of data from several clinical
studies.” It has been found effective against diarrhoeas caused
by Escherichia coli, Shigella dysenteriae, Salmonella paratyphi B,
Klebsiella, Giardia lamblia and Vibrio cholerae. Berberine has
been used to treat trachoma, an infectious ocular disease caused
by Chlamydia trachomatis, which is a major cause of blindness
and impaired vision in developing countries.)

Clinical studies have shown berberine to stimulate bile and
bilirubin secretion and to improve symptoms of chronic
cholecystitis, and to correct raised concentrations of tyramine in
patients with liver cirrhosis.)

Further investigation is required to determine whether or not
the effects described for berberine also occur with golden seal.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for golden seal
and further investigation of these aspects is required. The alkaloid
constituents are potentially toxic and symptoms of golden seal
poisoning include stomach upset, nervous symptoms and depres-
sion; large quantities may even be fatal.’ High doses of
hydrastine are reported to cause exaggerated reflexes, convulsions,
paralysis and death from respiratory failure. The root may cause
contact ulceration of mucosal surfaces.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Golden seal is contra-indicated in individuals with raised blood
pressure.(67 ©? S®) The alkaloid constituents of golden seal are

potentially toxic and excessive use should be avoided.

fey

Drug interactions None documented. However, in view of the
documented pharmacological actions of golden seal and the
alkaloid constituents, the potential for preparations of golden seal
to interact with other medicines administered concurrently,
particularly those with similar or opposing effects, should be
considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Golden seal is contra-indicated for use
during pregnancy.°”°*”) Berberine, canadine, hydrastine and
hydrastinine have all been reported to produce uterine stimulant

tivity) Tei aa : :
activity. Tt is not known whether the alkaloids are excreted in
breast milk. The use of golden seal during lactation should be
avoided.

----- PAGE 350 -----
vance: maXO!

. Spain: B joum. UK:
Digestive; Golden Seal Indigestion Tablets; HRI Golden Seal
Digestive; Wind & Dyspepsia Relief. USA: Immune Support.

References

1 Gleye J et al. La canadaline: nouvel alcaloide d'Hydrastis canadensis.
Phytochemistry 1974; 13: 675-676.
2 El-Masry S et al. Colorimetric and spectrophotometric determination

Golden Seal

of Hydrastis alkaloids in pharmaceutical preparations. ] Pharm Sci
1980; 69: 597-598.

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Hydrastis canadensis, Berberis vulgaris,
Berberis aquitolium and other berberine containing plants. In:
Textbook of Natural Medicine. Seattle: John Bastyr College
Publications, 1985 (looseleaf).

Genest K, Hughes DW. Natural products in Canadian
pharmaceuticals iv. Hydrastis canadensis. Can J Pharm Sci 1969; 4:
4144S.

Nishino H et al. Berberine sulphate inhibits tumour-promoting
activity of teleocidin in two-stage carcinogenesis on mouse skin.
Oncology 1986; 43: 131-134.

Wisniewski W, Gorta T. Effect of temperature on the oxidation of
hydrastine to hydrastinine in liquid extracts and rhizomes of Hydrastis
canadensis in the presence of air and steam. Acta Pol Pharm 1969; 26:
313-317.

Preininger V. The pharmacology and toxicology of the Papaveraceae
alkaloids. In: Manske RHE, Holmes HL, eds. The Alkaloids, vol 15.
New York: Academic Press, 1975: 239.

Hardin JW, Arena JM. Human Poisoning from Native and Cultivated
Plants, 2nd edn. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press,
1974.

G

----- PAGE 351 -----
Gravel Root

The chemistry of gravel root is poorly studied and no mn

evidence was located to justify the herbal uses. In view of the
very limited information on the chemistry and
pharmacological and toxicological effects of gravel root,
excessive use and use during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

Species (Family)

Eupatorium purpureum L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)
E. trifoliatum L., Joe-Pye Weed, Kydney Root, Purple Boneset

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983” ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLios?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G20 and G40.

Little information is available on the chemistry of gravel root. It
is stated to contain euparin (a benzofuran compound), eupatorin
(a flavonoid), resin and volatile oil.

Other plant parts The herb is reported to contain echinatine, an
unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloid.”

Food Use

Gravel root is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Gravel root is stated to possess antilithic, diuretic and antirheu-
matic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for urinary
calculus, cystitis, dysuria, urethritis, prostatitis, rheumatism,
gout, and specifically for renal or vesicular calculi.'°7 °

Benzofurans
CH;
g \
HO °
euparin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of gravel root.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 2-4 as a decoction three times daily.”
(G7)

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.

Tincture 1-2 mL (1:5 in 40% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of gravel
root and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Figure 3. Gravel root — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 352 -----
Side-effects, To:

None documented although there is a lack of clinical safety an
toxicity data for gravel root and further investigation of these
aspects is required. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids are constituents of
many species of Eupatorium.'” © Pyrrolizidine alkaloids with an
unsaturated pyrrolizidine nucleus are reported to be hepatotoxic
in both animals and humans (see Comfrey). An unsaturate
pyrrolizidine alkaloid, echinatine, has been reported for the aeria
parts of gravel root.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. However, there is very limited chemical an
pharmacological information available for gravel root and this
should be considered when assessing whether or not use of grave
root is appropriate.

Drug interactions None documented. However, there is very
limited chemical and pharmacological information available for

Gravel Root

gravel root and the potential for preparations of gravel root to
interact with other medicines administered concurrently should be
considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of gravel root has not been
established. In view of the lack of phytochemical, pharmacological
and toxicological information the use of gravel root during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

UK: Backache.

Reference

1 Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids. Environmental Health Criteria 80. Geneva:
WHO, 1988.

----- PAGE 353 -----
. Ground Ivy

support some of the herbal uses, although there is a lack of
clinical research assessing the effects of ground ivy and

rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required. In
view of the lack of safety and toxicity data, and the reported
cytotoxic activity of ursolic acid, excessive use of ground ivy
and use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Glechoma hederacea L. (Labiatae)

Synonym(s)
Nepeta hederacea (L.) Trevis, N. glechoma Benth.

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'@*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Amino acids Asparagic acid, glutamic acid, proline, tyrosine and
valine.

Flavonoids Flavonol glycosides (e.g. hyperoside, isoquercitrin,
rutin) and flavone glycosides (e.g. luteolin diglucoside, cosmosyin,
cynaroside and cosmoriin).?

Steroids -Sitosterol.

Terpenoids Oleanolic acid, o-ursolic acid, B-ursolic acid.”
Volatile oils — 0.03—0.06%. Various terpenoid components
including p-cymene, linalool, limonene, menthone, &-pinene, B-
pinene, pinocamphone, pulegone and terpineol; glechomafuran (a
sesquiterpene).

Other constituents Palmitic acid and other fatty acids, rosmarinic
acid, succinic acid, bitter principle (glechomin), choline, gum,
diterpene lactone (marrubiin), saponin, tannin and wax.

Food Use

Ground ivy is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that
ground ivy can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted

manner, although there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity.'°!®

Herbal Use

Ground ivy is stated to possess mild expectorant, anticatarrhal,
astringent, vulnerary, diuretic and stomachic properties. Tradi-
tionally, it has been used for bronchitis, tinnitus, diarrhoea,
haemorrhoids, cystitis, gastritis, and specifically for chronic
b - (G6, G7, G8, G49, Ge4)

ronchial catarrh.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.'C%°”

Liquid extract 24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily(Co%

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

In vivo anti-inflammatory activity has been reported for an
ethanolic extract of ground ivy, which was stated to exhibit a
moderate inhibition (27%) of carrageenan-induced rat paw
oedema.

Ursolic acid analogues, 2¢- and 2B-hydroxyursolic acid, have
been documented to provide significant ulcer-protective activity in
mice.)

The astringent activity documented for ground ivy has been
attributed to rosmarinic acid, a polyphenolic acid.

Glechomin and marrubiin are stated to be bitter principles, and

a-terpineol is known to be an antiseptic component of volatile
oils, (C48 G4)

Flavonoids

glucosyl-O.

cynaroside OH
(luteolin-7-glucoside)

cosmoriin H
(apigenin-7-glucoside)

Fatty acids

es COOH

9-hydroxy-10-trans-12-cis
-octadecadienoic acid

Figure 1 Selected constituents of ground ivy.

----- PAGE 354 -----
Figure 2 Ground ivy (Glechoma hederacea).

Anti-inflammatory and astringent properties are generally
associated with flavonoids and tannins, respectively. Anti-inflam-
matory properties have been documented for rosmarinic acid (see
Rosemary).

In vitro antiviral activity against the Epstein—Barr virus has
been documented for ursolic acid.” Both oleanolic and ursolic
acids were found to inhibit tumour production by TPA in mouse
skin, with activity comparable to that of retinoic acid, a known
tumour-promoter inhibitor.”

Significant cytotoxic activity has also been reported for ursolic
acid in lymphocytic leukaemia (P-388, L-1210) and human lung
carcinoma (A-549), and marginal activity in KB cells, human
colon (HCT-8), and mammary (MCF-7) tumour cells.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of ground
ivy and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for ground ivy
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Poisoning in cattle and horses has been documented in Eastern
Europe.” Symptoms include accelerated weak pulse, difficulty in
breathing, conjunctival haemorrhage, elevated temperature, dizzi-
ness, spleen enlargement, dilation of the caecum, and gastro-
enteritis revealed at post-mortem. Antitumour and cytotoxic
activities have been reported for oleanolic and ursolic acids (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

Ground ivy volatile oil contains many terpenoids and terpene-
rich volatile oils are irritant to the gastrointestinal tract and
kidneys. Pulegone is an irritant, hepatotoxic, and abortifacient
principle of the volatile oil of pennyroyal. However, in comparison
with pennyroyal the overall yield of volatile oil is much less (0.03-—
0.06% in ground ivy and 1-2% in pennyroyal).

Figure 3. Ground ivy - dried drug substance (herb).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Ground ivy is contra-indicated in epilepsy” although no

rationale for this statement has been found. Excessive doses may
be irritant to the gastrointestinal mucosa and should be avoided
by individuals with existing renal disease.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of ground ivy to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of ground ivy has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data and the possible
irritant and abortifacient action of the volatile oil, the use of
ground ivy during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
UK: Gerard House Water Relief Tablets; Water Naturtabs.

References

1 Zieba J. Isolation and identification of flavonoids from Glechoma
hederacea. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm 1973; 25: 593-597.

2 Zieba J. Isolation and identification of nonheteroside triterpenoids
from Glechoma hederacea. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm 1973; 25: 587-592.

3. Stahl E, Datta SN. New sesquiterpenoids of the ground ivy (Glechoma
hederacea). Justus Liebigs Ann Chem 1972; 757: 23-32.

4 Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

5 Okuyama E et al. Isolation and identification of ursolic acid-related

compounds as the principles of Glechoma hederacea having an
37: 52-55.
6 Okuda T et al. The components of tannic activities in Labiatae plants.

antiulcerogenic activity. Shoyakugaku Zasshi 1983;

I. Rosmarinic acid from Labiatae plants in Japan. Yakugaku Zasshi
1986; 106: 1108-1111.

7 Tokuda H et al. Inhibitory effects of ursolic and oleanolic acid on skin
tumor promotion by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate. Cancer
Lett 1986; 33: 279-285.

8 Lee K-H et al. The cytotoxic principles of Prunella vulgaris,
Psychotria serpens, and Hyptis capitata: Ursolic acid and related
derivatives. Planta Med 1988; 54: 308.

9 MAFE. Poisonous Plants in Britain. London: HMSO, 1984: 139.

----- PAGE 355 -----
Guaiacum

was found to justify the herbal use of guaiacum as an
antirheumatic or anti-inflammatory agent. In view of the lack
of toxicity data, excessive use of guaiacum and use during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Guaiacum officinale L. (Zygophyllaceae)
Guaiacum sanctum L.

Synonym(s)

Guaiac, Guajacum, Guayacar, Lignum Vitae, Palo Santo

Part(s) Used

Resin obtained from the heartwood

(-)-guaiaretic acid

(-)-dihydroguaiaretic acid CH3

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 19960”?

Complete German Commission EC”
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
cL

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Resins = 15-20%. Guaiaretic acid, dehydroguaiaretic acid,
guaiacin, isoguaiacin, o%-guaiaconic acid (lignans), furoguaiacin
and its monomethyl ether, furoguaiacidin, tetrahydrofuroguaia-
cin-A and tetrahydrofuroguaiacin-B (furano-lignans), furoguaia
oxidin (enedione lignan).

Steroids {-Sitosterol.

“my

OCH
R OCH3
(+)-guaiacin

(-)-nordihydroguaiaretic acid H

CH;0O.
HO’
furoguaiaoxidin
Sesquiterpenes
guaiol guaiazulene

Figure 1 Selected constituents of guaiacum.

I \

Caa6
OH

furoguaiacin

OCH3

Simple phenols

OC
OCH;

guaiacol

----- PAGE 356 -----
Terpenoids Saponins, oleanolic acid.® Sesquiterpenes, includ-
ing guaiol and guaiazulene.

Food Use

Guaiacum is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
guaiacum can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.“@!

Herbal Use

Guaiacum is stated to possess antirheumatic, anti-inflammatory,
diuretic, mild laxative and diaphoretic properties. Traditionally, it
has been used for subacute rheumatism, prophylaxis against gout,

and specifically for chronic rheumatism and rheumatoid arthri-
tis, (OO 7.8, Got)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal and/or pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

Dried wood 1-2 g as a decoction three times daily,(C%°”

1-2mL (1:1 in 80% alcohol) three times

Liquid extract
daily."

G6, G7)

Figure 2. Guaiacum (Guaiacum officinale).

Figure 3. Guaiacum - dried drug substance (wood).

Guaiacum

Tincture of Guaiacum (BPC 1934) 24mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented. Antimicrobial properties are associated with
lignans and much has been documented for nordihydroguaiaretic
acid, the principal lignan constituent in chaparral (see Chaparral).

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
guaiacum and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for guaiacum
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Guaiacum resin has been reported to cause contact dermati-
tis.(©°) The resin is documented to be of low toxicity; the oral
LDso in rats is greater than 5 g/kg body weight.'°*

Contra-indications, Warnings

It is recommended that guaiacum is avoided by individuals with
(G49)

hypersensitive, allergic or acute inflammatory conditions.
Drug interactions None documented. However, there is limited
pharmacological information for guaiacum, and the potential for
preparations of guaiacum to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of guaiacum during
pregnancy has not been established. In view of this, and the overall
lack of pharmacological and toxicological data, the use of
guaiacum during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Boswellia Compound; Guaiacum Complex. Switzer-
land: Pommade au Baume. UK: Gerard House Reumalex;
Rheumatic Pain Relief; Rheumatic Pain Remedy; Rheumatic
Pain.

References

1 King FE, Wilson JG. The chemistry of extractives from hardwoods.
Part XXXVI. The lignans of Guaiacum officinale L. ] Chem Soc 1964;
40114024.

2 Kratochvil JF et al. Isolation and characterization of o-guaiaconic acid
and the nature of guaiacum blue. Phytochemistry 1971; 10: 2529-3251.

3 Majumder PL, Bhattacharyya M. Structure of furoguaiacidin: a new
furanoid lignan of the heartwood of Guaiacum officinale L. Chem Ind
1974; 77-78.

4 Majumder P, Bhattacharyya M. Furoguaiaoxidin — a new enedione
lignan of Guaiacum officinale: a novel method of sequential
introduction of alkoxy functions in the 3- and 4-methyl groups of 2,5-
diaryl-3,4-dimethylfurans. JCS Chem Commun 1975; 702-703.

5 Ahmad VU et al. Officigenin, a new sapogenin of Guaiacum
officinale. J] Nat Prod 1984; 47: 977-982.

6 Ahmad VU et al. Guaianin, a new saponin from Guaiacum officinale.
J Nat Prod 1986; 49: 784-786.

----- PAGE 357 -----
Hawthorn

surveillance studies suggest that the hawthorn preparations
assessed are well-tolerated when taken at recommended
dosages. However, results cannot necessarily be extrapolated
to other hawthorn products, which may differ qualitatively
and quantitatively in their chemical content. Further well-
designed post-marketing surveillance studies are required to
assess the safety of hawthorn extracts, including with long-
term use. In view of the documented pharmacological actions
of hawthorn the potential for preparations of hawthorn to
interfere with other medicines administered concurrently,
particularly those with similar or opposing effects, including
antihypertensive, antihypotensive, and inotropic agents,
should be considered. Hawthorn fruit or hawthorn leaf and
flower are contraindicated during pregnancy and
breastfeeding.

Species (Family)

*Crataegus laevigata (Poir.) DC. (Rosaceae)
Crataegus monogyna Jacq.

Synonym(s)

*C. oxyacanthoides Thuill., C. oxyacantha auct.
+Crataegus oxyacantha L., nom. ambig.

Part(s) Used

Fruit, leaf, flower

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia‘?!

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08)

BHMA 20030°

Complete German Commission EC)
ESCOP 200307

Martindale 35th edition'©*”

Ph Eur 2007°°8?

WHO volume 2'¢7°

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Hawthorn is not included in the GSL.‘C*”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General

References G1 and G2.

Amines Phenylethylamine, O-methoxyphenethylamine and tyr-
ine“)

amine.

Flavonoids Up to 1%.“ Flavonol (e.g. kaempferol, quercetin)

and flavone (e.g. apigenin, luteolin) derivatives, rutin, hyperoside,
vitexin glycosides, orientin glycosides.?~ The fruits contain
relatively more hyperoside and the leaves relatively more vitexin
glycosides.'@”)

Tannins Proanthocyanins (catechin-type oligomers).”)

Other constituents Cyanogenetic glycosides and saponins.

Quality of plant material and commercial products

As with other herbal medicinal products, there can be variation in
the qualitative and quantitative composition of hawthorn crude
plant material and commercial preparations of hawthorn fruit
and/or leaf with flower. According to the British and European
Pharmacopoeias, hawthorn leaf with flower consists of the whole
or cut, dried flower-bearing tops of C. laevigata or C. monogyna
(or rarely certain other Crataegus species), and contains not less
than 1.5% of flavonoids, expressed as hyperoside and calculated
with reference to the dried drug.“@*"°* Detailed descriptions of
hawthorn berry and leaf with flower for use in botanical,
microscopic and macroscopic identification have been published,
along with qualitative and quantitative methods for the assess-
ment of hawthorn berry and leaf with flower raw material.'¢!)
Aqueous-alcoholic (40-70% ethanol or methanol) extracts of
hawthorn leaf with flower obtained from several different
manufacturers were reported to have a similar profile of
constituents (procyanidins, flavonoids, total vitexin and_ total
phenols) both qualitatively and quantitatively, whereas an aqueous
extract was stated to have a lower concentration of procyanidins,
flavonoids and total phenols, and a similar total vitexin content.
However, no statistical analyses were described to support these
findings and there were in fact also substantial quantitative
variations between aqueous-alcoholic extracts in content of
procyanidins (8.7-13.5%), flavonoids calculated as hyperoside
(1.1-3.4%), vitexin-2"-O-rhamnoside and hyperoside (5.7—7.9%),
total vitexins (4.1-4.9%) and total phenols (19.5-25.6%); values
for these constituents for the aqueous extract were 8.0%, 0.7%,
5.6%, 4.1% and 14.0%, respectively. Further work showed that all

----- PAGE 358 -----
the extracts had a relaxant effect on norepinephrine (noradrena-
line)-induced contractions of guineapig aortic rings in vitro,
achieving relaxations of 29-44% of baseline values. ECso (effective
concentration) values were between 4.2-9.8mg/mL for the
aqueous-alcoholic extracts and 22.4mg/mL for the aqueous
extract, although maximum effects were similar for all extracts.”
The positive control milrinone had a significantly greater effect
than any of the extracts (ECso 1.3mg/mL). Basic statistical
analyses indicated that there were no statistically significant
differences between the aqueous-alcoholic extracts in terms of
their relaxant effects, indicating pharmacological equivalence.
However, more sophisticated analysis allowing for multiple
analyses indicated that the effects of the 40% ethanol and 55%
methanol extracts differed significantly from those of the other
aqueous-alcoholic extracts. These findings provide some support
for the equivalence of 40-70% ethanol or methanol extracts of
hawthorn leaf with flower,\*) although this would be strengthened
by more consistent results in further studies. The equivalence of
preparations of hawthorn fruit also requires investigation.

Food Use

Hawthorn is not commonly used in foods. It is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category
N2). This category indicates that hawthorn can be added to
foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible limitation of an
active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final product.'©!®

Herbal Use

Hawthorn fruit is stated to possess cardiotonic, coronary
vasodilator and hypotensive properties. Traditionally, it has been
used for cardiac failure, myocardial weakness, paroxysmal
tachycardia, hypertension, arteriosclerosis and Buerger's disea-
se.(° The German Commission E did not approve therapeutic
use of the fruit.“©?) Modern interest in hawthorn is focused on the

use of hawthorn leaf with flower in reduced cardiac performan-
~e (@B)
ce.

Flavonoids OH OH
glucose
HO. HO. ZA 0.
S
OH O OH O
hyperoside vitexin (apigenin-8-C-glucoside)
Procyanidins OH

a ‘OH “ ‘OH

OH "0H
ow OH
F ‘OH
“OH
OH
4,8-2,3-cis-procyanidin
(dimeric procyanidin B2)

‘OH

OH
4,6-2,3-cis-procyanidin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of hawthorn.

Hawthorn

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Fruit

Dried fruit 0.3-1.0g as an infusion three times daily.”
Liquid extract 0.5-1.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C”

Tincture 1-2mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'©”

Leaf with flower For the treatment of decreasing cardiac
efficiency corresponding to functional stage II of the New York
Heart Association 160-900 mg aqueous-alcoholic extract (ethanol
45% v/v or methanol 70% v/v; drug to extract ratio 4-7: 1, with
defined flavonoid and/or procyanidin content corresponding to
3.5-19.8 mg flavonoids, calculated as hyperoside, and 30-168.7 mg

Figure 2 Hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata).

Figure 3. Hawthorn - dried drug substance (fruit and leaf).

----- PAGE 359 -----
Hawthorn

procyanidins, calculated as epicatechin) daily, in two to three
divided doses.“

Clinical trials of hawthorn leaf with flower in patients with
different stages of heart failure (according to the NYHA
classification) mainly have assessed the effects of a standardised
extract (WS-1442, containing 18.8% oligomeric procyanidins)
administered orally at doses ranging from 160-1800 mg daily for
up to 16 weeks.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics There are only limited data available on the
pharmacokinetics of constituents of hawthorn preparations. In
male rats given an 80% ethanol extract of the fruits of C.
pinnatifida Bge. var major N.E.Br. containing (—)-epicate-
in15.8%, chlorogenic acid 3.4%, hyperoside 2.7% and iso-
uercitrin 2.0% at a dose of 220 mg/kg by intravenous injection,
armacokinetic parameters for these compounds were (expressed
s mean (standard deviation)): plasma drug concentration, 142.8
16.2), 33.1 (6.1), 38.8 (6.0) and 26.7 (4.9), respectively;
elimination half-life (ty), 74.2 (10.0), 18.9 (1.8), 18.1 (1.1) and
11.1 (2.2) minutes, respectively; area under the plasma-concentra-
ion time curve (AUC), 2204.5 (261.0), 526.1 (37-4), 358.8 (18.0)
and 216.0 (11.5) ug/min/mL, respectively; clearance, 16.0 (2.0),
14.3 (1.0), 16.7 (0.8) and 20.9 (1.1) mL/min/kg, respectively.’ The
plasma drug concentration, tj2, AUC and urinary excretion were
significantly higher, and the volume of distribution and total body
clearance were significantly lower, following intravenous injection
of the extract than following intravenous injection of the
individual four compounds at doses matching those in the extract
(p < 0.05 for all). Following oral administration of a similar dose
of the extract and the individual compounds, only epicatechin was
absorbed, and there were no statistically significant differences in
its pharmacokinetic parameters after administration as part of an
extract or as the pure compound. A possible explanation for these
findings is that other constituents of hawthorn extract may
influence the pharmacokinetics of the constituents studied.”)

pu oo

4

Cardiovascular activity Cardiovascular activity has been
documented for hawthorn and attributed to the flavonoid
components, in particular the procyanidins.

A dry ethanol (45%) extract of hawthorn leaf with flower (drug-
to-extract ratio 4-6.6 : 1, standardised for oligomeric procyanidins
18.75%; WS-1442) at a dose 100 mg/kg orally by gavage daily for
seven days significantly improved cardiac function and reduced
infarct size in a rat model of prolonged ischaemia and reperfusion,
compared with control (p < 0.05). In other experiments,

awthorn extracts and/or isolated constituents increased coronary
blood flow both in vitro (in the guinea-pig heart) and in vivo (in
the cat, dog and rabbit), reduced blood pressure in vivo (in cat,
dog, rabbit and rat models), increased (head, skeletal muscle and
idney) and reduced (skin, gastrointestinal tract) peripheral blood
flow in vivo (in the dog) and reduce peripheral resistance in vivo
(in the dog).'° ''' The hypotensive activity of hawthorn has been
attributed to a vasodilation action rather than via adrenergic,
muscarinic or histaminergic receptors.) Beta-adrenoceptor
blocking activity (versus adrenaline-induced tachycardia) has
been exhibited in vivo in the dog and in vitro in the frog heart
using flower, leaf and fruit extracts standardised for their
procyanidin content.
the concentration of procyanidin and observed actions.

) A direct relationship was found between

Negative chronotropic and positive inotropic actions have been
observed in vitro using the guinea-pig heart and attributed to
flavonoid and proanthocyanidin fractions.) A positive inotropic
effect has also been exhibited by amine constituents in vitro using
guinea-pig papillary muscle.”

Hawthorn extracts have also been reported to lack any effect on
the heart rate and muscle contractility in studies that have
observed an effect on blood pressure in the dog and rat.‘'!9)
Hawthorn extracts have exhibited some prophylactic anti-
arrhythmic activity in rabbits administered intravenous aconi-
tine.""® Extracts infused after aconitine did not affect the induced
arrhythmias. In vitro, vitexin rhamnoside has been reported to
have no effect on the action of ouabain and aconitine. A crude
extract of Crataegus pinnatifidia Bge. var major N.E.Br. and the
flavonoid vitexin rhamnoside have been reported to exert a
protective action on experimental ischaemic myocardium in
anaesthetised dogs.''”) The extracts were observed to decrease
left ventricular work, decrease the consumption of oxygen index,
and increase coronary sinus blood oxygen concentrations,
resulting in a decrease in oxygen consumption and balance of
oxygen metabolism. In contrast to other studies, an increase in
coronary blood flow was not observed. The authors attributed
these opposing results to the variation in concentrations of active
constituents between the different plant parts. In vitro, vitexin
rhamnoside has been reported to exert a protective action towards
cardiac cells deprived of oxygen and glucose.”

Other activities A mild CNS-depressant effect has been
documented in mice that received oral administration of hawthorn
flower extracts.?" An increase in barbiturate sleeping time and a
decrease in spontaneous basal motility were the most noticeable
effects.

Free radicals have been linked with the ageing process. When
fed to mice, a hawthorn fruit (C. pinnatifidia) extract has been
reported to enhance the action of superoxide dismutase (SOD),
which promotes the scavenging of free radicals.“ An inhibition
of lipid peroxidation, which can be caused by highly reactive free
radicals, was also documented.'‘~’ The pharmacological actions of
leaf with flowers include increase in cardiac contractility, increase
in coronary blood flow and myocardial circulation, protection
from ischaemic damage and decrease of peripheral vascular

. 352)
resistance.'(C

Clinical studies

Heart failure and other cardiovascular disorders Clinical trials
of preparations of hawthorn mainly have assessed the effects of
standardised extracts of the leaf and flower in patients with
different stages of heart failure, according to the NYHA
classification. There have been at least 13 randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trials of hawthorn extracts involving
patients with NYHA heart failure classes I to III. The results of at
least ten other studies have been published, but these have a: ed
the effects of combination preparations of hawthorn or were not
conducted according to a randomised, placebo-controlled design.
Most randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials have
assessed the effects of a dry 45% ethanol extract of hawthorn
leaves with flowers (WS-1442; drug-to-extract ratio 4-6:1,
containing 18.8% oligomeric procyanidins). Several other trials
have compared the effects of another extract of hawthorn leaf
with flower (LI-132; standardised for 2.2% flavonoids) with those
of placebo, or the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
captopril.

----- PAGE 360 -----
A systematic review and meta-analysis included 13 randomised,

double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of standardised extracts of
hawthorn leaf and flower in patients with chronic heart failure.
Ten trials tested the extract WS-1442 administered orally at doses
ranging from 160 to 1800 mg daily for three to 16 weeks, whereas
the other three trials assessed the extract LI-132 at doses of 300,
600 or 900mg daily for four or eight weeks; in several trials,
participants were also receiving concurrent standard treatments,
such as diuretics, although a number of trials excluded patients
who were already receiving diuretics, glycosides, calcium antago-
nists and ACE inhibitors, and in some studies it was not clear
whether or not participants received concomitant medications.?
Eight trials, involving a total of 632 participants, provided data
that were suitable for meta-analysis. Data from four trials (n =
310 participants), which assessed maximal workload, showed that
hawthorn extracts were superior to placebo (weighted mean
difference (WMD), 95% confidence interval (CI): 7 Watt, 3 to 11
Watt; p < 0.01), and data from six trials which as: d the
systolic blood pressure-heart rate product (systolic blood pressure
in mmHg multiplied by heart rate per minute divided by 100)
showed that this outcome was reduced to a greater extent in
hawthorn recipients than placebo recipients (WMD, 95% CI: -20,
-32 to -8). Of the five trials that were not included in the meta-
analysis, three reported statistically significant effects for haw-
thorn extracts, compared with placebo, with respect to primary
outcome measures, and two reported no statistically differences
for hawthorn extracts, compared with placebo.
The review concluded that hawthorn extracts are beneficial as
adjunctive treatments in patients with chronic heart failure, but
there is insufficient evidence to support the use of hawthorn
extract alone in the treatment of chronic heart failure.
some of the trials did not score highly in an
sment of their methodological quality and as, overall, the
studies involved relatively small numbers of patients, further well-
designed randomised controlled trials are necessary to confirm the
findings. Also, the observed effects cannot necessarily be
extrapolated to hawthorn preparations other than those tested
in the trials described above.

The largest trial included in the meta-analysis was a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial initially invol-
ving 209 patients with chronic stable NYHA class III heart failure
who received hawthorn extract WS-1442 900 or 1800 mg daily, or
placebo, for 16 weeks. At the end of the study, for the 139 patients
who were eligible for analysis, the maximum tolerated workload
during bicycle exercise was significantly greater for the higher dose
hawthorn group, compared with the placebo group (p < 0.05).°

In another randomised, double-blind, controlled trial, 40
patients with chronic heart failure (NYHA class II) received a
combination preparation containing extracts of hawthorn and
passionflower (standardised on flavone and proanthocyanidin
content) 2mL three times daily, or placebo, for 42. days.?>
Significant improvements were noted for the treatment group,
compared with placebo, in exercise capacity, heart rate at rest,
diastolic blood pressure during exercise, and concentrations of
total plasma cholesterol and low-density lipids (p < 0.05 for each).
There were no statistically significant differences between groups
in maximum exercise capacity, breathlessness, and_ physical
performance.

In a non-randomised, double-blind, controlled trial, the effects
of a standardised extract of hawthorn leaf and flower (LI-132)
900mg daily were compared with those of the ACE inhibitor
captopril 37.5mg daily for eight weeks in 132 patients with
chronic stable NYHA class II heart failure. During the study,

Furthermore, as

asse!

Hawthorn

exercise tolerance increased significantly in both groups, com-
pared with baseline values (p < 0.001), and the blood pressure—
art rate product and incidence and severity of symptoms
decreased in both groups; there were no statistically significant
differences between the groups.

The effectiveness (i.e. effects when used in general practice) of a
awthorn extract (WS-1442) were assessed in a prospective, non-
interventional, cohort study involving 952 patients with heart
failure (NYHA class II). Of these, 588 patients received the
awthorn extract either alone or in addition to standard
treatment, and 364 patients received standard treatment alone.
Interim results for 533 patients from whom 130 pairs of patients
matched for certain cardiac and demographic characteristics at
aseline suggested that fatigue (p = 0.036), stress dyspnoea (p =
0.020) and, marginally, palpitations (p = 0.048) were significantly
ess marked in the hawthorn extract cohort than in the
comparative cohort.°” However, final results of the study are
required before conclusions can be drawn.

A preliminary randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial assessed the effects of a hawthorn extract 500 mg daily, alone
and in combination with a magnesium supplement 600 mg daily,
for ten weeks in 36 patients with mild hypertension. Reductions in
systolic and diastolic blood pressure were observed in all groups,
and there were no statistically significant differences between
groups.*) However, it is possible that as the study involved only
small numbers of participants that it did not have adequate
statistical power to detect any differences between groups.

Data pooled from two randomised, controlled, crossover
studies each involving 24 participants with orthostatic dysregula-
tion who received one of three doses of an oral combination
preparation containing an ethanol extract of hawthorn berries, D-
camphor and menthol on four separate days indicated a
statistically significant effect for higher dose of the combination
preparation, compared with placebo, with respect to mean arterial
pressure, and systolic and diastolic blood pressure.?”

Other conditions The effects of a combination preparation
containing C. oxyacantha, Eschscholtzia californica and magne-
d in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial involving 264 participants with mild-to-moderate
anxiety disorders with associated functional disturbances. Parti-
cipants received the combination preparation (1 = 130), or
placebo (m = 134), two tablets twice daily for three months. At the
end of the study, reductions in Hamilton anxiety scale scores were
significantly greater for the treatment group than for the placebo
group.’

sium were as:

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Data from randomised controlled trials and post-marketing
surveillance studies suggest that hawthorn preparations are well-
tolerated when taken at recommended dosages. While these
studies provide some useful data for the hawthorn products
assessed, their results cannot necessarily be extrapolated to other
manufacturers’ hawthorn products, which may differ qualitatively
and quantitatively in their chemical content. In addition, clinical
trials are designed primarily to assess efficacy, not safety, and have
the statistical power only to detect common, acute adverse effects.
Further well-designed post-marketing surveillance studies are
required to assess the safety of hawthorn extracts, including with
long-term use.

----- PAGE 361 -----
Hawthorn

A systematic review and meta-analysis included 13 randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trials of standardised extracts of
hawthorn leaf and flower in patients with chronic heart failure
(see Pharmacological Actions, Clinical studies), of which 12 trials
reported data on adverse events. Of these, nine trials tested the
extract WS-1442 administered orally at doses ranging from 160—
1800 mg daily for three to 16 weeks, whereas the other three trials
assessed the extract LI-132 at doses of 300, 600 or 900 mg daily for
four or eight weeks.°) The systematic review reported that in five
trials no adverse events occurred in the hawthorn groups and that
in the seven other trials, 39 adverse events, most commonly,
dizziness/vertigo (mn = 8 cases), occurred among around 300
hawthorn recipients. However, the review did not state whether or
not the number and type of adverse events occurring in the
hawthorn groups were different to those for the placebo groups. In
the largest trial included in the systematic review, the frequency of
dizziness was lower in the higher dose hawthorn group than in the
lower dose hawthorn and placebo groups.”

In two post-marketing surveillance studies involving over 4500
patients with NYHA class I or II heart failure who received
hawthorn extract (WS-1442°) 900mg daily for eight or 24
weeks, adverse events were reported by 1.3% and 1.4%°" of
participants. Adverse events reported included hot flushes,
stomach complaints, palpitations, dizziness, dyspnoea, headache
and epistaxis.”

Preclinical data

General symptoms of acute toxicity observed in a number of
animal models (e.g. guinea-pig, frog, tortoise, cat, rabbit, rat)
have been documented as bradycardia and respiratory depression
leading to cardiac arrest and respiratory paralysis." ' Acute
toxicity (LDso) of isolated constituents (mainly flavonoids) has
been documented as 50-2600 mg/kg (by intravenous injection) and
6g/kg (by mouth) in various animal preparations."'' The
documented acute toxicity of commercial hawthorn preparations
has also been reviewed."

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the nature of the actions documented for hawthorn,
there is a view that preparations of hawthorn berries and leaves
with flowers are not suitable for self-medication.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
actions of hawthorn, the potential for preparations of hawthorn
to interfere with other medicines administered concurrently,
particularly those with similar or opposing effects, including
antihypertensive, antihypotensive, and inotropic agents, should be
considered.

In an open-label, randomised, crossover study involving healthy
volunteers who received digoxin 0.25 mg for ten days and digoxin
0.25 mg in addition to an extract of hawthorn leaves and flowers
(WS-1442) 450 mg twice daily (equivalent to 168.6 mg oligomeric
procyanidins) for three weeks with a three-week wash-out period,
there were no statistically significant differences between digoxin
alone and digoxin plus hawthorn extract in any of the measured
pharmacokinetic parameters.°*) Digoxin concentrations were
lower in the digoxin plus hawthorn group and, although this
did not reach statistical significance (p = 0.054), it is possible that
the study did not have sufficient statistical power to detect a
difference. Furthermore, the study involved healthy volunteers,
and the effects of co-administration of digoxin and hawthorn
extract in patients with heart failure requires investigation.

Pregnancy and lactation Certain hawthorn extracts exhibit
activity on uterine tissue (reductions in tone and motility) in vitro
and in vivo (animals)."''"!») The clinical relevance of these findings
is not known. In view of the these and other pharmacological
activities described for hawthorn, together with the lack of
information on the use of hawthorn during pregnancy and
breastfeeding, preparations containing hawthorn fruit or haw-
thorn leaf and flower are contra-indicated during these periods.

Passin; Protecor; Salus Herz-Schutz-Kapseln; Septacord; Tc
nix. Hungary: Biovital; Biovital. Israel: Nerven-Dragees;
Passiflora. Italy: Anevrasi; Lenicalm; Noctis; Parvisedil;
Passiflorine; Sedatol; Sedatol; Sedofit; Sedopuer F Mexico:
Ifupasil. Monaco: Neuropax. Portugal: Neurocardol. Russia:
Doppelherz Vitalotonik (Aommeaprepu Buraaotonnx); Herbion
Drops for the Heart (Mep6uon Cepacunsie Kanan). Spain:
Natusor High Blood Pressure; Natusor Somnisedan; Passi-
florine; Sedasor; Sedonat; Tensiben. Switzerland: Arterosan
Plus; Cardiaforce; Circulan; Dragees pour le coeur et les nerfs;
Dragees sedatives Dr Welti; Ipasin; Phytomed Cardio; Strath
Gouttes pour le coeur; Tisane pour le coeur et la circulation;
Triallin; Valverde Coeur. UK: Tranquil. Venezuela: Cratex;
Equaliv; Eufytose; Pasidor; Pasifluidina; Passiflorum. USA:
Heart Health; My Favorite Multiple.

----- PAGE 362 -----
1

9

10

cel

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

References

Wagner H, Grevel J. Cardioactive drugs IV. Cardiotonic amines from
Crataegus oxyacantha. Plant Med 1982; 45: 99-101.

Nikolov N et al. New flavonoid glycosides from Crataegus monogyna
and Crataegus pentagyna. Planta Med 1982; 44: 50-53.

Ficarra P et al. High-performance liquid chromatography of flavonoids
in Crataegus oxyacantha L. Il Farmaco Ed Pr 1984; 39: 148-157.
Ficcara P et al. Analysis of 2-phenyl-chromon derivatives and
chlorogenic acid. Il — High-performance thin layer chromatography
and high-performance liquid chromatography in flowers, leaves and
buds extractives of Crataegus oxyacantha L. Il Farmaco Ed Pr 1984;
39: 342-354,

Pietta P et al. Isocratic liquid chormatographic method for the
simultaneous determination of Passiflora incarnata L. and Crataegus
monogyna flavonoids in drugs. J Chromatogr 1986; 357: 233-238.
Racz-Kotilla E et al. Hypotensive and beta-blocking effect of
procyanidins of Crataegus monogyna. Planta Med 1980; 39: 239.
Vanhaelen M, Vanhaelen-Fastre R. TLC-densitometric determination
of 2,3-cis-procyanidin monomer and oligomers from hawthorn
(Crataegus laevigata and C. monogyna). ] Pharm Biomed Anal 1989;
7: 1871-1875.

Vierling W et al. Investigation of the pharmaceutical and
pharmacological equivalence of different hawthorn extracts.
Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 8-16.

Chang Q et al. Comparison of the pharmacokinetics of hawthorn
phenolics in extract versus individual pure compound. J Clin
Pharmacol 2005; 45: 106-112.

Veveris M et al. Crataegus special extract WS’ 1442 improves cardiac
function and reduces infarct size in a rat model of prolonged coronary
ischemia and reperfusion. Life Sci 2004; 74: 1945-1955.

Ammon HPT, Handel M. Crataegus, toxicology and pharmacology.
Part I: Toxicity. Planta Med 1981; 43: 105-120.

Ammon HPT, Handel M. Crataegus, toxicology and pharmacology.
Part Il: Pharmacodynamics. Planta Med 1981; 43: 209-239.

Ammon HPT, Handel M. Crataegus, toxicology and pharmacology.
Part III: Pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics. Planta Med 1981;
43: 313-322.

Liévre M et al. Assessment in the anesthetized dog of the
cardiovascular effects of a pure extract (hyperoside) from hawthorn.
Ann Pharm Fr 1985; 43: 471-477.

Abdul-Ghani A-S et al. Hypotensive effect of Crateagus oxyacantha.
Int ] Crude Drug Res 1987; 25: 216-220.

Petkov V. Plants with hypotensive, antiatheromatous and
coronarodilatating action. Am ] Chin Med 1979; 7: 197-236.

Leukel A et al. Studies on the activity of Crataegus compounds upon
the isolated guinea pig heart. Planta Med 1986; 52: 65.

Thompson EB e¢ al. Preliminary study of potential antiarrhythmic
effects of Crataegus monogyna. ] Pharm Sci 1974; 63: 1936-1937.

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

Hawthorn

Lianda L et al. Studies on hawthorn and its active principle. I. Effect
on myocardial ischemia and hemodynamics in dogs. | Trad Chin Med
1984; 4: 283-288.

Lianda L et al. Studies on hawthorn and its active principle. II. Effects
on cultured rat heart cells deprived of oxygen and glucose. J Trad Chin
Med 1984; 4: 289-292.

Della Loggia R et al. Depressive effect of Crataegus oxyacantha L. on
central nervous system in mice. Sci Pharm 1983; 51: 319-324.

Dai Y-R et al. Effect of extracts of some medicinal plants on
superoxide dismutase activity in mice. Planta Med 1987; 53: 309-310.
Pittler MH, e¢ al. Hawthorn extract for treating chronic heart failure:
meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am J Med 2003; 114: 665-674.
Tauchert M. Efficacy and safety of crataegus extract WS" 1442 in
comparison with placebo in patients with chronic stable New York
Heart Association class-III heart failure. An Heart J 2002; 143: 910-
915.

von Eiff M et al. Hawthorn/Passionflower extract and improvement in
physical exercise capacity of patients with dyspnoea Class II of the
NYHM functional cla: cation. Acta Ther 1994; 20: 47-66.
Tauchert M et al. [Effectiveness of the hawthorn extract LI 132
compared with the ACE inhibitor captopril. Multicentre, double-blind
study in 132 patients with NYHA stage II cardiac insufficiency].
Miinch Med Wochenschr 1994; 136 (Suppl. Suppl.1):527-$33
[German].

Habs M. Prospective, comparative cohort studies and their
contribution to the benefit assessments of therapeutic options: heart
failure treatment with and without hawthorn special extract WS"
1442. Forsch Komplementiirmed Klass Naturheilkd 2004; 11 (Suppl.
Suppl.1): 36-39.

Walker AF Promising hypotensive effect of hawthorn extract: a
randomized, double-blind, pilot study of mild essential hypertension.
Phytotherapy Res 2002; 16: 48-54.

Belz GG et al. Camphor-Crataegus berry extract combination dose-
dependently reduces tilt induced fall in blood pressure in orthostatic
hypotension. Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 581-588.

Hanus M, et al. Double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled study
to evaluate the efficacy and safety of a fixed combination containing
two plant extracts (Crataegus oxyacantha and Eschscholtzia
californica) and magnesium in mild-to-moderate anxiety disorders.
Curr Med Res Opinion 2004; 20(1): 63-71.

Tauchert M et al.. High-dose crataegus (hawthorn) extract WS" 1442
in the treatment of NYHA stage II heart failure. Herz 1999; 24: 465—
474,

Schmidt U, et al. High dosed therapy with crataegus extract in
patients suffering from heart failure NYHA stage I and II. Z
Phytother 1998; 19: 22-30.

Tankanow R, et al. Interaction study between digoxin and a
preparation of hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacantha). J Clin Pharmacol
2003; 43: 637-642.

----- PAGE 363 -----
7 Holy Thistle

available pharmacological data support most of the stated
uses. However, there is a lack of clinical research assessing
efficacy and safety of preparations of holy thistle. In view of
the lack of toxicity data, excessive use of holy thistle and use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Cnicus benedictus L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)
Blessed Thistle, Carbenia Benedicta, Carbenia benedicta (L.)
Arcang., Carduus Benedictus, Cnicus

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'¢

BHP 19960”)

Complete German Commission E@?)
Martindale 35th edition'**?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6, G30, G40 and G62.

Lignans
and trachelogenin.

Arctigenin, nortracheloside, 2-acetyl nortracheloside
ed)

Polyenes Several polyacetylenes.”

Steroids Phytosterols (e.g. m-nonacosan, sitosterol, sitosteryl
glycoside, stigmasterol).

Tannins Type unspecified (8%).

Terpenoids Sesquiterpenes including cnicin 0.2-0.7%,“ yielding
salonitenolide as aglycone,” and artemisiifolin. Shoot and
flowering head are reported to be devoid of cnicin. Triterpenoids
including o&-amyrenone, %-amyrin acetate, o&-amyrin, multiflor-
enol, multiflorenol acetate and oleanolic acid.

Volatile oils Many components, mainly hydrocarbons.

Other constituents Lithospermic acid, mucilage, nicotinic acid
and nicotinamide complex, resin.

Food Use

Holy thistle is listed by the Council of Europe as natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that holy

thistle can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.(“'% Previously in the USA, holy thistle was
permitted for use in alcoholic beverages.(“%”

Herbal Use

Holy thistle is stated to possess bitter stomachic, antidiarrhoeal,
antihaemorrhagic, febrifuge, expectorant, antibiotic, bacterio-
static, vulnerary and antiseptic properties. Traditionally, it has
been used for anorexia, flatulent dyspepsia, bronchial catarrh,
topically for gangrenous and indolent ulcers, and specifically for
atonic dyspepsia, and enteropathy with flatulent colic.'C% °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried flowering tops
daily(CoO

Liquid extract 1.5-3.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C%°”

1.5-3.0g as an infusion three times

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antibacterial activity has been reported for an aqueous extract of
the herb, for cnicin, and for the volatile oil.“ Activity has been

Sesquiterpenes

CH2OH

‘OCH
OR?

R' R? R°
(-)-arctigenin H H CHg
trachelogenin OH H CH;
nortracheloside OH Glucose H
2-acetylnor- O-Acetyl Glucose H

tracheloside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of holy thistle.

----- PAGE 364 -----
Holy Thistle

Figure 2 Holy thistle (Cnicus benedictus).

documented against Bacillus subtilis, Brucella abortus, Brucella
bronchoseptica, Escherichia coli, Proteus species, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus faecalis.
The antimicrobial activity of holy thistle has been attributed to
cnicin and to the polyacetylene constituents.”

Cnicin has exhibited in vivo anti-inflammatory activity
(carrageenan-induced rat-paw oedema test) virtually equipotent
to indometacin. Antitumour activity has been documented in
mice against sarcoma 180 for the whole herb, and against
lymphoid leukaemia for cnicin;') cnicin has also been reported to
exhibit in vitro activity against KB cells." An o-methylene-y-
lactone moiety is thought to be necessary for the antibacterial and
antitumour activities of cnicin.®

Lithospermic acid is thought to be responsible for the
antigonadotrophic activity documented for holy thistle.‘ The
sesquiterpene lactone constituents are stated to be bitter
principles.'@

Tannins are generally known to possess astringent properties.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of holy
thistle and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for holy thistle and further investigation of these
aspects is required.

The toxicity of cnicin has been studied in mice: the acute oral
LDso9 was stated to be 1.6-3.2mmol/kg body weight and
intraperitoneal administration was reported to cause irritation
of tissue. In the writhing test, cnicin was found to cause
abdominal pain with an EDso estimated as 6.2 mmol/kg.

Antitumour activity has been documented for the whole herb
and for cnicin (see Pharmacological Actions; I vitro and animal
studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented for holy thistle. Plants containing sesquiter-
pene lactones with an #-methylene-y-lactone moiety are generally
considered to be allergenic, although no documented hypersensi-

Figure 3 Holy thistle - dried drug substance (herb).

tivity reactions to holy thistle were located. Holy thistle may cause
an allergic reaction in individuals with a known hypersensitivity
to other members of the Compositae (e.g. chamomile, ragwort,
tansy).

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of holy thistle to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of holy thistle has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data, excessive use of
holy thistle during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi

gredient preparations

Austria: Mariazeller. Brazil: Digestron. Czech Republic:
Ungolen. Germany: Gallexier; Gastritol. Russia: Original
Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opurunaapupii Boanmoii Baansam
Burrnepa). South Africa: Essens Amara of Groen Amara.
Switzerland: Gastrosan. UK: Bio-Strath Artichoke Formula;
Sure-Lax (Herbal).

References

1 Vanhaelen M, Vanhaelen-Fastré R. Lactonic lignans from Cnicus
benedictus. Phytochemistry 1975; 14: 2709.

2 Vanhaelen-Fastré R. Constituents polyacetyleniques de Cnicus
benedictus L. Planta Med 1974; 25: 47-59.

3 Ulubelen A, Berkan T. Triterpenic and steroidal compounds of Cnicus
benedictus. Planta Med 1977; 31: 375-377.

4 Schneider G, Lachner I. A contribution to analytics and pharmacology
of Cnicin. Planta Med 1987; 53: 247-251.

5 Vanhaelen-Fastré R, Vanhaelen M. Presence of saloniténolide in
Cnicus benedictus. Planta Med 1974; 26: 375-379.

6 Vanhaelen-Fastré R. Constitution and antibiotical properties of the
essential oil of Cnicus benedictus. Planta Med 1973; 24: 165-175.

7 Cobb E. Antineoplastic agent from Cnicus benedictus. British Patent
1,335,181 (CI.A61k) 24 Oct 1973, Appl.54,800/69 (via Chemical
Abstracts 1975; 83: 48189}).

8 Vanhaelen-Fastré R. Antibiotic and cytotoxic activities of cnicin
isolated from Cnicus benedictus. ] Pharm Belg 1972; 27: 683-688.

9 Vanhaelen-Fastré R. Cnicus benedictus: Separation of antimicrobial
constituents. Plant Med Phytother 1968; 2: 294-299.

----- PAGE 365 -----
Documented pharmacological activities support the herbal
uses, although evidence from robust clinical studies is limited.
Excessive use of hops and use during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided in view of the limited toxicity data.

Species (Family)

Humutlus lupulus L. (Cannabaceae/Moraceae)

Synonym(s)

Humulus, Lupulus

Part(s) Used

Strobile

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 1996'C*)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission EC)
ESCOP 2003'07

Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Ph Eur 20078

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G52.

Flavonoids Astragalin, kaempferol, quercetin, quercitrin and
rutin.

Chalcones_ Isoxanthohumol, xanthohumol, 6-isopentenylnarin-
genin, 3/-(isoprenyl)-2', 4-dihydroxy-4’, 6’-dimethoxychalcone,
2/,6'-dimethoxy-4, 4/-dihydroxychalcone.”

Oleo-resin 15-30%. Bitter principles (acylphloroglucides) in a
soft and hard resin. The lipophilic soft resin consists mainly of o-
acids (e.g. humulone, cohumulone, adhumulone, prehumulone,
posthumulone), B-acids (e.g. lupulone, colupulone, adlupulone),
and their oxidative degradation products including 2-methyl-3-
buten-2-ol®*°°) The hard resin contains a hydrophilic 8-resin
and y-resin.

Tannins 2-4%. Condensed; gallocatechin identified.”

Volatile oils 0.3-1.0%. More than 100 terpenoid components
identified; primarily (at least 90%) B-caryophyllene, farnescene
and humulene (sesquiterpenes), and myrcene (monoterpene).

Other constituents Amino acids, phenolic acids, gamma-linoleic
acids, lipids and oestrogenic substances (disputed).

Tt has been stated that only low amounts of 2-methy]l-3-buten-2-
ol, the sedative principle identified in hops, are present in sedative
tablets containing hops.) However, it is thought that 2-methyl-3-
buten-2-ol is formed in vivo by metabolism of the «-bitter acids
and, therefore, the low amount of 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol in a
preparation may not indicate low sedative activity. Interestingly,
relatively high concentrations of 2-methy]l-3-buten-2-ol were found
in bath preparations, suggesting that high concentrations of 2-
methyl-3-buten-2-ol may be achieved in both tea and bath
products containing hops.”

Food Use

Hops are listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that hops
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'©!® Previously, hops has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).(@°

Modified phloroglucinols

humulone lupulone
Sesquiterpenes Aliphatic alcohols
1s
OH
2-methylbuten-3-en-2-ol
humulene
Chalcones
HO. OH OH
CL
CH;0 =O
xanthohumol
Figure 1 Selected constituents of hops.

----- PAGE 366 -----
Herbal Use

Hops are stated to possess sedative, hypnotic and topical
bactericidal properties. Traditionally, they have been used for
neuralgia, insomnia, excitability, priapism, colitis,
topically for crural ulcers, and specifically for restlessness
associated with nervous tension headache and/or indigestion.
The German Commission E approved use for mood disturbances
such as restlessness and anxiety as well as sleep disturbances.'©?)
Hops are used in combination with valerian root for nervous
sleeping disorders and conditions of unrest.(@?)

mucous

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in contemporary standard herbal reference texts are
given below.

Dried strobile 0.5 g as an infusion two to four times daily.”

Liquid extract 0.5-2.0 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) up to three times
daily.'6

Tincture
G76)

1-2mL (1:5 in 60% alcohol) up to three times
daily.’

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antibacterial activity, mainly against Gram-positive bacteria, has
been documented for hops, and attributed to the humulone and
lupulone constituents.” The activity of the bitter acids against
Gram-positive bacteria is thought to involve primary membrane
leakage. Resistance of Gram-negative bacteria to the resin acids is
attributed to the presence of a phospholipid-containing outer
membrane, as lupulone and humulone are inactivated by serum
phospholipids.” Structure-activity studies have indicated the
requirement of a hydrophobic molecule and a six-membered
central ring for such activity.

Figure 2. Hops (Humulus lupulus).

Hops

The humulones and lupulones are thought to possess little
activity towards fungi or yeasts. However, antifungal activity has
been documented for the bitter acids towards Trichophyton,
Candida, Fusarium and Mucor species. Flavonone constituents
have also been documented to possess antifungal activity towards
Trichophyton and Mucor species, and antibacterial activity
towards Staphylococcus aureus.

Antispasmodic activity has been documented for an alcoholic
hops extract on various isolated smooth muscle preparations."
Hops have been reported to exhibit hypnotic and_ sedative
properties.‘“*) 2-Methyl-3-buten-2-ol, a bitter acid degradation
product, has been identified as a sedative principle in hops.**?) 2-
Methyl-3-buten-2-ol has been shown to possess narcotic proper-
ties in mice and motility depressant activity in rats, with the latter
not attributable to a muscle-relaxant effect.” It has also been
suggested that isovaleric acid residues present in hops may
contribute towards the sedative action. In mice, hops extract
administered intraperitoneally (100, 250, 500 mg/kg) 30 minutes
prior to a series of behavioural tests, resulted in a dose-dependent
suppression of spontaneous locomotor at doses of 250 mg/kg for
up to one hour.'!?) The time for mice to be able to remain on a
rota rod was decreased by 59% and 65% at doses of 250 mg/kg
and 500 mg/kg, respectively. The time of onset of convulsions and
survival time after administration of pentylenetetrazole (100 mg/
kg) was significantly lengthened. Hops extract (35 mg/kg,
intraperitoneal administration) produced a dose-dependent
increase in sleeping time in mice treated with pentobarbitol. An
antinociceptive effect was noted by increased latency of licking
forepaws in hotplate tests and hypothermic activity observed from
a time-dependent fall of rectal temperature at a dose of 500 mg/
kg.)

Hops have previously been reported to possess oestrogenic
constituents.) However, when a number of purified components,
including the volatile oil and the bitter acids, were examined using
the uterine weight assay in immature female mice, no oestrogenic
activity was found.

Clinical studies

Clinical research assessing the effects of hops is limited and
rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.
Clinical studies have generally assessed hops given in combina-
tion with one or more additional herbs. For example, hops has
been reported to improve sleep disturbances when given in
combination with valerian (see Valerian, Clinical studies).{!”

Figure 3 Hops — dried drug substance (strobile).

----- PAGE 367 -----
Hops

Hops, in combination with chicory and peppermint, has been
documented to relieve pain in patients with chronic cholecystitis
(calculous and non-calculous)."!°) A herbal product containing a
mixture of plant extracts, including hops and uva-ursi, and alpha-
tocopherol acetate was reported to improve irritable bladder and
urinary incontinence." However, these observations require
confirmation in robust clinical studies.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for hops and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Respiratory allergy caused by the handling of hop cones has
been documented; a subsequent patch test using dried, crushed
flowerheads proved negative. Positive patch test reactions have
been documented for fresh hop oil, humulone, and lupulone.
Myrcene, present in the fresh oil but readily oxidised, was
concluded to be the sensitising agent in the hop oil.“C) Contact
dermatitis to hops has long been recognised'**” and is attributed
to the pollen.‘@*”

Small doses of hops are stated to be non-toxic.'°) Large doses
administered to animals by injection have resulted in a soporific
effect followed by death, with chronic administration resulting in
weight loss before death.‘

Contra-indications, Warnings

Allergic reactions have been reported for hops, although only
following external contact with the herb and oil.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of hops to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. There are some conflicting data on
the estrogenic activity of hops,” although 8-prenylnaringenin,
documented as a constituent of hops, has been shown to have
oestrogenic activity in preclinical studies.“ Concern has been
expressed that herbs with oestrogenic effects may stimulate breast
cancer growth and oppose action of competitive oestrogen
receptor antagonists such as tamoxifen.''®) However, this requires
confirmation.

Pregnancy and lactation In vitro antispasmodic activity on the
uterus has been documented. In view of this and the lack of
toxicity data, the use of hops during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

ervenruh; Nerventee St Severin; Sedadom;
Wechseltce St Severin. Canada: Herbal Sleep Aid; Herbal Sleep
Well. Chile: Valupass. Czech Republic: Baldracin, Detsky Caj s
Hermankem; Fytokliman Planta; Novo-Passit; Sanason; Schlaf-
Nerventee N; Species Nervinae Planta; Valofyt Neo; Visinal.

Herbal Tablets; Calmanite Tablets; Fenneherb Newrelax;
Gerard House Serenity; Gerard House Somnus; HRI Calm
Life; HRI Night; Kalms Sleep; Kalms; Napiers Sleep Tablets;
Napiers Tension Tablets; Natrasleep; Newrelax; Nodoff;
Nytol Herbal; Quiet Days; Quiet Life; Quiet Nite; Quiet
Tyme; Relax B+; Sleepezy; Slumber; Sominex Herbal; Stress-
less; Unwind Herbal Nytol; Valerina Night-Time; Ymea.
Venezuela: Lupassin; Nervinetas.

References

1 Song-San § et al. Chalcones from Humulus lupulus. Phytochemistry
1989; 28: 1776-1777.

2 Hansel R et al. The sedative-hypnotic principle of hops. 3.
Communication: Contents of 2-methyl-3-butene-2-ol in hops and hop
preparations. Planta Med 1982; 45: 224-228.

3 Wohlfart R et al. Detection of sedative—hypnotic hop constituents, V:
Degradation of humulones and lupulones to 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol, a
hop constituent possessing sedative-hypnotic activity. Arch Pharm
(Weinheim) 1982; 315: 132-137.

4 Gorissen H e¢ al. Separation and identification of (+)-gallocatechin in
hops. Arch Int Physiol Biochem 1968; 76: 932-934.

5 Fenselau C, Talalay P. Is oestrogenic activity present in hops? Food
Cosmet Toxicol 1973; 11: 597-603.

6 Hansel R, Wohlfart R. Narcotic action of 2-methyl-3-butene-2-ol
contained in the exhalation of hops. Z Naturforsch 1980; 35: 1096-
1097.

7 Teuber M, Schmalreck AF. Membrane leakage in Bacillus subtilis 168
induced by the hop constituents lupulone, humulone, isohumulone
and humulinic acid. Arch Mikrobiol 1973; 94: 159-171.

8 Schmalreck AF eg al. Structural features determining the antibiotic
potencies of natural and synthetic hop bitter resins, their precursors
and derivatives. Can J Microbiol 1975; 21: 205-212.

9 Mizobuchi S, Sato Y. Antifungal activities of hop bitter resins and
related compounds. Agric Biol Chem 1985; 49: 399-405.

10 Mizobuchi $, Sato Y. A new flavanone with antifungal activity isolated
from hops. Agric Biol Chem 1984; 48: 2771-2775.

11 Caujolle F et al. Spasmolytic action of hop (Humulus lupulus).
Agressologie 1969; 10: 405-10.

12 Wohlfart R et al. The sedative-hypnotic principle of hops. 4.
Communication: Pharmacology of 2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol. Planta Med
1983; 48: 120-123.

13. Lee KM et al. Effects of Humulus lupulus extract on the central
nervous system in mice. Planta Med 1993; 59: A691.

14 Miiller-Limmroth W, Ehrenstein W. Untersuchungen iiber die Wirkung
von Seda-Kneipp auf den Schlaf schlafgestérter Menschen. Med Klin
1977; 72: 1119-1125.

15 Chakarski | e¢ al. Clinical study of a herb combination consisting of
Humulus lupulus, Cichorium intybus, Mentha piperita in patients

----- PAGE 368 -----
16

Hops

with chronic calculous and non-calculous cholecystitis. Probl Vatr 17 Newmark FM. Hops allergy and terpene sensitivity: An occupational
Med 1982; 10: 65-69. disease. Ann Allergy 1978; 41: 311-312.

Lenau H e¢ al. Wirksamkeit und Vertraglichkeit von Cysto Fink bei 18 Baxter KB, ed. Stockley's Drug Interactions, 7th edn. London:
Patienten mit Reizblase und/oder Harninkontinenz. Therapiewoche Pharmaceutical Press, 2006.

1984; 34: 6054.

----- PAGE 369 -----
and clinical research into the effects of preparations of black
horehound. In view of the lack of data on pharmacological
effects, efficacy and safety, the appropriateness of medicinal
use of black horehound should be considered. Excessive use,
at least, should be avoided. The use of black horehound
during pregnancy and breastfeeding should be avoided. The
potential for black horehound to interact with other
medicines should be considered.

Species (Family)
Ballota nigra L. (Labiatae)

Synonym(s)

Ballota, Ballota foetida Lam.

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)
BP 2007'08#

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Black horehound is not included in the GSL.‘@*”

Constituents

Diterpenes Ballotinone (7-oxomarrubiin),“? ballotenol,” pre-
leosibirin,®) 13-hydroxyballonigrinolide, ballonigrin,“*) and 7-a-
acetoxymarrubiin.

Flavonoids Lactoylated flavonoids 7-O-(2S-B-p-glucopyranosyl-
oxypropanoyl)-luteolin and 7-O-(2S-hydroxypropanoy])-luteolin
(luteolin-7-lactate),.” apigenin-7-glucoside, vicenin-2.)

Phenylpropanoids Verbascoside (acteoside), forsythoside B,
arenarioside, ballotetroside, alyssonoside, _ lavandulifoliside,
5,7, 9-12)

angoroside, caffeoylmalic acid.

Essential oil B. nigra ssp. foetida 0.02%, major components B-
caryophyllene and germacrene p.''”

Related species Diterpenes from B. africana, B. andreuzziana, B.
aucheri, B. hispanica, B. inaequidens, B. pseudodictamnus, B.
lanata, B. rupestris and B. saxatilis, and flavonoids from B.
acetabulosa, B. glandulissima, B. hirsuta, B. inequidens, B.
pseudodictamnus and B. saxatilis.'?

Horehound, Black

Food Use

Black horehound is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates
that black horehound can be added to foodstuffs in the
traditionally accepted manner, although insufficient information
is available for an adequate assessment of potential toxicity.'©!®

Herbal Use

Black horehound is stated to possess anti-emetic, sedative and
mild astringent properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
nausea, vomiting, nervous dyspepsia, and specifically for vomiting
of central origin.(C7 °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.'C”

Liquid extract 1-3 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.”

Tincture 1-2 mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.”

Pharmacological Actions

There is a lack of basic experimental and clinical research into the
effects of preparations of black horehound, although a small

Diterpenes

CH2OH OH
ballotenol

©" ballotinone
(7-oxo-marrubiin)

ras

SF

AcO’

OH
CH,OAc fey

preleosibirin

°

ballonigrin

7-a-acetoxymarrubiin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of black horehound.

----- PAGE 370 -----
number of studies has investigated pharmacological properties of
isolated constituents.

In-vitro and animal studies

Certain phenylpropanoid derivatives isolated from the aerial parts
of black horehound show pharmacological properties in vitro,
including antibacterial, antioxidant and neurosedative activities.
The phenylpropanoid glycosides arenarioside, forsythoside B and
verbascoside, and the non-glycosidic phenylpropanoid caffeoyl-
malic acid bind to benzodiazepine, dopaminergic and morphinic
receptors in vitro." In radiolabelled ligand receptor binding
assays using rat brain preparations, ICso (concentrations required
for 50% inhibition of radioligand binding) values for these
compounds for each of the three receptor types were all < 5.0 mg/
mL. By contrast, ballotetroside did not show any affinity for
binding to the receptors studied.

Arenarioside, forsythoside B and verbascoside inhibited the
growth of one strain of the Gram-negative bacterium Proteus
mirabilis and two strains of the Gram-positive bacterium
Staphylococcus aureus, including a methicillin-resistant strain of
S. aureus (minimum inhibitory concentration to prevent visible
growth = 128 ptg/mL)."? Arenarioside also inhibited the growth
of one strain of P. mirabilis when incubated at a concentration of
64tg/mL. The compounds tested did not show any activity
against Enterococcus faecalis, and the Gram-negative bacteria
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, Enterobacter aero-
genes, Klebsiella pneumoniae and K. oxytoca.''”)

Flavonoids
RO
AP
°
OH O
R
luteolin-7-lactate H
luteolin-7-(2-glucosy! lactate) gic
Phenylpropanoids
1
° OR
R80. O°
Se OG ° OH
IH
HO CHs 3S Ol
HO OH
OM oR?
R' Re RS
verbascoside H H H
(acteoside)
forsythoside B B-D-apioside H H
arenarioside B-D-xyloside H H
ballotetroside B-D-apioside a-L-arabinoside H
alyssonoside f-D-apioside H CHg
lavandulifoliside H a-L-arabinoside H
angaroside A a-L-arabinoside H H
COOH
HO. x
SS O—CH
S
CH2COOH
HO

caffeoylmalic acid

Figure 2 Selected constituents of black horehound.

Horehound, Black

Figure 3 Black horehound (Ballota nigra).

Arenarioside, forsythoside B and verbascoside, as well as
ballotetroside, another phenylpropanoid glycoside isolated from
the aerial parts of black horehound, have antioxidant properties i1
vitro.) These compounds inhibited copper ion-induced oxida-
tion of low-density lipoproteins (LDL) with EDso (efficacious
concentration) values of 1.8, 1.0, 1.0 and 7.5 jumol/L, respectively.
(LDL oxidation may be involved in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis.) By comparison, quercetin, a known inhibitor of
copper ion-induced LDL oxidation had an EDso value of 2.3 ,umol/
L. Further experiments showed that whereas quercetin chelated
copper ions, the phenylpropanoid glycosides tested did not,
indicating that their inhibition of copper ion-induced LDL
oxidation is independent of any capacity for copper ion
chelation”

In further experiments involving cell-free systems, arenarioside,
ballotetroside, forsythoside B and verbascoside, as well as the non-
glycosidic phenylpropanoid caffeoylmalic acid, demonstrated a
concentration-dependent scavenging capacity towards several
reactive oxygen species (ROS). For each of the compounds, the

Figure 4 Black horehound — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 371 -----
Horehound, Black

greatest ROS scavenging activity was seen for hydrogen peroxide
and hypochlorous acid (concentrations required for 50% inhibi-
tion were < 5.0 mg/L for all compounds, except ballotetroside, <
12 mg/L). Concentration-dependent inhibitions of ROS produc-
tion by phorbol ester-stimulated PMNs were also seen in cellular
systems following incubation with forsythoside B, verbascoside
and caffeoylmalic acid, whereas arenarioside and ballotetroside
showed little or no activity.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of black
horehound and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for black horehound and further investigation of
these aspects is required.

In in vitro experiments, the release of lactate dehydrogenase
from polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN), an indicator of
toxicity, was maintained below 20% following incubation with
arenarioside, ballotetroside, forsythoside B, verbascoside and
caffeoylmalic acid at concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 200 mg/
L. A report of the study states that this effect was not significant
(p < 0.01), although it is not clear what was the control.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential
for preparations of black horehound to interact with other

medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Black horehound is reputed to affect
the menstrual cycle although the scientific basis for this statement
is not clear.“ In view of the lack of phytochemical,
pharmacological and toxicity data, the use of black horehound
during pregnancy and breastfeeding should be avoided.

References

1 Savona G et al. Structure of ballotinone, a diterpenoid from Ballota
nigra. ] Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1 1976; 1607-1609.

2 Savona G et al. The structure of ballotenol, a new diterpenoid from
Ballota nigra. ] Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1 1977; 497-499.

3 Bruno M et al. Preleosibirin, a prefuranic labdane diterpene from
Ballota nigra subsp. foetida. Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 538-539.

4 Seidel V et al. Isolation from Ballota nigra L. of 13-
hydroxyballonigrinolide, a diterpene useful for the standardization of
the drug. J Pharm Belg 1996; 51: 72-73.

5 Seidel V et al. Diterpéne esters hétérosidiques phénylpropanoiques de
Ballota nigra L. Ann Pharm Franc 1998; 56: 31-35.

6 Savona G et al. Structures of three new diterpenoids from Ballota
species. J Chem Soc Perkin Trans 1 1997; 5: 322-324.

7 Bertrand MO et al. Two major flavonoids from Ballota nigra. Biochem
Syst Ecol 2000; 28: 1031-1033.

8 Daels-Rakotoarison DA e¢ al. Neurosedative and antioxidant
activitites of phenylpropanoids from Ballota nigra. Arzneim Forsch
2000; 50: 16-23.

9 Seidel V et al. Phenylpropanoid glycosides from Ballota nigra. Planta
Med 1996; 62: 186-187.

10 Seidel V et al. A phenylpropanoid glycoside from Ballota nigra.
Phytochemistry 1997; 44(4): 691-693.

11 Seidel V, et al. Phenylpropanoids from Ballota nigra L. inhibit in vitro
LDL peroxidation. Phytotherapy Res 2000; 14: 93-98.

12 Didry N et al. Isolation and antibacterial activity of phenylpropanoid
derivatives from Ballota nigra. ] Ethnopharmacol 1999; 67: 197-202.

13 Bader A et al. Composition of the essential oil of Ballota undulata, B.
nigra ssp. foetida and B. saxatilis. Flavour Frag Journal 2003; 18: 502—
504.

14 Sever Yilmiz B, Saltan Citoglu G.[Chemical constituents of Ballota L.
species]. Ankara Ecz Fak Derg 2003; 32: 37-53 [Turkish].

----- PAGE 372 -----
- Horehound, White

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of white horehound is well documented.
Limited pharmacological information is available, although
expectorant properties have been reported which support
some of the herbal uses. There is a lack of robust clinical
research assessing the efficacy and safety of white horehound.
In view of the lack of toxicity data and suggested cardioactive
properties, excessive use of white horehound and use during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Marrubium vulgare L. (Labiatae)

Synonym(s)

Common Hoarhound, Hoarhound, Horehound, Marrubium

Part(s) Used

Flower, leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°)

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007*

Complete German Commission EO)
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL ©)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and Gé2.

Diterpenes

vulgarol

marrubenol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of white horehound.

Alkaloids

turicine.

Pyrrolidine-type. Betonicine 0.3%, the cis-isomer

Flavonoids Apigenin, luteolin, quercetin, and their glycosides.”

Terpenoids Diterpenes including marrubiin 0.3—-1.0%, a lactone,
as the main component with lesser amounts of various alcohols
(e.g. marrubenol, marrubiol, peregrinol and vulgarol). Marrubiin
has also been stated to be an artefact formed from a precursor,
premarrubiin, during extraction.”

Volatile oils Trace. Bisabolol, camphene, p-cymene, limonene, B-
pinene, sabinene and others,” a sesquiterpene (unspecified).

Other constituents Choline, saponin (unspecified), B-sitosterol
(a phytosterol), waxes (C2¢-C34 alkanes).

Food Use

White horehound is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that white horehound can be added to foodstuffs in small
quantities, with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.'©!® Previously, white horehound
has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).'°

Herbal Use

White horehound is stated to possess expectorant and antispas-
modic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for acute or
chronic bronchitis, whooping cough, and specifically for bron-
chitis with non-productive cough.'©? 6% C7 G8: 6%)

Figure 2. White horehound (Marrubium vulgare).

----- PAGE 373 -----
Horehound, White

Figure 3. White horehound — dried drug substance (leaf).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 1-2 as an infusion three times daily.'C%°”

Liquid extract
daily(CoO

24mL (1:1 in 20% alcohol) three times

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Aqueous extracts have been reported to exhibit an antagonistic
effect towards 5-hydroxytryptamine in vivo in mice, and in vitro
in guinea-pig ileum and rat uterus tissue.) Expectorant and
vasodilative properties have been documented for the volatile
oil.” However, the main active expectorant principle in white
horehound is reported to be marrubiin, which is stated to
stimulate secretions of the bronchial mucosa.‘“® Marrubiin has
also been stated to be cardioactive, possessing anti-arrhythmic
properties, although higher doses are reported to cause arrhyth-
mias.'(C° Marrubin acid (obtained from the saponification of
marrubiin) has been documented to stimulate bile secretion in
rats, whereas marrubiin was found to be inactive.©’ White
horehound is stated to possess bitter properties (BI 65000
compared to gentian BI 10000-30000) with marrubiin as the
main active component.'°®

Large doses of white horehound are purgative.
volatile oil has antischistosomal activity.

(G10, G60) Tho

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of white
horehound and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for white
horehound and further investigation of these aspects is required.
The plant juice of white horehound is stated to contain an
irritant principle, which can cause contact dermatitis.“@°”
No documented toxicity studies were located for the whole
plant, although an LD so (rat, by mouth) value for marrubin acid is
reported as 370 mg/kg body weight.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. Cardioactive properties and an antagonism of
5-hydroxytryptamine have been documented in animals. However,
the clinical relevance, if any, of these findings is unclear.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of white horehound to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation White horehound is reputed to be an
abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle.“ Uterine
stimulant activity in animals has been documented.‘°* In view
of this and the lack of safety data, the use of white horehound
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
UK: Rob-Bron Tablets.

(G30)

References

1 Kowalewski Z, Matlawska I. Flavonoid compounds in the herb of
Marrubium vulgare L. Herba Pol 1978; 24: 183-186.

2 Henderson MS, McCrindle R. Premarrubiin. A diterpenoid from
Marrubium vulgare L. ] Chem Soc 1969; (C): 2014.

3 Cahen R. Pharmacologic spectrum of Marrubium vulgare. C R Soc
Biol 1970; 164: 1467-1472.

4 Karryev MO et al. Some therapeutic properties and phytochemistry of
common horehound. Izv Akad Nauk Turkm SSR Ser Biol Nauk 1976;
3: 86-88.

5 Krejci I, Zadina R. Die Gallentreibende Wirkung von Marrubiin und
Marrabinsaure. Planta Med; 1959; 7: 1-7.

6 Saleh MM, Glombitza KW. Volatile oil of Marrubium vulgare and its
anti-schistosomal activity: Planta Med 1989; 55: 105.

----- PAGE 374 -----
Horse-chestnut

attributed to the saponin and flavonoid constituents in ho
chestnut. The traditional use of horse-chestnut in peripheral
vascular disorders is supported by data from preclinical
studies in which anti-inflammatory and capillary stabilising
effects have been observed. There is evidence from
randomised, double-blind, controlled clinical trials to support
the use of horse-chestnut seed extract in the treatment of
symptoms of chronic venous insufficiency but confirmation
from more robust studies is required. In view of the limited
information on safety and toxicity, excessive use of horse-
chestnut and use during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Aesculus hippocastanum L. (Hippocastanaceae)

Synonym(s)

Aesculus

Part(s) Used
Seed

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

ESCOP 2003'¢7"
Martindale 35th edition‘
USP29/NF24‘C80)

G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

(637)

GSL (for external use only

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G52, G59 and G62.

Coumarins  Aesculetin, fraxin (fraxetin glucoside), scopolin
(scopoletin glucoside).

Flavonoids Flavonol (kaempferol, quercetin) glycosides including
astragalin, isoquercetrin, rutin; leucocyanidin (quercetin deriva-
tive).

Saponins French pharmacopoeial standard, not less than 3%
aescin. A mixture of saponins collectively referred to as ‘aescin' (3—
10%); a- and B-aescin as major glycosides.

Tannins Type unspecified but likely to be condensed in view of
the epicatechin content (formed during hydrolysis of condensed
tannins).

Other constituents Allantoin, amino acids (adenine, adenosine,
guanine), choline, citric acid, phytosterol.

Food Use

Horse-chestnut is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Traditionally, horse-chestnut has been used for the treatment of
varicose veins, haemorrhoids, phlebitis, diarrhoea, fever and
enlargement of the prostate gland. The German Commission E
approved use for treatment of chronic venous insufficiency in the

legs.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Fruit 0.2-1.0g three times daily.'C*”

Preparations
calculated as aescin, in divided doses.'

Extracts equivalent to 50-150 mg_ triterpenes
G52)

Pharmacological Actions

Documented studies have concentrated on the actions of the
saponins, in particular, aescin.

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory and anti-oedema effects Anti-inflamma-
tory activity in rats has been documented for both a fruit extract
and the saponin fraction.“ Anti-inflammatory activity in the rat
has been reported to be greater for a total horse-chestnut extract
compared to aescin. In addition, an extract excluding aescin also
exhibited activity, suggesting that horse-chestnut contains anti-
inflammatory agents other than aescin.") No difference in activity
was noted when the horse-chestnut extracts were administered
prior to and after dextran (inflammatory agent). It has been
proposed that aescin affects the initial phase of inflammation by
exerting a ‘sealing’ effect on capillaries and by reducing the
number and/or diameter of capillary pores.

Effects on venous tone Horse-chestnut extract (16% aescin,
0.2 mg/mL) and also aescin (0.1 mg/mL) induced contractions in
isolated bovine and human veins.'©°?) Concentration-dependent
contractions of isolated canine veins were observed with a horse-
chestnut extract (16% aescin, 5 x 10°-*mg/mL).(C” A standar-
dised extract (16% aescin, 50mg, given intravenously) increased
femoral venous pressure in anaesthetised dogs, and decreased
cutaneous capillary hyperpermeability in rats (200 mg/kg, given
orally).

----- PAGE 375 -----
Horse-chestnut

Triterpenes

R' R2
- 1-4
aescin glucose ———> glucuronic acid angeloyl
(major glycoside)
2
F
glucose
CH20H
HO 4 COOH
HO ) fo) a
CH,0H,OX_ i
fe)
HO OH
HO:

Other glycosides glucuronic acid moiety angeloyl, tigloyl,
substituted at C-4 with 2-methylbutyryl or
galactose or xylose isobutyryl

Coumarins
R' R? R®
Rt N aesculin O-glucose OH H
aesculetin OH OH H
R ° ° scopolin OCH3 O-glucose H
. scopoletin OCH; OH H
Ri fraxin OCH; OH O-glucose
fraxetin OCH; OH OH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of horse-chestnut.

In addition, the saponin fraction has been reported to exhibit
analgesic and antigranulation activities in rats,” to reduce
capillary permeability, and to produce an initial hypotension
followed by a longer lasting hypertension in anaesthetised
animals. Prostaglandin production by venous tissue is thought
to be involved in the regulation of vascular reactivity.”
Prostaglandins of the E series are known to cause relaxation of
venous tissues whereas those of the F, series produce contraction.
Increased venous tone induced by aescin in vitro was found to be
associated with an increased PGF>,, synthesis

in the venous tissue.

Other activities In vitro, aescin has been documented to inhibit
hyaluronidase activity (ICs 150 mol/L).'@°?)
A saponin fraction of horse-chestnut has been reported to
contract isolated rabbit ileum.”
Antiviral activity in vitro against influenza virus (A>/Japan 305)
has been described for aescin.)
Metabolism studies of aescin in the rat have concluded that
aescin toxicity is reduced by hepatic metabolism.”
Flavonoids and tannins are generally recognised as having anti-
inflammatory and astringent properties, respectively.

Clinical studies

Chronic venous insufficiency Several studies have assessed the
effects of horse-chestnut seed extract in patients with chronic
venous insufficiency, a common condition which causes oedema of
the lower leg.

A Cochrane systematic review of randomised, double-blind,
controlled trials of horse-chestnut seed extract in chronic venous
insufficiency included 17 studies: ten placebo-controlled trials and
seven studies comparing horse-chestnut seed extract with
reference medication (O-B-hydroxyethylrutosides, pycnogenol) or
compression therapy." Trials involved the administration of
horse-chestnut seed extract equivalent to 50-150 mg aescin daily
for two to 16 weeks. Collectively, results of placebo-controlled
studies indicated that horse-chestnut seed extract was superior to
placebo with respect to leg pain (weighted mean difference (95%
confidence interval (CI)) in 100mm visual analogue scale scores:
42.40 mm (34.90-49.90; six trials), oedema and pruritus resulting
from chronic venous insufficiency." Trials comparing horse
chestnut seed extract with other treatment approaches indicated
that the herbal preparation was as effective in relieving symptoms
of chronic venous insufficiency. The review concluded that horse-
chestnut seed extract is an effective short-term treatment for
symptoms of chronic venous insufficiency, but that because of
methodological limitations of existing studies, further well-

designed clinical trials are required for confirmation of the
(10)

observed effects.

Other effects | Glycosaminoglycan hydrolyses are enzymes
involved in the breakdown of substances (proteoglycans) that
determine capillary rigidity and pore size (thus influencing the
passage of macromolecules into the surrounding tissue). Proteo-
glycans also interact with collagen, stabilising the fibres and
regulating their correct biosynthesis."!") The activity of these

----- PAGE 376 -----
enzymes was found to be raised in patients with varicosis,
compared with healthy patients. In a study involving 15 patients
with varicosis treated with horse-chestnut extract (900 mg daily)
for 12 days, the activity of these enzymes was significantly
reduced.) However, this observation requires confirmation in
larger, robust clinical studies.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study
involving 70 healthy individuals with haematomas, a topical gel
(2% aescin) reduced sensitivity to pressure on affected areas.‘

The cosmetic applications of horse-chestnut have been
reviewed;''” these effects are attributed to properties associated
with the saponin constituents.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for horse-
chestnut and further investigation of these aspects is required.
Two incidences of toxic nephropathy have been reported and
were stated as probably secondary to the ingestion of high doses
of aescin.''?) In Japan, where horse-chestnut has been used as an
anti-inflammatory drug after surgery or trauma, hepatic injury
has bi

en described in a male patient who received an

intramuscular injection of a proprietary product containing
horse-chestnut.‘" Liver function tests showed a mild abnormality
and a diagnosis of giant cell tumour of bone (grade 2) by bone
biopsy was made. Other side-effects stated to have been reported
for the product include shock, spasm, mild nausea, vomiting and
urticaria.“ However, a causal association with horse-chestnut

shed.

use in this case has not been estab!

Preclinical data

A proprietary product containing horse-chestnut (together with
phenopyrazone and cardiac glycoside-containing plant extracts)
has been associated with the development of a drug-induced
autoimmune dis called 'pseudolupus syndrome! in Germany

Figure 2 Horse-chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum).

Horse-chestnut

and Switzerland." '!® The individual component in the product
sible for the syndrome was not established.

The effect of aescin, both free and albumin-bound, on rena
tubular transport processes has been studied in the isolated,
artificially perfused frog kidney.” Aescin was found to primarily
affect tubular, rather than glomerular, epithelium and it was noted
that binding to plasma protein (approximately 50%) protects
against this nephrotoxicity. Aescin was thought to be neither
secreted nor reabsorbed in the tubules, and the concentration of
unbound aescin filtered through the kidney (13%) was considered
to be too low to have toxic effects. The authors commented that
the symptoms of acute renal failure in humans are caused
primarily by interference with glomeruli and in view of this, the
nephrotoxic potential of aescin is probably only relevant when the
kidneys are already damaged and also if the aescin is displaced
from its binding to plasma protein.”

It has been noted that death occurs rapidly in animals given

in, due to massive haemolysis.

respor

Death is more
(4)

prolonged in animals given smaller doses of aescin.

LDso values for aescin have been estimated in mice, rats and
guinea-pigs and range from 134 to 720mg/kg (by mouth) and
from 1.4 to 15.2mg/kg (intravenous injection).“*” The tota
saponin fraction has been reported to be less toxic in mice
(intraperitoneal injection) compared to the isolated aescin mixture
(LDso 46.5 mg/kg and 9.5 mg/kg, respectively).°’ The haemolytic
index of horse-chestnut is documented as being 6000, compared
with 9500 to 12 500 for aescin.'°” Daily doses in rats (100 mg/kg,
orally) of a standardised extract of horse-chestnut (16% aescin)
did not produce teratogenic effects, and the extract was negative

in the Ames test with Salmonella typhimurium TA98 without
(G52)

actuation.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Horse-chestnut may be irritant to the gastrointestinal tract due to
the saponin constituents. Saponins are generally recognised to
possess haemolytic properties, but are not usually absorbed from
the gastrointestinal tract following oral administration. As a
precaution, horse-chestnut should be avoided by patients with
existing renal or hepatic impairment.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of horse-chestnut to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Horse-chestnut has
coumarin constituents, although those detected so far do not

Figure 3 Horse-chestnut — dried drug substance (seed).

----- PAGE 377 -----
Horse-chestnut

possess the minimum structural requirements for anti-coagulant
activity. There is evidence from preclinical studies that aescin, the
main saponin component in horse-chestnut, binds to plasma
protein. However, it is not clear if this has clinical relevance in
terms of affecting binding of other drugs.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of horse-chestnut during
pregnancy and lactation has not been established. In view of the
pharmacologically active constituents present in horse-chestnut,
use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Mediflor Tisane Circulation du Sang No 12; Opo-Veinogene;
Phlebosedol; Phytomelis; Veinophytum; Veinostase; Veinoto-
nyl. Germany: Aescusan; Amphodyn; Cefasabal; Cycloven
Forte N; Diu Venostasin; Fagorutin Rosskastanien-Balsam N;
Heparin Comp; Intradermi; PC 30 V; Sportupac M; Trauma-
cyl; Varicylum-S; Venen Krauter NT; Venen-Salbe N; Venengel;
Weleda Hamorrhoidalzapfchen. Italy: Capill Venogel; Capill;
Centella Complex; Centella Complex; Centeril H; Centeril H;

References
1

10

1

12

13

14

1s
16

17

Farnsworth NR, Cordell GA. A review of some biologically active
compounds isolated from plants as reported in the 1974-75 literature.
Lloydia 1976; 39: 420-455.

Benoit PS et al. Biological and phytochemical evaluation of plants.
XIV. Antiinflammatory evaluation of 163 species of plants. Lloydia
1976; 39: 160-171.

Cebo B et al. Pharmacological properties of saponin fractions from
Polish crude drugs: Saponaria officinalis, Primula officinalis, and
Aesculus hippocastanum. Herba Pol 1976; 22: 154-162.

Vogel G et al. Untersuchungen zum Mechanismus der therapeutischen
und toxischen Wirkung des Rosskastanien-saponins aescin.
Arzneimittelforschung 1970; 20: 699-705.

Tsutsumi S, Ishizuka S. Anti-inflammatory effects of the extract
Aesculus hippocastanum and seed. Shikwa-Gakutto 1967; 67: 1324-
1328.

De Pascale V et al. Effect of an escin-cyclonamine mixture on capillary
permeability. Boll Chim Farm 1974; 113: 600-614.

Longiave D e¢ al. The mode of action of aescin on isolated veins:
Relationship with PGF,«. Pharmacol Res Commun 1978; 10: 145-153.
Rao SG, Cochran KW. Antiviral activity of triterpenoid saponins
containing acylated B-amyrin aglycones. J Pharm Sci 1974; 63: 471.
Rothkopf M. Effects of age, sex and phenobarbital pretreatment on
the acute toxicity of the horse chestnut saponin aescin in rats.
Naunyn-Schmied archpharm 1977; 297 (Suppl. Suppl.): R18.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Horse-chestnut seed extract for chronic venous
insufficiency (Review). 2006, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD003230.10.1002/
14651858.CD003230.pub2

Kreysel HW et al. A possible role of lysosomal enzymes in the
pathogenesis of varicosis and the reduction in their serum activity by
Venostasin®. Vasa 1983; 12: 377- 382.

Proserpio G et al. Cosmetic uses of horse-chestnut (Aesculum
bippocastanum) extracts, of escin and of the cholesterol/escin
complex. Fitoterapia 1980; 51: 113-128.

Grasso A, Corvaglia E. Two cases of suspected toxic tubulonephrosis
due to escine. Gazz Med Ital 1976; 135: 581-584.

Takegoshi K e¢ al. A case of Venoplant®-induced hepatic injury.
Gastroenterol Japonica 1986; 21: 62-65.

Grob P et al. Drug-induced pseudolupus. Lancet 1975; ii: 144-148.
Russell AS. Drug-induced autoimmune disease. Clin Immunol Allergy
1981; 1: 57-76.

Rothkopf M et al. Animal experiments on the question of the renal
toleration of the horse chestnut saponin aescin. Arzneimittelforschung
1977; 27: 598-605.

----- PAGE 378 -----
Horseradish

anzvmec vais al aqacalleciie AEE WEB

located, although the isothiocyanates and peroxidases
probably account for the reputed circulatory stimulant and
wound-healing actions, respectively. The oil is one of the
most hazardous of all essential oils and it is not recommended
for either external or internal use.‘¢5® Horseradish should not
be ingested in amounts exceeding those used in foods.

Species (Family)

Armoracia rusticana P. Gaertin., B. Mey. & Scherb.

Synonym(s)

Armoracia lapathifolia, Cochlearia armoracia L., Nasturtium
armoracia (L.) Fr.

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Complete German Commission E'C?)
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
CSL”)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G40, G58 and G62.

Coumarins Aesculetin, scopoletin.

Phenols — Caffeic acid derivatives and lesser amounts of
hydroxycinnamic acid derivatives. Concentrations of acids are

: : 1
reported to be much lower in the root than in the leaf.”

Volatile oils Glucosinolates (mustard oil glycosides) gluconas-
turtiin and sinigrin (S-glucosides), yielding phenylethylisothiocya-
nate and _ allylisothiocyanate after hydrolysis. Isothiocyanate
content estimated as 12.2-20.4 mg/g freeze dried root.?") Other
isothiocyanate types include isopropyl, 3-butenyl, 4-pentenyl,
phenyl, 3-methylthiopropyl and benzyl] derivatives.

Other constituents Ascorbic acid, asparagin,
enzymes, resin, starch and sugar.

peroxidase

Other plant parts
documented for the leaf.

Kaempferol and quercetin have been

Food Use

Horseradish is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that

horseradish can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.(©'® Previously horseradish has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).'¢” Horseradish is commonly
used as a food flavouring.

Herbal Use

Horseradish is stated to possess antiseptic, circulatory and
digestive stimulant, diuretic and vulnerary properties.'(C 9? 0%
Traditionally, it has been used for pulmonary and urinary
infection, urinary stones, oedematous conditions, and externally
for application to inflamed joints or tissues.‘

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older herbal reference texts are given below.

Root (fresh) 2-4 g before meals.'“*?

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A marked hypotensive effect in cats has been documented for
horseradish peroxidase, following intravenous administration.)
The effect was completely blocked by aspirin and indometacin,
but was not affected by antihistamines. It was concluded that
horseradish peroxidase acts by stimulating the synthesis of
arachidonic acid metabolites.

Glucosinolates

q
p-s-0 °
Ho CHAOH, \ ae Hydrolysis =§S~Sy—=c=s
HO 2 allylisothiocyanate
HO
sinigrin B
(prop-2-enylglucosinolate) —CH2,CH=CH2
gluconasturtin
(2-phenylethyiglucosinolate) © —CH2CH2CsHs
Coumarins
HO [e} [e}
R
aesculin glucose

aesculetin H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of horseradish.

----- PAGE 379 -----
Horseradish

Figure 2 Horseradish (Armoracia rusticana).

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
horseradish.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for horseradish
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Isothiocyanates are reported to have irritant effects on the skin
and also to be allergenic.“©°"°® Animal poisoning has been
documented for horseradish. Symptoms described include inflam-
mation of the stomach or rumen, and excitement followed by
collapse.’

Contra-indications, Warnings

It is stated that horseradish may depress thyroid function, and
should be avoided by individuals with hypothyroidism or by those
receiving thyroxine."©4*°) No rationale for this statement is
included, except that this action is common to all members of the
cabbage and mustard family.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of horseradish to interact with other medicines

Figure 3 Horseradish — dried drug substance (root).

administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Allylisothiocyanate is extremely toxic
and a violent irritant to mucous membranes.‘@**) In view of this,
use of horseradish should be avoided during pregnancy and
lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Garlic and Horseradish + C Complex; Garlic,
Horseradish, A & C Capsules; Procold. Germany: Angocin
Anti-Infekt N. Malaysia: Horseradish Plus. Switzerland:
Kernosan Elixir; Sanogencive. UK: Mixed Vegetable Tablets.

References

1 Stoehr H, Herrman K. Phenolic acids of vegetables. III.
Hydroxycinnamic acids and hydroxybenzoic acids of root vegetables.
Z Lebensm-Unters Forsch 1975: 159: 219-224.

2 Hansen H. Content of glucosinolates in horseradish (Armoracia
rusticana). Tidsskr Planteavl 1974; 73: 408-410.

3 Kojima M. Volatile components of Wasabia japonica. II. Volatile
components other than isothiocyanates. Hakko Kogaku Zasshi 1971;
49: 650-653.

4 Kojima M et al. Studies on the volatile components of Wasabia
japonica, Brassica juncea, and Cocholearia armoracia by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry. Yakugaku Zasshi 1973; 93: 453-
459.

5 Sjaastad OV et al. Hypotensive effects in cats caused by horseradish
peroxidase mediated by metabolites of arachidonic acid. J Histochem
Cytochem 1984; 32: 1328-1330.

----- PAGE 380 -----
- Hydrangea

hydrangea, allinene|p related species have been investigated
more thoroughly.““*” No scientific evidence was located to
justify the herbal uses. In view of the lack of toxicity data,
excessive use of hydrangea and use during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Hydrangea arborescens L. (Saxifragaceae)

Synonym(s)

Mountain Hydrangea, Seven Barks, Smooth Hydrangea, Wild
Hydrangea

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G40.

Limited information is available on the chemistry of hydrangea.
It is stated to contain carbohydrates (e.g. gum, starch, sugars),
flavonoids (e.g. kaempferol, quercetin, rutin), resin, saponins,
hydrangin and hydrangenol, a stilbenoid, and to be free from
tannins.

Food Use

Hydrangea is not used in foods. Previously in the USA, hydrangea
has been listed as a 'Herb of Undefined Safety'.'©?”

Herbal Use

Hydrangea is stated to possess diuretic and antilithic properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for cystitis, urethritis, urinary

Coumarins Stilbenes
SO.
HO’ [e} ie)
OH O
umbelliferone
(hydrangin) hydrangenol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of hydrangea.

Figure 2 Hydrangea (Hydrangea arborescens).

calculi, prostatitis, enlarged prostate gland, and specifically for
urinary calculi with gravel and cystitis.'67 °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 2-4 as a decoction three times daily.'C”
Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.‘6”

Tincture 2-10 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for hydrangea. Synthesised hydrangenol
derivatives have been reported to possess anti-allergic properties,

Figure 3. Hydrangea — dried drug substance (rhizome).

----- PAGE 381 -----
Hydrangea

exhibiting a strong inhibitory action towards hyaluronidase
activity and histamine release.”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
hydrangea and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

e-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for hydrangea
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Hydrangea has been reported to cause contact dermatitis,
and it is stated that hydrangin may cause gastroenteritis.
Symptoms of overdose are described as vertigo and a feeling of
tightness in the chest.(©?”)

(G51)
(G22)

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of hydrangea to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of hydrangea has not been
established. In view of the lack of phytochemical, pharmacological
and toxicity data, the use of hydrangea during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

UK: Antiglan; Backache.

References

1 Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary. London: Taylor
and Francis, 1993.

2 Kakegawa H et al. Inhibitory effects of hydrangeol derivatives on the
activation of hyaluronidase and their anti-allergic activities. Planta
Med 1988; 54: 385-389.

----- PAGE 382 -----
Hydrocotyle

triterpenoid constituents. Documented preclinical studies
support the herbal use of hydrocotyle as a dermatological
agent although robust clinical studies are lacking. In view of
the lack of toxicity data, excessive ingestion of hydrocotyle
and use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Centella asiatica (L.) Urban (Apiaceae Umbelliferae)

Synonym(s)

Asiatic Pennywort, Centella, Gotu Kola, Hydrocotyle asiatica L.,
Hydrocotyle lurida Hance, Indian Pennywort, Indian Water
Navelwort, Ji Xue Cao

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983‘?
Martindale 35th edition‘
WHO volume 1 1999°%)

G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSL (for external use only)'*”)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G60.

Amino acids Alanine and serine (major components), amino-
butyrate, aspartate, glutamate, histidine, lysine and threonine.”
The root contains greater quantities than the herb.”

Flavonoids Quercetin, kaempferol and various glycosides.

Terpenoids ‘Triterpenes, asiaticoside, centelloside, madecasso-
side, brahmoside and brahminoside (saponin glycosides). Agly-
cones are referred to as hydrocotylegenin A-E;“’ compounds A-D
are reported to be esters of the triterpene alcohol R,-
barrigenol.* Asiaticentoic acid, centellic acid, centoic acid
and madecassic acid.

Volatile oils Various terpenoids including B-caryophyllene, trans-
B-farnesene and germacrene D (sesquiterpenes) as major compo-
nents, o-pinene and f-pinene. The major terpenoid is stated to be
unidentified.

Other constituents Hydrocotylin (an alkaloid), vallerine (a bitter
principle), fatty acids (e.g. linoleic acid, linolenic acid, lignocene,
oleic acid, palmitic acid, stearic acid), phytosterols (e.g.
campesterol, sitosterol, stigmasterol),"” resin and tannin.

The underground plant parts of hydrocotyle have been reported

to contain small quantities of at least 14 different polyacetyl-

enes.1

Food Use

Hydrocotyle is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Hydrocotyle is stated to possess mild diuretic, antirheumatic,
dermatological, peripheral vasodilator and vulnerary properties.
Traditionally it has been used for rheumatic conditions, cutaneous
affections, and by topical application, for indolent wounds,
leprous ulcers, and cicatrisation after surgeryC” °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf 0.6 g as an infusion three times daily.'©”

Sesquiterpenes

AWK SN

B-farnesene

A-caryophyllene germacrene B

Triterpenes

asiatic acid
asiaticoside is a triglycoside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of hydrocotyle.

----- PAGE 383 -----
Hydrocotyle

Figure 2 Hydrocotyle (Centella asiatica).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The triterpenoids are regarded as the active principles in
hydrocotyle."? Asiaticoside is reported to possess wound-healing
ability, by having a stimulating effect on the epidermis and
promoting keratinisation."'? Asiaticoside is thought to act by an
inhibitory action on the synthesis of collagen and mucopolysac-
charides in connective tissue.”

Both asiaticoside and madecassoside are documented to be
anti-inflammatory, and the total saponin fraction is reported to be
active in the carrageenan rat paw oedema test.”

In vivo studies in rats have shown that asiaticoside exhibits a
protective action against stress-induced gastric ulcers, following
“3) and accelerates the healing of
chemical-induced duodenal ulcers, after oral administration.“ It
was thought that asiaticoside acted by increasing the ability of the
rats to cope with a stressful situation, rather than via a local effect
on the mucosa.'!?)

In vivo studies in mice and rats using brahmoside and
brahminoside, by intraperitoneal injection, have shown a CNS-
depressant effect."*) The compounds were found to decrease
motor activity, increase hexobarbitone sleeping time, slightly
decrease body temperature, and were thought to act via a
cholinergic mechanism." A hypertensive effect in rats was also
observed, but only following large doses.'') In vitro studies with
brahmoside and brahminoside indicated a relaxant effect on the
rabbit duodenum and rat uterus, and an initial increase, followed
by a decrease, in the amplitude and rate of contraction of the
isolated rabbit heart.‘') Higher doses were found to cause cardiac
arrest, although subsequent intravenous administration in dogs
caused no marked change in an ECG."

Fresh plant juice is reported to be devoid of antibacterial
activity,” although asiaticoside has been reported to be active
versus Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Bacillus leprae and Enta-
moeba histolytica, and oxyasiaticoside was documented to be
active against tubercle bacillus.“%!” The fresh plant juice is also
stated not to exhibit antitumour or antiviral activities, but to
Possess a moderate cytotoxic action in human ascites tumour
cells."°

subcutaneous administration,

Clinical studies

Several studies describing the use of hydrocotyle to treat wounds
and various skin disorders have been documented. However, these

studies have important methodological limitations and preclude
definitive conclusions on the effects of hydrocotyle. Robust clinical
studies are required. A cream containing a hydrocotyle extract
was found to be effective in the treatment of psoriasis in seven
patients to whom it was applied.) An aerosol preparation,
containing a hydrocotyle extract, was reported to improve the
healing in 19 of 25 wounds that had proved refractory to other
forms of treatment.” A hydrocotyle extract containing asiatico-
side (40%), asiatic acid (29-30%), madecassic acid (29-30%) and
madasiatic acid (1%) was stated to be successful as both a
preventive and curative treatment, when given to 227 patients with
keloids or hypertrophic scars.'” The effective dose in adults was
reported to be between 60 and 90 mg. It was proposed that the
triterpene constituents in the hydrocotyle extract act in a similar
manner to cortisone, with respect to wound healing, and interfere
with the metabolism of abnormal collagen.

Pharmacokinetics There are only very limited data on the
pharmacokinetics of constituents of hydrocotyle.

The triterpene constituents are reported to be metabolised
primarily in the faeces in a period of 24-76 hours, with a small
percentage metabolised via the kidneys.''” An extract containing
asiatic acid, madecassic acid, madasiatic acid and asiaticoside
reached peak plasma concentrations in 2-4 hours, irrespective of
whether it is administered in tablet, oily injection or ointment
formulations.”

le-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
ydrocotyle and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

A burning sensation was reported by four of 20 patients during
the period of application of an aerosol preparation containing
ydrocotyle."'? However, it is not clear whether other components
in the formulation contributed to this reaction. Ingestion of

ydrocotyle is stated to have produced pruritus over the whole
body.'05!

Preclinical data

In vitro antifertility activity against human and rat sperm has been
described for the total saponin fraction.” Asiaticoside and
brahminoside are thought to be the active components, although
no spermicidal or spermostatic action could be demonstrated for

Figure 3 Hydrocotyle — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 384 -----
the pure saponins.” A crude hydrocotyle extract has been
reported to significantly reduce the fertility of female mice when
administered orally." No mechanism of action was investigated.

Teratogenicity studies in the rabbit have reported negative
findings for a hydrocotyle extract containing asiatic acid,
madecassic acid, madasiatic acid and asiaticoside.\!”

Contra-indications, Warnings

It is stated that hydrocotyle may produce photosensitisation.'©”
Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of hydrocotyle to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that brahmoside and brahminoside,
constituents of hydrocotyle, have CNS depressant activity."

Pregnancy and lactation Hydrocotyle is reputed to be an
abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle.‘ Relaxation of
the isolated rat uterus has been documented for brahmoside and
brahminoside.) Triterpene constituents have been reported to
lack any teratological effects in rabbits.) However, in view of the
lack of toxicity data, the use of hydrocotyle during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Moragen; No-Gras; Ovumix; Pentol; Redudiet; Vagicural Plus;
Venoful; VNS 45. Australia: Extralife Leg-Care. Brazil:
Composto Anticelulitico; Composto Emagrecedor; Derm'at-
tive 10; Emagrevit. Chile: Celulase Con Neomicina; Cicapost;
Dermaglos Plus; Escar T-Neomicina; Madecassol Neomicina.
France: Calmiphase; Fadiamone; Madecassol Neomycine

Hydrocotyle

Monaco: Akildia. Portugal: Antiestrias. Spain: Blastoestimu-
lina; Blastoestimulina; Blastoestimulina; Cemalyt; Nesfare.

References

1 George VK, Gnanarethinam JL. Free amino acids in Centella asiatica.
Curr Sci 1975; 44: 790.

2 Rzadkowska-Bodalska H. Flavonoid compounds in herb pennywort
(Hydrocotyle vulgaris). Herba Pol 1974; 20: 243-246.

3. Voigt G et al. Zur Struktur der Flavonoide aus Hydrocotyle vulgaris L.
Pharmazie 1981; 36: 377-379.

4 Hiller K e¢ al. Isolierung von Quercetin-3-O-(6-O-a-L-
arabinopyranosyl)-B-b-galaktopyranosid, einem neuen Flavonoid aus
Hydrocotyle vulgaris L. Pharmazie 1979; 34: 192-193.

5S Hiller K et al. Saponins of Hydrocotyle vulgaris. Pharmazie 1971; 26:
780.

6 Hiller K et al. Zur Struktur des Hauptsaponins aus Hydrocotyle
vulgaris L. Pharmazie 1981; 36: 844-846.

7 Asakawa Y et al. Mono- and sesquiterpenoids from Hydrocotyle and
Centella species. Phytochemistry 1982; 21: 2590-2592.

8 Bohlmann F, Zdero C. Polyacetylenic compounds. 230. A new polyyne
from Centella species. Chem Ber 1975; 108: 511-514.

9 Schulte KE et al. Constituents of medical plants. XX VII.
Polyacetylenes from Hydrocotyle asiatica. Arch Pharm (Weinheim)
1973; 306: 197-209.

10 Gotu Kola. Lawrence Review of Natural Products, 1988.

11 Morisset T et al. Evaluation of the healing activity of hydrocotyle
tincture in the treatment of wounds. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 117-121.

12. Jacker H-J et al. Zum antiexsudativen Verhalten einiger
Triterpensaponine. Pharmazie 1982; 37: 380-382.

13. Ravokatra A, Ratsimamanga AR. Action of a pentacyclic triterpenoid,
asiaticoside, obtained from Hydrocotyle madagascariensis or Centella
asiatica against gastric ulcers of the Wistar rat exposed to cold (2°). C
R Acad Sci (Paris) 1974; 278: 1743-1746.

14 Ravokatra A et al. Action of asiaticoside extracted from hydrocyte on
duodenal ulcers induced with mercaptoethylamine in male Wistar
rats. C R Acad Sci (Paris) 1974; 278: 2317-2321.

15 Ramaswamy AS et al. Pharmacological studies on Centella asiatica
Linn. (Brahma manduki) (N.O. Umbelliferae). J Res Indian Med 1970;
4: 160-175.

16 Lin Y-C et al. Search for biologically active substances in Taiwan
medicinal plants. 1. Screening for anti-tumor and anti-microbial
substances. Chin J Microbiol 1972; 5: 76-81.

17 Oliver-Bever B. Medicinal Plants in Tropical West Africa. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1986.

18 Natarajan S, Paily PP. Effect of topical Hydrocotyle asiatica in
psoriasis. Indian J Dermatol 1973; 18: 82-85.

19 Bossé J-P et al. Clinical study of a new antikeloid agent. Ann Plast
Surg 1979; 3: 13-21.

----- PAGE 385 -----
Ispaghula

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The characteristic component of ispaghula is the mucilage
which provides it with its bulk laxative action. Many of the
herbal uses are therefore supported, although no published
information was located to justify the use of ispaghula in
cystitis or infective skin conditions. Adverse effects and
precautions generally associated with bulk laxatives apply to
ispaghula. Clinical evidence exists for hypocholesterolaemic
activity.

The EMEA Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products
(HMPC) draft Community Herbal Monographs for ispaghula
husk‘©®2) and seed©®) include the following therapeutic
indications: (a) treatment of habitual constipation; (b)
conditions in which easy defecation with soft stools is
desirable, e.g. in cases of painful defecation after rectal or anal
surgery, anal fissures and haemorrhoids;‘©®” ©» and for
ispaghula husk, (c) in patients for whom an increased daily
fibre intake may be advisable, e.g. as an adjuvant in
constipation-predominant irritable bowel syndrome, and as
an adjuvant to diet in hypercholesterolaemia.‘°®” Bulk
laxatives lower the transit time through the gastrointestinal
tract and may affect the absorption of concurrently
administered drugs. Concomitant use with thyroid hormones
and medicines known to inhibit peristalsis should only be
under medical supervision.‘¢°” °°)

Ispaghula seed and husk may be used during pregnancy
and lactation.

Species (Family)

Plantago ovata Forssk. (Plantaginaceae)

Synonym(s)

Blond Psyllium, Indian Plantago, Ispagol, Ispaghul, Pale Psyllium,
Spogel

Part(s) Used
Seed, husk

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%

BHP 1996”)

BP 20070

Complete German Commission E (Psyllium, Blonde)
EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monographs‘“*” “*)
ESCOP 2003079)

Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Ph Eur 2007°°8”

WHO volume 1 19999

USP29/NF24°8°

(G3)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6, G52 and G59.

Alkaloids Monoterpene-type. (+)-Boschniakine (indicaine), (+)-
boschniakinic acid (plantagonine) and indicainine.

Mucilages 10-30%. Mucopolysaccharide consisting mainly of a
highly branched arabinoxylan with a xylan backbone and
branches of arabinose, xylose and 2-O-(galacturonic)-rhamnose
moieties. Present mainly in the seed husk.

Other constituents Aucubin (iridoid glucoside), sugars (fructose,
glucose, sucrose), planteose (trisaccharide), protein, sterols
(campesterol, B-sitosterol, stigmasterol), triterpenes (o- and B-
amyrin), fatty acids (e.g. linoleic, oleic, palmitic, stearic), tannins.

Food Use

In food manufacture, ispaghula may be used as a thickener or
stabiliser.(C4

Herbal Use

Ispaghula is stated to possess demulcent and laxative properties.
Traditionally, ispaghula has been used in the treatment of chronic
constipation, dysentery, diarrhoea and cystitis,(C7 6% O° C% 6
643,652,664) Tonically, a poultice has been used for furunculosis.
The German Commission E approved use for chronic constipation
and disorders in which bowel movements with loose stools are

desirable, e.g. patients with anal fistulas, haemorrhoids, preg-
Alkaloids

OHC N

| Z
N
boschniakine
(indicaine)
Iridoids

HO

S
oO

HOCH, H
glucose

aucubin

Polysaccharides
gal

ara rha ara xyl

bf bf

—> 4) = xyl - (1 —= 4) - xyl - (1 = 3) - xyl - (1 = 4) - xyl = (1 4) = xyl- (1

ara=arabinose gal=galacturonicacid rha=rhamnose  xyl=xylose

Figure 1 Selected constituents of ispaghula.

----- PAGE 386 -----
Figure 2 Ispaghula (Plantago ovata).

nancy, secondary medication in the treatment of various forms of
diarrhoea and in the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome.“

The European Medicines Agency (EMEA) Committee on
Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC) has adopted a Community
Herbal Monograph for ispaghula husk‘°*” and seed.‘©*) The
draft monographs include the following therapeutic indications
under well-established use: (a) treatment of habitual constipation;
(b) conditions in which easy defaecation with soft stools is
desirable, e.g. in cases of painful defaecation after rectal or anal
surgery, anal fissures and haemorrhoids;“**°*) and for ispa-
ghula husk, (c) in patients for whom an increased daily fibre
intake may be advisable, e.g. as an adjuvant in constipation-
predominant irritable bowel syndrome, and as an adjuvant to diet
in hypercholesterolaemia.‘“*”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Seeds 5-10¢ (3g in children) three times daily;@*°” 12-40 g per
day, husk 4-20 g;'9 3-5 g.'C) Children 6-12 years, half adult
dose. Children under six years, treat only under medical
supervision.“ Seeds should be soaked in warm water for
several hours before taking.

Liquid extract
daily. (G6, G7)

24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

Husk 3-5 g.‘“* Seeds and husk should be soaked in warm water
for several hours before administration.

Ispaghula as

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monographs advise the
following dosages.

Ispaghula husk, indications (a) and (b) (see Herbal Use)‘“*”)
Adults, elderly, adolescents aged over 12 years: 7-11 ¢ daily in
divided doses. Children aged 6-12 years: 3-8 g daily in divided
doses.

Ispaghula husk, indication (c) (see Herbal Use)'C*? Adults,
elderly, adolescents aged over 12 years: 7-20 g daily in one to three
divided doses.

Ispaghula seed, indications (a) and (b) (see Herbal Use’
Adults, elderly, adolescents aged over 12 years: 25—40g daily in
one to three divided doses. Children aged 6-12 years: 12-25 g daily
in one to three divided doses.

) (G83)

Pharmacological Actions

The principal pharmacological actions of ispaghula can be
attributed to the mucilage component.

In vitro and animal studies

An alcoholic extract lowered the blood pressure of anaesthetised
cats and dogs, inhibited isolated rabbit and frog hearts, and
stimulated rabbit, rat and guinea-pig ileum.'C*) The extract
exhibited cholinergic activity." A mild laxative action has also
been reported in mice administered iridoid glycosides, including
aucubin. Four-week supplementation of a fibre-free diet with
ispaghula seeds (100 or 200 g/kg) was compared with that of the
husks and wheat bran in rats.” The seeds increased faecal fresh
weight by up to 100% and faecal dry weight by up to 50%. Total
faecal bile acid secretion was stimulated, and -glucuronidase
activity reduced, by ispaghula. The study concluded that ispaghula
acts as a partly fermentable, dietary fibre supplement increasing
stool bulk, and that it probably has metabolic and mucosa-
protective effects.

Ispaghula husk depressed the growth of chickens by 15% when
added to their diet at 2%.'©*?

Ispaghula seed powder is stated to have strongly counteracted
the deleterious effects of adding sodium cyclamate (2%), FD & C
Red No. 2 (2%), and polyoxyethylene sorbitan monostearate (4%)
to the diet of rats.(C*?

Clinical studies

(G3, G43, G52)

Ispaghula is used as a bulk laxative. ) The swelling

properties of the mucilage enable it to absorb water in the
gastrointestinal tract, thereby increasing the volume of the faeces

Figure 3. Ispaghula - dried drug substance (seed).

----- PAGE 387 -----
Ispaghula

and promoting peristalsis. Bulk laxatives are often used for the
treatment of chronic constipation and when excessive straining
must be avoided following ano rectal surgery or in the manage-
ment of haemorrhoids. Ispaghula is also used in the management
of diarrhoea and for adjusting faecal consistency in patients with
colostomies and in patients with diverticular disease or irritable
bowel syndrome.

Laxative effect Ispaghula increases water content of stools and
total stool weight in patients, thus promoting peristalsis and

reducing mouth-to-rectum transit
42 adults with constipation (<3

time. In a short-term study,
bowel movements per week)

received either ispaghula (7.2 g/day) or ispaghula plus senna

(6.5¢+ 1.5 g/day). Both treatments increased defecation fre-
quency, and wet and dry stool weights, improved stool consistency,
and gave subjective relief.

A randomised, double-blind, double-dummy, multicentre study
involved 170 subjects with chronic idiopathic constipation. The
study included a two-week baseline (placebo) phase, followed by
two weeks' treatment with ispaghula (Metamucil) 5.1g, twice
daily or docusate sodium 100mg twice daily. Compared with
docusate, ispaghula significantly increased stool water content
(0.01% versus 2.33% for docusate and ispaghula, respectively; p =
0.007), and total stool output (271.9 g/week versus 359.9 g/week
for docusate and ispaghula, respectively; p = 0.005). Furthermore,
bowel movement frequency was significantly greater for ispaghula,
compared with docusate. It was concluded that ispaghula has
greater overall laxative efficacy than docusate in patients with
chronic constipation.

Antidiarrhoeal effect An open, randomised, crossover trial
involving 25 patients with diarrhoea compared the effects of
loperamide with those of ispaghula and calcium.” Nineteen
patients completed both periods of treatment. The results
indicated that both treatments halved stool frequency. Ispaghula
and calcium were reported to be significantly better than
loperamide with regard to urgency and stool consistency.”

Nine volunteers with phenolphthalein-induced diarrhoea were
treated in random sequence with placebo, ispaghula (Konsyl),
calcium polycarbophyl or wheat bran.) Wheat bran and calcium
polycarbophy] had no effect on faecal consistency or on faecal
viscosity. By contrast, ispaghula made stools firmer and increased
faecal viscosity. In a dose-response study involving six subjects, 9,
18 and 30g ispaghula per day caused a near-linear increase in
faecal viscosity.”

The effects of ispaghula have been explored in children. In an
open, uncontrolled study, 23 children with chronic non-specific
diarrhoea were treated with an unrestricted diet for one week, and
then treated with ispaghula (Metamucil) for two weeks (one
tablespoonful twice daily). Seven patients responded to the

unrestricted diet and 13 were said to respond to ispaghula
(9)

treatment.

Hypocholesterolaemic effects In a double-blind, placebo-
controlled, parallel-group study, 26 men with mild-to-moderate
hypercholesterolaemia (serum cholesterol concentration: 4.86-
8.12 mmol/L) received ispaghula (Metamucil) 3.4g, or cellulose
placebo, three times daily at meal times for eight weeks." At the
end of the study, serum cholesterol concentrations were reduced by
14.8% in the treated group, low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
cholesterol by 20.2% and ratio of LDL to high-density lipoprotein
(HDL) cholesterol by 14.8%, compared with baseline values.
There were no significant changes in serum lipid concentrations
with placebo treatment, compared with baseline values. Differ-

ences in serum cholesterol concentrations between the two groups
were statistically significant after four weeks (p-value not
reported).

A double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel trial study com-
pared the effects of ispaghula (Metamucil 5.1 g, daily) and placebo
in 118 patients (aged 21-70 years old) with primary hypercholes-
terolaemia (total serum cholesterol >5.7 mmol/L). Thirty-
seven participants maintained a high-fat diet and 81 a low-fat diet.
Treated patients in both low- and high-fat diet groups showed
small significant decreases (p < 0.05) in total cholesterol and LDL
cholesterol levels (5.8% and 7.2%, respectively, for high-fat diets;
4.2% and 6.4%, respectively, for low-fat diets). No significant
differences were seen in LDL cholesterol response for treated
patients on either diet.

In a randomised, double-blind, crossover study, 20 males
(mean (SD) age 44 (4) years) with moderate hypercholester-
olaemia (mean (SD) total cholesterol concentration 265 (17) mg/
dL, LDL 184 (15) mg/dL) were randomised to receive a 40-day
course of ispaghula (Metamucil) 15g daily, or placebo (cellu-
lose). There was a wash-out period of more than 10 days
between treatments. Ispaghula lowered LDL cholesterol (168 mg/
dL) more than did cellulose placebo (179mg/dL), decreased
relative cholesterol absorption, and increased the fractional
turnover of both chenodeoxycholic acid and cholic acid. Bile acid
synthesis increased in subjects whose LDL cholesterol was
lowered by more than 10%. It was concluded that ispaghula
lowers LDL cholesterol primarily by stimulation of bile acid
synthesis.”

A meta-analysis of eight published and four unpublished
studies carried out in four countries reviewed the effect of
consumption of ispaghula-enriched cereal products on blood
cholesterol, and LDL and HDL cholesterol concentrations.»
Overall, the trials included 404 adults with mild-to-moderate
hypercholesterolaemia (5.17—7.8 mmol/L) who consumed low-fat
diets. The meta-analysis indicated that subjects who consumed
ispaghula cereal had lower total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol
than subjects who ate control cereal concentrations (differences of
0.31mmol/L (5%) and 0.35mmol/L (9%), respectively). HDL
cholesterol concentrations were not affected in subjects eating
ispaghula cereal.

Another meta-analysis included eight studies involving a total
of 384 patients with hypercholesterolaemia who received ispaghula
and 272 subjects who received cellulose placebo." Compared
with placebo, consumption of 10.2 g ispaghula per day for >8
weeks lowered serum total cholesterol concentrations by 4% (p <
0.0001) and LDL cholesterol by 7% (p < 0.0001), but did not
affect serum HDL cholesterol or triacyl glycerol concentrations.
The ratio of apolipoprotein (apo) B to apo A-1 was lowered by
6% (p < 0.05), relative to placebo, in subjects consuming a low-
fat diet.“ It was concluded that ispaghula is a useful adjunct to a
low-fat diet in individuals with mild-to-moderate hypercholester-
olaemia.

A randomised, placebo-controlled, multicentre study evaluated
the long-term effectiveness of ispaghula husk as an adjunct to diet
in treatment of primary hypercholesterolaemia." Men and
women with hypercholesterolaemia followed the American Heart
Association Step 1 diet for eight weeks prior to treatment.
Individuals with LDL cholesterol concentrations between 3.36 and
4.91 mmol/L were randomly assigned to receive either ispaghula
(Metamucil 5.1 g) or cellulose placebo twice daily for 26 weeks
whilst continuing diet therapy. Overall, 163 participants com-
pleted the full protocol, 133 receiving ispaghula and 30 receiving
cellulose placebo. Serum total and LDL cholesterol concentrations

e

----- PAGE 388 -----
were 4.7% and 6.7% lower, respectively, in the ispaghula group
than in the placebo group after 24-26 weeks (p < 0.001).

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover trial
assessed the effects of ispaghula in lowering elevated LDL
cholesterol concentrations in 20 children (aged 5-17 years).
Children with LDL cholesterol concentrations of >2.84 mmol/L
after three months on a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet received five
a ready-to-eat cereal containing water-
soluble ispaghula husk (6 g/day) or placebo. The results indicate
that there were no significant differences in total cholesterol, LDL

weeks' treatment wit!

cholesterol or HDL cholesterol concentrations between the two
groups.
In a similar 12-week study, 50 children (aged 2-11 years) with
LDL cholesterol concentrations > 110 mg/dL received either cerea
enriched with ispaghula (3.2 g soluble fibre per day) or plain cerea
whilst maintaining a low-fat diet.”
by 21 mg/dL for the ispaghula group in comparison with 11.5 mg/
dL for the control group (p < 0.001). LDL cholesterol also
decreased by 23 mg/dL for the treated group in comparison with
8.5 mg/dL for the placebo group (p < 0.01).

The effect of adding water-soluble fibre to a diet low in tota
fats, saturated fat and cholesterol to treat hypercholesterolaemic
children and adolescents
summarised that reductions in LDL cholesterol concentrations
ranged from 0-23%. This wide range may be related to dietary
intervention and to clinical trial conditions. It was proposed that
additional trials with larger numbers of well-defined subjects are
needed.

) Total cholesterol decreased

as been reviewed.'*) The review

Hypoglycaemic effect Several studies have shown that
ispaghula husk lowered blood glucose concentrations due to
delayed intestinal absorption.'(© In over study, 18
patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes received ispaghula
(Metamucil) or placebo twice (immediately before breakfast
and dinner) during each 15-hour crossover phase." For meals
eaten immediately after ispaghula ingestion, maximum post-
prandial glucose elevation was reduced by 14% at breakfast and
20% at dinner, relative to placebo. Postprandial serum insulin
concentrations measured after breakfast were reduced by 12%,
relative to placebo. Second-meal effects after lunch showed a
31% reduction in postprandial glucose elevation, relative to
placebo. No significant differences in effects were noted
between patients whose diabetes was controlled by diet alone
and those whose diabetes was controlled by oral hypoglycaemic
drugs. It was concluded that the results indicate that ispaghula
as a meal supplement reduces proximate and second-mea
postprandial glucose and insulin in non-insulin dependent
diabetics.“

one cross

Other effects Ispaghula husk has been used to treat smal
numbers of patients with left-sided diverticular disease. Marked
motility was observed for the right colon, but was not as
pronounced for the left colon. The effects of ispaghula in this
condition may be worth further investigation.

In an open, randomised, multicentre trial, 102 patients with
ulcerative colitis (three months in remission, salicylate-treated,
colitis over 20cm) received ispaghula (10g twice daily; 7 = 35),
oral mesalazine (500mg three times daily; 1 = 37) or ispaghula
plus mesalazine (2 = 30) for one year.?” Assessment, including
endoscopy, was carried out at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months. The results
suggested that ispaghula may be equivalent to mesalazine in
maintaining remi:
further investigation in a randomised, double-blind study.

ion in ulcerative colitis. However, this requires

Ispaghula

Side-effects, Toxicity

In common with all bulk laxatives, ispaghula seed and husk may
increase or cause flatulence, although this usually disappears in
the course of treatment. There is a risk of abdominal distension
and intestinal or oesophageal obstruction, particularly if ispa-
ghula seed or husk is swallowed dry or without sufficient fluid.

Allergic reactions, including (rarely) anaphylactic reactions, may
(G3, G83, G84)

occur.

Contra-indications, Warnings

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monographs include the
following information. Ispaghula seed and husk should not be
used by patients with: a sudden change in bowel habit that persists
for more than two weeks; undiagnosed rectal bleeding; failure to
defecate following the use of a laxative; abnormal constrictions in
the gastrointestinal tract; diseases of the oesophagus and cardia;
potential or existing intestinal blockage (ileus); paralysis of the
intestine or megacolon; poorly controlled diabetes mellitus;
known hypersensitivity to ispaghula seed or husk.'@8 C5
Ispaghula seed and husk should not be used by patients with
faecal impaction and undiagnosed abdominal symptoms, abdom-
inal pain, nausea and vomiting (unless advised by a doctor).(C™
Where ispaghula seed or husk is used in constipation, the use of
ispaghula husk should be discontinued and medical advice sought
if the constipation does not resolve within three days of starting
treatment, if abdominal pain occurs and/or if there is any
irregularity in the faeces. Where ispaghula seed or husk is used as
an adjuvant to diet in hypercholesterolaemia this should be under
medical supervision.'(“*” Ispaghula seed and ispaghula husk
should always be taken with a sufficient amount of fluid: for
each 1g of the herbal substance, at least 30 mL of fluid (water,
milk or fruit juice) should be used to prepare a mixture. Taking
these preparations without adequate fluid may cause them to swell
and block the throat or oesophagus and may cause choking.
Intestinal obstructions may occur if an adequate fluid intake is not
maintained. Ispaghula should not be taken by anyone who has had
difficulty in swallowing or any throat problems. If chest pain,
vomiting or difficulty in swallowing or breathing is experienced
after taking the preparation, immediate medical attention should
be sought. The treatment of the debilitated patient requires
medical supervision. The treatment of elderly patients should be
supervised. Preparations of ispaghula seed and ispaghula husk

should be taken during the day and at least 30 minutes away from
(G82, G83)

intake of other medicines.

Drug and other interactions Bulk laxatives lower the transit
time through the gastrointestinal tract and therefore may affect
the absorption of other drugs.‘°* Absorption of concurrently
administered drugs may be delayed. The EMEA HMPC Commu-
nity Herbal Monographs include the following information.
Enteral absorption of concomitantly administered medicines
such as minerals (e.g. calcium, iron, lithium, zinc), vitamins
(By), cardiac glycosides and coumarin derivatives may be delayed.
For this reason the product should not be taken within 0.5—1 hour
of other medicines. If the product is taken together with meals in
the case of insulin-dependent diabetics, it may be necessary to
reduce the insulin dose. Ispaghula seed and husk should only be
used concomitantly with thyroid hormones under medical super-
vision as the dose of thyroid hormones may need to be adjusted.
In order to reduce the risk of gastrointestinal obstruction,
ispaghula seed and husk should only be used with medicines

----- PAGE 389 -----
Ispaghula

known to inhibit peristalsis (e.g. loperamide, opioids and opioid-

like agents) under medical supervision. 8 C8)

Pregnancy and lactation Ispaghula seed and husk may be used
during pregnancy and lactation.

Soury; Parapsyllium; Schoum; Spagulax au Citrate de Pota
sium; Spagulax au Sorbitol. Germany: Agiolax. Hong Kong:
Agiolax. Ireland: Fybogel Mebeverine. Israel: Agiolax. Italy:
Agiolax; Duolaxan; Fibrolax Complex; Sedatol; Sedatol;
Soluzione Schoum. Mexico: Agiolax. Netherlands: Agiolax.
Norway: Agiolax. Portugal: Agiolax; Excess. South Africa:
Agiolax. Spain: Agiolax; Solucion Schoum. Sweden: Agiolax;
Vi-Siblin S$. Switzerland: Agiolax; Mucilar Avena. Thailand:
Agiolax. UK: Anased; Fibre Dophilus; Fibre Plus; Fybogel
Mebeverine; HRI Calm Life; Manevac; Nodoff; Nytol Herbal;
Slumber. USA: Perdiem; Senna Prompt. Venezuela: Agiolax;
Avensy]; Fiberfull; Fibralax; Senokot con Fibra.

References

1

2

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

Inouye H et al. Purgative activities of iridoid glycosides. Planta Med
1974; 25: 285-288.

Leng-Peschlow E. Plantago ovata seeds as dietary fibre supplement:
physiological and metabolic effects in rats. Br J Nutr 1991; 66: 331—
349.

Stevens J et al. Comparison of the effects of psyllium and wheat bran
on gastrointestinal transit time and stool characteristics. | Am Diet
Assoc 1988; 88: 323-326.

Thorburn HA et al. Does ispaghula husk stimulate the entire colon in
diverticular disease? Gut 1992; 33: 352-356.

Marlett JA et al. Comparative laxation of psyllium with and without
senna in an ambulatory constipated population. Am J Gastroenterol
1987; 82: 333-337.

McRorie JW ez al. Psyllium is superior to docusate sodium for
treatment of chronic constipation. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1998; 12:
491-497.

Qvitzau S e¢ al. Treatment of chronic diarrhoea: loperamide versus
ispaghula husk and calcium. Scand J Gastroenterol 1988; 23: 1237—
1240.

Eherer AJ e¢ al. Effect of psyllium, calcium polycarbophil, and wheat
bran on secretory diarrhea induced by phenolphthalein.
Gastroenterology 1993; 104: 1007-1012.

Smalley JR e¢ al. Use of psyllium in the management of chronic
nonspecific diarrhea of childhood. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 1982;
1: 361-363.

Anderson JW et al. Cholesterol-lowering effects of psyllium
hydrophilic mucilloid for hypercholesterolemic men. Arch Intern Med
1988; 148: 292-296.

Sprecher DL et al. Efficacy of psyllium in reducing serum cholesterol
levels in hypercholesterolemic patients on high- or low-fat diets. Ann
Intern Med 1993; 119: 545-554.

Everson GT et al. Effects of psyllium hydrophilic mucilloid on LDL-
cholesterol and bile acid synthesis in hypercholesterolemic men. ]
Lipid Res 1992; 33: 1183-1192.

Olson BH e¢ al. Psyllium-enriched cereals lower blood total
cholesterol and LDL cholesterol, but not HDL cholesterol, in
hypercholesterolemic adults: results of a meta-analysis. J Nutr 1997;
127: 1973-1980.

Anderson JW et al. Cholesterol-lowering effects of psyllium intake
adjunctive to diet therapy in men and women with
hypercholesterolemia: meta-analysis of 8 controlled trials. Am J Clin
Nutr 2000; 71: 472-479.

Anderson JW et al. Long-term cholesterol-lowering effects of psyllium
as an adjunct to diet therapy in the treatment of
hypercholesterolaemia. Am J Clin Nut 2000; 71: 1433-1438.
Dennison BA, Levine DM. Randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, two-period crossover clinical trial of psyllium fiber in
children with hypercholesterolemia. J Pediatr 1993, 123: 24-29.
Williams CL et al. Soluble fiber enhances the hypocholesterolemic
effect of the step I diet in childhood. J Am College Nutr 1995; 14: 251—
257.

Kwiterovich Jr PO. The role of fiber in the treatment of
hypercholesterolemia in children and adolescents. Pediatrics 1995; 96:
1005-1009.

Pastors JG et al. Psyllium fiber reduces rise in postprandrial glucose
and insulin concentrations in patients with non-insulin-dependent
diabetes. Am J Clin Nutr 1991; 53: 1431-1435.

Fernandez-Baiares F et al. Randomised clinical trial of Plantago ovata
efficacy as compared to mesalazine in maintaining remission in
ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology 1997; 112: A971.

----- PAGE 390 -----
herbal uses. However, there is a lack of clinical research
assessing the efficacy and safety of Jamaica dogwood.
Although Jamaica dogwood is reported to be of low toxicity
in various animal species, it is also documented as toxic to
humans.‘©>" In view of this, excessive use of Jamaica
dogwood and use during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Piscidia piscipula L. Sarg. (Leguminosae)

Synonym(s)

Erythina piscipula L., Fish Poison Bark, Ichthyomethia communis
S.E Blake, I. piscipula (L.) Hitche., I. piscipula (L.) Hitche., var.
typica Stehle & L. Quentin, P. inebrians Medik, P. erythina L., P.
toxicaria Salisb., Robinia alata Mill., West Indian Dogwood

Part(s) Used
Root bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHC 1992'°°)

BHP 1996'0”)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6 and G40.

Acids Piscidic acid (p-hydroxybenzyltartaric) and its mono and
diethyl esters," fukiic acid and the 3/-O-methyl derivative; malic
acid, succinic acid, and tartaric acid.

Isoflavonoids Ichthynone, jamaicin, piscerythrone, piscidone and
others. Milletone, isomillettone, dehydromillettone, rotenone and
sumatrol (rotenoids), and lisetin.?~>

Glycosides Piscidin, reported to be a mixture of two compounds,
saponin glycoside (unidentified).

Other constituents Alkaloid (unidentified, reported to be from
the stem), resin, volatile oil 0.01%, B-sitosterol, tannin (unspe-
cified).

Jamaica Dogwood

Food Use

Jamaica dogwood is stated by the Council of Europe to to be

toxicologically unacceptable for use as a natural food flavour-
«| (G16)
ing.

Herbal Use

Jamaica dogwood is stated to possess sedative and anodyne
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for neuralgia, migraine,
insomnia, dysmenorrhoea, and specifically for insomnia due to
neuralgia or nervous tension, (6% 67% Ge)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried root bark 1-2 as a decoction three times daily.'C% °”

Liquid extract
daily.C%

Liquid Extract of Piscidia (BPC 1934) 2-8 mL.

1-2mL (1:1 in 30% alcohol) three times

Isoflavonoids

erythbigenin prenyl OH  prenyl

prenyl OH H

icthynone OCH3

piscidone jamaicin H

piscerythrone OH _prenyl H

lisetin rotenone H

sumatrol OH

Acids
OH A
R mf COOH 5
cr " piscidic acid H
fukii IH
HO HO”: “COOH uticacia 0
H 3’-O-methylfukiic OCH
acid
Figure 1 Selected constituents of Jamaica dogwood.

----- PAGE 391 -----
Jamaica Dogwood

Figure 2 Jamaica dogwood (Piscidia piscipula).

Figure 3 Jamaica dogwood - dried drug substance (root bark).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Results of early studies reported Jamaica dogwood to possess
weak cannabinoid and sedative activities in the mouse, guinea-pig
and cat.* In addition, in vitro antispasmodic activity on rabbit
intestine, and guinea-pig and rat uterine muscle’!
and in vivo utero-activity in the cat and monkey were
documented.'%”'°! In some instances, in vitro antispasmodic
activity was found to be comparable to, or greater than, that
observed for papaverine.

More recent work has supported these findings and reported
that the antispasmodic activity of Jamaica dogwood on uterine
smooth muscle is attributable to two isoflavone constituents, one
being equipotent to papaverine."

Jamaica dogwood extracts have also been documented to
exhibit antitussive, antipyretic, and anti-inflammatory activities in
various experimental animals.”

were noted

Rotenone is an insecticide that has been used in agriculture for
the control of lice, fleas, and as a larvicide.‘“* Jamaica dogwood
has been used extensively throughout Central and South America
as a fish poison; the wood contains two piscicidal principles,
rotenone and ichthynone.

Rotenone has reportedly exhibited anticancer activity towards
lymphocytic leukaemia and human epidermoid carcinoma of the
nasopharynx.(©”)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of Jamaica
dogwood and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for Jamaica
dogwood and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Symptoms of overdose are stated to include numbness, tremors,
salivation and sweating.'(¢?”

Jamaica dogwood has been found to be toxic when adminis-
tered parenterally to rats and rabbits, but non-toxic when given
orally, with doses exceeding 90 g dried extract/kg tolerated. An
LDso (mice, intravenous injection) of an unidentified saponin
constituent has been reported as 75 pg/kg body weight.” Oral
doses of up to 1.5 mg/kg were stated to have no effect.

Jamaica dogwood is stated to be irritant and toxic to

humans.'©*) Rotenone is documented to be carcinogenic. ©?”

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. However, in view of the available information,
Jamaica dogwood should be used with caution.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of Jamaica dogwood to interact with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited
evidence from preclinical studies that Jamaica dogwood has
sedative activity.

Pregnancy and lactation Jamaica dogwood has been reported
to exhibit a potent depressant action on the uterus both in vitro
and in vivo. In view of this and the general warnings regarding the
use of Jamaica dogwood, it should not be used during pregnancy
and lactation.

References

1 Bridge W et al. Constituents of ‘Cortex Piscidiae Erythrinae’. Part I.
The structure of piscidic acid. |] Chem Soc 1948; 257.

2 Falshaw CP et al. The Extractives of Piscidia Erythrina L. Ill. The
constitutions of lisetin, piscidone and piscerythrone. Tetrahedron
1966; Suppl 7: 348.

3 Redaelli C, Santaniello E. Major isoflavonoids of the Jamaican
dogwood Piscidia erythrina. Phytochemistry 1984; 23: 2976-2977.

4 Delle Monache F et al. Two isoflavones from Piscidia erythrina.
Phytochemistry 1984; 23: 2945-2947.

5 Harborne JB, Mabry TJ, eds. The Flavonoids. New York: Chapman
and Hall, 1982: 606.

6 Costello CH, Butler CL. An investigation of Piscidia erythrina
(Jamaica Dogwood). J Am Pharm Assoc 1948; 37: 89-96.

7 Aurousseau M et al. Certain pharmacodynamic properties of Piscidia
erythrina. Ann Pharm Fr 1965; 23: 251-257.

8 Della-Loggia R et al. Evaluation of the activity on the mouse CNS of
several plant extracts and a combination of them. Riv-Neurol 1981;
S1: 297-310.

9 Pilcher JD et al. The action of the so-called female remedies on the
excised uterus of the guinea-pig. Arch Intern Med 1916; 18: 557-583.

10 Pilcher JD, Mauer RT. The action of female remedies on the intact
uteri of animals. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1918; 97-99.

11 Della Loggia R et al. Isoflavones as spasmolytic principles of Piscidia
erythrina. Prog Clin Biol Res 1988; 280: 365-368.

----- PAGE 392 -----
Java Tea

elr Mechanisms o1

specific pharmacological activities an
action are necessary.

There have been reports of adulteration/botanical
substitution occurring with Orthosiphon.?

In view of the lack of toxicity and safety data, excessive use
of Java tea, and use during pregnancy and lactation, should

Species (Family)
Orthosiphon aristatus var. aristatus (Blume) Mig. (Labiatae/
Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)
Kumis Kucing (Indonesian, Malay), Orthosiphon aristatus Miq.,
Orthosiphon spicatus (Thunb.) Bak., O. stamineus Benth.

Part(s) Used

Fragmented dried leaves, tops of stems

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'@”)
BP 2007'¢8

be avoided. Complete German Commission EC”
Benzochromenes
OH fe)
SS SS
CH30’ fo) R fe}
OCH; OCH3 R
orthochromene A methylripariochromene A OCH;
acetovanillochromene H
Flavonoids

OCH;

Re icy R? R®
sinensetin OCH; OCH; OCH;
tetramethyl-
scutellarin OCH = OCH H
eupatorin OH OCH3 OH
5-hydroxy-6,7,3’,4’-
tetramethylflavone OH OCHs OCH;
3'-hydroxy-5,6,7,4’-
tetramethoxyflavone OCrs §=OCHs = 10H
salvigenin OH OCH; H
trimethylapigenin OCH3 H H
tetramethyllutein OCH; H OCH

Phenylpropanoids
0 fe)
OH OH
HO. 1
Son, 8
OH a
HO’ HOOC fe)
rosmarinic acid OH R' Re
caffeoyl tartrate caffeoyl H
di-caffeoyl tartrate caffeoyl _caffeoyl

Figure 1 Selected constituents of java tea.

----- PAGE 393 -----
Java Tea

ESCOP 20030” :
Martindale 35th edition'“*”
Ph Eur 20078?

Legal category (Licensed Products)

Java tea is not included in the GSL.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G52.

Benzochromenes Orthochromene A,'” methylripariochromene
A® and acetovanillochromene.‘"?)

Diterpenes Numerous closely related pimarane-type diterpenes,
including orthosiphonones A and B,\? orthosiphols A, B, E to I,
M,N,BR, S, T,“>* staminol A® neo-orthosiphols A and B°%”
neo-orthosiphone A,“ norstaminolactone A, norstaminols B and
C, norstaminone A,” and seco-orthosiphols A to C.”

Essential oil 0.02-0.7%. Various compounds including p-
elemene, f-caryophyllene, %-humulene, B-caryophyllene oxide,
can-2-one and palmitic acid.”

Flavonoids  Sinensetin, tetramethylscutellarein, eupatorin, 5-
hydroxy-6,7,3’,4/-tetramethoxyflavone, 3/-hydroxy-5,6,7,4’-tetra-
methoxyflavone, salvigenin, trimethylapigenin, tetramethoxylute-
olin nine flavonoids which are methylated derivatives of
scutellarein (5,6,7,4’-tetramethoxyflavone) or 6-hydroxyluteolin
(5,6,7,  3',4/-pentahydroxyflavone),  quercetin-3-O-glucoside,
kaempferol-3-O-glucoside,“* 2"! _4/,5,6,7-tetramethoxyflavone,
3!,4/,5,6,7-pentamethoxyflavone."”

Phenylpropanoids Rosmarinic acid (major), caffeoyl tartrate,
dicaffeoyltartrate, four caffeic acid depsides (1-4)."

Other constituents Inositol, phytosterols (e.g. B-sitosterol) 1b!
esculetin (a coumarin), potassium salts.

Food Use

Java tea is not used in foods.

Phenylpropanoids

HO.

caffeic acid depsides
R' Re RS Rt
1/2 OH OH OH OH

3 OH OH OH H
°' HOH OH OH
4 H OH OH H

Figure 2 Selected constituents of java tea.

Diterpenes

AcO,,_

B20"

R'O,,,

RO"

orthosipholA Ac 4H
orthosiphol B

orthosiphol F Ac H Bz
orthosipholG Ac H H
orthosipholH Ac Ac Bz

neoorthosiphol B
neoorthosiphol A H

staminol A Ac

Figure 3 Selected constituents of java tea.

Herbal Use

Java tea has traditionally been used in Java for the treatment of
hypertension and diabetes.‘"® 7°?) It has also been used in folk
medicine for bladder and kidney disorders, gallstones, gout and

rheumatism. Java tea is stated to have diuretic properties.'®)

Dosage

Dosage for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in contemporary standard herbal reference texts
are given below.

Dried material 2-3 g in 150 mL water two to three times daily as

an infusion.'C

Pharmacological Actions
In vitro and animal studies

Diuretic effects Several studies in rats have reported diuretic
activity of extracts of O. stamineus and O. aristatus''*° and of
flavonoids (sinensetin and a tetramethoxyflavone) isolated from O.
aristatus.°” Intraperitoneal administration of a hydroalcoholic
extract of O. stamineus to rats caused a significant diuresis over the
following 2-24 hours compared with controls." The effect was
similar to that observed following intraperitoneal administration
of hydrochlorothiazide (10 mg/kg). Oral administration of an
aqueous extract of O. aristatus increased ion excretion to a similar
extent as did furosemide, although no diuretic action was noted.2”

----- PAGE 394 -----
Oral administration of methylripariochromene A (100 mg/kg)
has been shown to increase urinary volume in fasted rats for three
hours after oral administration; the increase in urine volume was
similar to that observed with oral administration of hydrochloro-
thiazide (25 mg/kg). Sodium, potassium and chloride ion
excretion was increased with methylripariochromene A (100 mg/
kg), although urinary sodium ion excretion did not increase. A
mechanism for the diuretic action of methylripariochromene A
has not yet been elucidated, although it appears to have a different
mode of action to that of hydrochlorothiazide.'”

Hypoglycaemic effects In normoglycaemic rats, oral adminis-
tration of an aqueous extract of O. stamineus (0.5 g/kg) had no
significant effect on fasting blood glucose concentrations over a 7-
hour period, although administration of 1g/kg produced a
significant decrease in blood glucose concentration compared
with that in a control group.°” A hypoglycaemic effect was also
observed following administration of O. stamineus extract (1 g/kg)
to rats loaded with glucose (1.5 g/kg) and in  streptozotocin-
induced diabetic rats; the effect of O. stamineus extract in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats was similar to that observed
with glibenclamide (10 mg/kg).'”

Antihypertensive effects Methylripariochromene A has been
reported to have several pharmacological actions related to
antihypertensive activity.

In stroke-prone, spontaneously hypertensive rats, subcutaneous
administration of methylripariochromene A (100 mg/kg) produced
a continuous reduction in systolic blood pressure and a decrease in
heart rate. Methylripariochromene A also suppressed agonist-
induced contractions in the rat thoracic aorta and decreased the
contractile force in isolated guinea-pig atria without significantly
affecting the beating (heart) rate. The mechanism of action for
these antihypertensive effects of methylripariochromene A is,
however, unclear.“!””

Migrated pimarane-type diterpenes (neo-orthosiphols A and
B), isopimarane-type diterpenes (orthosiphols A and B, orthosi
phonones A and B), benzochromenes (methylripariochromene,
acetovanillochromene, orthochromene A) and flavones (tetra-
methylscutellarein, sinensetin) isolated from O. aristatus have

Diterpenes

HO
RO.

fe)

norstaminone A

secoorthosiphol AH

Java Tea

been reported to exhibit a suppressive effect on contractile
. : 3}
responses in the rat thoracic aorta.”

Cytostatic effects Sinensetin and tetramethylscutellarein have
been reported to demonstrate in vitro cytostatic activity towards
Ehrlich ascites tumour cells.°*) Growth inhibition appears to be
dose dependent, with 50% inhibition occurring at concentrations
of approximately 30 and 15,1g/mL for sinensetin and_tetra-
methylscutellarein, respectively. Orthosiphols A and B have been
reported to inhibit inflammation induced by the tumour promoter
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) on mouse ears.

Fractions of O. stamineus leaves have been reported to have
activity against a melanoma cell line in vitro.°*

Antimicrobial effects An aqueous extract of O. aristatus has
demonstrated antibacterial activity against two serotypes of
Streptococcus mutans (MIC 7.8-23.4mg/mL).2 Other in vitro
studies have reported a lack of antibacterial activity for flavonoids
(sinensetin, tetramethylscutellarein and a tetramethoxyflavone in
concentrations of 10 and 100 pg/mL) isolated from O. aristatus
leaves against Escherichia coli, Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus.°”

O. stamineus extract has also been shown to inhibit spore
germination in six out of nine fungal species tested: Sacchar-
omyces pastorianus, Candida albicans, Rhizopus nigricans,
Penicillium digitatum, Fusarium oxysporum and Trichophyton
mentagrophytes.°©

Other effects In vitro, O. spicatus has been shown to inhibit 15-
lipoxygenase, an enzyme thought to be involved in the develop-
ment of atherc “D Burthermore, the flavonoids
and tetramethylscutellarein demonstrate dose-dependent inhibi-
tion with ICso values of 114+ 5 and 110+3 mol/L, respectively,
although other flavonoids from O. spicatus appear to be less
efficient inhibitors of 15-lipoxygenase. The inhibitory activity of
the whole extract was greater than could be expected from the
activities of each of its flavonoid constituents, and it has been
suggested that synergism may be occurring." More recent in
vitro studies have shown that flavonoids from O. spicatus prevent
oxidative inactivation of 15-lipoxygenase, with trimethylapigenin,

lerosi sinensetin

norstaminolactone A

secoorthosiphol C R=H

secoorthosiphol B CH3

Figure 4 Selected constituents of java tea.

----- PAGE 395 -----
Java Tea

eupatorin and tetramethylluteolin showing the strongest enzyme-
ayes 27) i

stabilising effects.°” However, there was no correlation between

enzyme stabilisation and enzyme inhibition.?”

Clinical studies

Clinical investigation of preparations of Java tea is extremely
limited. A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-
over study reported no effect on 12- and 24-hour urine output or
on sodium excretion in 40 healthy volunteers who received 600 mL
of an infusion of Orthosiphon leaves daily (equivalent to 10g
dried leaves) for four days.°*) A small number of uncontrolled
studies has explored the effects of preparations of Java tea and
reported conflicting findings. The design of such studies does not
allow the observed effects to be attributed definitively to the
intervention. A study involving six healthy volunteers who drank
Orthosiphon tea (250 mL) every six hours for one day reported an
increase in urine acidity six hours after ingestion.°”

A study involving 67 patients with uratic diathesis who received
Java tea for three months reported that no effects were observed
on diuresis, glomerular filtration, osmotic concentration, urinary
pH, plasma content and excretion of calcium, inorganic
phosphorus and uric acid.°”

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None known. In view of the lack of clinical data on the use of Java
tea, excessive or long-term use should be avoided. It has been
recommended that adequate fluid intake (2L or more per day)
should be ensured whilst using Java tea,(“** although the
scientific basis for this statement is not clear.

Drug interactions None documented. However, in view of the
documented pharmacological actions of Java tea, the potential for
preparations of Java tea to interfere with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no data available on the use
of Java tea in pregnancy and lactation. In view of the lack of
toxicity data, use of Java tea during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

France: Dellova; Tealine.

Solubitrat.
Aqualibra; BioCyst; Canephron novo; Dr. Scheffler Bergischer
Krautertee Blasen- und Nierentee; Harntee STADA; Harntee-

Austria: Germany:

Steiner; Hevert-Blasen-Nieren-Tee N; Heweberberol-Tee;
Nephronorm med; Nephrubin-N; Nephrubin-N. Spain: Lepi-
sor; Urisor. Switzerland: Bilifuge; Demonatur Dragees pour les
reins et la vessie; Prosta-Caps Chassot N; Tisane pour les reins
et la vessie.

References

1

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

8

24

Shibuya H et al. Indonesian medicinal plants. XXII. 1) Chemical
structures of two new isopimarane-type diterpenes, orthosiphonones
A and B, and a new benzochromene, orthochromene A from the leaves
of Orthosiphon aristatus (Lamiaceae). Chem Pharm Bull 1999; 47:
695-698.

Guerin J-C, Reveillere H-P. Orthosiphon stamineus as a potent source
of methylripariochromene A. J Nat Prod 1989; 52: 171-173.

Ohashi K et al. Indonesian medicinal plants. XXIII. 1) Chemical
structures of two new migrated pimarane-type diterpenes,
neoorthosiphols A and B, and suppressive effects on rat thoracic aorta
of chemical constituents isolated from the leaves of Orthosiphon
aristatus (Lamiaceae). Chem Pharm Bull 2000; 48: 433-435.

Masuda T et al. Orthosiphol A and B, novel diterpenoid inhibitors of
TPA (12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate)-induced inflammation,
from Orthosiphon stamineus. Tetrahedron 1992; 48: 6787-6792.
Stampoulis P et al. Staminol A, a novel diterpene from Orthosiphon
stamineus. Tetrahedron Lett 1999; 40: 4239-4242.

Shibuya H et al. Two novel migrated pimarane-type diterpenes,
neoorthosiphols A and B, from the leaves of Orthosiphon aristatus
(Lamiaceae). Chem Pharm Bull 1999; 47: 911-912.

Awale § et al. Norstaminane- and isopimarane-type diterpenes of
Orthosiphon stamineus from Okinawa. Tetrahedron Lett 2002; 58:
5503-5512.

Awale § et al. Neoorthosiphonone A; a nitric oxide (NO) inhibitory
diterpene with new carbon skeleton from Orthosiphon stamineus.
Tetrahedron Lett 2004; 45: 1359-1362.

Awale § et al. Secoorthosiphols A-C: three highly oxygenated
secoisopimarane-type diterpenes from Orthosiphon stamineus.
Tetrahedron Lett 2002; 43: 1473-1475.

Schut G, Zwaving JH. Content and composition of the essential oil of
Orthosiphon aristatus. Planta Med 1986; 52: 240-241.

Lyckander IM, Malterud KE. Lipophilic flavonoids from Orthosiphon
spicatus as inhibitors of 15-lipoxygenase. Acta Pharm Nord 1992; 4:
159-166.

Schneider G, Tan HS. Die lipophilen Flavone von Folia Orthosiphonis.
Dtsch Apoth Ztg 1973; 113: 201.

Sumaryono W et al. Qualitative and quantitative analysis of the
phenolic constituents from Orthosiphon aristatus. Planta Med 1991;
57: 176-180.

Proksch P. Orthosiphon aristatus (Blume) Miquel—der Katzenbart.
Pflanzeninhaltsstoffe und ihre potentielle diuretische Wirkung. Z
Phytother 1992; 13: 63-69.

Pietta PG et al. High-performance liquid chromatography with diode-
array ultraviolet detection of methoxylated flavones in Orthosiphon
leaves. | Chromatog 1991; 547: 439-442.

Bombardelli E et al. Flavonoid constituents of Orthosiphon stamineus.
Fitoterapia 1972; 43: 35.

Matsubara T et al. Antihypertensive actions of
methylripariochromene A from Orthosiphon aristatus, an Indonesian
traditional medicinal plant. Biol Pharm Bull 1999; 22: 1083-1088.
Beaux D et al. Effect of extracts of Orthosiphon stamineus Benth,
Hieracium pilosella L., Sambucus nigra L., and Arctostaphylos uva-
ursi (L.) Spreng, in rats. Phytother Res 1998; 12: 498-501.
Casadebaig-Lafon J. Elaboration d'extraits végétaux adsorbés,
réalisation d'extraits secs d'Orthosiphon stamineus Benth. Pharm
Acta Helv 1989; 64: 220-224.

Englert J, Harnischfeger G. Diuretic action of aqueous Orthosiphon
extract in rats. Planta Med 1992; 58: 237-238.

Schut GA, Zwaving JH. Pharmacological investigation of some
lipophilic flavonoids from Orthosiphon aristatus. Fitoterapia 1993; 64:
99-102.

Mariam A et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of the aqueous extract of
Orthosiphon stamineus. Fitoterapia 1996; 67: 465-468.

Malterud KE et al. Flavonoids from Orthosiphon spicatus. Planta
Med 1989; 55: 569-570.

Estevez NA. Fractions of Orthosiphon stamineus Benth. leaves with
antitumour activity: Preliminary results. Rev Cuba Farm 1980; 14: 21.
Chen C-P et al. Screening of Taiwanese drugs for antibacterial activity
against Steptococcus mutans. ] Ethnopharmacol 1989; 27: 285-295.

----- PAGE 396 -----
26

27

28

Guerin J-C, Reveillere H-P. Antifungal activity of plant extracts used
in therapy. II. Study of 40 plant extracts against 9 fungi species. Ann
Pharm Franc 1985; 43: 77-81.

Lyckander IM, Malterud KE. Lipophilic flavonoids from Orthosiphon
spicatus prevent oxidative inactivation of 15-lipoxygenase.
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1996; 54: 239-246.

Du Dat D et al. Studies on the individual and combined diuretic
effects of four Vietnamese traditional herbal remedies (Zea mays,

29

30

Java Tea

Imperata cylindrica, Plantago major and Orthosiphon stamineus). J

Ethnopharmacol 1992; 36: 225-231.

Nirdnoy M, Muangman V. Effects of Folia orthosiphonis on urinary
stone promoters and inhibitors. J Med Assoc Thailand 1991; 74: 319-
321.

Tiktinsky OL, Bablumyan YA. The therapeutic effect of Java tea and
Equisetum arvense in patients with uratic diathesis. Urol Nefrol 1983;
48: 47-50.

----- PAGE 397 -----
Juniper

juniper. There is evidence that the berries are abortifacient
and since this is believed not to be due to the oil there must
be other toxic constituents present. In view of this, use of
juniper should not exceed levels specified in food legislation.
Juniper is contra-indicated during pregnancy and should not
be used during lactation.

Species (Family)

Juniperus communis L. (Cupressaceae)

Synonym(s)

Baccae Juniperi, Common Juniper, Geniévre, Wacholderbeeren,
Zimbro

Part(s) Used
Fruit (berry)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007?

Complete German Commission E@)
ESCOP 20030”)

Martindale 35th edition'**?

Ph Eur 20078

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G58 and G62.

Acids Diterpene acids, ascorbic acid and glucuronic acid.

Flavonoids Amentoflavone,'!
and various glycosides.

quercetin, isoquercitrin, apigenin

Tannins —Proanthocyanidins (condensed), gallocatechin and
epigallocatechin.”

Volatile oils 0.2-3.42%. Primarily monoterpenes (about 58%)
including o&-pinene, myrcene and sabinene (major), and camphene,
camphor, 1,4-cineole, p-cymene, o&- and y-cadinene, limonene, B-
pinene, Y-terpinene, terpinen-4-ol, terpinyl acetate, o-thujene,
borneol; sesquiterpenes including caryophyllene, epoxydihydro-
caryophyllene and B-elemem-7a-ol.°®

Other constituents Geijerone (Cy) terpenoid), junionone

(monocyclic cyclobutane monoterpenoid),’ desoxypodophyllo-
toxin (lignan),'® resins and sugars.

Food Use

Juniper berries are widely used as a flavouring component in gin.
Juniper is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (fruit N2, leaf and wood N3). Category N2
indicates that the berries can be added to foodstuffs in small
quantities, with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product. Category N3 indicates that there
is insufficient information available for an adequate assessment of
potential toxicity to be made." Previously, in the USA, extracts
and oils of juniper were permitted for food use.‘°°)

Herbal Use

The German Commission E approved use for dyspepsia.
Juniper is stated to possess diuretic, antiseptic, carminative,
stomachic and antirheumatic properties. Traditionally, it has been
used for cystitis, flatulence, colic, and applied topically for
rheumatic pains in joints or muscles.(C? 7°

(G3)

Monoterpenes
a-pinene B-pinene sabinene terpin-4-ol
Sesquiterpenes

a-cadinene #-cadinene

Flavonoids OH

OH O
amentoflavone

Figure 1 Selected constituents of juniper.

----- PAGE 398 -----
Figure 2

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal
reference texts are given below.

Dried ripe fruits 100 mL as an infusion (1:20 in boiling water)

three times daily.'©”

Fruit 1-2 g or equivalent three times daily; 2-10 g (equivalent to
20-100 mg of volatile oil).(@?

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”

Tincture 1-2 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Pharmacological Actions

Pharmacological actions that have been documented for juniper
are primarily associated with the volatile oil components.

In vitro and animal studies

The volatile oil is stated to possess diuretic, gastrointestinal
antiseptic and irritant properties. 'C*)

The diuretic activity of juniper has been attributed to the
volatile oil component, terpinen-4-ol, which is reported to
increase the glomerular filtration rate. Terpenin-4-ol is no
longer thought to be irritant to the kidneys.'°”

An antifertility effect has been described for a juniper extract,
administered to rats (300 or 500mg, by mouth) on days 1-7 of
pregnancy.” An abortifacient effect was also noted at both doses
when the extract was administered on days 14-16 of pregnancy.”
No evidence of teratogenicity was reported. Anti-implantation
activity has been reported as 60-70%'® and as being dose
dependent.” Juniper is reported to have both a significant”

no“ antifertility effect. A uterine stimulant activity has been

(G30)

” and

documented for the volatile oil.

A potent and non-toxic inhibition of the cytopathogenic effects
of herpes simplex virus type 1 in primary human amnion cell
culture has been described for a juniper extract.°' The active

Juniper 387

component isolated from the active fraction was identified as a
lignan, desoxypodophyllotoxin. Antiviral activities documented
for the volatile oil have also been partly attributed to the flavonoid
amentoflavone."”
Anti-inflammatory activity of 60% compared to 45% for the
indometacin control has been reported for juniper berry
extract.(1)
rats (100 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg respectively) one hour before eliciting
foot oedema.
A transient hypertensive effect followed by a more prolonged
hypotensive effect has been reported for a juniper extract in rats
(25 mg/kg, intravenous injection)."”
A fungicidal effect against Penicillium notatum has been
documented.”
Astringent activity is generally associated with tannins, which
have been documented as components of juniper. An aqueous
decoction of the berries has a hypoglycaemic effect in rats.“ In
rats, oral administration of an aqueous infusion (5 mL) increased
chloride ion secretion by 119% and by 45% in similar experiments
with rabbits.'0”)

Both test and control were administered orally to

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for juniper and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

The volatile oil is reported to be generally non-sensitising and
non-phototoxic, although slightly irritant when applied externally
to human and animal skin.*"°®

Dermatitic reactions have been recognised with juniper and
positive patch test reactions have been documented.’ °° The
latter are attributed to the irritant nature of the juniper extract.)
Adverse effects following external application of the essential oil

are described as burning, erythema, inflammation with blisters
(G22)

and oedema.

Preclinical data

The acute toxicity of juniper has been investigated in rats who
were administered extracts for seven days. An oral dose of
2.5 g/kg was tolerated with no mortalities or side-effects noted. A
dose of 3 g/kg induced hypothermia and mild diarrhoea in 10-
30% of animals.“ An LDso value (mice, intraperitoneal
injection) has been stated as 3 g/kg." There is evidence from

Figure 3 Juniper — dried drug substance (fruit).

----- PAGE 399 -----
Juniper

preclinical studies that juniper has antifertility and abortifacient
effects (see Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Juniper is contra-indicated in individuals with acute or chronic
inflammation of the kidney.‘©”

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of juniper to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that juniper has diuretic and hypogly-
caemic effects.

Pregnancy and lactation A juniper fruit extract has exhibited
abortifacient, antifertility and anti-implantation activities (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies). In view of
this, juniper is contra-indicated in pregnancy.'C” °°) Juniper
should not be used during lactation.

France: Depuratum; Mediflor Tisane Antirhumatismale No
2. Germany: Amara-Tropfen. Italy: Broncosedina. South
Africa: Amara. Switzerland: Heparfelien; Kernosan Heidelber-
ger Poudre; Tisane pour les reins et la vessie. UK: Backache;
Watershed. USA: Natural Herbal Water Tablets; Water Pill.

1

2

14

1s

References

Chandler RE. An inconspicuous but insidious drug. Rev Pharm Can
1986; 563-566.

Friedrich H, Engelshowe R. Tannin producing monomeric substances
in Juniperus communis. Planta Med 1978; 33: 251-257.

Wagner H, Wolff P, eds. New Natural Products and Plant Drugs with
Pharmacological, Biological or Therapeutical Activity. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1977.

Fenaroli's Handbook of Flavor Ingredients, 2nd edn. Boca Raton:
CRC Press, 1975.

Thomas AF, Ozainne M. 'Junionone' [1-(2,2-Dimethylcyclobutyl)but-
1-en-3-one], the first vegetable monocyclic cyclobutane
monoterpenoid. J C § Chem Commun 1973; 746.

Markkanen T et al. Antiherpetic agent from juniper tree

(Juniperus communis), its purification, identification, and testing in
primary human amnion cell cultures. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1981; 7:
691-697.

Agrawal OP et al. Antifertility effects of fruits of Juniperus communis.
Planta Med 1980; 40 (Suppl. Suppl.): 98-101.

Prakash AO e¢ al. Anti-implantation activity of some indigenous
plants in rats. Acta Eur Fertil 1985; 16: 441-448.

Prakash AO. Biological evaluation of some medicinal plant extracts
for contraceptive efficacy. Contracept Deliv Syst 1984; 5: 9.
Marrkanen T. Antiherpetic agent(s) from juniper tree (Juniperus
communis). Preliminary communication. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1981; 7:
69-73.

Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
antiinflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

Lasheras B et al. Etude pharmacologique préliminaire de Prunus
spinosa L. Amelanchier ovalis Medikus, Juniperus communis L. et
Urtica dioica L. Plant Méd Phytothér 1986; 20: 219-226.
Hejtmankova N et al. The antifungal effects of some Cupressaceae.
Acta Univ Palacki Olomuc Fac Med 1973; 60: 15-20.

Sanchez de Medina F et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of Juniper berries.
Planta Med 1994; 60: 197-200.

Mathias CGT et al. Plant dermatitis — patch test results (1975-78).
Note on Juniperus extract. Contact Dermatitis 1979; 5: 336-337.

----- PAGE 400 -----
- Kava

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of kava is well documented (see Constituents)
and there is strong evidence that the kavalactone constituents
are responsible for the observed pharmacological activities.

Randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials
of certain standardised kava preparations have shown
beneficial effects on measures of anxiety, although because of
methodological limitations of some studies, further well-
designed trials are required to confirm the anxiolytic effects.
Also, most trials have been carried out with one particular
standardised kava extract (containing 70% kavalactones) and
it cannot be assumed that the effects shown in these studies
will be produced by other kava extracts. Clinical trials
involving patients with anxiety have also compared well-
defined standardised kava preparations with certain standard
anxiolytic agents. While these studies have suggested that the
kava extracts tested may be as effective as certain standard
anxiolytic agents, further investigation is necessary. Data from
pharmacological studies provide supporting evidence for the
anxiolytic effects of kava, although many of the other
traditional uses of kava (see Herbal use) have not been tested
scientifically. Many pharmacological studies involving
individual kavalactones have investigated the effects of the
synthetic kavalactone (+)-kavain, rather than the natural
compound (-+)-kavain. Some studies have used both the
natural compound and the synthetic racemate and have
reported a lack of stereospecific effect.

In placebo-controlled clinical trials, standardised kava
extracts generally have been well tolerated; reported adverse
events have been mild and transient and similar in nature and
frequency to those reported for placebo. Clinical trials,
however, can provide only limited information on the safety
profile of a medicine. Spontaneous reports of hepatotoxicity
associated with the use of kava preparations have arisen since
the year 2000. Although the risk of serious liver toxicity is
thought to be low, the reaction is idiosyncratic. Against this
background, kava was prohibited in unlicensed medicines in
the UK in 2003, and in the EU, all licensed kava products were
removed from the market. In 2005 in the UK, evidence
relating to hepatotoxicity associated with kava was reviewed
and the Expert Working Group’s report concluded that there
was insufficient new evidence to support a change in the
regulatory position, i.e. the inclusion of kava in unlicensed
medicines remains prohibited. Regulatory action has also
been taken in Canada and Australia (voluntary recall), and in
the USA, consumers were warned of the risk of liver toxicity
with use of kava-containing products.

Other adverse reactions documented for kava preparations
include an ichthyosiform (scaly, non-inflammatory) skin
condition, termed ‘kava dermopathy’, usually associated with
the traditional method of preparing and ingesting kava (see
Side-effects, Toxicity, Skin reactions).

In view of the documented pharmacological actions of kava
and in view of the reported inhibitory activity against certain
cytochrome P450 drug metabolising enzymes, the potential

for preparations of kava root/rhizome to interfere with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered.

Use of kava should be avoided during pregnancy and
breastfeeding.

Although kava is prohibited in the UK and several other
countries, individuals may obtain kava preparations over the
Internet. Healthcare professionals should be aware that
patients may be taking herbal medicinal products containing
kava. Healthcare professionals should enquire about use of
kava in patients presenting with symptoms of hepatotoxicity
(see Side-effects, Toxicity, Hepatotoxicity). Adverse reactions
have been reported in association with use of ‘herbal ecstasy’
tablets, which often contain ephedrine alkaloids, although
healthcare professionals should be aware that some products
have been stated to contain kava.

Species (Family)

Piper methysticum Forst. f. (Piperaceae)
Fourteen different varieties are used throughout Oceania
(Polynesia, Melanesia, Micronesia).

Related species

Cultivars of P. methysticum have been developed in some Pacific
Islands from Piper wichmannii C. DC (syn: Piper erectum C. DC,
Piper arbuscula Trelease).°>»

Synonym(s)

Intoxicating Pepper, Kava-kava, Kawa, Kawa-kawa, Macropiper
methysticum (G. Forst.) Hook. & Arn., M. latifolium Migq.,
Waghi, Wati, Bari (Irian Jaya), Koniak, Keu, Oyo (Papua New
Guinea)

Part(s) Used

Peeled dry rhizome (sometimes referred to incorrectly as the root)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHMA 2003'°°

BHP 19960”?

Complete German Commission E 199g)
Expanded German Commission E 2000‘
Martindale 35th edition'*”

WHO volume 2 20020”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Prohibited in unlicensed medicines in the UK.

Constituents

Kavalactones Kawalactones, kavapyrones, 2-pyrones, 5-lactones
with styryl or dihydrostyryl substituents.“ %*?® Dried

rhizomes should contain at least 3.5% kavalactones'‘®
good-quality material 5.5-8.3%." Ethanol-water extracts con-

and

----- PAGE 401 -----
Kava

tain 30% kavalactones, whereas acetone—water extracts contain
70%. The kavalactones occur as a complex mixture of at least
18 compounds,” which are of three main types: styryl enolide
pyrones (e.g. kawain (= kavain), dimethoxykawain, methysticin),
styryl dienolide pyrones (e.g. yangonin, desmethoxyyangonin),
and dihydrostyryl enolide pyrones (e.g. dihydrokawain, dimethoxy-
dihydrokawain, dihydromethysticin). The four major kavalactones
of the rhizome are kawain (1-2%), dihydrokawain (0.6-1%),
methysticin (1.2-2%) and dihydromethysticin (0.5-0.8%).'C
Smaller quantities (<0.1%) of dimeric kavalactones (e.g. trux-
yangonins I, II, III) have also been isolated.»

Alkaloids/amides Cepharadione A (aporphine-type) is a minor
component (4kg yielded 1mg)."' Small quantities of N-
cinnamoylpyrrolidine and its O-methoxy analogue are also
present. !2"19)

Chalcones Flavokawains A, B and C.?!®)

Flavonoids Pinostrobin, 5,7-dimethoxyflavanone.'®

Kavalactones

Steroids Sitosterol, stigmasterol, stigmastanol.'~ '?)

(3)

Esters Bornyl cinnamate?) and bornyl 3,4-methylenedioxycin-

namate.‘"?

Aliphatic alcohols Docosan-1-ol, dodecan-1-ol, eicosan-1-ol,
hexacosan-l-ol, hexadecan-1-ol, octadecan-1-ol, -tetradecanol,
transphytol.

Other constituents Cinnamylideneacetone,) long-chain fatty
sids,
acids.

Other parts of the plant

Stem peelings may be included as raw material in kava commerce
due to the high demand for the rhizome; leaves and branches are
used in folk medicine. Pipermethystine (a piperidone amide) is
present in stem peelings (traces to 0.85%).') 30,40-Epoxy-5B-
pipermethysticin (0.93%) was isolated from stem peelings of one
cultivar, but was absent from 10 other cultivars, and the related

Ri RR
kawain H H
dimethoxykawain OCH; OCH3
methysticin —OCH,0O—
OCH;
S
S fe) [e)
CHO
yangonin
Flavonoids
R! R?
pinostrobin OH OCH;
5,7-dimethoxyflavanone OCH; OCH3
Amides
fe}
R
pipermethystine

fo)
—N )
—n >.
[o} lity
°

R! R?
dihydrokawain H H
dimethoxydihydrokawain OCH3 OCH;
dihydromethysticin —OCH,0—
R
OAc

Ac

3a,4a-epoxy-5f-pipermethystine

awaine
= OH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of kava.

----- PAGE 402 -----
alkaloid awaine was present in the unopened leaves of 11 cultivars
(0.16-2.67%). 7,8-Dihydrokawain, 7,8-dihydromethysticin and
5,6,7,8-tetrahydroyangonin are present in stem peelings.

Other species

Kavalactones occur in PR. wichmanni and P. sanctum. The latter
species contains several cinnamoyl butenolides (piperolides), e.g.
methylenedioxypiperolide and 7,8-epoxypiperolide.

Food Use

Kava is used as an intoxicant drink, on either informal or
ceremonial occasions, by Pacific Islanders e.g. from Fiji, Samoa
and Tonga.'"” Some claim that it has a pleasant, cooling,
aromatic taste with numbing on the tongue and is stimulating,
while others refer to great bitterness with a burning sensation in
the mouth. It is reputed to reduce fatigue, allay anxieties and
produce a cheerful and sociable attitude. Unpleasant effects
reported include dizzin sleeping disorders, stomach pains,
lethargy and skin reactions. These reported effects are taken from
a wide geographical area and any differences may be due to a
number of reasons including plant varieties or growing conditions.

Herbal Use

In many parts of the Pacific it is believed that kava is beneficial to
health by soothing nervous conditions, inducing relaxation and
sleep, counteracting fatigue, and reducing weight. Medicinal uses
also include treatment of urinary tract infections, asthma,
rheumatism, headache, fever, gonorrhoea and syphilis, and use

‘“7C39 The medicinal use of kava is

as a diuretic and stomachic.
now widespread, e.g. across Europe, North America and
Australia, where it is used to treat anxiety, nervous tension,
restlessness, mild depression and menopausal symptoms.'@? “7
G50, G56,G60,G67) Te has also been adopted by the Aboriginal
community in parts of Australia as an intoxicating drink."
The German Commission E recommended kava for the

treatment of nervous anxiety, stress and restlessness.“ Tradi-

Figure 2 Kava (Piper methysticum).

jure 3— Kava — dried drug substance (rhizome).

tional uses listed for kava rhizome in other standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts include cystitis, urethritis, infection
or inflammation of the genitourinary tract, rheumatism and,

topically, for joint pains.(C%

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for treatment of anxiety
recommended in older and contemporary standard herba
reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome 1.5-3g per day.@*

kavalactones per day.‘

) Equivalent to 60-120 mg

Liquid extract 3-6 mL per day (1:2 liquid extract, unspecifie
solvent).

Standardised preparations
day.(@ 60 mg kavalactones 2-4 times per day in tablet form.
60-120 mg kavalactones per day,‘

Kava exists in numerous varieties of differing potency”) ani

100-200 mg kavalactones per
(G50)

only preparations with standardised kavalactone content shoul
be used for medicinal purposes. Medicinal extracts prepared with
ethanol-water yield dry extracts with about 30% kavalactones
content, whereas acetone-water prepared dry extracts contain
about 70% kavalactones.'°*

Dosages (adults) used in clinical trials have varied widely, but
typically are those equivalent to 60-240 mg kavalactones daily by
oral administration in divided doses (see Pharmacological
Actions, Clinical studies). Duration of use of kava extracts
generally should not exceed three months.‘ “°

Pharmacological Actions

Kava has been investigated mostly for its anxiolytic effects
although other central nervous s}

onvulsant and analgesic properties, and other effects have been

ystem activities, such as antic-

documented following preclinical studies. The kavalactones are
believed to be the major active constituents of kava.

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics Uptake of the kavalactones kavain, dihydro-
kavain, yangonin and desmethoxyyangonin into brain tissue has
been documented following intraperitoneal administration of each
of these compounds at a dose of 100 mg/kg to mice." Maximum
concentrations of kavain and dihydrokavain were noted five
minutes after administration, and these compounds were rapidly

----- PAGE 403 -----
Kava

eliminated. In contrast, yangonin and desmethoxyyangonin were
eliminated more slowly. All four compounds were also detected in
mouse brain tissue following intraperitoneal administration of
in 120 mg/kg (containing kavain 36.7%, dihydrokavain
19.2%, yangonin 15% and desmethoxyyangonin 13.3%), although
the concentrations of kavain and yangonin were higher than was
noted following individual administration of these constituents.

kava res

Central nervous system activities Anxiolytic properties for kava
extract and isolated kavalactones have been documented in an
experimental model of anxiety, the chick social separation-stress
procedure. In a series of experiments, kava extract (containing
30% kavalactones; 30 mg/mL per kg body weight), dihydrokavain
(30 mg/mL per kg body weight) and chlordiazepoxide (5 mg/mL
per kg body weight) administered intraperitoneally 30 minutes
before testing significantly reduced the separation-stress effect (p
< 0.05 for each substance).''®) However, the isolated kavalactones
kavain, methysticin, dihydromethysticin, yangonin and des-
methoxyyangonin administered according to the same regimen
did not have a statistically significant effect. Further work using
the same experimental model confirmed these findings and found
that total kavalactone content was not predictive of outcome, but
that a dihydrokavain content of at least 15% was necessary for
anxiolytic activity.” In this study, the kava samples and fractions
that demonstrated anxiolytic activity were reported to be without
sedative effects.

In contrast, previous studies have reported sedative effects for
ava extract. In mice, kava extract (containing 7% kavalactones)
at doses of at least SOmg/kg body weight (by intraperitoneal
injection) reduced spontaneous motility to a greater extent than
did control.°” The effect was enhanced by the addition of (+)-
avain (ratio of kava extract to (+)-kavain, 1: 0.12), although this
compound had no sedative effect when administered alone. In
another experimental model, kava extract 100 mg/kg body weig!
and (+)-kavain 12 mg/kg body weight, each administered alone,
ad no sedative effect, whereas a combination of the two
substances significantly reduced amphetamine (Smg/kg body
weight subcutaneously)-induced hypermotility. Sedative effects
ave also been documented for an ethanolic extract of kava
rhizome (containing 50% kavalactones) 100 mg/kg body weig]
administered by gastric tube and 200mg/kg body weight
intraperitoneally in the amphetamine-induced hypermotility test
and barbiturate-induced sleeping time, respectively.?”

In studies utilising the conditioned avoidance response test in
rats, an experimental model used to test for antipsychotic activity,
aqueous (kavalactone-free) kava extract 30-500 mg/kg body
weight intraperitoneally had no statistically significant effect.”
in at doses of 125 mg/kg
intraperitoneally significantly inhibited the conditioned avoidance
response, although to a lesser extent than did chlorpromazine and
haloperidol.

In cats, a kava extract in arachis oil (50-100 mg kavalactones
per kg body weight intraperitoneally) and the individual
kavalactone (-)-kavain (10-50mg per kg body weight intraper-
itoneally) were reported to be active in the amygdala complex
region of the brain.?>)

Receptor binding studies with kava extracts and individual
kavalactones have reported conflicting results.
experiments found that kava resin and individual kavalactones
displayed only weak activity on GABAg- and no activity on
GABA,-binding sites in rat brain membranes in vitro, and that
there was no significant effect on benzodiazepine receptors
following intraperitoneal administration of kava resin 150 mg/kg

3

3

However, administration of kava r

One series of

body weight to mice.?” A marked effect of kavain on GABA has
also been stated to be unlikely) By contrast, a kavalactone-
enriched ethanol/aqueous extract of kava rhizome (containing
58% kavalactones and 42% other lipid-soluble compounds)
increased the density of GABA-binding sites in certain brain
Other experiments have shown concentration- and
structure-dependent effects of kavalactones on binding of bicucul-
line methochloride (BMC) to GABA, receptors from rat cortex
preparations.?” (+)-Kavain, (+)-methysticin and (+)-dihydro-
methysticin enhanced BMC binding by 18-28% at a concentration
of 0.1pmol/L, whereas (+)-dihydrokavain did so only at a
concentration of 10 mol/L, and yangonin at a concentration of
1pumol/L; desmethoxyyangonin had no effect. Further radio-
receptor assays demonstrated that these six kavalactones had no
effect on the binding of flunitrazepam to benzodiazepine receptors
in rat cortex preparations, indicating that the influence of
kavalactones on GABA, receptors was not based upon an
interaction with benzodiazepine receptors.””

Other in vitro studies have investigated the effects of kava
extracts and individual kavalactones on other transmitters in the
central nervous system (CNS). A kavalactone-rich kava rhizome
extract (containing 68% kavalactones) was a reversible inhibitor
of monoamine-oxidase B (MAO-B) in intact and disrupted
platelets (inhibitory concentration ICso 24 tmol/L and 1.2 mol/
L, respectively), although there were differences in MAO-B
inhibition among the different synthetic kavalactones with
desmethoxyyangonin and (+)-methysticin being the most potent
inhibitors.°*) Differences between kavalactones in inhibition of
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) uptake in synaptosomes prepared
from rat cerebral cortex and hippocampus have also been
documented: (+)- and (+)-kavain gave approximately equal values
and both were more potent inhibitors than (+)-methysticin,
although none of the compounds inhibited serotonin uptake.?” It
has been suggested, following in vitro studies involving ipsapirone
(a serotonin-1, receptor agonist)-induced field potential changes
in guinea-pig hippocampal slices, that kavain and dihydromethys-
ticin may modulate serotonin-1, receptor activity, although
further work is needed to identify the precise mechanism for

In vivo studies in rats administered a single oral dose of (+)-
dihydromethysticin 100 mg/kg body weight or fed (+)-kavain in
the diet over a 78-day period showed that neither kavalactone
regimen affected brain tissue concentrations of dopamine and
serotonin, although since extracellular neurotransmitter concen-
trations were not measured in this study, receptor-mediated effects
of kavalactones on dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons could
not be excluded." In vivo (rats), kava extract 20 and 120 mg/kg
body weight intraperitoneally increased dopamine concentrations
sus accumbens, although a dose of 220 mg/kg body
weight led to an initial decrease followed by an increase above
baseline values.” It was suggested that this ceiling effect may be
due to yangonin which may have dopamine antagonist activity.

The development of physiological tolerance to an aqueous
extract of kava administered intraperitoneally to mice has been
documented, although there was no clear evidence of development
of physiological or learned tolerance to kava resin.°»

regions.?°

in the nuc

Anticonvulsant and neuroprotective activities Studies
described in the older literature have documented anticonvulsant
: ; (34, G50)

effects for kavalactones in several experimental models.
The anticonvulsant properties of (+)-methysticin im vitro may
arise from a direct membrane action on the excitability of
34) ays have shown that (+)-methysti

neurons, and in vitro

----- PAGE 404 -----
(36 Bt

kavain

cin, (+)-kavain® and the synthetic kavalactone
*® appear to interact with voltage-dependent sodium channels,
and that (+)-kavain also interacts with voltage-dependent calcium
*) Inhibition by (+)-kavain of veratridine-activated

voltage-dependent sodium ion channels in synaptosomes from
(38)

channels.‘
rat cerebral cortex, and veratridine-induced increase in
intracellular calcium ion concentrations has been described
following in vitro studies utilising rat cerebrocortical synapto-
somes, °”)
following (+)-kavain administration has been reported both in
vitro®) and in vivo in freely moving rats.“ Substances which

Reduction in veratridine-induced glutamate release

reduce extracellular glutamate concentrations are of interest for
their potential as anticonvulsant agents.

Some of the mechanisms describe
certain kavalactones may also be important in neuroprotective
effects reported for the synthetic kavalactone (+)-kavain. For
example, the role of sodium-ion channel blockade in the
neuroprotective effect of (+)-kavain against anoxia in vitro has
been described,“ and (4)-kavain (50, 100 or 200mg/kg
intraperitoneally) has been shown to protect nigrostriatal
dopaminergic neurons against 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahy-
dropyridine (MPTP)-induced toxicity in mice, an experimental
model of Parkinson's disease.” A neuroprotective effect against

above documented for

ischaemic brain damage in mice and rats has been demonstrated
for kava extract (WS-1490 containing 70% kavalactones) and the
individual kavalactones methysticin and dihydromethysticin, but
not for kavain, dihydrokavain and yangonin. Kava extract 150 mg/
kg given orally as an emulsion (polyethyleneglycol 400 and water;
20:80) one hour before experimentally induced ischaemia, and
methysticin and dihydromethysticin (both 10 and 30mg/kg
intraperitoneally 15 minutes before induction of ischaemia),
compared with control, significantly reduced the size of the
infarct area in mice brains (p < 0.05). In rats, kava extract
administered according to the same regimen as used in mice
significantly reduced infarct volume compared with control (p <

0.05).

Analgesic activity Antinociceptive activity in vivo (mice) in the
tail immersion test has been documented for kava resin (150 mg/kg
intraperitoneally) and for the individual kavalactones dihydroka-
wain, dihydromethysticin, kavain and methysticin at doses of 150,
275, 300 and 360 mg/kg (intraperitoneally), respectively, compared
with controls.” Yangonin, tetrahydroyangonin, desmethoxyyan-
gonin and dehydroyangonin had no or only a weak effect. Both
kava resin (200 mg/kg, orally) and aqueous kava extract (250 mg/
kg, intraperioneally) displayed antinociceptive activity in the
acetic acid-induced writhing test, also in mice. In further tests
using both models, naloxone failed to reverse the antinociceptive
effects of kava resin or aqueous kava extract, indicating that
analgesic activity of kava is achieved via non-opiate pathways.“
Analgesic activity of dihydrokawain and dihydromethysticin has
been reported previously.)

Other activities Kava extract has been reported to have a muscle
relaxant effect in isolated frog muscles, thought to be due to a
direct effect on muscle contractility.“ Reductions in contractions
of isolated guinea-pig ileum induced by carbachol and by raised
extracellular potassium ion concentrations have been documented
for the synthetic kavalactone (+)-kavain, although the compound
had no effect on caffeine-induced contractions of ileum strips or
on calcium ion-induced contractions of skinned muscles.” (+)-
Kavain has also been reported to relax maximally contracted
murine airway smooth muscle and to reduce carbachol- and
potassium chloride-induced airway smooth mus (48)

> contraction.

Kava

Further investigation indicated that nitric oxide and cyclooxygen-
ase-mediated events did not play a role in kavain-induced
relaxation.

In contrast, a previous study found that (+)-kavain inhibited
human platelet aggregation in a concentration-dependent manner
in vitro.” The formation of prostaglandin Ey and thromboxane
By was also inhibited in a concentration-dependent manner,
suggesting that (+)-kavain is an inhibitor of cyclooxygenase.

An ethanol extract of kava and the isolated kavalactones
dehydrokavain, dihydrokavain, kavain, yangonin and methysticin
inhibited tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFa) release in vitro
from BALB/3T3 cells incubated with okadaic acid and suppressed
lipopolysaccharide-induced TNFa production in vivo in diabetic
mice following intraperitoneal administration.”

Antifungal activity against several microorganisms, including

Candida albicans, has been described for a 10% aqueous kava
(51)

extract.

Clinical studies

Clinical trials of kava preparations have focused on investigating
anxiolytic effects in various patient groups. Several trials have
assessed effects in healthy volunteers, and others have explored the
effects of kavain, a constituent of kava.

A Cochrane systematic review of monopreparations of kava for

the treatment of anxiety included 12 randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trials involving a total of 700 participants.”
All but one of these trials tested the effects of a standardised (70%
kavalactones) preparation of kava rhizome (WS-1490) at various
losages but typically equivalent to 60-240 mg kavalactones daily
for four weeks. Only two trials were conducted for longer than
four weeks; both used a dose equivalent to 210mg kavalactones
aily given for eight weeks in one study and 24 weeks in the
other.°”
Seven of the 12 trials, involving a total of 380 participants, used
the total score on the Hamilton Anxiety Scale as their primary
outcome measure, and provided data suitable for meta-analysis.
Meta-analysis showed a reduction in anxiety scale scores in kava
recipients, compared with placebo recipients (weighted mean
: 3.9; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.1-7.7; p = 0.05).
All except one of these trials included participants with non-
psychotic anxiety; one study involved women with anxiety
associated with the climacteric (perimenopausal period). Remov-
ing this trial and the trial that did not assess the kava extract WS-
1490 from the meta-analysis indicated a statistically significant
reduction in anxiety scores for kava recipients compared with
placebo recipients (weighted mean difference: 3.4; 95% CI, 0.5—
6.45 p = 0.02).

The five studies not included in the meta-analysis reported
statistically significant improvements for kava recipients, com-
pared with placebo recipients, on outcomes (e.g. response rates,
reduction in scores on various anxiety scales). These five
studies were heterogeneous in that they involved different patient
groups, such as women with anxiety associated with the
perimenopausal period, individuals with preoperative anxiety,
and outpatients with neurotic anxiety. Consequently, dosage
regimens of kava varied widely (e.g. equivalent to kavalactones
60mg in the evening and 1 hour preoperatively, to 140mg
kavalactones daily for four weeks).

The conclusions of the review were that kava extract is an
effective symptomatic treatment for anxiety, but that limitations
of the studies included meant that further rigorous trials were
needed.” A similar meta-analysis, which included six rando-

ifferenc

----- PAGE 405 -----
Kava

mised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials assessing the effects
of the kava extract WS-1490 in patients with non-psychotic
anxiety disorders reached a similar conclusion.°*

Some other research has been published, but has added little to
the evidence base because of methodological issues. In a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial,
61 patients with sleep disturbances associated with anxiety,
sness states of non-psychotic origin received a
kava extract (WS-1490) 200mg daily, or placebo, for four
6% At the end of the study, statistically significant
improvements in the two primary outcome measures quality of
sleep and recuperative effect after sleep were observed for kava
recipients, compared with the placebo group (p = 0.007 and 0.018,
respectively; intention-to-treat analysi

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial con-
ducted entirely over the Internet, 391 adults who scored at least 40
points on the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) State scale and
who reported having sleeping problems on at least two occasions
received capsules containing kava extract (each containing total
kavalactones 100 mg) one three times daily, two capsules contain-
ing valerian extract (each containing valerenic acids 3.2 mg; no
further details of preparation provided) one hour before bedtime,
or placebo, for 28 days.” At the end of the study, there were no
statistically significant differences between kava and placebo with
respect to the primary outcome measures changes from baseline in
STAI-state anxiety scores and Insomnia Severity Index scores.

For example, a study involving 68 perimenopausal women
reported that kava extract 100mg (containing 55% kavain) or
200 mg daily improved anxiety compared with no treatment, but
participants were not masked as to their treatment allocation.

Results from some clinical studies have suggested that kava
extracts may be as effective as certain standard anxiolytic agents,
although this requires further investigation and confirmation. In a
six-week, randomised, double-blind trial involving 172 patients
with non-psychotic anxiety, the standardised kava extract WS-
1490 (containing 70% kavalactones) 100 mg three times daily was
as effective as oxazepam 5 mg and bromazepam 3 mg, each taken
three times daily.°?) Another randomised, double-blind, multi-
centre trial, involving 129 outpatients with generalised anxiety
disorder, reported that the kava extract LI-150 400 mg (standar-
dised to 30% kavapyrones = 120mg) each morning for eight
weeks was as effective as buspirone Smg twice daily and
opipramol (a tricyclic antidepressant) 50 mg twice daily.‘

A randomised, placebo-controlled study involving 40 post-
menopausal women with anxiety assessed the effects of a kava
extract 100 mg daily (containing 55% kavain) given in addition to
hormone replacement therapy (oestrogens plus progestogens or
oestrogens alone).°" It was reported that women who received
kava showed greater reductions in anxiety scores than women who
received placebo. However, the study had various methodological
limitations.

In a randomised, controlled study involving 54 healthy
volunteers, kava extract (LI-150, equivalent to 120mg kavalac-
tones; 2 = 18) and valerian extract 600 mg (LI-156; 1 = 18), taken
daily for one week, significantly reduced systolic blood pressure
following mental stress tests, compared with baseline values,
whereas no such reduction was observed in the no-treatment
control group (p < 0.001 for both kava and valerian). No effect
on diastolic blood pressure was recorded for either herbal
preparation, and valerian, but not kava, appeared to reduce heart
rate following mental stress tests. These findings require
confirmation in placebo-controlled studies, and their relevance
to everyday stress needs to be investigated.

se!

tension and restle:

weeks.

Several other randomised, double-blind, controlled trials
involving patients with anxiety have compared the effects of the
synthetic kavalactone, (-)-kavain, administered at a dose of
200 mg three times daily for 3-4 weeks, with those of placebo,»
or benzodiazepines, such as oxazepam.? One trial assessed the
effects of kavain, or placebo, 200mg three times daily for three
weeks in 83 outpatients who had been treated with benzodiaze-
pines for at least six weeks and who were undergoing
benzodiazepine withdrawal. Generally, these studies have
reported beneficial effects for kavain, but typically have involved
only small numbers of patients.

A preliminary study involving healthy individuals assessed the
effects of a single 300mg dose of a kava extract on cognitive
performance and mood in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Some improvements in mood (in trait cheerful
participants only) and cognitive performance were observed
during the study, although further assessment of the effects of
kava on these parameters is required.

A case series described improvements after administration of a
kava extract (WS-1490) in extrapyramidal side-effects experienced
by 42 patients with various psychiatric diagnoses who were
receiving neuroleptic drugs. The hypothesis that kava extract
can reduce extrapyramidal side-effects requires testing in rigorous
randomised controlled trials.

Pharmacokinetics Little is known about the clinical pharmaco-
kinetics of kava preparations. Several metabolites of kavalactones
have been detected and identified in human urine following
ingestion of around 1L of kava (prepared by the traditional
method of aqueous extraction of kava rhizome) over 1 hour by
healthy male volunteers before sleeping.® Urine samples were
collected before sleeping and on rising in the morning. Kawain,
dihydrokawain, desmethoxyyangonin, tetrahydroyangonin, dihy-
dromethysticin, 11-methoxytetrahydroyangonin, —yangonin,
methysticin and dehydromethysticin were detected unchanged in
human urine; metabolic transformations observed included
reduction of the 3,4-double bond and/or demethylation of the 4-
methoxyl group of the kavalactone ring. The Cy) hydroxy
analogue of yangonin (12-hydroxy-12-desmethoxyyangonin) was
also detected, and it may have been formed by demethylation of
yangonin and/or C,) hydroxylation of desmethoxyyangonin.
Dihydroxylated metabolites of the kavalactones and products
from ring opening of the kavalactone ring were not detected.

Side-effects, Toxicity

In randomised, placebo-controlled trials involving different
patient groups with anxiety, kava extracts generally have been
well tolerated; adverse events reported, and their frequencies, are
similar to those reported for placebo. However, clinical trials have
the statistical power only to detect common, acute adverse effects.

Spontaneous reports of suspected adverse drug reactions
associated witl

kava preparations have raised concerns over
hepatotoxic reactions (see Hepatotoxicity).

A systematic review of eight placebo-controlled trials of kava
extracts administered at doses equivalent to 55-240 mg kavalac-
tones daily for two days to 24 weeks found that adverse events
reported for both kava and placebo were most commonly
gastrointestinal symptoms, tiredness, restlessness, tremor and
headache.” Three trials included in the review, one of which
tested kava extract 100mg daily (equivalent to 55mg kavalac-
tones) for 24 weeks,'°" reported that adverse events were not
observed in either the kava or placebo groups.

----- PAGE 406 -----
A similar finding was reported by a more recent Cochrane
systematic review of monopreparations of kava for the treatment
of anxiety (see Clinical studies).°” This review comprised seven
of the eight placebo-controlled trials from the earlier review”
(the other trial was excluded from the Cochrane review because it
tested kava extract in addition to hormone replacement ther-
apy)°? and five new trials.

Four of the trials, involving 30% of the total number of
participants in the trials included in the review, reported that
adverse events were not observed during treatment with kava
2) Randomised, double-blind clinical trials comparing
kava extracts with certain benzodiazepines and other anxiolytic
agents have also found kava to be well tolerated. In a six-week
trial involving 172 patients with non-psychotic anxiety, gastro-
intestinal disturbances occurred in one of 57 participants who
received WS-1490 100 mg three times daily (equivalent to 210 mg
kavalactones daily), whereas tiredness, vertigo and_ pruritus
occurred in seven of the remaining 115 participants who received
oxazepam Smg or bromazepam 3mg, both taken three times
daily.” In an eight-week trial involving 129 outpatients with
generalised anxiety disorder, 14 of 43 (33%) participants who
received the kava extract LI-150 400mg (standardised to 30%
kavalactones = 120 mg) each morning experienced adverse events,
compared with 10 (24%) and 11 (26%) participants who received
buspirone 5mg twice daily and opipramol 50mg twice daily,
respectively. A total of 27 adverse events was reported in the
kava group, compared with 16 and 14 for buspirone and
opipramol, respectively. Adverse events reported for kava included
upper respiratory tract infections, gastrointestinal disorders,
weight changes, skin reactions and tachycardia, all of which
were also reported for buspirone and/or opipramol.

These clinical trials and systematic reviews, however, provide
only limited evidence to support the safety of kava extracts since
they involved only small numbers of participants, involved
different patient groups, tested different doses of kava extract
(typically equivalent to 60-240 mg kavalactones daily), and most
were of relatively short duration, usually around four weeks.
Further, most trials investigated preparations of the kava extract
WS-1490, and other standardised extracts of kava and kava
preparations supplied by herbal medicine practitioners have
undergone considerably less assessment.

Two post-marketing surveillance studies published in the early
to mid-1990s involving patients treated in one study with WS-1490
150 mg daily (equivalent to 105 mg kavalactones; n = 4049) and in
the other with Antares 120 (equivalent to 120 mg kavalactones; n
= 3029) reported that the frequenc 2 1.5%
and 2.3%, respectively.” In both studies, adverse events
commonly reported were mild gastrointestinal disorders and
allergic reactions and, in the latter study, headaches and vertigo,
which stopped when kava treatment was discontinued. A rather
higher frequency of adverse events was reported during a post-
marketing surveillance study carried out in Brazil." Among 850
participants with anxiety who received WS-1490 100mg three
times daily (equivalent to 210mg kavalactones daily), 16.7%
reported adverse events, most commonly fatigue/tiredness, nausea,
confusion and gastrointestinal upset.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide. To the end of the year 2005, the WHO-
UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 91 reports,
describing a total of 189 adverse reactions, for products reported

extract.

of adverse events we

Kava

Table 1 Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 91) of suspected
adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Piper
methysticum preparations held in the Vigisearch database of the
World Health Organization’ s § Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the
period up to end of 2005(7""*

Body as a whole — general disorders. 16

Cardiovascular disorders, general. 1

Central and peripheral nervous system disorders. Including 15
dizziness (4); headache (4)

Gastrointestinal system disorders. Including abdominal 18
pain (4); nausea (6); vomiting (3)

Heart rate and rhythm disorders. Including tachycardia (3) 3
Liver and biliary system disorders. Including hepatic failure 55
(3); hepatic function abnormal (3); hepatitis (13);

hepatocellular damage (6); bilirubinaemia (4); jaundice
(8); hepatic enzymes increased (6)

Metabolic and nutritional disorders. 3
Musculo-skeletal system disorders. 1
Platelet, bleeding and clotting disorders. 3
Psychiatric disorders. Including anxiety (5) 15
Respiratory system disorders. Including dyspnoea (3) 7

Skin and appendages disorders. Including dermatitis (3); 41
pruritus (8); rash, erythematous (8); rash, maculopapular
(4); urticaria (6)

Urinary system disorders. Including face oedema (4) 5
Vision disorders. Including vision abnormal (4) 6
Total number of suspected adverse drug reactions 189

*Specific reactions described where n = 3 or more

Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database
held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to
origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information included in this report does not represent the
opinion of the World Health Organization

to contain P. methysticum only as the active ingredient (see Table
1).”” This number may include some of the case reports described
in the sections below. Reports originated from nine different
countries. The total number of reactions included reports
describing a total of 55 reactions associated with liver and biliary
system disorders (see Table 1), including three cases of hepatic
failure and two of hepatic coma. (These data were obtained from
the Vigisearch database held by the WHO Collaborating Centre
for International Drug Monitoring, Uppsala, Sweden. The
information is not homogeneous at least with respect to origin
or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information included in this report does not
represent the opinion of the World Health Organization.)

Hepatotoxicity

Clinical data None of the clinical trials and post-marketing
surveillance studies described above reported hepatotoxicity as an
observed adverse event, although not all studies carried out liver
function tests on participants. Seven of the 11 trials included in the
Cochrane review of the kava extract WS-1490 for the treatment of
anxiety (see Clinical studies) did involve monitoring participants!
liver function (e.g. serum aspartate transaminase and alanine

----- PAGE 407 -----
Kava

transaminase concentrations) and did not report any abnormal-
ities or clinically significant changes in values obtained.”

Over the years 2000 and 2001, a safety concern arose regarding
cases of hepatoxicity reported in association with the use of kava
extracts. The signal first emerged in Switzerland, following a
cluster of spontaneous reports to the medicines' regulatory
authority, and was strengthened a year or so later following
further spontaneous reports from Switzerland and Germany. By
July 2002, a total of 68 reports of liver toxicity ass
of kava had been received by regulatory authorities in Canada,
France, the UK and USA, as well as in Switzerland and
Germany,” and by the end of January 2005, 79 cases of liver
damage associated with use of kava had been identified world-
wide.'”» The severity of the liver damage described in the reports
varied from abnormal liver function test results to irreversible liver
failure and death; at least six patients received liver transplants,
one of whom, as well as at least two other individuals,

ociated with use

subsequently died.

Cases reported in the UK included two of raised liver function
test values in men aged 40 and 48 who had taken unspecified kava
preparations for three months and eight years, respectively.
Both stopped taking kava and their liver function test values
normalised. Another UK case related to a woman (age not stated)
who had taken kava 150 mg three times daily for two months, in
addition to fluoxetine, and who experienced jaundice and raised
liver function test values and was hospitalised for seven week:

In the UK, evidence relating to the hepatotoxicity associated
with kava was reviewed in 2005 in a public consultation and later
that year by the Expert Working Group set up to consider the
evidence. The Expert Working Group's report was published in
July 2006 and concluded that there was insufficient new evidence
to support a change in the regulatory position, hence the inclusion
of kava in unlicensed medicines in the UK remains prohibited.”
The report also identified several new questions and issues that
may be important with respect to hepatotoxicity of kava,
including the possibility that other alkaloid and/or amide
constituents may be present, and their possible contribution to
hepatotoxicity, and the need for a systematic evaluation of all
marketed kava products and their source material, and of the
variation in the phytochemistry of kava cultivars.

Earlier reviews of German data relating to hepatotoxicity
associated with kava have produced conflicting opinions on
causality. One review emphasised that there was no dose-response
relationship for kava-associated hepatotoxicity, and that crude
estimates of incidence based on primary care data suggest that any
risk of hepatotoxicity is similar to that of benzodiazepines.
However, this conclusion is questionable since estimates of this
nature can be inaccurate and misleading.

By contrast, a review of seven previously published and 29
unpublished case reports of kava-associated hepatotoxicity
concluded that these data clearly showed the potential for severe,
unpredictable kava-related hepatotoxicity.) Cases included nine
individuals who developed fulminant hepatic failure, of whom six
underwent successful liver transplantation (one only after
retransplantation), two died after transplantation due to post-
operative infectious complications, and one who was too old to
undergo transplantation also died. All other cases, which
comprised mostly cholestatic or necrotising hepatitis, underwent
full recovery after withdrawal of kava treatment. Among these 36
reports, the relationship between kava ingestion and hepatotoxi-
city was considered 'certain' in three cases and ‘probable’ in 21.”
Most individuals were concurrently using other medication and
several were regular consumers of alcohol.

A case report from Australia describes a 56-year-old woman
who developed fatigue, nausea and jaundice after taking a
preparation named 'Kava 1800 Plus! one tablet three times daily
for around 10 weeks.)
avalactones 60mg, Passiflora incarnata 50mg and Scutellaria
lateriflora 100mg, although the latter ingredient was not
identified in the product, so the precise composition of the
product is unknown. She presented two weeks after first
experiencing these symptoms and was hospitalised. Five days
ater, a biopsy revealed non-spe severe acute hepatitis with
pan-acinar necrosis and collapse of hepatic lobules. She under-
went liver transplantation on day 17 after admission, but the
procedure was complicated and she died from progressive blood
loss and circulatory failure. Subsequent examinations confirmed
massive hepatic necrosis.

Until the year 2003, it was thought that kava-associated
epatoxicity occurred only with ethanolic and acetonic kava
extracts. However, recent reports described hepatoxic effects
associated with consumption of traditional aqueous extracts of
ava root. Two cases in New Caledonia involved women aged in
their fifties who started consuming kava prepared in the
traditional manner as an aqueous preparation.) Both women
developed signs and symptoms of hepatotoxicity, including icterus
and raised liver function test values four or five weeks after
starting kava. Neither patient consumed alcohol. Kava consump-

stopped; both patients recovered and liver function test
9)

Each tablet was stated to contain

tion was
values normalised over the following three months.”
quently, in a cross-sectional study, blood samples were collected
from 27 individuals who were chronic
from kava bars in New Caledonia. Participants had been
consuming kava regularly for at least five years and had a mean
intake equivalent to around 32 g kavalactones weekly or 70 mg/kg
daily; 12 participants also consumed alcohol.” Transaminase
concentrations were more than 1.5 times the upper limit of normal
in three participants, and 23 participants had incre
concentration of GGT (which is not necessarily a specific marker
of liver injury); alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin concentrations
were within normal ranges for all subjects. Another cross-
sectional study, involving indigenous people from an Arnhem
Land community (Northern Territory, Australia), included 98
participants, of whom 36 had never used kava.®° Of the 62 kava
users, 14 had ingested kava within the previous 24 hours, and 10
and 15 had used kava within the previous one or two weeks, or
one or two months, respectively. Investigation of liver function test
values indicated that changes appeared to be reversible and started
to normalise after one or two weeks of kava abstinence.”

Inhibition of certain cytochrome P450 (CYP) drug metabolising
enzymes has been shown in vitro and in vivo for kava extracts and
individual kavalactones (see Contra-indications, Warnings). The
relevance of this for the hepatotoxic effects described for kava is
not known; further work is needed to determine whether the
inhibition of CYP enzymes by kava can lead to raised plasma
concentrations of concurrently ingested drugs with hepatotoxic
effects.

Subse-

ava drinkers, recruited

ses in

Skin reactions

An ichthyosiform (scaly, non-inflammatory), usually yellowish or
whitish, skin condition termed kava dermopathy has been
documented among kava users in Polynesia, Micronesia and
Melanesia where powdered kava rhizome is prepared as a drink
with cold water or coconut milk.” The condition is reversible on
stopping kava. Initially, it was thought that the condition was

----- PAGE 408 -----
related to niacin deficiency, but this hypothesis was rejected
following a small randomised, placebo-controlled trial of
nicotinamide 100mg daily for three weeks which showed no
difference between groups.”

Measures of health among 39 users of kava (prepared as a cold
water infusion of powdered kava rhizome) were compared with
those of 34 age-matched non-users of kava in an Aboriginal
community in the Northern Territory in Australia.®? Most (n =
35) were ‘heavy’ or 'very heavy' users of kava (310g or more per
week). It was reported that kava users were more likely to
complain of poor health, and to have a scaly skin rash. However,
the study had several methodological limitations (e.g. no
correction for multiple statistical tests) and potential biases.

Several cases of allergic skin reactions have been reported in
association with kava use. One case described a man who
presented with oedema and severe non-pruritic erythema invol-
ving his upper body, head and neck, the morning after drinking
several cups of 'kava tea’. It was reported that the man had
previously had a similar reaction to kava tea three months earlier
whilst overseas and for which he was hospitalised and treated with
intravenous corticosteroids. A case of systemic contact-type
dermatitis following several weeks' use of kava extract (Antares),
chlorprothixene (an antipsychotic agent with properties similar to
those of chlorpromazine) and diazepam has been described.
described a 70-year-old man and a 52-year-old
woman who experienced skin eruptions (erythematous plaques
and/or papules) in sebaceous gland-rich areas after using kava
extract (no further details provided) for two to three weeks.
Both patients were reported to display reactions to kava in
diagnostic allergy or skin patch tests. Generalised erythema and
papules with severe itching were described in a 36-year-old woman
who had taken kava extract (Antares) 120mg daily for three
weeks.°” The rash, but not the itching, responded to short-term
treatment with systemic corticosteroids, and six weeks later,
patch test results for Antares were positive one day after
application.

Two further cases

Central nervous system effects

Four cases of involuntary movements and dyskinesia associated
with use of kava extracts have been reported, although causality
has not been established; it has been stated that these symptoms
suggest that constituents of kava may have antagonistic effects on
central dopaminergic pathways.* In three cases, involuntary
movements involving the neck, head and/or trunk, and involuntary
oral and lingual dyskinesia began within a few minutes to 4 hours
after ingestion of kava extracts (Laitan 100 mg or Kavasporal forte
150 mg) for anxiety. One of these cases involved a 28-year-old man
who had previously experienced three episodes of acute dystonic
reactions following exposure to promethazine and fluspirilene,
although he denied having used these medicines in relation to the
current episode. The fourth case report described a 76-year-old
woman being treated with levodopa 500mg and benserazide
125 mg for Parkinson's disease and who experienced an increase in
the duration and frequency of her 'off! periods 10 days after
starting Kavasporal forte 150mg twice daily, prescribed by her
physician for tension. (The 'on—off! phenomenon — sudden swings
in mobility-immobility — occurs with long-term use of levodopa.)
In all four cases, symptoms resolved on stopping kava or following
treatment with biperiden administered intravenously.

Two other cases describe neurological symptoms following
sive use of traditional preparations of kava, i.e. as a beverage.
A 27-year-old Aboriginal Australian man experienced generalised

ex

Kava

severe choreoathetosis (characterised by chorea and athetosis, a
form of dyskinesia) without impairment of consciousness
occasions after drinking large amounts of kava (precise quantity
not specified).°”) Routine investigations were normal, apart from
raised liver function test values (serum alkaline phosphatase
162 IU/L, normal range 35-135 TU/L; gamma-glutamyltransferase
426 IU/L, normal range <60IU/L). His symptoms responded to
treatment with diazepam administered intravenously. Disorienta-
tion was reported in a 34-year-old Tongan man, a heavy user of
kava (40 bowls daily for 14 years), who had ingested further
ive amounts of kava over the previous 12 hours.°° The man
was treated in hospital with Plasmalyte intravenously and
intramuscular thiamine and five hours after admission his
symptoms had resolved.

In a controlled study, individuals intoxicated following kava
consumption (205g powder) experienced ataxia, tremors, seda-
tion, blepharospasm and reduced accuracy performing a visual
search task, when compared with control subjects who had not
ingested kava. These results suggest that kava intoxication results
in specific abnormalities of movement co-ordination and visual
attention, but normal performance of complex cognitive func-

tions.°?”)

on three

exce:

Effects on mental performance

The effects of kava extracts and the synthetic kavalactone (
kavain on mental performance have been explored in studies

involving healthy volunteers. Preliminary studies involving small
numbers of volunteers have suggested that kava extract (WS-1490
200 mg three times daily for five days) did not appear to impair
memory as assessed by certain tests (e.g. word recognition) carried
out under laboratory conditions.” In another series of tests,
designed to as:
extract, Antares 120 (standardised to 120mg kavalactones per
tablet), one tablet daily, diazepam 10mg daily, or placebo. It
was reported that the experiments provided evidence that kava did
not cause drowsiness or lack of concentration, for example,
reaction time was reduced in placebo recipients, but not kava
recipients. Other research involving volunteers found that a single
dose of kava extract 600 mg (LI-158; drug-extract ratio, 12.5: 1)
led to a 'moderate' increase in tiredness, compared with placebo,
and as assessed using visual analogue scale scores, although
statistical analysis was not reported. Confirmation of these
findings is required. In a battery of psychometric and other tests
following administration of a range of single doses of the
synthetic kavalactone (-)-kavain (200, 400 and 600mg) and
clobazam 30mg to healthy volunteers, (+)-kavain appeared to
have a sedative effect which was stated to be different to that
observed with clobazam.°* Compared with placebo, (+)-kavain,
but not clobazam, improved intellectual performance, attention,
concentration and reaction time.

mental alertness, volunteers received kava

Other reactions

There are isolated reports of myopathy and myoglobinuria
associated with the use of kava preparations, although causality
in these cases has not been established.

One report described dermatomyositis associated with use of
kava for anxiety by a 47-year-old woman. The woman, who
had also been taking valproic acid for 18 months and sertraline
occasionally over two years for bipolar disorder, developed a rash
involving her back, neck and face, as well as muscle weakness, two
weeks after taking kava (dosage not specified). She improved
initially following treatment with methylprednisolone, but then

----- PAGE 409 -----
Kava

developed a fever which prompted her to attend a_ hospital
emergency department. Investigations revealed a raised serum
creatine kinase concentration (8654U/L, normal values stated as
24-170U/L) and myopathic patterns in various muscles, and
biopsy samples showed changes indicative of dermatomyositis.
The woman was treated initially with parenteral prednisone,
after which her creatine kinase concentration returned to normal,
and also received methotrexate for five months and hydroxy-
chloroquine. Prednisone treatment was reduced over the follow-
ing year, and at one year of follow-up the woman remained
symptom-free.

Another isolated report describes a 29-year-old man who
experienced severe muscle pain and passed dark urine one
morning a few hours after having taken a herbal product said
to contain kava 100mg, Ginkgo biloba extract 200mg and
guarana (which contains methylxanthines) 500 mg (daily dosage
was not stated), for the first time.°”) The man was admitted to an

intensive care unit and was found to have highly elevated serum
creatine kinase (100 SOOIU/L, normal range given as 0-195 IU/L)
and myoglobin (10000ng/mL, normal range stated as 0-90 ng/
mL) concentrations, but no renal complications. Investigations
excluded metabolic myopathy as a possible cause; his signs and
symptoms subsided over six weeks.

Disturbances of visual function have been reported following a
study involving a 30-year-old kava-naive male volunteer who
ingested 600mL of aqueous extract of pulverised kava 'root'
(rhizome)."°*) Measurements involving the man's right eye only
indicated reductions in near point of accommodation and
convergence, an increase in pupil diameter, and disturbance of
oculomotor balance, but no effects on visual or stereoacuity or
ocular refractive error. The experiment was not carried out
according to a double-blind, controlled design and, therefore, the
findings require further investigation.
A case of hypokalaemic renal tubular acidosis due to Sjégren's
syndrome (a symptom complex of unknown aetiology, marked by
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, xerostamia, with or without lachrymal
and salivary gland enlargement, respectively, and presence of
connective tissue disease, usually rheumatoid arthritis, but
sometimes systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma or poly-
myositis) has been reported in a 36-year-old woman.” She was
stated to have begun taking kava, echinacea and St John's wort
two weeks before becoming ill, but the report does not provide
any further details of the echinacea speci
product(s), nor of the types of preparations, formulations, dosages
and routes of administration of any of the herbal medicines listed.
The woman was hospitalised with severe generalised muscle
weakness and tests revealed she had a serum potassium ion
concentration of 1.3 mEq/L. She was given electrolyte replacement
for four days after which the muscle weakness resolved, and was
started on hydroxychloroquine 200mg daily for ‘probable!
Sjégren's syndrome. The authors suggested that ingestion of
echinacea may have aggravated an autoimmune disorder (see
Echinacea, Side-effects, Toxicity) although causality has not been
established.°”

No clear evidence of an association between kava consumption

s contained in the

and ischaemic heart disease (IHD) was found in a case-control
study (using up to four randomly selected control subjects)
involving 83 individuals from Aboriginal commun: in Arnhem
Land (Northern Territory, Australia) who were diagnosed with
IHD for the first time during 1992-1997." In a similar case-
control study involving 115 individuals (and 415 control subjects)

with pneumonia, no association between kava use and pneumonia
101)

was found.'

Toxicology

Incubation of the kava alkaloid pipermethystine, which occurs
mostly in kava leaves and stem peelings, with human hepatoma
cells resulted in a 90% loss in cell viability within 24 hours when
applied at a concentration of 100 ,tmol/L and 65% cell death at a
concentration of 50pmol/L."" Further experiments indicated
that pipermethystine causes cell death in part by disrupting
mitochondrial function. It has been suggested that pipermethys-
ticine could be involved in hepatoxicity associated with kava root
(12) although since hepatotoxicity has been associated
both with authorised commerical products (therefore made
according to the principles of good manufacturing practice) and

extracts,

traditional aqueous extracts (which might be more easily
contaminated with leaves and stem peelings) this suggestion
requires further examination.

A study involving small numbers of rats administered an
aqueous (water) extract of kava 'root' equivalent to kavalactones
200 or 500 mg/kg/day for 2-4 weeks found that serum concentra-
tions of the enzymes alanine aminotransferase, aspartate amino-
transferase, alkaline phosphatase and lactate dehydrogenase were
not elevated following kava administration, compared with

103 - So
) The clinical relevance of these findings is not known.

control."

In other toxicological studies, LDso values for a standardised
kava extract containing 70% kavalactones have been reported as
370 mg/kg and 16 g/kg for intraperitoneal and oral administration,
respectively, in rats, and 380 mg/kg and 1.8 g/kg for intraperitoneal
and oral administration, respectively, in mice.“

An ethanolic extract of kava root was reported to be cytotoxic
(ECso approximately 50 pmol/L) in an in vitro system a ing
viability of human hepatocytes. The kavalactones methysticin,
desmethoxyyangonin and yangonin also displayed cytotoxicity in
this system, with methysticin having the greatest cytotoxic
activity! In vitro cytotoxicity of kavalactones has also been
described in a human lymphoblastoid cell line; the cytotoxic effect

appears to be due to the parent compound and not as a result of
05)

activation of kava constituents to toxic metabolites.'!

Contra-indications, Warnings

It has been stated that kava is contra-indicated in endogenous
depression.“C
recommended dosage regimens, kava may adversely affect motor
reflexes, and may affect ability to drive and/or operate machi-
nero G9

It has been reported that there is no evidence that use of kava
extracts has the potential for physical or psychological depen-
dency to develop.’
extracts have been of short duration, typically around four weeks
(maximum 24 weeks) and/or usually have involved only small
numbers of participants, further study is required before definitive
statements are made on the potential for dependency with kava.

” Even when administered in accordance with

» However, as most clinical studies of kava

Drug interactions There is an isolated report of a 54-year-old
man who was taking alprazolam, cimetidine and terazosin and
who became lethargic and disoriented three days after he began
taking kava purchased from a health-food store (no further details
(8) The man was
hospitalised and his symptoms resolved after several hours. He

of the kava preparation were provided).

tested negatively for alcohol, and positively for benzodiazepines;
the man stated he had not taken overdoses of either alprazolam or
kava. The clinical importance and role of kava in this reaction is

not known, although there is a view that concurrent use of kava

----- PAGE 410 -----
and substances with central nervous system effects could lead to
enhanced activity.“¢* °

The effects on performance of a kava extract given in
combination with bromazepam have been explored in a rando-
mised, double-blind, controlled crossover trial involving 18
healthy volunteers. Participants received a kava extract (Antares)
equivalent to 120mg kavalactones twice daily, or bromazepam
4.5mg twice daily, or both agents, for 14 days.” Significant
reductions in indicators of performance, such as motor coordina-
tion, were reported for recipients of both kava and bromazepam,
compared with recipients of kava alone, but there was no
difference between kava plus bromazepam compared with
bromazepam alone.

Isolated case reports of extrapyramidal symptoms associated
with use of kava extracts have led to the suggestion that
constituents of kava may have dopamine antagonist effects (see
Side-effects, Toxicity, Central nervous system effects).°*) On this
basis, the potential for kava to interact with dopamine agonists or
antagonists should be considered.

Inhibition of certain cytochrome P450 (CYP) drug metabolising
enzymes has been shown in vitro and in vivo for kava extracts and
individual kavalactones. In a randomised, open-label, crossover
study, 12 healthy volunteers received kava root extract 1000 mg
twice daily (subsequently found to be equivalent to total
kavalactones 138mg daily) for 28 days; probe drugs were
administered before and after kava administration to assess
effects on CYP enzymes." Administration of the kava extract
according to this dosage regimen inhibited CYP2E1, but not
CYP3A4/5, CYP2D6 and CYP1A2.

In in vitro studies, methanolic, acetone and ethyl acetate
extracts of kava rhizome significantly inhibited CYP3A4 activity,
compared with control, at concentrations as low as 10 g/mL
(ethyl acetate extract).” In other in vitro experiments, several
individual kavalactones were tested for their effects on the
activities of CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and CYP2D6, as well
as CYP3A4. Desmethoxyyangonin, dihydromethysticin and
methysticin produced a concentration-dependent inhibition of
one or more of the CYP isoforms at concentrations of <10 timol/
L, considered as ‘potent’ inhibition (e.g. ICso values for
desmethoxyyangonin, dihydromethysticin and methysticin for
CYP2C19 were 0.51, 0.43 and 0.93 jmol/L, respectively, and for
dihydromethysticin and methysticin for CYP3A4 under certain
assay conditions were 2.49 and 1.49 mol/L, respectively). In
several cases, this degree of inhibition was greater than that shown
by positive controls which are known to produce clinically
significant drug interactions. Similar results have been reported
for an ethanolic kava root extract and the individual kavalactones
desmethoxyyangonin, dihydromethysticin and yangonin: in two in
vitro models, both the extract and the individual kavalactones
inhibited CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2E1 and CYP3A4
with ICs values of around 10 mol/L.“

Differences in CYP enzyme inhibition have been described for
commercial preparations (acetone, methanol and ethanol extracts)
and traditional aqueous extracts, with commercial preparations
having a greater inhibitory effect than traditional preparations on
CYP3A4, CYP1A2, CYP2C9 and CYP2C19."''? Desmethoxyyan-
gonin and dihydromethysticin induced the expression of CYP3A23
by approximately seven-fold in an in vitro system; other
experimental results suggested that the inductive effect of these
kavalactones is additively or synergistically enhanced by the
presence of other kavalactones."'?) Other in vitro experiments
have demonstrated that kava root extract and the individual
kavalactones kavain, dihydrokavain, methysticin, dihydromethys-

Kava

ticin and desmethoxyyangonin inhibit the efflux transporter P-
glycoprotein. (13)

The clinical relevance of these findings is not known, although
the potential for kava extracts to interact with concurrently
administered drugs metabolised mainly by the CYP enzymes
mentioned above should be considered.

There are conflicting results from in vitro studies regarding the
effects of the kavalactone (+)-kavain on cyclooxygenase activ-
ity.“ One study reported that (+)-kavain inhibited human
platelet aggregation in vitro (see In vitro and animal studies,
Other activities], although the clinical relevance of this, if any is
not known. At present, there is insufficient evidence to warn
against the concurrent use of kava preparations and antiplatelet
agents. The kavalactones kavain, methysticin, yangonin and
desmethoxyyangonin did not inhibit alcohol dehydrogenase in
vitro when applied to the system at concentrations of 1, 10 and
100 pmol/L.“

Alcohol The effects of concurrent use of kava extract and alcohol
have undergone some investigation. In a randomised, double-
blind, controlled trial, 20 healthy participants received kava
extract (WS-1490; Laitan) 300 mg daily (equivalent to 210 mg
kavalactones), or placebo, for eight days.) Alcohol was

ingested on days one, four and eight in quantities sufficient to
achieve a blood alcohol concentration of 50 mg%; participants
underwent a series of tests designed to assess psychomotor
performance before and after alcohol consumption. The results
indicated that there was no difference in performance between
the kava and placebo groups, apart from one test (concentra-
tion) in which the kava group was reported to be superior to
the placebo group.''!”

A small study involving 40 healthy participants found that
the concurrent ingestion of a kava beverage (350 mL of aqueous
extract of Fijian kava) and alcohol 0.75 g/kg led to a greater
reduction in cognitive performance, as assessed by a series of
tests, compared with that observed with ingestion of alcohol
alone; ingestion of kava alone did not affect cognitive
performance."''9)

Studies in mice given ethanol (3.5 and 4 g/kg, intraperitone-
ally) and kava resin 200 or 300 mg/kg orally have demonstrated
a prolongation of hypnotic effects.”

Pregnancy and lactation There is a lack of information on the
use of kava preparations during pregnancy and breastfeeding.
Given the lack of data, kava should be avoided during these
periods.

Brazil: Ansiopax; Calmonex; Farmakava; Kavakan; Kavalac;
Kavasedon; Laitan; Natuzilium. Czech Republic: Antares;
Kavasedon; Leikan. Venezuela: Kavasedon.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
USA: Calming Aid.

References

1 Singh YN, Blumenthal M. Kava an overview. Herbalgram 1997; 39:
33-55.

----- PAGE 411 -----
10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

Kava

Alton J. Kava-kava (Piper methysticum G. Forster) in contemporary
medical research [translation of reference 3]. Eur J Herb Med 1997; 3:
17-23.

Hansel R. Kava-kava (Piper methysticum G. Forster) in der modernen
Arzneimittelforschung. Z Phytother 1996; 17: 180-195.

The Medicines for Human Use (Kava-Kava) (Prohibition) Order 2002
(S12002/3170). London: The Stationery Office, 2003.

Dharmaratne HRW et al. Kavalactones from Piper methysticum, and
their C NMR spectroscopic analyses. Phytochemistry 2002; 59: 429-
433.

Parmar VS et al. Phytochemistry of the genus Piper. Phytochemistry
1997; 46: 597-673.

Singh YN. Kava: an overview. J] Ethnopharmacol 1992; 37: 13-45.
Shao Y et al. Reversed-phase high-performance liquid
chromatographic method for quantitative analysis of the six major
kavalactones in Piper methysticum. ] Chromatogr A 1998; 825: 1-8.
Wu D et al. Cyclooxygenase enzyme inhibitory compounds with
antioxidant activities from Piper methysticum (kava kava) roots.
Phytomed 2002; 9: 41-47.

Bone K. Kava — a safe treatment for anxiety. Br ] Phytother 1993/4; 3:
147-153.

Jaggy H, Achenbach H. Cepharadione A from Piper methysticum.
Planta Med 1992; 58: 111.

Achenbach H, Karl W. Uber die isolierung von zwei neuen
pyrrolididen aus Rauschpfeffer (Piper methysticum Forst.). Chem Ber
1970; 103: 2535-2540.

Cheng D et al. Identification by methane chemical ionization gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry of the products obtained by steam
distillation and aqueous acid extraction of commercial Piper
methysticum. Biomed Environ Mass Spectrom 1988; 17: 371-376.
Wu D et al. Novel compounds from Piper methysticum Forst (Kava
Kava) roots and their effect on cyclooxygenase enzyme. J Agric Food
Chem 2002; 50: 701-705.

Dragull K e¢ al. Piperidine alkaloids from Piper methysticum.
Phytochemistry 2003; 63: 193-198.

Cawte J. Psychoactive substances of the South seas: betel, kava and
pituri. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 1985; 19: 83-87.

Keledjian J et al. Uptake into mouse brain of four compounds present
in the psychoactive beverage kava. J Pharm Sci 1988; 77: 1003-1006.
Smith KK e¢ al. Anxiolytic effects of kava extract and kavalactones in
the chick social separation-stress paradigm. Psychopharmacology
2001; 155: 86-90.

Feltenstein MW et al. Anxiolytic properties of Piper methysticum
extract samples and fractions in the chick social-separation-stress
procedure. Phytother Res 2003; 17: 210-216.

Capasso A, Calignano A. Synergism between the sedative action of
kava extract and D,L-kawain. Acta Ther 1988; 14: 249-256.

Capasso A, Pinto A. Experimental investigations of the synergistic-
sedative effect of passiflora and kava. Acta Ther 1995; 21: 127-139.
Duffield PH et al. Effect of aqueous and lipid-soluble extracts of kava
on the conditioned avoidance response in rats. Arch Int Pharmacodyn
1989; 301: 81-90.

Holm E et al. Untersuchungen zum Wirkungsprofil von D,L-kavain.
Zerebrale Angriffsorte und Schlaf-Wach-Rhythmus im
Tierexperiment. Arzneim Forsch 1991; 41: 673-683.

Davies LP et al. Kava pyrones and resin: studies on GABA, GABA,
and benzodiazepine binding sites in rodent brain. Pharmacol Toxicol
1992; 71: 120-126.

Grunze H, Walden J. Kawain limits excitation in CA 1 pyramidal
neurons of rats by modulating ionic currents and attenuating
excitatory synaptic transmission [letter]. Hum Psychopharm Clin Exp
1999; 14: 63-66.

Jussofie A et al. Kavapyrone enriched extract from Piper metlysticum
as modulator of the GABA binding site in different regions of rat
brain. Psychopharmacology 1994; 116: 469-474.

Boonen G, Haberlein H. Influence of genuine kavapyrone enantiomers
on the GABA, binding site. Planta Med 1998; 64: 504-506.
Uebelhack R et al. Inhibition of platelet MAO-B by kava pyrone-
enriched extract from Piper methysticum Forster (kava-kava).
Pharmacopsychiatry 1998; 31: 187-192.

Seitz U et al. [3H]-Monoamine uptake inhibition properties of kava
pyrones [letter]. Planta Med 1997; 63: 548-549.

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

41

42

43

45

47

48

49

50

S1

52.

53

54

5S

Walden J et al. Actions of kavain and dihydromethysticin on
ipsapirone-induced field potential changes in the hippocampus. Hum
Psychopharmacol 1997; 12: 265-270.

Boonen G et al. In vivo effects of the kavapyrones (+)-
dihydromethysticin and (+/—)-kavain on dopamine, 3,4-
dihyroxyphenylacetic acid, serotonin and 5-hydrozyindoleacetic acid
levels in striatal and cortical brain regions. Planta Med 1998; 64: 507—
510.

Baum SS et al. Effect of kava extract and individual kavapyrones on
neurotransmitter levels in the nucleus accumbens of rats. Prog Neuro-
Psychopharmacol Biol Psychiat 1998; 22: 1105-1120.

Duffield PH, Jamieson D. Development of tolerance to kava in mice.
Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1991; 18: 571-578.

Gleitz J et al. Anticonvulsive action of (+/—)-kavain estimated from
its properties on stimulated synaptosomes and Na* channel receptor
sites. Eur ] Pharmacol 1996; 315: 89-97.

Magura El et al. Kava extract ingredients, (+)-methysticin and (+/—)-
kavain inhibit voltage-operated Na“-channels in rat CA1
hippocampal neurons. Neuroscience 1997; 81: 345-351.

Gleitz J et al. Kavain inhibits non-stereospecifically veratridine-
activated Na‘ channels [letter]. Planta Med 1996; 62: 580-581.
Schirrmacher K et al. Effects of (+/—)-kavain on voltage-activated
inward currents of dorsal root ganglion cells from neonatal rats. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 1999; 9: 171-176.

Gleitz J et al. (+/—)-Kavain inhibits veratridine-activated voltage-
dependent Na*-channels in synaptosomes prepared from rat cerebral
cortex. Neuropharmacology 1995; 34; 1133-1138.

Gleitz J et al. (+/—)-Kavain inhibits the veratridine- and KCl-induced
increase in intracellular Ca*+ and glutamate-release of rat
cerebrocortical synaptosomes. Neuropharmacology 1996; 35: 179-
186.

Ferger B et al. In vivo microdialysis study of (+/—)-kavain on
veratridine-induced glutamate release. Eur J Pharmacol 1998; 347:
211-214.

Gleitz J et al. The protective action of tetrodotoxin and (+/—)-kavain
on anaerobic glycolysis, ATP content and intracellular Na* and Ca?*
of anoxic brain vesicles. Neuropharmacology 1996; 35: 1743-1752.
Schmidt N, Ferger B. Neuroprotective effects of (+/—)-kavain in the
MPTP mouse model of Parkinson's disease. Synapse 2001; 40: 47-54.
Backhauss C, Krieglstein J. Extract of kava (Piper methysticum) and
its methysticin constituents protect brain tissue against ischemic
damage in rodents. Eur J Pharmacol 1992; 215: 265-269.

Jamieson DD, Duffield PH. The antinociceptive actions of kava
components in mice. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1990; 17: 495-508.
Briiggemann F, Meyer HJ. Die analgetische Wirkung der Kawa-
Inhaltsstoffe Dihydrokawain und Dihydromethysticin. Arzneimittel-
Forschung 1963; 13: 407-409.

Singh YN. Effects of kava on neuromuscular transmission and muscle
contractility. J Ethnopharmacol 1983; 7: 267-276.

Seitz U et al. Relaxation of evoked contractile activity of isolated
guinea-pig ileum by (+/—)-kavain. Planta Med 1997; 63: 303-306.
Martin HB et al. Kavain inhibits murine airway smooth muscle
contraction. Planta Med 2000; 66: 601-606.

Gleitz J et al. Antithrombotic action of the kava pyrone (+)-kavain
prepared from Piper methysticum on human platelets. Planta Med
1997; 63: 27-30.

Hashimoto T e¢ al. Isolation and synthesis of TNF-z release inhibitors
from Fijian kawa (Piper methysticum). Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 309—
317.

Blaszcyk T et al. Kawa-kawa als antimykotikum. Pharmazie 1997; 21:
32-34.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Kava extract versus placebo for treating anxiety
(Cochrane review). The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
2003, Issue 1. Art. No. :CD003383.

Warnecke G. [Psychosomatische Dysfunktionen im weiblichen
Klimakterium]. Fortschr Med 191 109: 119-122.

Volz H-P, Kieser M. Kava-kava extract WS 1490 versus placebo in
anxiety disorders — a randomized, placebo-controlled 25-week
outpatient trial. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997; 30: 1-5.

Witte $ et al. Meta-analysis of the efficacy of the acetonic kava-kava
extract WS"'1490 in patients with non-psychotic anxiety disorders.
Phytotherapy Res 2005; 19: 183-188.

----- PAGE 412 -----
56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

Lehrl S. Clinical efficacy of kava extract WS 1490 in sleep disturbances
associated with anxiety disorders. Results of a multicenter,
randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. J Affect
Disord 2004; 78(2): 101-110.

Jacobs BP et al. An internet-based randomized, placebo-controlled
trial of kava and valerian for anxiety and insomnia. Medicine 2005; 84
(4): 197-207.

Cagnacci A et al. Kava-kava administration reduces anxiety in
perimenopausal women. Maturitas 2003; 44: 103-109.

Woelk H et al. Behandlung von Angst-Patienten. Doppelblindstudie:
Kava-Spezialextrakt WS 1490 versus Benzodiazepine. Z Allg Med
1993; 69: 271-277.

Boerner RJ et al. Kava-kava extract LI 150 is as effective as opipramol
and buspirone in generalised anxiety disorder — an 8-week
randomized, double-blind, multi-centre clinical trial in 129 out-
patients. Phytomedicine 2003; 10(Suppl IV): 38-49.

De Leo Vet al. Valutazione dell'associazione di estratto di kava-kava e
terapia ormonale sostitutiva nel trattamento d'ansia in
postmenopausa. Minerva Ginecol 2000; 52: 263-267.

Cropley M et al. Effect of kava and valerian on human physiological
and psychological responses to mental stress assessed under
laboratory conditions. Phytother Res 2002; 16: 23-27.

Miller HJ, Heuberger L. Anxiolytische Potenz von D,L-kavain.
Ergebnisse einer plazebokontrollierten Doppelblindstudie. Miinch
Med Wschr 1989; 131: 656-659.

Lindenberg D, Pitule-Schédel H. D,L-kavain im Vergleich zu
Oxazepam bei Angstzustanden. Doppelblindstudie zur klinischen
Wirksamkeit. Fortschr Med 1990; 108: 31-34.

Moller H-J et al. Kavain als Hilfe beim Benzodiazepin-Entzug. Miinch
Med Wschr 1992; 134: 587-590.

Thompson R et al. Enhanced cognitive performance and cheerful
mood by standardized extracts of Piper methysticum (kava-kava).
Human Psychopharmacol 2004; 19(4): 243-250.

Boerner RJ, Klement $. Attenuation of neuroleptic-induced
extrapyramidal side-effects by kava special extract WS 1490. Wiener
Med Wochenschrift 2004; 154: 21-22.

Duffield AM et al. Identification of some human urinary metabolites
of the intoxicating beverage kava. J Chromatogr 1989; 475: 273-281.
Stevinson C et al. A systematic review of the safety of kava extract in
the treatment of anxiety. Drug Safety 2002; 25: 251-261.

Neto JT. Eficacia e tolerabilidade do extrato de kava-kava WS 1490 em
estados de ansiedade. Estudo multicéntrico brasileiro. Rev Bras Med
1999; 56: 280-284.

Uppsala Monitoring Centre. Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions
database (accessed 20 January, 2006).

Medicines Control Agency. Consultation MLX 286: Proposals to
prohibit the herbal ingredient kava-kava (Piper methysticum) in
unlicensed medicines. Medicines Control Agency, 19 July 2002.
Anon. Kava-kava. The Medicines for Human Use (Kava-kava)
(Prohibition) Order 2002. Herbal Safety News, Medicines and
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (http://www.mhra.gov.uk,
accessed 26 January, 2006).

Adverse Drug Reactions On-line Information Tracking (ADROIT)
system. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency,
London, UK.

Committee on Safety of Medicines' Expert Working Group (Kava).
Report of the CSM's expert working group on the safety of kava.
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, 2006.
Available at http://www.mhra.gov.uk (accessed 25 September, 2006).
Schulze J et al. Toxicity of kava pyrones, drug safety and precautions —
a case study. Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 68-73.

Stickel F et al. Hepatitis induced by kava (Piper methysticum
rhizoma). ] Hepatol 2003; 39: 62-67.

Gow PJ et al. Fatal fulminant hepatic failure induced by a natural
therapy containing kava. Med J Aust 2003; 178: 442-443.

Russmann § e¢ al. Hepatic injury due to traditional aqueous extracts
of kava root in New Caledonia. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2003; 15:
1033-1036.

Clough AR et al. Liver function test abnormalities in users of aqueous
kava extracts. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2003; 41(6): 821-829.

Norton SA, Ruze P. Kava dermopathy. J Am Acad Dermatol 1994; 31:
89-97.

Kava

82 Ruze P. Kava-induced dermopathy: a niacin deficiency? Lancet 1990;
335: 1442-1445,

83 Mathews JD et al. Effects of the heavy usage of kava on physical
health: summary of a pilot survey in an Aboriginal community. Med J
Aust 1988; 148: 548-555.

84 Levine R, Taylor WB. Take tea and see [letter]. Arch Dermatol 1988;
122: 856.

85  Siiss R, Lehmann P. Hamatogenes Kontaktekzem durch pflanzliche
Medikamente am Beispiel des Kavawurzelextraktes. Hautarzt 1996;
47: 459-461.

86 Jappe U et al. Sebotropic drug reaction resulting from kava-kava
extract therapy: a new entity? J Am Acad Dermatol 1998; 38: 104-106.

87 Schmidt P, Boehncke W-H. Delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction to
kava-kava extract. Contact Dermatitis 2000; 42: 363.

88 Schelosky L et al. Kava and dopamine antagonism. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry 1995; 58: 639-640.

89 Spillane PK et al. Neurological manifestations of kava intoxication.
Med J Aust 1997; 167: 172-173.

90 Chanwai LG. Kava toxicity. Emerg Med 2000; 12: 142-145.

91 Cairney S et al. Saccade and cognitive impairment associated with
kava intoxication. Human Psychopharmacol 2003; 18(7): 525-533.

92 Miinte TF et al. Effects of oxazepam and an extract of kava roots
(Piper methysticum) on event-related potentials in a word recognition
task. Neuropsychobiology 1993; 27: 46-53.

93 Gessner B, Cnota P. Untersuchung der Vigilanz nach Applikation von
Kava-kava-extrakt, diazepam oder Plazebo. Z Phytother 1994; 15: 30-
37.

94 Schulz H et al. The quantitative EEG as a screening instrument to
identify sedative effects of single doses of plant extracts in comparison
with diazepam. Phytomedicine 1998: 449-458.

95. Saletu B et al. EEG-Brain mapping, psychometric and
psychophysiological studies on central effects of kavain — a kava plant
derivative. Hum Psychopharmacol 1989; 4: 169-190.

96 Guro-Razuman § et al. Dermatomyositis-like illness following kava-
kava ingestion. J Clin Rheumatol 1999; 6: 342-345.

97 Donadio Vet al. Myoglobinuria after ingestion of extracts of guarana,
Ginkgo biloba and kava. Neurol Sci 2000; 21: 124.

98 Garner LF, Klinger JD. Some visual effects caused by the beverage
kava. J Ethnopharmacol 1985; 13: 307-311.

99 Logan JL, Ahmed J. Critical hypokalemic renal tubular acidosis due
to Sjégren's syndrome: association with the purported immune
stimulant echinacea. Clin Rheumatol 2003; 22: 158-159.

100 Clough AR et al. Case-control study of the association between kava
use and ischaemic heart disease in eastern Arnhem Land (Northern
Territory) Australia. J Epidemiol Community Health 2004; 58: 140-
141.

101 Clough AR et al. Case-control study of the association between kava
use and pneumonia in eastern Arnhem and Aboriginal communities
(Northern Territory, Australia). Epidemiol Infect 2003; 131(1): 627—
635.

102 Nerurkar PV et al. In vitro toxicity of kava alkaloid, pipermethystine,
in HepG2 cells compared to kavalactones. Toxicolog Sci 2004; 79:
106-111.

103 Singh YN, Devkota AK. Aqueous kava extracts do not affect liver
function tests in rats. Planta Med 2003; 69: 496-499.

104 Zou L et al. Effects of kava (kava-kava, 'Awa, Yaqona, Piper
methysticum) on c-DNA-expressed cytochrome P450 enzymes and
cryopreserved hepatocytes. Phytomedicine 2004; 11(4): 285-294.

105 Zou L et al. Kava does not display metabolic toxicity in a
homogeneous cellular assay. Planta Med 2004; 70(4): 289-292.

106 Almeida JC, Grimsley EW. Coma from the health food store:
interaction between kava and alprazolam. [letter]. Ann Intern Med
1996; 125: 940-941.

107 Herberg K-W. Alltagssicherheit unter Kava-Kava Extrakt,
Bromazepam und deren Kombination. Z Allg Med 1996; 72: 973-977.

108 Gurley BJ et al. In vivo effects of goldenseal, kava kava, black cohosh,
and valerian on human cytochrome P450 1A2, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4/5
phenotypes. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2005; 77: 415-426.

109 Unger M et al. Inhibition of cytochrome P450 3A4 by extracts and
kavalactones of Piper methysticum (kava-kava). Planta Med 2002; 68:
1055-1058.

----- PAGE 413 -----
Kava

110 Zou L et al. Effects of herbal components on cDNA-expressed
cytochrome P450 enzyme catalytic activity. Life Sci 2002; 71: 1579-
1589.

111 Cote CS et al. Composition and biological activity of traditional and
commercial kava extracts. Biochem Biophys Res Comm 2004; 322(1):
147-152.

112 Ma Y et al. Desmethoxyyangonin and dihydromethysticin are two
major pharmacological kavalactones with marked activity on the
induction of CYP3A23. Drug Metab Disp 2004; 32(11): 1317-1324.

113 Weiss J et al. Extracts and kavalactones of Piper methysticum G.
Forst. (kava-kava) inhibit P-glycoprotein in vitro. Drug Metab Disp
2005; 33(11): 1580-1583.

114 Anke J et al. Kavalactones fail to inhibit alcohol dehydrogenase in
vitro. Phytomedicine 2006; 13(3): 192-195.

115 Herberg KW. Zum Einfluss von Kava-Spezialextrakt WS 1490 in
Kombination mit Ethylalkohol auf sicherheitsrelevante
Leisungsparameter. Blutalkohol 1993; 30: 96-105.

116 Foo H, Lemon J. Acute effects of kava, alone or in combination
with alcohol, on subjective measures of impairment and intoxication
and on cognitive performance. Drug Alcohol Rev 1997; 16: 147—
15S.

117 Jamieson DD, Duffield PH. Positive interaction of ethanol and kava
resin in mice. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 1990; 17: 509-514.

----- PAGE 414 -----
= Lady’s Slipper

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Virtually no phytochemical or pharmacological data are
available for lady’s slipper to justify its use as a herbal remedy.
In view of the lack of toxicity data, excessive use and use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Cypripedium parviflorum var. pubescens (Willd.) O.W. Knight
(Orchidaceae)

Synonym(s)

American Valerian, Cypripedium, Cypripedium calceolus var.
pubescens (Willd.) Correll, Cypripedium pubescens Willd., Nerve
Root

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHP 19830”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL (Cypripedium) '°*”

Constituents

Little chemical information has been documented. Lady's slipper
is stated to contain glycosides, resin, tannic and gallic acids
(usually associated with hydrolysable tannins), tannins and a
volatile oil.

Several quinones have been reported including cypripedin,
stated to belong to a group of rare non-terpenoid phenanthra-

quinones and not previously isolated from natural sources.

Food Use

Lady's slipper is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Lady's slipper is stated to po: edative, mild hypnotic,
antispasmodic and thymoleptic properties. Traditionally, it has

Benzonaphthoquinone
°

OCH,
CHs0 CI
Ce:

OH
cypripedin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of lady’s slipper.

Figure 2 Lady’s slipper (Cypripedium parviflorum var. pubescens).

been used for insomnia, hysteria, emotional tension, anxiety
states, and specifically for anxiety states with insomnia.'C7 °°
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 2-4 as an infusion three times daily.'‘C”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.‘6”

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Figure 3 Lady’s slipper — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 415 -----
Lady’s Slipper

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of lady's
slipper and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are

required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for lady's slipper
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

It has been stated that the roots may cause psychedelic reactions
and large doses may result in giddiness, restlessness, headache,
(S22) | ady's slipper is
stated to be allergenic and contact dermatitis has been
©) The sensitising property of lady's slipper has
been attributed to the quinone constituents.

mental excitement and visual hallucinations.

documented.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Lady's slipper may cause an allergic reaction in sensitive
individuals.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of lady's slipper to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of lady's slipper has not
been established. In view of the lack of phytochemical,
pharmacological and toxicological information the use of lady's
slipper during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Reference

1 Schmalle H, Hausen BM. A new sensitizing quinone from lady slipper
(Cypripedium calceolus). Naturwissenschaften 1979; 66: 527-528.

----- PAGE 416 -----
5 Lemon Verbena

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited information is available on lemon verbena. Some of
the traditional uses may be attributable to the volatile oil, for
which many components have been identified, and to the
flavone constituents. In the UK, lemon verbena is mainly used
as an ingredient of herbal teas.

Species (Family)
Aloysia triphylla (L'Her.) Britton (Verbenaceae)

Synonym(s)

Aloysia citriodora (Cav.) Ort., Lippia citriodora (Ort.) HBK,
Verbena citriodora Cav., Verbena triphylla L'Her.

Part(s) Used

Flowering top, leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
G85)

Martindale 35th edition‘

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Lemon verbena is not included in the GSL.‘C*”?

Constituents

Flavonoids Flavones including apigenin, chrysoeriol, cirsimar-
itin, diosmetin, eupafolin, eupatorin, hispidulin, luteolin and
derivatives, pectolinarigenin and salvigenin.?

Volatile oils Terpene components include borneol, cineol, citral,
citronellal, cymol, eugenol, geraniol, limonene, linalool, B-pinene,
nerol, and terpineol (monoterpenes), and «-caryophyllene, B-
caryophyllene, myrcenene, pyrollic acid and isovalerianic acid
(sesquiterpenes).’

Monoterpenes

om
borneol we
S
cineole limonene
OH
S ‘OH PEG
te Te
linalool geraniol citral

Figure 1 Selected constituents of lemon verbena.

Figure 2 Lemon verbena (Aloysia triphylla).

Food Use

Previously, lemon verbena has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe) for human consumption in alcoholic
beverages. Lemon verbena is also used in herbal teas.'°*”

Herbal Use

Lemon verbena is reputed to possess antispasmodic, antipyretic,
sedative and stomachic properties. It has been used for the
treatment of asthma, cold, fever, flatulence, colic, diarrhoea and
indigestion, (3% 57 Go

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older pharmaceutical reference texts are given
below.

Figure 3. Lemon verbena - dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 417 -----
Lemon Verbena

Decoction 45 mL taken several times daily.(C*?

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of lemon
verbena and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for lemon verbena and further investigation of these
aspects is required. Terpene-rich volatile oils are generally
regarded as irritant and may cause kidney irritation during
excretion.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Individuals with existing renal disease should avoid excessive
doses of lemon verbena in view of the possible irritant nature of
the volatile oil.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of lemon verbena to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of pharmacological
and toxicity data, and the potential irritant nature of the volatile
oil, excessive doses of lemon verbena are best avoided during
pregnancy and lactation.

Spain: Agua del Carmen.

References

1. Skaltsa H, Shammas G. Flavonoids from Lippia citriodora. Planta
Med 1988; 54: 465.

2 Montes M et al. Sur la composition de l'essence d'Aloysia triphylla
(Cedron). Planta Med 1973; 23: 119-124.

----- PAGE 418 -----
5 Liferoot

pharmacological studies were found to substantiate the
traditional uses. The Senecio genus is characterised by
unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloid constituents and the
hepatotoxicity of this class of compounds is well recognised
(see Comfrey). In view of this, liferoot is not suitable for use as
a herbal medicine.

Species (Family)

Senecio aureus L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Golden Ragwort, Golden Senecio, Heart-leaved Groundsel,
Squaw Weed

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19830”
Martindale 35th edition‘

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Liferoot is not included in the GSL.'°?”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G19.

Limited information is documented regarding the constituents
of liferoot, although it is well recognised that Senecio species
contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids.

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
senecionine.'"?)

The volatile oil composition of various Senecio species (but not
Senecio aureus) has been investigated.)

Floridanine, florosenine, otosenine,

Food Use

Liferoot is not used as a food.

Alkaloids

senecionine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of liferoot.

Herbal Use

Liferoot is stated to possess uterine tonic, diuretic and mild
expectorant properties. Traditionally, it has been used in the
treatment of functional amenorrhoea, menopausal neurosis and
leucorrhoea (as a douche).'67 6%

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
However, current advice is that liferoot is not suitable for use as a
herbal medicine and should not be ingested.

Herb 1-4¢ as an infusion three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 14mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.‘6”

Figure 2 Liferoot (Senecio aureus).

Figure 3 Liferoot — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 419 -----
Liferoot

Pharmacological Actions

No documented studies were located.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Liferoot contains pyrrolizidine alkaloids. The toxicity, primarily
hepatic, of this class of compounds is well recognised in both
animals and humans‘@"”) (see Comfrey).

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the hepatotoxic pyrrolizidine alkaloid constituents,
liferoot should not be ingested.‘°!”)

Pregnancy and lactation
liferoot is contraindicated during pregnancy and lactation."

In view of the toxic constituents,
G49)

Furthermore, liferoot is traditionally reputed to be an abortifa-
cient, emmenagogue, and_ uterine tonic..67°) In animals,
placental transfer and secretion into breast milk“ has been
documented for unsaturated pyrrolizidine alkaloids.

References

1 Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids. Environmental Health Criteria 80. Geneva:
WHO, 1988.

2 Roder E et al. Pyrrolizidinalkaloide aus Senecio aureus. Planta Med
1983; 49: 57-59.

3. Dooren B et al. Composition of essential oils of some Senecio species.
Planta Med 1981; 42: 385-389.

4 Mattocks AR. Chemistry and Toxicology of Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids.
London: Academic Press, 1986: 1-393.

----- PAGE 420 -----
Lime Flower

scientific information was located to justify the reputed herbal
uses of lime flower, although some correlation can be made
with the known pharmacological activities of the reported
constituents. In view of the lack of toxicological data excessive
use of lime flower and use during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

Species (Family)

*Tilia cordata Mill. (Tiliaceae)

tTilia platyphyllos Scop.

$Tilia x vulgaris Hayne, a hybrid of the above (Tiliaceae)

Synonym(s)

Lime Tree, Linden Tree

*T. officinarum Crantz, T. officinarum Crantz subsp. officinarum
pro parte, T. ulmifolia Scop., T. parvifolia Ehrh. ex Hoffm., Small-
leaved Lime

+T. officinarum Crantz, T. officinarum Crantz subsp. officinarum
pro parte, Large-leaved Lime

$T. x europaea auct. non L., Lime

Part(s) Used

Flowerheads

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992)

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007*?

Complete German Commission E (Linden) ‘©
Martindale 35th edition'‘*”

Ph Eur 2007'°8?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Flavonoids

OH

tiliroside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of lime flower.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and Gé2.

Acids Caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid and p-coumaric acid.

Amino acids Alanine, cysteine, cystine, isoleucine, leucine,
phenylalanine and serine.

Carbohydrates Mucilage polysaccharides (3%). Five fractions
identified yielding arabinose, galactose, rhamnose, with lesser
amounts of glucose, mannose, and xylose; galacturonic and
glucuronic acids; gum.

Flavonoids Kaempferol, quercetin, myricetin and their glyco-
sides.

Volatile oil Many components including alkanes, phenolic
alcohols and esters, and terpenes including citral, citronellal,
citronellol, eugenol, limonene, nerol, o&-pinene and_terpineol
(monoterpenes), and farnesol (sesquiterpene).

Other constituents Saponin (unspecified), tannin (condensed)
and tocopherol (phytosterol).

Food Use

Lime flower is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that lime
flower can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.“©'® Previously, lime flower has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).‘@%

Herbal Use

Lime flower is stated to possess sedative, antispasmodic,
diaphoretic, diuretic and mild astringent properties. Traditionally
it has been used for migraine, hysteria, arteriosclerotic hyperten-
sion, feverish colds, and specifically for raised arterial pressure

associated with arteriosclerosis and nervous tension.'C> % O76

G64)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal and/or pharmaceutical reference
texts are given below.

Flowerhead 2-4 ¢ by infusion.
Liquid extract 2-4mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol).
Tincture 1-2mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

In vitro, lime flower has been reported to exhibit antispasmodic
activity followed by a spasmogenic effect on rat duodenum.” The
actions were inhibited by atropine and papaverine, and reinforced

----- PAGE 421 -----
Lime Flower

by acetylcholine. The diaphoretic and antispasmodic properties
claimed for lime flower have been attributed to p-coumaric acid
and the flavonoids.'@?” °° In addition, a number of actions have
been associated with volatile oils including diuretic, sedative and
antispasmodic effects, which may also account for some of the
reputed uses of lime flower.) Volatile oils are not thought to
possess any true diuretic activity, but to act as a result of certain
terpenoid components having an irritant action on the kidneys
during renal excretion.

Lime flower has been documented to possess a restricted range
of antifungal activity.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of lime
flower and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical and preclinical safety and toxicity data
for lime flower and further investigation of these aspects is
required.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Previously it has been advised that lime flower should be avoided
by individuals with an existing cardiac disorder;'C?* 0
however, the scientific basis for this statement, if any, is not
known.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of lime flower to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of lime flower has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicological data, use of lime
flower during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Vigilia. Israel: Jungborn. Italy: Alkagin; Lenicalm; Sedofit;
Tussol. Portugal: Alkagin; Alkagin; Alkagin. Spain: Agua del
Carmen; Jaquesor; Mesatil; Natusor Gripotul; Natusor
Jaquesan; Natusor Sinulan; Natusor Somnisedan. Switzerland:
Tisane contre les refroidissements; Tisane pour nourissons et
enfants. UK: Menopause Relief; Tranquil; Wellwoman.

References

1 Kram G, Franz G. Structural investigations on the water soluble
polysaccharides of lime tree flowers (Tilia cordata L.). Pharmazie
1985; 40: SOL.

2 Lanza JP, Steinmetz M. Actions comparees des exraits aqueux de
graines de Tilia platyphylla et de Tilia vulgaris sur l'intestin isolé de
rat. Fitoterapia 1986; 57: 185.

3 Taddei I et al. Spasmolytic activity of peppermint, sage and rosemary
essences and their major constituents. Fitoterapia 1988; 59: 463-468.

4 Svendsen AB, Scheffer JJC. Essential Oils and Aromatic Plants.
Proceedings of the 15th International Symposium on Essential Oils.
Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff, 1984; 225-226.

5 Sticher O. Plant mono-, di- and sesquiterpenoids with
pharmacological and therapeutical activity. In: Wagner H, Wolff P,
eds. New Natural Products with Pharmacological, Biological or
Therapeutical Activity. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1977: 137-176.

6 Guerin J-C, Reveillere H-P. Antifungal activity of plant extracts used
in therapy. I Study of 41 plant extracts against 9 fungi species. Ann
Pharm Fr 1984; B: 553-559

----- PAGE 422 -----
Liquorice

locumented pharmacological data althoug
evidence of antispasmodic activity was found.
Carbenoxolone, an ester derivative of a triterpenoid
constituent in liquorice, is well known for its use in ulcer
therapy. Much has been written concerning the steroid-type
adverse effects associated with liquorice ingestion. Liquorice
ingestion should therefore be avoided by individuals with an
existing cardiovascular disorder and moderate consumption
should be observed by other individuals.

Species (Family)
Glycyrrhiza glabra L. (Leguminosae)

Synonym(s)

Gan Cao (root/rhizome), Glycyrrhiza glabra L. var. glabra, G.
glabra L. subsp. glandulifera (Waldst. & Kit.) Ponert, Licorice

Part(s) Used

Root, stolon

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition\*”

Ph Eur 20078?

USP29/NF24‘C80)

WHO volume 1 1999°%)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Coumarins Glycyrin, heniarin, liqcoumarin, umbelliferone, GU-
7 (3-arylcoumarin derivative).\?

Flavonoids Flavonols and isoflavones including formononetin,
glabrin, glabrol, glabrone, glyzarin, glycyrol, glabridin and
derivatives, kumatakenin, licoflavonol, licoisoflavones A and B,
licoisoflavanone, licoricone, liquiritin and derivatives, phaseolli-
nisoflavan;” chalcones_ including isoliquiritigenin, licuraside,
echinatin, licochalcones A and B, neo-licuroside.)

Terpenoids Glycyrrhizin glycoside (1-24%) also known as
glycyrrhizic or glycyrrhizinic acid yielding glycyrrhetinic (or

glycyrrhetic) acid and glucuronic acid following hydrolysis;

glycyrrhetol, glabrolide, licoric acid, liquiritic acid and B-amyrin.

Volatile oils 0.047%." More than 80 components identified
including anethole, benzaldehyde, butyrolactone, cumic alcohol,
eugenol, fenchone, furfuryl alcohol, hexanol, indole, linalool, y-
nonalactone, oestragole, propionic acid, o-terpineol and thu-
jone

Other constituents Amino acids, amines, gums, lignin, starch,
sterols (f-sitosterol, stigmasterol), sugars and wax.

Other plant parts Components documented for the leaves of G.
glabra include flavonoids (kaempferol and derivatives, isoquerce-
tin, quercetin and derivatives, phytoalexins), coumarins (bergap-
ten, xanthotoxin), phytoestrogen, B-sitosterol and saponaretin."?

Food Use

Liquorice is widely used in foods as a flavouring agent. Liquorice
root is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of food
flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that liquorice
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'“'® Previously, liquorice has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).‘C*

Herbal Use

Liquorice is stated to possess expectorant, demulcent, antispas-
modic, anti-inflammatory and laxative properties. Traditionally, it
is also reported to affect the adrenal glands. It has been used for
bronchial catarrh, bronchitis, chronic gastritis, peptic ulcer, colic
and primary adrenocortical insufficiency.(C C° * 61% Ge)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Powdered root 1-4 as a decoction three times daily.C%°”

Liquorice Extract (BPC 1973) 0.6-2.0g.

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological actions of liquorice have been reviewed.” *)

In vitro and animal studies

Much has been documented regarding the steroid-type actions of
liquorice (see Side-effects, Toxicity). Both glycyrrhizin and
glycyrrhetinic acid (GA) have been reported to bind to
glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors with moderate
affinity, and to oestrogen receptors, sex hormone-binding globulin
and corticosteroid-binding globulin with very weak affinity.°-!? It
has been suggested that glycyrrhizin and glycyrrhetinic acid may
influence endogenous steroid activity via a receptor mechanism,
with displacement of corticosteroids or other endogenous
steroids.”

----- PAGE 423 -----
Liquorice

Triterpenoids

COOH
HO ce)
HO 3
COOH

glycyrrhizinic acid

Flavonoids

OH
H
i NN
R

°
R
glabrol H
3-—hydroxyglabrol OH

\soflavonoids

hispaglabridin A

Chalcones
HO. OH
Ce
°

Selected constituents of liquorice.

; OR

isoliquiritigenin
isoliquiritin

Figure 1

The anti-oestrogenic action documented for glycyrrhizin at
relatively high concentrations has been associated with a blocking
effect that would be caused by glycyrrhizin binding at oestrogen
receptors.) However, oestrogenic activity has also been docu-
mented for liquorice and attributed to the isoflavone constitu-
® Liquorice exhibits an alternative action on oestrogen
metabolism, causing inhibition if oestrogen concentrations are
high and potentiation when concentrations are low.

The relatively low affinity of glycyrrhizin and glycyrrhetinic
acid for binding to mineralocorticoid receptors, together with the
fact that liquorice does not exert its mineralocorticoid activity in
adrenalectomised animals, indicates that a direct action at

ents.

HO.

°
R
liquiritigenin H
liquiritin glucose

licoisoflavone A

R
H

glucose

mineralocorticoid receptors is not the predominant mode of
action.) It has been suggested that glycyrrhizin and glycyr-
thetinic acid may exert their mineralocorticoid effect via an
inhibition of 11B-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11B-OHSD).”)
11B-OHSD is a microsomal enzyme complex found predomi-
nantly in the liver and kidneys which catalyses the conversion of
cortisol (potent mineralocortoid activity) to the inactive cortisone.
Deficiency of 11B-OHSD results in increased concentrations of
urinary free cortisol and cortisol metabolites. Glycyrrhetinic acid
has been shown to inhibit renal 11B-OHSD in rats." It has also
been proposed that glycyrrhizin and glycyrrhetinic acid may
displace cortisol from binding to transcortin."?

----- PAGE 424 -----
Figure 2 Liquorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra).

Antiplatelet activity in vitro has been documented for a 3-
arylcoumarin derivative, GU-7, isolated from liquorice." GU-7
was thought to inhibit platelet aggregation by increasing
intraplatelet cyclic AMP concentration.

Isoliquiritigenin has been reported to inhibit aldose reductase,
the first enzyme in the polyol pathway which reduces glucose to
sorbitol." Isoliquiritigenin was subsequently found to inhibit
sorbitol accumulation in human red blood cells in vitro, and in red
blood cells, the sciatic nerve and the lens of diabetic rats
administered isoliquirigenin intragastrically."'* ') Many diabetic
complications, such as cataracts, peripheral neuropathy, retino-
pathy and nephropathy have been associated with the polyol

pathway and have shown improvement with inhibitors of aldose
(14, 15)

reductase.

Significant anti-inflammatory action is exhibited by glycyr-
rhetinic acid against UV erythema." 180-Glycyrrhetinic acid has
exhibited stronger anti-inflammatory action compared to its
stereoisomer 18-glycyrrhetinic acid.” Chalcones isolated from
G. inflata Bat. have been reported to inhibit leukotriene
production and increase cyclic AMP concentrations in human
polymorphonuclear neutrophils in vitro."'®) Glycyrrhetinic acid
derivatives, but not glycyrrhetinic acid, have exhibited inhibitory
effects on writhing and vascular permeability tests and on type IV
allergy in mice.” The dihemiphthalate derivatives were especially
active with respect to the two former activities and have previously
been found to inhibit lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase activities,
and to prevent formation of gastric ulcer.‘'”

Glycyrrhetinic acid is known to inhibit Epstein-Barr virus
activation by tumour promotors.2”

Antimicrobial activity versus Staphylococcus aureus, Mycobac-
terium smegmatis and Candida albicans has been documented for
liquorice and attributed to isoflavonoid constituents (glabridin,
glabrol and their derivatives).”’ Antiviral activity has been
described for glycyrrhetinic acid, which interacts with virus
structures producing different effects according to the viral stage
affected.°"” Activity was observed against vaccinia, herpes

Liquorice

simplex 1, Newcastle dise: and vesicular stomatitis virus
with no activity demonstrated towards poliovirus 1.°”

In vitro hepatoprotective activity against CCly-induced toxicity
has been reported to be greater for glycyrrhetinic acid compared
to glycyrrhizin.~? Glycyrrhetinic acid is thought to act by
inhibition of the cytochrome P450 system required for the
metabolism of CCl, to the highly reactive radical CCl.”
Glycyrrhiza uralensis Fisch is used to treat hepatitis B in China,
with a success rate reported to be greater than 70%.° Other
activities documented for G. uralensis are anti-inflammatory and
anti-allergic, treatment of jaundice, inhibition of fibrosis of the
liver, corticosteroid-like immunosuppressing effect and a detox-
ifying effect.?>

Screening of several plant extracts for antifertility activity
reported liquorice to be ineffective following oral administration
to rats in days 1-7 of pregnancy.”

Pharmacokinetics The pharmacokinetic profile of glycyrrhizin
in rats has been found to be similar to that observed in
humans.°° Glycyrrhizin is primarily (80%) excreted into the
bile from the liver against a concentration gradient.?> This
process is saturable and can therefore affect the excretion rate of
glycyrrhizin. In addition, enterohepatic recycling occurs with
reabsorption of bile-excreted glycyrrhizin from the intestinal

tract.2>

Clinical studies

Carbenoxolone, an ester derivative of glycyrrhetinic acid, has been
used in the treatment of gastric and oesophageal ulcers. It is
thought to exhibit a mucosal-protecting effect by beneficially
interfering with gastric prostanoid synthesis, and increasing
mucus production and mucosal blood flow.°”

Liquorice is thought to exert its mineralocorticoid effect by
inhibition of the enzyme 11B-OHSD, which catalyses the
conversion of cortisol to the inactive cortisone (see Pharmacolo-
gical Actions, In vitro and animal studies). Administration of
liquorice to healthy volunteers has resulted in a disturbance of
cortisol metabolism and a significant rise in urinary free cortisol,
despite there being no change in plasma concentrations. These
changes are consistent with this hypothesis, being indicative of
11B-OHSD deficiency.” Liquorice has also been found to
suppress both plasma renin activity and aldosterone secre-
tion.°7°?)

Subjects consuming 100-200 g liquorice/day have been reported
to achieve plasma glycyrrhetinic acid concentrations of 80-480 ng/
mL.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Apart from confectionery, liquorice can also be ingested from
infusions and by chewing tobaccos. Excessive or prolonged
liquorice ingestion has resulted in symptoms typical of primary
hyperaldosteronism, namely hypertension, sodium, chloride and
water retention, hypokalaemia and weight gain, but also in low

levels of plasma renin activity, aldosterone and antidiuretic
(13, 27, 30)

hormone.

Raised concentrations of atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP),
which is secreted in response to atrial stretch and has vasodilating,
natriuretic and diuretic properties, have also been observed in
healthy subjects following the ingestion of liquorice.» Indivi-
duals consuming 10-45 g liquorice/day have exhibited raised blood
pressure, together with a block of the aldosterone/renin axis and
electrocardiogram changes, which resolved one month after

----- PAGE 425 -----
4 Liquorice

withdrawal of liquorice." Individuals consuming vastly differing
amounts of liquorice have exhibited similar side-effect symptoms,
indicating that the mineralocorticoid effect of liquorice is not dose
dependent and is a saturable process.°”

Hypokalaemic myopathy has also been associated with
liquorice ingestion.°
lysis has been documented in a male patient following the
ingestion of an alcohol-free beverage containing only small
amounts of glycyrrhetinic acid (0.35 g/day).” The patient had
known liver cirrhosis due to alcohol consumption and it was
suggested that cirrhotic patients may be more susceptible to the
mineralocorticoid side-effects of liquorice.“” In one case,° the
myoglobinaemia led to glomerulopathy and tubulopathy but with
no clinical evidence of acute renal failure (ARF). The latter was
attributed to the volume expansion also caused by the liquorice
ingestion.

Rhabdomyolysis without myoglobinuria has been described.”
In addition, severe congestive heart failure and pulmonary oedema
have been reported in a previously healthy man who had ingested
700 g liquorice over eight days.°° Liquorice extract given orally
has been reported to have a similar but longer lasting action to
intravenous deoxycortone and it has been noted that sodium

chloride and water retention do not have to be accompanied by
(38)

236) Severe hypokalaemia with rhabdomyo-

clinical oedema. Amenorrhoea has been associated with
liquorice ingestion (anti-oestrogenic action), with the menstrual
cycle re-appearing following the withdrawal of liquorice.°”

It has been noted that symptoms of hyperaldosteronism often
resolve quickly, within a few days to two weeks, following the
withdrawal of liquorice, even in individuals who have ingested the
substance for many years.”

A case has been described where a patient presented with
symptoms related to hyperglycaemia and myopathy secondary to
liquorice-induced hypokalaemia. An inverse relationship was
observed between the concentrations of fasting serum glucose
and serum potassium.” Interestingly, animal studies have
indicated that liquorice may reduce diabetic complications

associated with intracellular accumulation of sorbitol.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Numerous instances have been documented where liquorice
ingestion has resulted in symptoms of primary hyperaldosteron-
ism, such as water and sodium retention and hypokalaemia.
Liquorice should therefore be avoided completely by individuals
with an existing cardiovascular-related disorder, and ingested in
moderation by other individuals.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of liquorice to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Excessive or prolonged use
of liquorice may lead to hypokalaemia and this, therefore, may
potentiate the action of cardiac glycosides and interact with
antiarrhythmic drugs or with drugs that induce reversion to sinus
rhythm (e.g. quinidine), concomitant use of liquorice with other
drugs inducing hypokalaemia (e.g. thiazide or loop diuretics,
adrenocorticosteroids and stimulant laxatives) may aggravate
electrolyte imbalance. There is limited evidence from preclinical
studies that constituents of liquorice have oestrogenic and anti-
oestrogenic effects, depending on dose.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the documented
pharmacological and toxicological effects, liquorice should not
be used during pregnancy and lactation.

Preparations
Proprietary single-ingredient preparations

Brazil: Brefus. Czech Republic: Gallentee. France: Depiderm;
Trio D.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: No-Tos Adultos; No-Tos Adultos; No-Tos Infantil;
No-Tos Infantil; Urinefrol. Australia: Asa Tones; Betaine
Digestive Aid; Broncafect; Feminine Herbal Complex; Gingo
A; Glycoplex; Glycyrrhiza Complex; Herbal Cold & Flu
Relief; Herbal Digestive Formula; Herbal PMS Formula;
Hydrastis Complex; Neo-Cleanse; Potassium Iodide and
Stramonium Compound; Senega and Ammonia; Verbascum
Complex. Austria: Gastripan; Heumann's Bronchialtee; Krau-
ter Hustensaft; Laxalpin; Midro Tee; Neoplex; Nesthakchen;
Sigman-Haustropfen. Brazil: Fontolax; Frutalax; Laxarine;
Laxtam; Peitoral Angico Pelotense; Sene Composta; Tamaril;
Tamarine; Tamarix; Tussucalman. Canada: Bentasil Licorice
with Echinacea; Bronchozone; Damiana-Sarsaparilla Formula;
Herbal Nerve; Milk Thistle Extract Formula. Chile: Naturlax;
Neostrata; Pectoral Pasteur. Czech Republic: Biotussil; Blasen-
und Nierentee; Bronchialtee N; Cajova Smes pri Nachlazeni;
Cajova Smes pri Redukcni Diete; Detska Cajova Smes; Detsky
Caj s Hermankem; Diabetan; Erkaltungstee; Ipecarin; Magen-
und Darmtee N; Naturland Grosser Swedenbitter; Projimava;
Pruduskova; Pulmoran; Reduktan; Schlaf-Nerventee N; Species
Pectorales Planta; Stoffwechseltee N; Tormentan; Zaludecni
Cajova Smes. France: Mediflor Tisane Contre la Constipation
Passagere No 7; Mediflor Tisane Hepatique No 5; Mediflor
Tisane No 4 Diuretique. Germany: Gastritol; Heumann
Bronchialtee Solubifix T; Heumann Magentee Solu-Vetan;
Heweberberol-Tee; Iberogast; Muc-Sabona; Renob Blasen- und
Nierentee; Salmiak; Ulcu-Pasc. Hong Kong: Mist Expect Stim;
Vida Brown Mixture. India: Arowash; Diovol Forte DGL;
Disogel; N-T-Tus. Israel: Gingisan; Gingisan; Lido Tea;
Midro-Tea. Italy: Cadifen; Cadimint; Dicalmir; Influ-Zinc
Gola; Lassatina; Midro; Proctopure; Rabro N; Sciroppo Berta;
Tamarine; Tussol. Malaysia: Horseradish Plus; Total Man.
Monaco: Blackoids du Docteur Meur. Norway: Solvipect
comp; Solvipect. New Zealand: Bonningtons Irish Moss.
Portugal: Midro. Russia: Doktor Mom (Aoxtop Mom); Doktor
Mom Herbal Cough Lozenges (Aoxrop Mom Pacrureapneie
Tlacrmaxn Or Kantas); Linkus (Avmac); Original Grosser
Bittner Balsam (Opurmmapneiii Boapmoii Baansam Burrnepa);
Prostanorm ([Ipocranopm). South Africa: Borsdruppels;
Chamberlains Cough Remedy Regular; Puma Cough Balsam.
Singapore: Phytoestrin. Spain: Bronpul; Laxomax; Malvaliz;
Natusor Astringel; Natusor Gastrolen; Natusor Low Blood
Pressure; Pastillas Pectoral Kely; Regamint. Switzerland: DAM
Antacidum; DemoPectol; DemoTussil; Gem; Iberogast; Ker-
nosan Elixir; Lapidar 10; Makaphyt Gouttes antitussives;
Makaphyt Sirop; Pastilles bronchiques S$ nouvelle formule;
Sirop pectoral contre la toux $; Sirop $ contre la toux et la
bronchite; Strath Gouttes pour l'estomac; Tisane laxative;
Tisane pectorale et antitussive; Tisane pectorale pour les
enfants. Thailand: Brown Mixture; Meloids; Ulgastrin. UK:
Allens Pine & Honey; Asthma & Catarrh Relief; Chesty
Cough Relief; Covonia Mentholated; Culpeper Detox Tea;
Honey & Molasses; Jamaican Sarsaparilla; Lane's Sage and
Garlic Catarrh Remedy; Lightning Cough Remedy; Napiers
Echinacea Tea; Nigroids; Potters Sugar Free Cough Pastilles;

----- PAGE 426 -----
Cough & Sore Throat Relief; Vegetable Cough Remover;
Vocalzone.

References

1

10

cel

12

13

14

15

16

17

Tawata M et al. Anti-platelet action of GU-7, a 3-arylcoumarin
derivative, purified from Glycyrrhizae radix. Planta Med 1990; 56:
259-263.

Mitscher LA et al. Antimicrobial agents from higher plants.
Antimicrobial isoflavanoids and related substances from Glycyrrhiza
glabra L. var. typica. ] Nat Prod 1980; 43: 259-269.

Miething H, Speicher-Brinker A. Neolicuroside — A new chalcone
glycoside from the roots of Glycyrrhiza glabra. Arch Pharm
(Weinheim) 1989; 322: 141-143.

Takino Y et al. Quantitative determination of glycyrrhizic acid in
liquorice roots and extracts by TLC-densitometry. Planta Med 1979;
36: 74-78.

Kameoka H, Nakai K. Components of essential oil from the root of
Glycyrrhiza glabra. Nippon Nogeikagaku Kaishi [J] Ag Chem Soc
Japan} 1987; 61: 1119-1121.

Jimenez J et al. Flavonoids of Helianthemum cinereum. Fitoterapia
1989; 60: 189.

Chandler RF. Licorice, more than just a flavour. Can Pharm J 1985;
118: 421-424.

Pizzorno JE, Murray AT. Glycyrrhiza glabra. A Textbook of Natural
Medicine. Seattle, WA: John Bastyr College Publications, 1985
(looseleaf).

Tamaya MD et al. Possible mechanism of steroid action of the plant
herb extracts glycyrrhizin, glycyrrhetinic acid, and paconiflorin:
Inhibition by plant herb extracts of steroid protein binding in the
rabbit. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1986; 155: 1134-1139.

Armanini D et al. Binding of agonists and antagonists to
mineralocorticoid receptors in human peripheral mononuclear
leucocytes. J Hypertens 1985; 3 (Suppl. Suppl.3): $157-159.
Armanini D et al. Affinity of liquorice derivatives for
mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid receptors. Clin Endocrinol 1983;
19: 609-612.

Stewart PM et al. Mineralocorticoid activity of liquorice: 11-beta-
hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency comes of age. Lancet 1987;
ii: 821-824.

Forslund T et al. Effects of licorice on plasma atrial natriuretic peptide
in healthy volunteers. J Intern Med 1989; 225: 95-99.

Aida K et al. Isoliquiritigenin: A new aldose reductase inhibitor from
Glycyrrhizae radix. Planta Med 1990; 56: 254-258.

Yun-ping Z, Jia-qing Z. Oral baicalin and liquid extract of licorice
reduce sorbitol levels in red blood cell of diabetic rats. Chin Med J
1989; 102: 203-206.

Fujita H et al. Antiinflammatory effect of glycyrrhizinic acid. Effects
of glycyrrhizinic acid against carrageenin-induced edema, UV-
erythema and skin reaction sensitised with DCNB. Pharmacometrics
1980; 19: 481-484.

Amagaya S et al. Separation and quantitative analysis of 18a-
glycyrrhetinic acid and 18f-glycyrrhetinic acid in Glycyrrhizae radix
by gas-liquid chromatography. ] Chromatogr 1985; 320: 430-434.

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

Liquorice

Kimura Y et al. Effects of chalcones isolated from licorice roots on
leukotriene biosynthesis in human polymorphonuclear neutrophils.
Phytother Res 1988; 2: 140-145.

Inque H et al. Pharmacological activities of glycerrhetinic acid
derivatives: Analgesic and anti-type IV allergic effects. Chem Pharm
Bull 1987; 35: 3888-3893.

Tokuda H et al. Inhibitory effects of ursolic and oleandolic acid on
skin tumor promotion by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate.
Cancer Lett 1986; 33: 279-285.

Pompei R et al. Antiviral activity of glycyrrhizic acid. Experientia
1980; 36: 304.

Kiso Y et al. Mechanism of antihepatotoxic activity of glycyrrhizin, I:
Effect on free radical generation and lipid peroxidation. Planta Med
1984; 50: 298-302.

Chang HM et al. Advances in Chinese Medicinal Materials Research.
Singapore: World Scientific, 1985.

Sharma BB et al. Antifertility screening of plants. Part I. Effect of ten

indigenous plants on early pregnancy in albino rats. Int J Crude Drug
Res 1983; 21: 183-187.

Ichikawa T et al. Biliary excretion and enterohepatic cycling of
glycyrrhizin in rats. J Pharm Sci 1986; 75: 672-675.

Guslandi M. Ulcer-healing drugs and endogenous prostaglandins. Int
J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol 1985; 23: 398-402.

Conn J et al. Licorice-induced pseudoaldosteronism. Hypertension,
hypokalaemia, aldosteronopenia and suppressed plasma renin activity.
JAMA 1968; 205: 492-496.

Epstein MT et al. Effect of eating liquorice on the renin-angiotensin
aldosterone axis in normal subjects. BMJ 1977; 1: 488-490.
Mantero EF. Exogenous mineralocorticoid-like disorders. Clin
Endocrinol Metab 1981; 10: 465-478.

Chamberlain TJ. Licorice poisoning, pseudoaldosteronism, heart
failure. JAMA 1970; 213: 1343.

Corrocher R et al. Pseudoprimary hyperaldosteronism due to
liquorice intoxication. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 1983; 5: 467-470.
Piette AM et al. Hypokaliémie majeure avec rhabdomyolase
secondaire a l'ingestion de pastis non alcoolisé. Ann Med Interne
(Paris) 1984; 135: 296-298.

Cibelli G et al. Hypokalemic myopathy associated with liquorice
ingestion. Ital J] Neurol Sci 1984; 5: 463-466.

Heidermann HT, Kreuzfelder E. Hypokalemic rhabdomyolysis with
myoglobinuria due to licorice ingestion and diuretic treatment. Klin
Wochenschr 1983; 61: 303-305.

Ruggeri CS e¢ al. L. Carnetina cloruro e KCI nel trattamento di un
caso di rabdomiolisi atraumatica senza mioglobinuria da ingestione di
liquerizia. Minn Med 1985; 76: 725-728.

Bannister B et al. Cardiac arrest due to liquorice induced
hypokalaemia. BMJ 1977; 2: 738-739.

Maresca MC et al. Low blood potassium and rhabdomyolosis.
Description of three cases with different aetiologies. Minerva Med
1988; 79: 79-81.

Molhuysen JA. A liquorice extract with deoxycortone-like action.
Lancet 1950; ii: 381-386.

Jamil A et al. Hyperglycaemia related to licorice-induced
hypokalaemia. J Kwt Med Assoc 1986; 20: 69-71.

----- PAGE 427 -----
- Lobelia

“Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The principal constituent of lobelia is lobeline, an alkaloid
with similar pharmacological properties to those of nicotine.
Lobelia has previously been used in herbal preparations for
the treatment of asthma and bronchitis, and in anti-smoking
preparations aimed to lessen nicotine withdrawal symptoms.
However, in view of its potent alkaloid constituents, excessive
use of lobelia and use during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

Species (Family)

Lobelia inflata L. (Campanulaceae)

Synonym(s)

Indian Tobacco

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL°*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Alkaloids

lobeline

gs
- \

lobelanine

lobelanidine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of lobelia.

Figure 2 Lobelia (Lobelia inflata).

Alkaloids  Piperidine-type. 0.48%. Lobeline (major); others
include lobelanine, lobelanidine, norlobelanine, lelobanidine,
norlelobanidine, norlobelanidine and lobinine.

Other constituents Bitter glycoside (lobelacrin), chelidonic acid,
fats, gum, resin and volatile oil.

Food Use

Lobelia is not generally used as a food.

Herbal Use

Lobelia is stated to possess respiratory stimulant, antasthmatic,
antispasmodic, expectorant, and emetic properties. Traditionally,
it has been used for bronchitic asthma, chronic bronchitis, and
specifically for spasmodic asthma with secondary bronchitis. It
has also been used topically for myositis and rheumatic

nodules. 'G% 97 S% Ge)

Figure 3 Lobelia — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 428 -----
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 0.2-0.6g as an infusion or decoction three times
daily.“C%

Liquid extract 0.2-0.6mL (1:1 in 50% alcohol) three times
daily,“C%

Simple Tincture of Lobelia (BPC 1949) 0.6-2.0 mL.

Tincture Lobelia Acid 1-4mL (1:10 in dilute acetic acid) three
times daily.“C%

Pharmacological Actions

The pharmacological activity of lobelia can be attributed to the
alkaloid constituents, principally lobeline. Lobeline has peripheral
and central effects similar to those of nicotine, but is less potent.
Hence, lobeline initially causes CNS stimulation followed by
respiratory depression. Lobeline is also reported to possess
expectorant properties.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of lobelia
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Lobelia

Side-effects, Toxicity

Side-effects of lobeline and lobelia are similar to those of nicotine
and include nausea and vomiting, diarrhoea, coughing, tremors
and dizziness. Symptoms of overdosage are reported to include
profuse diaphoresis, tachycardia, convulsions, hypothermia,
hypotension and coma, and may be fatal.'*

Contra-indications, Warnings

The pharmacological actions of lobeline are similar to those of
nicotine.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of lobelia to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. The pharmacological activity of
lobeline is similar to that of nicotine.

Pregnancy and lactation Lobelia should not be used during
pregnancy or lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
UK: Catarrh Tablets.

----- PAGE 429 -----
Marshmallow

. D
of clinical studies investigating the effects of marshmallow.
Although no toxicity data were located, the chemistry of
marshmallow and its use in foods indicate that there should
not be any reason for concern regarding safety.

Species (Family)
Althaea officinalis L. (Malvaceae)

Synonym(s)

Althaea, A. taurinensis DC., A. Rragujevacensis Panc.

Polysaccharides

Part(s) Used

Leaf, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHC 1992'6

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08)

Complete German Commission EC)

ESCOP 200307

Martindale 35th edition'©*”

Ph Eur 2007°°8?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'@”)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G52.

f-o-gal

3
1

B-p-glyc A

4 1
= p-o-gal

a-p-gal A

4 1
= a-i-rha + a-p-galA

gal = galactose, rha = rhamnose, glyc A = glucuronic acid

gal A = galacturonic acid

R!
; Ol
HO. O. Re

Flavonoids

OH O
RR?
hypolaetin OH OH
isoscutellarein OH H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of marshmallow.

----- PAGE 430 -----
Polysaccharides Mucilage polysaccharides (S—10%), consisting

. . T
of galacturono-rhamnans, arabinans, glucans, arabinogalactans.'”
G52)

Flavonoids Hypolaetin 8-glucoside, isoscutellarein 4’-methy-
lether-8-glucoside-2/’-sulfate.”)

Phenolic acids Caffeic, p-coumaric, ferulic, p-hydroxybenzoic
and syringic.

Other constituents Asparagine 2%, calcium oxalate, coumarins
(scopoletin), pectin, starch and tannin.

Food Use

Marshmallow is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that marshmallow can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities,
with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.'“'® Previously in the USA,
marshmallow has been approved for use in foods.‘°*?

Herbal Use

Marshmallow is stated to possess demulcent, expectorant,
emollient, diuretic, antilithic and vulnerary properties.'°? C+ °°
G8, G43, G52, G54, G64) Ty aditionally, it has been used internally for
the treatment of respiratory catarrh and cough, peptic ulceration,
inflammation of the mouth and pharynx, enteritis, cystitis,
urethritis and urinary calculus, and topically for abscesses, boils
and varicose and thrombotic ulcers. The German Commission E
approved use of root and leaf for irritation of oral and pharyngeal
mucosa and associated dry cough and root for mild inflammation
of gastric mucosa.(“*) Marshmallow root is used in combination
with anise fruit, eucalyptus oil, liquorice and with anise fruit,
liquorice and primrose root and with anise fruit and primrose root
for catarrh of the upper respiratory tract and resulting dry
cough.'©»

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf 2-5 g as an infusion three times daily;'C%° 5 g.'C®

Leaf, liquid extract 2—SmL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.“C%

Figure 2. Marshmallow (Althaea officinalis).

Marshmallow

Figure 3. Marshmallow — dried drug substance (root).

Ointment 5% Powdered althaea leaf in usual ointment base three
times daily.“ °)

Dried root 2-5g by cold extraction three times daily;“°%°?

6g.)
Root, liquid extract 2-5 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C&S”

Syrup of Althaea (BPC 1949) 2-10 mL three times daily.'®°?

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antimicrobial activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus
vulgaris and Staphylococcus aureus has been documented for
marshmallow.”

The mucilage has demonstrated considerable hypoglycaemic
activity in non-diabetic mice.

Inhibition (17%) of mucociliary transport in ciliated epithelium
isolated from frog oesophagus was observed with 200 nL of cold
macerate of marshmallow root (6.4 g/140 mL).‘°

Marshmallow root extract is reported to stimulate phagocy-
tosis, and to release oxygen radicals and leukotrienes from human
neutrophils.(C” In addition, release of cytokines, interleukin 6
and tumour necrosis factor from monocytes occurs, demonstrat-
ing potential anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effects.
In mice, intraperitoneal administration of isolated polysaccharide
(10mg/kg) resulted in activity of macrophages in a carbon
clearance test, and was indicative of non-specific immunomodu-
lation.'©°) A lack of anti-inflammatory activity has been observed
for marshmallow in the carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema
test.) The anti-inflammatory effect of an ointment containing
0.05% dexamethasone was enhanced by addition of aqueous
extract of marshmallow (20%) as assessed in a rabbit ear irritancy
test using UV irradiation or furfuryl alcohol.'“”

A total extract of root and isolated polysaccharide (100 and
50 mg/kg, respectively) have been tested for their antitussive
activity in unanaesthetised cats." The polysaccharide gave a
statistically significant decrease in the number of cough efforts
from laryngopharyngeal and tracheobronchial areas. The root
extract was less effective than the isolated polysaccharide.

A polysaccharide enriched extract showed moderate concentra-
tion-dependent adhesive properties in porcine buccal membranes
ex vivo.”

----- PAGE 431 -----
Marshmallow

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
marshmallow and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials
are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for marshmallow, and further investigation of these
aspects is required where therapeutic dosages are greater than the
quantities ingested in foods.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of marshmallow to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Marshmallow may delay
the absorption of other medicines taken simultaneously.'©”” There
is limited evidence from preclinical studies that marshmallow has
hypoglycaemic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of marshmallow during pregnancy or lactation. However,
amounts ingested should not exceed those used in foods.

Kamfeine. Brazil: Asmatiron; Broncofenil; Bronquidex; Bron-
toss; Expectobron; Expectol; Iodeto de Potassio; Iodeto de

Mixture; Modern Herbals Cold & Catarrh; Modern Herbals
Cold & Congestion; Napiers Uva Ursi Tea; Potter's Catarrh
Pastilles; Sinotar; Vegetable Cough Remover. USA: Laci Le
Beau Super Dieter's Tea.

References

1 Blaschek W, Franz G. A convenient method for the quantitative
determination of mucilage polysaccharides in Althaeae radix. Planta
Med 1986; 52 (Suppl. Suppl.): 537.

2 Gudej J. Flavonoids, phenolic acids and coumarins from the roots of
Althaea officinalis. Planta Med 1991, 57: 284-285.

3 Recio MC et al. Antimicrobial activity of selected plants employed in
the Spanish Mediterranean area Part II. Phytother Res 1989; 3: 77-80.

4 Tomodo M et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of twenty plant mucilages
and three modified products. Planta Med 1987; 53: 8-12.

5 Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987; 1: 28-31.

6 Nosalova G et al. Antitussive wirkung des extraktes und der
polysaccharide aus eibisch (Althaea officinalis L., var. robusta).
Pharmazie 1992; 47: 224-226.

7 Schmidgall J et al. Evidence for bioadhesive effects of polysaccharides
and polysaccharide-containing herbs in an ex vivo bioadhesion assay
on buccal membranes. Planta Med 2000; 66: 48-53.

----- PAGE 432 -----
= Mate

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Maté is characterised by the xanthine constituents, which also
represent the active principles. The herbal uses of maté can be
attributed to the pharmacological actions of caffeine, which
are well documented. However, there is a lack of clinical
research assessing the efficacy and safety of preparations of
mate. Side-effects and warnings associated with other
xanthine-containing beverages, such as tea and coffee, are
applicable to maté.

Species (Family)

Ilex paraguariensis St. Hil. (Aquifoliaceae)

Synonym(s)

Tlex, Jesuit's Brazil Tea, Paraguay Tea, St Bartholomew's Tea,
Yerba Maté

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”?
Complete German Commission E'C»
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Alkaloids Xanthine-type. Caffeine 0.2-2.0%, theobromine 0.1—
0.2%, theophylline 0.05%.

Flavonoids Kaempferol, quercetin, and their glycosides, includ-
ing rutin.

Tannins 4-16%.

Terpenoids Ursolic acid (major), B-amyrin, ilexoside A, ilexoside
B methyl ester.”

Other constituents Choline and trigonellin (amines), amino
acids," riboflavin (vitamin B3), pyridoxine (vitamin Bg), niacin,
pantothenic acid, vitamin C and resins.

Other \lex species Triterpenoid saponins termed ilexsaponins By,
By, and B; have been isolated from Ilex pubescens Hook. &
Arn.)

A cyanogenetic glucoside has been isolated from Ilex aquifo-
lium.

Purines
fe) 2
f R! R?
RL
N | y caffeine CH3 = CH
aA theobromine H CH3
fe) N | theophylline CH3 H
CH, CHs

Triterpenes

OH ilexoside A

Figure 1 Selected constituents of maté.

Food Use

Mat is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of food
flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that maté can be

added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible limitation
(G16)

of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final product.
Maté is commonly consumed as a beverage. It is stated to be less
astringent than tea.'“*) Previously, maté has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).'¢%

Herbal Use

Maté is stated to pc CNS-stimulant, thymoleptic, diuretic,
antirheumatic and mild analgesic properties. Traditionally, it has
been used for psychogenic headache and fatigue, nervous

depression, rheumatic pains, and specifically for headache
associated with fatigue.(C* 676% GO)

Figure 2  Maté (Ilex paraguariensis).

----- PAGE 433 -----
Figure 3 Maté - dried drug substance (leaf).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf 24g as an infusion three times daily©%°?

Liquid extract 2-4mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily(CoO

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

In vivo hypotensive activity in rats has been reported for an
aqueous extract of Ilex pubescens (commonly referred to as
maodong qing or MDQ) It was concluded that intravenous
administration of MDQ releases histamine.)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of maté and
rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

The xanthine constituents, in particular caffeine, are the active
principles in maté. The pharmacological actions of caffeine are
well documented and include stimulation of the CNS, respiration
and skeletal muscle, in addition to cardiac stimulation, coronary
dilation, smooth muscle relaxation and diuresis.(“*! Reduction of
appetite has been documented for maté.'”

In China, MDQ is used parenterally for the treatment of
cardiovascular diseases (hypotensive action).

Side-effects, Toxi

ity

Side-effects generally associated with xanthine-containing bev-
erages include sleeplessness, anxiety, tremor, palpitations and
withdrawal headache.

Veno-occlusive disease of the liver in a young woman has been
attributed to the consumption of large quantities of maté over a
number of years.'“* The association between consumption of
maté infusions and oesophageal cancer has been investigated in
Uruguay, where oesophageal cancer constitutes a major public
health problem.'°” Heavy consumption was reported to elevate
the relative risk of oesophageal cancer by 6.5 and 34.6 in men and
women, respectively.

The fatal dose of caffeine in humans is stated to be 10 g.(@*”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Warnings generally associated with caffeine are applicable, such as
restricted intake by individuals with hypertension or a cardiac
disorder.

Drug interactions None documented for maté. However, the
potential for preparations of maté to interact with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered. Warnings
generally associated with caffeine are applicable.

Pregnancy and lactation It is generally recommended that
caffeine consumption should be restricted during pregnancy,
although conflicting results have been documented concerning the
association between birth defects and caffeine consumption. In
view of this, excessive consumption of maté during pregnancy
should be avoided. Caffeine is excreted in breast milk, but at
concentrations too low to represent a hazard to breastfed
infants.‘* As with all xanthine-containing beverages, excessive
consumption of maté by breastfeeding mothers should be avoided.

References

1 Ohem N, Holzl J. Some new investigations on Ilex paraguariensis —
Flavonoids and triterpenes. Planta Med 1988; 54: 576.

2 Inada A. Two new triterpenoid glycosides from the leaves of Ilex
chinensis. Chem Pharm Bull 1987; 37: 884-885.

3 Hidaka K et al. New triterpene saponins from Ilex pubescens. Chem
Pharm Bull 1987; 35: 524-529.

4 Willems M. Quantification and distribution of a novel cyanogenic
glycoside in Ilex aquifolium. Planta Med 1989; 55: 114.

5 Yang ML, Pang PKT. The vascular effects of Ilex pubescens. Planta
Med 1986; 52: 262-265.

6 Morton JE The potential carcinogenicity of herbal tea. Environ
Carcino Rev. ] Environ Sci Health 1986; C4: 203-223.

7 Vassallo A et al. Esophageal cancer in Uruguay: a case control study. J
Natl Cancer Inst 1985; 75: 1005-1009.

----- PAGE 434 -----
- Meadowsweet

tannins. Documented scientific evidence from preclinical
studies supports some of the antiseptic, antirheumatic and
astringent traditional uses. However, there is a lack of clinical
research assessing the efficacy and safety of meadowsweet.
No documented toxicity data were located for meadowsweet
and, in view of this, excessive use of meadowsweet and use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Filipendula ulmaria (L.) Maxim. (Rosaceae)

Synonym(s)

Dropwort, Filipendula, Queen of the Meadow

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992)

BHP 1996”)

BP 200708

Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'°8?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Flavonoids Flavonols, flavones, flavanones and chalcone deriva-
tives (e.g. hyperoside” and spireoside,” kaempferol glucoside”)
and avicularin.’

Salicylates Main components of the volatile oil including
salicylaldehyde (major, up to 70%), gaultherin, isosalicin, methyl
salicylate, monotropitin, salicin, salicylic acid and spirein. °°)

Tannins 1% (alcoholic extract), 12.5% (aqueous extract).

Hydrolysable type; leaf extracts have also yielded catechols,\?
compounds normally associated with condensed tannins.

Volatile oils Many phenolic components including salicylates
(see above), benzyl alcohol, benzaldehyde, ethyl benzoate,
heliotropin, phenylacetate, vanillin.)

Other constituents Coumarin (trace), mucilage, carbohydrates
and ascorbic acid (vitamin C).

Food Use

Meadowsweet is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that meadowsweet can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities,
with a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.'“!® Previously, meadowsweet
has been listed by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as a
Herb of Undefined Safety.‘©?”

Herbal Use

Meadowsweet is stated to possess stomachic, mild urinary
antiseptic, antirheumatic, astringent and antacid properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for atonic dyspepsia with heartburn
and hyperacidity, acute catarrhal cystitis, rheumatic muscle and
joint pains, diarrhoea in children, and_ specifically for the
prophylaxis and treatment of peptic ulcer.'C? 9% 67 G8 6?

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 4-6g as an infusion three times daily\C%

Liquid extract 1.5-6.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'CS”

Tincture 2—4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Lowering of motor activity and rectal temperature, myorelaxation
and potentiation of narcotic action have been documented for
meadowsweet.") In addition, flower extracts have been reported to

Salicylates
CHO COOH CH20H
CY OH OH O-glucose
salicylaidehyde salicylic acid salicin
R
; _-O-primeverosyl
R
spiraein CHO
monotropitin COOCH3
HO
primeverosyl
\
HO CHp
HO °
HO. Oo
HO

Figure 1 Selected constituents of meadowsweet.

----- PAGE 435 -----
Meadowsweet

Figure 2 Meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria).

prolong life expectancy of mice, lower vascular permeability and
prevent the development of stomach ulcers in rats and mice.‘ !®
') However, meadowsweet has also been reported to potentiate
the ulcerogenic properties of histamine in the guinea-pig." The
anti-ulcer action documented for meadowsweet is associated with
the aqueous extract and greatest activity has been observed with
the flowers.”'' Meadowsweet has been reported to increase
bronchial tone in the cat”) and to potentiate the bronchospastic
properties of histamine in the guinea-pig.’ In vitro, meadows-
weet has been reported to increase intestinal tone in the guinea-
pig and uterine tone in the rabbit.”

Bacteriostatic activity against Staphylococcus aureus, Staphy-
lococcus epidermidis, Escherichia coli, Proteus vulgaris and
Pseudomonas aeruginosa has been documented for flower
extracts.(?)

Tannins are generally considered to possess astringent proper-
ties and have been reported as constituents of meadowsweet.
Meadowsweet is stated to promote uric acid excretion.'“”

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
meadowsweet and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials
are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for meadowsweet and further investigation of these
aspects is required.

Figure 3 Meadowsweet - dried drug substance (herb).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Salicylate constituents have been documented and therefore the
usual precautions recommended for salicylates are relevant for
meadowsweet (see Willow). Meadowsweet is stated to be used for
the treatment of diarrhoea in children, but in view of the salicylate
constituents, this is not advisable.

Bronchospastic activity has been documented in preclinical
studies and, therefore, it is prudent to advise that meadowsweet
should be used with caution by asthmatics.

Aqueous extracts have been reported to contain high tannin
concentrations and excessive consumption should therefore be
avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of meadowsweet to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In vitro utero-activity has been
documented for meadowsweet. In view of the salicylate constitu-
ents and the lack of toxicity data, the use of meadowsweet during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Czech Republic: Antirevmaticky Caj. France: Mediflor Tisane
Antirhumatismale No 2; Mediflor Tisane No 4 Diuretique;
Polypirine. Italy: Pik Gel. Spain: Dolosul; Natusor Harpago-
sinol; Natusor Renal. Switzerland: Urinex. UK: Acidosis;
Acidosis; Indigestion Mixture; Napiers Uva Ursi Tea; Roberts
Acidosis Tablets. USA: Amerigel.

References

1 Genic AY, Ladnaya LY. Phytochemical study of Filipendula ulmaria
Maxim. and Filipendula hexapetala Gilib. of flora of the Lvov region.
Farm Zh (Kiev) 1980; 1: 50-52.

2 Novikova NN. Use of Filipendula ulmaria in medicine. Tr Perm Farm
Inst 1969; 267-270.

3. Scheer T, Wicht! M. Zum Vorkommen von Kampferol-4'-O-B-p-
glucopyranoside in Filipendula ulmaria und Allium cepa. Planta Med
1987 53: 573-574.

4 Syuzeva ZB, Novikova NN. Flavonoid composition of Filipendula
ulmaria queen-of-the meadow. Nauch Tr Perm Farm Inst 1973; 5: 2-
26.

5 Barnaulov OD et al. Chemical composition and primary evaluation of
the properties of preparations from Filipendula ulmaria (L.) Maxim
flowers. Rastit Resur 1977; 13: 661-669.

6 Saifullina NA, Kozhina IS. Composition of essential oils from flowers
of Filipendula ulmaria, E denudata, and EF. stepposa. Rastit Resur
1975; 11: 542-544.

7 Thieme H. Isolierung eines neuen phenolischen glykosids aus den
bliiten von Filipendula ulmaria (L.) Maxim. Pharmazie 1966; 21: 123.

8 Valle MG et al. Das atherische 61 aus Filipendula ulmaria. Planta Med
1988; 54: 181-182.

9 Barnaulov OD et al. Preliminary evaluation of the spasmolytic
properties of some natural compounds and galenic preparations.
Rastit Resur 1978; 14: 573-579.

10 Barnaulov OD, Denisenko PP. Antiulcerogenic action of the decoction
from flowers of Filipendula ulmaria (L.). Pharmakol-Toxicol
(Moscow) 1980; 43: 700-705.

11 Yanutsh AY et al. A study of the antiulcerative action of the extracts
from the supernatant part and roots of Filipendula ulmaria. Farm Zh
(Kiev) 1982; 37: 53-56.

12. Catanicin-Hintz | et al. Action of some plant extracts on the bacteria
involved in urinary infections. Clujul-Med 1983; 56: 381-384.

----- PAGE 436 -----
- Melissa

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Randomised clinical trials have suggested that topical lemon
balm extract may have some effects on healing cutaneous
lesions resulting from HSV-1 virus infection, although further
rigorous studies are required to determine whether there is
any effect on recurrence of infection. There is some evidence
from randomised controlled trials of combination
preparations containing lemon balm leaf extract to support
the efficacy of such products in individuals with minor sleep
disorders, there has been little investigation of the effects of
lemon balm extract alone on sleep quality. Further studies are
required to determine the effects of preparations of lemon
balm leaf extract in individuals with sleep disorders.
Supporting evidence for the use of lemon balm for
gastrointestinal complaints is limited to in vitro work and
requires clinical investigation.

Small-scale, short-term studies indicate that oral
combination preparations containing lemon balm extract and
topical preparations of lemon balm extract are well tolerated.
However, there is a lack of research investigating the safety of
long-term administration of lemon balm. In view of the lack of
toxicity data, oral administration of lemon balm during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Melissa officinalis L. (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)
Balm, Faucibarba officinalis (L.) Dulac, Honeyplant, Lemon

Balm, Mutelia officinalis (L.) Gren. ex Mutel, Sweet Balm,
Thymus melissa Krause

Part(s) Used

Dried leaves and flowering tops

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007 (Lemon Balm)@**)

Complete German Commission E (Lemon Balm)?
ESCOP 2003'¢7°
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 20078?

)

G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G52.

Volatile oil —0.06-0.375% vim.'"° Contains at least 70
components,” including: monoterpenes >60%. Mainly alde-
hydes, including citronellal, geranial, neral; also citronellol,

(G2

Monoterpenes

S . UCH20H

CHO CHO

geraniol

a

A-caryophyllene

neral citronellal

Sesquiterpenes

germacrene D

Figure 1 Selected constituents of melissa.

geraniol, nerol, B-ocimene.”» Sesquiterpenes >35%. B-Caryo-
phyllene, germacrene D.

Flavonoids 0.5%. Including glycosides of luteolin (e.g. luteolin
3/-O-B-p-glucuronide), quercetin, apigenin and kaempferol.

Polyphenols Protocatechuic acid, hydroxycinnamic acid deriva-
tives,”) caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid, rosmarinic acid,” 2-(3/,4!-
dihydroxyphenyl)-1,3-benzodioxole-5-aldehyde.

Food Use

Lemon balm is used to give fragrance to wine, tea and beer.
Lemon balm (herb, flowers, flower tips) is listed by the Council of
Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category N2). This
category indicates that lemon balm can be added to foodstuffs in
small quantities, with a possible limitation of an active principle
(as yet unspecified) in the final product.'©!® Previously, lemon
balm has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As
Safe) C6

Herbal Use

Lemon balm has been used traditionally for its sedative,
spasmolytic and antibacterial properties.(°™ It is also stated to
be a carminative, diaphoretic and a febrifuge,“¢™
used for headaches, gastrointestinal disorders, nervousness and
rheumatism.” Current interest is focused on its use as a sedative,
and topically in herpes simplex labialis as a result of infection
with herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). The German
Commission E monographs state that lemon balm can be used
for nervous sleeping disorders and functional gastrointestinal

complaints.'°?

) and has been

----- PAGE 437 -----
426, Melissa

Figure 2 Melissa (Melissa officinalis).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 1.5—4.5 g as an infusion in 150 mL water several times
daily'C®

Topical application Cream containing 1% of a lyophilised
aqueous extract of dried leaves of Melissa officinalis (70: 1) two to
four times daily.(@°?)

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antiviral activity Aqueous extracts of Melissa officinalis have
been reported to inhibit the development of several viruses.’
8.652) The virucidal effect of several aqueous extracts of M.
officinalis against HSV-1 has been demonstrated in a rabbit
kidney cell line.” However, the extracts appeared to have no
activity against experimental HSV-1 infection in the eyes of
rabbits.”

Anti-human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) activity has
been reported for an aqueous extract of M. officinalis in in vitro
studies using MT-4 cells; the EDsy (50% effective dose for
inhibition of HIV-1-induced cytopathogenicity) was found to be
16 pg/mL." Furthermore, the aqueous extract demonstrated
potent inhibitory activity (EDs) = 62,g/mL) against HIV-1
replication (KK-1 strain, freshly isolated from a patient with
acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). In other in vitro
studies, an aqueous extract of M. officinalis inhibited giant cell
formation in co-cultures of MOLT-4 cells with and without HIV-1
infection, and showed inhibitory activity against HIV-1 reverse
transcriptase (EDs9 = 1.6 g/mL).

Aqueous extracts of M. officinalis have been reported to inhibit
protein biosynthesis in a cell-free system from rat liver cells, and it
has been suggested that this effect may be due to caffeic acid and a
component isolated from the glycoside fraction of the extract.)

The latter component appears to block the binding of the
elongation factor EF-2 to ribosomes, thus terminating peptide
elongation.”

Antimicrobial activity Antimicrobial activity of essential oil
extracted from M. officinalis by steam distillation, determined
using a micro-atmospheric technique, has been reported against
the yeasts Candida albicans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and
against Pseudomonas putida, Staphylococcus aureus, Micrococcus
luteus, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Proteus vulgaris, Shigella
sonnei and Escherichia coli.”

Other activity In studies in mice, a hydroalcoholic extract of M.
officinalis leaves administered intraperitoneally _ significantly
reduced behavioural activity in two tests, compared with control,
suggesting that the extract has sedative effects." In both tests,
the effect was maximum at 25mg/kg. The same _ extract
demonstrated peripheral analgesic activity by reducing acetic
acid-induced writhing and stretching in mice when administered
intraperitoneally at doses of 25-1600 mg/kg 30 minutes after
intraperitoneal administration of 1.2% acetic acid solution."
However, no analgesic effects were observed on heat-induced pain
(hotplate test) which suggests a lack of central analgesic activity.
In other tests, low doses (3 and 6mg/kg) of a hydroalcoholic
extract of M. officinalis leaves administered intraperitoneally
induced sleep in mice given an infrahypnotic dose of pentobarbi-
tal."') By contrast, in the same battery of tests, essential oil
obtained from M. officinalis by distillation did not demonstrate
sedative or sleep-inducing effects."

A 30% alcoholic extract of M. officinalis demonstrated an
antispasmodic effect on rat duodenum in vitro.‘

Aqueous methanolic extracts of the aerial parts of M.
officinalis demonstrated inhibition of lipid peroxidation in vitro
in both enzyme-dependent and enzyme-independent systems.\!)
The same tests carried out on the main known phenolic
components of M. officinalis revealed that rosmarinic acid,
caffeic acid, luteolin and luteolin-7-O-glucoside were more potent
inhibitors of enzyme-dependent lipid peroxidation than enzyme-
independent lipid peroxidation.

Clinical studies

Antiviral effects The effects of a topical preparation of a
standardised aqueous extract of M. officinalis leaves (drug/
extract 70:1) have been investigated in herpes simplex virus
(HSV) infection. In an open, multicentre study, 115 patients with

Figure 3 Melissa — dried drug substance (leaf and flowering tops).

----- PAGE 438 -----
HSV infection of the skin or transitional mucosa applied lemon
balm leaf extract five times daily for a maximum of 14 days;
complete healing of lesions was achieved after eight days of
treatment in 96% of participants."®'” Subsequently, a rando-
mised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 116
patients with HSV infection of the skin or transitional mucosa
reported statistically significant differences between the treat-
ment (applied locally two to four times daily over 5—10 days) and
placebo groups for some (including redness, physician's assess-
ment, patient's assessment), but not all, outcome measures (e.g.
extent of scabbing, vesication, pain). Another randomised,
double-blind trial that involved 66 patients with an acute episode
of recurrent (at least four episodes per year) herpes simplex
labialis compared verum cream (applied on the affected area four
times daily over five days) with placebo."® There was a
significant difference in the primary outcome measure —
symptom score after two days’ treatment — between the two
groups (p = 0.042). However, further investigation is required to
determine if time to recurrence is prolonged.

Sedative effects The acute sedative effects of several plant
extracts, including a preparation of M. officinalis leaves, were
explored in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover study involving 12 healthy volunteers.) M. officinalis
extract 1200mg was administered orally as a single dose about
two hours before administration of caffeine 100mg. Melissa
extract was one of the extracts tested that showed least effects on
increasing tiredness (i.e. it was no different from placebo) as
measured using a visual analogue scale score for alertness.

Several other studies have investigated the sedative effects of
combination preparations containing extracts of lemon balm and
valerian (Valeriana officinalis). A randomised, double-blind trial
involving healthy volunteers who received Songha Night (V.
officinalis root extract 120mg and M. officinalis leaf extract
80mg) three tablets daily taken as one dose 30 minutes before
bedtime for 30 days (7 = 66), or placebo (7 = 32), found that the
proportion of participants reporting an improvement in sleep
quality was significantly greater for the treatment group,
compared with the placebo group (33.3% versus 9.4%, respec-
tively; p = 0.04).°° However, analysis of visual analogue scale
scores revealed only a slight but statistically non-significant
improvement in sleep quality in both groups over the treatment
period. Another double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
patients with insomnia who received Euvegal forte (valerian
extract 160mg and lemon balm extract 80 mg) two tablets daily
for two weeks reported significant improvements in sleep quality
in recipients of the herbal preparation, compared with placebo
recipients.*” A placebo-controlled study involving 'poor sleepers!
who received Euvegal forte reported significant improvements in
sleep efficiency and in sleep stages three and four in the treatment
group, compared with placebo recipients.”

Other studies have investigated the sedative effects of
combination preparations of extracts of lemon balm, valerian
and hops (Humulus lupulus). In an open, uncontrolled, multi-
centre study, 225 individuals who were experiencing nervous
agitation and/or difficulties falling asleep and achieving unin-
terrupted sleep were treated for two weeks with a combination
preparation containing extracts of valerian root, hop grains and
lemon balm leaves.*” Significant improvements in the severity and
frequency of symptoms were reported, compared with the
pretreatment period. Difficulties falling asleep, difficulties sleep-
ing through the night, and nervous agitation were improved in
89%, 80% and 82% of participants, respectively.

Melissa

Side-effects, Toxicity

Small-scale, short-term (two weeks' duration) studies investigating
the sedative effects of oral combination preparations containing
lemon balm extract indicate that these preparations are well-
tolerated and do not appear to induce a ‘hangover effect’. In an
open, uncontrolled, multicentre study, 225 individuals who were
experiencing nervous agitation and/or difficulties falling asleep
and achieving uninterrupted sleep were treated for two weeks with
a combination preparation containing extracts of valerian root,
hop grains and lemon balm leaves.*) The tolerability of the
preparation was rated as 'good' or 'very good! by 97% of physicians
and 96% of patients. In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial involving healthy volunteers who received Songha
Night (V. officinalis root 120mg and M. officinalis leaf extract
80 mg) three tablets daily for 30 days (n = 66), or placebo (1 = 32),
the proportion of volunteers reporting adverse events was similar
in both groups (around 28%).°° Sleep disturbances and tiredness
were the most common adverse events reported during the study.
(Note: the study was designed to assess the effects of the
preparation on sleep quality.) No severe adverse events were
reported. A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study
involving 48 adults assessed the adverse effects of two weeks!
treatment with a combination preparation (valerian root extract
95mg, hops extract 15mg and lemon balm leaf extract 85 mg)
taken alone or with alcohol." Compared with placebo, the herbal
combination preparation did not have adverse effects on
performance (e.g. concentration, vigilance). Furthermore, co-
administration of the combination preparation with alcohol did
not have potentiating effects on performance parameters." No
serious adverse events were observed during the study.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of a
topical preparation containing 1% dried extract of M. officinalis
leaves (drug/extract 70:1) involving 116 patients with HSV
infection of the skin or transitional mucosa reported that there
were no statistically significant differences between the treatment
and placebo groups with regard to the frequency of adverse
effects.” Adverse events reported were minor (irritation, burning
sensation); there were no reports of allergic contact reactions.
However, skin sensitisation may occur with melissa.(@°*

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of melissa to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of toxicity data,

oral administration of lemon balm during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided. Topical use of lemon balm during pregnancy
and lactation is unlikely to be problematic.

roprietary single-ingredient preparations

Austria: Lomaherpan. Belgium: Dormiplant. Chile: Citromel.
Czech Republic: Lakinal; Medovka Lekarska; Medunkovy,
Medunkova. Germany: Gastrovegetalin; Lomaherpan; Me-
Sabona; Sedinfant. Russia: Novo-Passit (Hoso-Iaccut). Swit-
zerland: Valverde Boutons de fievre creme.

----- PAGE 439 -----
Melissa

Regium; Solucion Schoum. Switzerland: Arterosan Plus;
Baldriparan; Cardiaforce; Carmol; Dormiplant; Dragees pour
la detente nerveuse; Gastrosan; Hyperiforce comp; Iberogast;
Relaxane; Relaxo; Songha Night; Soporin; Tisane calmante
pour les enfants; Tisane favorisant l'allaitement; Tisane pour
l'estomac; Tisane pour le coeur et la circulation; Tisane pour le
sommeil et les nerfs; Tisane pour nourissons et enfants;
Valverde Detente dragees; Valviska. UK: Boots Alternatives
Sleep Well; Boots Sleepeaze Herbal Tablets; Melissa Comp.;
Napiers Echinacea Tea; Valerina Day Time; Valerina Day-
Time; Valerina Night-Time; Valerina Night-Time.

References

1. Tittel G e¢ al. Uber die chemische Zusammensetzung von
Melissendlen. Planta Med 1982; 46: 91-98.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

21

24

Carnat AP et al. The aromatic and polyphenolic composition of lemon
balm (Melissa officinalis L. subsp. officinalis) tea. Pharm Acta Helv
1998; 72: 301-305.

Sarer E, K6kdil G. Constituents of the essential oil from Melissa
officinalis. Planta Med 1991; 57: 89-90.

Heitz A et al. Luteolin 3/-glucuronide, the major flavonoid from
Melissa officinalis subsp. officinalis. Fitoterapia 2000; 71: 201-202.
Tagashira M, Ohtake Y. A new antioxidative 1,3-benzodioxole from
Melissa officinalis. Planta Med 1998; 64: 555-558.

Kucera LS, Herrmann ECJr. Antiviral substances in plants of the mint
family (Labiatae). I Tannin of Melissa officinalis. Proc Soc Exp Biol
Med 1967; 124: 865-869.

Herrmann ECJr, Kucera LS. Antiviral substances in plants of the mint
family (Labiatae). II Nontannin polyphenol of Melissa officinalis.
Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1967; 124: 869-874.

May G, Willuhn G. Antivirale Wirkung wassriger Pflanzenextrakte in
Gewebekulturen. Arzneimittelforschung 1978; 28: 1-7.

Dimitrova Z et al. Antiherpes effect of Melissa officinalis L. extracts.
Acta Microbiol Bulg 1993; 29: 65-72.

Yamasaki K e¢ al. Anti-HIV-1 activity of herbs in Labiatae. Biol Pharm
Bull 1998; 21: 829-833.

Chlabicz J, Galasinski W. The components of Melissa officinalis L.
that influence protein biosynthesis in-vitro. J Pharm Pharmacol 1986;
38: 791-794.

Larrondo JV et al. Antimicrobial activity of essences from labiates.
Microbios 1995; 82: 171-2.

Soulimani R et al. Neurotropic action of the hydroalcoholic extract of
Melissa officinalis in the mouse. Planta Med 1991; 57: 105-109.
Soulimani R et al. Recherche de I'activitébiologique de Melissa
officinalis L. sur le systéme nerveux central de la souris in vivo et le
duodenum de rat in vitro. Plantes Méd Phytothér 1993; 26: 77-85.
Hohmann J et al. Protective effects of the aerial parts of Salvia
officinalis, Melissa officinalis and Lavandula angustifolia and their
constituents against enzyme-dependent and enzyme-independent lipid
peroxidation. Planta Med 1999; 65: 576-578.

Wolbling RH, Milbradt R. Klinik und Therapie des Herpes simplex.
Therapiewoche 1984; 34: 1193-1200.

Wolbling RH, Leonhardt K. Local therapy of herpes simplex with
dried extract from Melissa officinalis. Phytomedicine 1994; 1: 25-31.
Koytchev R et al. Balm mint extract (Lo-701) for topical treatment of
recurring Herpes labialis. Phytomedicine 1999; 6: 225-230.

Schulz H et al. The quantitative EEG as a screening instrument to
identify sedative effects of single doses of plant extracts in comparison
with diazepam. Phytomedicine 1998, 5: 449-458.

Cerny A, Schmid K. Tolerability and efficacy of valerian/lemon balm
in healthy volunteers (a double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre
study). Fitoterapia 1999; 70: 221-228.

Dressing H et al. Verbesserung der Schlafqualitat mit einem
hochdosierten Baldrian-Melisse-Praparat. Eine plazebokontrollierte
Doppelblindstudie. Psychopharmakotherapie 1996; 3: 123-130.
Dressing H et al. Baldrian-Melisse-Kombinationen versus
Benzodiazepin. Bei Schlafstérungen gleichwertig? Therapiewoche
1992; 42: 726-736.

Orth-Wagner S et al. Phytosedativum gegen Schlafstarungen. Z
Phytother 1995; 16: 147-156.

Herberg K-W. Nebenwirkungen pflanzlicher Beruhigungsmittel. Z
Allgemeinmed 1996; 72: 234-240.

----- PAGE 440 -----
Milk Thistle

Teas prepared from milk thistle fruits or herb are not
commonly used as only a small proportion of silymarin gets
into the aqueous extract such that pharmacologically active
doses are not attained. For this reason, in Germany teas are
recommended only as supportive treatment in functional gall
bladder disorders and not for antihepatotoxic effects.(¢? In
Germany, milk thistle fruit (3-5 g) as an infusion three or four
times daily is also indicated for mild digestive disorders.”

There are some toxicity and safety data for milk thistle
which, together with data on the adverse effects reported in
clinical trials, provide good evidence for the safety of milk
thistle when used at recommended doses in the short term.
However, further data on the long-term safety of milk thistle
use are required.

Species (Family)

Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Lady's Thistle, Mariana lactea Hill, Marian Thistle, Mediterra-
nean Milk Thistle, St Mary's Thistle.

Part(s) Used

Fruits (often referred to as 'seeds'), herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHP 1996”)
BP 200708

Complete German Commission EC”
Martindale 35th edition'‘“*»

Ph Eur 20078”
USP29/NF24'C8°)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
Milk thistle is not included in the GSL.“@*”)

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Fruit

Flavolignans 1.5-3% silymarin, a mixture containing approxi-
mately 50% silibinin (=  silybin, silybinin), silichristin and
silidianin, as well as  silimonin, isosilichristin, isosilibinin,
silandrin, silhermin, neosilihermins A and B, 2,3-dehydrosilibinin
and tri- to pentamers of silibinin (silybinomers).

Flavonoids Quercetin, taxifolin and dehydrokaempferol.”
Lipids 20-30%. Linoleic acid, oleic acid and palmitic acid.
Sterols Cholesterol, campesterol and stigmasterol.

Other constituents Mucilages, sugars (arabinose, rhamnose,
xylose, glucose), amines and saponins.)

Leaves
Flavonoids Apigenin, luteolin and kaempferol and their glyco-
sides.”

Other constituents
triterpene acetate.”
Silymarin is not found in the leaves.

B-Sitosterol and its glucoside, and a

Food Use

Milk thistle is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Traditionally, milk thistle fruits have been used for disorders of the
liver, spleen and gall bladder such as jaundice and gall bladder
colic. Milk thistle has also been used for nursing mothers for
stimulating milk production, as a bitter tonic, for haemorrhoids,
for dyspeptic complaints and as a demulcent in catarrah and
(G2, G32, G34, G35, G50, G64) 7

pleurisy. It is stated to possess hepatopro-
tective, antioxidant and choleretic properties."

Current interest is focused on the hepatoprotective activity of
milk thistle and its use in the prophylaxis and treatment of liver
damage and disease.

The leaves have also been used for the treatment of liver, spleen
and gall bladder disorders and as an antimalarial, emmenagogue
and for uterine complaints. Milk thistle leaf preparations are
available today, although most research has been conducted with
preparations of the fruit since the leaf does not contain the
pharmacologically active component silymarin.

----- PAGE 441 -----
Milk Thistle

Flavanolignans
0.
HO fe) CX
: fe)
‘OH

OH O

silybin (silybinin)

gxCH2OH

OCH;

OH

OH O
silandrin

OH O

silydianin
Figure 1 Selected constituents of milk thistle.
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Fruit Crude drug 12-15 g daily in divided doses (equivalent to
silymarin 200-400 mg daily).'@?

Herb Approximately 1.5 g of finely chopped material as a tea, two
or three cups daily.

The doses of silymarin used in clinical trials have ranged from
280-800 mg/day (equivalent to milk thistle extract 400-1140 mg/
day standardised to contain 70% silibinin).© For hepatic
disorders, doses of up to 140 mg (equivalent to 60 mg silibinin)
two or three times daily have been suggested.“©*)

In Germany, the recommended regimen for treatment of
Amanita phalloides poisoning with a standardised silymarin
preparation (Legalon) is a total dose of silibinin (as the disodium
dihemisuccinate) (20 mg/kg body weight) over 24 hours, divided
into four intravenous infusions each given over a 2-hour
period.(C S59)

Pharmacological Actions

Several pharmacological activities have been documented for milk
thistle fruit, including hepatoprotective, antioxidant, anti-inflam-
matory, antifibrotic and antitumour properties, as well as
inhibition of lipid peroxidation, stimulation of protein biosynth-

Flavonoids

OH O
taxifolin (2,3-dihydroquercetin)

esis and acceleration of liver regeneration. Silymarin (an isomer
mixture comprising mainly silibinin, silichristin and silidianin) is
the pharmacologically active component of milk thistle fruit;
silibinin is the main component of silymarin. There is an extensive
literature on the pharmacological effects of silymarin and
silibinin, particularly with regard to their hepatoprotective
activity which provides supporting evidence for the clinical uses.
The pharmacology and clinical efficacy of milk thistle have been
reviewed.'' 5°55) The following represents a summary of
selected publications on this subject.

There is a lack of research investigating the pharmacological
effects of preparations of milk thistle leaf.(C% 3"

In vitro and animal studies

Antioxidant activity Silymarin and _ silibinin (silybin) are
antioxidants that react with free radicals (e.g. reactive oxygen
species) transforming them into more stable and less reactive
compounds.'’* Silymarin and silybin have been reported to
inihibit lipid peroxidation induced by iron-linked systems in rat
liver microsomes"”® and protect against phenylhydrazine-induced
lipid peroxidation in rat erythrocytes.) Furthermore, in rats,
intraperitoneal silymarin has been shown to increase total
glutathione in the liver, intestine and stomach and to improve
the reduced glutathione to oxidised glutathione ratio.” Silymarin
has been shown to inhibit copper-induced oxidation of human

----- PAGE 442 -----
Figure 2. Milk thistle (Silybum marianum).

low-density lipoprotein (LDL) in vitro in a concentration-
dependent manner. Silybin appears to be the constituent of
silymarin responsible for the LDL antioxidant effect. In contrast,
silichristin and silydianin appeared to act as pro-oxidants, but
without significantly reducing the total LDL antioxidant capacity
of silymarin.

Free radicals are recognised as having an important role in
several pathological processes, including inflammation, necrosis,
fibrosis, atherosclerosis, carcinogenesis and ageing and in the
hepatotoxic mechanisms of various substances. The antioxidant
activity of silymarin is thought to contibute to its hepatoprotective
properties." 9)

Hepatoprotective properties In vitro studies using isolated
hepatocytes have documented the protective activity of silymarin
and several of its components against cell damage induced by
various cytotoxic substances."

In vivo studies in rats and mice have demonstrated the
hepatoprotective activity of silymarin and silybin in acute liver
toxicity induced by various toxic agents with different mechan-
isms of action, including carbon tetrachloride, galactosamine,
thioacetamide, ethanol, paracetamol (acetaminophen), thallium,
phalloidin and o&-amanitin (the main toxic constituents of the
mushroom A. phalloides)." Experimental studies in chronic liver
toxicity induced by repeated administration of carbon tetrachlor-
ide, heavy metals, thioacetamide and several drugs, including
azathioprine and indometacin, have also demonstrated that
administration of silymarin and silybin protects against
damage." Other studies have reported protective effects of
silymarin against liver injury induced by ischaemia’ and gamma
irradiation.''?)

Studies in rabbits fed a high-fat diet for 12 weeks have shown
that histopathological alterations were least advanced in animals
which also received a silymarin—phospholipid complex." In rats,
silymarin inhibited the development of diet-induced hypercholes-
terolaemia.*) The hypocholesterolaemic effects of silymarin may
be due to the effects of silymarin on lipoprotein metabolism."

Milk Thistle

The effects of silymarin on biliary bile salt secretion have been
seen in studies in rats.” Intraperitoneal silymarin (25, 50, 100
and 150 mg/kg/day) for five days induced a dose-dependent
increase in bile flow and bile salt secretion. Stimulation of bile
salt secretion was mainly accounted for by an increase in the
biliary secretion of the hepatoprotective bile salts B-muricholate
and ursodeoxycholate.

Nephroprotective properties Silibinin injected into rats prior to
administration of cisplatin afforded protection of glomerular and
proximal tubular function.""*!” Silibinin does not affect the
cytotoxic activity of cisplatin.” Intraperitoneal silibinin (5 mg/
kg) administered to rats 30 minutes before ciclosporin decreased
ciclosporin-induced lipid peroxidation but produced no protective
effect on the glomerular filtration rate.°”

Anticancer activity Silybin at concentrations of 0.1-20 jtmol/L
inhibited the growth of drug-resistant ovarian cancer cells and
doxorubicin-resistant breast cancer cells in vitro.?! Furthermore,
silybin in the range of 0.1-1.0,1mol/L potentiated the effect of
cisplatin and doxorubicin in experimental tumour cell lines. When
applied to the skin of SENCAR mice, silymarin gave protection
against the effects of the tumour promoters 12-O-tetradecanoyl-
phorbol (TPA) and okaidic acid (OA).°” Topical application of
silymarin prior to that of TPA and OA completely inhibited
induction of tumour necrosis factor « (TNFa) mRNA expression
in the epidermis. Substantial protection from photocarcinogenesis
in mice treated with phorbol ester or 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)
anthracene has been demonstrated.**?) The antitumour effect is
primarily at stage 1 tumour promotion and silymarin acts by
inhibiting cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2) and interleukin 1 (IL-
1a).° Such effects may involve inhibition of promoter-induced
oedema, hyperplasia, the proliferation index and oxidant state.)
Treatment of serum-starved human prostate carcinoma DU145
cells with silymarin resulted in significant inhibition of transform-
ing growth factor « (TGFa)-mediated activation of the epidermal
growth factor receptor erbB1.°° There was also a decrease in
tyrosine phosphorylation of an immediate downstream target, the
adapter protein SHC, together with a decrease in binding to
erbB1. In the silymarin-treated cell lines there was a significant
induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CDKIs) Cip1/
p21 and Kip/p27 concomitant with a significant decrease in CDK4
expression, but no changes in the levels of CDK2 and CDK6 and
their associated cyclins E and D1, respectively. Additional
experiments showed that there was a significant inhibition of
constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation of both erbB1 and SHC, but

Figure 3. Milk thistle - dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 443 -----
Milk Thistle

no changes in their protein levels. The results indicated that
silymarin may exert a strong anticarcinogenic effect against
prostate cancer and that this effect is likely to involve impairment
of the erbB1-SHC-mediated signalling pathway, induction of
CDKIs and resultant G, arrest.?

There was a significant inhibition of mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) ERK activity at lower doses in epidermal A431
cells treated with silymarin, whereas higher doses activated
MAPK/JNK1.°”) Silymarin exerted a strong anticarcinogenic
effect against human breast carcinoma cells MDA-MB468 with G,
arrest in cell cycle progression and also induction in protein
expression of the CDKI Cip/p21.°°

The cancer chemoprevention and anticarcinogenic effects of
silymarin have been shown to be due to its major constituent
silibinin.°” Silibinin decreases prostate-specific antigen (PSA) in
hormone-refractory human prostate carcinoma LNCaP cells and
inhibits cell growth via G, arrest.°

Silibinin was fed orally to SENCAR mice and its tissue
distribution investigated.” Free silibinin mainly accumulated in
the liver, although it was also distributed in other organs.
Increases in  glutathione-S-transferase and quinone reductase
activities in the liver, lung, stomach, skin and small bowel were
the bioavailability of and
phase II enzyme induction of silibinin in different tissues where
silymarin has been shown to be a strong cancer chemopreventive
agent.

observed. The results demonstrate

Anti-inflammatory activity  Silymarin administered orally
reduced foot-pad abscesses in a dose-dependent manner in the
carrageenan rat-paw oedema test (EDso = 62.4 mg/kg). In the
xylene-induced inflammation test, topically applied silymarin was
comparable with indometacin.°” Silymarin given intraperitone-
ally to mice resulted in inhibition of leukocyte accumulation in
inflammatory exudates and reduced the neutrophil count.‘
Activation of NF-«B induced by TNE, phorbol ester, okaidic acid
and ceramide was blocked by silymarin in a dose-dependent
manner.» Silymarin also inhibited TNF-induced activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase and c-Jun N-terminal kinase.°?)
The inhibition of activation of NF-«B and the kinases may provide
part of the molecular ba: nflammatory and
anticarcinogenic effects of  silymarin. Silymarin potently
suppressed both NF-kB-DNA binding activity and its dependent
gene expression induced by okaidic acid in the hepatoma cell line
Hep G2.°* In addition, silymarin inhibits COX-2 and IL-1a.°”

for the anti
(33)

Gastric ulcer protective effects Oral administration of silymarin
to rats prevented gastric ulceration induced by cold-restraint
stress.°° Gastric secretion volume and acidity were not affected,
but histamine concentration was significantly decreased. It was
suggested that the anti-ulcerogenic effect of silymarin may be
related to inhibition of enzymic peroxidation by the lipoxygenase
pathway.°) The protective effect of silymarin on gastric injury
induced in rats by ischaemia—reperfusion and its effects on
mucosal myeloperoxidase has been compared with that of
allopurinol.° The mean ulcer indexes (4.75, 4.50 and 3.63 ui,
respectively) of rats treated with 25, 50 and 100 mg/kg silymarin
were significantly lower than in control rats, although allopurinol
was considerably more potent (2.3 ui; 100 mg/kg).°

Other effects Silymarin has been shown to prevent alloxan-
induced diabetes mellitus in rats, possibly due to its antioxidant
activity and increases in plasma and pancreatic glutathione
concentrations.°”)

It has been reported that Silybum marianum and silymarin
beneficially affect skin elasticity A  phospholipid-silymarin
complex (Silymarin—Phytosome) evaluated for its topical effects
against croton oil dermatitis in mice and UV-induced erythema in
humans showed reduction of oedema and inhibition of myeloper-
oxidase activity."® A standardised extract of S. marianum
significantly inhibited porcine elastase in vitro.°” An 80%
ethanol extract of S. marianum aerial parts showed activity
against Bacillus subtilis, Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus
haemolyticus, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus
mirabilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Salmonella typhi.“

Clinical studies

Clinical trials with milk thistle preparations have focused on their
use in alcoholic liver disease, cirrhosis and acute viral and chronic
hepatitis. However, several trials have included patients with liver
disease of different aetiology, e.g. alcoholic and non-alcoholic
cirrhosis. There is also interest in the use of silymarin in toxin-
and drug-induced hepatitis, for example following ingestion of the
death cap mushroom A. phalloides.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre
trial involving 200 alcoholic patients with histologically or
laparoscopically proven liver cirrhosis investigated the effects of
administration of silymarin (150mg) three times daily.“ The
results indicated that silymarin had no effect on survival and the
clinical course in these patients: 125 patients (silymarin 7 = 57 and
placebo n = 68) completed the two-year study period, during
which 29 died (n 15 and 14 for silymarin and placebo,
respectively; no statistically significant difference).

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial,
patients with alcoholic (7 = 91) or non-alcoholic (n = 79)
cirrhosis received silymarin (140 mg) three times daily or placebo
for two years.) The four-year survival rate was significantly
higher in silymarin-treated patients than in placebo recipients
(58% versus 39%, respectively, p = 0.036). Subgroup analysis
indicated that the effect of silymarin on mortality was more
pronounced in those patients with alcoholic cirrhosis.

Another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
carried out over four years reported a significantly higher survival
treated with silymarin

rate in patients with alcoholic cirrhosi
(420 mg) daily compared with placebo recipients, although the
effect in patients with non-alcoholic cirrhosis was less marked.“
Other controlled trials have also investigated the effects of
silymarin in patients with alcohol-related liver damage. S:
these,“ but not all,“° reported statistically significant
benefits with silymarin, e.g. on serum transaminases, compared
with placebo." In a randomised controlled trial, 60 patients with
diabetes caused by alcoholic liver cirrhosis received silymarin
(600 mg/day) or no silymarin treatment for six months.) At the
end of the study period, the mean values for fasting blood glucose,
daily blood glucose, daily glycosuria, glycosylated haemoglobin,
daily insulin requirement, malondialdehyde and glucagon-stimu-
lated C peptide were significantly lower in silymarin-treated
patients than in those who did not receive silymarin treatment.
A pilot study involving 20 patients with chronic active hepatitis
randomised to receive a silybin—phosphatidylcholine complex
preparation (IdB1016; Silipide) (240 mg) twice daily or placebo for
seven days reported significant reductions in the mean serum
concentrations of aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), y-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT) and
total bilirubin in silybin complex-treated patients compared with

values in placebo recipients.® The same preparation has been

everal of

----- PAGE 444 -----
reported to reduce serum concentrations of liver enzymes (AST
and ALT) in 65 patients with chronic persistent hepatitis in a
randomised placebo-controlled trial.“

A Cochrane systematic review of trials assessing milk thistle
preparations for the treatment of alcoholic and/or hepatitis B or C
virus induced liver disease included 13 randomised trials involving
a total of 915 patients.” The methodological quality of included
trials was considered to be low: only 23% reported an adequate
method for concealment of treatment allocation and only 46%
were adequately double-blinded. When all trials were considered,
mortality due to liver disease was found to be significantly reduced
in the milk thistle group compared with controls (relative risk
(95% confidence interval) 0.50 (0.29 to 0.88)), but not when data
from only high-quality trials were assessed (0.57 (0.28 to 1.19)).
There were no statistically significant differences for milk thistle,
compared with placebo or no treatment controls, with respect to

all-cause mortality, complications of liver disease and_ liver
))

histology.

The hepatoprotective effects of silymarin in 222 de novo
tacrine-treated patients with mild to moderate dementia of the
Alzheimer type were investigated in a randomised, double-blind
(for silymarin), placebo-controlled, multicentre, 12-week trial.”
Patients received tacrine plus silymarin (420 mg/day) (7 = 110) or
tacrine plus placebo (m = 112); silymarin (and placebo) were
initiated one week before tacrine (40 mg/day for six weeks then
80 mg/day for six weeks). An intention-to-treat analysis indicated
that there was no difference in serum ALT concentrations between
the two groups, but that silymarin-treated patients experienced
significantly fewer gastrointestinal and cholinergic side-effects
without any impact on cognitive status than did placebo
recipients.)

The effects of silymarin in preventing psychotropic drug-
induced hepatic damage have been investigated in a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.°?) Sixty women aged 40-
60 years who had been taking phenothiazines or butyrophenones
for at least five years and who had AST and ALT activity twice
normal values were randomised to continued treatment with
psychotropic agents or suspension of treatment and to silymarin
(800 mg/day) or placebo for 90 days. The findings indicated that
treatment with silymarin reduced the lipoperoxidative hepatic
damage associated with prolonged administration of butyrophe-
nones and phenothiazines and that the protec
greater when treatment with these psychotropic agents was
suspended for three months.”

There have been numerous case reports, many of which report
favourable outcomes, on the therapeutic use of silymarin and
silibinin, usually given in combination with standard treatment, in
poisoning caused by ingestion of the death cap mushroom A.
phalloides, although there are no controlled trials in this
(1,52°55,655) Silibinin is usually given intravenously and
case reports have indicated that early administration appears to be
important.° ”)

ve effect was

indication.

Pharmacokinetics Studies of the pharmacokinetics of silymarin
and its components and of a_ silibinin-phosphatidylcholine
complex preparation (IdB 1016; Silipide) in both healthy
volunteers and patients with cirrhosis and those who have
undergone cholecystectomy have been 1, G50, G55)
Approximately 20-50% of silymarin is absorbed following oral
administration and approximately 80% of the dose, whether
administered orally or intravenously, is excreted in the bile.°*
Studies in healthy volunteers have reported an elimination half-life
of approximately six hours following administration of single

reviewed. '

Milk Thistle

dos

silibinin.

of silymarin corresponding to approximately 240mg
°.6°) Other studies have compared the pharmacokinetics
of different silymarin preparations and shown statistically
significant differences in bioavailability.

The bioavailability of a silybin—phosphatidylcholine complex
preparation (IdB 1016) has been shown to be several times greater
than that of silymarin in single-dose studies involving healthy

volunteers) and patients with hepatic cirrhosis.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Clinical safety and toxicity data for milk thistle are limited and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

No adverse events were noted in a pharmacokinetic study
involving healthy male volunteers following single oral doses of
silymarin corresponding to up to 254 mg silibinin.
linical trials involving patients with liver disorders of various
origin and who received oral silymarin at doses of up to 600-

800 mg/day for up to six months have reported that no adverse
42, 47, 52)

effects were observed.

Data from drug monitoring studies involving more than 3500
patients, including one study involving 2637 patients with various
types of chronic liver disease treated with silymarin (Legalon)
(560 mg/day) for eight weeks, have indicated that the frequency of
adverse effects with silymarin is approximately 1%. Adverse
effects are mainly transient, non-serious, gastrointestinal com-
plaints.4° 9 Tt is stated that silymarin may occasionally
produce a mild laxative effect.'©?)

A case report from Australia described a reaction associated
with a preparation of milk thistle. The symptoms included
episodes of severe sweating, abdominal cramping, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhoea and weakness and these were verified by
rechallenge.® Another report described a case of anaphylactic
shock in a 54-year-old man with immediate-type allergy to kiwi
fruit.” He experienced facial oedema, swelling of the oral
mucosa, bronchospasm, respiratory distress and decreased blood
pressure after taking a preparation of milk thistle; a skin-prick
test of an extract of milk thistle fruit elicited an immediate-type
reaction.

Preclinical data

The acute toxicity of oral and intravenous silymarin and silibinin
has been investigated in various animal species (mice, rats, rabbits
and dogs). Oral silymarin administered to mice and dogs at
doses of 20 and 1 g/kg, respectively, did not cause adverse effects or
mortality. Long-term oral administration of silymarin (100 mg/kg/
day) to rats for 16 or 22 weeks did not reveal any adverse effects.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. In view of the lack of long-term safety data,
excessive use of milk thistle should be avoided (except where its
use may help to prevent toxicity caused by other substances).

Milk thistle is contra-indicated for individuals with hypersen-
sitivity to species of Asteraceae.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of milk thistle to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

----- PAGE 445 -----
Milk Thistle

Skottova N et al. Activities of silymarin and its flavolignans upon low
density lipoprotein oxidizability in vitro. Phytother Res 1999; 13: 535—
537.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of toxicity data, use 10
of milk thistle preparations during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

Thistle Plus. Austria: Hepabene; Rutiviscal; Wechseltee
Severin. Canada: Milk Thistle Extract Formula; Milk Thistle.
Czech Republic: Alvisan Neo; Hepabene; Hypotonicka;
Naturland Grosser Swedenbitter; Ungolen. France: Mediflor
Tisane Circulation du Sang No 12. Germany: Antihypertoni-
cum §; Bilisan Duo; Cholhepan N; Cholosom-Tee; Gallexier;
Heumann Verdauungstee Solu-Lipar; Iberogast; Ilja Rogoff.
Hungary: Hepabene. Italy: Epagest; Venoplus. Portugal:
Cholagutt. Russia: Hepabene (Mena6ene); Herbion Drops for
the Heart (fep6uon Cepaeuupre Karan). Singapore: Hepatofalk
Planta. Switzerland: Demonatur Gouttes pour le foie et la bile;
Iberogast; Tisane hepatique et biliaire. USA: Liver Formula.

References

1 Morazzoni P, Bombardelli E. Silybum marianum (Carduus marianus).
Fitoterapia 1995; 66: 3-42.

2 Awang D. Milk thistle. Can Pharm J 1993; 403-404, 422.

3 Pepping J. Milk thistle: Silybum marianum. Am J Health-Syst Pharm
1999; 56: 1195-1197.

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

24

26

27

Valenzuela A, Garrido A. Biochemical basis of the pharmacological
action of the flavonoid silymarin and its structural isomer silibinin.
Biol Res 1994; 27: 105-112.

Wu CG et al. Protective effect of silymarin on rat liver injury induced
by ischaemia. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Mol Pathol 1993; 64: 259—
263.

Kropacova K et al. Protective and therapeutic effect of silymarin on
the development of latent liver damage. Radiat Biol Radioecol 1998;
38: 411-415.

Drozdzik M et al. Effect of silymarinphospholipid complex on the
liver in rabbits maintained on a high-fat diet. Phytother Res 1996; 10:
406-409.

Krecman V et al. Silymarin inhibits the development of diet-induced
hypercholesterolemia in rats. Planta Med 1998; 64: 138-142.
Skottova N, Krecman V. Silymarin a potential hypocholesterolaemic
drug. Physiol Res 1998; 47: 1-7.

Crocenzi FA et al. Effect of silymarin on biliary bile salt secretion in
the rat. Biochem Pharmacol 2000; 59: 1015-1022.

Gaedeke J et al. Cisplatin nephrotoxicity and protection by silibinin.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 1996; 11: 55-62.

Bokemeyer C et al. Silibinin protects against cisplatin-induced
nephrotoxicity without compromising cisplatin or ifosfamide anti-
tumour activity. Br J Cancer 1996; 74: 2036-2041.

Zima T et al. The effect of silibinin on experimental cyclosporine
nephrotoxicity. Renal Failure 1998; 20: 471-479.

Scambia G et al. Antiproliferative effects of silybin on gynaecological
malignancies: synergism with cisplatin and doxorubicin. Eur J Cancer
1996; 32A: 877-882.

Zi X et al. Novel cancer chemopreventative effects of a flavonoid
constituent silymarin: inhibition of mRNA expression of an
endogenous tumour promoter TNFalpha. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 1997; 239: 334-339.

Katiyar SK et al. Protective effects of silymarin against
photocarcinogenesis in a mouse skin model. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;
89: 556-566.

Zhao J et al. Significant inhibition by the flavonoid antioxidant
silymarin against 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate caused
modulation of anti oxidant and inflammatory enzymes and
cyclooxygenase 2 and interleukin-1 alpha expression in SENCAR
mouse epidermis: implications in the prevention of stage | tumour
promotion. Mol Carcinogen 1999; 26: 321-333.

Lahiri-Chatterjee M et al. A flavonoid antioxidant, silymarin, affords
exceptionally high protection against tumour promotion in the
SENCAR mouse skin tumorigenic model. Cancer Res 1999; 59: 622—
632.

Zi X et al. A flavonoid antioxidant, silymarin, inhibits activation of
erbB1 signaling and induces cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, G;
arrest and anticarcinogenic effects in human prostate carcinoma
DU145 cells. Cancer Res 1998; 58: 1920-1929.

Zi X, Agarwal R. Modulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
activation and cell cycle regulators by the potent skin cancer
preventative agent silymarin. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999;
263: 528-536.

4 Leng-Peschlow E. Properties and medical use of flavolignans 28 Zi X et al. Anticarcinogenic effect of a flavonoid antioxidant,
(silymarin) from Silybum marianum. Phytother Res 1996; 10: $25-26. silymarin, in human breast cancer cells MDA-MB468: induction of G;
5 Pascual C et al. Effect of silymarin and silybinin on oxygen radicals. arrest through an increase in Cip1/p21 concomitant with a decrease in
Drug Dev Res 1993; 29: 73-77. kinase activity of cyclin-dependent kinases and associated cyclins. Clin
6 Mira L et al. Scavenging of reactive oxygen species by silibinin Cancer Res 1998; 4: 1055-1064. 7
dihemisuccinate. Biochem Pharmacol 1994; 48: 753-759. 29 Bhatia N et al. Inhibition of human carcinoma cell growth and DNA
7 Bindoli A et al. Inhibitory action of silymarin of lipid peroxide synthesis by silibinin, an active constituent of milk thistle: comparison
formation in rat liver mitochondria and microsomes. Biochem with silymarin. Cancer Lett 1999; 147: 784. : .
Ph 11977; 26: 2405-240 30 Zi X et al. Silibinin decreases prostate-specific antigen with cell
jarmacol 1977; 26: 05: 9. . oa. growth inhibition via G, arrest, leading to differentiation of prostate
8 Valenzuela Act al. Antioxidant Propertics of the flavonoids silybin carcinoma cells: implications for prostate cancer intervention. Proc
and (+)-cyanidanol-3: comparison with butylated hydroxyanisole and Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96: 7490-7495.
butylated hydroxytoluene. Planta Med 1986; 19: 438-440. 31 Zhao J, Agarwal R. Tissue distribution of silibinin, the major active

9 Valenzuela A et al. Selectivity of silymarin on the increase of the
glutathione content in different tissues of the rat. Planta Med 1989;
55: 420-422.

constituent of silymarin, in mice and its association with enhancement
of phase II enzymes: implications in cancer chemoprevention.
Carcinogenesis 1999; 20: 2101-2108.

----- PAGE 446 -----
32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

De La Puerta R et al. Effect of silymarin on different acute
inflammation models and in leukocyte migration. J Pharm Pharmacol
1996; 48: 968-970.

Manna SK et al. Silymarin suppresses TNF-induced activation of NF-
kappaB, c-Jun N-terminal kinase and apoptosis. J Immunol 1999; 163:
6800-6809.

Saliou C et al. Selective inhibition of NF-kappaB activation by the
flavonoid hepatoprotector silymarin in HepG2. FEBS Lett 1998; 440:
8-12.

De La Lastra C e¢ al. Gastric antiulcer activity of silymarin, a
lipoxygenase inhibitor, on rats. ] Pharm Pharmacol 1992; 44: 929-931.
De La Lastra C et al. Gastroprotection induced by silymarin, the
hepatoprotective principle of Silybum marianum in ischaemia—
reperfusion mucosal injury: role of neutrophils. Planta Med 1995; 61:
116-119.

Soto CP et al. Prevention of alloxan-induced diabetes mellitus in the
rat by silymarin. Comp Biochem Physiol 1998; 119C: 125-129.
Bombardelli E et al. Ageing skin: protective effect of silymarin—
Phytosome’ . Fitoterapia 1991; 62: 115-122.

Benaiges A et al. Study of the refirming effect of a plant complex. Int J
Cosmet Sci 1998; 20: 223-233.

Izzo AA et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
antibacterial activity. Phytother Res 1995; 9: 281-286.

Pares A et al. Effects of silymarin in alcoholic patients with cirrhosis
of the liver: results of a controlled, double-blind, randomized and
multicenter trial. J Hepatol 1998; 28: 615-621.

Ferenci P et al. Randomized controlled trial of silymarin treatment in
patients with cirrhosis of the liver. ] Hepatol 1989; 9: 105-113.
Benda L et al. The influence of therapy with silymarin on the survival
rate of patients with liver cirrhosis. Wien Klin Wschr 1980; 92: 678—
683.

Salmi H, Sarna S. Effect of silymarin on the chemical, functional and
morphological alterations of the liver. Scand ] Gastroenterol 1982; 17:
517-521.

Feher J et al. Hepatoprotective activity of silymarin Legalon’ therapy
in patients with chronic alcoholic liver disease. Orv Hetil 1989; 130:
2723-2727.

Trinchet JC et al. Traitement de I'hépatite alcoolique par la
silymarine. Une étude comparative en double insu chez 116 malades.
Gastroenterol Clin Biol 1989; 13: 120-124.

Velussi M et al. Silymarin reduces hyperinsulinaemia,
malondialdehyde levels, and daily insulin need in cirrhotic diabetic
patients. Curr Ther Res 1993; 53: 533-545.

Buzzelli G et al. A pilot study on the liver protective effect of silybin—
phosphatidylcholine complex (IdB1016) in chronic active hepatitis. Int
J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol 1993; 31: 456-460.

Marcelli R et al. Cited by Morazzoni P et al. Silybum marianum
(Carduus marianus). Fitoterapia 1995; 66: 3-42. Eur Bull Drug Res
1992; 1: 131-135.

50

S1

52

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

Milk Thistle

Rambaldi A et al. Milk thistle for alcoholic and/or hepatitis B or C
virus liver diseases (review). Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, 2005, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD003620.

Allain H et al. Aminotransferase levels and silymarin in de novo
tacrine-treated patients with Alzheimer's disease. Dementia Geriat
Cogn Disord 1999; 10: 181-185.

Palasciano G et al. The effect of silymarin on plasma levels of malon-
dialdehyde in patients receiving long-term treatment with
psychotropic drugs. Curr Ther Res 1994; 55: 537-545.

Klein AS et al. Amanita poisoning: treatment and the role of liver
transplantation. Am J Med 1989; 86: 187-193.

Floersheim GL et al. Die Klinische Knollenblatterpilzverg; Frung:
prognostische faktoren und therapeutische massnahmen. Schweiz Med
Wochenschr 1982; 112: 1164-1177.

Carducci R et al. Silibinin and acute poisoning with Amanita
phalloides. Minerva Anestesiol 1996; 62: 187-193.

Hruby K et al. Pharmacotherapy of Amanita phalloides poisoning
using silybin. Wien Klin Wochenschr 1983; 95: 225-231.

Hruby K et al. Chemotherapy of Amanita phalloides poisoning with
intravenous silibinin. Hum Toxicol 1983; 2: 183-190.

Mennicke WH. Zur biologischen Verfiigbarkeit und
Verstoffwechselung von Silybin. Dtsch Apoth Ztg 1975; 115: 1205—
1206.

Lorenz D et al. Pharmacokinetic studies with silymarin in human
serum and bile. Meth Find Exp Clin Pharmacol 1984; 6: 655-661.
Weyhenmeyer R et al. Study on the dose-linearity of the
pharmacokinetics of silibinin diastereomers using a new stereospecific
assay. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther Toxicol 1992; 30: 134-138.

Cho J-Y et al. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of two formulations
containing silymarin: Legalon 140™ cap and Silymarin™, J Korean
Soc Clin Pharmacol Ther 1998; 6: 119-127.

Schulz H-U et al. Untersuchungen zum Freisetzungsverhalten und zur
Bioaquivalenz von Silymarin—Praparaten. Arzneimittelforschung 1995;
4S: 61-64.

Barzaghi N et al. Pharmacokinetic studies on 1dB 1016, a silybin—
phosphatidylcholine complex, in healthy human volunteers. Eur J
Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 1990; 15: 333-338.

Orlando R et al. Silybin kinetics in patients with liver cirrhos'
comparative study of silybin—phosphatidylcholine complex and
silymarin. Med Sci Res 1990; 18: 861-863.

Albrecht M, Fredrick H. Therapy of toxic liver pathologies with
Legalon. Z Klin Med 1992; 47: 87-92.

Anon. An adverse reaction of the herbal medication milk thistle

na

(Silybum marianum). Adverse Drug Reactions Advisory Committee.
Med J Aust 1999; 170: 218-219.

Geier J et al. Anaphylactic shock due to an extract of Silybum
marianum in a patient with immediate-type allergy to kiwi fruit.
Allergologie 1990; 13: 387-388.

----- PAGE 447 -----
Mistletoe

ations, or their isola omponents, are effe e
the treatment of cancer or as adjunctive treatments in cancer.
Further research using rigorous clinical trial methodology to
test the effects of well-characterised mistletoe extracts is
warranted.

Reviews of clinical trials which have provided an assessment
of the safety of mistletoe, generally have reported mistletoe
preparations to be well tolerated. The most frequently
reported adverse events in trials using lectin-standardised
mistletoe preparations are local reactions, such as urticaria
and/or erythema at the injection site, which usually resolve
within 48 hours.

The toxic nature of the mistletoe constituents (e.g. lectins,
viscotoxins) indicates that mistletoe is unsuitable for self-
medication. Mistletoe berries are poisonous and, in the UK,
sale/supply is restricted to pharmacies only and by or under
the supervision of a pharmacist.

Species (Family)

Viscum album L. (Loranthaceae)

Synonym(s)

Viscum

Part(s) Used
Leaf, fruit (berry), twig

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHMA 2003
BHP 1996”)

Complete German Commission E'C?)
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

(G37)

Mistletoe is not included in the GSL.'

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
References 1 and 2 and General Reference G2.

Acids Fatty acids (Cy)—Cy2), 80% oleic and palmitic, myrisitic;>)

phenolic acids, e.g. caffeic, p-coumaric, gentisic, p-hydroxyben-
zoic, p-hydroxyphenylacetic, protocatechuic, vanillic;'>* anisic,
quinic and shikimic.°**

Alkaloids It has been suggested that alkaloids can be passed on
from hosts to parasitic plants such as mistletoe (e.g. nicotine
alkaloids have been isolated from mistletoe growing on Solana-
ceae shrubs).

Amines Acetylcholine, choline, B-phenylethylamine, histamine,
propionylcholine and tyramine.

Flavonoids Chalcones, e.g. 2'-hydroxy-4', 6’-dimethoxy-chal-
cone-4-O-glucoside, 2'-hydroxy-3, 4’, 6’-trimethoxychalcone-4-O-
glucoside, 2'-hydroxy-4' ,6’-dimethoxychalcone-4-O-(apiosyl-
12)-glucoside.‘"”

Flavanones, e.g. (2R)-5,7-dimethoxyflavanone-4’-O-glucoside,
(28)-3', 5, 7-trimethoxyflavanone-4’-O-glucoside, homoeriodictyol
(4/,5,7-trihydroxy-5’-methoxyflavanone.'"”)

Flavones, e.g. quercetin, isorhamnetin, sakuranetin, rhamnazin
(3,4’,5-trihydroxy-3’,7-dimethoxyflavone; quercetin 3',7-dimethyl
ether) and its glycoside rhamnazin-3,4'-di-O-glucoside and other
quercetin methyl ethers.“"”

Lectins Lectins are heterodimeric glycoproteins (mol. wt between
55kDa and 63kDa),'” which belong to a group of type 2
ribosome-inactivating proteins (RIPs) and are structurally similar
to ricin. They are composed of two distinct subunits, one B-
subunit (B-chain, the galactose-binding site; 34kDa) and one
toxophoric A-subunit (A-chain, the cytotoxic-binding site, RNA-
N-glycosidase; 29kDa). The structure of the B-chain of mistletoe
lectins is based on 264 amino acids. Seven cysteine residues and
three N-linked carbohydrate chains are included. Mistletoe lectins
(V, album agglutinin-1, viscumin (mol. wt 60000)) are galactoside-
specific plant lectins (63 kDa). Three different mistletoe lectins
have been isolated: ML-1 (main component; broad range of
affinity for o/B-linked galactopyranosyl residues), ML-2 (affinity
for D-galactose and N-acetyl-p-galactosamine) and ML-3 (affinity
for N-acetyl-p-galactosamine). The chitin-binding lectin (chitin-
binding-agglutinin, visalb-CBA or visalb-CBL), which is distinct

----- PAGE 448 -----
from ML-1, ML-2 and ML-3, is a homodimer lectin with two
identical subunits (10.8kDa). Its amino acid composition is
similar to that of other chitin-binding hololectins.'” Reported
yields of ML-1, ML-2 and ML-3 from leaves and stems are 3-
170 mg/100g dry weight, 0.1-35mg/100g dry weight, and 0-
67 mg/100g dry weight, respectively.”

ML-1, ML-2 and ML-3 have been isolated from Iscador Qu
Special and Iscador M Special. Iscador P contains almost no
mistletoe lectins (R Dierdorf, personal communication, Septem-
ber 2003).

Terpenoids An acyclic monoterpene glucoside, 2,6-dimethylocta-
2,7-diene-1,6-diol-6-O-[6’-B-p-apiofuranosy]]-B-p-glucopyrano-
side, has been isolated from leaves and stems.) Phytosterols,
including B-sitosterol, stigmasterol and glycosides, together with
pentacyclic triterpenes B-amyrin and its acetate, betulinic acid,
oleandrin and oleanolic acid are present.” '°

Viscotoxins Viscotoxins (mol. wt 5 kDa) have been isolated from
leaf homogenates. Viscotoxins are amphipathic, strongly basic
polypeptides that are highly enriched with cysteine residues; they
belong to the family of a- and B-thionins." Viscotoxins consist of
46 amino acid residues with three disulphide bonds, which

Flavonoids
Chalcones Rr!

Rr! R
2’-hydroxy-4’ ,6’-dimethoxychalcone-4-O-glucoside H gic
2’-hydroxy-3,4’,6’-trimethoxychalcone-4-O-glucoside OCH; gic
2’-hydroxy-4’,6’-dimethoxychalcone-4-O- H — ap-gic

(apiosyl 1 2)-glucose

Flavanones

rR! R2 R? Rt

5,7-dimethoxyflavanone-4’-O-glucoside OCH; OCH; gic H
3’,5,7-trimethoxyflavanone-4’-O-glucoside OCH3 OCHgs gic OC
homoeriodictyol OH OH OH OC

Flavones

Ri
quercetin OH OH
isorhamnetin OH OCH3
rhamnazin OCH3 OCH3

gic = glucosyl, ap = apiosyl

Figure 1 Selected constituents of mistletoe.

Mistletoe

stabilise the conformation of the molecule. Several different
viscotoxins have been isolated, the main ones being viscotoxins

A2, A3 and B.

Other constituents Lignans Syringaresinol 4,4’-O-diglucoside
(eleutheroside E).‘”

Phenylpropanoids Syringenin-4’-O-glucoside (syringin), syrin-
genin-4/-O-apiosyl-1—+2-glucoside (syringoside).'

Polyalcohols 1-p-1-O-Methyl-muco-inositol (a derivative of O-
methyl-inositol),(©?) mannitol, pinitol, quebrachitol and viscu-
mitol.

Polysaccharides Mainly a methylester of 1+4a-galacturonic acid
in the leaves and rhamnogalacturans in the berries. Pectin (mol.
wt 42kDa), arabinogalactan (mol. wt 110kDa) are present in
leaves, and a rhamnogalacturan (mol. wt 700kDa) is found in
the berries. The berries contain acidic (mol. wt 1340 kDa) and

(mol. wt 30kDa) polysaccharides. The acidic poly-

saccharides interact with ML-1. Simple sugars and tannins are

also present.“

neutral

Terpenoids

HO 36

CH2OH
2,6-dimethylocta-2,7-diene-1 ,6-diol-6-O-(6-O-B-p-
apiofuranosyl)-f-o-glucopyranoside

Lignans

syringaresinol-4,4’-O-diglucoside
(eleutheroside E)

Phenylpropanoids

CHgO. CH20H
HO

OCH
syringenin

Figure 2 Selected constituents of mistletoe.

----- PAGE 449 -----
Mistletoe

Food Use

Mistletoe is not generally used as a food. The branches and
berries of mistletoe are listed by the Council of Europe as natural
sources of food flavouring (category N3).'©'% This category
indicates that mistletoe may be added to foodstuffs in the
traditionally accepted manner, although there is insufficient
information available for an adequate assessment of potential
toxicity.

Herbal Use

Mistletoe is stated to possess hypotensive, cardiac-depressant and
sedative properties. Traditionally, it has been used for high blood
pressure, arteriosclerosis, nervous tachycardia, hypertensive head-
ache, chorea and hysteria.'? 67 9% S°)

Modern use of mistletoe preparations is focused on use as a
treatment and as an adjuvant treatment in cancer. Clinical studies
of mistletoe preparations have assessed mistletoe preparations as a
treatment, or as an adjunctive treatment, in patients with different
types of cancers. A small number of other clinical trials have been
conducted involving patients with chronic hepatitis C infection,
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and respiratory
infections. (see Pharmacological Actions, Clinical studies).

Figure 3 Mistletoe (Viscum album).

~\ ‘
Figure 4 Mistletoe — dried drug substance (twig).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in
standard herbal reference texts for the traditional uses are given
below.

Dried leaves 2-6 g as an infusion three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 1-3 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Tincture 0.5 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Infusion 40-120 mL (1:20 in cold water) daily.©”

Soft extract 0.3-0.6mL (1:8 infusion or tincture) three times
daily.'C”

The administration of mistletoe preparations as adjunctive
treatments in cancer is mostly by subcutaneous injection, and the
manufacturer's recommendations for the specific mistletoe pre-
parations should be followed. Dosages used in clinical trials
assessing different mistletoe preparations, therefore, vary widely
and are often complex; dosage regimens also vary depending on
the type of cancer being treated. Trials involving ML-1
standardised mistletoe preparations usually describe the dose of
mistletoe extract in terms of the equivalent amount of ML-1. For
example, in a trial involving patients with head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma, an ML-1 standardised mistletoe extract
(Eurixor) equivalent to ML-1 Ing/kg body weight twice weekly
was given by subcutaneous injection over a 60-week period in
treatment cycles of 12 weeks followed by a break in treatment after
every four weeks."

Pharmacological Actions

There is a vast scientific literature relating to the biochemical and
pharmacological effects of mistletoe and its constituents,
particularly the lectin and viscotoxin constituents, which are
believed to be the active principles.) There is also a substantial
literature on clinical investigations with mistletoe extracts and
purified components, and at least one scientific meeting focused
solely on research into mistletoe in cancer therapy.

In vitro and animal studies

Preclinical research has focused on investigating the cytotoxic and
immunomodulatory activities of mistletoe and its constituents,
although other effects, such as agglutinating and hypotensive
properties have also been documented. These activities have been
summarised in several comprehensive reviews.'”!?'*'®) A brief
summary of some of the scientific literature on the properties of
mistletoe and its constituents is given below. Evaluation,
interpretation and comparison of preclinical studies is not
straightforward as studies have investigated the effects of different
types of mistletoe extracts and commercial products, some of
which are not characterised or their composition is not adequately
described in reports of studies; a number of other studies have
used purified mistletoe lectins and/or viscotoxins.

Cytotoxic and anticancer activities The lectin and, to a lesser
extent, viscotoxin constituents of mistletoe are the main cytotoxic
components.) Cytotoxic activity in vitro has been documented
for mistletoe extracts and for purified mistletoe lectins and
viscotoxins. In one study, aqueous extracts (ABNOBAviscum) of
mistletoe sourced from two host trees and purified mistletoe
lectins II and III inhibited cell growth for several tumour cell lines,
including murine B cell hybridomas, P815 (murine mastocytoma),
EL-4 (murine thymoma), MOLT-4 (human T cell acute lympho-

----- PAGE 450 -----
blastic leukaemia) and U937 (human _ histiocytoma). For
example, the mistletoe extract sourced from apple trees at a
dilution of 1:10 (corresponding to aqueous extract 0.15 mg/mL)
resulted in 98% inhibition of the growth of the MOLT-4 tumour
cell line. The effects of another mistletoe extract (Isorel M), also
obtained from mistletoe grown on apple trees, on normal and
tumour cell growth were compared with those of its low and high
molecular weight components and mistletoe lectins in vitro using
melanoma B16 cell cultures. At the highest concentration tested
(2g/mL), all preparations significantly inhibited [*H]thymidine
incorporation into melanoma cells, compared with control.?”
However, separately, the low and high molecular weight
components achieved less inhibition than the total mistletoe
extract, suggesting that the constituents of both fractions are
needed for optimal activity.

In another in vitro study, mistletoe lectin I and purified
viscotoxins (ratio of viscotoxins A2: A3:B was 1:1.6:0.6) showed
cytotoxic activity against MOLT-4 cells as well as Yoshida
sarcoma cells and K562 human myeloid cells in a concentration-
dependent manner.?" Mistletoe lectins I, II and III showed

cytotoxic activity against sensitive and resistant human colon
(22)

cancer cell lines in a concentration-dependent manner in vitro.
The mechanism of growth arrest demonstrated with mistletoe
extracts in in vitro studies using human and murine tumour cell
ines was shown to be due to the induction by mistletoe
constituents of programmed cell death (apoptosis). Induction
of apoptosis by mistletoe extracts (various Iscador preparations)
has also been demonstrated in endothelial cells.? The apoptosis-
inducing properties and hence cytotoxicity of V. album extracts
depend on the content of active compounds, mainly the mistletoe
ectins, the content of which in turn is dependent on factors such
as the host tree and the manufacturing process.?*? Further-
more, other compounds present in mistletoe extract may modulate
the cytotoxic activity.
It has recently been reported following in vitro studies in

hepatocarcinoma cells that mistletoe lectin II from Korean
mistletoe induces apoptosis by inhibiting telomerase, an enzyme
that maintains protein—nucleic acid complexes (telomeres) at the
ends of chromosomes.” This effect appeared to be mediated via
a pathway independent of p53.

Antitumour activity in animal models has been demonstrated
for several different commercial preparations of mistletoe extract,
and for mistletoe lectins. In one study, mice bearing a hind-limb
melanoma B16F10 tumour were given a single dose (100 mg/kg
body weight, intraperitoneally) of a mistletoe extract (Isorel M)
obtained from mistletoe growing on apple trees. Compared with a
control group (which received a saline injection), mice treated

with mistletoe showed a statistically significant reduction in

tumour volume measured two days after mistletoe administra-
tion.°” Inhibition of tumour growth was documented for an
aqueous mistletoe extract (Lektinol, containing mistletoe lectins
405 g/mL), administered intraperitoneally or subcutaneously at
doses equivalent to mistletoe lectins 30 and 300 ng/mL/kg per day
for up to four weeks, in mice with Renca (renal cell carcinoma),
C8 colon 38 carcinoma and F9 testicular carcinoma, when
compared with control.'*) No such inhibitory effect was observed
in mice with Lewis lung carcinoma and B16 melanoma under the
same conditions.

Anticarcinogenic activities have been described for a bacterially
fermented mistletoe extract (Iscador M; mistletoe grown on apple
trees).”?) Methylcholanthrene-induced sarcoma formation was
inhibited in mice treated with Iscador M (1.66 mg twice weekly for
15 weeks, intraperitoneally), compared with a control group. In

Mistletoe

separate experiments, mistletoe was reported to markedly inhibit
the development of lung metastases when co-administered with
metastatic B16F10 melanoma cells through the lateral tail vein;?”
however, the results from this experiment were not subjected to
statistical testing. Antimetastatic activity has also been documen-
ted for other commercial mistletoe preparations (e.g. Lektinol,
Helixor) standardised for mistletoe lectin content in other in vivo
studies (mice).°°>”

Immunomodulatory activity Certain types of immune cells,
such as natural killer (NK) cells, can lyse tumour cells; this can
occur with or without activation by cytokines.” Extracts of
mistletoe have been shown to enhance the cytolytic activity of NK
cells in studies using human peripheral blood mononuclear cells
and a human cancer cell line (K562 leukaemia).°*) Several other
studies have described the enhancing effects of mistletoe extracts
and their isolated components on natural killer activity of
peripheral blood mononuclear cells in vitro and in vivo.”

Components of mistletoe have also been reported to induce the

proliferation of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells in
0,

vitro.’ In one study, of six mistletoe extracts tested, an extract
(Iscador P) derived from mistletoe grown on pine trees induced the
strongest proliferative response on peripheral blood mononuclear
cells from non-treated individuals.” This extract is almost devoid
of lectins, suggesting that a non-lectin-associated antigen from
this extract is responsible for the observed effects.

Stimulation of cytokine release (e.g. interleukin 1 (IL-1), IL-2,
IL-6, IL-12, tumour necrosis factor «% (TNFa)) by mistletoe
extracts or mistletoe lectins has been demonstrated in various
experimental studies in vitro."2°*?

Immunostimulant activity in mice, demonstrated for example
by an increase in the phagocytic activity of peritoneal macro-
phages, has been documente
mistletoe extrac
In vivo immunostimulant activity in mice (humoral and cellular),
demonstrated by an enhancement of delayed hypersensitivity and
antibody formation to sheep red blood cells, has been documented
for the crude plant juice, Iscador and for a polysaccharide fraction
isolated from the berries.°*) Activity was attributed to stimulation
of the monophagocytic system and to induction of inflammation.
The results indicated that the immunostimulant property of
mistletoe is not solely attributable to the polysaccharides found in
the berries (plant juice also active) or to the lactobacilli content of
the fermented plant juice (crude extract also active). Non-specific
immunological effects with mistletoe extracts are reported to be
dependent on the frequency and quantity of the applied extract.°”)

for mistletoe lectin 1 and for

s standardised for mistletoe lectin 1 content.‘?)

Agglutinating activity Agglutinating activity that is preferential
towards tumour cells over erythrocytes has been exhibited by
Iscador and by a lectin fraction.“°) The lectins have been shown
to bind to a number of cells including erythrocytes (non-specific
to blood type),*** lymphocytes, leukocytes, macrophages,
glycoproteins and plasma proteins.“ *» Binding has been found
to be stereospecific towards units containing a D-galactose
molecule,“”** although p-galactose units with unmodified
hydroxyl groups at C2, C3; and Cy, inhibit erythrocyte agglutina-
tion.“” Tyrosine residues are also thought to be involved in the
agglutination process. Plasma proteins compete for the lectin
receptor site and, therefore, decre: the agglutination of
erythrocytes and tumour cells.“* Unlike many other sugars,
lactose units have also been found to inhibit erythrocyte
agg! utination.“”

Mistletoe lectins have been reported to prevent viscotoxin- and
allergen-stimulated histamine release from human leukocytes.”

----- PAGE 451 -----
Mistletoe

Hypotensive effect The hypotensive effect documented for
mistletoe has been attributed to various biologically active
constituents such as acetylcholine, histamine, gamma aminobu-
tyric acid (GABA), tyramine and flavones.'©*" The exact nature of
the hypotensive effect of mistletoe seems unclear: it has been
reported that activity is mainly due to an inhibitory action on the
excitability of the vasomotor centre in the medulla oblongata.”
However, it has also been stated that the hypotensive action of
mistletoe is mainly of a reflex character, exerting a normalising
effect on both hypertensive and hypotensive states. The effect
of different mistletoe plant parts and host plant on the
hypotensive activity has been studied with highest activity
reported for mistletoe leaves parasitising on willow.°”

Antimicrobial activity Extracts of the V. album subspecies
album, abietis, austriacum and pallasiana have been tested for
activity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37A in vitro. Ether
extracts of the V. album subspecies album, abietis and austriacum
and petroleum ether extracts of the subspecies abietis and
austriacum were active against M. tuberculosis (minimum
inhibitory concentration, MIC: 200pg/mL for each).°! From
these results, it is not possible to determine whether polar or non-
polar compounds are responsible for the observed antimycobac-
terial activity.

Clinical studies

Numerous clinical studies of mistletoe preparations have been
carried out, mostly in the area of oncology, although few used
rigorous randomised controlled clinical trial methodology and
meet today's good clinical practice standards for the conduct of
clinical trials. Collectively, the results of these studies are difficult
to interpret as they involved patients with different types of
cancer, who were or were not receiving different types of
conventional cancer treatment (surgery, radiotherapy and/or
cancer chemotherapy), and investigated the effects of different
mistletoe preparations which vary markedly in their qualitative
and quantitative composition. Hence, results regarding efficacy
(and safety) need to be considered for each individual
product.

Nevertheless, several narrative reviews and systematic reviews
of clinical trials of mistletoe preparations involving patients with
cancer have been published. In short, there is insuffi
from well-designed clinical trials that mistletoe preparations, or
their isolated components, are effective in the treatment of cancer
or as adjunctive treatments in cancer. Although a small number of
reasonably well-designed trials have reported statistically sig-
nificant results for mistletoe, compared with controls, at present,
there is insufficient evidence to support the use of any specific
mistletoe preparation in the treatment of any specific type of
cancer. Further research using rigorous clinical trial methodology
to test the effects of well-characterised mistletoe extracts is
warranted. A summary of the clinical trial evidence relating to
mistletoe preparations is given below.

ent evidence

Pharmacokinetics There is a lack of clinical pharmacokinetic
data for the constituents of mistletoe preparations.

Therapeutic effects Cancer A systematic review of prospective,
controlled clinical trials of mistletoe preparations in the
treatment of cancers included 23 studies, of which 16 involved
random allocation to treatment, two involved quasi-randomi-
sation and the remaining five were non-randomised studies;
three of the studies were nested within an epidemiological
cohort study.” In total, the trials involved over 3500 patients

with different types of cancer (and at different stages),
including breast (1 = 4 studies), lung (4), colorectal (3),
melanoma (2), stomach, kidney, bladder, glioma, and head and
neck (1 each); several trials studied more than one cancer type.
Most trials tested the anthroposophical mistletoe preparations
Iscador and Helixor (7 = 14 and 3, respectively), whereas in six
the intervention was Eurixor. In most trials, the mistletoe
intervention was administered in addition to conventional
treatment (cancer chemotherapy, radiotherapy, corticosteroids
and/or surgery) and compared with conventional treatment
alone; other trials involved a no-treatment control group, or
compared the mistletoe preparation directly with conventional
treatment. Only two studies included a placebo control group,
and blinding of the intervention was not undertaken in any of
the trials (reliable blinding is hard to achieve as parenteral
administration of mistletoe can cause local skin reactions at
the injection site).°?) An assessment of the methodological
quality of the included clinical trials revealed that many of the
studies had methodological limitations to their design and/or
analysis and that most did not meet contemporary standards in
these respects.

The results of this group of clinical trials need to be
considered critically because of the poor methodological
quality of the studies. Furthermore, the heterogeneity of the
studies precluded a quantitative assessment of effect size.” Of
the 23 trials, 12 recorded statistically significant results in
favour of the mistletoe intervention, compared with control, in
at least one clinically relevant outcome measure (e.g. mean/
median survival time, five-/six-year survival rate). Of the five
trials that incorporated a quality-of-life outcome measure,
three reported statistically significant results in favour of
mistletoe, compared with control, one reported no effect and
one result was omitted from the original publication of the
study. Three other trials reported statistically significant results
for mistletoe, compared with control, in reducing the
frequency of adverse effects of concomitantly administered
conventional cancer treatments. In summary, although several
trials reported positive results for certain mistletoe prepara-
tions, the data are inconclusive because of the studies!
methodological limitations, and further research using well-
designed and properly conducted trials is necessary.”
Another systematic review of prosp
trials of mistletoe preparations involving patients with cancer
employed stricter inclusion/exclusion criteria: only randomised
trials were considered. The review included 10 studies, eight of

e

ive controlled clinica

which were included in the systematic review”) described
above; the other two studies were available only as a conference
abstract and unpublished data from a manufacturer of a
mistletoe preparation, which prevented their thorough critical
analysis.°°) Of the eight trials for which a full ass
methodological quality was possible, the best five scored 3
points from a maximum of 5; as with the previous review,") a
quantitative analysis of data from the included studies was not
possible because of the heterogeneity of the trials. From this
review, it was concluded that the evidence does not provide
strong support for the efficacy of mistletoe preparations as a
treatment for cancer, or as supportive therapy in cancer.)

The two reviews®>*

ssment of

») described above have superseded a
previous systematic review” of controlled clinical trials of
mistletoe preparations in cancer, although there is little
difference in the respective conclusions of the more recent
and older reviews. The earlier review included 11 controlled
trials, only one of which was judged to be of high

----- PAGE 452 -----
methodological quality, although even this did not involve
masking (blinding) of the intervention. This trial was the only
study included in the review that did not show a beneficial
effect on outcome for a mistletoe preparation. The review
concluded that mistletoe extracts could not be recommended in
the treatment of patients with cancer, except in the setting of
clinical trials.

One other review (which does not fully describe the methods
used so must be described as non-systematic) included only
those trials which had evaluated the effects of well-charac-
terised mistletoe extracts standardised for their content of
mistletoe lectins I, I and III]. The conclusions of the review
concur with those of systematic reviews in that mistletoe
preparations do not have an established place in oncology and
that further rigorous clinical trials are necessary.°°) This
review did not involve a formal assessment of the methodo-
logical quality of included studies, but did highlight that two
trials"'°® only were conducted using contemporary rigorous
clinical trial methodology and in accordance with the
principles of good clinical practice. These two studies were
included in the two recent systematic reviews?*?) described
above, but at the time, data from one study were available
only in promotional literature produced by a manufacturer of a
mistletoe preparation.

One of these stud:
ML-1 standardised mistletoe extract (Eurixor) involving 477
patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.
Participants were stratified into two groups — surgery only,

or surgery followed by radiotherapy groups — and randomised
(11)

was a randomised controlled trial of an

to receive additional treatment with the mistletoe extract.
The dosage regimen for mistletoe extract was equivalent to
ML-1 Ing/kg body weight twice weekly by subcutaneous
injection over a 60-week period in treatment cycles of 12 weeks
followed by a break in treatment after every four weeks.
Mistletoe treatment was commenced 1-4 days before surgery
in 72% of participants; the remainder (for whom early
administration was not possible) first received mistletoe shortly
after undergoing surgery.

In total, 200 (42%) of the 477 participants experienced a
relapse during the follow-up period (median four years for
surviving participants); there was no statistically significant
difference between the mistletoe and control groups in
incidence of relapse and in the development of metastases
and second primary tumours.” In an_ intention-to-treat
analysis, there was no statistically significant difference
between the two groups in disease-free survival, the primary
efficacy parameter (adjusted hazard ratio, 95% confidence
interval (CI): 0.959, 0.725-1.268). There were also no
statistically significant differenc
control groups in secondary outcome measures (immune
parameters, quality-of-life score) assessed at different time
points throughout the study. The conclusion of the study was
that the ML-1 standardised mistletoe extract tested (Eurixor) is

not effective as an adjuvant treatment for patients with head
(1)

s between the treatment and

and neck cancer.

The second of these studies (now published as an abstract so
full details are still not available) was a randomised, double-
blind, multicentre trial involving 272 patients with breast
cancer who had undergone surgery and were receiving
treatment with cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and 5-fluor-
ouracil. In addition, they received one of three doses of
mistletoe extract (Lektinol) equivalent to 5, 15 or 35ng ML-1,
or placebo, twice weekly by subcutaneous injection for 15

Mistletoe

weeks. This was the first study to incorporate double-blinding
into the study design, although it is not clear from the
published information how this was achieved and whether or
not a check on the success of blinding was carried out.
Participants who received the intermediate dose of mistletoe
extract had statistically significant improvements in quality-of-
life scores, compared with those in the placebo group; this
result was not observed with the lower and higher doses of
mistletoe extract.

This result is difficult to interpret from a dose-response
perspective. However, the assumption that the optimal dose of
a herbal medicine is the highest tolerated dose has been
challenged previously, particularly since some herbal medi-
cines, including mistletoe, appear to act at least in part through
immunostimulatory or immunomodulatory mechanisms.°”
This view is borne out by the results of the present study®”
since the apparently effective dose of mistletoe extract
(equivalent to ML-1 15 ng, twice weekly) was not the highest
dose tested (mistletoe extract equivalent to ML-1 35 ng, twice
weekly). Furthermore, the effective dose was much lower than
that administered in a previous study‘'”) (equivalent to ML-1
Ing/kg body weight, albeit of a different ML-1 standardised
mistletoe extract) which found no effect for mistletoe extract,
compared with control, on quality of life. The hypothesis that
high doses of mistletoe extract adversely affect quality of life
requires testing.

The results of another prospective randomised controlled
trial, which have now been published in more detail since
(52,53) Were conducted, have echoed previous
findings that mistletoe extract (in this case, Iscador M) is not
effective as an adjuvant treatment in cancer. Patients involved
in this study had either high-risk stage II (thickness > 3 mm) or
stage III (regional lymph node metastases) melanoma without
distant metastases.“ The study, carried out by the German

systematic reviews

Cancer Society (DKG), at present is published only as a joint
report with another randomised controlled trial set up by the
European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer
(EORTC) to assess the value of low doses of the recombinant
interferons (rIFNs) rIFN-o2B8 and rIFN-y; the DKG study
contributed patients randomised to the rIFNs and control
groups. With respect to mistletoe, the report provides analysis
only for the Iscador M group versus the control group, and not
for Iscador M versus rIFNs.

The DKG study randomised 407 patients to receive Iscador
M in escalating doses as recommended (n = 102), rIFN-x2B
1 MU subcutaneously every other day (1 = 101), rIFN-y 0.2 mg
subcutaneously every other day (7 = 102), or control (m = 102),
for one year, or until tumour progression. The Iscador M
regimen was as follows: escalating doses from 0.01 to 1.0 mg/
mL (volume administered not stated) every other day over two
weeks, resumed after three treatment-free days for 14 doses of
20 mg/mL every other day, followed by seven treatment-free
days, and repeated over one year (or until tumour progres-
sion).*)

In an intention-to-treat analysis, there was no statistically
significant difference between the mistletoe group and the
control group with respect to the primary end-point of the
study, the disease-free interval, and duration of survival
(estimated hazard ratio (95% Cl): 1.32 (0.93-1.87), p = 0.12
and 1.21 (0.84-1.75), p = 0.31 for disease-free interval and
survival, respectively). Thus, adjuvant treatment with Iscador
M in patients with melanoma did not lead to a more favourable
outcome, when compared with control.* The findings raised

----- PAGE 453 -----
Mistletoe

the hypothesis that mistletoe treatment potentially may have an
adverse effect in patients with melanoma by stimulating
melanoma cell proliferation.

Another prospective, randomised, controlled, multicentre
trial, conducted in China, compared the effects of a mistletoe
preparation (Helixor A) with those of a polysaccharide
biological response modifier (Lentinan; 4 mg by intramuscular
injection, daily) on quality of life in 233 patients with breast (1
= 68), ovarian (n = 71) and non-small-cell lung cancer (1 = 94)
who also received conventional cancer chemotherapy.”
Participants randomised to the mistletoe group received
escalating doses, administered three times weekly by sub-
cutaneous injection and starting with 1 mg up to a maximum
of 200 mg (although it is not stated in a report of the study, this
probably refers to the amount of mistletoe extract, rather than
the mistletoe lectin content). The duration of treatment for
standard and adjuvant therapy was not stated in a report of the
trial.

A statistically significant improvement in the Karnofsky
Performance Index (which measures physical condition) was
reported for the mistletoe group, compared with the placebo
group (proportion of participants reporting an improvement:
50.4% and 32.4% for Helixor A and Lentinan, respectively; p
= 0.002). However, it is not known to what extent the lack
of blinding of treatment allocation could have influenced the
results and, in view of this and other methodological
limitations (e.g. no sample size calculation), the results of
this trial cannot be considered conclusive.

A new instrument has been developed to measure specifi-
cally the quality of life of patients with cancer treated with
mistletoe preparations in the clinical trial setting.‘

Effects on immunological parameters Immunomodulatory

effects do not necessarily translate into clinical efficacy, and
the influence of some immune parameters, for example,
interleukin-1 and -6, may be to stimulate the growth of certain
types of tumour cells.’ Other factors, such as res
changes in immune parameters, can occur in advanced stages in
some types of cancer, thus the responses of different tumour
types towards immunomodulatory effects need to be consid-
ered separately.

Many studies involving patients with cancer have investi-
gated the effects of mistletoe preparations on immune
parameters, such as lymphocytes, natural killer cells and
cytokines. Most, but not all, of these studies describe effects
for different mistletoe preparations. The results of several
studies have been summarised in a non-systematic, yet
comprehensive, review of clinical trials of well-characterised,
lectin-standardised mistletoe extracts in patients with different
types of cancer.

The two most methodologically rigorous randomise
controlled trials (see Therapeutic effects, Cancer), which
assessed the effects of mistletoe extracts on immune para-
meters (as well as on clinical outcome measures), reporte:
conflicting results. In a randomised controlled trial involving
477 patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma who
received an ML-1 standardised mistletoe extract (Eurixor) in

istance to

addition to conventional treatment, there were no statistically

significant differences between the treatment and contro!
groups in blood concentrations of the following lymphocyte
subsets when assessed at different time points throughout the
study: CD3+, CD4+, CD8+, CD19+, CD16+53+3+,
CD16+534+3, CD25+ and CD3+DR."! In contrast, a

randomised, double-blind, multicentre trial involving 272
patients with breast cancer who received mistletoe extract
(Lektinol) equivalent to 5, 15 or 35ng ML-1, or placebo, in
addition to conventional treatment found a. statistically
significant increase in blood concentrations of CD4+ cells in
the mistletoe group, compared with the placebo group.

Other studies discussed in the review had methodological
flaws and their results cannot be considered definitive. In one
of these studies — a randomised, controlled trial involving 35
patients with malignant stage III/IV glioma — statistically
significant increases in peripheral blood CD3+, CD4+ and
CD8-+ cell counts were observed after three months' treatment
with mistletoe extract (Eurixor) equivalent to Ing/kg body
weight twice weekly, compared with values for the control
group.” Another trial, in which 47 patients with advanced
breast cancer were randomised to receive mistletoe extract
(Eurixor) equivalent to 0.5 or 1 ng/kg body weight twice weekly
by subcutaneous injection for eight weeks followed by a four-
week break, for at least two cycles, reported increases in
plasma B-endorphin concentrations and enhanced activity of
natural killer cells and T-lymphocytes, compared with
pretreatment values.” This trial supported the findings of
an earlier similar study,'° which also reported increased in
vitro release of cytokines (IL-2, IFN-y and TNFa) by
mononuclear cells from patients with breast cancer treated
with mistletoe extract (Eurixor).

Other preliminary studies have described the production of
anti-ML-1 antibodies in patients with cancer who were treated
(6) The antibodies produced were
typically of the immunoglobulin G type, although in some
instances, antibodies of the immunoglobulin E and other types
were produced. There is some evidence that the antibody
ponse differs depending on the type of mistletoe preparation
administered (i.e. the profile of antigens within the extract).
In association with this work, in vitro studies showed that anti-
ML-1 antibodies neutralised the cytotoxic effect of mistletoe

with mistletoe extracts.

re

lectins on peripheral blood mononuclear cells,(°"% and
tumour cell lines.)

In a small (7 = 14), uncontrolled study, an increase in the
incorporation of [*H]thymidine into the DNA of unstimulated
lymphocytes, as a marker for DNA repair, was observed in
patients with breast cancer who received mistletoe extract
(Iscador M; single intravenous infusion then, after two days,
subcutaneous injections daily for seven days).°” The effect was
greatest on days 7-9 of treatment when values were 2.7 times
igher than pretreatment values. This finding raised several
ypotheses which require further testing.

Mistletoe preparations have also been documented to induce
immunological responses in healthy volunteers. In a rando-
mised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving 48
ealthy volunteers, Iscador Q (in increasing doses twice weekly
y subcutaneous injection, over 12 weeks), but not Iscador P
(in increasing doses twice weekly by subcutaneous injection
over 12 weeks), induced eosinophilia after five weeks' treatment
which persisted until the end of treatment (week 12), when
compared with placebo. At the end of the study, anti-ML-1
antibodies were detected in all 16 volunteers in the Iscador Q
group, but in less than half those exposed to Iscador P, whereas
anti-viscotoxin A2 immunoglobulin G antibodies were found
in all mistletoe-exposed participants.” In a preliminary study
involving healthy volunteers who received Iscador Q_ by
subcutaneous injection, significant increases in the microcircu-
lation were observed, both local to the injection site and in

----- PAGE 454 -----
other target tissues investigated (e.g. gingival, rectal). Increased
transmigration of white blood cells was also noted both locally
and in other target tissues, a phenomenon which is believed to
be important in the immunological response.

In other studies, T-lymphocytes were obtained from blood
samples from patients with cancer who had received sub-
cutaneous injections three times weekly of aqueous mistletoe
extracts prepared from mistletoe grown on apple and pine trees
to examine their response to subsequent incubation with the
3.79 Proliferation of T-lymphocytes
from mistletoe-treated patients occurred, but was not observed
for T-lymphocytes obtained from untreated control subjects.
Further investigation revealed that the responding cells were
the CD44 T-cell subset.” A small uncontrolled study
s in the release of cytokines, such as TNFa
and IL-6, measured in the supernatants of cultured peripheral
blood mononuclear cells obtained from patients with breast
cancer who were treated with mistletoe extract (ABNOBA-
Viscum, 0.2mg fresh plant material/30kg body weight by
subcutaneous injection twice weekly for 16 weeks).

mistletoe extracts in vitro.

described increa:

Other conditions Clinical investigation of the effects of mistletoe
preparations in conditions other than cancer is limited. Several
preliminary investigations in patients with chronic hepatitis C
infection,” respiratory infections”°”” and HIV infection”
have been undertaken. Some of these studies have reported
improvements in clinical outcomes and immunological para-
meters in mistletoe recipients, compared with pretreatment
values or with placebo or other control group values. However,
due to the methodological limitations of these studies, the
results are inconclusive.

Side-effects, To.

Clinical data

Clinical safety and toxicity data for mistletoe are limited and
further investigation of these aspects is required. Many clinical
trials have not provided an assessment of safety or have reported
little information on safety aspects, and there is a paucity of well-
designed postmarketing surveillance studies of mistletoe prepara-
tions.

The UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency's (MHRA) national spontaneous reporting scheme for
suspected adverse drug reactions has received a total of four
reports of suspected adverse drug reactions (ADRs) associated
with Iscador preparations up to 2004.” These reports described
12 suspected ADRs, including hepatitis and abnormal liver
function (two reports), myalgia, dizziness, wheezing, cough,
hoarseness, abdominal pain, pyrexia, urticaria (one report) and
a suspected interaction (one report).”” The MHRA has received
one further suspected ADR report of arteritis associated with a
multi-ingredient product containing mistletoe (no further details
available at the time of writing). Causality in these cases has not
been established.

Reviews of clinical trials which have provided an assessment of
the safety of mistletoe, generally have reported mistletoe
preparations to be well tolerated.°*°°) The most frequently
reported adverse events in trials using ML-standardised mistletoe
preparations were local reactions, such as urticaria and/or
erythema, at the injection site which usually resolved within 48
©) The frequency of occurrence of such reactions in
patients with cancer who received mistletoe preparations by
injection has been described as being up to 48%.°*

hours.

Mistletoe

This information, however, comes mostly from small-scale
clinical trials involving patients with different types of cancer who
were also receiving various different conventiona
(surgery, radiotherapy and/or cancer chemotherapeutic agents) in
addition to mistletoe preparations. Furthermore, studies have
assessed the effects of different types of mistletoe preparations,
which vary both qualitatively and quantitatively in their
composition, administered according to different dosage regi-
mens. Against this background, the safety of each individual
mistletoe preparation needs to be considered.

In a randomised controlled trial involving 477 patients with
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma receiving conventional
treatment, an ML-1 standardised mistletoe extract (Eurixor) was
administered in doses equivalent to ML-1 1ng/kg body weight
twice weekly by subcutaneous injection over a 60-week period in
treatment cycles of 12 weeks followed by a break in treatment after
every four weeks; the control group did not receive any additional
treatment.” In total, 43% of mistletoe recipients developed local
and/or systemic adverse events at the onset of mistletoe treatment,
although this fell to around 8% by week 32 or later of treatment.
The most common local reactions occurring at the onset of
treatment were rubor, prurigo and indurations (hard spots);
vesiculation was observed in 1-3% of mistletoe recipients over the
treatment period. Other reactions (melalgia, fever, sleeplessness,
tiredness, cold or heat sensations and sneezing) occurred in 14%
of the mistletoe group. In total, around 18% of mistletoe
recipients refused further injections during the study (after a
median of 12 weeks) because of adverse events believed to be

treatments

induced by mistletoe.”

In a randomised controlled trial involving 407 patients with
melanoma who received mistletoe extract (Iscador M in escalating
as recommended), rIFN-«2f, rIFN-y, or control, for one
year or until tumour progression, study withdrawals due to
anorexia, malaise, depressive moods, fever and inflammation at
the injection site occurred in 4.9%, 4.6% and 7.8% of the
mistletoe-, rIFN-0.2B- and rIFN-y recipients, respectively. Apart
from the statement that no organ toxicity was observed during the
study, no further information on safety aspects was provided.
Several small, non-randomised, controlled studies have assessed
the tolerability of mistletoe preparations in immunocompromised
HIV-positive and healthy individuals. In two studies in which
participants received mistletoe extracts (Iscador Qu FrF or Iscador
Qu Special) by subcutaneous injection twice weekly in increasing
loses for up to 68 weeks, erythema at the injection site occurred in
all but one participant.°°*”

Other adverse events rated to be possibly or probably associated
with mistletoe extract (Iscador Qu FrF) were headache, fatigue,
fever and inflammation; diarrhoea and nausea occurred in small
numbers of participants, but were not thought to be
with mistletoe treatment.°°*” Significant increases in serum urea
nitrogen and creatinine concentrations were observed for HIV-
positive participants after mistletoe treatment, compared with
baseline values (statistical comparisons with the control group
were not undertaken), but concentrations remained within the

los

sociated

normal range; no other statistically significant changes in
biochemical parameters, including liver function test values,
were seen.

Aspects of the local skin reaction that occurs following
subcutaneous injection of mistletoe extracts (Iscador QFrF or
Qu Special) have been described following studies involving
healthy volunteers.°”*» The reaction appears to involve a
subepidermal lymphomonocytic infiltrate, induced by mistletoe
extract, at the injection site.

----- PAGE 455 -----
Mistletoe

Hepatitis has been documented in a woman who had ingested a
herbal preparation containing kelp, motherwort, scullcap and
mistletoe.“ Mistletoe was assumed by the authors of the report
to be the causal factor since it was the only ingredient of the
remedy known to contain toxic constituents (although these had
not previously been linked with hepatotoxicity). No other
instances of hepatotoxicity have been associated with mistletoe
ingestion and, since the case report was published, hepatitis has
been documented with scullcap (see Scullcap).

V. album should not be confused with American mistletoe
(Phoradendron leucarpum, P. serotinum, P. flavescens). The safety
of American mistletoe has been reviewed.'(7"8**?)

Anaphylactic reactions There are isolated reports of anaphy-
lactic reactions occurring in individuals who have received
parenteral treatment with mistletoe extracts. One report described
three such cases involving patients who were already undergoing
treatment with mistletoe, but did not provide full details of the
mistletoe preparations administered, the reactions and outcomes,
and did not undertake a causality assessment.** One case
involved a non-atopic, 44-year-old man who was admitted to an
intensive care unit with hypotension, urticaria and loss of
consciousness which had developed within five minutes of an
injection of V. album L. (Quercus) 10mg (route of inje
specified). The man was treated with intravenous fluids and
corticosteroids. A similar case involved a 70-year-old non-atopic
woman after receiving her 25th dose (0.1 mg) of mistletoe extract;
one month later, she displayed a positive result (which included
generalised pruritus, pharyngeal oedema and malaise) following
an intradermal challenge with V. album at one-tenth dilution.
The third case involved a 42-year-old man with multiple
who received a maintenance dose of V. album (Quercus) 10 mg and
who immediately developed pruritus, oedema, asthma and
hypotension.

tion not

leros

Ss

Preclinical data

Data from an in vitro study involving human melanoma cell lines
indicate that clinically relevant low concentrations of mistletoe
lectin may stimulate tumour cell proliferation.” In contrast,
other in vitro experiments did not demonstrate that an aqueous
mistletoe extract (containing galactosid
265 g/mL) stimulated tumour cell proliferation.

Toxicity in animals has been documented for mistletoe lectins

-specific mistletoe lectin
(90)

and viscotoxins. Intravenous administration of viscotoxin to cats
(35 g/kg) resulted in a negative inotropic effect on cardiac muscle,
reflex bradycardia and hypotension.” Viscotoxins A3 and B have
also caused muscle contracture and progressive depolarisation in
isolated smooth, skeletal and cardiac muscle preparations (rabbit,
frog).°?) The mode of action was thought to involve the
displacement of calcium from cell membrane-bound sites. The
viscotoxins precipitate histamine release from human leukocytes
in an irritant manner without destroying the cells. Viscotoxin is
toxic on parenteral administration and an LDso value (mice,
intraperitoneal injection) has been estimated as 0.7 mg/kg.°

Mistletoe lectins inhibit protein synthesis in both cells and cell-
free systems.°” In common with other known toxic lectins (e.g.
ricin), mistletoe lectins bind to plasma proteins, are specific
towards p-galactose, possess some cytotoxic activity and have
caused macroscopic lesions in rats (e.g. ascites, congested
intestine, pancreatic haemorrhages).°*) An LDso (mice) value for
mistletoe lectin fraction is reported as 80 g/kg compared with
3 pg/kg for ricin.°”

Documented LDso values (mice, intraperitoneal injection) are
greater than 2.25mg for the polysaccharide fraction from the
berries, 32 mg for the crude plant juice, and 276 mg for Iscador.°*)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Mistletoe is contra-indicated in cases of known allergy to
mistletoe preparations, acute inflammatory conditions and high
fever, and chronic progressive conditions, such as tuberculosis.'°°?
Increases in body temperature can occur following mistletoe
injection.

Drug interactions In view of the documented pharmacological
activities of mistletoe, whether or not there is potential for
clinically important interactions between mistletoe and other
medicines with similar or opposing effects, such as existing
cardiac, immunosuppressant, hypo/hypertensive, antidepressant
and anticoagulant/coagulant therapies, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The use of mistletoe is contra-
indicated in pregnancy and breastfeeding in view of the toxic
constituents.

References

1 Pfiiller U. Chemical constituents of European mistletoe (Viscum
album L.) isolation and characterisation of the main relevant
ingredients: lectins, viscotoxins, oligo-/polysaccharides, flavonoids,
alkaloids. In: Biissing A, ed. Mistletoe. The Genus Viscum.
Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Press, 2000: 101-122.

2 Fukunaga T et al. Studies on the constituents of the European
mistletoe, Viscum album L. Chem Pharm Bull 1987; 35: 3292-3297.

3. Krzaczek T. Pharmacobotanical studies of the subspecies Viscum
album L. \V. Ann Univ Mariae Curie-Sklodowska, Sect D 1977; 32:
281-291.

4 Becker H, Exner J. Comparative studies of flavonoids and
phenylearboxylic acids of mistletoes from different host trees. Z
Pflanzenphysiol 1980; 97: 417-428.

S Khwaja TA et al. Recent studies on the anticancer activities of
mistletoe (Viscum album) and its alkaloids. Oncology 1986; 43: 42-50.

6 Graziano MN et al. Isolation of tyramine from five Argentine species
of Loranthaceae. Lloydia 1967; 30: 242-244.

7 Khwaja TA et al. Isolation of biologically active alkaloids from
Korean mistletoe Viscum album, coloratum. Experientia 1980; 36:
599-600.

8 Stein GM, Berg PA. Non-lectin component in a fermented extract

induces proliferation of
lymphocytes from healthy and allergic individuals in vitro. Eur J Clin
Pharmacol 1994; 47: 33-38.

9 Deliorman D et al. A new acyclic monoterpene glucoside from Viscum

album ssp album. Fitoterapia 2002; 72: $101.

10 Krzaczek T. Pharmacobotanical studies of the subspecies Viscum
album L. Ill. Terpenes and sterols. Ann Univ Mariae Curie-
Sklodowska, Sect D 1977; 32: 125-134.

11 Steuer-Vogt MK e¢ al. The effect of an adjuvant mistletoe treatment
programme in resected head and neck cancer patients: a randomised
controlled clinical trial. Eur J Cancer 2001; 37: 23-31.

12 Mengs U et al. Mistletoe extracts standardized to mistletoe lectins in
oncology: review on current status of preclinical research. Anticancer
Res 2002; 22: 1399-1408.

13 Die Mistel in der Tumortherapie. Grundlagenforschung und klinik.

from Viscum album L. grown on pin

In: Proceedings of the 3rd Mistletoe Symposium, Nonnweiler-
Otzenhausen, Germany, 2003. Nonnweiler-Otzenhausen:
Europaisches Bildungszentrum Otzenhausen, 2003.

14 Mansky PJ. Mistletoe and cancer: controversies and perspectives.
Semin Oncol 2002; 29: 589-594.

15 Gabius H-J et al. From ill-defined extracts to the immunomodulatory
lectin: will there be a reason for oncological application of mistletoe?
Planta Med 1994; 60: 2-7.

----- PAGE 456 -----
16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

Bocci V. Mistletoe (Viscum album) lectins as cytokine inducers and
immunoadjuvant in tumor therapy. A review. ] Biol Reg Homeostatic
Agents 1993; 7: 1-6.

Schink M. Mistletoe therapy for human cancer: the role of the natural
killer cells. Anti-Cancer Drugs 1997; 8 (Suppl. Suppl.1): $47-S51.
Biissing A. Biological and pharmacological properties of Viscum
album L. From tissue flask to man. In: Biissing A, ed. Mistletoe. The
Genus Viscum. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic Press, 2000: 128-182.
Janssen O et al. In vitro effects of mistletoe extracts and mistletoe
lectins. Cytotoxicity towards tumor cells due to the induction of
programmed cell death (apoptosis). Arzneim Forsch/Drug Res 1993;
43: 1221-1227.

Zarkovié N et al. Comparison of the effects of high and low
concentrations of the separated Viscum album L. lectins and of the
plain mistletoe plant preparation (Isorel) on the growth of normal and
tumor cells in vitro. Periodicum Biologorum 1995; 97: 61-67.

Urech K et al. Comparative study on the cytotoxic effect of viscotoxin
and mistletoe lectin on tumour cells in culture. Phytother Res 1995; 9:
49-55.

Valentiner U et al. The cytotoxic effect of mistletoe lectins I, II and III
on sensitive and multidrug resistant human colon cancer cell lines in
vitro. Toxicology 2002; 171: 187-199.

Van Huyen J-PD et al. Induction of apoptosis of endothelial cells by
Viscum album: a role for anti-tumoral properties of mistletoe lectins.
Mol Med 2002; 8: 600-606.

Biissing A et al. Differences in the apoptosis-inducing properties of
Viscum album L. extracts. Anti-Cancer Drugs 1997; 8 (Suppl.
Suppl.1): S9-S14.

Biissing A, Schietzel M. Apoptosis-inducing properties of Viscum
album L. extracts from different host trees correlate with their content
of toxic mistletoe lectins. Anticancer Res 1999; 19: 23-28.

Li S-S. Mistletoe lectins: telomerase inhibitors in alternative cancer
therapy. Drug Discovery Today 2002; 7: 896-897.

Zarkovié N et al. The Viscum album preparation Isorel inhibits the
growth of melanoma B16F10 by influencing the tumour-host
relationship. Anticancer Drugs 1997; Suppl. Suppl.1: $17-S22.
Burger AM et al. Anticancer activity of an aqueous mistletoe extract
(AME) in syngeneic murine tumor models. Anticancer Res 2001; 21:
1965-1968.

Kuttan G e¢ al. Anticarcinogenic and antimetastatic activity of
Iscador. Anticancer Drugs 1997; Suppl. Suppl.1: $15-S16.

Weber K et al. Effects of a standardized mistletoe preparation on
metastatic B16 melanoma colonization in murine lungs. Arzneim
Forsch/Drug Res 1998; 48: 497-502.

Braun JM et al. Standardized mistletoe extract augments immune
response and down-regulates local and metastatic tumor growth in
murine models. Anticancer Res 2002; 22: 4187-4190.

Braun JM et al. Application of standardized mistletoe extracts
augment immune response and down regulates metastatic organ
colonization in murine models. Cancer Lett 2001; 170: 25-31.
Mueller EA e¢ al. Biochemical characterization of a component in
extracts of Viscum album enhancing human NK cytotoxicity.
Immunopharmacology 1989; 17: 11-18.

Hostanska K et al. A plant lectin derived from Viscum album induces
cytokine gene expression and protein production in cultures of human
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Nat Immun 1995; 14: 295-304.
Braun JM et al. Cytokine release of whole blood from adult female
donors challenged with mistletoe lectin-1 standardised mistletoe
extract and E. coli endotoxin or phytohaemagglutinin (PHA).
Anticancer Res 2003; 23: 1349-1352.

Ribéreau-Gayon G et al. Modulation of cytotoxicity and enhancement
of cytokine release by Viscum album L. extracts or mistletoe lectins.
Anti-Cancer Drugs 1997; 8 (Suppl. Suppl.1): $3-S8.

Joller PW et al. Stimulation of cytokine production via a special
standardized mistletoe preparation in an in vitro human skin bioassay.
Arzneim Forsch/Drug Res 1996; 46: 649-653.

Bloksma N ef¢ al. Stimulation of humoral and cellular immunity by
Viscum preparations. Planta Med 1982; 46: 221-227.

Coeugniet EG, Elek E. Immunomodulation with Viscum album and
Echinacea purpurea extracts. Onkologie 1987; 10: 27-33.

Luther P, Mehnert WH. Zum serologischen Verhalten einiger
handelsiiblicher Praparate aus Viscum album L., insbesondere des

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S51

52

53

54

5S

56

57

59

60

61

62

64

Mistletoe

Iscador, in bezug aug menschliche Blutzellen und Aszites-Tumorzellen
von Mausen. Acta Biol Med Ger 1974; 33: 351-357.

Luther P et al. Isolation and characterization of mistletoe extracts. II.
Action of agglutinating and cytotoxic fractions on mouse ascites
tumor cells. Acta Biol Med Ger 1977; 36: 119-125.

Luther P et al. Reaktionen einiger antikérperahnlicher Substanzen aus
Insekten (Protektine) und Pflanzen (Lektine) mit Aszites-Tumorzellen.
Acta Biol Med Ger 1973; 31: K11-K18.

Ziska P et al. The lectin from Viscum album L. purification by
biospecific affinity chromatography. Experientia 1978; 34: 123-124.
Franz H et al. Isolation and properties of three lectins from mistletoe
(Viscum album L.). Biochem J 1981; 195: 481-484.

Luther P e¢ al. The lectin from Viscum album L. — isolation,
characterization, properties and structure. Int J Biochem 1980; 11:
429-435.

Ziska P et al. Chemical modification studies on the D-
galactopyranosyl binding lectin from the mistletoe Viscum album L.
Acta Biol Med Ger 1979; 38: 1361-1363.

Ziska P, Franz H. Studies on the interaction of the mistletoe lectin I
with carbohydrates. Experientia 1981; 37: 219.

Franz H e¢ al. Isolation and characterization of mistletoe extracts. I.
Affinity chromatography of mistletoe crude extract on insolubilized
plasma proteins. Acta Biol Med Ger 1976; 36: 113-117.

Luther P et al. Allergy and lectins: interaction between IgE-mediated
histamine release and glycoproteins from Viscum album L. (mistletoe).
Acta Biol Med Ger 1978; 37: 1623-1628.

Petkov V. Plants with hypotensive, antiatheromatous and
coronarodilatating action. Am J Chin Med 1979; 7: 197-236.
Deliorman D e¢ al. Evaluation of antimycobacterial activity of Viscum
album subspecies. Pharmaceutical Biol 2001; 39: 381-383.

Kienle GS et al. Mistletoe in cancer. A systematic review on controlled
clinical trials. Eur J Med Res 2003; 8: 109-119.

Ernst E et al. Mistletoe for cancer? A systematic review of randomised
clinical trials. Int J Cancer 2003; 107: 262-267.

Kleijnen J, Knipschild P. Mistletoe treatment for cancer. Review of
controlled trials in humans. Phytomedicine 1994; 1: 255-260.
Stauder H, Kreuser E-D. Mistletoe extracts standardised in terms of
mistletoe lectins (ML 1) in oncology: current state of clinical research.
Onkologie 2002; 25: 374-380.

Wetzel D, Schafer M. Results of a randomised placebo-controlled
multicentre study with PS76A2 (standardised mistletoe preparation) in
patients with breast cancer receiving adjuvant chemotherapy
[abstract]. Phytomedicine 2000; II(Suppl): 34.

Vickers A. Botanical medicines for the treatment of cancer: rationale,
overview of current data, and methodological considerations for phase
I and II trials. Cancer Invest 2002; 29: 1069-1979.

Kleeberg UR et al. for the EORTC Melanoma Group in cooperation
with the German Cancer Society (DKG). Final results of the EORTC
18871/DKG 80-1 randomised phase III trial: rIFN-«2B versus rIFN-y
versus Iscador M" versus observation after surgery in melanoma
patients with either high-risk primary (thickness > 3 mm) or regional
lymph node metastasis. Eur J Cancer 2004; 40: 390-402.

Piao BK e¢ al. Impact of complementary mistletoe extract treatment
on quality of life in breast, ovarian and non-small cell lung cancer
patients. A prospective randomized controlled clinical trial.
Anticancer Res 2004; 24: 303-310.

Kirchberger I et al. Development and validation of an instrument to
measure the effects of a mistletoe preparation on quality of life of
cancer patients: the Life Quality Lection-53 (LQL-53) Questionnaire.
Qual Life Res 2004; 13: 463-479.

Lenartz D et al. Immunoprotective activity of the galactoside-specific
lectin from mistletoe after destructive therapy in glioma patients.
Anticancer Res 1996; 16: 3799-3802.

Heiny B-M et al. Correlation of immune cell activities and B-
endorphin release in breast carcinoma patients treated with
galactoside-specific lectin standardized mistletoe extract. Anticancer
Res 1998; 18: 583-586.

Heiny B-M, Beuth J. Mistletoe extract standardized for the
galactoside-specific lectin (ML-1) induces f-endorphin release and
immunopotentiation in breast cancer patients. Anticancer Res 1994;
14: 1339-1342.

Stettin A et al. Anti-mistletoe lectin antibodies are produced in
patients during therapy with an aqueous mistletoe extract derived

----- PAGE 457 -----
65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

78

Mistletoe

from Viscum album L. and neutralize lectin-induced cytotoxicity in
vitro. Klin Wochenschr 1990; 68: 896-900.

Stein GM et al. Induction of anti-mistletoe lectin antibodies in
relation to different mistletoe extracts. Anti-Cancer Drugs 1997; 8
(Suppl. Suppl.1): $57-S59.

Stein GM et al. Modulation of the cellular and humoral immune
responses of tumor patients by mistletoe therapy. Eur ] Med Res 1998;
3: 194-202.

Stein GM et al. Recognition of different antigens of mistletoe extracts
by anti-mistletoe lectin antibodies. Cancer Lett 1999; 135: 165-170.
Tonevitsky AG et al. Hybridoma cells producing antibodies against A-
chain of mistletoe lectin are resistant to this toxin. Immunol Lett 1995;
46: 5-8.

Kovacs E et al. Improvement of DNA repair in lymphocytes of breast
cancer patients treated with Viscum album extract (Iscador). Eur ]
Cancer 1991; 27: 1672-1676.

Huber R et al. Effects of a lectin- and a viscotoxin-rich mistletoe
preparation on clinical and hematologic parameters: a placebo-
controlled evaluation in healthy subjects. J Altern Comp Med 2002; 8:
857-866.

Klein R et al. In vivo-induction of antibodies to mistletoe lectin-1 and
viscotoxin by exposure to aqueous mistletoe extracts: a randomised
double-blinded placebo-controlled phase I study in healthy
individuals. Eur J Med Res 2002; 7: 155-163.

Klopp R et al. Changes in immunological characteristics of white
blood cells after administration of standardized mistletoe extract. In
Vivo 2001; 15: 447-458.

Fischer S et al. Oligoclonal in vitro response of CD4 T cells to vesicles
of mistletoe extracts in mistletoe-treated cancer patients. Cancer
Immunol Immunother 1997; 44: 150-156.

Fischer S et al. Stimulation of the specific immune system by mistletoe
extracts. Anti-Cancer Drugs 1997; 8 (Suppl. Suppl.1): $33-$37.
Huber R et al. Effects of a mistletoe preparations with defined lectin
content on chronic hepatitis C: an individually controlled cohort
study. Eur J Med Res 2001; 6: 399-405.

Chernyshov VP e¢ al. Immunomodulatory actions of Viscum album
(Iscador) in children with recurrent respiratory disease as a result of
the Chernobyl nuclear accident. Comp Ther Med 1997; 5: 141-146.
Chernyshov VP e¢ al. Immunomodulatory and clinical effects of
Viscum album (Iscador M and Iscador P) in children with recurrent
respiratory infections as a result of the Chernobyl] nuclear accident.
Am J Therapeut 2000; 7: 195-203.

Stoss M, Gorter RW. No evidence of IFN-y increase in the serum of
HIV-positive and healthy subjects after subcutaneous injection of a

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

non-fermented Viscum album L. extract. Nat Immun 1998; 16: 157—
164.

Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Adverse Drug
Reactions On-line Information Tracking (ADROIT) database
(accessed 26 July 2004).

Van Wely M et al. Toxicity of a standardized mistletoe extract in
immunocompromised and healthy individuals. Am ] Therapeut 1999;
6: 37-43.

Gorter RW et al. Tolerability of an extract of European mistletoe
among immunocompromised and healthy individuals. Altern Ther
1999; 5: 37-48.

Gorter RW et al. Subcutaneous infiltrates induced by injection of
mistletoe extracts (Iscador). Am ] Therapeut 1998; 5: 181-187.

Stoss M et al. Decrease of activated lympocytes four and nine hours
after a subcutaneous injection of a Viscum album L. extract in healthy
volunteers. Nat Immun 1998; 16: 185-197.

Harvey J, Colin-Jones DG. Mistletoe hepatitis. BMJ 1981; 282: 186-
187.

Hall AH et al. Ass
1320-1323.

Spiller HA et al. Retrospective study of mistletoe ingestion. Clin
Toxicol 1996; 34: 405-408.

Krenzelok EP et al. American mistletoe exposures. Am J Emerg Med
1997; 15: 516-520.

Hutt N et al. Anaphylactic reactions after therapeutic injection of
mistletoe (Viscum album L.). Allergol Immunol 2001; 29: 201-203.
Gabius H-J et al. Evidence for stimulation of tumor proliferation in
cell lines and histotypic cultures by clinically relevant low doses of the
galactoside-binding mistletoe lectin, a component of proprietary
extracts. Cancer Invest 2001; 19: 114-126.

Burger AM et al. No evidence of stimulation of human tumor cell
proliferation by a standardized aqueous mistletoe extract in vitro.
Anticancer Res 2003; 23: 3801-3806.

Rosell S, Samuelsson G. Effect of mistletoe viscotoxin and phoratoxin
on blood circulation. Toxicon 1966; 4: 107-110.

Andersson K-E, Joéhannsson M. Effects of viscotoxin on rabbit heart
and aorta, and on frog skeletal muscle. Eur J Pharmacol 1973; 23:
223-231.

Samuelsson G. Screening of plants of the family Loranthaceae for
toxic proteins. Acta Pharm Suec 1966; 3: 353-362.

Stirpe F et al. Inhibition of protein synthesis by a toxic lectin from
Viscum album L. (mistletoe). Biochem J 1980; 190: 843-845.

ssing mistletoe toxicity. Ann Emerg Med 1986; 15:

----- PAGE 458 -----
Motherwort

n

reported for motherwort (L. cardiaca), although the clinical
relevance of this is not clear. There is a lack of clinical research
assessing the efficacy and safety of motherwort, and any
symptoms of cardiac disorder are not suitable for self-
diagnosis and treatment with a herbal remedy. In view of the
lack of toxicity data, excessive use of motherwort and use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Leonurus cardiaca L. (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Leonurus

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°)

BHP 1996”)

BP 200708

Complete German Commission EC”
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Ph Eur 2007'°8?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Alkaloids 0.35%. Stachydrine (a pyrrolidine-type alkaloid),
betonicine and turicin (stereoisomers of 4-hydroxystachydrine),
leonurine 0.0068% (a guanidine derivative), leonuridin, leonur-
inine. The presence of leonurine in L. cardiaca has been disputed,
although it has been documented for other Leonurus species.

Flavonoids Glycosides of apigenin, kaempferol, and quercetin
(e.g. hyperoside, kaempferol-3-p-glucoside, genkwanin, quinque-
loside, quercitrin and rutin).2°>)

Iridoids Ajugol, ajugoside, galiridoside, leonuride and three or
four more unidentified glycosides.

Tannins —2-8%. Type not specified. Pseudotannins (e.g.
pyrogallol, catechins).

Terpenoids Volatile oil 0.05%, resin, wax, ursolic acid, leocardin
(a labdane diterpene)) as an epimeric mixture, and a diterpene
lactone similar to marrubiin.” Cardiac glycosides (bufadienolide/
bufanolide type) have been documented although their presence in
motherwort has not been confirmed.

Other constituents Citric acid, malic acid, oleic acid, bitter
principles,” carbohydrates 2.89%, choline and a_ phenolic
glycoside (caffeic acid 4-rutinoside).

A Cad-specific lectin has been isolated from the seeds.”

Food Use

Motherwort is not used in foods. Previously, motherwort has been
listed by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as a Herb of
Undefined Safety.‘©?”

Herbal Use

Motherwort is stated to possess sedative and antispasmodic
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for cardiac debility,
simple tachycardia, effort syndrome, amenorrhoea, and _specifi-
cally for cardiac symptoms associated with neurosis.(6% 07 #6

Alkaloids
{= Geom
OH NOTH
cH’ ‘CH, cHs” ‘CH,

stachydrine betonicine

CH;O

°

u _/NH2
HO C-O(CHaW N= CK
CH;

leonurine
Iridoids

genkwanin

leocardin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of motherwort.

----- PAGE 459 -----
Motherwort

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.'C%°”

Liquid extract 2-4mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily(CoO

Tincture 2-6 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'(C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The uterotonic principle in motherwort is unclear, although
leonurine is reported to be the utero-active constituent in various
Leonurus species. In addition, oxytocic activity documented for L.
cardiaca has been attributed to another alkaloid constituent,
stachydrine.'©" Uterotonic activity has been reported for
leonurine in various in vitro preparations including human
myometrial strips and isolated rat uterus." '?

In vitro cardioactivity has been documented for motherwort.
An alcoholic extract was found to have a direct inhibitory effect
on myocardial cells: antagonistic action towards calcium chloride
(provided that the extract was administered before calcium
chloride), and towards both «- and B-adrenoceptor stimulation
was observed. No significant effect on the cardiac activity of the
isolated guinea-pig heart was noted for caffeic acid 4-rutinoside.®

Ursolic acid has been reported to possess antiviral, tumour-
inhibitory and cytotoxic activities." Ursolic acid was found to
inhibit the Epstein-Barr virus in vitro and to inhibit tumour
production by 12-O-tetradeconoyl phorbol (TPA) in mouse skin,
with activity comparable to that of retinoic acid, a known tumour-
promoter inhibitor.” In vitro cytotoxicity was documented in
lymphocytic leukaemia (P-388, L-1210), human lung carcinoma
(A-549), KB cells, human colon (HCT-8) and mammary tumour
(MCE-7)."1)

(12)

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
motherwort and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for motherwort
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

It has been stated that the leaves of motherwort may cause
contact dermatitis and that the lemon-scented oil may result in
photosensitisation.“°*

Preclinical data

No documented toxicity studies were located. Cytotoxic activities
have been reported for ursolic acid (see Pharmacological Actions,
In vitro and animal studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Sensitive individuals may experience an allergic reaction.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of motherwort to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Motherwort is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle.'“?” In view of the lack of toxicity data and the
documented in vitro uterotonic activity,“©*” the use of mother-

wort during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Biocarde. Germany: Biovital Aktiv; Biovital Classic; Mutellon;
Oxacant-sedativ. Hungary: Biovital; Biovital. Switzerland:
Tisane pour le coeur et la circulation. UK: Fenneherb
Prementaid; Menopause Relief; Modern Herbals Stress; Period
Pain Relief; Prementaid; Quiet Life; Roberts Alchemilla
Compound Tablets; SuNerven; Wellwoman.

References

1 Gulubov AZ. Structure of alkaloids from Leonurus cardiaca. Nauch
Tr Vissh Predagog Inst Plovdiv Mat Fiz Khim Biol 1970; 8: 129-132.

2. Scott JH et al. Components of Leonurus cardiaca. Sci Pharm 1973; 41:
149-155.

3. Kartnig T et al. Flavonoid-O-glycosides from the herbs of Leonurus
cardiaca. ] Nat Prod 1985; 48: 494-507.

4 Buzogany K, Cucu V. Comparative study between the species of
Leonurus quinquelobatus. Part Il Iridoids. Clujul Med 1983; 56: 385—
388.

5 Malakov P et al. The structure of leocardin, two epimers of a
diterpenoid from Leonurus cardiaca. Phytochemistry 1985; 24: 2341-
2343.

6 Brieskorn CH, Hofmann R. Labiatenbitterstoffe: Ein clerodanderivat
aus Leonurus cardiaca L. Tetrahedron Lett 1979; 27: 2511-2512.

7 Brieskorn CH, Broschek W. Bitter principles and furanoid compounds
of L. cardiaca. Pharm Acta Helv 1972; 47: 123-132.

8 Tschesche R et al. Caffeic acid 4-rutinoside from Leonurus cardiaca.
Phytochemistry 1980; 19: 2783.

9 Bird GWG, Wingham J. Anti-Cad lectin from the seeds of Leonurus
cardiaca. Clin Lab Haematol 1979; 1: 57-59.

10 Yeung HW et al. The structure and biological effect of leonurine — a
uterotonic principle from the Chineses drug, I-mu Ts'ao. Planta Med
1977; 31: 51-S6.

11 Kong YC et al. Isolation of the uterotonic principle from Leonorus
artemisia, the Chinese motherwort. Am J Chin Med 1976; 4: 373-382.

12 Yanxing X. The inhibitory effect of motherwort extract on pulsating
myocardial cells in vitro. | Trad Chin Med 1983; 3: 185-188.

13. Kuo-Hsiung L et al. The cytotoxic principles of Prunella vulgaris,
Psychotria serpens, and Hyptis capitata: Ursolic acid and related
derivatives. Planta Med 1988; 54: 308.

14 Tokuda H et al. Inhibitory effects of ursolic and oleanolic acid on skin
tumor promotion by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate. Cancer
Lett 1986; 33: 279-285.

----- PAGE 460 -----
oe - altho ‘do ai
studies were located. Lipid-lowering properties via a stimulant
action on the thyroid gland have been documented for C.
mukul both in animals and, to a limited extent, in humans.
However, robust clinical research assessing the efficacy and
safety of myrrh is lacking. In view of the lack of toxicity data,
excessive use of myrrh and use during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Commiphora myrrha (Nees) Engl. (Burseraceae)

Synonym(s)

African Myrrh, Arabian Myrrh, Balsamodendron Myrrha,
Balsamodendron myrrha (Nees), Bitter Myrrh, Commiphora,
Commiphora molmol (Engl.) Engl., C. coriacea Engl., C.
cuspidata Chiov., C. habessinica (O. Berg) Engl. var. grossedentata
Chiov., C. myrrha (Nees) Engl. var. molmol Engl., C. playfairii
(Oliv.) Engl. var. benadirensis Chiov., C. rivae Engl., Diddin,
Didin, Male Myrrh, Malmal, Mohmol, Molmol, Murr, Myrrh,
Somali Myrrh, Yemen Myrrh

Part(s) Used

Oleo-gum-resin

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C?)
ESCOP 2006'¢”°
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 20078?
USP29/NF24‘C80)

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G52.

Carbohydrates Up to 60% gum yielding arabinose, galactose,
xylose, and 4-O-methylglucuronic acid following hydrolysis.

Resins Up to 40% (average 20%) consisting of a-, B- and y-
commiphoric acids, commiphorinic acid, &- and B-heerabomyr-
rhols, heeraboresene and commiferin.

Steroids Campesterol, cholesterol and B-sitosterol.

Terpenoids x-Amyrin. Furanosesquiterpenes, including furaneu-
desma-1,3-diene (major), furaneudesma-1,4-diene-6-one, lindes-
trine, curzerenone, furanodiene, 2-methoxyfuranodiene and 4,5-
dihydrofuranodiene-6-one.("

Volatile oils 1.5-17%. Main constituents are furanosesquiter-
penes. Dipentene, cadinene, heerabolene, limonene, pinene,
eugenol, m-cresol, cinnamaldehyde, cuminaldehyde, cumic alco-
hol and others.

Food Use

Myrrh is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that myrrh
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'@! Previously, in the USA, myrrh has been permitted for
use in alcoholic beverages.'°°

Herbal Use

Myrrh is stated to possess antimicrobial, astringent, carminative,
expectorant, anticatarrhal, antiseptic and vulnerary properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for aphthous ulcers, pharyngitis,
respiratory catarrh, common cold, furunculosis, wounds and
abrasions, and specifically for mouth ulcers, gingivitis and
pharyngitis.'C» + 9° G# C#. G52, G4 The German Commission E
approved topical use for mild inflammation of the oral and
pharyngeal mucosa.)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older pharmaceutical reference texts are given
below.

Myrrh Tincture (BPC 1973) 2.5-5.0mL; in a glass of water
several times daily as a gargle or a mouthwash. For skin, undiluted
or diluted.'(@>”)

Tincture Myrrh Co (Thompsons) (1 part Capsicum Tincture
BPC 1973 to 4 parts Myrrh Tincture BPC 1973) 1.0— 2.5 mL.

Sesquiterpenes
° CHO. fe]
/ iy,
Oo
4, 5-dihydrofurano 2-methoxy- lindestrene
-dien-6-one furanodiene
H

curzerenone elemol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of myrrh.

----- PAGE 461 -----
Myrrh

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory activity Anti-inflammatory (carrageenan-
induced inflammation and cotton pellet granuloma)” and
antipyretic activities in mice) have been documented for C.
molmol.

Hypoglycaemic activity Hypoglycaemic activity in both normal
and diabetic rats has been reported for a myrrh extract.“>*
Together with an aloe gum extract, myrrh was found to be an
active component of a multi-plant extract that exhibited
antidiabetic activity. The mode of action was thought to involve
a decrease in gluconeogenesis and an increase in peripheral
utilisation of glucose in diabetic rats.

Myrrh is stated to have astringent properties on mucous
membranes‘“*) and to have antimicrobial activities in vitro.”

Anti-inflammatory activity Anti-inflammatory activities have
been reported for an Indian plant, Commiphora mukul,
commonly known as guggulipid. Anti-inflammatory activity was
described for a crystalline steroidal fraction of guggulipid in both
acute (carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema test) and chronic
(adjuvant arthritis) models of inflammation.

Lipid-lowering effects A ketosteroid has been identified as the
active hypocholesterolaemic principle in guggulipid.” In some
animal species, thyroid suppression is required as well as
cholesterol administration in order to achieve experimental
hypercholesterolaemia. Results of studies in chicks administered
a thyroid suppressant and cholesterol indicated that guggulipid
prevents endogenous hypercholesterolaemia via stimulation of the
thyroid gland.‘ When fed to rabbits, guggulipid has been found
to reverse the decrease in catecholamine concentrations and
dopamine-B-decarboxylase activity that are associated with
hyperlipidaemia.”

Stimulation of phagocytosis Stimulation of phagocytosis has
been documented in mice innoculated with Escherichia coli and
given with extracts of myrrh by intraperitoneal injecton.'©”

Cytoprotective activity An aqueous suspension of myrrh
administered to rats at oral doses of 250-1000mg/kg gave
significant and dose-dependent protection to gastric mucosa
against various ulcerogenic agents.‘

Analgesic activity In mice, powdered myrrh (1 mg/kg, orally)
had significant analgesic activity in the hotplate test.” Isolated
furanoeudesma-1,3-dione (50 mg/kg, orally) was significantly
more effective than control (p < 0.01) in the mouse writhing

test, and the effective dose was reversed by naloxone (1 mg/
kg).(652)

Anti-tumour and cytotoxic activities In mice with Ehrlich solid
tumours, an aqueous suspension of myrrh (250 or 500 mg/kg,
orally) produced significant decreases in tumour weight (p < 0.05)
after 25 days.‘©°”) Aqueous suspension of myrrh increased survival
time in mice with Ehrlich ascite tumours.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of myrrh
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.
Guggulipid has been reported to lower the concentration of
total serum lipids, serum cholesterol, serum triglycerides, serum
phospholipids and B-lipoproteins in 20 patients.” This effect was

reported to be comparable to that of two other known lipid-
lowering drugs also used in the study.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for myrrh and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

No reported side-effects were located for C. molmol or C.
abyssinica. Hiccup,” diarrhoea,” restlessness and apprehen-
sion,®’ were documented as side-effects for guggulipid when
administered to 20 patients.’ Myrrh has been reported to be non-
irritating, non-sensitising and non-phototoxic to human and
animal skins.‘@*?

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of myrrh to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence from
preclinical studies that myrrh has hypoglycaemic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation in view of the lack of safety

information, use of myrrh during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

ter. Denmark: Dolodent. Germany: Ad-Muc; Mint-Lysoform;
Myrrhinil-Intest; Repha-Os. Hong Kong: Ad-Muc. Italy:
Gengivario. Russia: Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opuru-
waApupiit Boapnroii Baansam Burruepa). South Africa: Hel-
montskruie; Lewensessens. Spain: Buco Regis. Switzerland:
Pommade au Baume; Sanogencive. UK: Golden Seal Indiges-
tion Tablets; Herbal Indigestion Naturtabs; HRI Golden Seal
Digestive; Indigestion and Flatulence; Napiers Digestion
Tablets; Nervous Dyspepsia Tablets; Vocalzone; Wind &
Dyspepsia Relief. Venezuela: One Drop Spray.

References

1 Brieskorn CH, Noble P. Constituents of the essential oil of myrrh. II:
Sesquiterpenes and furanosesquiterpenes. Planta Med 1982; 44: 87-90.

2. Tariq M et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of Commiphora molmol.
Agents Actions 1986; 17: 381-382.

3 Mohsin A et al. Analgesic, antipyretic activity and phytochemical
screening of some plants used in traditional Arab system of medicine.
Fitoterapia 1989; 60: 174-177.

4 Al-Awadi FM, Gumaa KA. Studies on the activity of individual plants
of an antidiabetic plant mixture. Acta Diabetol Lat 1987; 24: 37-41.

5S Al-Awadi FM et al. On the mechanism of the hypoglycaemic effect of
a plant extract. Diabetologia 1985; 28: 432-434.

----- PAGE 462 -----
6 Arora RB et al. Anti-inflammatory studies on a crystalline steroid
isolated from Commiphora mukul. Indian J] Med Res 1972; 60: 929—
931.

7 Tripathi SN et al. Effect of a keto-steroid of Commifora mukul L. on
hypercholesterolemia and hyperlipidemia induced by neomercazole
and cholesterol mixture in chicks. Indian J Exp Biol 1975; 13: 15—
18.

Myrrh

Srivastava M et al. Effect of hypocholesterolemic agents of plant
origin on catecholamine biosynthesis in normal and cholesterol fed
rabbits. J Biosci 1984; 6: 277-282.

Malhotra SC, Ahuja MMS. Comparative hypolipidaemic effectiveness
of gum guggulu (Commiphora mukul) fraction 'A', ethyl-p-
chlorophenoxyisobutyrate and Ciba-13437-Su. Indian J Med Res
1971; 59: 1621-1632.

----- PAGE 463 -----
Nettle

and for the effects of nettle in relief of symptoms of allergic
rhinitis. Clinical evidence exists to support the efficacy of root
extracts in the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia.
However, further well-designed clinical trials of nettle
involving large numbers of patients are required to establish
the benefits. Irritant properties have been documented for
nettle, and excessive use and use during pregnancy and

lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Urtica dioica L. (Urticaceae)

Synonym(s)

Stinging Nettle, Urtica

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission E@?)
ESCOP 2003'07

Martindale 35th edition'@*

Ph Eur 20078

USP29/NF24'68°

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6 and G52.

Acids Carbonic, caffeic, caffeoylmalic, chlorogenic, formic,
silicic, citric, fumaric, glyceric, malic, oxalic, phosphoric, quinic,
succinic, threonic and threono-1,4-lactone.')

Amines
N : i NH HO. :
4 NH2
N N
H H
histamine serotonin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of nettle.

Amines Acetylcholine, betaine, choline, lecithin, histamine,
serotonin” and a glycoprotein.”

Flavonoids Flavonol glycosides (e.g. isorhamnetin, kaempferol,
quercetin).

Inorganics Up to 20% minerals, including calcium, potassium
and silicon.

Lignans Several lignans, including (—)-secoisolariciresinol.

Other constituents Choline acetyltransferase, scopoletin,” B-
sitosterol and tannin

Other plant parts The rhizome contains lectin (Urtica dioica
agglutinin) composed of six isolectins,°”) coumarin (scopoletin),
triterpenes (B-sitosterol, its glucoside, and six stearyl deriva-
tives),**) two phenylpropane derivatives, and six lignans."

Food Use

Nettle (herbs and leaves) is listed by the Council of Europe as a
natural source of food flavouring (category 1) (see Appendix
3).(6 Nettle is used in soups and herbal teas. Previously, in the
USA, nettle has been listed by the Food and Drugs Administration
(FDA) as a Herb of Undefined Safety.“°

Herbal Use

Nettle is stated to possess antihaemorrhagic and hypoglycaemic
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for uterine haemor-
rhage, cutaneous eruption, infantile and psychogenic eczema,
epistaxis, melaena and specifically for nervous eczema.'°> + O°
CB G32, G43, G50, G52, G54, G64) The German Commission E approved
internal use of nettle leaf as supportive therapy for rheumatic
ailments and as irrigation therapy for inflammatory disease of the
lower urinary tract and prevention of kidney gravel; internal and
external use for rheumatic ailments.'“*) The root is approved for
difficulty in urination from benign prostatic hyperplasia.(©?

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 2-4 as an infusion three times daily;'C%°” 8-12. g
daily;‘> fresh juice 10-15 mL three times daily.(@°?

Liquid extract 3-4mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily(Co%

Tincture 2-6 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'(C%°”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The pharmacological properties of nettle have been reviewed.‘

652,658 Information from these reviews and other sources is
summarised below.

Anti-inflammatory activity An aqueous ethanol extract and
isolated caffeoylmalic acid partially inhibited the biosynthesis of

----- PAGE 464 -----
Figure 2. Nettle (Urtica dioica).

arachidonic acid in vitro.(©>”

Nettle extract (0.1mg/mL) and
isolated acid (1mg/mL) inhibited 5-lipoxygenase-derived bio-
synthesis of leukotriene By by 20.8% and 68.2%, respectively,
and inhibited synthesis of cyclooxygenase-derived prostaglandins
(ICso 92pg/mL and 38 tg/mL, respectively). The same extract
significantly reduced tumour-necrosis-factor-% (TNF) and inter-
leukin 18 (IL-1B) concentrations after lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-
stimulated secretion of these proinflammatory cytokines in human
blood.‘ An aqueous ethanol extract (0.25 mg/mL) inhibited
platelet-activating factor (PAF)-induced exocytosis of elasta’
from human neutrophils by 93%, but failed to inhibit biosynthesis
of prostaglandins from ['*C]arachidonic acid.“

In vitro addition of a commercial preparation of nettle leaf
(IDS-23) to whole human blood resulted in an inhibition of LPS-
stimulated TNFa and IL-18 secretion, correlating with drug
ingestion. The same preparation inhibited phytohaemogglutinin-
stimulated production of T helper cell 1 (Th1)-specific inter-
leukin-2 (IL-2) and interferon-y (IFNy) in culture in a dose-
dependent manner up to 50% and 74%, respectively.” By
contrast, T helper cell 2 (Th2)-specific interleukin-4 (IL-4)
production was stimulated. The results suggested that the nettle
leaf extract acts by mediating a switch in T helper cell-derived
cytokine patterns and may inhibit the inflammatory cascade in
autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis.) The
transcription
inflammatory diseases and is responsible for the enhanced

factor NF-kB is elevated in several chronic

expression of some proinflammatory gene products. A nettle
leaf extract (IDS 23) potently inhibited NF-«B activation in a
number of cells, including human T cells, macrophages, epithelial

) Tr was

cells and mouse L929 fibrosarcoma cells in vitro.'
proposed that part of the anti-inflammatory effects of nettle may

be due to its inhibitory effect on NF-«B activity.

Benign prostatic hyperplasia activity Several lignans and their
metabolites reduce binding activity of human sex hormone-
binding globulin (SHBG) in vitro. Lignans from nettle are
competitive inhibitors of the interaction between SHBG and Sa-

dihydrotestosterone.(©" An aqueous extract of nettle root led to

Nettle

a concentration-dependent (0.6-10 mg/mL) inhibition of SHBG
interaction with its receptor on human prostatic membranes. A
20% methanol extract of root inhibited binding capacity of SHBG
after preincubation in human serum.‘

Subfractions of an aqueous methanol extract of nettle root
inhibited cellular proliferation in benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH) tissue. A root extract had a specific and concentration-
dependent inhibition of human leukocyte elastase (HLE) activity
in vitro. (HLE is an important marker in clinically silent
genitourinary tract infection and inflammation.) Root extracts
inhibited alternative and classic complementary pathways and
significantly inhibited prostate growth in mice with induced BPH
(by 51%, compared with control; p < 0.003).'%

Other activities CNS-depressant activity has been documented
for nettle. It has been shown to produce a reduction in
mice,'!*'* inhibition of drug-
induced convulsions, and a lowering of body temperature in
3) Nettle has been reporte
pressure of mice,‘ whereas in cats it has produced a marked
hypotensive effect and bradycardia." Atropine was reported to
have no effect on these latter actions and a mode of action via &-
adrenoceptors was suggested.'!)

Nettle is stated to contain both hypoglycaemic and hypergly-
caemic principles." The hypoglycaemic component has been
termed 'urticin' and nettle has been reported to lower the blood
sugar concentration in hyperglycaemic rabbits."

spontaneous activity in rats an

rats. to have no effect on the blood

An 80% ethanolic and an aqueous extract of nettle adminis-
tered to mice at a dose of 25 mg/kg orally prior to glucose load,
led to hypoglycaemia effects.”
effects

No diuretic or ion excretion
were observed in rats after oral administration of an
aqueous extract of nettle (1g/kg)."'4'® Dried nettle had a
potassium ion to sodium ion ratio of 63:1, whereas an aqueous
decoction had a corresponding ratio of 448 : 1." It was suggested
that the high potassium ion concentration in aqueous decoctions
may contribute to their diuretic activity.

Utero-activity has been documented for nettle in pregnant and
non-pregnant mice; betaine and serotonin were stated to be the
active constituen
of antifertility activity following oral administration to mice
(250 mg/kg).?? Analgesic activity in mice has been documen-
ted." Administration of an aqueous extract (1200 mg/kg) to mice
showed resistance to stimulation in the hotplate test at 55°C with
a 190% increase in reaction time.’ Conversely, no analgesic

2 :
) A nettle extract was reported to be devoid

activity was noted in the hotplate test on rats given an ethanolic

Figure 3 Nettle - dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 465 -----
Nettle

extract, but the same extract did reduce the writhing response to
phenylquinone after oral (1 g/kg) and intraperitoneal (500 mg/kg)
treatment.)

The isolectins isolated from the rhizome are reported to cause
non-specific agglutination of erythrocytes, to induce the synthesis
of interferon by human lymphocytes,” and have carbohydrate-
binding properties.”

An extract of nettle at a concentration of 1.2 mg/mL has been
reported to be active against L-1210 leukaemic cells in mice.”

Clinical studies

Diuretic effect In an open, uncontrolled study, 32 patients with
myocardial or chronic venous insufficiency were treated with
15mL of nettle juice three times daily for two weeks.© A
significant increase in daily volume of urine was observed
throughout the study, the volume by day two being 9.2% (p <
0.0005) higher than the baseline value in patients with myocardial
insufficiency and 23.9% higher than the baseline value (p <
0.0005) in those with chronic venous insufficiency. It has been
proposed that the diuretic activity of aqueous extracts of nettle
may be attributed to the high potassium content.'” The reputed
diuretic effects of nettle require further investigation.

Arthritis and rheumatism An open, uncontrolled multicentre
study involving 152 patients with various, mainly degenerative,
rheumatic conditions reported that 70% of participants experi-
enced symptom relief by the end of the three-week treatment
period.'S°?) In an open, randomised pilot study involving 37
patients with acute arthritis, diclofenac 50 mg plus stewed nettle
herb 50g was compared with diclofenac 200 mg.* Assessment
was based on the decrease in elevated acute phase C-reactive
protein serum concentrations, and clinical signs of acute arthritis.
Clinical improvement was observed in both groups to a similar
extent. On the basis of the findings, it was suggested that nettle
herb administration may enhance the effectiveness of diclofenac in
rheumatic conditions. However, this requires further investiga-
tion.

In a randomised, double-blind, crossover study, 27 patients with
osteoarthritis pain at the base of the thumb and index finger,
received stinging nettle leaf (applied for 30 seconds daily for one
week to the painful area) or white dead nettle (Lamium album) as
placebo, followed by a five-week wash-out period before crossing
to the other arm of the study.** The results indicated that
reductions in visual analogue scale scores for pain and in a health
assessment questionnaire score for disability were significantly
better for the stinging nettle group, compared with the placebo
group (p = 0.026 and p = 0.0027 for pain and disability,
respectively).

Benign prostatic hyperplasia A small number of clinical studies
has assessed the effectiveness of nettle preparations in the
treatment of symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).

Several uncontrolled trials have reported improvements in
urological symptoms, compared with baseline values, following
administration of nettle root extract (5:1) 600-1200 mg daily for
three weeks to 20 months.(@ Large observational studies
involving patients with BPH who received nettle root extract for
two to three months have reported improvements in various
symptoms, such as urinary frequency, urinary flow and noctur-
“5 These studies provide justification for further, rigorous
investigation of the effects of nettle in BPH.

A placebo-controlled trial involving 79 patients with BPH
ssed the effects of nettle root extract 600 mg daily for six to

ia."

ass

eight weeks. Compared with placebo, nettle root extract
administration resulted in greater improvements in urinary flow
‘650 Another placebo-
controlled trial of nettle root extract 600 mg daily for nine weeks
in men with BPH (7 = 50) reported a significant decrease in SHBG
concentrations and significant improvement in micturition volume
and maximum urinary flow.'5

and urine volume and residual volume.

Rhinitis A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study
sed the effects of a freeze-dried preparation of nettle herb in
individuals with allergic rhinitis.*° Participants received nettle
herb 600 mg, or placebo, at the onset of symptoms over a one-
week period. A ment was based on daily symptom diaries and
global responses recorded at follow-up visits after one week of
therapy. Nettle herb was rated more highly than placebo in the
global assessment, but was rated less highly on the basis of data
from the symptom diaries. It was concluded that there should be
further investigation with a larger sample size and involving a
longer treatment period.

as:

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for nettle and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Postmarketing surveillance studies involving a total of almost
2000 patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated for three weeks
with nettle leaf extract (IDS-23) administered as an adjuvant to
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), or as mono-
therapy, have reported that the extract was well-tolerated.2%?”

Consumption of nettle tea has caused gastric irritation, a
burning sensation of the skin, oedema and oliguria.'“*” The
leaves are extremely irritant in view of their acetylcholine- and
histamine-containing glandular hairs.

Preclinical data

An LDspo in mice following intraperitoneal administration of nettle
has been reported as 3.625 g/kg." The LDso for intravenous
infusion of nettle leaf in mice has been documented as 1.92 g/kg,
and the LDso for chronic administration in rats has been stated as
1.31 g/kg.“ An ethanolic extract of nettle (plant part unspeci-
fied) showed low toxicity in rats and mice after oral and
intraperitoneal administration at doses equivalent to 2 g/kg.\'*

Contra-indications, Warnings

Gastrointestinal irritation has been documented following con-
sumption of nettle tea.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of nettle to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence from
preclinical studies that nettle preparations have hypoglycaemic,
hypotensive and CNS depressant effects.

Pregnancy and lactation Nettle is reputed to be an
abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle.“ Utero-activity
has been documented in animal studies. In view of this and other
documented pharmacological activities, the use of nettle during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

----- PAGE 466 -----
plant. Malaysia: Cleansa Plus. Mexico: Prosgutt. Russia:
Herbion Urtica (fep6uon Vpruxa). South Africa: Combu-
doron; Enzian Anaemodoron Drops; Menodoron. Spain:
Natusor Artilane. Switzerland: Combudoron; Prostagutt-F;
Prostatonin; The a l'avoine sauvage de Vollmer; Tisane
Diuretique; Tisane pour les problemes de prostate. UK:
Culpeper Detox Tea; Napiers Echinacea Tea; Summertime
Tea Blend. USA: Prostate Health.

References

1 Bakke ILF e¢ al Water-soluble acids from Urtica dioica L. Medd Nor
Farm Selsk 1978; 40: 181-188.

2 Adamski R, Bieganska J. Studies on substances present in Urtica
dioica L. leaves Il. Analysis for protein amino acids and nitrogen
containing non-protein amino acids. Herba Pol 1984; 30: 17-26.

3 Andersen $, Wold JK. Water-soluble glycoprotein from Urtica dioica
leaves. Phytochemistry 1978; 17: 1875-1877.

4 Chaurasia N, Wichtl M. Flavonolglykoside aus Urtica dioica. Planta
Med 1987; 53: 432-434.

5 Barlow RB, Dixon ROD. Choline aceytltransferase in the nettle Urtica
dioica L. Biochem J 1973; 132: 15-18.

6 Shibuya N et al. Carbohydrates binding properties of the stinging
nettle (Urtica dioica) rhizome lectin. Arch Biochem Biophys 1986; 249:
215-224.

7 Damme EJM et al. The Urtica dioica agglutinin is a complex mixture
of isolectins. Plant Physiol 1988; 86: 598-601.

8 Chaurasia N, Wichtl M. Scopoletin, 3-B-sitosterin und 3-B-D-glucosid

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

Nettle

aus Brennesselwurzel (Urticae radix). Dtsch Apothek Zeitung 1986;
126: 81-83.

Chaurasia N, Wichtl M. Sterols and steryl glycosides from Urtica
dioica. ] Nat Prod 1987; 50: 881-885.

Chaurasia N, Wichtl M. Phenylpropane und lignane aus der wurzel
von Urtica dioica L. Dtsch Apothek Zeitung 1986; 126: 1559-1563.
Klingelhoefer $ et al. Antirheumatic effect of IDS 23, a stinging nettle
leaf extract, on in vivo expression of T helper cytokines. J Rheumatol
1999; 26: 2517-2522.

Riehemann K e¢ al. Plant extracts from stinging nettle (Urtica dioica),
an antirheumatic remedy, inhibit the proinflammatory transcription
factor NF-KB. FEBS Lett 1999; 442: 89-94.

Broncano J et al. Estudio de diferentes preparados de Urtica dioica L
sobre SNC. An R Acad Farm 1987; 53: 284-291.

Lasheras B e¢ al. Etude pharmacologique préliminaire de Prunus
spinosa L. Amelanchier ovalis medikus Juniperus communis L. et
Urtica dioica L. Plant Méd Phytothér 1986; 20: 219-226.

Broncano FJ et al. Etude de I'effet sur le centre cardiovasculaire de
quelques préparations de l'Urtica dioica L. Planta Med 1983; 17: 222-
229.

Oliver-Bever B, Zahland GR. Plants with oral hypoglycaemic activity.
QJ Crude Drug Res 1979; 17: 139-196.

Neef H et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of selected European plants.
Phytother Res 1995; 9: 45-48.

Tita B et al. Urtica dioica L.: Pharmacological effect of ethanol
extract. Pharmacol Res 1993; 27: 21-22.

Szentmihalyi K et al. Potassium-sodium ratio for the characterization
of medicinal plants extracts with diuretic activity. Phytother Res 1998;
12: 163-166.

Broncano FJ et al. Estudio de efecto sobre musculatura lisa uterina de
distintos preparados de las hojas de Urtica dioica L. An R Acad Farm
1987; 53: 69-76.

Sharma BB et al. Antifertility screening of plants. Part I. Effect of ten
indigenous plants on early pregnancy in albino rats. Int J Crude Drug
Res 1983; 21: 183-187.

Ilarionova M et al. Cytotoxic effect on leukemic cells of the essential
oils from rosemary, wild geranium and nettle and concret of royal
bulgarian rose. Anticancer Res 1992; 12: 1915.

Chrubasik S et al. Evidence for antirheumatic effectiveness of herba
Urtica dioicae in acute arthritis: a pilot study. Phytomedicine 1997; 4:
105-108.

Randall C et al. Randomized controlled trial of nettle sting for
treatment of base-of-thumb pain. J R Soc Med 2000; 93: 305-309.
Mittman P. Randomized, double-blind study of freeze-dried Urtica
dioica in the treatment of allergic rhinitis. Planta Med 1990; 56: 44-47.
Sommer R-G, Sinner B. Kennen sie den neuen zytokinanatagonisten?
Therapiewoche 1996; 1: 44-49.

Ramm §S, Hansen C. Brennesselblatter-extrakt bei arthrose und
rheumatoider arthritis-Multizentrische anwendungsbeobachtung mit
rheuma-hek. Therapiewoche 1996; 28: 1575-1578.

----- PAGE 467 -----
Parsley

apiole, myristicin and furanocoumarin constituents. Most of
the reported uses of parsley are probably due to the volatile
oil; no documented information was located regarding
antirheumatic and antimicrobial properties. There is a lack of
clinical research assessing the efficacy and safety of parsley.
Parsley should not be consumed in doses that greatly exceed
the amounts used in foods, as excessive ingestion may result
in apiole and myristicin toxicity.

Species (Family)

Petroselinum crispum (Mill.) Hill (Apiaceae/Umbelliferae)

Synonym(s)
Apium petroselinum L., Carum petroselinum (L.) Benth.,

Petroselinum sativum Hoffm., P. peregrinum (L.) Lag., P. hortense
auct., P. vulgare Lag.

Part(s) Used

Leaf, root, seed

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%

BHP 1996?)

Complete German Commission EC)
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Flavonoids Glycosides of apigenin, luteolin (e.g. apiin, luteolin-
7-apiosyl-glucoside, apigenin-7-glucoside (leaf only), luteolin-7-
diglucoside (leaf only)).

Furanocoumarins Bergapten and oxypeucedanin as major
constituents (up to 0.02% and 0.01% respectively); also 8-
methoxypsoralen, imperatorin, isoimperatorin, isopimpinellin,
psoralen, xanthotoxin (up to 0.003%).

Volatile oils 2-7% in seed, 0.05% in leaf. The seed contains
apiole, myristicin, tetramethoxyallylbenzene, various terpene
aldehydes, ketones, and alcohols. The leaf contains myristicin
(up to 85%), apiole, 1,3,8-p-menthatriene, 1-methyl-4-isoprope-
nylbenzene, methyl disulfide, monoterpenes (e.g. ¢- and B-pinene,
B-myrcene, B-ocimene, B-phellandrene, p-terpinene, o&-terpineol),
sesquiterpenes (e.g. &-copaene, carotol, caryophyllene).

Other constituents Fixed oil, oleo-resin, proteins, carbohydrates,
and vitamins (especially vitamins A and C).
A detailed vitamin and mineral analysis is given elsewhere. ‘¢?”)

Food Use

Parsley is listed by the Council of Europe as natural source of food
flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that parsley can
be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'“! Parsley is commonly used in foods. Previously,
pars ey has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As
Safe).

Herbal Use

Parsley is stated to possess carminative, antispasmodic, diuretic,
emmenagogue, expectorant, antirheumatic and antimicrobial
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for flatulent dyspepsia,
colic, cystitis, dysuria, bronchitic cough in the elderly, dysmenor-
thoea, functional amenorrhoea, myalgia and_ specifically for
flatulent dyspepsia with intestinal colic.'C* 6% 67% Ge?)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Leaf/root 2-4¢ as an infusion.

Seed 1-2¢.

Dried root 24g or by infusion three times dailyC%°?

Liquid extract 24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily(Co%

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Parsley extract (0.25-1.0 mL/kg, by intravenous injection) has been
reported to lower the blood pressure of cats by more than 40%,”
and to decrease both respiratory movements and blood pressure in
anaesthetised dogs. Parsley exhibits a tonic effect on both
intestinal and uterine muscle.” This uterine effect has been
attributed to the apiole content,*” but has also been observed
with apiole-free aqueous extracts.) An aqueous extract of parsley
has been documented to contain an antithiamine substance which
was unaffected by cooking or contact with gastric juice.
Mpyristicin and apiole are both effective insecticides.

Parsley seed oil has been reported to stimulate hepatic
regeneration in a rat model.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of parsley
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Myristicin is the hallucinogenic principle present in nutmeg
seed. It has been hypothesised that myristicin is converted in the
body to amfetamine, to which it is structurally related.

----- PAGE 468 -----
Phenylpropanoids

Parsley 457,

o-\ o-"\ OCH3
CHO. o CHO. © CHO OCH,
‘OCH; ‘OCH;
apiole myristicin allyltetra-
methoxybenzene
Furanocoumarins
R'
J s 1
° o~ So ° 07 Sa
Re R' R oxypeucedanin
psoralen H H
bergapten OCH; H
8-methoxypsoralen H OCH3
imperatorin H isopentenyl
isopimpinellin OCH; OCH3

Figure 1

Selected constituents of parsley.

¥ 2

Figure 3. Parsley — dried drug substance (root).

Myristicin has a structural similarity with sympathomimetic
amines and it is thought that it may compete for monoamine
oxidase enzymes, thereby exhibiting a monoamine oxidase
inhibitor (MAOI)-like action. However, this requires confirma-
tion. Parsley oil has been included in the diet of pregnant women
and is reported to increase diuresis, and plasma protein and
plasma calcium concentrations.)

The diuretic effect associated with the consumption of parsley
may be attributable to the pharmacological activities of myristicin
(sympathomimetic action) and apiole (irritant effect).

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for parsley and
further investigation of these aspects is required. The suggestion
that myristicin, a constituent of parsley, has MAOI-like activity
requires confirmation.

Chronic and excessive consumption of fresh parsley (170 g daily
for 30 years) has been associated with generalised itching and
pigmentation of the lower legs in a 70-year-old woman. The
symptoms were attributed to excessive ingestion of parsley in the
presence of chronic liver disease. The aetiology of the chronic
hepatitis was unknown, but considered possibly related to the
chronic exposure to the psoralen constituents in parsley. Apiole
and myristicin are also documented to be hepatotoxic.

The ingestion of approximately 10g apiole has been reported to
cause acute haemolytic anaemia, thrombocytopenia purpura,
nephrosis and hepatic dysfunction. However, ingestion of 10g of
apiole would require a dose of more than 200g parsley. The
amount of apiole ingested as a result of normal dietary
consumption of parsley is not hazardous. Myristicin has been
documented to cause giddiness, deafness, hypotension, decrease in
pulse rate, and paralysis, followed by fatty degeneration of the
liver and kidney.'©?”) In addition, myristicin is known to possess
hallucinogenic properties. However, when compared to nutmeg,
parsley contains a relatively low concentration of myristicin (less

----- PAGE 469 -----
Parsley

than 0.05% in parsley leaf, about 0.4-0.89% in nutmeg); parsley
seed is potentially hazardous in view of its higher volatile oil
content (about 2-7%) which contains apiole and myristicin.

Parsley contains phototoxic furanocoumarins (see Celery).
However, photodermatitis resulting from the oral ingestion of
parsley is thought to be unlikely. The ingestion of 50g parsley
provides negligible amounts of bergapten (0.5-0.8¢).” The
concentration of oxypeucedanin provided was not mentioned.
However, a photoactive reaction from topical contact with parsley
is possible.

Apiole is an irritant component of the volatile oil and may
cause irritation of the kidneys during excretion.

Parsley seed oil has been reported to stimulate hepatic
regeneration. Myristicin and apiole are documented to have a
similar chemical structure and acute toxicity to safrole, which is
known to be carcinogenic and hepatotoxic (see Sassafras). The
carcinogenic potential of apiole and myristicin has not been
evaluated.

LDs9 (mice, intravenous injection) values for apiole and
myristicin have been documented as 50mg/kg and 200 mg/kg
body weight, respectively.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Parsley should not be ingested in excessive amounts in view of the
documented toxicities of apiole and myristicin. Parsley may cause
a photoactive reaction, especially following external contact, and
may aggravate existing renal disease.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of parsley to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Parsley is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle.‘©7) Utero-activity has been documented in
humans and animals,“ and parsley is stated to be contra-

indicated during pregnancy.'©*”® Myristicin has been reported
to cross the placenta and can lead to foetal tachycardia." In view
of this, parsley should not be taken during pregnancy and
lactation in doses that greatly exceed the amounts used in foods.

agus-P; nephro-loges. Malaysia: Total Man. Russia: Herbion
Urological Drops ((ep6uon Ypoaornueckue Kanan). UK:
Athera; Fre-bre; Héfels One-A-Day Garlic with Parsley; Mixed
Vegetable Tablets; Modern Herbals Menopause. USA: Natural
Herbal Water Tablets; PMS Control.

References

1 Chaudhary SK et al. Oxypeucedanin, a major furocoumarin in
parsley, Petroselinum crispum. Planta Med 1986; 52: 462-464.

2. Petkov V. Plants with hypotensive, antiatheromatous and
coronarodilatating action. Am J Chin Med 1979; 7: 197-236.

3 Opdyke DLJ. Parsley seed oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1975; 13 (Suppl.
Suppl.): 897-898.

4 Buchanan RL. Toxicity of spices containing methylenedioxybenzene
derivatives: A review. J Food Safety 1978; 1: 275-293.

5 Gershbein LL. Regeneration of rat liver in the presence of essential oils
and their components. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1977; 15: 171-181.

6 Cootes P. Clinical curio: liver disease and parsley. BMJ 1982; 285:
1719.

7 Zaynoun S et al. The bergapten content of garden parsley and its
significance in causing cutaneous photosensitization. Clin Exp
Dermatol 1985; 10: 328-331.

8 Lavy G. Nutmeg intoxication in pregnancy. J Reprod Med 1987; 32:
63-64.

----- PAGE 470 -----
a Parsley Piert

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Little chemical information is available on parsley piert. No
scientific evidence was found to justify the herbal uses. There
is a lack of clinical research assessing the efficacy and safety of
parsley piert. In view of the lack of toxicity data, excessive use
of parsley piert and use during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Aphanes arvensis L. (Rosaceae)

Synonym(s)

Alchemilla arvensis Scop., Aphanes

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983‘?

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G7.

Limited information is available. Parsley piert is stated to
contain an astringent principle.'°%

Food Use

Parsley piert is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Parsley piert is stated to possess diuretic and demulcent proper-
ties, and to dissolve urinary deposits. Traditionally, it has been

used for kidney and bladder calculi, dysuria, strangury, oedema of

renal and hepatic origin, and specifically for renal calculus.'(C7 °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 2—4g as an infusion three times daily.“©”
Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.'°”

Tincture 2-10 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of parsley
piert and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for parsley piert and further investigation of these
aspects is required.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of parsley piert to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of phytochemical,

pharmacological, and toxicity information, the use of parsley
piert during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Figure 1 Parsley piert (Aphanes arvensis).

Figure 2 Parsley piert — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 471 -----
Parsley Piert

----- PAGE 472 -----
Passionflower

been described for preparations of P. incarnata following pre-
clinical studies, providing supporting evidence for some of the
traditional uses. However, well-designed clinical trials of P.
incarnata preparations are lacking and further studies are
required to determine their clinical efficacy and effectiveness.
The few clinical trials available generally have investigated the
effects of proprietary products containing P. incarnata, in
some cases in combination with other herbal ingredients, in
patients with anxiety disorders. Further investigation of the
efficacy and effectiveness of P. incarnata preparations is
required.

Trials of monopreparations of P. incarnata have involved
relatively small numbers of participants (less than 70 per trial)
and been of short duration (up to four weeks). Information on
the safety and toxicity of P. incarnata preparations is limited
and, in view of this, excessive use (higher than recommended
dosages and/or for long periods of time) and use during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Passiflora incarnata L. (Passifloraceae)

Synonym(s)

Apricot Vine, Grenadille, Maypop, Passiflora, Passion Vine

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°®

BHMA 20036

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C?)
ESCOP 2003079
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 20078?

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSL'°*?
Constituents
Alkaloids Indole alkaloids of the B-carboline type, including

harman, harmol, harmine, harmalol and harmaline. The
alkaloids are minor constituents and may be present in ppm or

even not detectable in some samples of plant material. The yields
of harman and harmine in the aerial parts of greenhouse grown
plants have been reported as 0.012% and 0.007%, respectively,
while the yields in field grown plants were 0.005% and not
detectable, respectively."

Flavonoids Pharmacopoeial standard not less than 1.5%
expressed as vitexin.(“*"°*) Aglycones apigenin, chrysin (5,7-
hydroxyflavone), luteolin, quercetin and kaempferol. C-glycosides
of apigenin (e.g. vitexin, isovitexin, schaftoside, isoschaftoside)
and of luteolin (e.g. orientin, iso-orientin) and_ related

Flavonoid C-glycosides

Rt
vitexin H OH gic H
isovitexin gic OH H H
orientin H OH gic OH
isoorientin gic OH H OH
schaftoside gic OH ara H
isoschaftoside ara OH gic H
swertisin gic OCH; H H
vicenin-2 gic OH gic 4H
lucenin-2 gic OH gic OH
isovitexin-2”
-O-glucoside soph OH H H
isoorientin-2”
-O-glucoside soph OH H OH

ara = a-1—arabinopyranosy!
gle = B-o-glucopyranosy! 12
soph = sophorosyl (sophorose = glucose ————* glucose)

Alkaloids

S
N NH
R n~ 47 R n~ 7
H H
Hg HH
R R

harman =H harmalol OH
harmol OH harmaline OCH3
harmine OCH3
Cyanogenic glucosides y—Benzopyrans
O. CH3
NC, | |
ms “OH
GleO OH
H (o}
gynocardin maltol
Figure 1 Selected constituents of passionflower.

----- PAGE 473 -----
Passionflower

flavonoids. There is considerable variation, qualitatively and
quantitatively; in the flavonoid composition depending on the
source of plant material.°°° The four major C-glycosidic
flavonoids have been identified as schaftoside, isoschaftoside,
isovitexin-2”-O-glucopyranoside and iso-orientin-2”-O-glucopyr-
anoside on the basis of mass spectral and ['*C] NMR data.”

Other constituents Cyanogenic glycoside gynocardin,'*” y-

benzopyrones maltol and ethylmaltol,"® polyacetylene  passi-
col," essential oil (hexanol, benzylalcohol, linalool, 2-phenyl-
ethyl alcohol, 2-hydroxybenzoic acid methyl ester, carvone
(major), transanethole, eugenol, isoeugenol, B-ionone, o-berga-
molol, phytol),” amino acids, fatty acids (e.g. linoleic, linolenic,
myristic, palmitic, oleic acids), formic and butyric acids, sterols
(e.g. stigmasterol, sitosterol), sugars (e.g. raffinose, sucrose,
glucose, fructose).

Other plant parts Coumarins (scopoletin and umbelliferone) are
found in the root.

Other Passiflora species

Passiflora edulis Sims, source of edible passionflower fruit,
contains numerous glycosides including flavonoids (e.g. luteolin-
6-C-chinovoside, luteolin-6-C-fucoside),' cyanogenic glycosides
(e.g. passibiflorin, epipassibiflorin, passicapsin, passicoriacin,
epipassicoriacin, cyanogenic-B-rutinoside, epitetraphyllin  B,
amygdalin, prunasin,”*'®) triterpenoid glycosides (e.g.passiflorine)
and salicylate glycosides. Also present are the -carboline
alkaloids harman, harmine, harmaline and harmalol,‘'” phenols,
carotenes and y-lacton

Cyanogenic glycosides are present in species of Passifloraceae
including species of Passiflora.‘'?) When the genus was reviewed in
2002 for the presence of cyanogenic glycosides, only 33 species
(7%) of some 460 species had been investigated chemically for
these constituents. Four structurally different types of glycosides
have been identified and their occurrence related to the subgeneric
classification of this large genus. In a subsequent review of the
chemical constituents of Passiflora, it was claimed that only 46 of
the 500 species of the genus had been investigated chemically.»
Flavonoids and cyanogenic glycosides are present in many of the
species. Low concentrations (ppm) of harman-type alkaloids were
detected in 53 of 104 samples, representing 91 species of Passiflora
analysed by HPLC. The highest concentration detected of total
alkaloids in any species was 6.35 ppm."

Quality of plant material and commercial products

Flavonoids The presence of complex mixtures and varying
composition of flavonoids, both qualitatively and quantitatively;
in P. incarnata herb and its preparations has led to a number of
analytical investigations.“*® The C-glycosides are readily sepa-
rated by HPLC and the major ones characterised by MS,” MS-
(8C]-NMR,” and MS-2D-NMR."'®) HPLC separation of C-
glycosides provides a ‘fingerprint’ for the C-glycosides and
analyses of 14 different commercial samples of P. incarnata
revealed considerable qualitative and quantitative differences. '”
Vitexin and orientin were absent from some samples but detected
in others at concentrations of 0.05-0.25%. Swertisin was the
major C-glycoside in two samples whilst it was absent in others,
isovitexin was the major compound in five samples, isovitexin-2”’-
O-glucoside was the major compound in four samples with
schaftoside and isoschaftoside being major in the three other
samples. Interpretation of HPLC analytical results was simplified

by acid hydrolysis resulting in the loss of O-glycosides but not C-
glycosyl flavonoids. HPLC was used to compare the flavonoid
content of six different species of Passiflora grown under identical
conditions.°” The highest concentration of isovitexin was found
in P. incarnata leaves. Accelerated solvent extraction and HPLC
analysis were used to investigate the presence of schaftoside,
isoschaftoside, orientin, iso-orientin, vitexin and isovitexin in 115
samples of Passiflora species obtained from the Americas, Europe
and Australia.*") There was a wide diversity in the number and
concentration of the flavonoid C-glycosides. The methodology
was claimed to be suitable for the analysis of phytochemical
preparations containing P. incarnata.

High performance thin layer chromatography (HPTLC) and
densitometry have been used for the quantitative determination of
total flavonoids and of orientin and iso-orientin in the leaves of
four species of Passiflora.°”) The results were compared with those
of HPLC-UV analyses. Although HPTLC proved to be a reliable
and fast method for 'fingerprinting' P. incarnata, HPLC proved to
be more useful for quantitative determination of the flavonoids.
These methods were used to examine 11 commercial samples of
Passiflora leaf.

Capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE) has been used for the
separation and resolution of 14 flavonoid glycosides from P.
incarnata.”» The technique was applied to 18 different commer-
cial samples and demonstrated the great variability in qualitative
composition. Four C-glycoside flavonoid patterns of P. incarnata
were defined: high isovitexin content; high swertisin content; high
isovitexin-2”-O-glucoside content; four flavonoids present, namely
isovitexin, isoschaftoside, schaftoside and iso-orientin. CZE has
also been used to separate and quantify 13 flavonoids from 10
different commercial samples of P. incarnata herb.? There were
differences in the amount of individual flavonoids present and the
total flavonoid content was 0.37-3.75%.

HPLC analysis of 12 liquid and 14 solid pharmaceutical
preparations of P. incarnata revealed that the flavonoid content
ranged from 0.31-5.81mg/g and 2.56—2.68 mg/100 mg extract,
respectively. HPLC-DAD and HPLC-MS have been applied to
study the stability of flavonoids in tinctures of P. incarnata.*°) The
shelf-life of a 60% v/v tincture was determined as being six
months.

Alkaloids Reversed phase HPLC was used to screen 17 different
samples of P. incarnata herb for the presence of alkaloids.) Only
one sample yielded a possible harman content of approximately
0.1 ppm. A sample of Japanese P. incarnata herb was quantified by
reversed-phase HPLC for the presence of harmol, harman and
harmine. The amounts present were determined as being 410, 126
and 30.8ng/g dry weight, respectively? HPLC analysis of nine
different samples of P. incarnata herb available in Australia
resulted in a range of concentrations for harman (not detected to
0.112 g/g) and harmine (not detected to 0.271 g/g); harmol was
not detected.°” Reversed phase HPLC with photodiode array
detection was used to determine the harman alkaloid content of
104 samples (91 species) of Passiflora."® One sample of P.
incarnata contained harmalol, harmol, harman, harmaline and
harmine (0.05, 0.09, 0.11, 0.20 and 0.23 ppm, respectively).

Food Use

Passionflower is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates
that passionflower can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally
accepted manner, but that there is insufficient information

----- PAGE 474 -----
available for an adequate assessment of potential toxicity.C!®

Previously in the USA, passionflower has been permitted for use in

food.'C%

Herbal Use

Passionflower is stated to possess sedative, hypnotic, antispasmo-
dic and anodyne properties.'° Traditionally, it has been used for
neuralgia, generalised seizures, hysteria, nervous tachycardia,
spasmodic asthma, and specifically for insomnia.'°” The German
Commission E approved internal use for nervous restlessness.)
Passionflower is used in combination with valerian root and
lemon balm for conditions of unrest, difficulty in falling asleep
due to nervousness.“©?) Passionflower is used extensively in
homeopathy.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in older
standard herbal reference texts for the traditional uses are given
below.

For restlessness and resulting irritability and insomnia, and
nervous tension 0.5-1g of dried plant equivalent three times
daily;'“*) 4-8 g herb daily.“C»

Modern standard herbal reference texts recommend the
following dosages for oral administration (adults).

For tenseness, restlessness and irritability with difficulty falling
asleep: 0.5—2 g of drug three to four times daily; 2.5 g of drug as an
infusion three to four times daily; 1-4mL of tincture (1:8) three
to four times daily.‘©”

There has been insufficient clinical investigation of P. incarnata
preparations to describe dosages typically used in clinical trials.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Preclinical studies have focused on investigating the anxiolytic and
sedative properties of preparations of Passiflora incarnata,
although other activities, such as anticonvulsant, anti-inflamma-
tory, anti-addictive and aphrodisiac effects, have also been
explored."'?) There are conflicting reports on which of the
constituents of P. incarnata are responsible for the documented
pharmacological effects; the alkaloids and flavonoids are con-
sidered to be important for activity, although the alkaloids are not
detected in some samples of P incarnata material. A tri-

Figure 2  Passionflower (Passiflora incarnata).

Passionflower

substituted benzoflavone moiety has been associated with various
activities.)

A mechanism of action for P. incarnata has not clearly been
established." In radioligand receptor binding studies, extracts of
P. incarnata aerial parts (containing 3% or 9% flavonoids) at
concentrations of 10-1000 g/mL did not interact with benzodia-
zepine, dopaminergic and histaminergic binding sites.°*) Two
flavonoid constituents of P. incarnata, isovitexin-2"-O-glucoside
and iso-orientin-2"-O-glucoside, at concentrations up to 30 mol/
L also failed to inhibit the interaction of ligands with the
benzodiazepine receptor binding site. In vitro experiments
utilising rat CNS receptors have shown that a multi-herb product
(containing hydroalcoholic extracts of P incarnata stalks and
leaves and Valeriana officinalis roots, aqueous extracts of
Crataegus oxyacantha flowers and Ballota foetida, and dried
seed powder of Paullinia cupana and Cola nitida) as well as P.
incarnata extract alone, inhibited the binding of ligands to
central, but not peripheral, benzodiazepine receptors (ICs 37.1
and 601.4u1g/mL for the multi-herb extract and P incarnata
extract, respectively).°”) The multi-herb extract and P. incarnata
extract also inhibited the binding of ligands to alpha-2
adrenoceptors, but had no such effect on binding of ligands to
serotonergic 5-HT, and S-HT, and dopaminergic DA; and DA;
receptors.

Anxiolytic activity Several studies have explored the anxiolytic
properties of P. incarnata preparations in experimental models. In
a battery of experiments in mice, a hydroalcoholic extract (10%
w/v) of the fresh aerial parts of P. incarnata collected in Italy was
administered intraperitoneally at doses ranging from 3 to 800 mg/
kg (doses expressed in terms of dry plant material) body weight 30
minutes before tests.°°” Compared with controls, animals treated
with P incarnata extract displayed increased activity in the
staircase test (at doses of 400 and 800 mg/kg body weight) and
increased time spent in the light compartment in the light/dark
avoidance test (at a dose of 400 mg/kg body weight). These results
were indicative of anxiolytic, rather than sedative effects.
Mixtures comprising different quantities of maltol plus different
quantities of indole alkaloids or flavonoids found in P. incarnata,
also administered intraperitoneally, had no effect on behavioural
activity in the staircase test, suggesting that these compounds are
not responsible for activity.°”

Anxiolytic activity has also been documented for P. incarnata
following studies using the elevated plus-maze model, an
experimental test used to observe anxiolytic behaviour; less

Figure 3. Passionflower — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 475 -----
Passionflower

anxious animals spend more time in the 'open' arms of the plus
maze. In mice, a methanol extract of the aerial parts of P.
incarnata was significantly more effective than control in
increasing the amount of time animals spent in the open arms
of the model (p < 0.001) when administered orally at doses
ranging from 75 to 200mg/kg body weight. By contrast, a
methanol extract of the aerial parts of P. edulis, a related species
with which P. incarnata has been confused, was virtually devoid of
activity in this test.°”

Subsequent work using different extracts of carefully separated
plant parts of P. incarnata found that methanol extracts of the
respective plant parts showed the greatest anxiolytic activity in
mice in an experiment involving the elevated plus-maze model.)
It was concluded that methanol extracts of the leaves/petioles and
the stems/tendrils achieved greater anxiolytic activity than did
extracts of the flowers/buds, the whole plant and the roots,
although statistical tests for intergroup differences were not
carried out. Selection of the entire aerial parts excluding the
flowers may be the optimum approach to achieving a maximal
anxiolytic effect.°?) Further investigations, utilising bioactivity-
guided fractionation and chromatographic techniques, indicated
that a subfraction of a methanol extract of the aerial parts of P.
incarnata showed the greatest anxiolytic activity in mice in the
elevated plus-maze model. Anxiolytic activity of this subfraction
at a dose of 10 mg/kg body weight orally was comparable to that
of diazepam 2mg/kg body weight orally.°* The subfraction
comprised f-sitosterol and a compound reported to be a
benzoflavone derivative.

In a study involving mice, animals received ethanol 2 g/kg twice
daily orally and a benzoflavone fraction (obtained from a
methanol extract of the aerial parts of P incarnata) 10, 20 or
50 mg/kg orally, or control, twice daily for six days. The
anxiogenic profile of the animals was assessed on day seven after
treatment with alcohol with or without the benzoflavone fraction
had ceased. Compared with control, treated animals showed
reductions in hyperanxiety due to alcohol cessation, as assessed by
mean duration of time spent in the open arms of the elevated plus-
maze model (p < 0.001).

Chrysin, a flavonoid found in P. incarnata, has been reported to
have anxiolytic activity following a series of experiments carried
out in rats. Compared with control, chrysin 1 mg/kg administered
intraperitoneally significantly increased the length of time spent in
the light compartment in the light/dark test of anxiety (p < 0.05).
The anxiolytic effect of chrysin was inhibited by pre-treatment of
animals with the benzodiazepine receptor antagonist flumazenil
(3 mg/kg, intraperitoneally).°”

Sedative activity Sedative effects for preparations of P. incarnata
have also been documented following several studie:

An aqueous extract (10% w/v) of the fresh aerial parts of P.
incarnata collected in Italy exhibited sedative effects in three tests
when administered at doses of 400 and 800 mg/kg body weight.”
Treatment with flumazenil (a benzodiazepine receptor antagonist)
10mg/kg body weight before administration of P incarnata
aqueous extract 400 mg/kg body weight did not influence the
sedative activity observed in the staircase test. A methanol extract
of the leaves of P. incarnata administered at doses of 100, 200, 300
and 400 mg/kg body weight intraperitoneally to mice one hour
before intraperitoneal administration of pentobarbital sodium 25
mg/kg body weight significantly prolonged the pentobarbital-
induced sleeping time (time elapsed between loss and recovery of
the righting reflex), compared with control (p < 0.05 for all
doses).°® A similar result was obtained with a multifraction dry

extract of the whole aerial parts (leaves, stems and flowers) of P.
incarnata administered orally at a dose of 60mg/kg body
weight.°”

An aqueous ethanolic extract of P. incarnata fresh aerial parts
administered intraperitoneally at a dose of 160 mg/kg body weight
to rats prolonged sleeping time induced by pentobarbital (50-
4000 mg/kg) and reduced spontaneous locomotor activity.°* In
mice, a 70% ethanol extract of P. incarnata herb (1000 mg/kg,
intraperitoneally) administered 10 minutes prior to sodium
pentobarbitol (40 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) resulted in a signifi-
cant prolongation (40%) of sleeping time,” although a p value
was not provided. When given by gastric tube one hour prior to
amfetamine (5 mg/kg, subcutaneous), the same extract at a dose of
500mg/kg body weight caused a significant reduction in
hypermotility.

CNS sedation, prolongation of hexobarbitone-induced sleeping
time (at high doses) and a reduction in spontaneous motor activity
have been documented for maltol and ethylmaltol
” Subsequent research documenting similar activities
in mice was unable to attribute the observed activities to either

flavonoid or alkaloid components present in the extract tested.)
However, maltol is reportedly an artefact and not a relevant
constituent.)

There are conflicting reports on the role of the flavonoid chrysin
(5,7-dihydroxyflavone) in the sedative effects of P. incarnata
preparations. In the pentobarbital-induced sleeping test in mice,
there was a significant prolongation in sleeping time in chrysin-
treated animals, compared with controls (p value not stated)
although the dose required to achieve this effect (30 mg/kg) was
higher than that reported to be found in extracts of P.
incarnata. In a study in rats, chrysin (50 mg/kg body weight
intraperitoneally) did not have any significant effect on the
pentobarbital-induced sleeping time (time elapsed between loss
and return of righting reflex.°° Chrysin and another flavonoid
found in P. incarnata, apigenin, displayed sedative activity as
determined by reductions in locomotor behaviour when admini:
tered intraperitoneally to rats at doses of 25-100 mg/kg body
weight. This activity was not influenced by prior administration
of the benzodiazepine receptor antagonist flumazenil (3 mg/kg
intraperitoneally).°>

An aqueous ethanolic extract of P. incarnata fresh aerial parts
administered intraperitoneally at a dose of 160 mg/kg body weight
to rats raised the threshold to nociceptive stimuli in tail flick and
hotplate tests.°* A methanol extract of the leaves of P. incarnata
administered at doses of 100, 200, 300 and 400 mg/kg body weight
intraperitoneally to mice one hour before intraperitoneal admin-
istration of acetic acid (0.6% v/v) 10mL/kg body weight
significantly reduced the number of writhings in treated animals,
compared with controls (p < 0.05 for all doses).°%

Anticonvulsant activity A methanol extract of the leaves of P.
incarnata administered at doses of 100, 200, 300 and 400 mg/kg
body weight intraperitoneally to mice one hour before intraper-
itoneal administration of the convulsant agent pentylenetetrazole
50 mg/kg body weight significantly delayed the onset of convul-
sions and increased survival time in treated animals, compared
with controls (p < 0.05 for all doses).°°
obtained with a multi-fraction dry extract of the whole aerial
parts (leaves, stems and flowers) of P incarnata administered
orally at a dose of 60 mg/kg body weight (p < 0.01 for treated
animals versus controls).°”

Anticonvulsant activity (at high doses) has been documented
for maltol and ethyl maltol in mice.“!°*”

” A similar result was

----- PAGE 476 -----
Anti-addictive activities Reports from several preclinical studies
have documented that the tri-substituted benzoflavone moiety

found in P. incarnata reverses tolerance and dependence to several
substances,» including the cannabinoid delta-9 tetrahydrocan-
nabinol (THC), diazepam, ethanol,° morphine“® and
nicotine.“” These studies have typically involved oral adminis-
tration to mice of the benzoflavone moiety at a dose of 10 or 20
mg/kg body weight (10-100 mg/kg in the case of morphine)
concomitantly with the addictive substance (THC and morphine:
10 mg/kg body weight orally twice daily; diazepam 20 mg/kg body
weight orally; nicotine 2 mg/kg body weight subcutaneously four
times daily; ethanol 2 g/kg body weight orally twice daily) for up
to 21 days.

Aphrodisiac activity A methanol extract of P. incarnata leaves
administered to male mice at oral doses of 75, 100 and 150 mg/kg
body weight significantly increased the number of mounts on non-
oestrus female mice, compared with control.“ The greatest
mounting activity was seen during the assessment period covering
105 to 120 minutes post administration, and for mice given the
100 mg/kg body weight dose, compared with control (mean
(standard deviation) number of mounts: 15.67 (1.21) and 1.0
(1.09), respectively; p <0.001). The extract tested was reported to
contain P. incarnata flavonoids and glycosides, but was free of
alkaloids. In another preclinical study, in which a benzoflavone
moiety isolated from a methanol extract of the aerial parts of P.
incarnata was administered orally to male rats at a dose of 10 mg/
kg body weight, a significant increase in mounting behaviour was
observed in the treated group, compared with the control group at
each of three assessment periods (p < 0.05 versus control).
Sperm count was also significantly higher in treated rats,
compared with rats in the control group, as was the proportion
of female rats (with whom male rats were given the opportunity to
mate) who became pregnant (6/15 versus 14/15 for control and
treated rats, respectively; p value not reported). Further controlled
experiments have described restoration of THC-induced decline in
sexual function in male rats given THC and the benzoflavone
moiety concurrently,
induced changes in parameters of sexual function
reported in male rats treated with the benzoflavone moiety,
compared with control.°)

Prevention of ethanol- and_nicotine-

as also been

Other activities A methanol extract of the leaves of P. incarnata
significantly reduced the extent of carrageenan-induced paw
oedema in mice when administered intraperitoneally one hour
before injection into paws of carrageenan 0.1mL.°° Anti-
inflammatory activity was greatest in animals treated with P
incarnata extract 400mg/kg body weight (p < 0.05 versus
control). An ethanolic extract of P incarnata flowering and
fruiting tops administered orally to rats one hour prior to
injection of carrageenan into rat paws at doses of 75-500 mg/kg
body weight reduced oedema in a dose-dependent manner, with
significant reductions in oedema in treated rats, compared with
control rats, observed with doses of 125mg/kg and above.©”)
Significant effects in other experimental models of inflammation,
including dextran-induced pleurisy and cotton pellet-induced
granuloma, were also documented for the P. incarnata extract.
Antitussive activity has been documented for a methanol
extract of P. incarnata leaves. In mice, P. incarnata leaf extract
administered orally at doses of 100 or 200mg/kg body weight
significantly reduced sulphur dioxide induced cough (39.4% and
65% reduction in frequency of cough for the lower and higher
doses, respectively, compared with control; p < 0.01). In an
experimental model of asthma, a methanol extract of P. incarnata

Passionflower

leaves administered orally to guinea pigs at doses of 50, 100 and
200 mg/kg body weight significantly reduced acetylcholine
induced bronchospasm at the two highest doses, compared with
control (p < 0.05).

An ethanol extract of P. incarnata (whole plant) significantly
inhibited phorbol-ester-promoted Epstein-Barr virus early antigen
(EBV-EA) activation in vitro. This assay is used to identify
potential cancer chemopreventive substances. An ethanol extract
of P. incarnata aerial parts had no calcium antagonist activity in in
vitro experiments involving inhibition of aortic contractions
induced by potassium ion depolarisation.%° Passicol exhibits
antimicrobial activity towards a wide variety of moulds, yeasts
“) Group A haemolytic streptococci are more
susceptible than are Staphylococcus aureus, with Candida
albicans of intermediate susceptibility."

and_ bacteria.

Pharmacokinetics Hard gelatin capsules containing different
preparations of 'Passiflora' (likely P incarnata) material have
different dissolution profiles in vitro.°”) Dissolution profiles for
capsules containing 100 mg freeze-dried extract of P. incarnata or
164.8 mg of a commercial dried purified extract of P. incarnata
(Passoflo2-LMF) showed that the release of flavonoids from both
preparations was almost 100% after ten minutes, whereas
flavonoid release from capsules containing 410.6 mg P. incarnata
powder was only around 50% after the same amount of time.

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics No information relating to the clinical
pharmacokinetics of P. incarnata preparations was found.

Therapeutics Clinical investigation of P. incarnata preparations
is limited. The few clinical trials available generally have
investigated the effects of proprietary products containing P.
incarnata, in some cases in combination with other herbal

ingredients, in patients with anxiety disorders. Further investiga-
tion of the efficacy and effectiveness of P. incarnata preparations is
required.

In a randomised, double-blind study, 36 patients with general-
ised anxiety disorder received P. incarnata extract (Passipay; Iran)
45 drops daily (no further details of preparation provided), or
oxazepam 30mg daily, for four weeks. At the end of the study,
participants in both groups showed significant reductions in
anxiety scores (assessed using the Hamilton Anxiety Rating
Scale), compared with baseline values (p < 0.001 for both), and
there were no statistically significant differences between the two
groups.°*) However, this was a small study, a sample size
calculation does not appear to have been carried out, and it is
possible that the study was not large enough to detect a difference
between the two treatments. In addition, the study did not include
a placebo arm, so it is also possible that the effects in both groups
could be explained as a placebo response.

Another randomised, double-blind trial compared the effects of

P. incarnata extract 20 drops three times daily (no further details
of preparation provided) plus clonidine 0.8 mg daily (maximum
dose) with clonidine alone on the opiate withdrawal syndrome in
65 men addicted to opiates. At the end of the two-week study,
participants in both groups experienced significant reductions in
total symptom scores (both physical and mental symptoms),
compared with baseline values (p < 0.05) for both.°” The
reduction in total score in the P. incarnata plus clonidine was
greater than that observed with clonidine alone (p = 0.011). This
study also has methodological limitations, including an apparent
lack of a sample size calculation.

----- PAGE 477 -----
Passionflower

Two further studies have explored the effects of a combination
herbal preparation (Euphytose) containing dry extracts of P.
incarnata (40mg), Valeriana officinalis (S0 mg), Crataegus oxya-
cantha (10mg) and Ballota foetida (10 mg) as well as powdered
Paullinia cupana (15 mg) and Cola nitida (15 mg) (plant part(s) for
each not stated). In a randomised, double-blind, multi-centre
study in a general practice setting, 182 patients diagnosed with
adjustment disorder with anxious mood received Euphytose two
tablets three times daily, or placebo, for 28 days. At the end of
the study, the mean Hamilton anxiety scale score (the primary
outcome variable) was reported to be significantly lower for the
treatment group, compared with the placebo group, although the
p value given for this was <0.05. A significantly greater
proportion of participants in the treatment group was classified
as 'responders' (participants with Hamilton anxiety scale score <
10 at the end of the study: 42.9% and 25.3% for the treatment and
placebo groups, respectively; p = 0.012)."% Although this was a
reasonably good-sized study, a formal sample size calculation was
not reported. Other methodological limitations are that details of
the method of randomisation were not provided, there was no
description of the formulation of the placebo preparation, a check
for the success of blinding does not appear to have been carried
out, and although the two groups were reported to be similar at
baseline, baseline data on age, sex and other characteris
not provided in a report of the study.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving
healthy volunteers assessed the psychometric effects of Euphytose.
Sixty participants received the herbal preparation, or placebo,
twice daily for 14 days and underwent a battery of psychometric
tests, including the number-symbol pair test, the reaction choice
test and the flicker-fusion test. There were no_ statistically
significant differences between the treatment and placebo groups
on a: ments on days three, seven and 14 of the

A protocol for a Cochrane systematic review of studies
assessing the effectiveness of 'passiflora’ or 'passionflower' in the
treatment of any generalised anxiety disorder has been pub-
lished. The protocol does not state that the review will be
limited to preparations of P. incarnata, yet it is important to
consider phytochemical differences between species (and between
different manufacturers’ products) which could result in different
clinical outcomes.

‘s were

study, (6?)

Side-effects, Toxicity

Cyanogenic glycosides have been documented for related Passiflora
species.

Clinical data

There are only limited clinical data on safety aspects of P.
incarnata_ preparations. No  post-marketing  surveillance-type
studies were identified, and there is only a small number of
clinical trials of P. incarnata.

In a randomised, double-blind study in which 36 patients with
generalised anxiety disorder received P. incarnata extract (Passi-
pay; Iran) 45 drops daily (no further details of preparation
provided), or oxazepam 30mg daily, for four weeks, no
statistically significant differences in the overall frequency of
adverse effects was observed between the two groups (p =
0.831).°% Impairment of job performance occurred more
frequently in the oxazepam group, although this only just reached
statistical significance (p = 0.049). There were no statistically
significant differences in the frequencies of other adverse effects

sed, such as dizziness, drowsiness and confusion (p > 0.1 for
all). A report of another randomised, double-blind trial involving
the same preparation of P. incarnata’” did not provide adverse
event data.

In a randomised, double-blind, multi-centre study in a general
practice setting, 182 patients diagnosed with adjustment disorder
with anxious mood received Euphytose (a combination herbal
preparation containing P. incarnata dry extract as well as five
other herbal ingredients) two tablets three times daily, or placebo,
for 28 days.©° Four adve events (dry mouth, headache,
constipation, drowsiness) judged probably related to treatment
occurred in the Euphytose group, and eight occurred in the
placebo group.

Several case reports describe suspected adverse reactions
associated with the ingestion of preparations of P. incarnata. In
Australia, a 34-year-old woman developed severe
vomiting within 24 to 48 hours of first taking three tablets of a
herbal preparation, Sedacalm (containing P. incarnata 500 mg per
tablet; no further details of preparation provided). The woman
also developed a prolonged QT, interval and experienced episodes
of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia, and was admitted to
hospital for cardiac monitoring and treatment wit
fluids.» She stopped taking the herbal preparation after two
days, and within one week all symptoms had resolved. A sample
of the product had a similar chromatographic profile to that of a
sample from another batch of the same product and to a sample
of P. incarnata, and digoxin and digitoxin were not detected.'°?
No further details of this analysis were provided.

Another report describes a 77-year-old man with rheumatoid
arthritis who was a participant in a clinical trial of a gel
containing a NSAID for treatment of wrist synovitis.” The man
had already been taking diclofenac and cyclopenthiazide for five
years and, over the previous three weeks, had taken two tablets of
a herbal preparation (Naturest) containing 'passionflower' extract
on alternate nights for insomnia. After six applications of the gel,
the man developed a pruritic erythematous rash on areas of his
chest, and continued to develop blisters, papules and purpura on
several areas of his body despite ceasing use of the gel; this clinical
picture was suggestive of a hypersensitivity vasculitis.“ Subse-
quently, it was revealed that the man had been randomised to the
placebo gel group, thus removing suspicion from the gel product
as the causative agent. In addition, because of the temporal
relationship between use of the herbal product and the onset of
the reaction, the herbal product was suspected as being associated
with the reaction. However, causality in this case has not been
established.

Two further cases describe hepatotoxic reactions ass
with the use of herbal combination preparations containing P.
incarnata,©* © although in both cases, P. incarnata was not the
main suspected herbal ingredient. One case involved a 43-year-
old woman who developed jaundice, nausea and vomiting,
hepatitis and markedly raised liver function test values in
association with use of a product reported to contain passion-
flower as well as seven other herbal ingredients, including
skulleap, black cohosh and valerian." The duration of
administration of the herbal product, and the time to onset of
symptoms were not known. A second case describes a 56-year-old
woman who developed acute hepatic failure and who died.‘
The woman had taken a preparation labelled as containing kava
(Piper methysticum), P. incarnata and Scutellaria lateriflora,
although analysis of the product failed to identify S. lateriflora as
an ingredient but did reveal an unidentified compound (no
further details provided).

as:

nausea and

intravenous

ciated

----- PAGE 478 -----
The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide, including the UK. At the end of July 2005,
the WHO-UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 16
reports, describing a total of 39 adverse reactions, for products
reported to contain P. incarnata only as the active ingredient (see
Table 1). This number includes at least one of the case
reports described in details above. Reports originated from
seven different countries, although most reports (1 = 8) came
from the UK. In 11 of the 16 reports, P. incarnata was the sole
suspected drug, and in four of these cases, the patient concerned
was taking other medicines. The database contains at least four
further reports describing a total of 11 adverse reactions
associated with herbal combination products containing P.
incarnata in addition to other herbal ingredients.

Preclinical data

Preclinical toxicity for P. incarnata preparations are also limited.
In mice, the acute toxicity threshold of an aqueous ethanolic
extract of P. incarnata fresh aerial parts administered intraper-
itoneally was greater than 900mg/kg body weight.°* Also in
mice, a dose of 250mg/kg body weight of a hydrochloric acid
soluble fraction of P incarnata extract caused decreases in
spontaneous activity, respiratory rate and heart rate." The

Table 1 Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 16) of suspected
adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Passiflora
incarnata preparations held in the Vigisearch database of the World
Health Organization’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the period up
to end of July 2005°®

*Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database
held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to
origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information include this report does not represent the
opinion of the World Health Organization

Passionflower

same fraction at a dose of 1000 mg/kg body weight caused tremor-
like symptoms and death. LDs9 values for maltol and ethylmaltol
in mice after subcutaneous administration were 820 and 910 mg/kg
body weight, respectively.”

In rats, a benzoflavone moiety isolated from a methanol extract
of the aerial parts of P. incarnata, administered orally to male rats
at a dose of 10mg/kg body weight, was associated with a
significantly higher sperm count in treated rats, compared with
rats in the control group.” The proportion of female rats (with
whom male rats were given the opportunity to mate) who became
pregnant was also significantly higher in treated rats, compared
with rats in the control group (6/15 versus 14/15 for control and
treated rats, respectively; p value not reported).

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented, although it is possible that use of doses (see
Dosage) of passionflower higher than those recommended may
cause sedation to a greater extent than intended. In view of the
lack of safety data, use of P. incarnata extracts at dosages higher
than those recommended and/or for longer periods should be
avoided.

Drug interactions No interactions have been documented for P.
incarnata. However, in view of the documented pharmacological
effects, whether or not there is potential for clinically important
interactions with other medicines with similar or opposing effects
and used concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation No clinical data regarding the use of
passionflower during pregnancy or lactation were identified. A
hydroalcoholic extract of P. incarnata aerial parts (400-1600 1g/
mL) was reported to potentiate the rhythmic spasms induced by
potassium chloride (10 mmol/L) when added to isolated rat uterus
suspended in Tyrode's solution. The highest concentration of P
incarnata extract also increased spontaneous contractions, and
reduced the response of the tissue to acetylcholine, when
compared with control (p < 0.05).

In view of the lack of information on the use of P. incarnata
during pregnancy and lactation, its use should be avoided during
these periods.

us; Proesten; ; Relaxaplex; Valerian Plus Her'
Plus Formula 12. Austria: Nervenruh; Passedan; Passelyt;
Sedogelat; Wechseltee St Severin. Belgium: Sedinal; Seneuval.
Brazil: A Saude da Mulher; Benzomel; Bronquiogem; Calman;

----- PAGE 479 -----
Passionflower

antirhumatismales; Dragees pour la detente nerveuse; Dragees
pour le coeur et les nerfs; Phytomed Cardio; Relaxane; Relaxo;
Soporin; Strath Gouttes pour le coeur; Strath Gouttes pour le
nerfs et contre l'insomnie; Tisane antirhumatismale; Tisane
calmante pour les enfants; Valverde Coeur; Valverde Detente
dragees. UK: Anased; Avena Sativa Comp; Bio-Strath Valerian
Formula; Daily Tension & Strain Relief; Fenneherb Sweet-
dreams; Gerard House Serenity; Herbal Pain Relief; HRI
Night; Kalms Sleep; Modern Herbals Stress; Nighttime Herb;
Nodoff; Nytol Herbal; PMT Formula; Quiet Life; Quiet Nite;
Quiet Tyme; Relax B+; Sleepezy; Slumber; Sominex Herbal;
SuNerven. USA: Calming Aid. Venezuela: Cratex; Equaliv;
Eufytose; Lupassin; Pasidor; Pasifluidina; Passiflorum; Ren-
detil.

References

1 Rehwald A e¢ al. Trace analysis of harman alkaloids in Passiflora
incarnata by reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography.
Phytochem Anal 1995; 6: 96-100.

2 Lohdefink J, Kating H. Zur Frage des Vorkommens von
Harmanalkaloiden in Passiflora-Arten. Planta Med 1974; 25: 101-104.

3 Lutomski J, Nourcka B. Simple carboline alkaloids. VI. Comparative
chemical evaluation of alkaloid fractions from different sources.
Herba Polon 1968; 14: 235-238.

4 Schmidt PC, Ortega GG. Passionsblumenkraut. Bestimmung des
Gesamtflavonoidgehaltes von Passiflorae herba. Deutsche Apotheker
Zeitung 1993; 47(25): 17-26.

5 Schilcher H. Zur Kenntnis der Flavon-C-Glykoside in Passiflora
incarnata L. Z Naturforsch 1968; 23b: 1393.

6 Meier B. Passiflorae herba — pharmazeutische Qualitat. Z Phytother
1995; 16: 90-99.

7 QM Liet al. Mass spectral characterisation of C-glycosidic flavonoids
isolated from a medicinal plant (Passiflora incarnata). ] Chromatog
1991; 562: 435-446.

8 Spencer KC, Seigler DS. Gynocardin from Passiflora. Planta Med
1984; 50: 356-357.

9 Jaroszewski JW et al. Cyanohydrin glycosides of Passiflora:
distribution pattern, a saturated cyclopentane derivative from P.
guatemalensis, and formation of pseudocyanogenic o-hydroxyamides
as isolation artefacts. Phytochemistry 2002; 59: 501-511.

10 Aoyagi N et al. Studies on Passiflora incarnata dry extract. 1. Isolation
of maltol and pharmacological action of maltol and ethyl maltol.
Chem Pharm Bull 1974; 22: 1008-1013.

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

Nicholls JM et al. Passicol, an antibacterial and antifungal agent
produced by Passiflora plant species: qualitative and quantitative range
of activity. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1973; 3: 110-117.
Buchbauer G, Jirovetz L. Volatile constituents of the essential oil of
Passiflora incarnata. ] Essent Oil Res 1992; 4: 329-334.

Dhawan K et al. Passiflora: a review update. J Ethnopharmacol 2004;
94: 1-23.

Lutomski J et al. Pharmacochemical investigation of the raw materials
from Passiflora genus. Planta Med 1975; 27: 112-121.

Olafsdottir ES et al. Cyanohydrin glycosides of Passifloraceae.
Phytochemistry 1989; 28(1): 127-132.

Abourashed EA et al. High-speed extraction and HPLC fingerprinting
of medicinal plants — II. Application of harman alkaloids of genus
Passiflora. Pharmaceutical Biol 2003; 41(2): 100-106.

Raffaelli A et al. Mass spectrometric characterization of flavonoids in
extracts from Passiflora incarnata. ] Chromatog A 1997; 777: 223-231.
Chimichi S et al. Isolation and characterization of an unknown
flavonoid in dry extracts from Passiflora incarnata. Nat Prod Letts
1998; 11: 225-232.

Rehwald A et al. Qualitative and quantitative reversed-phase high-
performance liquid chromatography of flavonoids in Passiflora
incarnata L. Pharm Acta Helv 1994; 69: 153-158.

Menghini A e¢ al. Flavonoid contents in Passiflora spp. Pharmacol Res
1993; 27 (Suppl. Suppl.1): 13-14.

Abourashed EA et al. High-speed extraction and HPLC fingerprinting
of medicinal plants — I. Application to Passiflora flavonoids.
Pharmaceut Biol 2002; 40(2): 81-91.

Pereira CAM et al. A HPTLC densitometric determination of
flavonoids from Passiflora alata, P. edulis, P. incarnata and P. caerulea
and comparison with HPLC method. Phytochemical Anal 2004; 15:
241-248.

Voirin B et al. Separation of flavone C-glycosides and qualitative
analysis of Passiflora incarnata L. by capillary zone electrophoresis.
Phytochemical Anal 2000; 11: 90-98.

Marchart E et al. Quantification of the flavonoid glycosides in
Passiflora incarnata by capillary electrophoresis. Planta Med 2003; 69:
452-456.

Bilia AR et al. Stability of the constituents of calendula, milk thistle
and passionflower tinctures by LC-DAD and LC-MS. J] Pharm Biomed
Anal 2002; 30: 613-624.

Tsuchiya H et al. Beta-carboline alkaloids in crude drugs. Chem
Pharm Bull 1999; 47(3): 440-443.

Grice ID et al. Identification and simultaneous analysis of harmane,
harmine, harmol, isovitexin, and vitexin in Passiflora incarnata
extracts with a novel HPLC method. J Lig Chrom Rel Technol 2001;
24(16): 2513-2523.

Burkard W et al. Receptor binding studies in the CNS with extracts of
Passiflora incarnata. Pharm Pharmacol Lett 1997; 7: 25-26.

Valli M et al. Euphytose"’, an association of plant extracts with
anxiolytic activity: investigation of its mechanism of action by an in
vitro binding study. Phytotherapy Res 1991; 5: 241-244.

Soulimani R et al. Behavioural effects of Passiflora incarnata L. and
its indole alkaloid and flavonoid derivatives and maltol in the mouse. J
Ethnopharmacol 1997; 57: 11-20.

Dhawan K et al. Comparative biological activity study on Passiflora
incarnata and P. edulis. Fitoterapia 2001; 72: 698-702.

Dhawan K et al. Anxiolytic activity of aerial and underground parts of
Passiflora incarnata. Fitoterapia 2001; 72: 922-926.

Dhawan K et al. Anti-anxiety studies on extracts of Passiflora
incarnata Linneaus. ] Ethnopharmacol 2001; 78: 165-170.

Dhawan K et al. Suppression of alcohol-cessation-oriented hyper-
anxiety by the benzoflavone moiety of Passiflora incarnata Linneaus in
mice. J Ethnopharmacol 2002; 81: 239-244.

Zanoli P et al. Behavioral characterisation of the flavonoids apigenin
and chrysin. Fitoterapia 2000; 71: $117-S123.

Dhawan K et al. Evaluation of central nervous system effects of
Passiflora incarnata in experimental animals. Pharm Biol 2003; 41(2):
87-91.

Speroni E et al. Sedative effects of crude extract of Passiflora incarnata
after oral administration. Phytotherapy Res 1996; 10: $92-S94.
Speroni E, Minghetti A. Neuropharmacological activity of extracts
from Passiflora incarnata. Planta Med 1988; 54: 488-491.

----- PAGE 480 -----
39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S1

52

53

54

Capasso A, Pinto A. Experimental investigations of the synergistic-
sedative effect of passiflora and kava. Acta Ther 1995; 21: 127-140.
Kimura R et al. Central depressant effects of maltol analogs in mice.
Chem Pharm Bull 1980; 28: 2570-2579.

Meier B. Passiflora incarnata L.-Passionsblume-Portrait einer
Arzneipflanze. Z Phytother 1995; 16: 115-126.

Speroni E et al. Role of chrysin in the sedative effects of Passiflora
incarnata L. Phytotherapy Res 1996; 10: S98-S100.

Dhawan K. Drug/substance reversal effects of a novel tri-substituted
benzoflavone moiety (BZF) isolated from Passiflora incarnata Linn.—
a brief perspective. Addiction Biology 2003; 8: 379-386.

Dhawan K et al. Reversal of cannabinoids (A°-THC) by the
benzoflavone moiety from methanol extract of Passiflora incarnata
Linneaus in mice: a possible therapy for cannabinoid addiction. J
Pharm Pharmacol 2002; 54: 875-881.

Dhawan K et al. Attenuation of benzodiazepine dependence in mice by
a tri-substituted benzoflavone moiety of Passiflora incarnata Linneaus:
a non-habit forming anxiolytic. | Pharm Pharmaceut Sci 2003; 6(2):
215-222.

Dhawan K et al. Reversal of morphine tolerance and dependence by
Passiflora incarnata — a traditional medicine to combat morphine
addiction. Pharmaceutical Biology 2002; 40(8): 576-580.

Dhawan K et al. Nicotine reversal effects of the benzoflavone moiety
from Passiflora incarnata Linneaus in mice. Addiction Biology 2002; 7:
435-441.

Dhawan K et al. Aphrodisiac activity of methanol extract of leaves of
Passiflora incarnata Linn. in mice. Phytotherapy Research 2003; 17:
401-403.

Dhawan K et al. Beneficial effects of chrysin and benzoflavone on
virility in 2-year-old male rats. J Med Food 2002; 5(1): 43-48.
Dhawan K, Sharma A. Restoration of chronic- A’-THC-induced
decline in sexuality in male rats by a novel benzoflavone moiety from
Passiflora incarnata Linn. Br J Pharmacol 2003; 138: 117-120.
Dhawan K, Sharma A. Prevention of chronic alcohol and nicotine-
induced azospermia, sterility and decreased libido, by a novel tri-
substituted benzoflavone moiety from Passiflora incarnata Linneaus in
healthy male rats. Life Sciences 2002; 71: 3059-3069.

Borrelli F et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of Passiflora incarnata L. in
rats. Phytotherapy Research 1996; 10 (Suppl. Suppl.): $104-S106.
Dhawan K, Sharma A. Antitussive activity of the methanol extract of
Passiflora incarnata leaves. Fitoterapia 2002; 73: 397-399.

Dhawan K e¢ al. Antiasthmatic activity of the methanol extract of
leaves of Passiflora incarnata. Phytotherapy Research 2003; 17: 821—
822.12916087

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

Passionflower

Kapadia GJ et al. Inhibitory effect of herbal remedies on 12-O-
tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-promoted Epstein-Barr virus early
antigen activation. Pharmacol Res 2002; 45(3): 213-220.

Rauwald HW et al. Screening of nine vasoactive medicinal plants for
their possible calcium antagonistic activity. Strategy of selection and
isolation for the active principles of Olea europaea and Peucedanum
ostruthium. Phytotherapy Research 1994; 8: 135-140.

Taglioli V et al. Evaluation of the dissolution behaviour of some
commercial herbal drugs and their preparations. Pharmazie 2001; 56:
868-870.

Akhondzadeh § et al. Passionflower in the treatment of generalized
anxiety: a pilot double-blind randomized controlled trial with
oxazepam. | Clin Pharm Ther 2001; 26: 363-367.

Akhondzadeh S et al. Passionflower in the treatment of opiates
withdrawal: a double-blind randomized controlled trial. J Clin Pharm
Ther 2001; 26: 369-373.

Bourin M e¢ al. A combination of plant extracts in the treatment of
outpatients with adjustment disorder with anxious mood: controlled
study versus placebo. Fundament Clin Pharmacol 1997; 11: 127-132.
Bourin M. Etude des effets d'Euphytose™ sur les performances
psychométriques du volontaire sain. Psychologie Medicale 1994; 26
(14): 1471-1478.

Miyasaka LS et al. Passiflora for anxiety disorder (protocol). The
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2003, Issue 4. Art. No.:
CD004518.

Fisher AA et al. Toxicity of Passiflora incarnata L. Clin Toxicol 2000;
38(1): 63-66.

Smith GW et al. Vasculitis associated with herbal preparation
containing Passiflora extract. Br J Rheumatol 1993; 32(1): 87-88.
Whiting PW et al. Black cohosh and other herbal remedies associated
with acute hepatitis. Med J Aus 2002; 177: 432-435.

Gow PJ et al. Fatal fulminant hepatic failure induced by a natural
therapy containing kava. Med J Aus 2003; 178: 442-443.

Thomsen M et al. Fatal fulminant hepatic failure induced by a natural
therapy containing kava. Med J Aus 2004; 180: 198-199.

Uppsala Monitoring Centre. Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions
database (accessed 25 July, 2005)

Sadraei H et al. Effects of Zataria multiflora and Carum carvi
essential oils and hydroalcoholic extracts of Passiflora incarnata,
Berberis integerrima and Crocus sativus on rat isolated uterus
contractions. Int J Aromather 2003; 13(2/3): 121-127.

----- PAGE 481 -----
7 Pennyroyal

Interest in pennyroyal has focused on the toxicity associated
with the volatile oil. No documented reports of the
pharmacological actions exhibited by the herb were located.
In view of its potential toxicity, pennyroyal oil is not suitable
for internal or external use.

Species (Family)
*Mentha pulegium L. (Labiatae/Lamiceae)
+Hedeoma pulegioides (L.) Pers.

Synonym(s)

*Pulegium vulgare Mill., P. parviflorum (Req.) Samp. pro parte
+Melissa pulegioides L., Squaw Mint

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19830” :
Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

(G37)

Pennyroyal is not included in the GSL.'

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22, G48 and G58.

Volatile oils 1-2%. Pulegone is the principal component (60—
90%); others include menthone, iso-menthone, 3-octanol, piper-
itenone and trans-iso-pulegone.

Food Use

Pennyroyal is not commonly used in foods. It is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category
N3).9'9 This category indicates that there is insufficient
information available for an adequate assessment of toxicity
(but see Side-effects, Toxicity). Previously, in the USA, pennyroyal
has been permitted for use in foods.'°°

Herbal Use

Pennyroyal is stated to possess carminative, antispasmodic,
diaphoretic and emmenagogue properties, and has been used
topically as a refrigerant, antiseptic and insect repellent.
Traditionally, it has been used for flatulent dyspepsia, intestinal
colic, common cold, delayed menstruation, and topically for
cutaneous eruptions, formication and gout.'©”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
Pennyroyal oil is not suitable for internal or external use.

Herb 1-4g as an infusion three times daily©”

Liquid extract 1-4 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
pennyroyal.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

The toxicity of pennyroyal oil is well recognised and human
fatalities following its ingestion as an abortifacient have been
reported.“ Symptoms reported following ingestion of the oil
include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, lethargy
and agitation, pyrexia, raised blood pressure and pulse rate, and
generalised urticarial rash. Generally, doses required for an
abortifacient effect are also toxic and fatalities have involved
both nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity.°~ Doses of one ounce
and 30mL"*) have proved fatal, whereas individuals have
recovered following unsuccessful abortion attempts involving the
ingestion of 7.5 mL oil.°) The mechanism of hepatotoxicity for
pennyroyal is not known.” A direct hepatoxic action has been
suggested for the ketone component, pulegone.” Alternatively,
metabolic conversion of pulegone to a reactive intermediate, a
furan or epoxide, has been proposed.”

Preclinical data

Acute LDso values for pennyroyal oil are documented as 0.4 g/kg
(oral, rats) and 4.2 g/kg (dermal, rabbits). The oil is non- or
moderately irritating, non-sensitising and non-phototoxic.?
Acute LDs9 values documented for pulegone, the principal oil
component, are, not suprisingly, similar to those for the oil: 0.47 g/
kg (oral, rats), 3.09 g/kg (dermal, rabbits). Steroid (pregneno-
lone-16a-carbonitrile) treatment has reduced hepatotoxicity

Monoterpenes
° fe} fe} fe}
“™
(-)-pulegone (-)-menthone (+)-isomenthone piperitenone
Figure 1 Selected constituents of pennyroyal.

----- PAGE 482 -----
observed in female rats fed pulegone, whereas triamcinolone has
Toxicity of pulegone is unaffected by partial
hepatectomy or ligation of the common bile duct, while partial
nephrectomy intensified toxicity.”

increased it.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Pennyroyal oil is irritant and instances of hepatotoxicity and
nephrotoxicity have been documented following its ingestion.
Both the internal and external use of pennyroyal oil are contra-
indicated.‘

Pregnancy and lactation Pennyroyal is contra-indicated in
pregnancy.'°”’ Traditionally, it has been employed as an abortifa-

Pennyroyal

cient; fatalities have resulted from the doses of oil required to
exert an abortifacient effect.

References

1 Vallance WB. Pennyroyal poisoning. A fatal case. Lancet 1955; ii: 850-
851.

2. Sullivan JB et al. Pennyroyal oil poisoning and hepatotoxicity. JAMA
1979; 242: 2873.

3. Gunby P. Plant known for centuries still causes problems today. JAMA
1979; 241: 2246-2247.

4 Opdyke DLJ. Pennyroyal oil european. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12:
949-950.

5 Opdyke DLJ. Fragrance raw materials monographs: d-pulegone. Food
Cosmet Toxicol 1978; 16: 867-868.

----- PAGE 483 -----
Pilewort

investigations. There is a lack of clinical research assessing the
efficacy and safety of pilewort. In view of the toxic and irritant
properties stated for protoanemonin, the excessive use of
pilewort and use during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Ranunculus ficaria L. (Ranunculaceae)

Synonym(s)

Ficaria, Ficaria ranunculoides Roth, EF. degenii Hervier, EF
nudicaulis A. Kern., E verna Huds., FE vulgaris A. St.-Hil., Lesser
Celandine, Ranunculus

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”) ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Simple lactones

CH,OH
HO ¢ =
HO. O-CHo'y
HO H O° °O
ranunculin
Triterpenes

hederagenin
oleanolic acid = CH3

CH2OH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of pilewort.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G40 and G42.

Lactones
anemonin).

Anemonin (dimer), protoanemonin (precursor to

Triterpenoids Glycosides based on the sapogenins hederagenin
and oleanolic acid, with arabinose, glucose and rhamnose, as
sugar moieties.“

Other constituents Tannin and ascorbic acid (vitamin C).

Food Use

Pilewort is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Pilewort is stated to possess astringent and demulcent properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for haemorrhoids, and specifically
for internal or prolapsed piles with or without haemorrhage, by
topical application as an ointment or a suppository.'C” °°

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and/or
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below. Another source
states that pilewort is not suitable for internal use.'*”

Dried herb 2-5 g as an infusion three times daily.'C”

Liquid extract 2-5 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.”

Pilewort Ointment (BPC 1934) 30% fresh herb in benzoinated
lard.

°
a
Lx ;
CH, “OY ~O \X [eo]
protoanemonin anemonin

----- PAGE 484 -----
Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Local antihaemorrhoidal activity has been documented for the
saponin constituents.) Antibacterial and antifungal properties
have been documented for both anemonin and protoanemonin,

although anemonin is reported to exhibit much weaker activi-
ty. (G33, G48)

The reported presence of tannin constituents‘*” supports the

reputed astringent activity of pilewort, although no pharmacolo-
gical studies were located.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of pilewort
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for pilewort and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

The sap of pilewort is stated to be irritant.(@*!
is stated to be an acrid skin irritant, although it is readily
converted into the inactive dimer anemonin.‘©*?
is stated to have a marked ability to combine with sulfhydryl (-SH)
groups and it is thought that the toxic subdermal properties of

) Protoanemonin

” Protoanemonin

Figure 2 Pilewort (Ranunculus ficaria).

Pilewort awn

Figure 3 Pilewort — dried drug substance (herb).

protoanemonin may depend on the inactivation of enzymes

containing -SH groups.'**) An LDso value (mice, intraperitoneal

injection) for anemonin has been reported as 150 mg/kg body
«1. (G48)

weight.

Contra-indications, Warnings

: . . (G49)
Pilewort is not recommended for internal consumption.”

Topical use of pilewort may cause irritant skin reactions.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of pilewort has not been
established. In view of this, the use of pilewort during pregnancy
and lactation should be avoided.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Confortel. Czech Republic: Avenoc. France: Apai-
sance; Hemorrogel. UK: Piletabs; Roberts Anti-Irritant Oint-
ment.

Reference

1 Texier O ef al. A triterpenoid saponin from Ficaria ranunculoides
tubers. Phytochemistry 1984; 23: 2903-2905.

----- PAGE 485 -----
7 Plantain

reputed antihaemorrhagic properties may be attributable to
the tannin constituents. In addition, bronchospastic activity
has been documented in preclinical and preliminary clinical
studies. The toxicity of plantain is reported to be low, but
excessive ingestion should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Plantago major L. (Plantaginaceae)

Synonym(s)

Common Plantain, General Plantain, Greater Plantain, Plantago
asiatica auct. eur. pro parte, non L.

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)

BP 20070

Complete German Commission E@)
Martindale 35th edition'“*?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

(G37)

Plantain is not included in the GSL."

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G40, G51 and Gé2.

Acids Benzoic acid, caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid, cinnamic acid,
p-coumaric acid, ferulic acid, fumaric acid, gentisic acid, p-
hydroxybenzoic acid, neochlorogenic acid, salicylic acid, syringic

Iridoids
OH OH,
Ss S
0 fo)
H
HOCH, O-glucose = HOCH> O-glucose
aucubin catalpol
Alkaloids
OHC.

boschniakine

Figure 1 Selected constituents of plantain.

acid, ursolic acid, vanillic acid; oleanolic acid and ascorbic
acid.

Alkaloids Trace (unspecified) °°” boschniakine and the methyl
ester of boschniakinic acid

Amino acids pi-a-Alanine, asparagine, L-histidine, DL-lysine, DL-
leucine, serine and tryptophan.

Carbohydrates
stachyose, d-xylose, sorbitol, tyrosol, mucilage and gum.”

L-Fructose, D-glucose, planteose, saccharose,
)

Flavonoids Apigenin, baicalein, scutellarein, baicalin, homo-
plantaginin, nepitrin, luteolin, hispidulin and plantagoside.*"”

Iridoids Aucubin, aucubin derivatives, plantarenaloside, aucubo-
side and melitoside.©'"”)

Tannins 4%. Unspecified.

Other constituents Choline, allantoin, invertin and emulsin
(enzymes), fat 10-20%, resin, saponins, steroids" and thiogluco-
side.

Food Use

Plantain leaf is not used in foods. A related species, Plantago
lanceolata L., is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that P. lanceolata can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities,
with a possible limitation of an active constituent (as yet
unspecified) in the final product.''® Previously, plantain has
been listed by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as a
Herb of Undefined Safety.‘©?”

Herbal Use

Plantain is stated to possess diuretic and antihaemorrhagic
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for cystitis with
haematuria, and specifically for haemorrhoids with bleeding
and irritation. (6% 67 G4 CG)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
Dried leaf 24g as an infusion three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.”

Tincture 2-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

An aqueous extract has been reported to possess bronchodilatory
activity in guinea-pigs. It was more effective against acetylcholine-
induced contraction, than towards constriction induced by
histamine or serotonin. The bronchodilatory activity of
plantain in guinea-pigs has been reported to be less active and
of shorter duration compared to salbutamol or atropine."

----- PAGE 486 -----
Hypotensive activity in normotensive, anaesthetised dogs has
been documented; 125mg/kg extract was found to decrease
arterial blood pressure by 20-40 mmHg."

An aqueous extract, reported to contain flavonoids, saponins,
steroids and alkaloids, was shown to possess anti-inflammatory
activity in the rat using various models of inflammation, and a
strengthening of capillary vessels has also been documented.?)
However, an extract was found to exhibit minimal (11%)
inhibition of carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema." Leaf
extracts in hexane have shown potent wound-healing activity in
rabbits; the effect was primarily attributed to Cys—C39 alcohols
present in the extract.’ Both the anti-inflammatory and wound-
healing activities of plantain have been attributed to the high
content of chlorogenic and neochlorogenic acids.”

Aucubin and a haemolytic saponin fraction have exhibited
antibiotic activity towards Micrococcus flavus and Staphylococcus
aureus (aucubin only). Antibacterial activity towards Bacillus
subtilis has been documented for the fresh plant juice, which was
also found to lack activity towards Gram-positive organisms and

A negative response to cytotoxic, antitumour and
(20)

fungi.”
antiviral activity was also reported for the plant juice.
A mild laxative action has been reported in mice administered
iridoid glycosides, including aucubin.? Plantain seed is some-
times used as a substitute for ispaghula (a bul laxative).(C*
Plantain has been documented to lower concentrations of total
plasma lipids, cholesterol, B-lipoproteins and triglycerides in
rabbits with experimental atherosclerosis.°” Plantain has been
reported to be useful in lowering plasma cholesterol concentra-
tions.°?)
A tonus-raising effect on isolated guinea-pig and rabbit uterus
tissue has been documented for an aqueous extract.°
Aucubin has been stated to be the active principle responsible
for a hepatoprotective effect documented for plantain.°°)

Clinical studies

Clinical research assessing the effects of plantain is limited and
rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Figure 2 Plantain (Plantago major).

Plantain

Figure 3. Plantain - dried drug substance (leaf).

Plantain has been reported to be effective in the treatment of
chronic bronchitis of a spastic or non-spastic nature."'47%7”) A
pronounced improvement in both subjective and objective
symptoms of the common cold following treatment with plantain
has also been reported.°® Plantain, in combination with
agrimony, German chamomile, peppermint and St. John's wort,
has been documented to provide pain relief in patients with
chronic gastroduodenitis.°” Following treatment, previously
diagnosed erosions and haemorrhagic mucous changes were
stated to have disappeared. However, the methodological limita-
tions of these studies preclude definitive conclusions.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for plantain and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Allergic contact dermatitis to plantain has been reporte
The green parts of the plant are thought to yield a mustard oil-
type of thioglucoside, which releases an irritant principle
(isothiocyanate) upon enzymatic hydrolysis.'(“* The seed may
also cause sensitisation and dermatitis.

(6s)

Preclinical data

Plantain is reported to be of low toxicity with LDs9 values in the
rat documented as 1 g/kg (intraperitoneal injection) and greater
than 4¢/kg (by mouth).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Plantain may cause a contact allergic reaction; it induces the
formation of IgE antibodies, which may cross-react to psyllium.°”
Excessive doses may exert a laxative effect and a hypotensive
effect.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of plantain to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In vitro uterotonic activity has been
documented for plantain. In view of this, and the lack of
information on safety, use of plantain should be avoided during
pregnancy and lactation.

----- PAGE 487 -----
Plantain

France: Ephydrol. Portugal: Erpecalm. Switzerland: Kernosan
Elixir; Pastilles pectorales Demo N; Pectoral N; Tisane
pectorale et antitussive; Tisane pectorale pour les enfants.
UK: Napiers Breathe Easy Tea.

References

1 Andrzejewska-Golec E, Swiatek K. Chemotaxonomic studies on the
genus Plantago II. Analysis of phenolic acid fraction. Herba Pol 1986;
32: 19-31.

2 Maksyutina NP. Hydroxycinnamic acids of Plantago major and Pl.
lanceolata. Khim Prirodn Soedin 1971; 7: 795.

3. Smolenski SJ et al. Alkaloid screening. IV. Lloydia 1974; 37: 30-61.

4 Pailer M, Haschke-Hofmeister E. Inhaltsstoffe aus Plantago major.
Planta Med 1969; 17: 139-145.

5 Popov S et al. Cyclopentanoid monoterpenes from Plantago species.
Izv Khim 1981; 14: 175-180.

6 Maksyutin GV. Amino acids in Plantago (plantain) major leaves and
Matricaria recutita inflorescences. Rastit Resur 1972; 8: 110-112.

7 Tomoda M et al. Plant mucilages. XXIX. Isolation and
characterization of a mucous polysaccharide, plantago-mucilage A,
from the seeds of Plantago major var. asiatica. Chem Pharm Bull 1981;
29: 2877-2884.

8 Lebedev-Kosov VI. Flavonoids of Plantago major. Khim Prirodn
Soedin 1976; 12: 730.

9 Lebedev-Kosov VI et al. Flavonoids of Plantago major. Khim Prirodn
Soedin 1977; 13: 223.

10 Endo Tet al. The glycosides of Plantago major var. japonica Nakai. A
new flavone glycoside, plantagoside. Chem Pharm Bull 1981; 29: 1000-
1004.

11 Oshio H, Inouye H. Two new iridoid glucosides of Plantago asiatica.
Planta Med 1982; 44: 204-206.

12 Andrzejewska-Golec E, Swiatek K. Chemotaxonomic studies on the
genus Plantago I. Analysis of the iridoid fraction. Herba Pol 1984 30:
9-16.

13. Lambev I et al. Study of the anti-inflammatory and capillary

14

1s

16

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

restorative activity of a dispersed substance from Plantago major L.
Probl Vatr Med 1981; 9: 162-169.

Koichev A et al. Pharmacologic-clinical study of a preparation from
Plantago major. Probl Pneumol Ftiziatr 1983; 11: 68-74.

Marcov M et al. Pharmacologic study of the influence of the disperse
substance extracted from Plantago major on bronchial smooth
muscles. Probl Vatr Med 1980; 8: 132-139.

Kyi KK et al. Hypotensive property of Plantago major Linn. J Life Sci
1971; 4: 167-171.

Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for
anti-inflammatory activity. Phytother Res 1987: 1: 28-31.

Mironov VA e¢ al. Physiologically active alcohols of Plantago major.
Khim-Farm Zh 1983; 17: 1321-1325.

Tarle D. Antibiotic effect of aucubin, saponins and extract of plantain
leaf — herba or folium Plantaginis lanceolata. Farm Glas 1981; 37:
351-354.

Lin Y-C et al. Search for biologically active substances in Taiwan
medicinal plants I. Screening for anti-tumor and anti-microbial
substances. Chin ] Microbiol 1972; 5: 76-78.

Inouye H et al. Purgative activities of iridoid glycosides. Planta Med
1974; 25: 285-288.

Maksyutina NP et al. Chemical composition and hypocholesterolemic
action of some drugs from Plantago major leaves. Part I. Polyphenolic
compounds. Farm Zh (Kiev) 1978; 4: 56-61.

Ikram M. Medicinal plants as hypocholesterolemic agents. | Pak Med
Assoc 1980; 30: 278-279.

Shipochliev T. Extracts from a group of medicinal plants enhancing
the uterine tonus. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 18: 94-98.

Chang I-M, Yun (Choi) HS. Plants with liver-protective activities:
pharmacology and toxicology of aucubin. In: Chang HM et al., eds.
Advances in Chinese Medical Material Research. Singapore: World
Scientific, 1985: 269.

Koichev A. Complex evaluation of the therapeutic effect of a
preparation from Plantago major in chronic bronchitis. Probl Vatr
Med 1983; 11: 61-69.

Matev M et al. Clinical trial of Plantago major preparation in the
treatment of chronic bronchitis. Vatr Boles 1982; 21: 133-137.
Koichev A. Study on the therapeutic effect of different doses from the
preparation Plantago major in cold. Prob Vatr Med 1982; 10: 117-124.
Chakarski I e¢ al. Clinical study of a herb combination consisting of
Agrimonia eupatoria, Hipericum perforatum, Plantago major,
Mentha piperita, Matricaria chamomila for the treatment of patients
with gastroduodenitis. Probl Vatr Med 1982; 10: 78-84.

Rosenberg S et al. Serum IgE antibodies to psyllium in individuals
allergic to psyllium and English plantain. Ann Allergy 1982; 48: 294—
298.

----- PAGE 488 -----
J Pleurisy Root

phytochemical studies on pleurisy root and related Asclepias
species have identified many cardiac glycoside constituents.
No scientific evidence was found to justify the herbal uses.
There is a lack of clinical research assessing the efficacy and
safety of pleurisy root. In view of the potential toxicity of
pleurisy root, excessive use and use during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Asclepias tuberosa L. (Asclepiadaceae)
Synonym(s)

Asclepias, Butterfly Weed

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983'©”
Martindale 35th edition'@**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?
Constituents

Little chemical information is available for pleurisy root. Cardiac
glycosides of the cardenolide type (e.g. afroside, asclepin, calactin,
calotropin, gomphoside, syriogenin, syrioside, _ uscharidin,
uscharin and uzarigenin) have been documented for many
Asclepias species," including A. tuberosa.°) Concentrations
of cardiac glycosides are reported to vary between Asclepias
species and individual plant parts, in descending order of
latex, stem, leaf and root.

No other data regarding constituents of the root were located.

Other plant parts Constituents documented for the herb include
flavonols (e.g. kaempferol and quercetin) and flavonol glycosides
(e.g. rutin and isorhamnetin), amino acids, caffeic acid,
chlorogenic acid, choline, carbohydrates (e.g. glucose, fructose
and sucrose), f-sitosterol, triterpenes (e.g. a-amyrin and f-
amyrin, lupeol, friedelin, viburnitol), volatile oil and resin.” 0**)

Food Use

Pleurisy root is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Pleurisy root is stated to possess diaphoretic, expectorant,

antispasmodic and carminative properties. It has been used for

bronchitis, pneumonitis, influenza, and specifically for pleuri-
gy. G7 G2, Got)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Steroids

Hy. Fon onc

Lok.

asclepin

OCOCH
calotropin OH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of pleurisy root.

Dried root 14g as an infusion three times daily.‘©”

Liquid extract 1-4 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Tincture 1-5 mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Low doses of extracts of Asclepias species including A. tuberosa
have been documented to cause uterine contractions (in vivo) and
to exhibit oestrogenic effects, 16%
blood pressure or respiration (in vivo), or on the isolated heart
(frog, turtle).

Various activities have been reported for related Asclepias

” No effect was observed on

species. A positive inotropic action (in vivo and in vitro) has been

Figure 2 Pleurisy root (Asclepias tuberosa).

----- PAGE 489 -----
Pleurisy Root

Figure 3 Pleurisy root — dried drug substance (root).

reported for asclepin (Asclepias curassavica), which was found to
be more potent, longer acting and with a wider safety margin when
compared with other cardiac glycosides (including digoxin).''!?)
Asclepin was also reported to exhibit a more powerful activity
towards weak cardiac muscle.) Plant extracts of A. curassavica,
Asclepias engelmanniana and Asclepias glaucescens have exhibited
a stimulatory effect on the mammalian CNS, causing an increase in
serotonin and noradrenaline concentrations.‘ Antitumour/cyto-
toxic activities have been documented for A. albicans and were
attributed to various cardenolide constituents.'

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of pleurisy
root and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

e-effects, To

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for pleurisy root
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Pleurisy root and other Asclepias species have been documented
to cause dermatitis; the milky latex is reported to be irritant.'°*)
Large doses may cause nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea.'C” °”)

Preclinical data

Various Asclepias species, including A. tuberosa, are known to be
toxic to livestock, with cardenolides implicated as the toxic
constituents.) Toxic effects on the lungs, gastrointestinal tract,
kidneys, brain and spinal cord have been observed in rats and
rabbits following intravenous administration of an alcoholic
extract.)

Toxicity studies involving related Asclepias species have also
been documented. The cardenolide fraction of Asclepias eriocarpa
is reported to contain toxic principles. The whole plant, plant
extracts, an isolated and purified cardenolide (labriformin) and
digoxin were all found to show qualitatively similar signs of
toxicity and gross pathology in sheep and guinea-pigs." LDso
values (mice, intraperitoneal injection) for cardenolides obtained
from A. curassavica and A. eriocarpa were all estimated at less
than 5SO0mg/kg body weight. Asclepin (A. curassavica) was
reported to be safe following a three-month toxicity study in
rats, using doses of 0.8, 8 and 20 mg/kg (route unspecified).
Asclepin has also been documented to have a wider margin of
safety than digoxin!'") (see In vitro and animal studies).

Studies in cats have reported asclepin to be less cumulative
SB
compared to digoxin."

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of pleurisy root to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Cardiac glycosides (see
Constituents) have been documented as constituents of pleurisy
root.

Pregnancy and lactation Uterotonic activity (in vivo) has been
reported for pleurisy root.’ In view of this and the potential

toxicity of pleurisy root, it should be avoided during pregnancy or
lactation.

Australia: Broncafect; Verbascum Complex. UK: Antibron;
Chest Mixture; Horehound and Aniseed Cough Mixture;
Vegetable Cough Remover.

References

1 Seiber JN et al. New cardiac glycosides (cardenolides) from Asclepias
species. Proceedings of the Australia/USA Poisonous Plants
Symposium. Plant Toxicol 1985: 427-437.

2 Radford DJ et al. Naturally occurring cardiac glycosides. Med J Aust
1986; 144: P540-544.

3. Jolad SD et al. Cardenolides and a lignan from Asclepias subulata.
Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 2581-2590.

4 Seiber JN et al. Cardenolides in the latex and leaves of seven Asclepias
species and Calotropis procera. Phytochemistry 1982; 21: 2343-2348.

5 Conway GA, Slocumb JC. Plants used as abortifacients and
emmenagogues by Spanish New Mexicans. ] Ethnopharmacol 1979; 1:
241-261.

6 Duffey SS, Scudder GGE. Cardiac glycosides in North American
Asclepiadaceae, a basis for unpalatability in brightly coloured
Hemiptera and Coleoptera. J Insect Physiol 1972; 18: 63-78.

7 Nelson CJ et al. Seasonal and intraplant variation of cardenolide
content in the California milkweed Asclepias eriocarpa and
implications for plant defense. J Chem Ecol 1981; 7: 981-1010.

8 Pagani E Plant constituents of Asclepias tuberosa (Asclepiadaceae).
Boll Chim Farm 1975; 114: 450-456.

9 Costello CH, Butler CL. The estrogenic and uterine-stimulating
activity of Asclepias tuberosa. ] Am Pharm Assoc Sci Educ 1949; 39:
233-237.

10 Hassan WE, Reed HL. Studies on species of Asclepias VI. Toxicology,
pathology and pharmacology. J Am Pharm Assoc Sci Educ 1952; 41:
298-300.

11 Patnaik GK, Dhawan BN. Pharmacological investigations on asclepin
—a new cardenolide from Asclepius curassavica. Part 1. Cardiotonic
activity and acute toxicity. Arzneimittelforschung 1978; 28: 1095-1099.

12 Patnaik GK, Koehler E. Comparative studies on the inotropic and
toxic effects of asclepin, g-strophanthin, digoxin and digitoxin.
Arzneimittelforschung 1978; 28: 1368-1372.

13. Dhawan BN, Patnaik GK. Investigation on some new cardioactive
glycosides. Indian Drugs 1985; 22: 285-290.

14 Del Pilar Alvarez Pellitero M. Pharmacological action of medicinal
plants in the nervous system. An Inst Farmacol Espan 1971; 20: 299-387.

15 Koike K et al. Potential anticancer agents. V. Cardiac glycosides of
Asclepias albicans (Asclepiadaceae). Chem Pharm Bull 1980; 28: 401-
405.

16 Benson JM et al. Comparative toxicology of cardiac glycosides from
the milkweed Asclepias eriocarpa. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 1977; 41:
131-132.

----- PAGE 490 -----
- Pokeroot

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

There is limited chemical information available for pokeroot.
Apart from its traditional use as a herbal remedy, pokeroot is
also known to possess molluscicidal properties. Anti-
inflammatory activity documented in animal studies supports
the traditional use of pokeroot in rheumatism. However, there
is a lack of clinical research assessing the efficacy and safety of
pokeroot. Pokeroot is recognised as a toxic plant. The effects
of pokeroot intoxication arise from the ingestion of any or all
plant parts, liquid preparations of plant extracts such as herbal
teas, or through skin contact with the plant. The main toxic
agents are the pokeweed mitogen (lectins) and the glycoside
saponins. The toxic properties of these two classes of
compounds, mitogenic and irritant respectively, are well
recognised. In view of this, excessive use of pokeroot and use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Phytolacca americana L. (Phytolaccaceae)

Synonym(s)
Phytolacca dodecandra L., Pocan, Pokeberry, Pokeweed, Red Plant

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL ©)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G22, G48 and G64.

Alkaloids Betalain-type. Betanidine, betanine, isobetanine,
isobetanidine, isoprebetanine, phytolaccine and prebetanine.

Lectins Pokeweed mitogen (PWM) consisting of five glyco-
proteins Pa! to Pa.

Saponins Triterpenes — phytolaccosides A-1, D2, and 0,0)
aglycones include phytolaccagenin, jaligonic acid, phytolaccagenic
acid, aesculentic acid,'°**® acinosolic acid methyl ester;*)
monodesmosidic and bidesmosidic compounds with oleanolic
acid and phytolaccagenic acids as aglycone in P. dodecandra.”?

Other constituents Isoamericanin A (neo-lignan),\PAP (poke-
weed antiviral protein), a-spinasterol,”, histamine and gamma
aminobutyric acid (GABA).

Betalain alkaloids

H
Hooc™ N~ ~COOH
R
betanidin H
betanin glucose

Triterpenes

phytolaccoside B
Figure 1 Selected constituents of pokeroot.

Food Use

Pokeroot is not commonly used in foods. Previously, in the USA,
the Herb Trade Association has recommended that pokeroot
should not be sold as a herbal beverage or food.''”

Herbal Use

Pokeroot is stated to possess antirheumatic, anticatarrhal, mild
anodyne, emetic, purgative, parasiticidal and fungicidal proper-
ties. Traditionally, it has been used for rheumatism, respiratory
catarrh, tonsillitis, laryngitis, adenitis, mumps, skin infections

Figure 2 Pokeroot (Phytolacca americana).

----- PAGE 491 -----
Pokeroot

Figure 3 Pokeroot — dried drug substance (root).

(e.g. scabies, tinea, sycosis, acne), mammary abscesses and
mastitis.'C7 0

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried root 0.06-0.3 g as an decoction three times daily,'©”

Liquid extract 0.1-0.5mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily.'6”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory activity has been documented for saponin
fractions isolated from P. americana.”’'”) Activity comparable to
or greater than that of cortisone acetate was observed in the
carageenan rat paw oedema test when the extract was adminis-
tered by intraperitoneal injection. The major aglycone, phytolac-
cagenin, was reported to exhibit greater activity than glycyrrhetic
acid and oleanolic acid, which are both known to be effective in
acute inflammation. Oral administration required a_ six-fold
increase in dose for comparable activity.) Potency of the saponin
extract was reduced to one-eighth of that of cortisone when tested
against chronic inflammation (granuloma pouch method)."?) The
EDso for saponin and phytolaccagenin fractions against carragee-
nan-induced oedema in the rat (intraperitoneal injection) has been
determined as 15.1 and 26 mg/kg respectively.”

Isoamericanin A (a neo-lignan) isolated from the seeds of P.
americana has been reported to increase prostaglandin I, (PGI,)
production from the rat aorta by up to about 150% at a
concentration of 10° and to elicit a moderate inductive effect on
the in vivo release of PGh."”

Hypotensive properties have been described for a pokeroot
extract with the activity attributed to histamine and GABA."!”

A diuretic effect has been described in rats administered
pokeroot extract orally at a dose of 500 mg/kg."'*) The effect was
reported to be significantly greater than that observed in the
saline-treated group of rats, but less than in the furosemide-
treated (150 mg/kg) group.

In vitro contraction of the guinea-pig ileum has been described
for pokeroot extracts." Activity was attributed to a single active
constituent that proved to be heat resistant.

The properties of pokeweed antiviral protein have been
reviewed."

Molluscicidal activity against schistosomiasis-transmitting
snails and spermicidal activity have been documented for saponin
components obtained from the fruits of the related species, P.
dodecandra."'®'”) An enzyme located in the seeds has been
found to be necessary for molluscicidal activity of P. dodecan-
dra.) Crushing the seeds to release the enzyme is critical for
activity. The enzyme is inactivated by heat or alcohol and a cold
water extraction of the finely ground fruits was found to provide
the greatest molluscicidal activity. The saponin-containing extract
of P. dodecandra is commonly referred to as 'Endod'.'") Fruits of P.
americana also possess molluscicidal properties.“°?

Abortifacient activity in mice has been exhibited by a related
species P. acinosa Roxb. with activity strongest in the seed and
weakest in the leaf. Activity in the various extracts was destroyed
by heat and pepsin suggesting a protein to be the active
principle.°

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Haematological aberrations have been observed in human
peripheral blood following oral ingestion of the berries or
exposure of broken skin/conjunctival membrane to the berry
juice.?'*}) Analysis of peripheral blood revealed plasmacytoid
cells, dividing cells and mature plasmacytes. Eosinophilia was also
noted. The mitogenic principles in pokeroot, lectins, are reported
to be a mixture of agglutinating and non-agglutinating glycopro-
teins affecting both T cell and B cell lymphocytes.” Pokeroot leaf
extracts have been reported to be agglutinating, but lacking in
mitogenic activity?»

A 43-year-old woman suffered the following symptoms 30
minutes after drinking a cup of herbal tea prepared from half a
teaspoon of powdered pokeroot: nausea, vomiting, cramping,
generalised abdominal pain followed by profound watery
diarrhoea, weakness, haematemesis and bloody diarrhoea,
hypotension and tachycardia.°® Chewing the root for the relief
of a sore throat and cough has resulted in severe abdominal
cramps, protracted vomiting and profuse watery diarrhoea.°”
Additional symptoms of poisoning that have been documented for
pokeroot include difficulty with breathing, spasms, severe
convulsions and death.?*

The clinical symptoms of pokeroot poisoning have been
reviewed.”

All parts of the pokeroot plant are considered as potentially
toxic, with the root generally recognised as the most toxic part.°”
Toxicity is reported to increase with plant maturity although the
young green berries are more toxic compared to the more mature
red fruits.°”

Preclinical data

High doses of saponin extracts have produced thymolytic effects
in rats.)

LDso values for the saponin fraction (intraperitoneal injection)
have been determined as 181 mg/kg in mice and 208 mg/kg in
rats.) In contrast, no deaths were observed in rats administered
phytolaccagenin intraperitoneal injection up to a dose of 2g/
kg." Oral doses of saponin up to 1.5 g/kg did not produce any
mortalities in treated rats.'”)

----- PAGE 492 -----
The mutagenic potential of P. americana and P. dodecandra fruit
extracts has been tested using Salmonella typhimurium strain
TM677.""”) No activity was found for any of the extracts tested.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Fresh pokeroot is poisonous and the dried root emetic and
cathartic.©”’ The toxic effects documented following the
ingestion of pokeroot make it unsuitable for internal ingestion.
In addition, external contact with the berry juice should be
avoided: systemic symptoms of toxicity have occurred following
exposure of broken skin and conjunctival membranes to the juice.

In 1979, the American Herb Trade Association declared that
pokeroot should no longer be sold as a herbal beverage or food."
It further recommended that all packages containing pokeroot
carry an appropriate warning regarding the potential toxicity of
pokeroot when taken internally. In the UK, manufacturers of
licensed medicinal products are permitted to include pokeroot
provided that the dose is restricted and that suitable evidence is
given to demonstrate the absence of the toxic protein constituents.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of pokeroot to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Pokeroot is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle and is documented to exhibit uterine stimulant
activity in animals.‘@ In view of this and the documented toxic
effects, pokeroot should not be used during pregnancy and
lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
UK: Catarrh Tablets; Psorasolv.

References

1 Woo WS et al. Triterpenoid saponins from the roots of Phytolacca
americana. Planta Med 1978; 34: 87-92.

2 Woo WS et al. Constituents of Phytolacca species. (I) Anti-
inflammatory saponins. Korean ] Pharmacog 1976; 7: 47-50.

3 Kang SK, Woo WS. Two new saponins from Phytolacca americana.
Planta Med 1987; 53: 338-340.

4 Kang S, Woo WS. Triterpenes from the berries of Phytolacca
americana. ] Nat Prod 1980; 43: 510-513.

5 Woo WS et al. Constituents of Phytolacca species (II). Comparative
examination on constituents of the roots of Phytolacca americana, P.
esculenta and P. insularis. Korean ] Pharmacog 1975; 7: 51-54.

10

1

12

13

14

15
16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

Pokeroot

Woo WS, Kang SS. The structure of Phytolaccoside G. Pharm Soc
Korea 1977; 21: 159-162.

Dorsaz A-C, Hostettmann K. Further saponins from Phytolacca
dodecandra \'Herit. Helv Chim Acta 1986; 69: 2038-2047.

Hasegawa T et al. Structure of isoamericanin A, a prostaglandin 1,
inducer, isolated from the seeds of Phytolacca americana L. Chem Lett
1987; 2: 329-332.

Ready MP et al. Extracellular localization of pokeweed antiviral
protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1986; 83: 5033-5056.

Funayama S, Hikino H. Hypotensive principles of Phytolacca roots. J
Nat Prod 1979; 42: 672-674.

Tyler VE et al. Poke root. In: Pharmacognosy, 8th edn. Philadelphia:
Lea and Febiger, 1981: 493-494.

Woo WS, Shin KH. Antiinflammatory action of Phytolacca saponin. J
Pharm Soc Korea 1976; 20: 149-155.

Anokbonggo WW. Diuretic effect of an extract from the roots of
Phytolacca dodecandra \'Herit in the rat. Biochem Biol 1975; 11: 275—
277.

Anokbonggo WW. Extraction of pharmacologically active
constituents of the roots of Phytolacca dodecandra. Planta Med 1975;
28: 69-75.

Irvin JD. Pokeweed antiviral protein. Pharmac Ther 1983; 21: 371-387.
Adewunmi CO, Marzuis VO. Comparative evaluation of the
molluscicidal properties of aridan (Tetrapleura tetrapleura) laplapa
pupa (Jatropha gossypyfolia) endod (Phytolacca dodecandra) and
bayluscide. Fitoterapia 1987; 58: 325-328.

Dorsaz A-C, Hostettmann K. Further saponins from Phytolacca
dodecandra: their molluscicidal and spermicidal properties. Planta
Med 1986; 52: 557-558.

Parkhurst RM et al. The molluscicidal activity of Phytolacca
dodecandra. |. Location of the activating esterase. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 1989; 158: 436-439.

Pezzuto JM et al. Evaluation of the mutagenic potential of endod
(Phytolacca dodecandra), a molluscicide of potential value for the
control of schistosomiasis. Toxicol Lett 1984; 22: 15-20.

Yeung HW et al. Abortifacient activity in leaves, roots and seeds of
Phytolacca acinosa. J Ethnopharmacol 1987; 21: 31-35.

Barker BE et al. Haematological effects of pokeweed. Lancet 1967; i:
437.

Barker BE et al. Peripheral blood plasmacytosis following systemic
exposure to Phytolacca americana (pokeweed). Pediatrics 1966; 38:
490-493.

Barker BE et al. Mitogenic activity in Phytolacca americana
(pokeweed). Lancet 1965; i: 170.

McPherson A. Pokeweed and other lymphocyte mitogens. In:
Kinghorn AD, ed. Toxic Plants. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1979: 84-102.

Downing HJ et al. Plant agglutinins and mitosis. Nature 1968; 217:
655.

Lewis WH, Smith PR. Pokeroot herbal tea poisoning. JAMA 1979;
242: 2759-2760.

Roberge R et al. The root of evil — poke weed intoxication. Ann Emerg
Med 1986; 15: 470-473.

Hardin JW, Arena JM. Human Poisoning from Native and Cultivated
Plants, 2nd edn. Durham: Duke University Press, 1974: 69-73.

----- PAGE 493 -----
= Poplar

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of poplar is characterised by the phenolic
glycoside components, which support some of the reputed
herbal uses. However, there is a lack of clinical research
assessing the efficacy and safety of poplar. The usual
precautions associated with other salicylate-containing drugs
are applicable to poplar. In view of the lack of information,
the use of poplar during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Populus tremuloides Michx. (Salicaceae)

Synonym(s)
Aspen, Populus Alba, Quaking Aspen, White Poplar

Part(s) Used
Bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”)
Complete German Commission E‘~?)
Martindale 35th edition'@*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
SL(@?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6, G39 and G40.

Glycosides Salicin (about 2.4%), salicortin, salireposide and
various benzoate derivatives including populin (salicin-6-benzo-
ate), tremuloidin (salicin-2-benzoate) and tremulacin (salicortin-2-
benzoate).

Other constituents Tannins (unspecified), triterpenes including
a-amyrin and B-amyrin, carbohydrates including glucose, fructose
and various trisaccharides, fats, waxes.

Salicylates H
0.
° fe)
CH20H
‘OR O-glucose
R
salicin glucose salicortin
populin 6-O-benzoyiglucose

Figure 1

Selected constituents of poplar.

Food Use

Poplar is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that poplar
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'@'!® Previously, in the USA, poplar has been permitted
for use in foods.'(“%”

Herbal Use

Poplar is stated to possess antirheumatic, anti-inflammatory,
antiseptic, astringent, anodyne and cholagogue properties.
Traditionally, it has been used for muscular and arthrodial
rheumatism, cystitis, diarrhoea, anorexia with stomach or liver

disorders, common cold, and specifically for rheumatoid arthri-
G6, G7, G64)

tis.
The buds of Populus tremula (European white poplar, aspen)
and Populus nigra (black poplar) are used, reputedly as
expectorant and circulatory stimulant remedies, for upper
respiratory tract infections and rheumatic conditions.'°*”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried bark 1-4g as a decoction three times daily,C% ©)

Liquid extract
daily. (G6,G7)

1-4mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

Figure 2 Poplar (Populus tremuloides).

----- PAGE 494 -----
Figure 3. Poplar — dried drug substance (bark).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for poplar. See Willow for the pharmacological
actions associated with salicylates.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of poplar
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required. The
pharmacological actions of salicylates in humans are well
documented and are applicable to poplar. Salicin is a prodrug
that is metabolised to saligenin in the gastrointestinal tract and to
salicylic acid following absorption.

Poplar

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety and
toxicity data for poplar and further investigation of these aspects
is required. See Willow for side-effects and toxicity associated with
salicylates.

Contra-indications, Warnings

See Willow for contra-indications and warnings associated with
salicylates.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of poplar to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. The concurrent administration of
poplar with other salicylate-containing medicines should be
avoided. Drug interactions listed for salicylates are also applicable
to poplar and include oral anticoagulants, methotrexate, meto-
clopramide, phenytoin, probenecid, spironolactone and valproate
(see Willow for more information on drug interactions with
salicylates).

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of poplar taken during
pregnancy has not been established (see Willow for contra-
indications and warnings regarding the use of salicylates during
pregnancy and lactation). Use of poplar during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

ngredient preparations

Proprietary mu
UK: Tabritis Tablets.

----- PAGE 495 -----
ash should be consulted. There is limited scientific evidence
from preclinical studies to support the traditional herbal uses.
Also, there is a lack of robust clinical research assessing the
efficacy and safety of northern prickly ash. In view of the
pharmacologically active constituents and potential toxicity
associated with the alkaloids, excessive use of northern prickly
ash and use during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Zanthoxylum americana Mill. (Rutaceae)

Synonym(s)

Toothache Bark, Toothache-tree, Xanthoxylum, Zanthoxylum

Part(s) Used
Bark, berry

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983'°” ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Northern prickly ash is not included in the GSL.'°?”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Alkaloids Isoquinoline-type. Lauriflorine and nitidine (major
constituents), candicine, chelerythrine, magnoflorine and tembe-
tarine.

Coumarins Xanthyletin, xanthoxyletin, alloxanthoxyletin and 8-
(3,3-dimethylallyl)alloxanthoxyletin.

Other constituents Resins, tannins and acrid volatile oil.

Other plant parts Two furoquinoline alkaloids (y-fagarine and
skimmianine) have been isolated from the leaves.

Food Use

Prickly ash is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that
prickly ash can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted
manner, but that there is insufficient information available for an
adequate assessment of potential toxicity.(©!® Previously, in the

Prickly Ash, Northern

Alkaloids

°
' >
FR R! R?

chelerythrine H
nitidine OCH; H

xe
CH,O 7” *CHs

CH3O.
aCHs

C) e

N,,
HO , "CHs
HO. H

CH30

magnoflorine

Coumarins

ol LIL
aie xe: 07 So

CHg
xanthyletin
Figure 1 Selected constituents of northern prickly ash.

USA, prickly ash has been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised
As Safe).‘C%)

Herbal Use

Prickly ash is stated to possess circulatory stimulant, diaphoretic,
antirheumatic, carminative and sialagogue properties. Tradition-
ally, it has been used for cramps, intermittent claudication,
Raynaud's syndrome, chronic rheumatic conditions, and specifi-
cally for peripheral circulatory insufficiency associated with
rheumatic symptoms. The berries are stated to be therapeutically
Sin oi . (G6, G7, G64)
more active in circulatory disorders.

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried bark 1-3 g as a decoction three times daily,“C% ©?

Bark, liquid extract 1-3mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily\C°%

Bark, tincture
daily.'C%°”

2-SmL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times

Dried berry 0.5-1.5 g.0°°”
Berry, liquid extract 0.5-1.5 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol).(©°°?

----- PAGE 496 -----
Figure 2 Northern prickly ash (Zanthoxylum americana).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for northern prickly ash. See Prickly Ash,
Southern for activities of alkaloid constituents (e.g. chelerythrine
and nitidine).

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of northern
prickly ash and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.
Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for northern
prickly ash and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Prickly Ash, Northern

Figure 3 Northern prickly ash — dried drug substance (bark).

The alkaloid constituents are potentially toxic (see Prickly Ash,
Southern).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of northern prickly ash to interact with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered. Coumarin
constituents detected so far in northern prickly ash do not possess
the minimum structural requirements'°*? for anticoagulant
activity.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of northern prickly ash has
not been established. In view of the pharmacologically active
constituents the use of northern prickly ash during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
UK: Tabritis Tablets.

----- PAGE 497 -----
described for individual constituents. Few data have been
documented that support the herbal uses. Further, there is a
lack of robust clinical research assessing the efficacy and safety
of southern prickly ash. Limited toxicity data are available;
some benzophenanthridine alkaloids are associated with
cytotoxicity. In view of this, excessive use of prickly ash and
use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.
Northern prickly ash has been used for similar herbal uses but
has a different chemical composition compared to the
Southern species (see Prickly Ash, Northern).

Species (Family)

Zanthoxylum clava-herculis L. (Rutaceae)

Synonym(s)

Hercules-club, Toothache Bark, Xanthoxylum, Zanthoxylum

Part(s) Used
Bark, berry

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'@*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Alkaloids Isoquinoline-type. Chelerythrine and magnoflorine
(major constituents), candicine, lauriflorine, nitidine, N-acetyla-
nonaine™ and tembetarine.

Amides Cinnamamide, herculin and neoherculin.

Lignans (—)-Asarinin, (—)-sesamin, y,y-dimethylallyl ether of
(—)-pluviatilol.?

Other constituents Resins, tannins and an acrid volatile oil
(about 3.3%).

Food Use

Southern prickly ash is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural
source of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates
that prickly ash can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally
accepted manner, but that there is insufficient information
available for an adequate assessment of potential toxicity.(@!®

Prickly Ash, Southern

Herbal Use

Southern prickly ash is stated to possess circulatory stimulant,
diaphoretic, antirheumatic, carminative and sialogogue proper-
ties. Traditionally, it has been used for cramps, intermittent
claudication, Raynaud's syndrome, chronic rheumatic conditions,
and specifically for peripheral circulatory insufficiency associated
with rheumatic symptoms. The berries are stated to be
therapeutically more active in circulatory disorders.'°% 7” SC

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried bark 1-3 g as a decoction three times daily,“C% ©?

Bark, liquid extract 1-3 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times
daily.'C%S”

Bark, tincture
daily.'C%°”

2-SmL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times

Dried berry 0.5-1.5 g.0°°”
Berry, liquid extract 0.5-1.5 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol).(©°°?

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Southern prickly ash has been reported to act as a reversible
neuromuscular blocking agent. Activity was associated with a
neutral fraction of the bark that was thought to act primarily by
blockade of endplate receptors.”

Various activities have been documented for the benzophenan-
thridine alkaloids (e.g. chelerythrine, nitidine) present in southern
prickly ash. Hypotensive properties in mice have been documented
for nitidine chloride, a single dose of 2 mg/kg body weight lowered
the blood pressure by 20% within 90 minutes and persisted for six
hours. Nitidine was also found to antagonise the effects of
angiotensin-induced hypertension.) Antileukaemic activity has
been documented for nitidine, although preclinical toxicity
prevented further investigations.“**)

Anti-inflammatory activity in rats has been documented for
chelerythrine (10 mg/kg by mouth) comparable to that achieved
with indometacin (5 mg/kg by mouth). Chelerythrine has also
been reported to potentiate the analgesic effect of morphine,
prolong barbiturate-induced sleep, and cause temporary hyperten-
sion followed by hypotension in cats, mice and rabbits.”

Significant antimicrobial activity towards Gram-positive bac-
teria and Candida albicans has been documented for chelerythr-
ine, although conflicting activities have been reported regarding
Gram-negative bacteria. Chelerythrine has been shown to
interact with Na*K* ATPase and to inhibit hepatic t-alanine
and L-aspartate aminotransferases in the rat, while nitidine has
been reported to inhibit tRNA methyltransferase and catechol-O-
methyltransferase.)

The lignan component, asarinin, has been reported to possess
antitubercular activity.(C*? Neoherculin is reported to possess
insecticidal and sialogogic properties.”

----- PAGE 498 -----
Prickly Ash, Southern 487

Alkaloids

CH30 HO “CH
2
R’ R! Re HO.
chelerythrine H OCH;
nitidine OCH; 4H CH30
magnoflorine
Amides
CH3
cno—{_) concn ocen(_)
fe)
herclavin
HL
N

OSS SESE
°

neoherculin
(echinacein)

Lignans

(-)-asarinin Le}

Figure 1 Selected constituents of southern prickly ash.

Figure 2 Southern prickly ash (Zanthoxylum clava-herculis).

Figure 3 Southern prickly ash — dried drug substance (berry).

Side-effects, Toxicity Preclinical data

Ingestion of southern prickly ash by cattle, chicken and fish has
proved lethal. This was attributed to the neuromuscular blocking
No toxicity documented. However, there is a lack of clinical safety properties of the bark.”
and toxicity data for southern prickly ash and further investiga- major ichthyotoxic principle in an extract of southern prickly
tion of these aspects is required. ash bark.

Clinical data

Neoherculin is reported to be the

----- PAGE 499 -----
Prickly Ash, Southern

The acute and chronic toxicity of chelerythrine in mice is
reported to be low.) LDso values were stated as 18.5 mg/kg body
weight (intravenous injection) and 95 mg/kg (subcutaneous
injection). Oral administration of 10mg/kg for three days
followed by 5 mg/kg for seven days produced no adverse effects.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. The alkaloid constituents in southern prickly
ash are potentially toxic.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of southern prickly ash to interact with other
medicines administered concurrently, particularly those with
similar or opposing effects, should be considered. Chelerythrine
has been reported to interact with Na*K* ATPase. However the
clinical relevance of this with respect to prickly ash is unknown.
Hypotensive and sedative activities have been documented in
animals. Both chelerythrine and nitidine have been reported to
inhibit various hepatic enzymes (see Pharmacological Actions, In
vitro and animal studies).

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of southern prickly ash has
not been established. In view of this and the pharmacologically
active compounds, the use of southern prickly ash during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

References

1 Rao KV, Davies R. The ichthyotoxic principles of Zanthoxylum clava-
herculis. ] Nat Prod 1986; 49: 340-342.

2 Bowen JM, Cole RJ. Neuromuscular blocking properties of southern
prickly ash toxin. Fedn Proc 1981; 40: 696.

3 Addae-Mensah | e¢ al. Structure and anti-hypertensive properties of
nitidine chloride from Fagara species. Planta Med 1986; 52 (Suppl.
Suppl.): 58.

4 Krane BD et al. The benzophenanthridine alkaloids. J Nat Prod 1984;
47: 143.

5 Simanek V. Benzophenanthridine alkaloids. In: Brossi A, ed. The
Alkaloids, vol 26. New York: Academic Press, 1985: 185-240.

6 Lenfield J et al. Antiinflammatory activity of quaternary
benzophenanthridine alkaloids from Chelidonium majus. Planta Med
1981; 43: 161-165.

7 Preininger V. In: Manske RHE, ed. The Alkaloids, vol 15. New York:
Academic Press, 1975: 242.

----- PAGE 500 -----
Pulsatilla

and safety of pulsatilla. The fresh plant is known to be irritant;
it contains a toxic principle (protoanemonin) and should not
be ingested. The dried plant material is not considered to be
toxic, but allergic reactions have been documented. In view
of this and the lack of safety information, the use of pulsatilla
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

*Pulsatilla vulgaris Mill. (Ranunculaceae)
tPulsatilla pratensis (L.) Mill.
$Pulsatilla patens (L.) Mill.

Synonym(s)

*Anemone pulsatilla L., Pulsatilla ucrainica (Ugr.) E.D. Wissjul,
Pasque Flower

tAnemone pratensis L., Pulsatilla nigricans Stérck, Small Pasque
Flower

Anemone patens (L.) Mill.

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920
BHP 1996'0”)

Simple lactones

CH20H

HO

O° = =
oe for ‘es S
HO a 0 OQ CHa oO (e)

ranunculin

Triterpenes

hederagenin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of pulsatilla.

Martindale 35th edition\*

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Flavonoids Delphinidin and pelargonidin glycosides.
Saponins Hederagenin (as the aglycone).

Volatile oils Ranunculin (a glycoside); enzymatic hydrolysis
yields the unstable lactone protoanemonin which readily dimerises
to anemonin.

Other constituents
galactose, glucose,
sitosterol.

Carbohydrates (e.g. arabinose, fructose,
rhamnose), triterpenes (e.g. B-amyrin) and B-

Food Use

Pulsatilla is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Pulsatilla is stated to possess sedative, analgesic, antispasmodic
and bactericidal properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
dysmenorrhoea, orchitis, ovaralgia, epididymitis, tension head-
ache, hyperactive states, insomnia, boils, skin eruptions associated
with bacterial infection, asthma and pulmonary disease, earache,
and specifically for painful conditions of the male or female
reproductive system.(CC7S%S* Pulsatilla is widely used in
homeopathic preparations as well as in herbal medicine.

protoanemonin anemonin

----- PAGE 501 -----
Pulsatilla

x bs - ia

Figure 3 Pulsatilla — dried drug substance (herb).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 0.12-0.3g as an infusion or decoction three times
daily.'C°?

Liquid extract 0.12-0.3mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C&S”

Tincture 0.31.0 mL (1:10 in 40% alcohol) three times daily.'C®
G7)

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Utero-activity (stimulant and depressant) has been documented
for pulsatilla.('? © In vivo sedative and antipyretic properties in
rodents have been documented for anemonin and protoanemo-
nin.)

Cytotoxicity (KB tumour system) has been reported for

« (G22)
anemonin.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of pulsatilla
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for pulsatilla and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Fresh pulsatilla is poisonous because of the toxic volatile oil
component, protoanemonin. Protoanemonin rapidly degrades to
the non-toxic anemonin. Inhalation of vapour from the volatile oil
may cause irritation of the nasal mucosa and conjunctiva.‘@*))
Allergic reactions to pulsatilla have been documented and patch
tests ae produced vesicular reactions with hyperpigmenta-
tion.*”

Preclinical data

Cytotoxicity has been documented for anemonin (see Pharmaco-
logical Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Fresh pulsatilla is poisonous and should not be ingested. External
contact with the fresh plant should be avoided. The toxic
principle, protoanemonin, rapidly degrades to the non-toxic
anemonin during drying of the plant material. Individuals may
experience an allergic reaction to pulsatilla, especially those with
an existing hypersensitivity.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of pulsatilla to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that certain constituents of pulsatilla (e.g.
anemonin) have sedative activity. The clinical relevance of this is
not known.

Pregnancy and lactation Pulsatilla is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle.'©??) Utero-activity has been documented for
pulsatilla (see Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal
studies). In view of this, the use of pulsatilla during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

“Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Bioglan Cirflo; Calmo; Lifesystem Herbal Formula 4
Women's Formula; Proflo; Women's Formula Herbal Formula
3. Brazil: Eviprostat. Czech Republic: Cicaderma. France:
Hepatoum; Histo-Fluine P. Germany: Eviprostat N. Japan:
Eviprostat. South Africa: Cough Elixir. Singapore: Eviprostat.
UK: <Anased; Calmanite Tablets; Fenneherb Prementaid;
Menopause Relief; Napiers Back Ache Tea; Napiers Monthly
Calm Tea; Nytol Herbal; Period Pain Relief; Prementaid;
Roberts Alchemilla Compound Tablets. USA: Eye Support
Formula.

References

1 Pilcher JM et al. The action of the so-called female remedies on the
excised uterus of the guinea-pig. Arch Intern Med 1916; 18: 557-583.

2. Pilcher JM et al. The action of 'female remedies' on intact uteri of
animals. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1918; 18: 97-99.

3 Martin ML e¢ al. Pharmacological effects of lactones isolated from
Pulsatilla alpina subsp. apiifolia. ] Ethnopharmacol 1988; 24: 185—
191.

----- PAGE 502 -----
Quassia

However, there is a lack of robust clinical research assessing
the efficacy and safety of quassia. In view of the documented
cytotoxic activities and limited toxicological data, quassia
should not be taken in amounts greatly exceeding those used
in foods. The use of quassia during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

Species (Family)

*Picrasma excelsa (Sw.) Planch. (Simaroubaceae)
tQuassia amara L.

Synonym(s)

Bitterwood, Picrasma

*Aeschrion excelsa (Sw.) Kuntze, Jamaican Quassia, Quassia
excelsa Sw., Simarouba excelsa (Sw.) DC.

}Surinam Quassia

Part(s) Used

Stem wood

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'C%
BHP 1996'0”)
Martindale 35th edition‘

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Alkaloids Indole-type. Canthin-6-one, 5-methoxycanthin-6-one,
4-methoxy-5-hydroxycanthin-6-one, N-methoxy-1-vinyl-B-carbo-
line.“

Terpenoids Isoquassin (picrasmin) in P. excelsa, quassin 0.2%,
quassinol, quassimarin,” 18-hydroxyquassin, neoquassin, a
dihydronorneoquassin™ and simalikalactone D in Q. amara.
Coumarins Scopoletin."?

Other constituents B-Sitosterol, B-sitostenone; thiamine 1.8%
(in P. excelsa).

Food Use

Quassia is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that

Nortriterpenes

similikilactone D

Alkaloids

SS
n7 28
o2\Z

canthin-6-one

Coumarins

HO fe) [e}
scopoletin
Figure 1 Selected constituents of quassia.
quassia can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, although
the concentration of quassin must not exceed 5 mg/kg; a
concentration of 50mg/kg is permitted in alcoholic beverages
and 10 mg/kg in pastilles and lozenges.'“'® Previously, quassia has

been regarded by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as
GRAS (Generally Regarded As Safe).

Herbal Use

Quassia is stated to possess bitter, orexigenic, sialogogue, gastric
stimulant and anthelmintic properties. Traditionally, it has been
used for anorexia, dyspepsia, nematode infestation (by oral or
rectal administration), pediculosis (by topical application), and

specifically for atonic dyspepsia with loss of appetite.'C*°%°”
G8, Go4)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

----- PAGE 503 -----
Quassia

Figure 2 Quassia (Picrasma excelsa).

Dried wood 0.3-0.6g by cold infusion three times daily.(C%°”

Concentrated Quassia Infusion (BPC 1959) 2-4mL. Quassia
Infusion is prepared by diluting one volume of Concentrated
Quassia Infusion to eight volumes with water.

Tincture of Quassia (BP 1948) 2-4mL.
Enema 150 mL per rectum (infusion with cold water, 1 in 20) on

three successive mornings together with 16 g magnesium sulfate by
mouth.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

The f-carboline alkaloids have exhibited positive inotropic
activity in vitro." Canthin-6-one is reported to possess anti-
bacterial and antifungal activity. Cytotoxic and amoebicidal
activities (assessed against guinea-pig keratinocyte and Enta-
moeba histolytica test systems, respectively) have been documen-
ted for canthin-6-one and quassin (P. excelsa).°) However, later
studies have disputed any amoebicidal action. Quassin is reported
to be inactive against P388 leukaemia and 9KB test systems.
Significant antitumour activity in mice against the P388 lymphatic
leukaemia and in vitro against human carcinoma of the
nasopharynx (KB) has been documented.” Quassimarin and
simalikalactone were both isolated from the active extract.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of quassia
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

The effective treatment of 454 patients with headlice has been
documented for quassia tincture. Quassia has been used as an
enema to expel threadworms.'°*

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical and preclinical safety and toxicity data
for quassia and further investigation of these aspects is required.

No side-effects have been reported in 454 patients who used
quassia tincture as a scalp lotion to treat headlice. Large doses
of quassia may irritate the stomach and cause vomiting.(“®

Figure 3 Quassia — dried drug substance (stem wood).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Large doses of quassia are emetic.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of quassia to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that certain constituents of quassia have
cardiac effects, however, the clinical relevance of this is not clear.
Coumarin constituents detected so far in quassia do not possess
the minimum structural requirements for anticoagulant activity.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the reported cytotoxic and
emetic activities, the use of quassia during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Cuassicum; Uze Active; Yalu. France: Quintonine.
Italy: Dekar 2. South Africa: Essens Amara of Groen Amara;
Versterkdruppels. Switzerland: Stomacine. UK: Sanderson's
Throat Specific.

References

1 Wagner H et al. New constituents of Picrasma excelsa, |. Planta Med
1979; 36: 113-118.

2 Wagner H, Nestler T. N-Methoxy-1-vinyl-f-carbolin, ein neues
Alkaloid aus Picrasma excelsa (Swartz) Planchon. Tetrahedron Lett
1978; 31: 2777-2778.

3 Kupchan SM, Streelman DR. Quassimarin, a new antileukemic
quassinoid from Quassia amara. J] Org Chem 1976; 41: 3481-3482.

4 Grandolini G e¢ al. A new neoquassin derivative from Quassia amara.
Phytochemistry 1987; 26: 3085-3087.

5 Harris A, Phillipson JD. Cytotoxic and amoebicidal compounds from
Picrasma excelsa (Jamaican Quassia). | Pharm Pharmacol 1982; 34:
43P.

6 Jensen O et al. Pediculosis capitis treated with quassia tincture. Acta
Dermat Venereol (Stockholm) 1978; 58: 557-559.

----- PAGE 504 -----
a Queen’s Delight

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The Euphorbiaceae plant family is characterised by the
diterpene esters. These compounds, known as phorbol,
ingenane or daphnane esters depending on their skeleton
type, have been investigated as constituents of genera such as
Euphorbia and Croton, and some of them have been found to
be co-carcinogenic and highly irritant to mucous
membranes.©?) No scientific evidence was found to justify
the reputed herbal uses. In view of the lack of data on
pharmacological effects, efficacy and safety, and the potential
toxicity of queen’s delight, the appropriateness of medicinal
use of queen’s delight should be considered; and excessive
use, at least, and use during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

Species (Family)
Stillingia sylvatica L. (Euphorbiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Ditrysinia sylvatica (L.) Raf., Excoecaria sylvatica (L.) Baill.,
Queen's Root, Sapium sylvaticum (L.) Torr., Stillingia, Stillingia
sylvatica var. genuina Mill. Arg, Yaw Root

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHP 19960”?

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

Terpenoids Gnidilatin, a daphnane diterpene.'” Eight com-
pounds, termed stillingia factors $,-Sg, have been isolated and
identified as daphnane-type and tigliane-type esters carrying
saturated, polyunsaturated or hydroxylated fatty acids.)

Other constituents Volatile oil 3-4%, fixed oil, acrid resin
(sylvacrol), resinic acid, stillingine (a glycoside) and tannin.

Other plant parts Hydrocyanic acid (leaf and stem).”

Food Use

Queen's delight is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Queen's delight is stated to possess sialogogue, expectorant,
diaphoretic, dermatological, astringent, antispasmodic and, in

Diterpenes

H OH CH20H
gnidilatin

yet

daphnane skeleton tigliane skeleton

Figure 1 Selected constituents of queen’s delight.

large doses, cathartic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
bronchitis, laryngitis, laryngismus stridulus, cutaneous eruptions,
haemorrhoids, constipation and specifically for exudative skin
eruption with irritation and lymphatic involvement, and laryn-
gismus stridulus.©70™

Figure 2 Queen’s delight (Stillingia sylvatica).

----- PAGE 505 -----
Queen’s Delight

Figure 3 Queen’s delight - dried drug substance (root).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in
standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried root 1-2 as a decoction three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 0.5—2.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'6”

Tincture 1-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(©”)

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of queen's
delight and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for queen's
delight and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Overdose of queen's delight is reported to cause vertigo,
burning sensation of the mouth, throat and gastrointestinal tract,
diarrhoea, nausea and vomiting, dysuria, aches and pains, pruritus
and skin eruptions, cough, depression, fatigue and_perspira-
tion.'°) The diterpene esters are toxic irritant principles known
to cause swelling and inflammation of the skin and mucous
membranes.» ©)

Preclinical data

The leaves and stem are documented to be toxic to sheep because
of the hydrocyanic acid content.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the irritant nature of the diterpene esters, queen's
delight may cause irritation to the mucous membranes. In view of
the lack of data on pharmacological effects, efficacy and safety,
and the potential toxicity of queen's delight, whether or not
queen's delight is appropriate for medicinal use should be
considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the irritant and potentially
toxic constituents, the use of queen's delight during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

References

1 Dictionary of Natural Products. Chapman & Hall, 1982-2005.

2 Adolf W, Hecker E. New irritant diterpene-esters from roots of
Stillingia sylvatica L. (Euphorbiaceae). Tetrahedron Lett 1980; 21:
2887-2890.

3 Lewis WH, Elvin-Lewis MPF. Medical Botany. New York: Wiley
Interscience, 1977.

----- PAGE 506 -----
Raspberry

leaf preparations, including when taken during pregnancy.
view of this, raspberry leaf should not be taken during
pregnancy unless under medical supervision. Raspberry leaf
preparations should be avoided during breastfeeding. Use of
raspberry leaf preparations at doses higher than those
recommended and/or for excessive periods should be
avoided until further information is available on their safety
with long-term use. In view of the documented
pharmacological actions of raspberry leaf preparations, the
potential for interactions with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Species (Family)
Rubus idaeus L. (Rosaceae)

Synonym(s)
Rubus

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)
Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?

Constituents

Flavonoids Total flavonoid content in dried leaves 0.46-1.05%\”
and up to 5%.” Derivatives of kaempferol and quercetin,”
including quercetin-3-O-B-p-glucoside,"? quercetin- and kaemp-
ferol-3-O-B-p-galactosides, _ kaempferol-3-O-f-L-arabinopyrano-

side and
(tiliroside).

kaempferol-3-O-B-p-(6'-p-coumaroy])-glucoside

Polyphenols Gallo- and ellagi-tannins 2.06-6.89%'" and up to
10%.

Other constituents Volatile components, e.g. E-2-hexenal and Z-
3-hexenol, glycosides of Cy3-norisoprenoids, vitamin C.'¢”

Other parts of the plant Berries contain anthocyanins,
hydrolysable tannins, sanquin H6, a dimeric ellagitannin,
lambertianin (a tetrameric ellagitannin), triterpenoids a- and B-
amyrin, stigmasterol, campesterol, cycloartenol, cholesterol,
and raspberry ketone.”

Related species Mono-, sesqui-, di- and tri-terpenoids are
present in several species, and five labdane-type diterpenes have
been isolated from R. suavissimus.

Food Use

Both the leaf and fruit are listed by the Council of Europe as
natural sources of food flavouring (categories N2 and N1,
respectively). Category N2 allows the addition of the leaf to
foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible limitation of an
active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final product. Category
N1 indicates that no restrictions apply to the fruit.'©'% Raspberry
fruit is commonly used in foods.

Herbal Use

Raspberry is stated to possess astringent and partus praeparator
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for diarrhoea,
pregnancy, stomatitis, tonsillitis (as a mouthwash), conjunctivitis

Flavonoids

HO.

R! Re
quercetin H OH
quercetin-3-O-f-D-galactoside gal OH
kaempferol H H
kaempferol-3-O-f-D-galactoside gal H
kaempferol-3-O-f-L-arabinoside ara H

gal = galactoside, ara = arabinoside

Phenylpropanoids
le)
HO

4-(4-hydroxyphenyl)butan-2-one
(raspberry ketone — in the berries)

Figure 1 Selected constituents of raspberry.

----- PAGE 507 -----
Raspberry

Figure 2 Raspberry (Rubus idaeus).

(as an eye lotion), and specifically to facilitate parturition.'6?°”

Se) Modern interest is focused on the use of raspberry leaf to
stimulate and facilitate labour and to shorten its duration.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf 4-8 g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Liquid extract 4-8 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.“©”

Pharmacological Actions

There is only a limited amount of basic and clinical research
exploring the effects of raspberry leaf preparations.

In vitro and animal studies

A conference abstract published in the older literature describes
utero-activity for a raspberry leaf infusion (1g dried leaves infused
with 15 ml of saline for 10 minutes at 95°C, then filtered) when
applied to rat and human uterine tissue. The extract had little or
no effect on the uterine strips from non-pregnant rats, but
inhibited contractions of those from pregnant rats."”) Similarly, the
extract had no effect on strips from non-pregnant human uteri,
but initiated contractions in strips from human uteri obtained at
10-16 weeks of pregnancy. The intrinsic rhythm of the uterine
tissue in which a pharmacological effect was observed (pregnant
rat and human uteri) was reported to become more regular, with
contractions, in most cases, less frequent. No data are provided
in a report of these experiments, and no statistical analyses appear
to have been carried out; replication of this work is necessary in
order to confirm or refute the findings.

A methanol extract of fresh, dried R. idaeus leaves relaxed

transmurally stimulated guinea-pig ileum in vitro, whereas no
response was seen with exposure of the system to extracts
prepared with less polar solvents (n-hexane and ethyl acetate).(!”
Subsequent methanol extraction and bioassay-guided fractiona-
tion revealed activity associated with fractions eluted with
trichloromethane/methanol (95:5) and trichloromethane/metha-
nol (50:50). The two most active fractions relaxed transmurally
stimulated guinea-pig ileum in a concentration-dependent man-
ner.

Aqueous extracts of raspberry leaves have been reported to
contain a number of active constituents, including a smooth

muscle stimulant, an anticholinesterase, and an antispasmodic
that antagonised the stimulant actions of the two previous
fractions. The smooth muscle stimulant fraction was more potent
towards uterine muscle."

Flavonoids isolated from 70% ethanol extracts of the leaves
from four varieties of raspberry (species not stated) collected in
Russia have antioxidant activity in vitro, as assessed in a system
involving measurement of the rate of oxygen absorption during
initiated oxidation of isopropylbenzene.”

Hypoglycaemic activity has been documented for extracts of the
leaves of a related species, Rubus fructicosus L., in both non-
diabetic and diabetic (glucose-induced and alloxan-induced)
rabbits") The reduction in blood glucose concentrations,
compared with controls, was greatest in glucose-induced diabetic
rabbits. In addition, blood insulin concentrations increased
significantly, compared with baseline values, following adminis-
tration of an ethyl ether extract of R. fructicosus leaf to
hyperglycaemic rabbits."”’ However, confirmation of these find-
ings using more robust experimental methods is required. In vitro
antiviral activity documented for raspberry fruit extract has been
attributed to the phenolic constituents, in particular to tannic
acid.)

Tannins are known to possess astringent properties.

Clinical studies

The effects of a raspberry leaf preparation on labour, birth and
the post-partum period were investigated in a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 240 low-risk,
nulliparous women. Participants received tablets containing 1.2 ¢
raspberry leaf extract, one tablet twice daily, taken from 32 weeks!
gestation until the onset of labour (regular contractions)‘

In total, 192 women (n = 96 per group) completed the study;
the 48 withdrawals were evenly distributed across the two groups.
There were no statistically significant differences between the two
groups with respect to the length of gestation (p = 0.51),
likelihood of medical augmentation of labour (p = 0.91), need for
pethidine (meperidine) (p value not stated), need for artificial
rupture of membranes (p = 0.35), time spent in first, third (p value
not stated) and second stages of labour (p = 0.28), proportion of
normal vaginal births (62.4% and 50.6% for the raspberry leaf
and placebo groups, respectively; p = 0.19) and emergency
caesaerean section rate (p value not stated). There were also no
statistically significant differences between the two groups with
respect to safety outcomes in labour, including blood loss >
600 mL (p = 0.86), neonatal birth weight (p = 0.46), Apgar score

Figure 3 Raspberry — dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 508 -----
at five minutes (p = 0.11) and occurrence of meconium-stained
fluid (p value not stated). However, a higher proportion of
women in the raspberry leaf group developed pre-eclampsia (4.2%
and 2.1% in the raspberry and placebo groups, respectively), and a
higher proportion of babies admitted to special care units was
born to mothers from the raspberry leaf group than to those from
the placebo group (p values not stated). Several of the above
parameters showed a tendency (although not statistically
significant at p < 0.05) for more favourable outcomes in the
raspberry leaf group and, on this basis, further research
investigating other dosage regimens may be worth while.‘

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is only a limited amount of information on the safety and
toxicity of raspberry leaf preparations and further investigation of
these aspects is required. In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial, 240 low-risk, nulliparous women received tablets
containing 1.2g raspberry leaf extract, one tablet twice daily,
taken from 32 weeks’ gestation until the onset of labour (regular
contractions); 192 women, 96 in each group completed the
study"? A higher number of adverse events was reported by
raspberry leaf recipients than by placebo recipients (31 and 24, for
the raspberry leaf and placebo groups, respectively, corresponding
to 32.3% and 25.0% of women in each group, respectively),
although no statistical analysis for this comparison was reported.
No congenital abnormalities were reported for either group. Also,
there were no statistically significant differences between the two
groups with respect to several safety outcomes in labour (see
Pharmacological Actions, Clinical studies). This study provides
only very limited information on the safety of raspberry leaf when
taken during pregnancy (weeks 32 to labour onset) as clinical
trials are designed primarily to assess efficacy, not safety, and have
the statistical power only to detect common, acute adverse effects.

Contra-indications, Warnings

As excessive ingestion of tannins is not recommended, raspberry
leaf tea should not be used for prolonged periods.

Drug interactions None documented. In view of the pharma-
cological actions described for raspberry leaf, the potential for
preparations of raspberry leaf to interfere with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Preparations of raspberry leaf have
been used traditionally during labour to help ease parturition.
However, there is limited and conflicting scientific evidence that
raspberry leaf has effects on uterine contractions. A preliminary
report published in the older literature describes inhibition of
contractions of tissue obtained from the uteri of pregnant rats and
initiation of contractions in uterine strips obtained from pregnant

Raspberry

women at 10-16 weeks of pregnancy following application of a
raspberry leaf infusion in vitro. These findings require confirma-
tion. Furthermore, a randomised, double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled trial found no statistically significant differences in labour
outcomes for raspberry leaf extract 1.2 g twice daily taken from 32
weeks' gestation to labour onset, when compared with placebo.
Hence, at present, as there is a lack of evidence to support the
efficacy of preparations of raspberry leaf during late pregnancy to
assist parturition, and in view of the lack of safety data,
preparations of raspberry leaf should not be used during
pregnancy and labour. If raspberry leaf is taken during these
periods, this should only be under medical supervision.

There is a lack of information on the use of raspberry leaf
during breastfeeding. Until information is available, raspberry leaf
preparations should be avoided during breastfeeding.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

France: IgeE. UK: Fenneherb Monthly. USA: Women's
Menopause Formula.

References

1 Gudej J, Tomezyk M. Determination of flavonoids, tannins and ellagic
acid in leaves from Rubus L. species. Arch Pharm Res 2004; 27: 1114-
1119.

2. Nikitina VS et al. Flavonoids from raspberry and blackberry leaves
and their antioxidant activities. Pharm Chem J 2000; 34: 596-598.

3 Khabibullaeva LA, Khalmatov KK. Phytochemical study of raspberry
leaves. Mater Yubileinoi Resp Nauchn Konf Farm Posvyashch 1972;
Sept: 101-102.

4 Gudej J. Kaempferol and quercetin glycosides from Rubus idaeus L.
leaves. Acta Polon Pharm 2003; 60: 313-316.

5 Cygan F-C. Die Himbeere — Rubus idaeus L. Portrait einer
Arzneipflanze. Z Phytother 1995; 16: 366-374.

6 Puupponen-Pimia R et al. Bioactive berry compounds — novel tools
against human pathogens. App! Microbiol Biotech 2005; 67: 8-18.

7 Morimoto C et al. Anti-obese action of raspberry ketone. Life Sci
2005; 77: 194-204.

8 Patel AV et al. Therapeutic constituents and actions of Rubus species.
Curr Med Chem 2004; 11: 1501-1512.

9 Bamford DS et al. Raspberry leaf tea: a new aspect to an old problem.
Br J] Pharmacol 1970; 40: 161-162.

10 Rojas-Vera J et al. Relaxant activity of raspberry (Rubus idaeus) leaf
extract in guinea-pig ileum in vitro. Phytotherapy Res 2002; 16: 665-
668.

11. Beckett AH e¢ al. The active constituents of raspberry leaves. A
preliminary investigation. J Pharm Pharmacol 1954; 6: 785-796.

12 Alonso R et al. A preliminary study of hypoglycaemic activity of
Rubus fruticosus. Planta Med 1980; 40 (Suppl. Suppl.): 102-106.

13. Konowalchuk JK, Speirs JI. Antiviral activity of fruit extracts. | Food
Sci 1976; 41: 1013-1017.

14 Simpson M et al. Raspberry leaf in pregnancy: its safety and efficacy
in labor. J Midwifery Women's Health 2001; 46(2): 51-59.

----- PAGE 509 -----
= Red Clover

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of red clover is well documented. Limited
information is available on the pharmacological properties
and no documented scientific evidence was found to justify
the herbal uses. Robust clinical research assessing the efficacy
and safety of red clover is limited. Reported oestrogenic side-
effects in grazing animals have been attributed to the
isoflavone constituents. Few toxicity data are available for red
clover. In view of this and the isoflavone and coumarin
components, excessive use and use during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Trifolium pratense L. (Leguminosae)

Synonym(s)

Cow Clover, Meadow Clover, Purple Clover, Trefoil, Trifolium
borysthenicum Gruner, T. bracteatum Schousb., T. lenkoranicum
(Grossh.) Rosk., T. pratense L. var. lenkoranicum Grossh., T.
ukrainicum Opp.

Part(s) Used
Flowerhead

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 19960”)

Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Carbohydrates Arabinose, glucose, glucuronic acid, rhamnose,
xylose (following hydrolysis of saponin glycosides); polysacchar-
ide (a galactoglucomannan).

Coumarins Coumarin, medicagol.

Isoflavonoids

HO.

R R
formononetin CH3 biochaninA CH3
daidzein H genistein H
Figure 1 Selected constituents of red clover.

Isoflavonoids Biochanin A, daidzein, formononetin, genistein,
pratensin, trifoside, calycosine galactoside) and pectolinarin.

Flavonoids
glycosides.”

Isorhamnetin, kaempferol, quercetin, and their

Saponins Soyasapogenols B—F (C
(see above) yielded by acid hydrolys

F artefacts) and carbohydrates
. (3)

Other constituents Coumaric acid, phaseolic acid, salicylic acid,
trans- and cis-clovamide (L-dopa conjugated with trans- and cis-
caffeic acids), resin, volatile oil (containing furfural), fats,
vitamins and minerals. Cyanogenetic glycosides have been
documented for a related species, Trifolium repens.)

Food Use

Red clover is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category
be added to foodstuffs in small quantiti
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.'“!® Previously, red clover has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).'°

indicates that it can

s, with a possible

Herbal Use

Red clover is stated to act as a dermatological agent, and to

possess mildly antispasmodic and expectorant properties. Tannins

are known to possess astringent properties. Traditionally red

clover has been used for chronic skin dise: whooping cough,
1 specifically for ec coriag)¢, (Go G7 G8, G64)

and specifically for eczema and psoriasis.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
Dried flowerhead 4g as an infusion three times daily.C%°

Liquid extract 1.5-3.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily'C%°?
Tincture 1-2mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C® o)

Figure 2 Red clover (Trifolium pratense).

----- PAGE 510 -----
Figure 3 Red clover — dried drug substance (flowerhead).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Biochanin A, formononetin and genistein (isoflavones) are known
to possess oestrogenic properties. The saponin constituents are
reported to lack any haemolytic or fungistatic activity.) A
possible chemoprotective effect has been documented for biocha-
nin A, which has been reported to inhibit carcinogenic activity in

cell culture.

Clinical studies

A systematic review of randomised clinical trials assessing the
efficacy of products containing T. pratense isoflavones in reducing
the frequency of hot flushes in menopausal women identified 17
articles of which five were suitable for inclusion into a meta-
analysis.” The five studies assessed the effects of T. pratense
isoflavones administered in doses ranging from 40-82 mg daily.
Meta-analysis of data from these trials indicated that the
frequency of hot flushes was lower for red clover, compared
with placebo (weighted mean difference (95% confidence inter-
val): —1.5 (—2.94 to 0.03); p = 0.05). The clinical relevance, if any,
of this finding is unclear. Another systematic review, which
assessed the efficacy of phytoestrogens for treatment of meno-
pausal symptoms, also included five trials that examined the
effects of red clover extracts on frequency of hot flushes for red
clover preparations, compared with control groups (weighted
mean difference (95% confidence interval): —0.60 (—1.71 to
0.51).

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data
There is a lack of clinical and toxicity data for red clover and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Urticarial reactions have been documented.‘@*”)

Red Clover

Preclinical data

Infertility and growth disorders have been reported in grazing
animals.‘“>» These effects have been attributed to the oestrogenic
isoflavone constituents, in particular to formononetin.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

In view of the oestrogenic constituents, excessive ingestion should
be avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of red clover to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is evidence that
constituents of red clover have oestrogenic effects and the
possibility that this could interfere with the activity of hormonal
therapies taken concurrently should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the oestrogenic components
the use of red clover during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Australia: Promensil; Trinovin. Brazil: Climadil. UK: Meno-
flavon.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Bioglan Mens Super Soy/Clover; Bioglan Soy Power
Plus; Lifechange Menopause Formula; Trifolium Complex.
Canada: Natural HRT. Malaysia: Cleansa Plus. USA: Women's
Menopause Formula.

References

1 Saxena VK, Jain AK. A new isoflavone glycoside from Trifolium
pratense. Fitoterapia 1987; 58: 262-263.

2 Jain AK, Saxena VK. Isolation and characterisation of 3-
methoxyquercetin 7-O-B-b-glucopyranoside from Trifolium pratense.
Natl Acad Sci Lett 9: 379-380.

3 Olesek WA, Jurzysta M. Isolation, chemical characterization and
biological activity of red clover (Trifolium pratense L.) root saponins.
Acta Soc Bot Pol 1986; 55: 247-252.

4 Opdyke DLJ. Furfural. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1978; 16: 759-764.

5 Kelly RW et al. Formononetin content of 'Grasslands Pawera’ red
clover and its oestrogenic activity to sheep. NZ J Exp Agric 1979; 7:
131-134.

6 Cassady JM et al. Use of a mammalian cell culture benzo(a)pyrene
metabolism assay for the detection of potential anticarcinogens from
natural products: inhibition of metabolism by biochanin A, an
isoflavone from Trifolium pratense L. Cancer Res 1988; 48: 6257-6261.

7 Coon JT, et al. Trifolium pratense isoflavones in the treatment of
menopausal hot flushes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Phytomedicine 2007; 14(2-3): 158-159.

8 Krebs EE, et al. Phytoestrogens for treatment of menopausal
symptoms: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 2004; 104(4): 824-836.

----- PAGE 511 -----
Rhodiola

- ,
are limited to a small number of single-dose or short-term
trials (lasting less than three weeks) involving small numbers
of healthy volunteers.

In view of the lack of safety and toxicity data, excessive use
(higher than recommended dosages and/or for long periods
of time) of R. rosea should be avoided.

Pharmacists and other healthcare professionals should be
aware that herbal products containing rhodiola are readily
available over the internet and from retail outlets; such
products are often promoted as being beneficial in
supporting mental and physical performance, emotional
balance, cardiovascular health, resistance to infection, male
sexual function and in increasing ability to cope with stressful
situations. There are no licensed rhodiola products available in
the UK, so the quality of commercially available products is
not assured.

Species (Family)

Rhodiola rosea L. (Crassulaceae)

Synonym(s)

Arctic root, Golden root, Hong Jing Tian, Rhodiola, Rodiola,
Rose root, Sedum rosea (L.) Scop., Sedum roseum Scop.

Rhodiola rosea and several other Rhodiola species are used as
local medicines in China."

Part(s) Used

Rhizome and root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

None

Legal category (Licensed Products)

Rhodiola is not on the GSL. There are no licensed products
containing rhodiola available in the UK.

Constituents

Flavonoids Herbacetin, gossypetin, kaempferol and their glyco-
sides rhodionin, rhodionidin, rhodiolgin, rhodiolgidin, rhodalin,
thodalidin, rhodiosin and kaempferol-7-O-a-L-rhamnopyrano-
side.”

Phenylethanoids Hydroxyphenylethy] tyrosol (p-tyrosol) and its
glycoside salidroside (rhodioloside; p-hydroxyphenylethyl-O-B-p-
glucopyranoside).

Phenylpropanoids Rosin (cinnamyl-O-f-p-glucopyranoside),
rosarin (cinnamyl-(6’-O-a-L-arabinofuranosyl)-O-B-p-glucopyra-
noside), rosavin (cinnamyl-(6’-O-a-L-arabinopyranosyl)-O-B-b-
glucopyranoside), sachaliside 1 (4-hydroxy-cinnamyl-O-B-p-
glucopyranoside), vimalin (4-methoxy-cinnamyl-O-B-p-glucopyr-
anoside), cinnamyl-(6'-O-B-xylopyranosyl)-O-B-glucopyranoside,
4-methoxy-cinnamyl-(6’-O-a-arabinopyranosyl)-O-B-glucopyra-
noside™ and cinnamyl alcohol.”

Volatile oils 0.05% (1% has been documented for Russian
material) of dry weight of crude rhizome, containing mono-
terpene hydrocarbons, monoterpene alcohols and straight-chain
aliphatic alcohols as major components; major compounds
(>3%) include geraniol, 1,4-p-menthadien-7-ol, limonene, a-
pinene (monoterpenes), and decanol and dodecanol (aliphatic
alcohols). The monoterpenes rosiridol™ and rosiridin are also
present.

Other constituents Picein ((4-O-B-p-glucopyranosyl)-acetophe-
none), benzyl-O-B-p-glucopyranoside,“” sterols (B-sitosterol,
daucosterol),” tannins,” gallic acid and its esters.

Quality
As with other herbal medicines, there can be qualitative and
quantitative variation in the profile of constituents present in
crude rhodiola material and in marketed products. Content of
salidroside and tyrosol in samples of R. rosea root obtained from
different outlets in the Yanbian area of China has been reported to
vary up to ten-fold (range: 1.3-11.1 and 0.3-2.2mg/g_ for
salidroside and tyrosol, respectively).

Standardisation of commercial extracts of R. rosea may be for
content of 'salidrosides' and 'rosavins', although the precise
composition of these groups may not always be stated. For
example, one commercial product available in the UK is described
as containing 3% 'rosavins', 1% 'salidrosides' and 24% poly-
phenols per 100mg capsule of rhodiola. Several other rhodiola
products are stated to contain 1% 'salidrozid' and 40%
polyphenols. The quality of these products is not assured as
they are not licensed products.

----- PAGE 512 -----
Phenylethanoids R

tyrosol H

R-O HO
‘dros HO
OL salidroside es 5.
OH HO

Phenylpropanoids

R'O. R
me : oI
HO. —

HO
R! R?
rosin H H
HO.
it HO.
rosarin Ax.) H
rs
OH
. °
Tee wn i
HO
sachaliside H OH
4-methoxy-cinnamyl-O- H OCH;

-p-glucopyranoside
cinnamyl-(6’-O-p-

HO x
xylopyranosyl)-O-6- WON H

p-glucopyranoside HO

4-methoxy-cinnamyl- oH
(6’-O-a-arabinosyl)
O-f-p-glucopyranoside

OCH

Figure 1 Selected constituents of rhodiola.

An extract of R. rosea (SHR-S5) tested in clinical trials was
standardised for salidroside content (170mg or 185mg"?
extract provided approximately 4.5 mg salidroside).' ')

Analysis of 19 samples of dried rhizome from 10 Rhodiola
species other than R. rosea, obtained in the east of Qinghai
province in China, found that all species contained salidroside,
although only five species had a content greater than 0.3%."?)
Five species also contained lotaustralin, a cyanoglucoside which is
toxic to humans following oral administration.

Food Use

Rhodiola root and rhizome are not used in foods, although the
aerial parts of R. rosea are used as a food ingredient.”

Herbal Use

Rhodiola has a long history of use as a medicinal plant in several
traditional systems. It is reported to have been used as a 'brain
tonic’, to treat headache and lung disorders,''” and to eliminate
fatigue and improve work capacity.''?) It is also stated to have
stimulant properties, and to prevent stress."

Modern interest in rhodiola is focused on its adaptogenic
properties. (Adaptogens increase an organism's resistance to
physical, chemical and biological stressors, and have a normal-
ising influence on bodily systems.)

Rhodiola

Other glycosides

HO. R B
HO ° wer picein COCH3
HO o
HO benzyl-O-f-p- H

glucopyranoside

Flavonoids

OH
OH
O.

herbacetin H
gossypetin OH

R! R2 R?
rhodalin H xylose H
rhodionin xylose H H
rhodalidin H xylose glucose
thodiosin glucose'*rhamnose H H
thodionidin rhamnose glucose H

Figure 2 Selected constituents of rhodiola.

Monoterpenes

HO.
~ OH SS OR
geraniol R
rosiridol H
rosiridin Glucose
S
limonene a-pinene

Figure 3 Selected constituents of rhodiola.

----- PAGE 513 -----
Rhodiola

Figure 4 Rhodiola (Rhodiola rosea).

Dosage

Authoritative guidance on dosages of R. rosea preparations for
adults and children hitherto is lacking. Given the intended uses of
R. rosea, it is not suitable for use in children.

In clinical trials involving young adults, dosages used have
ranged from R. rosea root extract (SHR-5) 50mg twice daily
(salidroside content not stated)" to 170mg daily (equivalent to
approximately 4.5 mg salidroside) for two weeks. In another
study investigating the effects of R. rosea on fatigue and stress,
participants took a single dose of two or three capsules (total
daily doses of 370mg and 555mg R. rosea extract, respec-
tively).

Other dosages have been suggested, although data supporting
these regimens are not available. For example, for long-term use as
an adaptogen (up to four months) daily doses of R. rosea extract
standardised for 1% rosavin of 360-600 mg (equivalent to 3.6—
6 mg rosavin daily), initiated several weeks before an anticipated
period of increased stress and continued for its duration, have
been stated." For use as an adaptogen in acute stressful
situations, such as taking an examination, a dose three times
that suggested for longer term administration, taken as a single
dose (i.e. 1080-1800 mg R. rosea extract standardised for 1%
rosavin, equivalent to 10.8-18 mg rosavin), has been advised.)

Pharmacological Actions

A substantial body of research investigating the pharmacological
and clinical properties of R. rosea has been undertaken, although
much of this work has been published in the Russian scientific
literature, making it difficult to access. The following represents a
summary of some of this literature, together with that published
in English. Where papers published in Russian or Ukrainian are
cited, information has been taken from the English abstract and/
or previous authoritative reviews only, thus the data and methods
have not been scrutinised here. The information is included here
to guide the interested reader to the original literature, and should
not be taken as confirmation of the effects described.

Several activities, including various adaptogenic effects, as well
as anti-arrhythmic, cardioprotective, antimutagenic and antitu-
mour properties, have been described for R. rosea following
preclinical and/or clinical studies. Several of these more specific
activities are often considered as part of the overall profile of
adaptogenic activity of R. rosea. The precise chemical constituents
responsible for the documented pharmacological activities of R.
rosea root and rhizome are not fully understood, although tyrosol
and salidroside (rhodioloside) and the cinnamyl (phenylpropa-
noid) glycoside constituents (rosin, rosavin, rosarin) (see Con-
stituents) are believed to be important for certain activities. '®

In vitro and animal studies

Adaptogenic effects Several adaptogenic properties have been
described for R. rosea extracts following preclinical studies.

The effects of R. rosea extract on erythropoiesis and
granulocytopoiesis following paradoxical sleep deprivation (which
leads to behavioural disorders and changes in haematopoiesis, for
example, suppression of bone marrow erythropoiesis and activa-
tion of granulocytopoiesis) have been explored in experiments in
(718) Th one study, mice were given R. rosea extract (no
further details given) 1 ml/kg once daily by gastric lavage for five
days before sleep deprivation.” Measurement of peripheral
blood reticulocytes over days 1-7 following treatment indicated
that R. rosea, compared with control, stimulated erythropoiesis
during the early stage (days 1-3) but inhibited accumulation of
erythroid cells in the bone marrow during days 4-7. In contrast, in
a similar experiment using the same dosage regimen, administra-
tion of R. rosea before sleep deprivation did not modulate
granulocytopoiesis as demonstrated by bone marrow content of
neutrophilic granulocytes.''*)

A protective effect against various stress conditions was shown
for an aqueous extract of R. rosea (SHR-5; containing rosavin
3.6%, salidroside 1.6% and p-tyrosol <0.1%) when applied to
preparations of three-day-old larvae of the freshwater snail
Lymnaea stagnalis before they were exposed to stressors.”
Preincubation of larvae with increasing concentrations of R. rosea
extract (ranging from 4.05 to 40.5 jtg/mL) for 20 hours resulted in
a concentration-dependent protective effect against exposure to
lethal heat shock (43°C for 4 minutes) for concentrations above
4.05 g/mL. A protective effect of R. rosea was also demonstrated
against other stressors (menadione, copper and cadmium)
although the effect was less marked than against lethal heat
shock. Further investigations, involving incubation of larvae with

mice.

Figure 5 Rhodiola - dried drug substance (rhizome).

----- PAGE 514 -----
R. rosea extract at a concentration of 40.5 g/mL for 20 hours,
ruled out induction of the synthesis of heat shock proteins by R.
rosea extract as a possible mechanism of action for its protective
effect against stressors.''”

Cognitive effects The effects of a 40% ethanol extract of R. rosea
root on learning and memory were investigated in rats in a battery
of tests, including those involving passive avoidance and active
avoidance with negative or positive reinforcement.» The results
of these studies were conflicting. A single oral dose of R. rosea
root extract of 0.1mL given 30 minutes before maze training
significantly facilitated learning and improved memory at 24
hours after administration (p < 0.01 compared with control),
whereas doses of 0.02 and 1mL had no demonstrable effect. In
other tests using the staircase method (which trains animals to
retrieve food from the top stair), oral administration of R. rosea
extract 0.1mL daily for 10 days before training resulted in a
significantly greater proportion of trained rats, compared with
control (92.3% versus 61.5%, respectively; p < 0.05). However, in
other tests (including passive avoidance and active avoidance with
negative reinforcement methods), this dosage regimen of R. rosea
root extract had no significant effects on learning and memory.»
Oral administration of a 40% ethanol extract of R. rosea rhizome
0.1mL daily for 10 days before training also had no effect on
electroconvulsive shock-impaired learning and memory in rats.2”

The CNS depressant effects of a 50% ethanol extract (said to be
of Sedum rosea; plant part not stated) at doses of 10, 30 and
100 mg/kg body weight intraperitoneally were investigated in
mice." Animals were given a single dose of sodium pentobarbital
(SOmg/kg body weight, intraperitoneally) 30 minutes after S.
rosea, and the narcosis time (time between loss and recovery of the
righting reflex; the righting reflex is any one of the neuromuscular
responses that restore the body to its upright position when it has
been displaced) was measured by a blinded observer. It was
reported that S. rosea extract potentiated the effects of
pentobarbital, since the time to recovery of the righting reflex
was significantly longer for treated mice than for controls.
However, this finding is questionable since numerical data and a
precise p-value were not reported (the p-value was given as p <

0.05).

Antitumour activities Antitumour and antimetastatic effects
have been reported for an extract of R. rosea (no further details
given) following in vivo experiments. In one study, mice
transplanted with Ehrlich adenocarcinoma were treated with R.
rosea extract 0.5 mL/kg body weight orally daily from day 4 post-
transplantation until day 13 or 15 post-transplantation when the
animals were sacrificed.” It was reported that tumour growth
was significantly inhibited in treated mice, compared with
controls. However, the findings of this study are questionable
since the p-value given for this finding was p = 0.05, and the
number of animals involved in the experiment was not stated. A
similar experiment involved rats transplanted with metastasising
Pliss lymphosarcoma and treated with R. rosea extract according
to the same regimen. In this study, the extent of metastasis in
treated rats was reported to be 50% that in control animals (p <
0.01) and the mass of metastases was significantly less than that in
control animals (mean (standard deviation): 142.5 (23.0) and
203.3 (27.0), for treated and control groups, respectively; p <
0.05).°?) However, again, the sample size for this study was not
stated.

In another in vivo study, an extract of R. rosea root was tested
for its effects on the haematotoxicity of cyclophosphamide in mice
transplanted with Ehrlich ascites tumour and Lewis lung

Rhodiola

carcinoma. After transplantation, mice were treated with
cyclophosphamide (100 mg/kg body weight), R. rosea root extract
(0.5 mL/kg orally on days 2-8 following transplantation), or both
23) Cyclophosphamide, but not R. rosea extract,
reduced the numbers of leukocytes and myelokaryocytes to 40-
50%, compared with control (p < 0.05); when the two substances
were given in combination, the numbers of leukocytes ani
myelokaryocytes were reported to increase by 30% and 16-18%,
respectively, although only the change in the former parameter
was reported to be statistically significant (p < 0.05). R. rosea
extract was also reported to have no effect on the colony-forming
activity of myelokaryocytes, whereas cyclophosphamide inhibite:
the proliferation of these cells. In mice given a combination of the
two substances, no inhibition of colony-forming activity was
observed; this was stated to be statistically significant, compare
treated with cyclophosphamide alone,
although no p-value was given.)

substances."

with values for mic

Antimutagenic activities Antimutagenic activity has been
described for extracts of R. rosea. Ethanol extracts (20% an
40%) of R. rosea were reported to counteract gene mutations
induced by various chemical mutagens in the Ames test
(Salmonella typhimurium).°* In another in vitro experiment, R.
rosea extract (no further details given) was reported to reduce the
yield of bone
in vivo (mice) by cyclophosphamide. It is postulated in abstracts
of the Russian and Ukrainian literature that R. rosea acts as an
antimutagen by increasing the efficiency of intracellular DNA
repair mechanisms.”°) Since this information is taken from
abstracts, confirmation is required.

marrow cells with chromosome aberrations induce:

Cardiovascular activities Inotropic, anti-arrhythmic and other
cardioprotective activities have been described in abstracts of
papers published in Russian for R. rosea extracts. R. rosea extract
(no further details given), administered orally, was reported to
have an anti-arrhythmic effect in epinephrine (adrenaline)-induced
arrhythmia in rat heart,?® and to prevent the reperfusion-induced
decrease in contraction amplitude in isolated perfused rat
heart.”
administered by intravenous infusion, the authors postulated that
the observed cardioprotective effects of R. rosea extract may be
related to stimulation of the endogenous opioid system. This
information is taken only from abstracts, so confirmation is
required.

Since both these effects were reversed by naloxone

Clinical studies
Mental performance Several clinical trials, with reports
published in the English scientific literature, have investigated
the effects of preparations containing a dry extract of R. rosea
rhizome (SHR-5; Swedish Herbal Institute) on  stres
fatigue and on mental work capacity.
In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-
group trial, 40 healthy male Indian medical students took tablets
containing R. rosea dry extract 50mg, orally twice daily, or
placebo, for 20 days during an examination period." At the end
of the study, statistically significant improvements in self-assessed
mental fatigue, self-assessed general well-being and in one of the
psychomotor tests (accuracy of movement versus speed in a maze
test) were reported for the treated group, compared with the
placebo group (p < 0.01, 0.05 and 0.01, respectively). Statistically
non-significant differences were reported in several other tests,
including another psychomotor test (tapping test) and two mental
capacity tests. The findings of the study are limited since no

-induced

----- PAGE 515 -----
Rhodiola

predefined primary outcome measure was stated, the sample size
was small, and the method of randomisation of participants was
not adequately described. It was stated in a report of the study
that students who received R. rosea extract achieved a higher
average mark in the examinations than did placebo recipients
(3.47 and 3.20, respectively) and that this indicated the 'usefulness'
of R. rosea. However, this is a post-hoc outcome measure and
was not subjected to statistical testing, therefore the conclusion is
not necessarily valid.

A similar study, using a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, crossover design, assessed the effects of R. rosea dry
extract 170mg (containing approximately 4.5 mg_ salidroside)
daily for 14 days on mental performance among 56 healthy
Armenian physicians aged 24-35 years undertaking night duty."
Participants underwent a battery of tests before and after the 14-
day treatment period, at the end of the 14-day wash-out period
and after crossing over to the other study arm for 14 days. It was
reported that participants who received R. rosea during the first
14-day period experienced statistically significant improvements in
tests for fatigue, compared with placebo recipients, but that there
was no difference between the two groups at the end of th
crossover period." The investigators use this as evidence of the
beneficial effects of R. rosea extract, but this analysis and,
therefore, the conclusion is flawed since it takes no account of the

eo

second treatment period. Crossover studies are used as a means of
increasing the sta al power of a study without increasing the
sample size, so ignoring the second treatment period in effect
halves the sample size of the study.

As the two studies described above had used doses of R. rosea
that were considered to be low, a subsequent randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study assessed the effects
of two different doses of R. rosea extract on capacity for mental
work against a background of fatigue. In this study, 121 healthy
male cadets aged 19-21 years received two (7 = 41) or three (n =
20) capsules containing R. rosea extract (SHR-5, 185 mg contains
4.5mg_ salidroside); equivalent to a total of 370mg (9mg
salidroside) and 555 mg extract (13.5 mg salidroside), respectively,
or placebo (m = 40), as a single dose; a further 20 participants
were allocated to a no-treatment control group.''") Participants
underwent a battery of tests at 5pm before undertaking nig!
duties, and took their allocated study medication at 4am the next
morning, 1 hour before as
time.

Participants who received higher dose R. rosea
performed significantly better than did placebo recipients in all
five measures of capacity for mental work in the test battery
(scanning for pre-assigned symbols, number of errors in this test,
recall of digit sequences, arrangement of numbers in a grid and
number of errors in this test; p < 0.05 in each test). Statistically
significant improvements with lower dose R. rosea extract,
compared with placebo, were observed in only two of the five
tests (p < 0.01 for each). Both doses of R. rosea extract, compared
with placebo, were reported to achieve significantly better scores
on an Antifatigue Index (mean (standard deviation): 1.04 (0.29),
1.02 (0.21) and 0.90 (0.32) for lower and higher dose R. rosea
extract and placebo, respectively; p < 0.0001 for dose of R. rosea
extract versus placebo)"

This study, however, has several methodological flaws. For
example, a formal sample size calculation was not carried out, the
study had no predefined primary outcome measure, and in the
analysis, no adjustment appears to have been made for multiple
statistical tests. Further, although the study was said to include
random allocation to treatment, the randomisation proc

3

ssment in the test battery a second

extract

5 as

described in a report of the study is inadequate and, additionally,
the no-treatment control group was not randomly allocated at all
but simply comprised the last 20 cadets to be enrolled into the
study.

Other conditions In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, cros
over study designed to assess the effects of R. rosea on hypoxia
and oxidative stress, 15 healthy volunteers aged 20-33 years
received capsules each containing R. rosea 447mg (no further
details given), four daily for seven days, or placebo, before
undergoing hypoxic exposure (to simulate conditions at an
elevation of 4600 m).*) (The study also assessed the effects of a
supplement claimed to contain dissolved oxygen, although these
results are not reported here.) Fourteen participants completed the
study. There were no statistically significant differences between
R. rosea and placebo recipients in any of the outcome measures,
including arterial capillary blood oxygen (concentration — PcO.),
blood oxyhaemoglobin saturation as assessed using a pulse
oximeter on an index finger, and serum lipid peroxide and urine
malondialdehyde concentrations (as markers of
stress).°*) However, given the small sample size for this study,
further investigation into the effects of R. rosea preparations in
hypoxia is warranted.

Preliminary studies conducted in China and involving men
living and working at high altitude have compared the effects of a
multiherbal product containing the related species Rhodiola
kirilowii (Regel) Maxim. with those of acetazolamide.??*”

oxidative

Side-effects, Toxicity
Cl

There is a lack of reliable, accessible information relating to the
safety and toxicity of preparations of R. rosea. Data from clinical
trials of R. rosea are extremely limited, and no postmarketing
surveillance or other pharmacoepidemiological studies have been
identified.

Clinical trials involving small numbers of healthy young (<35
years) volunteers who received R. rosea extract (SHR-5) 100mg
for 20 days," or 170mg for 14 days" (see Pharmacological
Actions, Clinical studies for further details), have reported that no
adverse effects or events were observed during the studies.!®
Another study in which healthy young (19-21 years) volunteers
received R. rosea extract (SHR-5) 370mg (containing 9mg
salidroside) or 555 mg (containing 13.5 mg salidroside) as a single
dose also reported that no adverse effects or events were
observed."

‘al data

Preclinical data

In vitro experiments have investigated the effects of incubation of
three-day-old larvae of the freshwater snail Lymnaea stagnalis
with different concentrations of an aqueous extract of R. rosea
(SHR-5; containing rosavin 3.6%, salidroside 1.6% and p-tyrosol
<0.1%) for 24 hours. At a concentration of R. rosea extract of
1.35mg/mL, all larvae were killed; at 405 pg/mL, around 80%
were killed.” With a longer period of exposure (up to four days),
R. rosea extract 81.21g/mL did not induce death of exposed
larvae, but their development appeared to be retarded: specimens
hatched later and were smaller than control specimens, yet no
deformations or other abnormalities were observed. Exposure of
larvae to R. rosea 40.5pg/mL for up to four days was not
associated with any slowing down of growth or development.

----- PAGE 516 -----
Abstracts of papers published in Russian or Ukrainian have
described antimutagenic activity for R. rosea extracts, although
confirmation of these data is required. Antimutagenic activity has
been reported for ethanol extracts (20% and 40%) of R. rosea in
the Ames test (Salmonella typhimurium).° A reduction in the
yield of bone marrow cells with chromosome aberrations induced
in vivo (mice) by cyclophosphamide has also been described for an
extract of R. rosea.)

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. In view of the lack of safety data, use of R.
rosea extracts at dosages higher than those recommended (see
Dosage) and/or for longer periods should be avoided.

Drug interactions No interactions have been documented for R.
rosea. However, in view of the documented pharmacological
effects, whether or not there is potential for clinically important
interactions with other medicines with similar or opposing effects
should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of R. rosea has not been
established. In view of the lack of information on the use of R.
rosea during pregnancy and lactation, its use should be avoided
during these periods.

References

1 Yoshikawa M et al. Bioactive constituents of Chinese natural
medicines. Il. Rhodiolae radix. (1). Chemical structures and
antiallergic activity of rhodiocyanosides A and B from the
underground part of Rhodiola quadrifida (Pall.) Fisch et Mey.
(Crassulaceae). Chem Pharm Bull 1996; 44: 2086-2091.

2 Tolonen A. Analysis of secondary metabolites in plant and cell culture
tissue of Hypericum perforatum L. and Rhodiola rosea L. Oulu,
Finland: University of Oulu, 2003; (PhD thesis). Available at http://
herkules.oulu.fi/isbn9514271610/index.html?lang=en (accessed 16 July
2004).

3 Ssaratikov SA et al. [Rhodioloside, a new glycoside from Rhodiola
rosea and its pharmacological properties]. Pharmazie 1968; 23: 392—
395 [German].

4 Tolonen A et al. Phenylpropanoid glycosides from Rhodiola rosea.
Chem Pharm Bull 2003; 51: 467-470.

5 Rohloff J. Volatiles from rhizomes of Rhodiola rosea L.
Phytochemistry 2002; 59: 955-661.

6 Ganzera M et al. Analysis of the marker compounds of Rhodiola
rosea L. (golden root) by reversed phase high performance liquid
chromatography. Chem Pharm Bull 2001; 49: 465-467.

7 Nekratova NA et al. [Changes of quantitative contents of salidroside
and tannins in underground organs of Rhodiola rosea L. in its natural
habitats in Altai]. Rastit Resur 1992; 28: 40-48 [Russian].

8 Dubichev AG et al. [HPLC study of the composition of Rhodiola
rosea rhizomes]. Khim Prir Soedin 1991; 2: 188-193 [Russian].

9 Linh PT et al. Quantitiative determination of salidroside and tyrosol
from the underground part of Rhodiola rosea by high performance
liquid chromatography. Arch Pharm Res 2000; 23: 349-352.

10 Darbinyan Vet al. Rhodiola rosea in stress induced fatigue — a double
blind cross-over study of a standardized extract SHR-5 with a repeated
low-dose regimen on the mental performance of healthy physicians
during night duty. Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 365-371.

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

Rhodiola

Shetsov VA et al. A randomized trial of two different doses of a SHR-S
Rhodiola rosea extract versus placebo and control of capacity for
mental work. Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 95-105.

Kang S, Wang J. [Comparative study of the constituents from 10
rhodiola plants]. Zhong Yao Cai 1997; 20: 616-618 [Chinese].
Petkov VD et al. Effects of alcohol aqueous extract from Rhodiola
rosea L. roots on learning and memory: Acta Physiol Pharmacol Bulg
1986; 12: 3-15.

Spasov AA et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study of the
stimulating and adaptogenic effect of Rhodiola rosea SHR-S extract
on the fatigue of students caused by stress during an examination
period with a repeated low-dose regimen. Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 85—
89.

Anon. Rhodiola rosea. Altern Med Rev 2002; 7: 421-423.

Sokolov § et al. [Studies of neurotropic activity of new compounds
isolated from Rhodiola rosea L.]. Khim Farm Zh 1985; 19: 1367-1371
[Russian].

Provalova NV et al. Mechanisms underling the effects of adaptogens
on erythropoiesis during paradoxical sleep deprivation. Bull Exp Biol
Med 2002; 133: 428-432.

Provalova NV et al. Effects of adaptogens on granulocytopoiesis
during paradoxical sleep deprivation. Bull Exp Biol Med 2002;
264.

Boon-Niermeijer EK et al. Phyto-adaptogens protect against
environmental stress-induced death of embryos from the freshwater
snail Lymnaea stagnalis. Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 389-399.

Lazarova MB et al. Effects of meclofenoxate and extr. Rhodiolae
roseae L. on electroconvulsive shock-impaired learning and memory
in rats. Meth Find Exp Clin Pharmacol 1986; 8: 547-552.

Ahumada F et al. Effect of certain adaptogenic plant extracts on drug-
induced narcosis in female and male mice. Phytother Res 1991; 5: 29-
31.

Udintsev SN, Shakhov VP. The role of humoral factors of regenerating
liver in the development of experimental tumors and the effect of
Rhodiola rosea extract on this process. Neoplasma 1991; 38: 323-331.
Udintsev SN, Schakhov VP. Decrease of cyclophosphamide
haematotoxicity by Rhodiola rosea root extract in mice with Ehrlich
and Lewis transplantable tumours. Eur J] Cancer 1991; 27: 1182.
Duhan OM et al. [The antimutagenic activity of biomass extracts
from the cultured cells of medicinal plants in the Ames test]. Tsitol
Genet 1999; 33: 19-25.

Salikhova RA et al. [Effect of Rhodiola rosea on the yield of mutation
alterations and DNA repair in bone marrow cells]. Patol Fiziol Eksp
Ter 1997; 4: 22-22 [Russian].

Maimeskulova LA et al. [The participation of the mu-, delta- and
kappa-opioid receptors in the realization of the anti-arrhythmia effect
of Rhodiola rosea). Eksp Klin Farmakol 1997; 60: 38-39.

Lishmanoyv IuB e¢ al. [Contribution of the opioid
of inotropic effects of Rhodiola rosea extracts in ischemic and
reperfusion heart damage in vitro]. Eksp Klin Farmakol 1997; 60: 34—
36.

Wing SL et al. Lack of effect of rhodiola or oxygenated water
supplementation on hypoxemia and oxidative stress. Wilderness
Environ Med 2003; 14: 9-16.

Ha Z et al. [The effect of rhodiola and acetazolamide on the sleep
architecture and blood oxygen saturation in men living at high
altitude]. Chin J Tuberc Respir Dis 2002; 25: 527-530 [Chinese].
Ma Y et al. [Effect of rhodiola and acetazolamide in improving
hypoxia at high altitude]. Chin Ment Health J 2001; 15: 117-118
[Chinese].

261-

stem to realization

----- PAGE 517 -----
Rhubarb

preparations, the use of non-standardised products should
avoided because their pharmacological effect will be variable
and unpredictable. See Senna for information on side-effects,
toxicity, contra-indications and warnings, including drug
interactions and use in pregnancy and lactation, for
anthraquinone-containing preparations.

Species (Family)

*Rheum officinale Baill.

+R. palmatum L. (Polygonaceae)
Synonym(s)

*Yao Yong Da Huang
+R. potaninii Losinsk., R. ginlingense Y.K. Yang et al., R.
tanguticum (maxim. ex Regel) Maxim., Zhang Ye Da Huang

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BP 2007°°*

Complete German Commission EC?)
ESCOP 2003”
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 2007°°8

WHO volume 1 1999'°%”

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL‘°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G6 and G59.

Hydroxyanthracenes Primarily anthraquinone O-glycosides
(anthraglycosides) of aloe-emodin, emodin, chrysophanol and
physcion; dianthrone glycosides of rhein (sennosides A and B) and
their oxalates; heterodianthrones including palmidin A (aloe-
emodin, emodin), palmidin B (aloe-emodin, chrysophanol),
palmidin C (chrysophanol, emodin), sennidin C (rhein, aloe-
emodin), rheidin B (rhein, chrysophanol), and reidin C (rhein,
physcion); free anthraquinones mainly aloe-emodin, chrysopha-
nol, emodin, physcion and rhein.

Tannins Hydrolysable and condensed including glucogallin, free
gallic acid, (—)-epicatechin gallate and catechin.

Other constituents Calcium oxalate, fatty acids, rutin, resins,

BHC 1992'°° starch (about 16%), stilbene glycosides, carbohydrates, volatile oil
BHP 19960”) (trace) with more than 100 components.
-Anthraquinone aglycones,
OH O- OH
R' Re
thein COOH H
aloe-emodin CH20H H
Re 1 chrysophanol CH3 H
R emodin CH, OH
fe} physcion CH3 OCH3
Dianthrone aglycones
OH O OH Homodianthrones R' R? Re Rt
aloe-emodin dianthrone CH2,0H H CH2Z0H H
chrysophanol dianthrone = CH3 H CH3 H
emodin dianthrone CH3 OH CH3 OH
physcion dianthrone CH3 OCH; CH3 OCH;
R Rr! sennidin A,B COOH H COOH H
Rt Re
Heterodianthrones
palmidin A CHs OH CH20H H
palmidin B CH3 H CH2,0H H
OH O OH palmidin C CH3 H CH3 OH
palmidin D CHs H CH3 OCHs
theidin A CH3 OH COOH H
theidin B CHs H COOH H
theidin C CH3 OCH; COOH 4H
sennidin C,D CH,0H H COOH H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of rhubarb.

----- PAGE 518 -----
Oe cue
Figure 2. Rhubarb (Rheum officinale).

Food Use

Rhubarb is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that it can
be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
produet.“'® Rhubarb stems are commonly eaten as a food.
Previously, rhubarb has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).‘6°

Herbal Use

Rhubarb has been used traditionally both as a laxative and an
antidiarrhoeal agent.'©? 0% Ge)

Dosage

Rhizome/root 0.2-1.0g.

Pharmacological Actions

The laxative action of anthraquinone derivatives is well recognised
(see Senna). Rhubarb also contains tannins, which exert an
astringent action. At low doses, rhubarb is stated to act as an
antidiarrhoeal because of the tannin components, whereas at
higher doses it exerts a cathartic action.“©”)

Figure 3. Rhubarb — dried drug substance (rhizome).

Rhubarb

Side-effects, Toxicity

See Senna for side-effects and toxicity associated with anthraqui-
none-containing drugs. Rhubarb leaves are toxic because of the
oxalic acid content and should not be ingested. A case of
anaphylaxis following rhubarb ingestion has been documented.‘“>

Contra-indications, Warnings

See Senna for contra-indications and warnings associated with
anthraquinone-containing drugs.‘©?? The astringent effect of
rhubarb may exacerbate, rather than relieve, symptoms of
constipation.” It has been stated that rhubarb should be avoided
by individuals suffering from arthritis, kidney disease or urinary
problems.'¢”)

Drug interactions See Senna for information on drug interac-
tions associated with anthraquinone-containing drugs.

Pregnancy and lactation It is stated that rhubarb should be
avoided during pregnancy.‘
and warnings regarding the use of stimulant laxatives during
pregnancy and lactation.

C*®) See Senna for contra-indications

Ar, na: O € opic; Parodium; alvex
Australia: Betaine Digestive Aid; Neo-Cleanse; Pyralvex; SM-
33 Adult Formula. Austria: Eucarbon; Eucarbon Herbal;
Novocholin; Pyralvex; Sabatif; Silberne. Belgium: Pyralvex.
Brazil: Bilifel; Bisuisan; Boldopeptan; Eparema; Regulador
Xavier N-2. Canada: Herbal Laxative; Herbalax. Czech
Republic: Cynarosan; Dr Theiss Rheuma Creme; Dr Theiss
Schweden Krauter; Dr Theiss Schwedenbitter; Species Chola-
gogae Planta; Zlucnikova Cajova Smes. France: Parodium;
Pyralvex; Resource Rhubagil. Germany: Abdomilon. Greece:
Pyralvex. Hong Kong: Hepatofalk; Pyralvex. Hungary: Bolus
Laxans. Ireland: Pyralvex. Israel: Davilla; Encypalmed; Eucar-
bon; Novicarbon. Italy: Amaro Medicinale; Caramelle alle
Erbe Digestive; Colax; Critichol; Digelax; Dis-Cinil Complex;
Eparema-Levul; Eparema; Eucarbon; Eupatol; Lactolas; Las-
satina; Lassativi Vetegali; Magisbile; Mepalax; Neoform;
Puntualax; Pyralvex; Stimolfit. Netherlands: Pyralvex. Portu-
gal: Pyralvex. Russia: Parodium ([apoanym). South Africa:
Helmontskruie; Lewensessens; Moultons Herbal Extract;
Pyralvex; Wonderkroonessens. Singapore: Pyralvex. Spain:
Crislaxo; Laxante Bescansa Aloico; Menabil Complex; Pyr-
alvex; Solucion Schoum. Switzerland: Padma-Lax; Padmed
Laxan; Pyralvex; Schweden-Mixtur H nouvelle formulation.
Thailand: Pyralvex. UK: Acidosis; Digestive; Fam-Lax Senna;
Fam-Lax; Golden Seal Indigestion Tablets; Herbal Laxative
Tablets; HRI Golden Seal Digestive; Indian Brandee; Jacksons
Herbal Laxative; Nervous Dyspepsia Tablets; Pegina; Pyralvex;
Rhuaka; Stomach Mixture; Wind & Dyspepsia Relief.
Venezuela: Orafilm; Pinvex; Pyralvex.

Reference

1 Rohrback JA. Some uses of rhubarb in veterinary medicine. Herbalist
1983; 1: 239-241.

----- PAGE 519 -----
Rosemary

against endotoxin shock and adult respiratory distress
syndrome. However, these effects and other activities
documented for rosemary and/or its constituents following
preclinical studies require confirmation in robust clinical
studies. Rosemary should not be used by epileptic patients, or
used during pregnancy and lactation, in doses greatly
exceeding amounts used in food.

Species (Family)

Rosmarinus officinalis L. (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Rosmarinus laxiflorus Noé ex Lange

Part(s) Used

Leaf, twig

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BP 20078

BHP 19960”)

Complete German Commission E”
ESCOP 20030”

Martindale 35th edition'**?

Ph Eur 20078

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLios?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G41, G52 and G58.

Flavonoids Include diosmetin, diosmin, genkwanin and deriva-
tives, luteolin and derivatives, hispidulin, nepetin, nepitrin and
apigenin.

Phenols — Caffeic, chlorogenic, labiatic, neochlorogenic and
rosmarinic acids.

Volatile oi! 1-25%. Components vary according to chemotype.
Composed mainly of monoterpene hydrocarbons including «- and
B-pinenes, camphene and limonene, together with 1,8-cineole,
borneol, camphor (20-50% of the oil), linalool, verbinol,
terpineol, 3-octanone and isobornyl acetate.

Flavonoids

R°O.
R' R? R°
genkwanin H OH CHa
luteolin OH OH H

diosmetin OH OCH; H

Phenylpropanoids

fe)
HO. OH
HO’ HOOC ‘OH

rosmarinic acid

Monoterpenes
fe)
R
1,8-cineole borneol H camphor
bornyl-acetate COCH;
Diterpenes

camosol rosmanol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of rosemary.

Terpenoids Carnosol, carnosolic acid, rosmanol (diterpenes);
oleanolic and ursolic acids (triterpenes).

Food Use

Rosemary herb and oil are commonly used as flavouring agents in
foods. Rosemary is listed by the Council of Europe as a source of
natural food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates
that rosemary can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with
a possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in
the final product.“ Previously, rosemary has been listed as
GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).'C°

Herbal Use

Rosemary is stated to act as a carminative, spasmolytic,
thymoleptic, sedative, diuretic and antimicrobial.'©” Topically,
rubefacient, mild analgesic and parasiticide properties are
documented.'©” Traditionally rosemary is indicated for flatulent
dyspepsia, headache, and topically for myalgia, sciatica, and
intercostal neuralgia. The German Commission E approved

----- PAGE 520 -----
Figure 2 Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis).

internal use for dyspeptic complaints and external use as
supporting therapy for rheumatic diseases and circulatory
problems.'?)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried leaf/twig 2-4 ¢ as an infusion three times daily;©” 4-6 g
daily; external use 50g for one bath.'©?)

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily©”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antimicrobial activity Antibacterial and antifungal activities in
vitro have been reported for rosemary oil. APS) Rosemary
herb is an effective antimicrobial agent against Staphylococcus
aureus in meat and against a wide range of bacteria in laboratory
media." Antimicrobial activity has been documented for the oil
towards moulds, and Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria"
including S. aureus, S. albus, Vibrio cholerae, Escherichia coli and
corynebacteria.?) Carnosol and ursolic acid have inhibited a range
of food spoilage microbes (S. aureus, E. coli, Lactobacillus brevis,
Pseudomonas fluorescens, Rhodotorula glutinis and Kluyvero-
myces bulgaricus). Activity was comparable to that of known
antioxidants — butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) and butylated
hydroxytoluene (BHT) — and correlated with the respective

antioxidant properties of the two compounds (carnosol > ursolic
acid).

Antiviral activity A dried 95% ethanol extract of rosemary (2-
100 ,tg/mL) inhibited in vitro formation of herpes simplex virus
type 2 plaques from 2-100% in a concentration-dependent
manner. Carnosolic acid had activity against human immunode-
ficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) protease (ICsq value 0.08 pg/mL)
when assayed against HIV-1 replication (ICo9 value 0.32 pg/
mL).“*°) Carnosolic acid was cytotoxic to lymphocytes with a
TCo9 on H9 lymphocytes of 0.36 ttg/mL.

Antitumour activity An extract of rosemary (precipitate from
aqueous phase of 70% alcohol extract) inhibited KB cells by 87%
when applied at a concentration of 50 pg/mL.'° The volatile oil
(1.2-300 g/mL) was reported to be toxic to L-1210 leukaemia

Rosemary

cells.° Topical administration of a methanol extract five minutes
prior to application of carcinogens to the dorsal surface of CD-1
mice reduced the irritation and promotion of tumours. Applica-
tion of rosemary extract (1.2 mg and 3.6 mg) prior to [*H]-benzo
(a)pyrene reduced the formation of metabolite-DNA adducts by
30% and 54%, respectively.” In rats, dietary supplementation
with 1% rosemary extract for 21 weeks reduced the development
of dimethylbenz(a)anthracene mammary carcinoma in the treated
group, compared with the control group (40% versus 75%,
respectively).

Antispasmodic and anticonvulsant activities Rosemary oil,
1,8-cineole, and bornyl acetate have exerted a spasmolytic action
in both smooth muscle (guinea-pig ileum) and cardiac muscle
(guinea-pig atria) preparations, with the latter more sensitive.” In
smooth muscle this spasmolytic effect has been attributed to
antagonism of acetylcholine,'!”) with borneol considered the most
active component of the oil." The spasmolytic action of
rosemary oil is preceded by a contractile action, which is
attributed to the pinene components." o-Pinenes and B-pinenes
have exhibited a spasmogenic activity towards smooth muscle,
with no effect on cardiac muscle.”

Spasmolytic action in vivo (guinea-pigs) has been demonstrated
by rosemary oil (administered intravenously) via a relaxant action
on Oddi's sphincter contracted by morphine. Activity increased
with incremental doses of oil until an optimum dose was reached
(25 mg/kg) at which the unblocking effect was immediate.”
Further increases in dose reintroduced a delayed response time."
Smooth muscle-stimulant and analgesic actions have been
documented for a rosmaricine derivative.“C*)

The volatile oil of rosemary inhibited contractions of rabbit
tracheal smooth muscle induced by acetylcholine, and inhibited
contraction of guinea-pig tracheal smooth muscle induced by
histamine."?) The oil also inhibited contractions in both
preparations induced by high potassium concentrations. Contrac-
tions of rabbit and guinea-pig tracheal smooth muscle induced by
acetylcholine and histamine, respectively, were inhibited by
rosemary oil in calcium ion-free solution. It was suggested that
the oil has calcium antagonist activity.) A 30% ethanol extract
of rosemary produced a spasmolytic effect on guinea-pig ileum, as
demonstrated by measuring the increase in the EDs9 of acetylcho-
line (4.9 pg/L after addition of 2.5 mL extract and 25.1 g/L after
addition of 10mL extract).(“°? An increase in the EDso for

histamine from 8.1 ,1g/L to 44.6 j1g/L, respectively, was noted for
the same doses of extract.

Figure 3 Rosemary — dried drug substance (leaf).

----- PAGE 521 -----
Rosemary

Noradrenaline (norephinephrine)- and potassium ion-induced
contractions of rabbit aortic rings were significantly reduced by
rosemary oil 0.48mg/mL and 0.64mg/mL, respectively. It was

proposed that action was by a direct vascular smooth muscle
effect.)

Anti-inflammatory activity Complement activation and sub-
sequent triggering of the arachidonic acid cascade are thought to
play an important role in the early phase of shock. An intact
complement system is required for the formation of vasoactive
prostanoids (prostacyclin, thromboxane Aj), arterial hypotension
and thrombocytopenia." The effect of rosmarinic acid on
endotoxin-induced haemodynamic and haematological changes
has been studied in a rabbit model of circulatory shock.‘ ')
Rosmarinic acid (20 mg/kg, intravenous) was found to suppress
the endotoxin-induced activation of complement, formation of
prostacyclin, hypotension, thrombocytopenia, and the release of
thromboxane Ap." Unlike non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs), the mode of action by which rosmarinic acid
suppresses prostaglandin formation does not involve interference
with cyclooxygenase activity or prostacyclin synthetase.'')
Activity has been attributed to inhibition of complement factor
C3 conversion to activated complement components, which
mediate the inflammatory process." Rosmarinic acid has
inhibited carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema, and_ passive
cutaneous anaphylaxis, also in rats (IDs) 1 mg/kg, intravenously;
10 mg/kg, intramuscularly).

Topical application of rosmarinic acid (5%) to rhesus monkeys
reduced gingival plaque indices when compared with placebo.'¢”)
A methanol extract of herb (3.6mg) applied topically to CD-1
mice twice daily for four days inhibited skin inflammation and
hyperplasia caused by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA).‘C A similar extract inhibited both TPA- and arachidonic
acid-induced inflammation as well as TPA-induced hyperplasia.”

Anti-hepatotoxic activity A lyophilised aqueous extract of
rosemary significantly reduced hepatotoxicity of t-butylperoxide
to rat hepatocytes in vitro, significantly decreasing malonaldehyde
formation, release of lactic acid dehydrogenase and aspartate
aminotransferase.) Pretreatment of rats with an aqueous extract
(1 mg of lyophilisate equivalent to 7 mg young shoots) 30 minutes
prior to exposure to carbon tetrachloride, resulted in a 72%
decrease in plasma glutamic-pyruvic transaminase. Rosemary
extract supplementation in the diet of rats enhanced the activity of
GSH-transferase and NAD(P)H-quinone reductase.“°

Cholagogic activity A lyophilised ethanolic extract (1mg) of
young shoots at doses of 0.1, 1.0 and 2.0 g/kg was injected into the
jugular vein of common bile duct-cannulated Sprague-Dawley
rats infused with sodium taurocholate.® A significant, rapid
increase in bile flow (114%) was achieved with maximum effect in
30 minutes. The extract of young shoots was significantly more
active in stimulating bile flow than a similar extract of whole
plant. A rapid increase in bile secretion was observed (138% in 40
minutes) in cannulated guinea-pigs given an aqueous—ethanol
extract (15%).'6

Antioxidant activity Several extracts and constituents of
rosemary have been shown to have antioxidant activity.“@” An
antioxidant action, demonstrated by inhibition of chemilumines-
cence and hydrogen peroxide generation from human granulo-
cytes, has been reported for rosmarinic acid.“

Lipophilic and hydrophobic fractions of rosemary showed
activity which was attributed to the diterpenes carnosol,
carnosolic acid and rosmanol inhibiting superoxide anion

production in the xanthine/xanthine oxidase system.''?) These
diterpenes at concentrations of 3-30,1mol/L also completely
inhibit mitochondrial and microsomal lipid peroxidation induced
by NADPH or NADPH oxidation. '”

The complement-inhibiting and antioxidant properties of
rosmarinic acid are not thought to adversely affect the
chemotaxic, phagocytic and enzymatic properties of polymorp!
nuclear leukocytes.

)-

Other activities A hyperglycaemic effect was observed in glucose-
loaded rats treated with a solution of rosemary oil (925 mg/kg,
intramuscular).?” In rabbits with alloxan-induced diabetes given
rosemary oil (25 mg/kg, intramuscular) six hours after fasting,
plasma glucose concentrations increased by 17% six hours later.

Pretreatment with rosmarinic acid (20mg/kg and 10 mg/kg,
intravenously) has been reported to inhibit the development of
adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in a rabbit model.”
This action can be attributed to both the antioxidant and
anticomplement activities of rosmarinic acid.2”

The ability to reduce capillary permeability has been described

for diosmin.'“*” Activity reportedly exceeds that exhibited by
(G41)

rutin.

An increase in locomotor activity has been observed in mice
following either inhalation or oral administration of rosemary
oil.” The increase in activity paralleled a dose-related increase in
the serum 1,8-cineole concentration. Biphasic elimination of 1,8-
cineole from the blood was observed (ty. = 6 minutes, ty. = 45
minutes).°”

In rats, antigonadotrophic activity has been documented for
oxidation products of rosmarinic acid administered intramuscu-
larly?) Activity was determined by suppression of pregnant
mares’ serum-induced increase in ovarian and uterine weights.
Concentrations of 10°’ mol/L of the flavonoids nepitrin and
nepetin inhibited aldose-reductase activity in homogenised rat eye
lenses by 31% .'6”)

Cc

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
rosemary and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

‘al studies

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for rosemary and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Rosemary oil is stated to be non-irritating and non-sensitising
when applied to human skin,(@°* but moderately irritating when
applied undiluted to rabbit skin." Bath preparations, cosmetics
and toiletries containing rosemary oil may cause erythema and
dermatitis in hypersensitive individuals.“°” Photosensitivity has
been associated with the oil.(@?

Preclinical data

Rosmarinic acid exhibits low toxicity (an LDso in mice is stated as
561 mg/kg for intravenous administration) and is rapidly elimi-
nated from the circulation (t1/. = 9 minutes following intravenous
administration)."“® Transient cardiovascular actions become
pronounced at intravenous doses exceeding 50mg/kg." Acute
LDso values quoted include 5 mL/kg (rat, oral) and >10 mL/kg
(rabbit, dermal).

----- PAGE 522 -----
Diosmin is reportedly less toxic than rutin.(“*” No mortality

was seen in Wistar rats and Swiss mice given single intraperitoneal
doses of 2 g/kg of aqueous alcoholic rosemary extract (15%). (C52)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Topical preparations containing rosemary oil should be used with
caution by hypersensitive individuals. Rosemary oil contains 20—
50% camphor; orally, camphor readily causes epileptiform
convulsions if taken in sufficient quantity.‘

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of rosemary to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that rosemary oil has hyperglycaemic
activity. The clinical relevance of this, if any, is not clear.

Pregnancy and lactation Rosemary is reputed to be an
abortifacient'“*” and to affect the menstrual cycle (emmenago-

gue).'°*® In view of this, rosemary should not be ingested during
pregnancy and lactation in amounts greatly exceeding those
normally encountered in foods.

7; Mediflor Tisane Digestive No 3; Mediflor Tisane Hepatique
No 5; Romarene; Romarinex. Germany: Canephron; Melis-
sengeist. Russia: Canephron N (Kanecppon H). Spain:
Linimento Naion; Mesatil; Natusor Hepavesical; Natusor
Low Blood Pressure; Natusor Sinulan; Resolutivo Regium.
Switzerland: Phytomed Cardio. UK: Supa-Tonic Tablets; Wood
Sap Ointment.

References

1 Collin MA, Charles HP. Antimicrobial activity of carnosol and ursolic
acid: two anti-oxidant constituents of Rosmarinus officinalis L. Food
Microbiol 1987; 4: 311-315.

10

1

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

Rosemary

Panizzi L et al. Composition and antimicrobial properties of essential
oils of four Mediterranean Lamiaceae. J Ethnopharmacol 1993; 39:
167-170.

Opdyke DLJ. Rosemary oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12: 977-978.
Pari8 A et al. Inhibitory effect of carnosolic acid on HIV-1 protease in
cell-free assays. J Nat Prod 1993; 56: 1426-1430.

Pukl M et al. Inhibitory effect of carnosolic acid on HIV-1 protease.
Planta Med 1992; 58: A632.

Ilarionova M et al. Cytotoxic effect on leukemic cells of the essential
oils from rosemary, wild geranium and nettle and concret of royal
bulgarian rose. Anticancer Res 1992; 12: 1915.

Huang M-T et al. Inhibition of skin tumorigenesis by rosemary and its
constituents carnosol and ursolic acid. Cancer Res 1994; 54: 701-708.
Singletary K. Inhibition of DMBA-induced mammary tumorigenesis
by rosemary extract. FASEB J 1991; 5: 5A927.

Hof $, Ammon HPT. Negative inotropic action of rosemary oil, 1,8-
cineole, and bornyl acetate. Planta Med 1989; 55: 106-107.

Taddei I et al. Spasmolytic activity of peppermint, sage and rosemary
essences and their major constituents. Fitoterapia 1988; 59: 463-468.
Giachetti D et al. Pharmacological activity of essential oils on Oddi's
sphincter. Planta Med 1988; 389-392.

Agel MB. Relaxant effect of the volatile oil of Rosmarinus officinalis
on tracheal smooth muscle. J Ethnopharmacol 1991; 33: 57-62.
Agel MB. A vascular smooth muscle relaxant effect of Rosmarinus
officinalis. Int ] Pharmacog 1992; 30: 281-288.

Bult H et al. Modification of endotoxin-induced haemodynamic and
haematological changes in the rabbit by methylprednisolone, F(ab’)2
fragments and rosmarinic acid. Br J Pharmacol 1985; 84: 317-327.
Rampart M et al. Complement-dependent stimulation of prostacyclin
biosynthesis: inhibition by rosmarinic acid. Biochem Pharmacol 1986;
35: 1397-1400.

Parnham MJ, Kesselring K. Rosmarinic acid. Drugs Future 1985; 10:
756-757.

Joyeux M et al. Screening of antiradical, antilipoperoxidant and
hepatoprotective effects of nine plants extracts used in Caribbean folk
medicine. Phytother Res 1995; 9: 228-230.

Hoefler C et al. Comparative choleretic and hepatoprotective
properties of young sprouts and total plant extracts of Rosmarinus
officinalis in rats. J Ethnopharmacol 1987; 19: 133-143.

Haraguchi H e¢ al. Inhibition of lipid peroxidation and superoxide
generation by diterpenoids from Rosmarinus officinalis. Planta Med
1995; 61: 333-336.

Nuytinck JKS e¢ al. Inhibition of experimentally induced
microvascular injury by rosmarinic acid. Agents Actions 1985; 17:
373-374.

Al-Hader AA et al. Hyperglycemic and insulin release inhibitory
effects of Rosmarinus officinalis. ] Ethnopharmacol 1994; 43: 217-
221.

Kovar KA et al. Blood levels of 1,8-cineole and locomotor activity of
mice after inhalation and oral administration of rosemary oil. Planta
Med 1987; 315-318.

Gumbinger HG et al. Formation of compounds with antigonadotropic
activity from inactive phenolic precursors. Contraception 1981; 23:
661-665.

----- PAGE 523 -----
Sage

oil contains high concentrations of thujone, a toxic ketone,
and should not be ingested. Sage is commonly used as a
culinary herb and presents no hazard when ingested in
amounts normally encountered in foods. However, extracts of
the herb should be used with caution and should not be
ingested in large amounts or over prolonged periods.

Sage should not be used during pregnancy and lactation.

Species (Family)

*Salvia officinalis L. (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)
S. lavandulifolia Vahl

Synonym(s)

*Dalmatian Sage, Garden Sage, True Sage

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs
BHP 1996”)

BP 2007'°8)

Complete German Commission E@?)

ESCOP 2003079)

Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Ph Eur 200708”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
Reference 1 and General References G2, G52, G58 and G62.

Acids Phenolic — caffeic, chlorogenic, ellagic, ferulic, gallic and
rosmarinic.”

Flavonoids 5-Methoxysalvigenin.

Terpenes Monoterpene glycosides. Diterpenes, abietanes includ-
ing carnosic acid and derivatives, e.g. carnasol. Triterpenes,
oleanolic acid and derivatives.

Tannins 3-8%. Hydrolysable and condensed.”

Volatile oil 1-2.8%. Pharmacopoeial standard not less than 1.0%
cut herb.'C#"°*) Major components are a- and B-thujones (35—
50%, mainly «). Others include 1,8-cineole, borneol, camphor,
caryophyllene, linalyl acetate and various terpenes.»

Phenylpropanoids
fe)
HO. OH
are ee
HO’ HOOC ‘OH

rosmarinic acid

Monoterpenes

H,, CH
6050 ay °
H
fo)

a-thujone 1,8-cineole camphor
((-)-thujone)

Diterpenes

Figure 1 Selected constituents of sage.

It has been noted that commercial sage may be substituted with
Salvia triloba.” In contrast to S. officinalis, the principal volatile
oil component of S. triloba is 1,8-cineole, with a-thujone only
accounting for 1-5%.") Compared with S. officinalis, the volatile
oil yield of various Salvia species is lower, with lower total ketone
content and higher total alcohol content.'®

Food Use

Sage is commonly used as a culinary herb. It is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (category
N2).S' This category indicates that sage can be added to
foodstuffs providing the concentration of thujones («% and )
present in the final product does not exceed 0.5 mg/kg, with the
exceptions of alcoholic beverages (10 mg/kg), bitters (35 mg/kg),
food containing sage (25mg/kg) and sage stuffing (250 mg/
kg).'“' Previously, sage has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).‘°®

Herbal Use

Sage is stated to possess carminative, antispasmodic, antiseptic,
astringent and antihidrotic properties. Traditionally, it has been
used to treat flatulent dyspepsia, pharyngitis, uvulitis, stomatitis,
gingivitis, glossitis (internally or as a_ gargle/mouthwash),
hyperhidrosis, and galactorrhoea.'C* C4 97: G3 G43, G52, G54, God)
The herbals of Gerard, Culpeper and Hill credit sage with the
ability to enhance memory.” The German Commission E
approved internal use for dyspeptic symptoms and _ excessive

----- PAGE 524 -----
P PaaS
Figure 2 Sage (Salvia officinalis).

perspiration, and external use for inflammation of mucous
membranes of mouth and throat.'°?)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Leaf 1-4 as an infusion three times daily;'C” 4-6 g daily. (©

Liquid extract 1-4 mL (1:1 in 45% alcohol) three times daily©”

Gargles, rinses 2.5 9/100 mL water.'°

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Hypotensive activity in anaesthetised cats, CNS-depressant action
(prolonged barbiturate sleep) in anaesthetised mice, and an
antispasmodic action in vitro (guinea-pig ileum) have been
reported for a sage extract and for the essential oil.”

Antispasmodic activity Inhibition of contractions induced by
acetylcholine, histamine, serotonin and barium chloride by 60-
80% has been noted for a total sage extract, with lesser activity
exhibited by a total flavonoid extract."® An initial spasmogenic
action exhibited by low doses of sage oil has been attributed to the
pinene content.”) Antispasmodic activity in vivo (guinea-pigs) has
been reported for sage oil administered intravenously, which
released contraction of Oddi's sphincter induced by intravenous
morphine.)

Anticholinesterase activity Early herbals claim that sage
enhances the memory.” The anticholinesterase activity of several
Salvia species and their constituents have been investigated in the
search for new drugs for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. The
inhibition of anticholinesterase in vitro by an ethanolic extract of
S. officinalis (2.5 mg/mL) was 68%, and by oils of S. officinalis and
S. lavandulifolia (0.1 pg/mL) was 52% and 63%, respectively.
The ICso value of S. lavandulifolia oil is reportedly 0.03 g/mL."

Sage

The monoterpenes 1,8-cineole and o-pinene from the oil have been
identified as the inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase with ICso values
of 0.67 and 0.63 mmol/L, respectively." Rats given S. lavandu-
lifolia oil (20pL or SOwL for five days) were sacrificed, and
acetylcholinesterase activity assessed for striatum, cortex and
hippocampus of brain left hemisphere.'’” At the lower dose, there
was a decrease in acetylcholinesterase activity in the striatum, but
not in the hippocampus or cortex of treated rats. At the higher
dose, there was a decrease in striatal acetylcholinesterase activity.
It was concluded that the oil inhibited acetylcholinesterase in
selective areas of the brain.

Hypoglycaemic activity Hypoglycaemic activity in vivo (rabbits)
has been reported for §. lavandulifolia."?) and for mixed
phytotherapy preparations containing various Salvia species,
including S. officinalis." Activity in normoglycaemic, hypogly-
caemic and in alloxan-diabetic rabbits was observed, although no
change in insulin concentrations was noted.'!*)

Antimicrobial and antiviral activity Antimicrobial activity of
the volatile oil has been attributed to the thujone content.”
Antimicrobial activity in vitro was noted against Escherichia coli,
Shigella sonnei, Salmonella species, Klebsiella ozanae (Gram-
negative), Bacillus subtilis (Gram-positive), and against various
fungi (Candida albicans, C. krusei, C. pseudotropicalis, Toru-
lopsis glabrata, Cryptococcus neoformans)."'>) No activity was
observed versus Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Microencapsulation
of sage oil into gelatin-acacia capsules introduced a lagtime with
respect to antibacterial activity and inhibited antifungal activity.”
Diterpene constituents of S. officinalis are reported to be active
against vesicular stomatitis virus.“

Other activities An aqueous ethanolic extract of sage (50%)
strongly inhibited collagenolytic activity of Porphyromonas
gingivitis. In addition to anticholinesterase activity, other
biological activities have relevance in the treatment of Alzheimer's
disease. In this context, S. lavandulifolia and its individual
constituents have been assessed for antioxidant, anti-inflamma-
tory and oestrogenic activities.” An ethanolic extract of dried
herb (5 mg/mL) and the monoterpenes a and B-pinene and 1,8-
cineole (0.1 mol/L) inhibited bovine brain liposome peroxidate
activity. Anti-inflammatory activity was demonstrated by weak
inhibition of thromboxane B, and leukotriene By synthesis, and
possible oestrogenic activity of sage oil (0.01 mg/mL) and geraniol
(0.1-2 mmol/L), demonstrated by induction of B-galactosidase in
yeast cells.

----- PAGE 525 -----
Sage

Clinical studies

Clinical research assessing the effects of sage is limited and
rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Excessive sweat induced by pilocarpine was inhibited by a
dialysate of an aqueous extract of fresh sage.'“” In an open
study, 40 patients were given dried aqueous extract of sage
(440 mg, equivalent to 2.6 g herbs) and 40 were given infusion of
sage (4.5g herb daily). Reduction of sweat (less than 50%) was
achieved in both groups of patients with idiopathic hyperhidrio-
sis”) It should be noted, however, that this study did not
include a control group and, therefore, the observed effects cannot
be attributed to sage with any certainty.

A double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study involving
20 healthy volunteers compared the effects of 50 tL, 100 pL and
150 pL of S. lavandulifolia oil and sunflower oil."'?) Cognitive
assessment indicated improvements in both immediate and
delayed word recall scores, coupled with decrements in accuracy
and speed of attention, with sage oil SOL. At this dose, self-
related alertness at 2.5 hours and calmness at four hours and six
hours were reported to be reduced.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for sage and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

A case of human poisoning has been documented following
ingestion of sage oil for acne." Convulsant activity in humans
(and animals) has been documented for sage oil." '®)

Sage oil is reported to be a moderate skin irritant”
recommended for use in aromatherapy.‘

and is not

Preclinical data

In rats, the subclinical, clinical and lethal doses for convulsant
action of sage oil are estimated as 0.3, 0.5, and 3.2 g/kg."'” This
toxicity has been attributed to the ketone terpenoids in the volatile
oil, namely camphor and thujone. Acute LD so values for sage oil
are documented as 2.6 g/kg in rats for oral administration and 5 g/
kg in rabbits for intradermal administration.” S. officinalis has
no mutagenic or DNA-damaging activity in either the Ames test

or Bacillus rec-assay.'°)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Sage oil is toxic (due to the thujone content) and should not be
ingested. S. lavandulifolia oil has a much lower content of thujone
than does S. officinalis oil."?) In view of the toxicity of the
essential oil, sage extracts should be used with caution and not
ingested in large amounts.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of sage to interact with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing effects,
should be considered. There is limited evidence from preclinical
studies that sage has hypoglycaemic activity. Sage oil has a high
content of thujones, which are convulsants.

Pregnancy and lactation Sage is contra-indicated during
pregnancy. Traditionally, it is reputed to be an abortifacient and
to affect the menstrual cycle.(“*” The volatile oil contains a high
proportion of a- and f-thujones, which are known to be
abortifacient and emmenagogic. Sage should not be used during
lactation.

matosan; Tormentan. France: Bolcitol; Gonaxine; Saugella;
Tisane Hepatique de Hoerdt. Germany: Amara-Tropfen;
Melissengeist; Parodontal. Israel: Baby Paste + Chamomile;
Kamilotract. Italy: Donalg; Saugella Attiva; Saugella Dermo-
latte; Saugella Fitothym; Saugella Salviettine; Saugella Solido
ph 3.5. South Africa: Amara; Dynexan. Spain: Diabesor;
Menstrunat; Natusor Farinol; Natusor Low Blood Pressure.
Switzerland: Strath Gouttes pour les muqueuses; Tisane
pectorale et antitussive; Wala Echinacea. Venezuela: One
Drop Spray. UK: Lane's Sage and Garlic Catarrh Remedy;
Menopace Plus; Napiers Echinacea Tea.

References

1 Tucker AO et al. Botanical aspects of commercial sage. Econ Bot 1980;
34: 16-19.

2. Petri G et al. Tannins and other polyphenolic compounds in the genus
Salvia. Planta Med 1988: 54: 575.

3 Murko D et al. Tannins of Salvia officinalis and their changes during
storage. Planta Med 1974; 25: 295-300.

4 Jalsenjak V et al. Microcapsules of sage oil: Essential oils content and
antimicrobial activity. Pharmazie 1987; 42: 419-420.

5 Giachetti D et al. Pharmacological activity of essential oils on Oddi's
sphincter. Planta Med 1988: 54: 389-392.

6 Ivanic R, Savin K. A comparative analysis of essential oils from several
wild species of Salvia. Planta Med 1976; 30: 25-31.

7 Perry EK et al. Medicinal plants and Alzheimer's disease: integrating
ethnobotanical and contemporary scientific evidence. J Alt
Complement Med 1998; 4: 419-428.

8 Todorov S et al. Experimental pharmacological study of three species
from genus Salvia. Acta Physiol Pharmacol Bulg 1984; 10: 13-20.

9 Taddei I et al. Spasmolytic activity of peppermint, sage and rosemary
essences and their major constituents. Fitoterapia 1988; 59: 463-468.

10 Perry N et al. European herbs with cholinergic activities: potential in
dementia therapy. Int J Geriat Psychiat 1996; 11: 1063-1069.

11. Perry NSL et al. In-vitro inhibition of human erythrocyte
acetylcholinesterase by Salvia lavandulaefolia essential oil and
constituent terpenes. J Pharm Pharmacol 2000; 52: 895-902.

12 Houghton PJ. Personal communication.

13. Jimenez J et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of Salvia lavandulifolia. Planta
Med 1986: 52: 260-262.

14 Cabo J et al. Accion hipoglucemiante de preparados fitoterapicos que
contienen especies del genero salvia. Ars Pharmac 1985; 26: 239-249.

15. Recio MC et al. Antimicrobial activity of selected plants employed in
the Spanish Mediterranean area. Part II. Phytother Res 1989; 3: 77.

16 Centini F et al. A case of sage oil poisoning. Zacchia 1987; 60: 263—
174.

17. Millet Y. Experimental study of the toxic convulsant properties of
commercial preparations of essences of sage and hyssop.
Electroencephal Clin Neurophysiol 1980; 49: 102P.

18 Millet Y et al. Toxicity of some essential plant oils — clinical and
experimental study. Clin Toxicol 1981; 18: 1485-1498.

19 Opdyke DLJ. Sage oil Dalmatian. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12:
987-988.

----- PAGE 526 -----
Sarsaparilla

Species (Family)
TS. purhampuy Ruiz

Synonym(s)

*Smilax ornata Hook

loses may be irritant to the gastrointestinal mucosa ani Part(s) Used
should, therefore, be avoided. Part(s) Used
There are no known problems with the use of sarsaparilla Rhizome, root

during pregnancy and lactation but, as a precaution, amounts
ingested should not exceed those usually found in foods.

Triterpenes

R' R?
HO! sarsasapogenin CH3; 4H
smilagenin H CH3

sarsaparilloside HO Ne

parillin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of sarsaparilla.

*Smilax regelii Killip & C.V. Morton (Smilacaceae)

+S. febrifuga Kunth, S. febrifuga var. aequatoris A. DC

----- PAGE 527 -----
Sarsaparilla

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°°
BHP 1996'°”’ :
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Saponins About 2%. Sarsasapogenin (parigenin), smilagenin,
diosgenin, tigogenin, asperagenin, laxogenin from various spe-
cies," sarsasaponin (parillin), smilasaponin (smilacin) and
sarsaparilloside.

Other constituents Caffeoylshikimic acid, ferulic acid, shikimic
acid, kaempferol, quercetin, phytosterols (e.g. f-sitosterol,
stigmasterol, pollinastanol), resin, starch, volatile oil (trace) and
cetyl alcohol.

Food Use

Sarsaparilla is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N4). This category indicates that the
use of sarsaparilla as a flavouring agent is recognised but that
there is insufficient information available to further classify it into
categories N1, N2 or N3.'C'® Sarsaparilla has been used as a
vehicle and flavouring agent for medicaments,‘“*> and is widely
employed in the manufacture of non-alcoholic beverages.'(°”
Previously, sarsaparilla has been listed as GRAS (Generally
Recognised As Safe).

Herbal Use

Sarsaparilla is stated to possess antirheumatic, antiseptic and
antipruritic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for psoriasis

Figure 2 Sarsaparilla (Smilax regelii).

Figure 3 Sarsaparilla — dried drug substance (root).

and other cutaneous conditions, chronic rheumatism, rheumatoid
arthritis, as an adjunct to other treatments for leprosy, and
specifically for psoriasis.'C% C7 Go

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried root 1-4g as a decoction three times daily.(©®

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory” and hepatoprotective” effects have been
described following studies in rats.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
sarsaparilla and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.
The following observations and uses require assessment in well-
designed clinical studies.

Improvement of appetite and digestion’
diuretic*® action have been reported. Limited clinical data
utilising extracts indicate improvement in psoriasis; the extract
has also been used as an adjuvant for the treatment of leprosy.”

as well as a

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented for sarsaparilla. However, there is a lack of
clinical safety and toxicity data for sarsaparilla and further
investigation of these aspects is required. Large doses of saponins
are reported to cause gastrointestinal irritation resulting in
diarrhoea and vomiting. Although haemolytic activity has been
documented for the saponins,'°°” they are not harmful when
taken by mouth and are only highly toxic if injected into the
bloodstream.'©”

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented for sarsaparilla. In view of the possible irritant
nature of the saponin constituents, excessive ingestion should be
avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of sarsaparilla to interact with other medicines

----- PAGE 528 -----
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of sarsaparilla during pregnancy and lactation. However,
in view of the possible irritant nature of the saponin components,
excessive ingestion (amounts greater than those found in foods)
should be avoided.

Reumalex; HRI Clear Complexion; Jamaican Sarsaparilla;
Napiers Skin Tablets; Skin Eruptions Mixture.

1

2

Sarsaparilla

References

Sharma SC e¢ al. Uber Saponine von Smilax parvifolia Wall.
Pharmazie 1980; 35: 646.

Ageel AM et al. Experimental studies on antirheumatic crude drugs
used in Saudi traditional medicine. Drugs Exp Clin Res 1989; 15: 369—
372.

Rafatullah $ et al. Hepatoprotective and safety evaluation studies on
sarsaparilla. Int J Pharmacog 1991; 29: 296-301.

Harnischfeger G, Stolze H. Smilax species — Sarsaparille. In: Bewahrte
Pflanzendrogen in Wissenschaft und Medizin. Bad Homburg/
Melsungen: Notamed Verlag., 1983: 216-225.

Hobbs C. Sarsaparilla — a literature review. Herbalgram 1988; 17: 1,
10-15.

Thermon FM. The treatment of psoriasis with a sarsaparilla
compound. N Engl J Med 1942; 227: 128-133.

Rollier R. Treatment of lepromatous leprosy by a combination of DDS
and sarsaparilla (Smilax ornata). Int J Leprosy 1959; 27: 328-340.

----- PAGE 529 -----
Sassafras

,
component of sassafras volatile oil. Consequently, the use of
safrole is no longer permitted in foods and sassafras is not
permitted as an ingredient in licensed medicinal products.

Antiseptic and diuretic properties claimed for sassafras are
probably attributable to the volatile oil, although no
documented studies were found supporting the
antirheumatic claims. Sassafras should not be used as a herbal
remedy, either internally or externally.

Species (Family)

Sassafras albidum (Nutt.) Nees (Lauraceae)

Synonym(s)

Ague Tree, Cinnamon Wood, Saloop, Sassafras sassfras (L.)
Karst., S. albidum var. molle (Raf.) Fern., Saxifrax

Part(s) Used

Inner root bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983” ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Sassafras is not permitted for use in medicinal products.

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Alkaloids soquinoline-type about 0.02%. Boldine, isoboldine,
norboldine, cinnamolaurine, norcinnamolaurine and reticuline.

Volatile oils = 5-9%. Safrole as major component (80-90%),
others include anethole, apiole, asarone, camphor, caryophyllene,
coniferaldehyde, copaene, elemicin, eugenol, 5-methoxyeugenol,
menthone, myristicin, &-pinene, %- and f-phellandrene, piper-
onylacrolein and thujone.

Other constituents Gum, mucilage, lignans (sesamin, des-
methoxyaschantin), resin, sitosterol, starch, tannins and wax.

Food Use

Sassafras oil was formerly used as flavouring agent in beverages
including root beer.'©°*) However, in the 1960s safrole, the major
component of the volatile oil, was reported to be carcinogen-
ic.©®) The use of safrole in foods is now banned, and its use in

Phenylpropanoids
seed
fe}

safrole

Alkaloids

R'O.
C) N—CH.
CH30"
OH
R! R?

boldine H CH3
isoboldine CH; H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of sassafras.

toilet preparations controlled.'©** Previously, in the USA, safrole-
free sassafras extract, leaf and leaf extract have been approved for
food use. In 1976, the US Food and Drugs Administration (FDA)
banned interstate marketing of sassafras for sassafras tea.'¢?”)

Herbal Use

Sassafras is stated to possess carminative, diaphoretic, diuretic,
dermatologic and antirheumatic properties. Traditionally, it has

been used for cutaneous eruptions, gout and rheumatic pains.‘©*

G7, G64)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
However, sassafras is no longer recommended for internal or
external use.

Bark 2—4g as an infusion three times daily.©”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.”

Pharmacological Actions

Studies have concentrated on investigating the toxicity associated
with the bark. However, aqueous and alcoholic extracts have been
reported to elicit ataxia, hypersensitivity to touch, CNS depres-
sion and hypothermia in mice." Both inhibition and induction of
hepatic microsomal enzymes have been documented for
safrole."* Enzyme-inducing activity was found to be a transient
phenomenon, with activity falling after the onset of hepatic
toxicity (see Side-effects, Toxicity). Safrole is reported to induce
both cytochrome P488 and P450 activities. Sassafras oil has been
used as a topical antiseptic, pediculicide and carminative.”

----- PAGE 530 -----
Figure 2 Sassafras (Sassafras albidum).

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

The toxicity of sassafras is attributable to the volatile oil, and in
particular to the safrole content. It is estimated that a few drops
of sassafras oil are sufficient to kill a toddler and as little as one
teaspoonful has proved fatal in an adult.©) Symptoms of
poisoning are described as vomiting, stupor and collapse. High
doses may cause spasm followed by paralysis.(©°* Large amounts
of the oil are reported to be psychoactive with the hallucinogenic
effects lasting for several days.°?”) One of the components of the
oil is myristicin, the hallucinogenic principle in nutmeg. Sassafras
has traditionally been used as an ingredient of beverages. To put
the potential toxicity of sassafras into perspective, the following
estimation has been made.” Extrapolation of results from animal
toxicity studies indicate that 0.66 mg/kg may prove hazardous in
humans.” By comparison, a cup of sassafras tea, prepared from a
2.5g teabag, may provide up to 200mg safrole, representing
approximately 3 mg/kg.”

Figure 3

Sassafras — dried drug substance (inner root bark).

Sassafras

Preclinical data

Safrole, the principal component of the volatile oil, was first
recognised to be a hepatocarcinogen in the 1960s‘ and many
animal studies have been documented concerning this toxicity.”
Both benign and malignant tumours have developed in laboratory
animals, depending on the dose of safrole administered.”

Both human and animal studies have shown that safrole gives
rise to a large number of metabolites.® A sulfate ester (formed via
a hydroxylated metabolite) has been established as the ultimate
carcinogen for safrole with tumour incidence paralleling the rate
of conversion to the ester.’ Induction of cytochrome P450 activity
has been associated with mutagenic and carcinogenic activity of
the inducing agent." The inducing effect of safrole on certain
metabolising enzymes is thought to play a role in the carcinogenic
activity of safrole. The liver has a high level of cytochrome P450
activity and is therefore susceptible to induction.

Acute oral LDso values for safrole have been reported as 1.95 g/
kg (rats) and 2.35 g/kg (mice).°’ Major symptoms of toxicity are
stated as ataxia, depression, diarrhoea, followed by death within
four hours to seven days." Rats fed safrole in their diet at
concentrations of 0.25, 0.5 and 1.0% exhibited reduction in
growth, stomach and testicular atrophy, liver necrosis, biliary
proliferation and primary hepatomas.“ Animals have also
developed tumours when fed safrole-free extracts.'°~”

Conflicting results have been reported from studies investigat-
ing the mutagenicity of safrole, using the Ames test and DNA
repair test.” !) Purity of the safrole, test system employed, type
of metabolic activation mix, and toxicity of the test system have
been suggested as reasons for the observed variations.”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Sassafras should not be used internally or externally. Safrole, the
major component in the volatile oil of sassafras, is hepatotoxic
and even safrole-free extracts of sassafras have been reported to
produce tumours in animals. Sassafras essential oil is contra-
indicated in internal and external use.'©°* Sassafras has been
reported to inhibit and induce microsomal enzymes.

Pregnancy and lactation Sassafras is contra-indicated during
pregnancy and lactation. The oil is reported to be abortifacient.”)

References

1 Segelman AB et al. Sassafras and herb tea. Potential health hazards.
JAMA 1976; 238: 477.

2 Opdyke DLJ. Safrole. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12: 983-986.

3. Jaffe H et al. In vivo inhibition of mouse liver microsomal
hydroxylating systems by methylenedioxypheny] insecticidal synergists
and related compounds. Life Sci 1968; 7: 1051-1062.

4 International Agency for Research on Cancer. [ARC Monographs on
the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man. Some
Naturally Occurring Substances, vol 10. Geneva: WHO, 1976.

5 Craig JO. Poisoning by the volatile oils in childhood. Arch Dis Child
1953; 28: 475-483.

6 Homburger F, Boger E. The carcinogenicity of essential oils, flavors,
and spices: A review. Cancer Res 1968; 28: 2372-2374.

7 Opdyke DLJ. Sassafras oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1982; 20: 825-826.

8 Ioannides C et al. Safrole: its metabolism, carcinogenicity and
interactions with cytochrome P-450. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1981; 19:
657-666.

9 Bock KW, Schirmer G. Species differences of glucuronidation and
sulfation in relation to hepatocarcinogenesis. Arch Toxicol 1987; 10
(Suppl. Suppl.): 125-135.

----- PAGE 531 -----
10

1

Sassafras

Iwasaki K et al. Induction of cytochrome P-448 activity as exemplified
by the O-deethylation of ethoxyresorufin. Effects of dose, sex, tissue
and animal species. Biochem Pharmacol 1986; 35: 3879-3884.
Jenner PM et al. Food flavourings and compounds of related structure.
I. Acute oral toxicity. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1964; 2: 327-343.

12

13

Sekizawa J, Shibamoto T. Genotoxicity of safrole-related chemicals in
microbial test systems. Mutat Res 1982; 101: 127-140.

Swanson AB et al. The mutagenicities of safrole, estragole, eugenol,
trans-anethole, and some of their known or possible metabolites for
Salmonella typhimurium mutants. Mutat Res 1979; 60: 143-153.

----- PAGE 532 -----
Saw Palmetto

pharmacological actions of saw palmetto preparations, thi
potential for interactions with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. Studies have assessed the
effects of combination preparations containing saw palmetto,
as well as different manufacturers’ products (which vary
qualitatively and quantitatively in their phytochemical
composition); at least eight studies involved one particular
saw palmetto product. These points should be taken into
account when considering the evidence to support the
efficacy and safety of individual products. PC-SPES, a
combination preparation containing saw palmetto fruit
extract and seven other herbal ingredients, has been found to
be adulterated with diethylstilbestrol, indometacin
(indomethacin), warfarin and ethinylestradiol.

Species (Family)

Serenoa repens (W. Bart.) Small (Arecaceae/Palmae)

Synonym(s)

Sabal, Sabal serrulata (Michx.) Schult. f., Serenoa, Serenoa
serrulata (Michx.) Hook. f. ex B.D. Jacks

Part(s) Used

Fruit

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'@”)

BHMA 2003'°°°

BP 2007'¢8

BPC 193401

Complete German Commission E‘
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'“*”

Ph Eur 2007'08)

USP29/NF24'C8°)

(G3)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GsL©)

Constituents

Carbohydrates Invert sugar 28.2%, mannitol, high molecular
weight polysaccharides (e.g. MW 100000) with galactose,
arabinose and uronic acid"? identified as main sugar components
for one.

Fixed oils 26.7%. Many free fatty acids and their glycerides.
Monoacylglycerides (1-monolaurin, 1-monomyristicin).”’ Oleic
acid (unsaturated) and capric acid, caproic acid, caprylic acid,
lauric acid, myristic acid, palmitic acid and _ stearic acid
(saturated).

Steroids
compounds.

B-Sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol and other
G-S)

Other constituents Flavonoids (e.g. rutin, isoquercitrin,
kaempferol),’ pigment (carotene), resin, tannin and volatile oil
1.5%.

Most commercial preparations of saw palmetto contain
lipophilic extracts.‘

Fatty acids

Teveen

myristoleic acid

Carbohydrates
H. OHH OH

— CH,OH

H OHH OH
mannitol
Figure 1 Selected constituents of saw palmetto.

----- PAGE 533 -----
Saw Palmetto

Quality of plant material and commercial products

As with other herbal medicinal products, there is variation in the
qualitative and quantitative composition of saw palmetto crude
plant material and commercial preparations of saw palmetto fruit.
Analysis of 14 saw palmetto products marketed in Europe and the
USA for content of specific groups of constituents using liquid
and gas chromatography revealed substantial variations in the
concentrations of constituents present in different products. Free
fatty acid content ranged from 40.7% (in one product which
contained 50% olive oil) to 80.7%, content of methyl and ethyl
esters ranged from 1.5% (in one product which contained 50%
olive oil) to 16.7%, long-chain esters from 0.7% to 1.4% and
glycerides from 6.8% to 52.2% (in one product which contained
50% olive oil). Although it is clear that there are variations
between products, data from this analytical study are difficult to
interpret as values for actual content of the respective constituents
were not reported.

Food Use

Saw palmetto is not used in foods. Previously, saw palmetto has
been listed by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as a
Herb of Undefined Safety.'C*”

Herbal Use

Saw palmetto is stated to possess diuretic, urinary antiseptic,
endocrinological and anabolic properties. Traditionally, it has
been used for chronic or subacute cystitis, catarrh of the
genitourinary tract, testicular atrophy, sex hormone disorders
and specifically for prostatic enlargement.'(07 °C Modern
interest in saw palmetto is focused on its use in the treatment of
symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).

for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older standard herbal reference texts are given
below.

Dried fruit 0.5-1.0g as a decoction three times daily.'©”

Extract 320mg lipophilic ingredients extracted with lipophilic
solvents (hexane or ethanol 90% v/y).‘C?

Clinical trials have assessed the effects of lipophilic extracts
(containing lipids and sterols) of saw palmetto usually at a dosage
of 160 mg twice daily.

Figure 2 Saw palmetto (Serenoa repens).

Figure 3. Saw palmetto — dried drug substance (fruit).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Several pharmacological activities have been documented for saw
palmetto in vitro and in vivo (animals). Several of these
properties, such as inhibition of 5-c-reductase activity, inhibition
of androgen binding and spasmolytic activity, are thought to
explain, at least in part, the effects of saw palmetto in BPH.
However, the clinical significance of the in vitro inhibition of 5-c.-
reductase activity by saw palmetto has not been clearly established
(see Clinical studies).

5-o-Reductase is the enzyme that catalyses the conversion of
testosterone to 5-c-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in androgen target
, including the prostate. DHT is more potent than
testosterone, and is thought to be implicated in the development
of BPH. There is evidence that 5-o-reductase activity is higher in
cells obtained from BPH tissue than from normal prostate tissue.

A lipidic (liposterolic) extract of saw palmetto was found to
inhibit 5-o-reductase-mediated conversion of testosterone to

tissu

dihydrotestosterone, and 3-ketosteroid reductase-mediated con-
version of dihydrotestosterone to an androgen derivative.’ Other
in vitro studies have shown that an ethanolic extract of saw
palmetto (IDS-89) inhibited 5-a-reductase activity in the epithe-
lium and stroma of human BPH tissue in a concentration-
dependent manner.” The ICs was around 2.2 mg/mL. This study
also demonstrated that the inhibitory effect of IDS-89 was mainly
due to the fatty acid constituents of a saponifiable subfraction of
the extract, as non-saponifiable and hydrophilic subfractions
showed little or no inhibition of 5-a-reductase activity. Inhibition
of 5-c-reductase by a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto has also
been documented in porcine prostatic microsomes.”

There are at least two isoenzymes of 5-a-reductase (S-o-
reductase types I and II), and several studies have documented that
a liposterolic extract (Permixon) of saw palmetto inhibits both
isoenzymes in prostate epithelial cells! and fibroblast cells."
Several other studies have documented inhibition of 5-a-reductase
activity by liposterolic extracts of saw palmetto in vitro.
Permixon was reported to inhibit 5-o-reductase activity without
affecting the secretion of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) by
epithelial cells, suggesting that use of saw palmetto extract should
not interfere with PSA measurements for prostate-cancer screen-
ing.)

Anti-androgenic activity has been documented for a hexane
liposterolic extract (Permixon) of saw palmetto. In vitro studies in
rat prostate tissue and human foreskin fibroblasts indicated that

----- PAGE 534 -----
this extract competitively inhibited the binding of dihydrotestos-
terone to cytosolic and nuclear androgen receptor sites."'""'” By
contrast, an alcoholic extract of saw palmetto appeared to be
without androgen receptor-binding activity.'?)

Liposterolic extracts of saw palmetto have also been investi-
gated in animal models of BPH. A liposterolic extract (Permixon)
of saw palmetto 50 mg/kg body weight administered for 30 days to
castrated rats with estradiol/testosterone-induced prostate enlar-
gement resulted in significant reductions in the wet weight of the
dorsal region of the prostate, compared with control." Another
study in rats compared the effects of a liposterolic extract of saw
palmetto with those of the 5-c-reductase inhibitor finasteride in
rat prostate hyperplasia induced by hyperprolactinaemia.> It
was reported that the liposterolic extract of saw palmetto
inhibited rat prostate hyperplasia in the lateral lobe induced by
hyperprolactinaemia, and that finasteride did not antagonise the
action of prolactin. By contrast, a study in dogs with BPH
reported a lack of effect for saw palmetto extract on prostatic
weight, prostatic volume, prostatic histologic scores, prostatic
ultrasonographs and serum testosterone concentrations." In the
study, 20 dogs with BPH, determined by raised prostatic volume
and prostatic volume per kilogram body weight, received saw
palmetto extract (type of extract not specified) 1500 mg daily in
meatballs (2 = 8), 300mg daily in meatballs (1 = 6) or
unmedicated meatballs (1 = 6), for 91 days. Dogs included in
this study did not have clinical signs of BPH (i.e. decreased urinary
flow and residual urine volume) that often occur in human males
with BPH. Dogs did not appear to be randomly assigned to
treatment, and the mean prostatic volume in the control group
was higher than that in the active treatment groups before
treatment, although it was stated that this was not statistically
significant. Assessments and data analysis were carried out by
blinded investigators.

Spasmolytic activity and effects on the micturition reflex have
also been documented for saw palmetto extract, although the
contribution of these effects to effects in men with BPH is unclear.

In anaesthetised, saline-infused rats, mean micturition interval,
micturition volume and bladder capacity were significantly
increased, and maximum micturition pressure was significantly
decreased, compared with baseline values (p < 0.05 for each), in
animals that received intraduodenal administration of saw
palmetto extract (Permixon) at a dose of 60 mg/kg body weight,
but not 6 mg/kg body weight.” In anaesthetised rats infused with
0.1% acetic acid, mean micturition interval, micturition volume
and bladder capacity were significantly increased, compared with
baseline values (p < 0.05 for each), in animals that received
intraduodenal administration of saw palmetto extract (Permixon)
at a dose of 12 or 20mg/kg body weight. However, p values for
statistical tests comparing saw palmetto-treated rats with vehicle-
treated rats (control group) are not reported for these sets of
experiments. In rats given saw palmetto extract 6mg/kg body
weight orally for 14 days, total mean micturition volume was
increased significantly, compared with baseline values, for days 9
to 14 (p < 0.05); however, a comparison with a parallel control
group was not reported. Further experiments using rat bladder
and prostate tissues showed that saw palmetto extract (10 to
300 t1g/mL) competitively inhibited the binding of [N-methyl-*H]-
scopolamine methyl chloride (ICso 46 g/mL in bladder tissue)
and [SH]-prazosin (ICsy 183pg/mL in prostate tissue) in a
concentration-dependent manner.”

An ethanolic lipidic extract was reported to produce a
concentration-dependent relaxation of rat uterus tonic contrac-
tion induced by vanadate (ECsq 11.41 p1g/mL)."® Further

Saw Palmetto

investigation suggested that a mechanism for the observed effect
could be interference with intracellular calcium mobilisation,
possibly mediated via cyclic AMP. Other in vitro studies
demonstrated that a lipophilic ethanolic extract of saw palmetto
0.3-0.75 mg/mL reduced norepinephrine (noradrenaline)-induced
contractions in rat deferential duct. Further study indicated that
the relaxant effect of saw palmetto extract results from either o-

adrenoceptor blockade or from calcium-blocking activity.'”

Cytotoxic and related activities In a study using human
prostate tissue, a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto (Permixon)
30 pg/mL significantly inhibited basic fibroblast growth factor-
induced proliferation of human prostate cell cultures, compare
th control, although the extract did not affect basal prostate cel
proliferation.°? An unsaponified fraction of the extract also
markedly inhibited basic fibroblast growth factor-induced cel
proliferation, but had only a minimal effect on basal cel
proliferation. In a study using stromal and epithelial tissue from
normal prostate and from patients with BPH, cell numbers ani
proliferative indices were found to be higher in BPH tissue than in
tissue from normal prostates.” In tissue from patients with BPH
who had been treated with a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto
(Permixon), there was significant induction of apoptosis ani
inhibition of cell proliferation, compared with tissue from patients
with BPH who had not received saw palmetto extract. In another
in vitro study, incubation with Permixon 10 jtg/mL also increase:
the apoptotic index for prostate epithelial cells by 35%."

Other in vitro studies have explored the effects of saw palmetto
extract and its constituents on human prostatic cancer cells ani
other tumour cell lines. An extract of saw palmetto fruit, prepare
by supercritical fluid extraction with carbon dioxide, induced cel
death in LNCaP cells (a hormonal therapy-resistant prostatic
cancer cell line) in a concentration-dependent manner.?” This
confirms the findings of previous studies demonstrating the effect
of a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto (Permixon) on the
mortality rate of LNCaP cells: increased mortality was observe
with saw palmetto extract 50{1g/mL, compared with control.?)
Further investigation identified myristoleic acid as a component
of saw palmetto extract that caused cell death. The ECso for both
the extract and myristoleic acid was around 100 pg/mL.)
Following incubation of LNCaP cells with saw palmetto extract
130 pg/mL or myristoleic acid 100}1g/mL, the proportions of
apoptotic and necrotic cells were 16.5% and 46.8%, respectively,
for the extract, and 8.8% and 81.8%, respectively, for myristoleic
acid. An extract of saw palmetto obtained by supercritical
extraction with carbon dioxide inhibited the invasion of PC-3 cells
(derived from human adenocarcinoma of the prostate) into
Matrigel in vitro in a concentration-dependent manner at
concentrations in the range 1-10 g/mL?” However, LNCaP
cells and SKRC-1 cells (derived from human renal carcinoma)
were unaffected by the extract. The extract was also shown to
inhibit the activity of urokinase-type plasminogen activator, a
protease enzyme that is necessary for tumour-cell invasion into
basement membranes. The monoacylglycerides 1-monolaurin and
1-monomyristicin isolated from saw palmetto demonstrated in
vitro activity against renal (A-498) and pancreatic (PACA-2)
human tumour cells (ECso for 1-monolaurin: 3.77 g/mL and
2.33 g/mL, respectively; ECs9 for 1-monomyristicin: 3.58 g/mL
and 1.87 g/mL, respectively).”’ However, only borderline cyto-
toxicity was observed against PC-3 cells (ECso for 1-monomyr-
isticin: 8.84 g/mL).

PC-SPES, a combination preparation containing saw palmetto
fruit extract and seven other herbal ingredients, has cytotoxic and

w

----- PAGE 535 -----
Saw Palmetto

pro-apoptotic activity in vitro in prostate carcinoma cells,? and
in drug-sensitive (H69) and drug-resistant (H69V) human small-
cell lung carcinoma cells.°° Batches of PC-SPES have, however,
been found to be adulterated with diethylstilbestrol, indometacin
and/or warfarin, and cytotoxic activity in prostate carcinoma cells
has been attributed to these contaminants.** In contrast, in
experiments involving H69 and H69V cells, the cytotoxic activity
of the contaminants was insufficient to account for the
cytotoxicity of PC-SPES.°° Adding contaminants to a. ‘less’
contaminated batch of PC-SPES did not alter the cytotoxic
activity of the herbal preparation in H69 and H69V cells. None of
the contaminants displayed apoptotic activity at concentrations
found as contaminants and higher, whereas both contaminated
and ‘less contaminated’ batches of PC-SPES exhibited pro-
apoptotic activity in these small-cell lung carcinoma cell lines.”

Other activities In vivo oestrogenic activity in the rat has also
been documented for an alcoholic extract.” Activity was
attributed to the high content of f-sitosterol, a known oestrogenic
agent, present in saw palmetto.

In vivo anti-oedema activity in the rat has been documented for
a hexane extract of saw palmetto, acting by inhibition of
histamine-induced increase in capillary permeability.?*
doses of an aqueous extract were effective in carrageenan-induced
paw oedema and pellet tests in the rat, although the extract was
not found to influence the proliferative stage of inflammation.'"”
The observed anti-inflammatory activity was attributed to a high
molecular weight polysaccharide (approximately 100000). Poly-
saccharides possessing immunostimulating activity have also been
documented for saw palmetto and were stated to contain a high
content of glucuronic acid."
An extract (SG-291) prepared from saw palmetto fruits by
supercritical fluid extraction with carbon dioxide was reported to
inhibit both cyclooxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase in vitro (ICso
28.1 pg/mL and 18.0pg/mL, respectively).°° Further study
indicated that the component(s) of saw palmetto extract that
inhibits these enzymes must be within the acidic lipophilic
fraction. Subsequent studies have documented that a liposterolic
extract of saw palmetto (Permixon) significantly inhibited the
production of S-lipoxygenase metabolites, including leukotriene

Low

B,, by human polymorphonuclear neutrophils at concentrations
of saw palmetto extract of 5 pg/mL and above.°”

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics Some data on the pharmacokinetics of saw
palmetto extracts in healthy male volunteers (1 = 12) come from
an open, randomised, single-dose bioequivalence study of a 320-
mg capsule of a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto compared
with two capsules of saw palmetto extract 160 mg as the reference
preparation.)
reported to be almost identical for both preparations. The
maximum concentration (Cy,ax) for saw palmetto extract 320-mg
capsule and 2 x 160-mg capsules was 2.54-2.61 g/mL and 2.57—
2.67 g/mL, respectively, and time to Cyrax (Tmax) Was 1.58 and 1.5
hours for the 320-mg capsule and 2 x 160-mg capsules,
respectively. Another study explored the bioavailability and
pharmacokinetic profile of a rectal formulation of saw palmetto
extract 640 mg in healthy male volunteers (7 = 12).°°) The mean
maximum plasma concentration of the second component of saw
palmetto was almost 2.6 tg/mL at around three hours after drug
administration.

The plasma concentration-time curves were

Pharmacodynamics The inhibitory effects of saw palmetto
extract on 5-a-reductase activity documented in vitro (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies) have been
confirmed in some studies in humans, and refuted by others.

In one study, 25 men with symptomatic, established BPH were
randomised to receive either a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto
(Permixon) 320 mg/day for three months (7 = 10), or no treatment
(n = 15).°% At the end of the treatment period, analysis of
samples of BPH tissue, obtained by suprapubic prostatectomy,
showed that dihydrotestosterone concentrations were significantly
reduced and that testosterone concentrations were significantly
higher in the treatment group, compared with the control group (p
< 0.001 for both). A significant reduction in concentrations of
epidermal growth factor in total BPH tissue was also observed in
the treatment group, compared with the control group (p < 0.01).
The reported biochemical effects were most evident in BPH tissue
from the periurethral region.

In another study, biopsy specimens of the prostate were taken
from 44 men with symptomatic BPH participating in a
randomised, placebo-controlled trial of a herbal combination
preparation containing saw palmetto lipoidal extract 106mg
together with nettle root extract, pumpkin seed oil, lemon
bioflavonoid extract and vitamin A.°°*°
statistically significant differences in median tissue dihydrotestos-
terone and testosterone concentrations between the treatment and
placebo groups at baseline. At the end of the study, mean tissue
dihydrotestosterone concentrations decreased significantly in the
treatment group, compared with baseline values (p = 0.005),
whereas there was no significant change in dihydrotestosterone
concentrations in the placebo group. However, in a separate
analysis, it was reported that the median change in tissue
dihydrotestosterone concentrations for the treatment group
(1.38 ng/g) did not differ significantly from the corresponding
change in the placebo group (0.87 ng/g). The findings of this study
should be interpreted cautiously as it is possible there are other
explanations for the observed effect.

Another randomised, double-blind trial involving 18 men with
BPH compared saw palmetto extract (IDS-89; Strogen) 640 mg
three times daily (i.e. six times the normal dose) for three months
with placebo.°” This high dose of saw palmetto extract achieved
only a moderate decrease in 5-o-reductase activity.

An open, randomised, placebo-controlled study involving 32
healthy male volunteers compared the effects of a liposterolic
extract of saw palmetto (Permixon) 80mg twice daily for seven
days with those of finasteride Smg daily for seven days on
inhibition of 5-c-reductase activity.°* Serum dihydrotestosterone
concentrations were reported to decrease significantly with
finasteride, compared with baseline values, but no significant
changes were ob:
Thus, this study did not support a mechanism of action for saw
palmetto in BPH by inhibition of 5-a-reductase activity.

In addition, in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, four-way,
crossover study in which 12 healthy male volunteers received three
different saw palmetto extract preparations (Prostagutt uno,
Prostess uno, Talso uno; 320 mg daily for eight days each,
separated by wash-out phases of at least two weeks), none of the
study medications showed signs of o-adrenoceptor subtype
occupancy as determined by a radioreceptor assay.°””

Effects of saw palmetto fruit extract on certain cytokines have
also been described. In an open, randomised, multicentre study, 30
men with BPH received a liposterolic extract of Serenoa repens
(Permixon) 160 mg twice daily for three months before undergoing
surgery, or to no treatment for three weeks before undergoing

There were no

srved for the saw palmetto and placebo groups.

----- PAGE 536 -----
surgery.)

treatment period, prostatic tissue concentrations of the cytokines
TNF-« and interleukin-1B were significantly lower in Permixon
recipients, compared with participants in the no-treatment control
group (p = 0.012 and 0.004, respectively). No significant
differences were observed, however, in concentrations of IL-6,
TGF (transforming growth factor) or EGF (epidermal growth
factor).

The effects of a combination preparation containing 106 mg of
a lipoidal extract of saw palmetto, as well as nettle root extract,
pumpkin seed oil, lemon bioflavonoid extract and vitamin A, were
assessed in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving 40 men with symptomatic BPH." At the end of the six-
month study, 23/60 and 25/60 nuclear morphometric descriptors
(NMDs) for nuclei of 200 randomly selected epithelial cells were
altered, compared with baseline characteristics, in prostatic ti
from men in the treatment group and placebo groups, respectively.
A statistically significant multivariate change from baseline in
NMDs was apparent for the treatment group but not the placebo
group. These preliminary data may reflect effects such as
alterations in gene expression, but this and the contribution of
the saw palmetto extract, require testing in further studies.“

It was stated that at the end of the three-month

ue

Therapeutic effects Numerous clinical studies have investigated
the effects of saw palmetto extracts in men with BPH.

A systematic review and meta-analysis included 21 randomised
controlled clinical trials (18 of which were double-blind) of saw
palmetto extracts involving a total of 3139 men with BPH.“ This
work is an update of a previous Cochrane systematic review.»
The updated review included 12 studies which compared saw
palmetto extracts alone with placebo, four comparing saw
palmetto extracts in combination with other herbals with placebo,
two comparing saw palmetto extracts alone with an active
control, one comparing saw palmetto extracts in combination
with other herbals with an active control, one comparing saw
palmetto extract with another herb and with placebo, and one
comparing oral saw palmetto extract with a rectal formulation of
saw palmetto extract. The mean duration of the included studies
was 13 weeks (range 448 weeks).

Compared with placebo, saw palmetto extracts were associated
with a decrease in urinary symptom scores (weighted mean
difference (WMD), 95% confidence interval (CI): —1.41, —2.52 to
—0.30; one trial), nocturia (WMD, 95% Cl: —0.76, —1.21 to
—0.32; ten trials) and residual volume (WMD, 95% CI: —22.95,
—42.33 to —3.56; six trials), and improvements in peak urine flow
(WMD, 95% CI: 1.86, 0.60 to 3.12; nine trials), mean urine flow
(WMD, 95% CI: 2.23, 1.18 to 3.27; four trials) and physician and
self-rating of urinary symptoms (weighted risk ratio, 95% CI:
1.72, 1.11 to 2.66; three trials and 1.76, 1.21 to 2.54; six trials,
respectively).“” Saw palmetto extracts had no effect, however, on
prostate size.

Compared with finasteride, saw palmetto extracts (mono- and
combination preparations) achieved similar improvements in
urinary symptom scores, frequency of nocturia, peak urine flow,
mean urine flow and residual volume, but not prostate size.

The conclusions of the review were that there is evidence that
preparations containing saw palmetto improve urinary symptoms
and flow measures in men with BPH and that improvement is
similar to that achieved with finasteride. However, the review

included trials which assessed the effects of preparations contain-
ing saw palmetto alone and in combination with other herbal
ingredients, as well as saw palmetto preparations produced by
different manufacturers, which vary qualitatively and quantita-

Saw Palmetto

tively in their phytochemical composition (although at least eight
studies involved one particular saw palmetto product). The results
of the trials discussed above cannot necessarily be transferred to
other saw palmetto products unless they are pharmaceutically and
bioequivalent.

Another systematic review and meta-analysis included only
trials involving a particular saw palmetto extract (Permixon) in

men with BPH. The review included 14 randomised controlled
(42)

ie:

trials (several of which were included in the Cochrane review
described above), of which nine were placebo-controlled, four
compared Permixon with standard drugs (finasteride, tamsulosin,
prazosin, alfuzosin) and one compared two doses of Permixon;
the remaining three were open, uncontrolled studies. The meta-
analysis found similar results to that of the Cochrane review:
compared with placebo, Permixon resulted in a_ significant
improvement in peak flow rate and a reduction in nocturia, and
a five-point reduction in International Prostate Symptom Scale
(IPSS) score.“ Data from an unpublished study included in the
meta-analysis have recently been published.4"*

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
100 men with BPH published since the Cochrane review found no
statistically significant effects for a carbon dioxide extract of S.
repens 320 mg daily on symptoms of BPH as assessed using IPSS
scores, peak urinary flow rate and the International Index of
Erectile Function questionnaire.) A sample size calculation was
used in determining the size of the study, so it seems unlikely that
the trial did not have sufficient statistical power to detect a
difference between groups. This finding is in contrast to findings
from previous studies, and warrants further investigation,
particularly with respect to the phytochemical composition of
the extract relative to that of other preparations for which
significant effects on symptoms of BPH have been described.
Another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial not
included in the Cochrane review assessed the effects of a

combination preparation containing saw palmetto complex
(standardised for 40-50% free fatty acids and f-sitosterol 43%),
cernitin (a pollen mixture comprising rye, timothy and corn) and
vitamin E two 'pills' daily (equivalent to total daily doses of saw
palmetto and f-sitosterol 286mg, cernitin 378mg, vitamin E
1001U and f-sitosterol) for 90 days in 144 men with symptoms of
BPH. At the end of the study, statistically significant differences
were reported for the treatment group, compared with placebo, in
nocturia, urinary frequency and total American Urological
Association symptom score."

Several other clinical studies of saw palmetto extracts in BPH
have been conducted although these di
criteria for the Cochrane review.

In a study involving 75 men with mild/moderate BPH according
to their International Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS), participants
received a liposterolic extract of saw palmetto (Permixon) 160 mg
twice daily for nine weeks (n = 57). A control group (1 = 18)
did not receive any medical treatment for BPH, and there was no
random allocation to treatment, although it was stated that
baseline parameters were comparable between the two groups. It
was reported that, at the end of the study, IPSS and quality-of-life
scores, compared with baseline values, significantly improved in
Permixon-treated men (p < 0.001). There were no significant
differences in these parameters, compared with baseline values,
for the control group.

Two randomised studies involving men with symptomatic BPH
have compared the effects of different regimens of saw palmetto
(05) A multi-centre, randomised, single-blind trial
involving 132 men with BPH compared the effects of saw palmetto

not meet the inclusion

extract.

----- PAGE 537 -----
Saw Palmetto

extract (Prostaserene) 320 mg once daily with 160 mg twice daily
for one year.°° Another study compared a liposterolic extract of
saw palmetto (Permixon) 320 mg daily with 160 mg twice daily for
three months in 100 men with symptomatic BPH.°! For each
regimen, both studies reported significant improvements in the
mean IPSS, maximum and mean urinary flow rates and residual
urine volume, at the end of the studies, compared with baseline
values. However, as these studies did not include a placebo-control
group, the possibility that the observed effects are placebo effects
cannot be excluded.

Several open, uncontrolled studies of saw palmetto extracts
(alone or in combination with other herbs), several of which were
drug-monitoring studies which also assessed effectiveness, have
reported improvements in symptoms of BPH at the end of
treatment, compared with baseline values.°? ©
these studies were usually 160 mg two or three times daily for up
to three years. These studies are discussed in more detail later (see
Side-effects, Toxicity).

A small number of studies have explored the effects of saw
palmetto extracts in disorders other than BPH. In a single-blind,
controlled trial, 64 men with USA National Institutues of Health
category III prostatitis (chronic pelvic pain syndrome) were
randomised to receive saw palmetto extract 325mg daily (not
further specified), or finasteride 5 mg daily, for one year.” At the
end of the study, the proportion of participants with a statistically
significant improvement in Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index
score was higher for finasteride, compared with placebo (65%
versus 24%; p < 0.02).

The effects of a softgel capsule preparation containing saw
palmetto extract 200mg (standardised for 85-95% liposterolic
content) and f-sitosterol 50mg in the treatment of androgenetic
alopecia (which affe men and women) were assessed in a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot trial.* In the
study, 26 men aged 23 to 64 years with mild-to-moderate
androgenetic alopecia received one softgel capsule, or placebo,
twice daily for up to 21 weeks (precise duration of treatment not
stated). Overall, 19 men completed the study and, for these,
investigator-assessed hair growth was deemed to be improved in a
greater proportion of those who received the active treatment,
compared with those who received placebo (60% versus 11%),
although no statistical tests were undertaken. With respect to
participants’ self- ment of their hair condition, none of the
active treatment recipients thought their condition had deterio-
rated, compared with 33% of placebo recipients. The hypothesis
that saw palmetto extract (with P-sitosterol) is beneficial in
androgenetic alopecia requires testing in well-designed rando-
mised controlled trials.

Saw palmetto is one of the eight herbal ingredients contained in
a commercial preparation known as PC-SPES; the other herbal
ingredients were stated as being chrysanthemum, isatis, licorice,
Ganoderma lucidum, Panax pseudoginseng, Rabdosia rubescens
and Scutellaria (scullcap). The combination preparation has been
investigated for oestrogenic activity, and for its potential effects in
the treatment of hormone-sensitive prostate cancer. In a

” Doses assessed in

randomised, controlled, crossover trial, 90 men with androgen-
independent prostate cancer received three capsules of PC-SPES
three times daily, or diethylstilbestrol 3 mg once daily. Participants
crossed to the other arm of the study on reaching clinical or
prostate-specific antigen progression. The median times to
progression for PC-SPES and diethylstilboestrol were 5.5 and 2.9
months, respectively.6° However, the study was terminated
prematurely because PC-SPES was withdrawn from the market
after being found to be contaminated with diethylstilbesterol and

radiol. Other contaminants, including warfarin and
25, 26)

ethinyles
indometacin have also been reported.’

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

A systematic review and meta-analysis included 21 randomised
controlled clinical trials (18 of which were double-blind) of saw
palmetto extracts involving a total of 3139 men with BPH (see
Clinical studies, Therapeutic effects). Of these,12_ studies
compared saw palmetto extracts alone with placebo; the mean
duration of all included studies was 13 weeks (range 448 weeks).
The review found that the frequency and type of adverse events
reported for saw palmetto extracts were similar to those reported
for placebo. There were no statistically significant differences
between participant withdrawal rates for saw palmetto, placebo
and finasteride (8.9, 7.1 and 9.0%, respectively; p = 0.17 for saw
palmetto versus placebo and p = 1.0 for saw palmetto versus
finasteride), and in the frequency of gastrointestinal adverse events
(1.3, 0.9, 1.5%, respectively; p > 0.5 for saw palmetto versus
finasteride). Impotence was reported more frequently by finaster-
ide recipients than by saw palmetto recipients, or placebo
recipients (4.9, 1.1 and 0.7%, respectively; p < 0.001 for saw
palmetto versus finasteride and p= 0.58 for saw palmetto versus
placebo). Clinical trials, however, are designed primarily to
assess efficacy, not safety, and have the statistical power only to
detect common acute adverse effects.

Several post-marketing surveillance type studies involving over
4000 men with BPH have assessed the safety and tolerability of
different saw palmetto extracts taken at recommended doses and
have also found preparations to be well-tolerated. Studies
conducted to date have, however, assessed the effects of several
different preparations of saw palmetto extract; these are likely to
vary qualitatively and quantitatively in their pharmaceutical
quality, and the implications of this for safety of specific products
should be considered. Some studies have monitored the effects of
longer term treatment (one to three years) with saw palmetto
preparations, but further well-designed post-marketing surveil-
lance studies are necessary to assess the safety of use of saw
palmetto fruit extracts in men with BPH for even longer periods.
To date, almost all clinical studies of saw palmetto fruit products
have involved men only, so there is a lack of information on the
safety of saw palmetto fruit preparations when used by women
(for example, for androgenetic alopecia and other conditions such
as acne).

In a drug-monitoring study involving 1334 men with BPH, the
tolerability of saw palmetto extract 160mg twice daily for 12
weeks was reported to be 'good' or ‘excellent’ by more than 95% of
participants.°”) This is similar to a finding from a three-year
prospective, uncontrolled study involving 435 men with BPH, in
which the tolerability of saw palmetto extract (IDS-89) 160mg
twice daily was classified as 'good' or ‘very good' by both
physicians and patients for 98% of participants.” A total of 46
adverse events was reported in 34 patients. Of these, 30% were
gastrointestinal disturbances. The withdrawal rate from the study
was 1.8%, mostly because of digestive disturbances (7 = 3) and
tumours (1 = 3). Non-serious adverse effects (4.95-6.63%),
mainly minor gastrointestinal effects, such as gastralgia, nausea,
diarrhoea, constipation and anorexia, as well as vertigo, headache,
dry mouth and pruritus, were reported in an open study involving
413 men with BPH who received saw palmetto extract 160mg
twice daily for three months.°*) An observational study involving

----- PAGE 538 -----
2080 patients with BPH who received a combination of saw
palmetto extract (WS-1473) and nettle root extract (WS-1031)
reported that the tolerability of the preparation was classified by
physicians to be 'good' or 'very good' for the majority of
participants. Mild adverse effects were reported in 15 patients
(0.72%).

Studies assessing the equivalence of two different regimens of
saw palmetto extract (320 mg once daily and 160 mg twice daily)
report that adverse events occurred with a similar frequency in
both groups."
unlikely to be related to treatment with saw palmetto extract.

In a small obervational study involving 155 men with BPH who
received a lipidosterolic extract of saw palmetto (Permixon)
160 mg twice daily for two years, 10 adverse events (including four
cardiovascular events; not further specified), none of which were
considered to be related to saw palmetto, were reported by nine
participants (5.8%).° However, the study did not involve
sufficient numbers of participants to have the statistical power
to detect rare adverse effects.

’ Most events were deemed to be unrelated or

An isolated report describes a 53-year-old white man with a
meningioma who experienced a bleeding episode during resection
of the tumour.‘ The man lost around two litres of blood before
the haemorrhage was stopped using standard treatments.
Laboratory values for prothrombin time and activated partial
thromboplastin time were reported to be within normal ranges,
although the bleeding time when measured after surgery was
found to be 21 minutes (normal range reported to be 2-10
minutes). The bleeding normalised over the next five days. The
patient stated that he had not taken non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory agents before undergoing surgery, but said he had
been taking saw palmetto for BPH. The authors of the report
stated that the prolonged bleeding time was 'probably' due to
cyclooxygenase inhibition caused by saw palmetto and affecting
platelets. However, this case relies on the patient's self-report of
saw palmetto use, no details of the saw palmetto product
implicated were provided in a report of the case, and no analysis
of the product was undertaken. Causality has not been
established.

The World Health Organization's Uppsala Monitoring Centre
(WHO-UMC; Collaborating Centre for International Drug
Monitoring) receives summary reports of suspected adverse drug
reactions from national pharmacovigilance centres of over 70
countries worldwide. To the end of the year 2005, the WHO-
UMC's Vigisearch database contained a total of 187 reports,
describing a total of 313 adverse reactions, for products reported
to contain S. repens only as the active ingredient (see Table 1).
This number may include the case reports described above.
Reports originated from several different countries.

Toxicity Incubation of high concentrations of saw palmetto
extract (Permixon) 9.0 mg/mL for 48 hours inhibited sperm
motility, compared with control.“ Cytotoxic activity has been
described for saw palmetto fruit extracts and certain individual
constituents in vitro (see Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and
animal studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

None specified. BPH, the main intended use for saw palmetto, is
not suitable for self-treatment.

Drug interactions In view of the reported anti-androgen and
oestrogenic activities, the possibility that saw palmetto extracts
could affect concurrent hormonal therapy, including the oral

Saw Palmetto

contraceptive pill and hormone replacement therapy, should be
considered. Drug interaction studies involving small numbers of
healthy volunteers who received saw palmetto extracts have
indicated that 14 or 28 days’ oral administration of saw palmetto
extract 320mg daily (equivalent to 396mg non-esterified fatty
acids and 6.3mg -sitosterol daily, or 277mg non-esterified
fatty acids daily) did not influence the activity of the
cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP2D6, and CYP 3A4,°°°° and
also CYP1A2 and CYP2E1.°°

Table 1 Summary of spontaneous reports (n = 187) of suspected
adverse drug reactions associated with single-ingredient Serenoa
repens preparations held in the Vigisearch database of the World
Health Organization’s Uppsala Monitoring Centre for the period up
to end of 2005°**»)

Application site disorders 1

Body as a whole — general disorders. Including asthenia (5) 22

Cardiovascular disorders, general. Including hypertension (4) 6

Central and peripheral nervous system disorders. Including 19
dizziness (3); headache (4); paraesthesia (3)

Endocrine disorders. Including gynaecomastia (9) 10

Gastrointestinal system disorders. Including abdominal pain 76
(11); diarrhoea (9); dyspepsia (18); eructation (3);
flatulence (4); nausea (11); vomiting (8)

Heart rate and rhythm disorders. Including atrial fibrillation 15
(3); tachycardia (3)

Liver and biliary system disorders. Including hepatitis, 15
cholestatic (4)
Metabolic and nutritional disorders. Including alkaline 9

phosphatase increased (3); weight decrease (3)

Musculo-skeletal system disorders.

Myoendopericardial and valve disorders

2
1
Neoplasm 1
Platelet, bleeding and clotting disorders. 8

Psychiatric disorders. Including confusion (3); impotence 33
(11); libido decreased (8)

Red blood cell disorders. 4

Reproductive disorders, female and male. Including testis 7
disorder (3)

Respiratory system disorders. Including dyspnoea (4) 7

Skin and appendages disorders. Including eczema (3); 37
pruritus (6); rash (3); rash, erythematous (3); rash,
psoriaform (5); urticaria (5)

Special senses other, disorders. 2

Urinary system disorders. Including urinary retention (4) 18

Vascular (extracardiac) disorders. 3

White cell and res disorders. Including granulocytopenia (3) 6

Other reactions described using terms not included in database 11

Total number of suspected adverse drug reactions 313

*Specific reactions described where n = 3 or more

Caveat statement. These data were obtained from the Vigisearch database
held by the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring,
Uppsala, Sweden. The information is not homogeneous at least with respect to
origin or likelihood that the pharmaceutical product caused the adverse
reaction. Any information included in this report does not represent the
opinion of the World Health Organization

----- PAGE 539 -----
Saw Palmetto

Habib FK, Wyllie MG. Not all brands are created equal: a comparison
of selected components of different brands of Serenoa repens extract.
Prostate Canc Prostatic Dis 2004; 7: 195-200.

7 Weisser H et al. Effects of the Sabal serrulata extract IDS 89 and its
subfractions on 5-a-reductase activity in human benign prostatic

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of saw palmetto has not 6
been established. In view of the lack of toxicity data and the
documented hormonal activity, the use of saw palmetto during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Keracnyl; Keracnyl; Sabal. Germany: Cefasabal; Granu Fi
Prosta; Nephroselect M; Prostagutt forte. Hong Kong: Phyto-
Ease; Prostease; Urgenin. Israel: Urgenin. Italy: Biothymus M.
Urto; Prostaplant. Malaysia: Total Man. Mexico: Prosgutt.
Portugal: Efluvium Anti-caspa; Efluvium Anti-seborreico;
Spasmo-Urgenin. Singapore: Palmetto Plus. Spain: Neo
Urgenin; Spasmo-Urgenin; Urgenin. Switzerland: Granu Fink
Prosta; Prosta-Caps Chassot N; Prostagutt-K Thailand:
Spasmo-Urgenin. UK: Antiglan; Daily Fatigue Relief; Damiana
and Kola Tablets; Elixir Damiana and Saw Palmetto; Prostaid;
Regina Royal Concorde; Roberts Black Willow Compound
Tablets; Strength; Strength Tablets; Supa-Tonic Tablets. USA:
ProstatExcell; Prostate Health.

References

1 Wagner H, Flachsbarth H. A new antiphlogistic principle from Sabal
serrulata, |. Planta Med 1981; 41: 244-251.

2 Shimada H e¢ al. Biologically active acylglycerides from the berries of
saw palmetto (Serenoa repens). J Nat Prod 1997; 60: 417-418.

3. Schépflin G et al. B-Sitosterin als méglicher Wirkstoff der
Sabalfriichte. Planta Med 1966; 14: 402-407.

4 Hansel R et al. Eine Diinnschichtchromatographische Untersuchung
der Sabalfriichte. Planta Med 1964; 12: 169-172.

5S Bombardelli E, Morazzoni P. Serenoa repens (Bartram) J.K. Small.
Fitoterapia 1997; 68: 99-113.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

17

18

19

20

21

24

27

28

29

30

hyperplasia. Prostate 1996; 28: 300-306.
Palin M-F et al. Inhibitory effects of Serenoa repens on the kinetic of
pig prostatic microsomal Sa-reductase activity. Endocrine 1998; 9: 65—
69.

Bayne CW et al. Serenoa repens (Permixon’): a So-reductase types |
and II inhibitor — new evidence in a coculture model of BPH. Prostate
1999; 40: 232-241.

Bayne CW et al. The selectivity and specificity of the actions of the
lipido-sterolic extract of Serenoa repens (Permixon’) on the prostate.
J Urol 2000; 164: 876-881.

Carilla E et al. Binding of permixon, a new treatment for prostatic
benign hyperplasia, to the cytosolic androgen receptor in the rat
prostate. ] Steroid Biochem 1984; 20: 521-523.

Sultan C et al. Inhibition of androgen metabolism and binding by a
liposterolic extract of 'Serenoa repens B' in human foreskin fibroblasts.
J Steroid Biochem 1984; 20: 515-519.

Diiker E-M et al. Inhibition of 5-c-reductase activity by extracts from
Sabal serrulata. Planta Med 1989; 55: 587.

Paubert-Braquet M et al. Effect of Serenoa repens extract (Permixon’)
on estradiol/testosterone-induced experimental prostate enlargement
in the rat. Pharmacol Res 1996; 34: 171-179.

Van Coppenolle F e¢ al. Pharmacological effects of the lipidosterolic
extract of Serenoa repens (Permixon ) on rat prostate hyperplasia
induced by hyperprolactinaemia: comparison with finasteride.
Prostate 2000; 43: 49-58.

Barsanti JA et al. Effects of an extract of Serenoa repens on dogs with
hyperplasia of the prostate gland. Am J Vet Res 2000; 61: 880-885.
Oki T et al. Effects of saw palmetto extract on micturition reflex of
rats and its autonomic receptor binding activity. J Urol 2005; 173:
1395-1399.

Gutiérrez M et al. Spasmolytic activity of a lipidic extract from Sabal
serrulata fruits: further study of the mechanisms underlying this
activity. Planta Med 1996; 62: 507-511.

Odenthal KP. Phytotherapy of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)
with Cucurbita, Hypoxis, Pygeum, Urtica and Sabal serrulata
(Serenoa repens). Phytother Res 1996; 10: $141-$143.
Paubert-Braquet M et al. Effect of the lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa
repens (Permixon’) and its major components on basic fibroblast
growth factor-induced proliferation of cultures of human prostate
biopsies. Eur Urol 1998; 33: 340-347.

Vachero F et al. Induction of apoptosis and inhibition of cell
proliferation by the lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa repens (LSEr,
Permixon’) in benign prostatic hyperplasia. Prostate 2000; 45: 259-
266.

Iguchi K et al. Myristoleic acid, a cytotoxic component in the extract
from Serenoa repens, induces apoptosis and necrosis in human
prostatic LNCaP cells. Prostate 2001; 47: 59-65.

Ravenna L et al. Effects of the lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa repens
(Permixon’) on human prostatic cell lines. Prostate 1996; 29: 219-230.
Ishii K et al. Extract from Serenoa repens suppresses the invasion
activity of human urological cancer cells by inhibiting urokinase-type
plasminogen activator. Biol Pharm Bull 2001; 24: 188-190.

Sovak M et al. Herbal composition PC-SPES for management of
prostate cancer: identification of active principles. J Nat Canc Inst
2002; 94: 1275-1281.

Sadava D, Winesburg J. Contaminants of PC-SPES are not responsible
for cytotoxicity in human small-cell lung carcinomas. Cancer Lett
2005; 220(2): 171-175.

Elghamry MI, Hansel R. Activity and isolated phytoestrogen of shrub
palmetto fruits (Serenoa repens Small), a new estrogenic plant.
Experientia 1969; 25: 828-829.

Stenger A et al. Pharmacology and biochemistry of hexane extract of
Serenoa repens. Gazz Med Fr 1982; 89: 2041-2048.

‘Wagner H et al. A new antiphlogistic principle from Sabal serrulata Il.
Planta Med 1981, 41: 252-258.

Breu W et al. Antiphlogistic activity of an extract from Sabal serrulata
fruits prepared by supercritical carbon dioxide: in vitro inhibition of

----- PAGE 540 -----
31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

cyclooxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase metabolism.
Arzneimittelforschung 1992; 42: 547-551.

Paubert-Braquet M et al. Effect of the lipidic lipidosterolic extract of
Serenoa repens (Permixon’) on the ionophore A23187-stimulated
production of leukotriene By (LTB4) from human polymorphonuclear
neutrophils. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1997; 57: 299-
304,

De Bernardi di Valserra M et al. Serenoa repens capsules: a
bioequivalence study. Acta Toxicol Ther 1994; 15: 21-39.

De Bernardi di Valserra M, Tripodi AS. Rectal bioavailability and
pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers of Serenoa repens new
formulation. Arch Med Intern 1994; 46: 77-86.

Di Silverio F et al. Effects of long-term treatment with Serenoa repens
(Permixon") on the concentrations and regional distribution of
androgens and epidermal growth factor in benign prostatic
hyperplasia. Prostate 1998; 37: 77-83.

Marks LS e¢ al. Tissue effects of saw palmetto and finasteride: use of
biopsy cores for in situ quantification of prostatic androgens. Urology
2001; 57: 999-1005.

Marks LS et al. Effects of a saw palmetto herbal blend in men with
symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia. J Urol 2000; 163: 1451—
1456.

Weisser H et al. Enzyme activities in tissue of human benign prostatic
hyperplasia after three months’ treatment with the Sabal serrulata
extract IDS 89 (Strogen’) or placebo. Eur Urol 1997; 31: 97-101.
Strauch G et al. Comparison of finasteride (Proscar’) and Serenoa
repens (Permixon’ ) in the inhibition of 5-alpha-reductase in healthy
male volunteers. Eur Urol 1994; 26: 247-252.

Goepel M et al. Do saw palmetto extracts block human o&)-
adrenoceptor subtypes in vivo? Prostate 2001; 46: 226-232.

Vela Navarrete R et al. BPH and inflammation: pharmacological
effects of Permixon on histological and molecular inflammatory
markers. Results of a double-blind pilot clinical assay. European Urol
2003; 44: 549-555.

Veltri RW et al. Saw palmetto alters nuclear measurements reflecting
DNA content in men symptomatic BPH: evidence for a possible
molecular mechanism. Urology 2002; 60: 617-622.

Wilt T et al. Serenoa repens for benign prostatic hyperplasia (review).
The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2002, Issue 3. Art.
No.: CD001423.

Wilt TJ et al. Serenoa repens for treatment of benign prostatic
hyperplasia. In: The Cochrane Library, Issue 3, 2001. Oxford: Update
Software.

Boyle P et al. Updated meta-analysis of clinical trials of Serenoa repens
extract in the treatment of symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia.
BJU International 2004; 93: 751-756.

Debruyne F et al. Comparison of a phytotherapeutic agent (Permixon)
with an a-blocker (tamsulosin) in the treatment of benign prostatic
hyperplasia: a 1-year randomized international study. European Urol
2002; 41: 497-507.

Debruyne F et al. Evaluation of the clinical benefit of Permixon and
tamsulosin in severe BPH patients —- PERMAL study subset analysis.
European Urol 2004; 45: 773-780.

Willetts KE et al. Serenoa repens extract for benign prostate
hyperplasia: a randomized controlled trial. BJU International 2003;
92: 267-270.

Preuss HG e¢ al. Randomized trial of a combination of natural
products (cernitin, saw palmetto, B-sitosterol, vitamin E) on

49

50

S1

52

53

54

5S

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

Saw Palmetto

symptoms of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Int Urol Nephrol
2001; 33: 217-225.

Al-Shukri SH et al. Early urodynamic effects of the lipido-sterolic
extract of Serenoa repens (Permixon’) in patients with lower urinary
tract symptoms due to benign prostatic hyperplasia. Prostate Cancer
Prostatic Dis 2000; 3: 195-199.

Braeckman J et al. Efficacy and safety of the extract of Serenoa repens
in the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia: therapeutic
equivalence between twice and once daily dosage forms. Phytother Res
1997; 11: 558-563.

Stepanov VN et al. Efficacy and tolerability of the lipidosterolic
extract of Serenoa repens (Permixon’ ) in benign prostatic hyperplasia:
a double-blind comparison of two dosage regimens. Adv Ther 1999;
16: 231-241.

Gerber GS e¢ al. Saw palmetto (Serenoa repens) in men with lower
urinary tract symptoms: effects on urodynamic parameters and
voiding symptoms. Urology 1998; 51: 1003-1007.

Braeckman J et al. Efficacy and safety of the extract of Serenoa repens
in the treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia: an open multicentre
study. Eur J Clin Res 1997; 9: 47-57.

Bach D, Ebeling L. Long-term drug treatment of benign prostatic
hyperplasia — results of a prospective 3-year multicenter study using
Sabal extract IDS 89. Phytomedicine 1996; 3: 105-111.

Vahlensieck W et al. Benigne Prostatahyperplasie — Behandlung mit
Sabalfrucht-Extrakt. Fort schritte Ther 1993; 18: 4548.

Schneider H-J et al. Behandlung der benignen Prostatahyperplasie.
Fortschritte Ther 1995; 3: 37-40.

Kaplan SA et al. A prospective, 1-year trial using saw palmetto versus

finasteride in the treatment of category III prostatitis/chronic pelvic
pain syndrome. J Urol 2004; 171: 284-288.

Prager N et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
to determine the effectiveness of botanically derived inhibitors of 5-a-
reductase in the treatment of androgenetic alopecia. J] Alt Comp Med
2002; 8: 143-152.

DiPaola RS et al. Clinical and biological activity of an estrogenic
herbal combination (PC-SPES) in prostate cancer. N Engl ] Med 1998;
339: 785-791.

Oh WK et al. Prospective, multicenter, randomized phase II trial of the
herbal supplement, PC-SPES, and diethylstilboestrol in patients with
androgen-independent prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 2004; 22(18):
3705-3712.

Pytel YA et al. Long-term clinical and biologic effects of the
lipidosterolic extract of Serenoa repens in patients with symptomatic
benign prostatic hyperplasia. Adv Ther 2002; 19: 297-306.

Cheema P et al. Intraoperative haemorrhage associated with the use of
saw palmetto herb: a case report and review of literature. J Int Med
2001; 250: 167-169.

Uppsala Monitoring Centre. Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions
database (accessed 6 January, 2006).

Ondrizek RR et al. Inhibition of human sperm motility by specific
herbs used in alternative medicine. J Assist Reprod Genet 1999; 16:
87-91.

Markowitz JS et al. Multiple doses of saw palmetto (Serenoa repens)
did not alter cytochrome P450 2D6 and 3A4 activity in normal
volunteers. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2003; 74: 536-542.

Gurley BJ et al. In vivo assessment of botanical supplementation of
human cytochrome P450 phenotypes: Citrus aurantium, Echinacea
purpurea, milk thistle and saw palmetto. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004;
76: 428-440.

----- PAGE 541 -----
Scullcap

species. Hepatitis has been associated with germander
(Teucrium chamaedrys). Hepatotoxicity has resulted in
humans taking commercially available remedies in the UK
which are stated to contain scullcap. In view of the possibility
of contamination, and the lack of pharmacological
information, it would seem advisable to avoid ingestion of
scullcap.

Species (Family)

*Scutellaria lateriflora L.
+S. baicalensis Georgi (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)

*Helmet Flower, Hoodwort, Quaker Bonnet, Scutellaria, Skullcap
+S. lanceolaria Miq., S. macrantha Fisch., Huang Qin

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996)
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G20 and G60.

Limited information has been documented regarding the
constituents of S. lateriflora and S. baicalensis.

Flavonoids Apigenin, hispidulin, luteolin, scutellarein, scutel-
larin (bitter glycoside).

Iridoids Catalpol.

Volatile oils Limonene, terpineol (monoterpenes); d-cadinene,
caryophyllene, ¢rans-B-farnesene, B-humulene (sesquiterpenes).

Other constituents Lignin, resin and tannin. S. baicalensis is
reported to contain baicalein, baicalin, chrysin, oroxylin A,
skullcapflavone II and wogonin.~

Other Scutellaria species The related species S. galericulata is
stated to contain apigenin, baicalein, baicalin, apigenin-7-gluco-
side and galeroside (baicalein-B-1-rhamnofuranoside).?

Food Use

Scullcap is not used in foods. Previously, scullcap has been listed
by the Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as a Herb of
Undefined Safety.”

Herbal Use

Scullcap is stated to possess anticonvulsant and sedative proper-
ties. °% Traditionally, it has been used for epilepsy, chorea,
hysteria, nervous tension states, and specifically for grand mal
epilepsy.” In Chinese herbal medicine, the roots of S. baicalensis
Georgi have been used traditionally as a remedy for inflammation,
suppurative dermatitis, allergic diseases, hyperlipidaemia and
atherosclerosis.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 1-2 as an infusion three times daily.‘©”

Flavonoids

Iridoids

=H
HOCH, O-glucose

scutellarein
(6-hydroxyapigenin)

catalpol

Monoterpenes

.

H HY:
S “MN

limonene OH — (+)-a-terpineol

Sesquiterpenes
8

HC an H Finny CH2
CHg=:
CHs
#-caryophyllene

Selected constituents of scullcap.

B-cadinene

Figure 1

----- PAGE 542 -----
Figure 2. Scullcap (Scutellaria lateriflora).

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”

Tincture 1-2 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.‘©”?

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Many investigations have been undertaken to study the pharma-
cological actions of S. baicalensis root. Documented actions have
primarily been attributed to the various flavonoid constituents and
include: in vitro inhibition of mast cell histamine release
comparable to disodium cromoglicate for some flavonoids; in
vitro cytotoxicity of scullcap flavone II; in vivo and in vitro
inhibition of lipid peroxidation;* in vitro inhibition of
lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase pathways; hypocholesterolae-
mic activity in rats." This in vivo effect has been linked to in
vitro actions documented for various flavonoids, including
prevention of ethanol-induced hyperlipidaemia," catechola-
mine-induced lipolysis"! and lipogenesis in adipose  tis-
sue;""' there is no pronounced effect on blood pressure in
cats and rabbits."'” In addition, the latter study found no CNS-
depressant and no antispasmodic activity. However, it did find
marked antibacterial activity against various Gram-positive
bacteria (e.g. Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli, Sarcina lutea
and Staphylococcus aureus).""»

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of scullcap
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Clinical investigation of scutellarin, a constituent of S.
lateriflora, involving 634 cases of cerebral thrombosis, cerebral
embolism, and paralysis caused by stroke has been undertaken.
An overall effective rate of more than 88% was reported following
intramuscular, intravenous or oral administration. However,
information from case series provides only a low level of clinical
evidence and the observed effects cannot be attributed definitively
to scutellarin.

Scullcap

Figure 3. Scullcap — dried drug substance (herb).

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for scullcap and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Symptoms caused by overdosage of scullcap tincture include
giddiness, stupor, confusion and_ seizures.'©? Hepatotoxic
reactions have been reported after ingestion of preparations
stated to contain scullcap;"> °°
cap herb by Teucrium species is recognised and several cases of
hepatitis have been associated with germander (Teucrium
chamaedrys).""

) however, adulteration of scull-

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented. In view of the possible hepatotoxicity
associated with scullcap preparations adulterated with germander,
its use is best avoided.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of scullcap to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Scullcap is stated to have been used
traditionally to eliminate a mother's afterbirth and to promote
menstruation.'©” Limited information is known regarding the
pharmacological activity and toxicity of scullcap. In view of this
and concerns over hepatotoxicity of adulterated preparations,
scullcap should not be taken during pregnancy and lactation.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Albizia Complex; Andrographis Compound;
Calmo; Euphrasia Compound; Feminine Herbal Complex;
Goodnight Formula; Nevaton; Pacifenity; Passiflora Complex;
Passionflower Plus; Relaxaplex; Valerian. Canada: Herbal
Nerve. UK: Fenneherb Newrelax; Herbal Indigestion Natur-
tabs; HRI Calm Life; Inflamol; Napiers Tension Tablets;
Newrelax; Nodoff; Quiet Days; Quiet Tyme; Scullcap &
Gentian Tablets; Sleepezy; St Johns wort Compound; Stress-
less; Vegetable Cough Remover; Wellwoman.

----- PAGE 543 -----
1

Scullcap

References

Kubo M et al. Scutellariae radix. X. Inhibitory effects of various
flavonoids on histamine release from rat peritoneal mast cells in vitro.
Chem Pharm Bull 1984; 32: 5051-5054.

Tomimori T et al. Studies on the constituents of Scutellarian species.
Yakugaku Zasshi 1985; 105: 148-15.
Tomimori T et al. Studies on the constituents of Scutellaria species.
VI. On the flavonoid constituents of the root of Scutellaria baicalensis
Georgi (5). Quantitative analysis of flavonoids in Scutellaria roots by
high-performance liquid chromatography. Yakugaku Zasshi 1985; 105:
148-155.

Popova TP et al. Chemical composition and medicinal properties of
Scutellaria galericulata. Farm Zh (Kiev) 1972; 27: 58-61.

Ryn SH et al. The cytotoxic principle of Scutellariae radix against
11210 cell. Planta Med 1985; 51: 355.

Kimura Y et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix; 1X. New component
inhibiting lipid peroxidation in rat liver. Planta Med 1984; 50: 290-
295.

Kimura Y et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix. IV. Effects on lipid
peroxidation in rat liver. Chem Pharm Bull 1981; 29: 2610-2617.
Kimura Y et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix. V1. Effects of flavanone
compounds on lipid peroxidation in rat liver. Chem Pharm Bull 1982;
30: 1792-1795.

10

1

12

13

14

1s

16

Kimura Y et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix. XIII. Effects of various
flavonoids on arachidonate metabolism in leukocytes. Planta Med
1985; 51: 132-136.

Kimura Y et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix. Ill. Effects on lipid
metabolism in serum, liver and fat cells of rats. Chem Pharm Bull
1981; 29: 2308-2312.

Kimura Y et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix. V. Effects on ethanol-
induced hyperlipidemia and lipolysis in isolated fat cells. Chem Pharm
Bull 1982; 30: 219-222.

Kurnakov BA. Pharmacology of skullcap. Farmakol i Toksikol 1957;
20: 79-80.

Kubo M et al. Studies on Scutellariae radix. Part I: The antibacterial
substance. Planta Med 1981; 43: 194-201.

Peigen X, Keji C. Recent advances in clinical studies of Chinese
medicinal herbs. 1. Drugs affecting the cardiovascular system.
Phytother Res 1987; 1: 53-57.

Perharic L et al. Toxicological problems resulting from exposure to
traditional remedies and food supplements. Drug Safety 1994; 11: 284—
294.

Larrey D et al. Hepatitis after germander (Teucrium chamaedrys)
administration: another instance of herbal medicine toxicity. Am Coll
Physicians 1992; 117: 129-132.

----- PAGE 544 -----
available. The activity of the saponins in animals supports the
herbal use for bronchitis. In view of the lack of toxicity data
and uncertainty regarding the risk associated with chronic
ingestion of haemolytic saponins, excessive use of senega,
and use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Polygala senega L. (Polygalaceae) and other closely related
Polygala species cultivated in western Canada and Japan.

Synonym(s)
Northern Senega (Canada), Polygala, Polygala senega var.

latifolia, Rattlesnake Root, Senega Root, Senega Snakeroot, Snake
Root

Part(s) Used

Root, rootstock

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0?)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C?)
ESCOP 2003079
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 20078?

G85)

Saponins

HO

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?)

Constituents

See Reference 1 and General References G2, G6, G20, G52, G59
and G62.

Acids Salicylic acid and its methyl ester 0.1-0.2%; hydroxycin-
namic acids (e.g. caffeic acid, ferulic acid, sinapic acid) free or
esterified with saponins.”

Carbohydrates Arabinose, fructose, glucose, melibiose, raffi-
nose, saccharose, stachyose, sucrose; 1,5-anhydro-p-glucitol and
other p-glucitol derivatives;>” trisaccharides; mucilage, pectin. A
series of oligosaccharide esters, senegoses A—O, containing acetic,
benzoic, trans- and cis-ferulic acid moieties linked to glucose and
fructose. Five acylated sucrose glycosides, tenuifolisides A-E,
have been isolated from P. tenuifolia.”*® The esterifying acids are
3,4,5-trimethoxycinnamic, p-hydroxybenzoic, sinapic and ferulic.

Terpenoids A complex mixture of bidesmosidic triterpene
saponins (6-10%) based on the aglycone presenegin. The total
saponin mixture may be referred to as senegin. The saponins of P.
senega var. latifolia are 3-glucosides of presenegin with tetra-,
penta- or hexa-glucosyl groups linked at C-28 and including 4’’-
methoxycinnamoyl or 3”,4’’-dimethoxycinnamoylfucosyl resulting
in E- and Z-cinnamoyl isomers of each saponin.” Senegins -
IV were the first saponins to be characterised and were E-
“21) P tenuifolia contains similar saponins named
onjisaponins A-G."* 19)

isomers.

Xanthones A number of xanthones have been isolated from P.
tenuifolia including 4-C-[B-p-apiofuranosyl-(1—+6)-B-p-glucopyr-
anosyl]-1,3,6-trihydroxy-7-methoxyxanthone.

CH,OH
°
HO

CH,O

fe)
OH
H

senegrin R' =R? =H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of senega.

----- PAGE 545 -----
Senega

Figure 2 Senega (Polygala senega).

Other constituents Fat, resin, sterols and valeric acid ester.

Other Polygala species Polygala paniculata contains coumarins
(aurapten, murrangatin, phebalosin and 7-methoxy-8-(1,4-di-
hydroxy-3-methyl-2-butenyl) coumarin,''® pyranocoumarin).”
Polygala chamaebuxus (European species) contains hydroxycin-
namic acid esters involving acetic, ferulic and sinapic acids as the
ester moieties, saponins, tenuifolin (prosapogenin), rutin (flavo-
noid glycoside), coniferin and syringen (phenolic glycosides).

Other European species (e.g. Polygala alpestris, Polygala
comosa, Polygala vayredae) contain complex mixtures of bi-
desmosidic saponins, tenuifolin (prosapogenin), hydroxycinnimic
acid esters similar to those reported for P. chamaebuxus.\'®
Polygala triphylla contains B-ring oxygen-free trioxygenated- and
glucosyloxy-xanthones."”) Polygala polygama contains podophyl-
lotoxin and demethylpodophyllotoxin (lignans).2

Food Use

Senega is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that senega
can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a possible
limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the final
product.(@!®

Herbal Use

Senega is stated to possess expectorant, diaphoretic, sialogogue
and emetic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
bronchitic asthma, chronic bronchitis, as a gargle for pharyngitis,
and specifically for chronic bronchitis.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried root 0.5-1.0g as an infusion three times daily.(C%°”
Senega Liquid Extract (BPC 1968) 0.3-1.0mL.

Senega Tincture (BPC 1968) 2.5-5.0mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Mucosal secretion Polygalic acid and senegin are stated to be
irritant to the gastrointestinal mucosa, and to cause a reflex
secretion of mucus in the bronchioles.’ °% “4° A fluid extract
of senega increased respiratory tract fluid secretion in guinea-pig,
cat and dog, but not in rabbit.'°

CNS-depressant activity CNS-depressant properties in mice
(e.g. reduction in spontaneous activity, inhibition of amfetamine
stimulation, potentiation of barbiturate-induced sleeping time,
and decrease in rectal temperature) have been documented for
Polygala microphylla.*” Similar properties have been reported for
Polygala tenuifolia and have been attributed to the saponin
constituents. A methanolic extract of P. tenuifolia, various
fractions and pure onjisaponins B, F and G prolonged hexobarbi-
tal sleeping time in mice.‘°*” Onjisaponin F produced sleep times
in mice of 33 and 35 minutes for doses of 5 and 20 mg/kg,
respectively, compared with 24 minutes for control and 42 minutes
for chlorpromazine hydrochloride (2 mg/kg).

Inhibition of alcohol absorption E,Z-senegin II and E,Z-
senagasaponins a and b from P. senega var. latifolia have potent
inhibitory effects on alcohol absorption in rats. E,Z-senegasapo-
nins a or b (100 mg/kg) administered orally to rats 1 hour after
20% aqueous ethanol (5mL/kg, orally) reduced blood alcohol
concentrations after 1 hour from 0.5mg/mL to 0.02 mg/mL.”
Under similar test conditions, E,Z-senegin II administration led to
a blood ethanol concentration of 0.09 mg/mL.

Hypoglycaemic activity Senegin II and E,Z-senegasaponins a
and b have significant hypoglycaemic effects in rodents.” Senegin
II (2.5 mg/kg, intraperitoneally) reduced blood glucose concentra-
tions in normal mice from 220 mg/dL to 131 mg/dL 4 hours after
administration and also significantly lowered blood glucose
concentrations in KK-Ay mice from 434mg/dL to 142 mg/dL
under similar test conditions (p < 0.001, compared with control,
for both studies). In glucose tolerance tests in rats, administration
of E,Z-senegasaponins a and b (100mg/kg, orally) resulted in
glucose concentrations of 107-123mg/mL after 30 minutes
compared with 156 mg/mL in control animals (p < 0.01).

Hypolipidaemic activity Seven hours after administration of an
n-butanol fraction of a methanolic extract of P. senega var. latifolia
containing senegin II (5mg/kg, intraperitoneally), the mean

Figure 3. Senega — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 546 -----
(standard deviation) blood triglyceride concentration was 65 (9)
mg/100 mL, compared with 152 (17) mg/mL in control animals (p
< 0.05).°) The blood triglyceride concentration in cholesterol-fed
mice was also significantly reduced (p < 0.05) under the similar
test conditions. Pure senegin II at a dose of 5mg/kg was also
reported to lower blood triglyceride concentrations in mice.?)

Other activities Guinea-pig serum taken two hours after
administration of lyophilised aqueous extract of P. tenuifolia
(600 mg, intraperitoneally) inhibited the growth of herpes simplex
virus type 1 (HSV-1) in Vero cells.'©°”) An unspecified senegin
from P. senega produced a 34% inhibition of influenza virus (A2/
Japan 305) at a concentration of 12.5 pg/mL.(° An ethanolic
extract of P. senega has been reported to inhibit growth of a range
of fungi.'(C”

Polygala erioptera and P. paniculata have exhibited molluscici-
dal activity, and P paniculata is reported to possess antifungal
activity.” A butanol extract of P. tanuifolia containing onjisapo-
nins (100 pg/mL) inhibited cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) diesterase by 73%.‘ Isolated onjisaponins E, F and
G inhibited cAMP phosphodiasterase, with ICso values of 3.1, 2.9,
and 3.7 x 10° mol/L, respectively, being similar in action to
papaverine. A total saponin concentration of P. senega var. latifolia
increased rat plasma concentrations of adrenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH), corticosterone and glucose 30 minutes after
intraperitoneal administration (25 mg/kg). Single doses of a dried
methanol (50%) extract of P. senega var. latifolia and P. tanuifolia
administered orally (2g/kg) to rats produced 62% and 100%
inhibition, respectively, of congestive oedema.‘°*”) Under the same
conditions, furosemide 100 mg/kg produced 100% inhibition of
congestive oedema.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of senega
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required. The
following observations and uses require assessment in well-
designed clinical studies.

A fluid extract of senega root was reported to reduce the
viscosity of sputum in patients with bronchiectasis.“©°”) A French
patent has stated that a triterpenic acid extracted from senega
possesses anti-inflammatory activity and is effective against graft
rejection, eczema, psoriasis and multiple sclerosis.°* These
reports provide only a low level of clinical evidence and the
observed effects cannot be attributed definitively to senega or its
constituents.

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for senega and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Saponins are generally regarded as irritant to the gastrointest-
inal mucosa, and irritant properties have been documented for
senega and other Polygala species.‘C°)) Large doses of senega are
reported to cause vomiting and purging.'°°”’

The haemolytic index (HI) of senega saponins is stated to be
between 2500 and 4500.‘“) Haemolytic saponins are toxic to
mammals when administered intravenously, but have a low
toxicity when given orally because they do not cross the
gastrointestinal mucosa.?) Contact with damaged mucosal areas
may cause a problem. Toxicity associated with chronic exposure of
the gastrointestinal mucosa to haemolytic saponins has not been
established. It has been stated that the suitability of saponins for
nutritional and pharmacological use requires further investiga-

Senega

tion: free saponins in the gastrointestinal tract may interact with
the mucosal cells, causing a transient increase in the permeability
of the small intestine to intraluminal solutes and inhibiting active
nutrient absorption.**) This action may consequently facilitate
the entry of antigens and biologically active food peptides into the
blood circulation, with adverse systemic effects.'°°) Aqueous and
methanol extracts of P. senega and P. tenuifolia were negative in
the rec-assay with Bacillus subtilis and in the reversion assay with
Ames strains TA98 and TA 100 of Salmonella typhimurium.° A
mixture of senegins given to rats (i.p.) gave an LDso value of 3 mg/
kg and inhibited the growth of Walker carcinoma in rats with an
EDso value of 1.5 mg/kg.'C”

Cytotoxic lignans have been documented as constituents of a
related species, P. polygama."”

Contra-indications, Warnings

Senega may exacerbate existing gastrointestinal inflammation and
excessive doses may cause vomiting. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that constituents of senega have
ypoglycaemic activity. The clinical relevance of this is not clear
although, until further information is available, senega should not
be used by patients with diabetes.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
reparations of senega to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence from
reclinical studies that certain constituents of senega have
ypoglycaemic activity. The clinical relevance of this, if any, is
not clear; however, until further information is available, it is
recommended that senega should not be used by patients receiving
ypoglycaemic agents.

Pregnancy and lactation Limited information is available on
the chemistry, pharmacology and toxicity of senega. In view of
this, and the potential irritant properties of senega, its use during
regnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Codion. Hong Kong: Coci-Fedra; Cocillana Christo; Cocillana
Compound; Cocillana Compound; Mefedra-N; Mist Expect
Stim. Portugal: Stodal. Russia: Neo-Codion Babies (Heo-
Koavon Aan Maaaennes). South Africa: Borstol Cough
Remedy. Spain: Broncovital; Pastillas Pectoral Kely; Pulmofasa.
Sweden: Cocillana-Etyfin. Switzerland: Hederix; Makaphyt
Gouttes antitussives; Makaphyt Sirop; Pectocalmine; Pectoral
N; Phol-Tux. UK: Antibron; Chest Mixture; Chesty Cough
Relief; Tickly Cough & Sore Throat Relief. Venezuela:
Acetoben.

References

1 Briggs CJ. Senega Snakeroot — A traditional Canadian herbal
medicine. Can Pharm J 1988; 121: 199-201.

----- PAGE 547 -----
10

1

12

Senega

Hamburger M, Hostettmann K. Hydroxycinnamic acid esters from
Polygala chamaebuxus. Phytochemistry 1985; 24: 1793-1797.
Takiura K et al. Studies on oligosaccharides. XIII. Oligosaccharides in
Polygala senega and structures of glycosyl-1,5-anhydro-p-glucitols.
Yakugaku Zasshi 1974; 94: 998-1003.

Takiura K et al. Studies on oligosaccharides XVI. New trisaccharides
found in Senega radix. Yakugaku Zasshi 1975; 95: 166-169.

Saitoh H et al. Senegoses A-E, oligosaccharide multi-esters from
Polygala senega var. latifolia Torr. et Gray. Chem Pharm Bull 1993; 41:
1127-1131.

Saitoh H et al. Senegoses F-I, oligosaccharide multi-esters from the
roots of Polygala senega var. latifolia Torr. et Gray. Chem Pharm Bull
1993; 41: 2125-2128.

Ikeya Y et al. Four new phenolic glycosides from Polygala tenuifolia.
Chem Pharm Bull 1991; 39: 2600-2605.

Ikeya Y et al. Xanthone C-glycoside and acylated sugar from Polygala
tenuifolia. Chem Pharm Bull 1994; 42: 2305-2308.

Yoshikawa M et al. E-Senegasaponins a and b, Z-senegasaponins a
and b, Z-senegins II and III, new type inhibitors of ethanol absorption
in rats from senegae radix, the roots of Polygala senega L. var latifolia
Torrey et Gray. Chem Pharm Bull 1995; 43: 350-352.

Yoshikawa M et al. Bioactive saponins and glycosides. I. Senegae
radix. (1): E-senegasaponins a and b and Z-senegasaponins a and b,
their inhibitory effect on alcohol absorption and hypoglycemic
activity. Chem Pharm Bull 1995; 43: 2115-2122.
Yoshikawa M et al. Bioactive saponins and glyc
radix. (2): Chemical structures, hypoglycemic activity, and ethanol
absorption-inhibitory effect of E-senegasaponin c, Z-senegasaponins
c, and Z-senegins II, Ill, and IV. Chem Pharm Bull 1996; 44: 1305—
1313.

Tsukitani Y et al. Studies on the constituents of Senegae radix. II. The
structure of senegin-II, a saponin from Polygala senega Linne var.
latifolia ‘Torry et Gray. Chem Pharm Bull 1973; 21: 791-799.

ides, II. Senegae

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

Tsukitani Y, Shoji J. Studies on the constituents of Senegae radix III.
The structures of senegin-III and -IV, saponins from Polygala senega
Linne var. latifolia Torry et Gray. Chem Bull Pharm 1973; 21: 1564—
1574.

Sakuma S, Shoji J. Studies on the constituents of the root of Polygala
tenuifolia Willdenow. I. Isolation of saponins and the structures of
onjisaponins g and f. Chem Pharm Bull 1981; 29: 2431-2441.
Sakuma S$, Shoji J. Studies on the constituents of the root of Polygala
tenuifolia Willdenow. II. On the structures of onjisaponins a, b and e.
Chem Pharm Bull 1982; 30: 810-821.

Hamburger M et al. Coumarins from Polygala paniculata. Planta Med
1985; 51: 215-217.

Hamburger M e¢ al. A new pyranocoumarin diester from Polygala
paniculata L. Helv Chim Acta 1984; 67: 1729-1733.

Hamburger M, Hostettmann K. Glycosidic constituents of some
European Polygala species. J Nat Prod 1986; May-June: 557.

Ghosal S$ et al. 1,2,3-Trioxygenated glucosyloxy xanthones.
Phytochemistry 1981; 20: 489-492.

Hokanson GC. Podophyllotoxin and 4-demethylpodophyllotoxin
from Polygala polygama (Polygalaceae). Lloydia 1978; 41: 497-498.
Carretero ME et al. Etudes pharmacodynamiques préliminaires de
Polygala microphylla (L.), sur le systéme nerveux central. Plant Méd
Phytothér 1986; 20: 148-154.

Kako M et al. Effect of senegin-II on blood glucose in normal and
NIDDM mice. Biol Pharm Bull 1995; 18 (Suppl. Suppl.8): 1159-1161.
Masuda H e¢ al. Intraperitoneal administration of senegae radix
extract and its main component, senegin-II, affects lipid metabolism
in normal and hyperlipidemic mice. Biol Pharm Bull 1996; 19: 315—
317.

Tubery P. Antiinflammatory triterpenic alcohol acids. Fr Demande
Patent 2,202,683.

Johnson IT et al. Influence of saponins on gut permeability and active
nutrient transport in vitro. J Nutr 1986; 116: 2270-2277.

----- PAGE 548 -----
Senna

However, the use of non-standardised hydroxyanthracene-
containing preparations should be avoided since their

pharmacological effect will be variable and unpredictable.
The sennoside content of many licensed senna products is
standardised and generally calculated as sennoside B. The use
of senna during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Senna alexandrina Mill. (Leguminosae)

Synonym(s)

Alexandrian Senna, Cassia acutifolia Delile, C. angustifolia M.
Vahl, C. alexandrina (Garsault) Thell., C. senna L., Indian Senna,
Khartoum Senna, Senna acutifolia (Delile) Batka, S. alexandrina
Garsault, S. angustifolia (Vahl) Batka, Tinnevelly Senna

Part(s) Used
Fruit (pod), leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C?)

EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monograph’
ESCOP 2003'¢7"
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 20078?
USP29/NF24‘C80)

WHO volume 1 1999°%)

(G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2,G6, G7, G20 and G32.

Hydroxyanthracenes Pharmacopoeial standards not less than
2.5% for leaf and 2.2% for C. angustifolia fruit.“C8O™
Dianthrone glycosides (1.5-3% leaf; 2-5% fruit), primarily
sennosides A and B (rhein dianthrones) with sennosides C and
D (rhein aloe-emodin heterodianthrones), aloe-emodin dia-
nthrone. Sennosides A and B yield sennidin A and B respectively.
Free anthraquinones including aloe-emodin, chrysophanol and
rhein with their glycosides.

Carbohydrates Polysaccharides (about 2.5%)" including
mucilage (arabinose, galactose, galacturonic acid, rhamnose)
and a galactomannan (galactose, mannose); free sugars (e.g.
fructose, glucose, pinitol, sucrose).

Flavonoids Flavonols, including isorhamnetin and kaempferol.
Glycosides 6-Hydroxymusizin and tinnevellin glycosides.

Other constituents Chrysophanic acid, salicylic acid, saponin,
resin, volatile oil (trace).

Food Use

Senna is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring. Previously, senna has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).

Herbal Use

Senna is stated to possess cathartic properties (leaf greater than
fruit) and has been used traditionally for constipation.(C? C+ O°
CB, G32, G43, G52, G54, G5 G64) The German Commission E approved
use for constipation.'“* Senna is also used in combination with
ispaghula for constipation.'°? The EMEA Committee on Herbal
Medicinal Products (HMPC) has adopted community herbal
monographs for senna leaf and senna fruit with indications for
short-term use in cases of occasional constipation.)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried pods 3-6 pods (Alexandrian) or 4-12 pods (Tinnevelly)
steeped in 150mL warm water for 6-12 hours;'C%°” 0.6-0.2 g
(equivalent to 20-30 mg hydroxyanthracene glycosides calculated
as sennosides B).‘@>”)

Hydroxyanthracene glycosides
glucose-O fe} OH

RB 10 R 10
* LH lH
R2 R 10° s 10°
Raa ya

dextro-rotation optically inactive

glucose-O oO OH

R! Re Isomeric form
sennosideA COOH COOH (+), trans
sennosideB COOH COOH meso, cis
sennosideC COOH CH,OH (+), trans
sennoside D COOH CH2OH meso, cis

Figure 1 Selected constituents of senna.

----- PAGE 549 -----
Senna

Dried leaflets 0.5-2.0g°°°° (equivalent to 20-30 mg hydro-
xyanthracene glycosides calculated as sennoside B).'@”

Leaf, liquid extract 0.5-2.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol).'C°°?
Senna Liquid Extract (BPC 1973) 0.5-2.0 mL.

Herbal drug preparations Equivalent to 15-30mg_hydroxy-

anthracene derivatives (calculated as sennoside B) to be taken at
i ed)

night.

Pharmacological Actions

The cathartic action of hydroxyanthracene-containing drugs
well recognised and such preparations have been used as laxatives
for many years. However, there is still some uncertainty as to the
exact mode of action of the hydroxyanthracenes. It is thought that
hydroxyanthracene glycosides are absorbed from the gastrointest-
inal tract, the aglycones liberated during metabolism and excreted
into the colon resulting in stimulation and an increase in
peristalsis. However, it has also been suggested that the purgative
action of senna is due to the action of intestinal bacteria. Using
human intestinal flora, it was found that sennoside A is reduced to
8-glucosyl rheinanthrone, hydrolysed to rheinanthrone and
oxidised to sennidin A. The active principle causing peristaltic

movements of the large intestine was thought to be rhein-
(4)

anthrone.

In vitro and animal studies

Sennosides A and B, and their natural metabolites sennidins A and
B, have been reported to act specifically on the large intestine in
the rat with the acceleration of colonic transport the major
component of their laxative effect.) Sennosides A and B have also

been reported to induce fluid secretion exclusively in the colon,
following oral administration of the glycosides to rats.

It has been suggested that the laxative action of the sennosides
involves prostaglandins. Indometacin has been found to partly
inhibit the action of sennosides A and B, although a bolus
injection of prostaglandins into the caecal lumen was stated
neither to influence transit time nor to induce diarrhoea.”
Pretreatment of mice with indometacin and a prostaglandin E
(PGE) antagonist has been documented to prevent diarrhoea
caused by intracaecal administration of rhein, which stimulates
the production of PGE-like material specifically in the colon.”
Indometacin was found to depress the large intestinal propulsive
activity of rhein, but did not suppress PGE -induced diarrhoea.
The authors suggest that the action of rhein is mediated by
prostaglandin biosynthesis and release.”

Antihepatotoxic activity has been documented for naphtho-a-
pyrone and naphtho-y-pyrone glycosides, and for the hydroxyan-
thracene glyco s Cassia tora.”
Greatest activity was documented for the naphtho-y-pyrone
glycosides.

Significant inhibitory activity in mice against leukaemia P388
Gal)

sides isolated from a related speci

has been documented for aloe-emodin.

Clinical studies

In a randomised, controlled trial, 91 patients with terminal cancer
received senna 12 mg daily, or lactulose, for 27 days. At the end
of the study, no differences were found between the two groups in
defecation-free intervals, or in days with defecation. The general
health of each group was also reported to be similar.

A randomised, double-blind, double-dummy, multicentre,
controlled, crossover study involving 77 hospitalised elderly

patients with a history of chronic constipation compared the
effects of a senna—fibre combination (senna 12.4%, ispaghula
54.2%, 10 mL daily) and lactulose (15 mL twice daily) for two 14-
day periods with a three- to five-day wash-out period.”
Assessments included stool frequency and consistency, ease of
evacuation, adverse effects and costs of treatment. The senna—
fibre combination was reported to be significantly more effective
than lactulose.

Commercial preparations containing senna and ispaghula have
been reported to be equally effective for the treatment of
constipation in small clinical studies involving elderly hospitalised
patients and/or residents in nursing homes.”

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Senna may cause mild abdominal discomfort such as colic or
cramps. Prolonged use or overdosage can result in diarrhoea with
excessive loss of potassium, albuminuria and haematuria.‘©>
Potassium deficiency may lead to disorders of the heart and
muscular weakness especially with concurrent use of cardiac
glycosides, diuretics or corticosteroids. An atonic non-functioning
colon may also develop.'“**) Excessive use and abuse of senna has

been associated with finger clubbing and with the development of
(12)

cachexia and reduced serum globulin concentrations.

Preclinical data

Sennosides A and B are reported to be most potent with respect to
laxative action, but to be the least toxic compared with other
hydroxyanthracene fractions in senna. Similarly, fractions with a
low laxative activity (e.g. rhein-8-glucoside) are reported to have
the highest acute toxicity’) LDs9 values in mice following
intravenous injection of sennosides A and B and of rhein-8-
glycoside are reported to be 4.1 g/kg and 400 g/kg, respectively.?)
The acute oral toxicity of all senna fractions in mice has been
reported to be greater than 5¢g/kg, although all of the animals
were stated to have died by the following week. The toxicity of
total senna extracts is greater than that of the individual
sennosides and it has been proposed that the laxative and toxic
components of senna could be separated.”

In vitro carcinogenicity testing has reported certain anthraqui-
nones, including aloe-emodin, to be active in more than one strain
of Salmonella typhimurium.” Aglycones were documented to
exhibit genotoxic activity in a mammalian cell assay.‘

Sensitising properties have been documented for emodin (see
Aloes).(@>

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monographs for senna
include the following information." There are no new, systematic
preclinical tests for senna leaf or preparations thereof. Most data
refer to extracts of senna fruit containing 1.4-3.5% of
hydroxyanthacenes, corresponding to 0.9-2.35% of potential
thein, 0.05—0.15% potential aloe-emodin and 0.001—-0.006% of
potential emodin, or to isolated active constituents, e.g. rhein or
sennosides A and B. The acute toxicity of senna fruit and specified
extracts thereof, as well as of sennosides in rats and mice was low
after oral treatment. As a result of investigations with parenteral
application in mice, extracts are supposed to possess a higher
toxicity than purified glucosides, possibly due to the content of
aglycones.

Sennosides displayed no specific toxicity when tested at doses
up to 500 g/kg in dogs for four weeks and up to 100 g/kg in rats for
six months. Data for herbal drug preparations are not available.

----- PAGE 550 -----
There was no evidence of any embryolethal, teratogenic or
fetotoxic actions in rats or rabbits after oral treatment with
sennosides. Furthermore, there was no effect on the postnatal
development of young rats, on rearing behaviour of dams or on
male and female fertility in rats. Data on herbal drug preparations
are not available.

An extract and aloe-emodin were mutagenic in in vitro tests;
sennosides A and B and rhein gave negative results. In vivo
examinations of a defined extract of senna pods were negative. A
specified senna extract given orally for two years was not
carcinogenic in male or female rats. The extract investigated
contained approximately 40.8% of hydroxyanthracenes from
which 35% were sennosides, corresponding to about 25.2% of
potential rhein, 2.3% of potential aloe-emodin and 0.007% of
potential emodin, and 142 ppm free aloe-emodin and 9 ppm free
emodin.

Contra-indications, Warnings

It is recommended that senna should not be given to patients with
intestinal obstruction and stenosis, atony, inflammatory colon
diseases (e.g. Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis), appendicitis, with
undiagnosed abdominal symptoms; severe dehydration states with
water and electrolyte depletion. Prolonged use should be
avoided! G20 G45, G52)

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monographs for senna
include the following information.

As with all laxatives, senna should not be given when any
undiagnosed acute or persistent abdominal symptoms are present.
If laxatives are needed every day the cause of the constipation
should be investigated. Long-term use of laxatives should be
avoided. Use for more than two weeks requires medical super-
vision. Chronic use may cause pigmentation of the colon
(pseudomelanosis coli) which is harmless and reversible after
drug discontinuation.

Abuse, with diarrhoea and consequent fluid and electrolyte
losses, may cause dependence, with possible need for increased
dosages, disturbance of water and electrolyte (mainly hypokalae-
mia) balance, atonic colon with impaired function. Intake of
anthranoid containing laxatives exceeding short-term use may
result in an aggravation of constipation.

Hypokalaemia can result in cardiac and neuromuscular
dysfunction, especially if cardiac glycosides, diuretics or cortico-
steroids are also taken. Chronic use may result in albuminuria and
haematuria.

In chronic constipation, stimulant laxatives are not an
acceptable alternative to a changed diet.

Interaction with other medicaments and other forms of
interaction Hypokalaemia (resulting from long-term use of
senna) may potentiate the action of cardiac glycosides and
interacts with antiarrhythmic drugs, with drugs which induce
reversion to sinus rhythm (e.g. quinidine). Concomitant use with
other drugs inducing hypokalaemia (e.g. thiazide diuretics, adreno
corticosteroids and liquorice root) may enhance electrolyte
imbalance. Abdominal spasms and pain may occur, in particular
in patients with irritable colon.”

Anthraquinones cause discoloration of the urine which may
interfere with diagnostic tests.'“*)

Pregnancy and lactation Non-standardised hydoxyanthracene
containing laxative preparations should not be taken during
pregnancy or lactation since their pharmacological action is

Senna

unpredictable. Although hydroxyanthracene derivatives may be
excreted in the breast milk, following normal dosage their
concentration is usually insufficient to affect the nursing
infant.'C*)

The EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monographs for senna
include the following information.”

Pregnancy Not recommended during pregnancy. There are no
reports of undesirable or damaging effects during pregnancy
and on the fetus when used at the recommended dosage
schedule. However, experimental data concerning a genotoxic
risk of several anthranoids (e.g. emodine and physcione) and
senna are not counterbalanced by sufficient studies to
eliminate a possible risk.

Lactation Breastfeeding is mot recommended as there are
insufficient data on the excretion of metabolites in breast
milk. Excretion of active principles in breast milk has not been
investigated. However, small amounts of active metabolites
(e.g. rhein) from other anthranoids are known to be excreted in
breast milk. A laxative effect in breastfed babies has not been
reported.

a; Agarol witl
Lax; Fletchers Castoria; Maximum Relief Ex-Lax; Senna-Gen;
Senokot; Senokotxtra; X-Prep.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Agiolax; Cirulaxia; Gelax; Kronolax; LX-30;
Rapilax Fibras. Australia: Agiolax; Neo-Cleanse; Peritone;
Prolax; Soflax. Austria: Abfuhrtee St Severin; Agiolax;
Carilax; Entschlackender Abfuhrtee EF-EM-ES; Eucarbon;
Eucarbon Herbal; Frugelletten; Laxalpin; Laxolind; Mag
Kottas Krauterexpress Abfuhrtee; Mag Kottas May-Cur-Tee;
Menodoron; Midro Tee; Neda Fruchtewurfel; Planta Lax;
Sabatif; The Chambard-Tee. Belgium: Agiolax; Tux. Brazil:

----- PAGE 551 -----
Senna

Constipation Tablets; Dual-Lax
Normal Strength; Fam-Lax Senna; Fibre Plus; Jacksons
Herbal Laxative; Kas-Bah; Laxative Tablets; Lion Cleansing
Herbs; Lustys Herbalene; Manevac; Modern Herbals Laxa-
tive; Modern Herbals Menopause; Natural Herb Tablets;
Out-of-Sorts; Pripsen; Rhuaka; Sciargo; Skin Cleansing;
Tabritis. USA: Laci Le Beau Super Dieter's Tea; Perdiem;
Senokot-S; X-Prep Bowel Evacuant Kit-1. Venezuela: Agiolax;
Fibralax.

1

10

1

12

13

14

References

European Medicines Agency. Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products
(HMPC). Community Herbal Monograph on Cassia senna L., fructus
and Cassia angustifolia Vahl, fructus. London, 7 September 2006. Doc
Ref. EMEA/HMPC/5187 1/2006; European Medicines Agency.
Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC). Community
Herbal Monograph on Cassia senna L. and Cassia angustifolia Vahl,
folium. London, 7 September 2006. Doc Ref. EMEA/HMPC/5 1869/2006.
Miller BM et al. Isolation and structural investigation of a
polysaccharide from Cassia angusti folia leaves. Planta Med 1989; 55:
99.

Alam N, Gupta PC. Structure of a water-soluble polysaccharide from
the seeds of Cassia angustifolia. Planta Med 1986; 52: 308-310.
Kobashi K et al. Metabolism of sennosides by human intestinal
bacteria. Planta Med 1980; 40: 225-236.

Leng-Peschlow E. Acceleration of large intestine transit time in rats by
sennosides and related compounds. J Pharm Pharmacol 1986; 38: 369—
373.

Leng-Peschlow E. Dual effect orally administered sennosides on large
intestine transit and fluid absorption in the rat. J Pharm Pharmacol
1986; 38: 606-610.

Yagi T et al. Involvement of prostaglandin E-like material in the
purgative action of rhein anthrone, the intraluminal active metabolite
of sennosides A and B in mice. J Pharm Pharmacol 1988; 40: 27-30.
Wong SM e¢ al. Isolation and structural elucidation of new
antihepatotoxic naphtho-gamma-pyrone glycosides, naphtho-a-
pyrone glycoside and anthraquinone glycosides from the seeds of
Cassia tora. Planta Med 1989; 55: 112.

Agra Y et al. Efficacy of senna versus lactulose in terminal cancer
patients treated with opioids. J Pain Symptom Management 1998; 15:
1-7.

Passmore AP et al. Chronic constipation in long stay elderly patients: a
comparison of lactulose and a senna-fibre combination. BM] 1993;
307: 769-771.

Petticrew M et al. Epidemiology of constipation in the general adult
population. Health Technol Assess 1997; 1: 1-S2.

Senna Lawrence Review of Natural Products. Levittown,
Pennsylvania: Pharmaceutical Information Associates Ltd, 1989.
Hietala P e¢ al. Laxative potency and acute toxicity of some
anthraquinone derivatives, senna extracts and fractions of senna
extracts. Pharmacol Toxicol 1987; 61: 153-156.

Westendorf J et al. Possible carcinogenicity of anthraquinone-
containing medical plants. Planta Med 1988; 54: 562.

----- PAGE 552 -----
a Shepherd’s Purse

The chemistry of shepherd’s purse is well documented.
Several actions affecting the circulatory system have been
observed in animal studies, although these actions do not
relate to the traditional herbal uses. There is a lack of robust
clinical research assessing the efficacy and safety of
shepherd’s purse. Limited toxicity data are available. In view
of this together with the demonstrated pharmacological
activity of the herb, excessive use of shepherd’s purse and use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Capsella bursa-pastoris (L.) Medik (Brassicaceae/Cruciferae)
Synonym(s)

Capsella

Part(s) Used

Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19960”?
Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?
Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G7.

Amines Acetylcholine, choline, amino acids 2.33% (major
component proline), histamine, tyramine and unidentified crystal-
line alkaloids.”

Flavonoids Quercetin, diosmetin, luteolin, hesperetin and their
glycosides (e.g. rutin, diosmin, hesperidin).”

Volatile oils 0.02%. Camphor (major); at least 74 components
identified.”

Other constituents Carotenoids, fumaric acid, sinigrin (mustard
oil glucoside), ascorbic acid (vitamin C) and vitamin K.45.62)
Food Use

Shepherd's purse is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Shepherd's purse is stated to possess antihaemorrhagic and
urinary antiseptic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
menorrhagia, haematemesis, haematuria, diarrhoea and acute
catarrhal cystitis,(C% 070

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 1-4¢ as an infusion three times daily'©”

Liquid extract 14 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.‘6”

Figure 1

Monoterpenes

fe}
camphor
Glucosinolates
it
o—$—0?
CH2OH N 6
° * =
HO Oo — CHe— CH=CH,
HO. s
HO
sinigrin

Selected constituents of shepherd’s purse.

Figure 3. Shepherd’s purse — dried drug substance (herb).

----- PAGE 553 -----
Shepherd’s Purse

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

A variety of actions has been documented for an ethanolic extract
of shepherd's purse in various animal models.'°? Anti-inflam-
matory activity has been exhibited versus carrageenan-induced
and dextran-induced rat paw oedema.” A reduction in capillary
permeability in the guinea-pig, induced by histamine and
serotonin, has also been observed,” and flavonoid components
isolated from shepherd's purse have been reported to reduce blood
vessel permeability in mice. Anti-ulcer activity has been
documented in rats following intraperitoneal injection. The
extract did not affect gastric secretion, but accelerated recovery
from stress-induced ulcers.” A hypotensive effect observed in
cats, dogs, rabbits and rats, following intravenous injection, was
inhibited by a B-adrenoceptor blocker but not by atropine, thus
dismissing earlier reports that this action was attributable to
cholinergic compounds present in shepherd's purse.”

Diuresis has been reported in mice, following oral or intraper-
itoneal administration of shepherd's purse. The mode of action was
stated to involve an increase in the glomerular filtration rate.

Documented cardiac actions include increased coronary blood
flow in dogs following intra-arterial administration, and a slight
inhibitory effect on ouabain-induced ventricular fibrillation in the
rat following intraperitoneal injection, together with a negative
chronotropic effect.) Studies on the isolated heart have reported
negative chronotropic and inotropic actions in the guinea-pig and
rabbit and coronary vasodilatation.)

A CNS-depressant action in mice has been demonstrated
(potentiation of barbiturate-induced sleeping time).

Weak antibacterial activity, mainly towards Gram-positive
organisms, has been reported.”

Antineoplastic activity in rats has been documented for fumaric
acid, which prevented the development of hepatic neoplasms when
co-administered with the carcinogen 3-MeDAB."))

Shepherd's purse seeds are stated to possess rubefacient and
vesicant properties because of their isothiocyanate-yielding
components.“0*))

In vitro studies have documented stimulatory action in various
smooth muscle tissue
in the guinea-pig were reported to be unaffected by atropine and
diphenhydramine, but were inhibited by papaverine.” Induced
utero-activity in the rat, equivalent to the effect of oxytocin 0.1 i.u.,
was unaffected by atropine, but inhibited by competitive inhibitors
of oxytocin. Two unidentified alkaloid components of shepherd's
purse have also been stated to elicit a physiological activity on the
uterus.) Induced tracheal contractions in the guinea-pig were
unaffected by adrenaline, which did inhibit acetylcholine-induced
contractions.” These studies concluded that the active substance

(s) in shepherd's purse responsible for the observed actions on
(8,9)

Induced contractions of the small intestine

smooth muscle were neither acetylcholine nor histamine.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of
shepherd's purse and rigorous randomised clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity
Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for shepherd's
purse and further investigation of these aspects is required.

Preclinical data

Shepherd's purse extracts have been reported to exhibit low
toxicity in mice. LDso values reported are 1.5 g/kg body weight
(mice, intraperitoneal injection) and 31.5 g/kg (mice, subcuta-
neous injection). Signs of toxicity were described as sedation,
enlargement of pupils, paralysis of hind limbs, difficulty in
respiration, and death by respiratory paralysis.) Following
hydrolysis, the constituent sinigrin yields allyl isothiocyanate
which is an extremely powerful irritant and produces blisters on
the skin.'C*) Isothiocyanates have been implicated in endemic
goitre (hypothyroidism with thyroid enlargement) and have been
reported to produce goitre in experimental animals.‘C*

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of shepherd's purse to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that shepherd's purse and/or certain
isolated constituents have hypotensive, diuretic and cardiac
activities and effects on thyroid fuction.

Pregnancy and lactation Shepherd's purse is reputed to act as
an abortifacient and to affect the menstrual cycle, and tyramine is
©3°) Th view of this, the
reported oxytocin-like activity and the general lack of safety data,
the use of shepherd's purse during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

Proprietary mul
UK: Fenneherb Cystaid.

documented as a utero-active constituent.‘

ingredient preparations

References

1 Kuroda K, Kaku T. Pharmacological and chemical studies on the
alcohol extract of Capsella bursa-pastoris. Life Sci 1969; 8: 151-155.

2. Jurisson S. Flavonoid substances of Capsella bursa pastoris.
Farmatsiya (Moscow) 1973; 22: 34-35.

3 Miyazawa M et al. The constituents of the essential oils from Capsella
bursa-pastoris Medik. Yakugaku Zasshi 1979; 99: 1041-1043.

4 Park RJ. The occurrence of mustard oil glucosides in Lepidium
hyssopifolium, L. bonariense, and Capsella bursa pastoris. Aust ]
Chem 1967; 20: 2799-2801.

5. Jurisson S. Vitamin content of shepherd's purse. Farmatsiya (Moscow)
1976; 25: 66-67.

6 Kuroda K, Takagi K. Studies on Capsella bursa pastoris. 1. General
pharmacology of ethanol extract of the herb. Arch Int Pharmacodyn
Ther 1969; 178: 382-391.

7 Kuroda K, Takagi K. Studies on capsella bursa pastoris. II. Diuretic,
anti-inflammatory and anti-ulcer action of ethanol extracts of the
herb. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1969; 178: 392-399.

8 Kuroda K, Takagi K. Physiologically active substance in Capsella
bursa-pastoris. Nature 1968; 220: 707-708.

9 Juri
pastori:

Determination of active substances of Capsella bursa

Tartu Riiliku Ulikooli Toim 1971; 270: 71-79.

10 Moskalenko SA. Preliminary screening of far-eastern ethnomedicinal
plants for antibacterial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15: 231-259.

11 Kuroda K. Neoplasm inhibitor from Capsella bursa pastoris. Japan
Kokai 1977; 41: 207.

son

----- PAGE 554 -----
J Skunk Cabbage

cabbage (even though citings as early as 1817 reporte:
irritant properties). No documented evidence was found to
justify the herbal uses. In view of the lack of data, the
appropriateness of medicinal use of skunk cabbage should be
considered. In view of the documented irritant properties,
excessive use, at least, should be avoided. Skunk cabbage
should not be used during pregnancy and breastfeeding. The
potential for skunk cabbage preparations to interact with
other medicines should be considered.

Species (Family)
Symplocarpus foetidus (L.) Salisb. ex W. Barton (Araceae)

Synonym(s)

Dracontium foetidum L., Skunkweed

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983‘?

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

Reported constituents include starch, gum-sugar, fixed and
volatile oils, resin, tannin, an acrid principle and iron.(622 Ge)

Other plant parts Large amounts of alkaloids (unspecified),
phenolic compounds and glycosides have been isolated from all
plant parts of skunk cabbage.” The leaves are reported to contain
hydroxytryptamine.““*”) The flower contains the anthocyanins
cyanidin-3-monoglucoside, cyanidin-3-rutinoside and peonidin-3-
rutinoside.”)

Food Use

Skunk cabbage is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Skunk cabbage is stated to possess expectorant, antispasmodic
and mild sedative properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
bronchitis, whooping cough, asthma and specifically for bronchi-
tic asthma.'67 6%

Figure 1 Skunk cabbage (Symplocarpus foetidus).

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses

recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Powdered rhizome/root 0.5—1.0g in honey or as an infusion or
decoction three times daily.(©”

Liquid extract 0.5-1.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C”

Tincture 2—4mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C” eG

Figure 2 Skunk cabbage - dried drug substance (rhizome).

----- PAGE 555 -----
Skunk Cabbage

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for the rhizome/root. There is a preliminary
report of bacteriostatic activity for ethanol extracts of skunk
cabbage (plant parts not specified), although data on minimum
inhibitory concentrations were not provided. The leaf extract has
haemolytic properties,“ although the scientific basis for this
statement is not clear.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of skunk
cabbage and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Tox'

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for skunk
cabbage and further investigation of these aspects is required.
The root is reported to be bitter and acrid, with a disagreeable
odour. Severe itching and inflammation of the skin has been
documented.'“* No published toxicity studies were located.

Contra-indications, Warnings

It has been stated that the fresh plant can cause blistering.“ In

view of the acrid principle thought to be present in both the dried
and fresh root,‘ skunk cabbage should be used with caution.

Drug interactions None documented. In view of the lack of
information on the constituents of skunk cabbage and _ their
pharmacological activities, the potential for skunk cabbage
preparations to interact with other medicines used concurrently
should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Skunk cabbage is reputed to affect the
menstrual cycle” although the scientific basis for this statement
is not clear. In view of the lack of phytochemical, pharmacolo-
gical, and toxicological information, and the irritant properties,
the use of skunk cabbage during pregnancy and lactation should
be avoided.

UK: Horehound and Aniseed Cough Mixture; Vegetable
Cough Remover.

References

1 Konyukhov VP et al. Dynamics of the accumulation of biologically
active agents in Lysichitum camtsochatcense and Symplocarpus
foetidus. Uch Zap Khabarovsk Gos Pedagog Inst 1970; 26: 59-62.

2 Chang N et al. Anthocyanins in Symplocarpus foetidus (L.) Nutt.
(Araceae). Bot J Linn Soc 1970; 63: 95-96.

----- PAGE 556 -----
Slippery Elm

e lack of information, the appropriateness of medicinal use
of slippery elm should be considered. Excessive use, at least,
should be avoided. Slippery elm should not be used during
pregnancy and breastfeeding. The potential for slippery elm
preparations to interact with other medicines should be
considered. The supply of whole bark is controlled by
regulations.

Species (Family)
Ulmus rubra Muhl. (Ulmaceae)

Synonym(s)
Ulmus fulva Mich.

Part(s) Used

Bark (inner)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%
BHP 1996'0”)
Martindale 35th edition'@**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSL.‘” Whole (unpowdered) slippery elm is controlled by
regulations.”

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G6 and G59.

Carbohydrates = Mucilage (major constituent) consisting of
hexoses, pentoses, methylpentoses, at least two polyuronides,
and yielding on hydrolysis galactose, glucose and fructose (trace),
galacturonic acid, L-rhamnose and p-galactose.”)

Other constituents Tannins 3.0-6.5% (type unspecified),
phytosterols (f-sitosterol, citrostadienol, dolichol), sesquiter-
penes, calcium oxalate and cholesterol.

Food Use

Slippery elm is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that

there is insufficient information available to make an adequate
assessment of potential toxicity.'C'?

Herbal Use

Slippery elm is stated to possess demulcent, emollient, nutrient
and antitussive properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
inflammation or ulceration of the stomach or duodenum,
convalescence, colitis, diarrhoea and locally for abcesses, boils
and ulcers (as a poultice).“6% 97% Go)

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses

recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Powdered bark 4-16mL (1:8 as a decoction) three times
daily.'C&S”

Powdered bark 4g in 500mL boiling water as a nutritional
supplement three times daily.C%°”

Coarse powdered bark With boiling water as a poultice.“

Liquid extract 5mL (1:1 in 60% alcohol) three times daily.“©*
G7

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

There is a lack of information on the pharmacological properties
of slippery elm. Mucilages are known to have demulcent and
emollient properties. Mucilage is the principal constituent of
slippery elm. Tannins are known to possess astringent properties.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of slippery
elm and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Figure 1 Slippery elm — dried drug substance (powdered bark).

----- PAGE 557 -----
Slippery Elm

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical and
preclinical safety and toxicity data for slippery elm and further
investigation of these aspects is required.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. In view of the lack of
information on the constituents of slippery elm and _ their
pharmacological activities, the potential for slippery elm prepara-
tions to interact with other medicines administered concurrently
should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Whole bark has been used to procure
abortions. In view of this and the lack of information on the
pharmacological properties of slippery elm, it should not be used
during pregnancy and breastfeeding.

Soap; Slippery Elm Stomach Tablets; Wood Sap Ointment.
USA: Laci Le Beau Throat Care.

References

1 The Medicines (Retail Sale or Supply of Herbal Medicines) Order
1977, SI 2130.

2 Tamayo C et al. The chemistry and biological activity of herbs used in
Flor-Essence™ herbal tonic and Essiac™. Phytotherapy Res 2000; 14:
1-14.

----- PAGE 558 -----
Squill

attributed to the cardioactive components and squill has been
used as an expectorant for many years. However, in view of
the documented cardioactive and emetic properties of the
aglycones, excessive use and use during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided. Red squill is primarily used as a
rodenticide.

Species (Family)

Drimia maritima (L.) Stearn (Asparagaceae)

Synonym(s)

Scilla, Sea Onion, Urginea, Urginea maritima (L.) Baker, Urginea
scilla Steinh., White Squill

Part(s) Used

Bulb (red and white varieties)

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992)

BHP 1996”)

BP 200708

Complete German Commission E'@?)
Martindale 35th edition'**)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents
See References 1 and 2 and General References G6 and Gé2.

Cardiac glycosides Scillaren A and proscillaridin A (major
constituents); others include glucoscillaren A, scillaridin A,
scillicyanoside, scilliglaucoside, scilliphaeoside, _ scillicoeloside,
scillazuroside and scillicryptoside. Scillaren B represents a mixture
of the squill glycosides.

Flavonoids Apigenin, dihydroquercetin, isovitexin, iso-orientin,
luteolin, orientin, quercetin, taxifolin and vitexin.

Other constituents Stigmasterol, tannin, volatile and fixed oils.

Food Use

The Food Additives and Contaminants Committee (FACC)
recommended that squill be prohibited as a food flavouring,.‘“*”
Herbal Use

Squill is stated to possess expectorant, cathartic, emetic,
cardioactive and diuretic properties. Traditionally, it has been
used for chronic bronchitis, asthma with bronchitis, whooping

cough, and specifically for chronic bronchitis with scanty
sputum, 6567 68.66

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried bulb 60-200 mg as an infusion three times daily.(C%°”

Squill Liquid Extract (BPC 1973) 0.06-0.2 mL.
Squill Tincture (BPC 1973) 0.3-2.0 mL.
Squill Vinegar (BPC 1973) 0.6-2.0 mL.

Pharmacological Actions

The aglycone components of the cardiac glycoside constituents
possess digitalis-like cardiotonic properties.'“* However, the
squill aglycones are poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tract and are less potent than digitalis cardiac glycosides.‘
Expectorant, emetic and diuretic properties have been docu-
mented for white squill.*” Squill is reported to induce vomiting
by both a central action and local gastric irritation.” Subemetic
or near-emetic doses of squill appear to exhibit an expectorant

effect, causing an increase in the flow of gastric secretions.'"”

Cardiac glycosides
R°0

R! R2 R?
scillarenin H H H
proscillaridin A H H rha
scillaren A H H gle-rha
glucoscillaren A H H_— gle-gle-rha
scilliphaeoside OH H tha
glucoscilliphaeoside OH H gic-rha
12-epi-scilliphaeoside H OH tha

glc = glucosyl, rha = rhamnosyl

O-glucosyl

scilliglaucoside H
scillicyanoside © OCOCH3

Figure 1 Selected constituents of squill.

----- PAGE 559 -----
Figure 2 Squill (Drimia maritima).

Antiseborrhoeic properties have been documented for methanol
extracts of red squill which have been employed as hair tonics for
the treatment of chronic seborrhoea and dandruff.(C*”

Squill extracts have been reported to exhibit peripheral
vasodilatation and bradycardia in anaesthetised rabbits.‘

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Excessive use of squill is potentially toxic because of the
cardiotonic constituents. However, squill is also a gastric irritant
and large doses will stimulate a vomiting reflex.

Preclinical data

Red squill is toxic to rats and is mainly used as a rodenticide,
causing death by a centrally induced convulsant action.) A
squill soft mass (crude extract) has been stated to be toxic in

Figure 3 Squill — dried drug substance (bulb).

guinea-pigs at a dose of 270 mg/kg body weight. A fatal dose for
Indian squill (Urginea indica Kunth.) is documented as 36 mg/kg.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Squill may cause gastric irritation and should be avoided by
individuals with a cardiac disorder. In view of the cardiotonic
constituents, precautions applied to digoxin therapy should be
considered for squill.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of squill to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. Squill contains cardiac glycosides,
and interactions listed for digoxin should be considered for squill.

Pregnancy and lactation Squill is reputed to be an abortifacient
and to affect the menstrual cycle.“ In addition, cardioactive
and gastrointestinal irritant properties have been documented.
The use of squill during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

References

1 Court WE. Squill — energetic diuretic. Pharm J 1985; 235: 194-197.
2 Anon. Squill: Lawrence Review of Natural Products. Levittown,
Pennsylvania: Pharmaceutical Information Associates Ltd, 1989.

----- PAGE 560 -----
= St John’s Wort

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemical composition of St John’s wort has been well
studied. Documented pharmacological activities provide
supporting evidence for several of the traditional uses stated
for St John’s wort. Many pharmacological activities appear to
be attributable to hypericin, hyperforin and/or the flavonoid
constituents; hypericin is also reported to be responsible for
the photosensitive reactions that have been documented for
St John’s wort. With regard to the antidepressant effects of St
John’s wort, hyperforin rather than hypericin, as originally
thought, has emerged as one of the major constituents
responsible for antidepressant activity. However, further
research is required in order to determine which other
constituents contribute to the antidepressant effect.

There are now over forty clinical trials of H. perforatum
preparations involving patients with different types of
depression, although a rigorous systematic review and meta-
analysis found that overall the evidence is inconsistent and
complex. H. perforatum preparations and standard
antidepressant agents appear to show similar effects, whereas
H. perforatum preparations have only small benefits over
placebo in patients with major depression; in older studies in
patients with mild-to-moderate depression, H. perforatum
preparations appear to be of more benefit than placebo. A
previous systematic review/meta-analysis, for which inclusion
criteria for trials were slightly less strict, found evidence from
randomised, controlled trials that St John’s wort preparations
were more efficacious than placebo in the treatment of mild-
to-moderately severe depression.

An important point is that there is heterogeneity not only
among the trials and their results, but also among the different
manufacturers’ products tested. Products are not necessarily
equally effective, and the results of the analyses above should
not be extrapolated to other H. perforatum preparations,
which may differ considerably in their pharmaceutical quality.
These comments also imply that the need for dose adjustment
should be considered for patients changing from one St John’s
wort product to another.

Clinical safety data from randomised controlled trials,
systematic reviews and meta-analyses of trials, and post-
marketing surveillance and other observational studies,
indicate that certain St John’s wort extracts are well-tolerated
when taken at recommended doses for shorter periods of time
(around eight weeks). Certain St John’s wort preparations do
appear to have a more favourable safety profile, at least with
short-term use, than standard antidepressants, particularly
older antidepressant agents, a factor that may be important in
patients continuing to take medication. Data from the small
number of longer-term (one year) studies support the
tolerability of certain St John’s wort extracts, although further
investigation of long-term use is warranted. Adverse events/
effects reported are generally mild and most commonly
gastrointestinal symptoms. These observations, however, are
based on data collected in the settings of formal randomised
or observational studies, and usually where H. perforatum

has been prescribed under the supervision of a physician. The
safety of St John’s wort products taken as self-treatment
without supervision by a healthcare professional requires
further study.

The risk of photosensitive reactions following oral ingestion
of St John’s wort preparations appears to be low, since serum
and skin concentrations of hypericin (the photosensitising
constituent) after oral administration of recommended doses
are below 100 ng/mL, although caution is advised as it is
possible that there may be unusual absorption of hypericin in
some individuals and in fair-skinned individuals and after
extended periods of solar irradiation, there may be increased
susceptibility to the photosensitising properties of hypericin.
Likewise, the phototoxic potential of topical application of H.
perforatum preparations appears to be low, although caution is
necessary, particularly as hypericin may penetrate more highly
through broken or lesional skin, and there may be increased
susceptibility to the photosensitising properties of hypericin in
fair-skinned individuals and after extended periods of solar
irradiation.

There are important pharmacokinetic interactions between
St John’s wort preparations and certain other medicines,
leading to a loss of or reduction in the therapeutic effect of
those medicines, and potential for important
pharmacodynamic interactions, which could lead to
enhancement or antagonism of pharmacological effects,
depending on the activities of the co-administered medicines.
Drugs that may be affected by pharmacokinetic interactions
include certain anticonvulsants, ciclosporin, digoxin, indinavir
(and other HIV protease inhibitors), oral contraceptives,
theophylline and warfarin, and by pharmacodynamic
interactions, triptans and selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors. Advice is that patients taking these medicines
should stop taking St John’s wort preparations, generally after
seeking professional advice, as dose adjustment may be
necessary.

There is evidence that pharmacokinetic interactions arise
through induction, by constituents of St John’s wort
preparations, of the cytochrome P450 (CYP) drug-
metabolising enzyme CYP3A4 (and possibly certain other CYP
enzymes), and through effects on P-glycoprotein (a transport
protein). As CYP3A4 is involved in the metabolism of many
drugs, and as P-glycoprotein is involved widely in drug
transport, it is possible that St John’s wort preparations interact
with other medicines in addition to those already identified.

In view of the lack of toxicity data, St John’s wort
preparations should not be used during pregnancy and
lactation.

Pharmacists and other healthcare professionals should be
mindful that patients at all levels of health care may self-treat
with herbal and other non-prescription medicines, and that
use is not necessarily disclosed to healthcare professionals. St
John’s wort products may be used in addition to, or instead of,
standard antidepressants and other conventional medicines.
The prevalence of concurrent use of St John’s wort products

----- PAGE 561 -----
St John’s Wort

among certain subgroups of patients with depression: a cross-
sectional survey involving members of a depression self-help
group reported that over 50% were using St John’s wort and
that, among these individuals, the concurrent use of St John’s
wort and conventional antidepressants was 29% (see Side-
effects, Toxicity, Clinical data).

Species (Family)

Hypericum perforatum L. (Guttiferae/Clusiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Hypericum, Hypericum veronense Schrank, H. noeanum Boiss.,
Millepertuis

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia'@”

BHMA 2003'0°

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission E'°”
ESCOP 2003 ‘°°

Martindale 35th edition'**?

Ph Eur 20078?

USP29/NF24'68°

WHO volume 2 (2002)‘°””

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

GSL (for external use only)'@”

Constituents
See also References 1 and 2 and General References G1 and G2.

Anthraquinone derivatives (naphthodianthrones) Hypericin,
pseudohypericin and isohypericin; protohypericin and protopseu-
dohypericin (biosynthetic precursors of hypericin and pseudohy-
pericin, respectively) are present in fresh
Cyclopseudohypericin is also stated to be present. The hypericin
content (approximately 0.1-0.15%) includes both hypericin and
pseudohypericin) and is sometimes referred to as 'total
hypericins'.

material.

Flavonoids Flavonols (e.g. kaempferol, quercetin), flavones (e.g.
luteolin) and glycosides (e.g. hyperoside, isoquercitrin, quercitrin,
rutin), biflavonoids including biapigenin (a flavone) and amento-
flavone (a biapigenin derivative)** and catechins (flavonoids
often associated with condensed tannins).'°” The concentrations
of rutin, hyperoside and isoquercitrin have been reported as 1.6,
0.9 and 0.3%, respectively.”

Prenylated phloroglucinols Hyperforin (2.0-4.5%) and adhy-
perforin (0.2-1.9%),(7 1G)

Tannins 8-9%. Type not specified. Proanthocyanidins (con-
densed type) have been reported.'©?

Other phenols  Caffeic, chlorogenic, p-coumaric, ferulic, p-
hydroxybenzoic and vanillic acids.

Volatile oils 0.05—0.9%. Major component (not less than 30%) is
methyl-2-octane (saturated hydrocarbon); others include 1-non-
ane and traces of methyl-2-decane and n-undecane (saturated
hydrocarbons),"!? o- and B-pinene, a-terpineol, geraniol, and
traces of myrcene and limonene (monoterpenes), caryophyllene
and humulene (sesquiterpenes).17!»

Other constituents Acids (isovalerianic, nicotinic, myristic,
palmitic, stearic), carotenoids, choline, nicotinamide, pectin, B-
sitosterol, straight-chain saturated hydrocarbons (Cy, C39)‘'"
and alcohols (Co4, C26, Crg).(1P

Quality of plant material and commercial products

According to the British and European Pharmacopoeias, St John's
wort herb consists of the whole or cut dried flowering tops of H.
perforatum, harvested during flowering time, and contains not less
than 0.08% of total hypericins, expressed as hypericin, calculated
with reference to the dried drug.@*"°* Detailed descriptions of
H. perforatum herb for use in botanical, microscopic and
macroscopic identification have been published, along with
qualitative and quantitative methods for the assessment of H.
perforatum herb raw material.'C?

As with other herbal medicinal products, there is variation in
the qualitative and quantitative composition of commercial St
John's wort preparations. In the USA, analysis of 21 St John's wort
products (18 of which claimed to contain only standardised
extracts and three of which were combinations of extracts and
crude plant material) found that seven products did not meet at
least one of the quality criteria assessed: four products had a
hypericin content ranging from 77% to 85% of that stated on
their labels or, if not stated on the label, of the minimum
acceptable concentration permitted in the analysis; one of the two
products claiming to contain hyperforin contained only 21.7% of
the stated amount; five products contained cadmium exceeding
acceptable concentrations in the analysis, and two of these
products contained more than twice the permitted concentration
of cadmium.) Overall, five of the 18 products labelled with
hypericin and/or hyperforin concentrations, and five of the seven
products labelled as being produced from ‘aerial parts’, failed the
analysis. Another analytical study which investigated eight St
John's wort products marketed in the USA found that their
hyperforin content varied from 0.01-1.89%, and that only two
products contained more than one percent hyperforin, the
minimum concentration suggested to be required for antidepres-
sant effects. Similarly, hypericin content varied from 0.03—
0.29% and, for several products, the actual content ranged from
57-130% of that stated on the label.

Analysis (using a liquid chromatographic method with
fluorescent detection) of 54 commercially available St John's
wort products purchased in the USA and Canada found that only
two of the products had a total naphthodianthrone concentration
(hypericin and pseudohypericin) within 10% of that stated on the
label.” Overall, total naphthodianthrone content for tablets and
capsules, respectively, ranged from 0-108.6% and from 31.3-
80.2% of the amount stated on the label. The naphthodianthrone
content of products formulated as tinctures ranged from 0-
118.6 pg/mL.

Isolated hyperforin is susceptible to oxidation, although the
hyperforin content of dried herb and preparations containing
extracts of H. perforatum appears to be more stable.“
Degradation products for hyperforin include deoxyfurohyperforin
A,") furohyperforin, furoadhyperforin and furohyperforin A and
other oxygenated hyperforin analogues.°"7”

----- PAGE 562 -----
A fast high-performance liquid chromatographic (HPLC)
method with photodiode array detection has been developed for
the determination of six of the naphthodianthrone (including
hypericin) and phloroglucinol (including hyperforin) compounds
in H. perforatum extracts.°?) The method allows quantitative
determination of concentrations as low as 2 ttg/mL and 0.5 jtg/mL
for hyperforin and hypericin, respectively, while detection limits
for these compounds were 0.1 and 0.02 g/mL, respectively.

Variation in St John's wort products is not limited to product
composition, but as with other herbal medicinal products also
applies to the dissolution profiles of products which might be
considered to be pharmaceutically equivalent. In vitro dissolution
tests using biorelevant conditions (i.e. simulated gastric fluid and
similar substances as the dissolution media) were used to
determine the dissolution profiles of five St John's wort products
purchased in Germany. All products were ethanol or methanol
extracts of St John's wort, formulated as tablets or capsules and
contained 300-612mg extract per unit dosage form.°* In
simulated gastric fluid without pepsin, and under conditions
simulating the fasted state in the proximal small intestine,
dissolution of hyperforin was 'not detected' and 'poor', respec-
tively. Dissolution of hyperforin improved under conditions
simulating postprandial conditions in the proximal small intestine
for some products (e.g. 90% release within two hours), but was
relatively poor for other products (e.g. <50% release within two
hours). Dissolution of hypericins into simulated gastric fluid was
also not detected; results for dissolution of hypericins into other
media were either not available or were deemed to be unreliable.
Dissolution of the flavonoid compounds tested (rutin, hyperoside,
isoquercitrin and quercitrin) was good into all media tested,
although there were variations between products in the release of
rutin.) These results indicate that these St John's wort products
cannot be considered interchangeable; the implication being that
the need for dose adjustment should be considered for patients
changing from one St John's wort product to another.

Food Use

St John's wort is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural

source of food flavouring (herb: category 5).'¢!”
Herbal Use
St John's wort is stated to pc sedative and astringent

properties. It has been used for excitability, neuralgia, fibrositis,
sciatica, wounds, menopausal neurosis, anxiety and depression
(G3,67,G32) ¢+ John's wort also has a long
history of traditional use in topical preparations for wound
healing.'C''S” St John's wort is used extensively in homeopathic
preparations as well as in herbal products. Modern interest is
focused on its use as an antidepressant.

and as a nerve tonic.

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) recommended in

‘S6G” are the same for several

standard herbal reference texts
traditional uses; examples are given below.

Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.“©”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.'©”

Tincture 2—4mL (1:10 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.'C”
Doses of St John's wort extracts used in clinical trials involving
patients with mild to moderate depression generally range from

St John’s Wort

Flavonoids

HO.
CHOH
OH O HO by
hyperoside
Dianthrones
OH O OH
HO : ‘CH;
HO. : R
R
OH O OH hypericin CH3

pseudohypericin CH2OH

Prenylated phloroglucinols

hyperforin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of St John’s wort.
240-1800 mg daily (equivalent to varying concentrations of
hypericin and hyperforin, depending on the extract), typically

for four to six weeks.?”

Pharmacological Actions

The major active constituents are considered to be hyperforin (a
prenylated phloroglucinol) and hypericin (a naphthodianthrone),
although other biologically active constituents, e.g. flavonoids and
tannins, are also present.? Several pharmacological activities,
including antidepressant, anticancer, antiviral and antibacterial
effects, have been documented for extracts of St John's wort and/
or its constituents following preclinical studies. Clinical studies
mainly have described antidepressant effects for St John's wort
preparations.

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacokinetics In vivo (rats), the bioavailability of hypericin
following oral administration was increased by co-administration
of procyanidin B2, isolated from H. perforatum, or hyperoside.?”

Antidepressant activity The precise mechanism of action for the
antidepressant effect of St John's wort is unclear. Initially,
attention was focused on hypericin as the constituent of St John's
wort believed to be responsible for the herb's antidepressant
effects. Inhibition of monoamine oxidase (MAO) type A and B in

----- PAGE 563 -----
552 St John’s Wort

Figure 2 St John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum).
rat brain mitochondria in vitro was described for hypericin.?”
However, other studies have demonstrated only weak or no MAO
inhibition.°°

In vitro receptor binding and enzyme inhibition assays carried
out using hypericum extract demonstrated significant receptor
affinity for adenosine, GABA,, GABAg, benzodiazepine and
MAO types A and B, although, with the exception of GABA, and
GABAg, the concentrations of hypericum required were unlikely
to be attained after oral administration in humans." Other
biochemical studies have reported that the hypericum extract LI
160 is only a weak inhibitor of MAO-A and MAO-B activity, but
that it inhibits the synaptosomal uptake of serotonin (5-
ydroxytryptamine or 5-HT), dopamine and noradrenaline
(norepinephrine) with approximately equal affinity and also leads
to a downregulation of B-receptors and an upregulation of 5-HT
receptors in the rat frontal cortex.°” The effects of fluoxetine and
ypericin- and flavonoid-standardised hypericum extracts (LI 160,
0.3% hypericin and 6% flavonoids and Ph-50, 0.3% hypericin and
50% flavonoids) on the concentrations of neurotransmitters in
brain regions were studied in rats." All three preparations
induced a significant increase in 5-HT concentrations in the rat
cortex, both LI 160 and Ph-50 caused increas
(norepinephrine) and dopamine in the rat diencephalon and Ph-50
also induced an increase in the noradrenaline (norepinephrine)

content in the brainstem, areas that are implicated in depres-
(33)

s in noradrenaline

sion.

Other in vitro experiments using peripheral blood mononuclear
cells have shown that an alcoholic extract of H. perforatum
containing 0.25mg/mL_ hypericin downregulated mitogen-
mediated tryptophan degradation in a concentration-dependent
manner. Tryptophan is a precursor for biosynthesis of 5-HT.

Hyperforin has now emerged as being one of the major active
constituents of importance in antidepressant activity. Hyper-
forin has been shown to be an uptake inhibitor of 5-HT,
dopamine, noradrenaline (norepinephrine), GABA and t-gluta-
mate in synaptosomal preparations” and to inhibit 5-HT uptake
in rat peritoneal cells in a dos
also described discrepancies between observed and theoretical

dependent manner.” Studies have

ICso values, indicating that hyperforin is not the only component
of hypericum extract that is responsible for the observed
effects.°7°® Adhyperforin, another phloroglucinol constituent
of H. perforatum, also inhibits the uptake of dopamine, serotonin
and norepinephrine in vitro, and its possible involvement in the
antidepressant activity of St John's wort requires further
investigation.”

Figure 3 St John’s wort - dried drug substance (herb).

In vitro screening of the activities of hypericin, pseudohyper-
icin, hyperforin and
perforatum using 42 biogenic amine receptors and transporters
(available as part of the National Institute of Mental Health
Psychoactive Drug Screening Program of the USA) showed that
compounds significantly inhibited ligand binding at the following
receptors in particular: amentoflavone — serotonin (5-HTjp, 5-
HT>¢), dopamine-D3, opiate (delta), benzodiazepine; hypericin
and pseudohypericin — dopamine-D3, dopamine-D,, B-adrenergic;
hyperforin — dopamine-D,, dopamine-D,."") Hyperforin was less
active than the other constituents tested on all receptors screened.

several flavonoid constituents of H.

Screening revealed some interactions at G-protein coupled
receptors that were previously unreported (e.g. hypericin and B-
adrenergic activity).

The effects of hyperforin on interleukin-6 (IL-6) release in
different experimental models have been explored as a possi
alternative mechanism for antidepressant effects, since St John's
been shown to inhibit substance-P mediated effi

wort h:
(substance P has been implicated in the aetiology of depre:
sion).“ Hyperforin inhibited both substance-P- and lipopoly-
saccharide-induced IL-6 release in human astrocytoma cells (ICso
= 1.6 and 1.9,mol/L, respectively), although concentrations
required to achieve this were around one order of magnitude
higher than those found in the plasma of patients treated with H.
perforatum extracts.”

Other findings indicate that flavonoids, as well as hyperforin
and hypericin, are at least some of the constituents of H.
perforatum responsible for its antidepressant activity.)

In vivo (mice and rats) experiments which assessed the effects of
a hydroalcoholic extract of H. perforatum (containing hypericin
0.15% and hyperforin 3.2%) and the same extract with hypericin
and hyperforin removed in turn, showed that all extracts,
including the extract devoid of both hypericin and hyperforin

(but containing 12% flavonoids), retained activity in behavioural
(43)

models.
It has been reported that the mode of action of hyperforin in
erotonin uptake inhibition seems to be associated with the
levation of free intracellular sodium ion concentrations and
at this may be secondary to activation of the Na‘/H* exchange
sa result of a decrease in intracellular pH.“® Further in vitro
‘xperiments using two cell systems (human platelets and rat
haeochromocytoma cells) have shown that hyperforin increases
oth intracellular sodium ion and calcium ion concentrations, and
at this is mediated through activation by hyperforin of non-
selective cation channels.”

oe

epg

ru

ao

----- PAGE 564 -----
Hyperforin was shown to inhibit 5-HT reuptake in washed
platelets but not in fresh platelet-rich plasma, suggesting that
plasma-protein binding could be a limiting factor for 5-HT uptake
inhibition in vivo.“*

A commercial extract of St John's wort has exhibited
psychotropic and antidepressant activities in mice.)
hyperforin and hypericum extracts also demonstrated antidepres-
sant activity in a despair behaviour test in rats.”

In other experimental models of depression, including acute
ape deficit induced by stressors,
hypericum extract was shown to protect rats from the con-
sequences of unavoidable stress. In studies using the rat forced
swimming test, an experimental model of depression, hypericum
extracts induced a significant reduction in immobility.°!
Flavonoid fractions and flavonoids isolated from th
have also been reported to have antidepressant activity in the
forced swimming test in rats.”

Pure

and chronic forms of es

fractions

Cytotoxic and anticancer activities The findings of a
substantial body of preclinical research have documented anti-
cancer activites for H. perforatum preparations and _ their
constituents. A methanolic extract of H. perforatum (containing
hypericin 0.3% and hyperforin 3.8%) administered intraperito-
neally (15 mg/kg body weight) ten days before implantation of PC-
3 human Caucasian prostate adenocarcinoma cells in nude mice
significantly reduced tumour growth and the number of regional
lymph node metastases (p < 0.01 for both).°°?
at a concentration of 1.41 mg/mL also significantly inhibited the
proliferation of PC-3 cells in vitro (ICs = 0.42 mg/mL). Ethanolic
extracts of H. perforatum from fresh and dried plant material
(drug to extract ratio 1.3-1.5:1) inhibited the proliferation of
human malignant cells (e.g. leakamia cell lines K562 and U937) in
a concentration-dependent manner.’ The extracts also induced
apoptosis of glioblastoma LN229 cells. The observed effects were
potentiated by light activation. In a similar series of experiments
using extracts of H. perforatum containing 0.3% hypericins but
differing concentrations of hyperforin (0.21%, 2.21% or 3.25% w/
w) and flavonoids (5.3% or 10% w/w), antiproliferative activity of
the different extracts varied (Glso values: 248.3 to 621.3 g/mL and
378.2 to 911.7 ttg/mL for K562 and U937 cell lines, respectively),
indicating that the flavonoid constituents, as well as hypericin and
hyperforin, contribute to the observed effects. The possibility
that constituents other than hypericin have cytotoxic and/or
antiproliferative activity is supported by further in vitro work
which showed that a methanolic extract of H. perforatum
flowering parts inhibited growth of K562 cells and induced
apoptosis to a greater extent than did hypericin alone. In mic
injected with murine and human cancer cell lines, seven days’
pretreatment with hyperforin (as the stable dicyclohexylammo-
nium salt) intraperitoneally reduced several markers of cancer
infiltration and metastasis.”
tions of MT-450 rat mammary carcinoma cells, treatment with
hyperforin (100L of 2mmol/L solution subcutaneously at the
tumour site once daily) for two weeks starting 15 days after
tumour injection inhibited tumour growth to a similar extent as
did paclitaxel given according to the same dosage regimen.°*
There is evidence that the mechanism by which hyperforin induces
apoptosis involves the activation of caspases (inactive proen-
zymes) .©8 59)

Numerous preclinical studies have established that hypericin is
a photocytotoxic agent. Hypericin photosensitisation has been
"and in

several in vivo experimental models of cancer. The

) The same extract

&”) Tn rats given subcutaneous injec-

documented for various cancer cell lines in vitro!

St John’s Wort

photocytotoxic effects of hypericin towards human leukaemic
HL-60 cells can be potientiated in vitro by co-incubation with
acetazolamide and quercetin.” Phototoxicity and induction of
apoptosis also occur with pseudohypericin in vitro. Hypericin
photo-induced apoptosis may involve the tumour necrosis factor
(TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand, activation of cas-
pases, such as caspase-8,°'”” and inhibition of proteasome
function (which is involved in caspase activation)."”

Further in vitro studies have added a layer of complexity to the
above findings. Hypericin can induce apoptos S5
depending on the intracellular hypericin concentration and/or the
light-activating dose.) Furthermore, exposure of U937 cells to
hypericin and sub-lethal doses of light irradiation induced
subsequent photoresistance with light doses which normally
induced apoptosis.”

In an in vitro system involving the human cytochrome P450
enzyme CYP1A1, three commercially available H. perforatum
extracts as well as several constituents of H. perforatum extracts
(with the exception of rutin) inhibited the CYP1A1-catalysed
epoxidation of (+)-trans-7,8-dihydro-7,8-dihydroxy-benzo(a) pyr-
ene, the reaction which leads to formation of the carcinogenic
product diolepoxide 2.”

In vitro cytotoxicity against human colon carcinoma cells (CO
115) has been described for hyperforin-related constituents

isolated from Hypericum calycinum and Hypericum revolu-
(76)
Mm.

or necrce

tui

Antimicrobial activity Extracts of H. perforatum aerial parts
have antibacterial activity against Gram-positive bacteria, parti-
cularly Bacillus subtilis and B. cereus, but not Gram-negative
bacteria and yeasts, according to the findings of a series of in vitro
assays.”

A leaf extract of H. perforatum has been documented as
enhancing the immunity of mice towards Staphylococcus aureus
and Bordetella pertussis."® Hyperforin has antibacterial activity
against S. aureus,”
positive bacteria, including Streptococcus pyogenes and Coryne-
bacterium diphtheriae.” However, the antibacterial effects of
hyperforin are only observed at high concentrations.°°* Other
experiments have shown that S. aureus is able to acquire resis
to hyperforin, but that this does not occur with hyperforin
concentrations similar to those found in patients treated with H.
perforatum extracts for depression.“ Hyperforin did not exhibit
any growth inhibitory effect against Gram-negative bacteria, such
as Enterococcus faecalis, Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa or against Candida albicans.” Other antibacterial
constituents (imanine and novoimanine) have been isolated from
St John's wort.6* 5"

Several other species of Hypericum have been shown to have
antimicrobial activity.“ In disc-diffusion assays, 33 of 34
chloroform extracts of Hypericum species (not including H.
perforatum) showed substantial activity against a clinical isolate
of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.®

) multi-drug resistant S. aureus and Gram-

tance

Antiviral activity Flavonoid and catechin-containing fractions
have exhibited antiviral activity, inhibiting the influenza virus by
83-100%.*” Hypericin and pseudohypericin have been reported
to inhibit several encapsulated viruses in vitro, including herpes
mplex types 1 and 2,*5° 9) and human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1).°!° Hypericin has also
been reported to inactivate murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) and
Sindbis virus.°") The antiviral activity of hypericin appears to
involve a photoactivation process.°*°" An extract of a St John's
wort product (5-50 pL/mL; no further details provided) and pure

varicella-zoster virus

----- PAGE 565 -----
St John’s Wort

hypericin (S—20tmol/L) inhibited UV-induced HIV gene expres-
sion in HeLa cells in a concentration-dependent manner, whereas
hypericin without UV-induced HIV gene activation had no effect
on HIV gene expression.)

Other effects In vitro studies using a hamster vas deferens
smooth muscle cell line demonstrated that hyperforin induces the
release of calcium ions from mitochondrial or other sources
followed by activation of cellular metabolism. It is not known
whether this activity contributes to the antidepressant effects of
hyperforin.

Oral administration of a single dose of St John's wort (100, 200,
400, 600 or 800 mg/kg) to two strains of alcohol-preferring rats
significantly reduced alcohol intake in both strains.°”) In another
study in experimental alcoholism, acute intraperitoneal adminis-
tration of St John's wort (10-40 mg/kg), fluoxetine (1-10 mg/kg)
and imipramine (3-30 mg/kg) reduced alcohol intake in a dose-
dependent manner in a 12-hour, limited access, two-bottle choice
(ethanol/water) procedure." In alcohol-preferring mice, the dose
(Smg/kg administered orally by gavage) of a hyperforin-rich
carbon-dioxide extract of H. perforatum required to reduce the
intake of 10% ethanol to a statistically significant extent was 125-
fold lower than that required with a crude methanolic extract
(625 mg/kg) with negligible hyperforin content administered by
the same route.” In mice, oral administration of a Hypericum
perforatum extract (Ph-50) attenuated nicotine withdrawal
symptoms.” Depression, alcoholism and smoking are thought

to have some neurochemical similarities, such as low brain
(100, 101)

serotonin concentrations.

An extract of St John's wort was found to suppress
inflammation and leukocyte infiltration induced by carrageenan
and prostaglandin E; (PGE,) in mice.” In vitro, hypericin has
been shown to inhibit tumour necrosis factor-induced activation
of the transcription factor NF-«B,"°» specific growth factor-
regulated protein kinases?! and the release of arachidonic
acid and leukotriene By." In a rabbit model of proliferative
vitreoretinopathy (PVR), intravitreal injection of hypericin 0.1 mL
(10 or 100 pmol/L, but not 1 pmol/L) inhibited the progression of
PVR when compared with severity in control eyes five days after
hypericin administration." It was suggested that, as protein
kinase C is important in the cellular reactions occurring in PVR,
modulation of protein kinase C by hypericin may be a factor in
this system. Hypericin and pseudohypericin have been reported to
inhibit 12-lipoxygenase activity; the products of lipoxygenase-
catalysed reactions, include leukotrienes.” Hyperforin has also
been shown to inhibit the activity of enzymes involved in
inflammatory pathways: in vitro, hyperforin inhibited 5-lipox-
ygenase and cyclooxygenase 1, but not cyclooxygenase 2."

Antioxidant properties have been reported for H. perforatum
following in vitro experiments. St John's wort products (Nature's
Plus and Movana, respectively) obtained in the USA and labelled
as being hypericin- (0.3-0.5%) and hyperforin-standardised
(minimum 3%) attenuated superoxide production in an inverse
concentration-dependent manner in a cell-free system and in an
experimental model using human vascular tissue."! Hyperforin
isolated from H. perforatum reduced radical formation by
polymorphonuclear cells from healthy human donors after
stimulation with N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (ICso
= 1.8 pmol/L)."'"?) However, in other systems, hyperforin did not
exhibit any free-radical scavenging activity against 2,2-diphenyl-1-
picrylhydrazyl and was inactive in an enzymatic assay based on
oxygen radical production by horseradish peroxidase in the
presence of hydrogen peroxide.

Imanine was reported to reduce blood pressure and increase the
frequency and depth of breathing following intravenous admin-
istration (50 mg/kg) to rabbits.“ A study of the vasoconstrictor
action of water-soluble imanine and imanine on the isolated
rabbit ear indicated that their hypotensive action was not due to a
3) When perfused through the
isolated frog heart, both water-soluble imanine and imanine were
found to cause cardiac systolic arrest at a dilution of 1 x 10°.)
Proanthocyanidin-containing fractions isolated from St John's
wort have been reported to inhibit contractions of the isolated
guinea-pig heart induced by histamine, PGF, and potassium
chloride.)

A tonus-raising effect on isolated guinea-pig and rabbit uteri
has been documented for a crude aqueous extract.' Of the
group of plants investigated, St John's wort was reported to
exhibit the weakest uterotonic activity.

A dried methanol extract of St John's wort (no further details
provided) protected human neuroblastoma cells against hydrogen
peroxide induced apoptosis in vitro.''!>

Analgesic activity in mice has been reported for a total
flavonoid fraction of H. perforatum;'''® the active principle was
stated to be of the quercetin type.

Tannins isolated from St John's wort are stated to have mild
astringent activity.!!” The anthraquinone derivatives documented
for St John's wort do not possess any purgative action.'C°

direct effect on the vasculature.

Cc

Clinical trials with extracts of St John's wort have focused mainly
on its effects in patients with depression, although there have been
several studies exploring its use in other conditions, including
asonal affective disorder, chronic fatigue and premenstrual
syndrome."'!®)

‘al studies

Pharmacodynamics Initially, hypericin was thought to be
responsible for the antidepressant activity of St John's wort,
although, more recently, experimental®®*” and clinical evi-
dence!” has emerged to indicate that hyperforin is one of the
major constituents required for antidepressant activity.

The precise of St John's wort's
antidepressant effect remains unclear (see Pharmacological
Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
study involving 16 healthy volunteers who received St John's wort
extract (Neuroplant) 300 mg three times daily for seven days, St
John's wort extract did not influence plasma norepinephrine
(noradrenaline) concentrations, but significantly increased plasma
dihydroxyphenylacetic acid concentrations (the main metabolite
of dopamine), compared with placebo (p = 0.013).{2

Studies in humans have reported conflicting results with res
to the effects of St John's wort extracts on endocrinological
parameters. A double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study
in 12 healthy male volunteers investigated the effects of a single
dose of St John's wort extract (LI 160) (2700mg, 9 x 300-mg
tablets standardised to 0.3% hypericin) on plasma concentrations
of growth hormone, prolactin and cortisol.‘ A. significant
increase in plasma growth hormone concentration and a
significant decrease in plasma prolactin concentration were
observed following St John's wort administration relative to
placebo administration. Plasma cortisol concentrations were
unchanged. These findings suggest that this dose of St John's
wort extract may increase aspects of brain dopamine function in
humans, although further studies are required to confirm this,
assess dose-response relationships and determine whether there is

mechanism of action

----- PAGE 566 -----
evidence for effects on dopaminergic systems in patients with

depression treated with St John's wort.'*") Another study, which

used a randomised, three-way, crossover design, investigated the

s of a single dose of St John's wort extract (LI 160S) (600 or

300 mg) or placebo on hormone concentrations in 12 healthy male

volunteers.‘'??) Compared with placebo, St John's wort extract

(600 mg) increased cortisol secretion between 30 and 90 minutes

after dosing, indicating an influence of St John's wort on certain

CNS neurotransmitters. There was no difference between the

three groups with regard to adrenocorticotrophic hormone

(ACTH), growth hormone and prolactin secretion.”

By contrast, in a randomised, single-blind, placebo-controlled,
crossover study involving 12 healthy male volunteers, mean serum
ACTH concentrations, but not cortisol, growth hormone and
prolactin concentrations, were significantly increased following
oral administration of a St John's wort extract (WS-5570) at doses
of 600, 900 and 1200 mg/day on four different days (p < 0.05
versus placebo). However, there were no significant differenc
ACTH concentrations between groups when a statistical adjust-
ment (Bonferroni correction) was made for post-hoc tests.'!?*)
Differences in the findings of this study, compared with previous
work, may be due to differences between doses, products tested
and their bioavailabilities.“'??

Therapeutic effects Depression There are now over forty clinical
trials of H. perforatum preparations involving patients with
different types of depression, and many of these trials have
been included in systematic reviews.

A Cochrane systematic review included 37 randomised,

double-blind, controlled clinical trials of monopreparations of

H. perforatum involving a total of 4925 patients with

depressive disorders.?? Of these, 26 trials were placebo-

controlled, 14 compared H. perforatum preparations with
standard antidepressants (imipramine 50 to 150 mg daily, four
trials; fluoxetine 20 to 40 mg daily, four trials;

150 mg daily, three trials; amitriptyline 30 or 75 mg daily, two

trials; maprotiline 75 mg daily, one trial) and three of these

studies"?*?9 also included a placebo control group. Trials
involved a variety of H. perforatum preparations administered
at doses of 240 to 1800 mg extract daily. The treatment period
was typically four to six weeks (29 trials) although adminis-
tration periods ranged from four to 12 weeks overall. The most
frequently investigated product was LI-160 (Lichtwer Pharma,

Germany). Overall, 24 trials involved only patients with major

depression. In most trials (7 = 35), the Hamilton Rating Scale

for Depression (HAMD) was the instrument used to assess
outcomes, and the methodological quality of the majority of

effec

in

ertraline 75 to

the included studies was considered to be ‘reasonable to

good'.29

Of the 26 trials (involving 3320 participants) comparing H.
perforatum preparations with placebo, 23 provided data which
were eligible for meta-analysis. For these studies, the results
indicated that H. perforatum preparations were more effective
than placebo (response rate ratio (RRR), 95% confidence
interval (CI): 1.55, 1.42-1.70), although when the anal
limited to larger (i.e. more precise) trials in patients with major
depression only, the results showed a small benefit for H.
perforatum over placebo (RRR, 95% Cl: 1.15, 1.02-1.129).°
Similarly, meta-analysis of data from the 23 placebo-controlled
trials which used HAMD scores to a indicated
that H. perforatum preparations were more effective than
placebo (weighted mean difference (WMD), 95% Cl: —3.25,
—3.74 to —2.77), but when the analysis was restricted to the 12

was

outcome:

St John’s Wort

such trials involving only patients with major depression, the
effect was less marked (WMD, 95% CI: —2.48, —3.06 to
~1.89).

Meta-analysis of data from the 14 trials (involving 2283
participants) comparing H. perforatum with standard anti-
depressant agents indicated that H. perforatum preparations
had similar effects to those of standard antidepressants (RRR,
95% CI: 1.01, 0.93 to 1.10 and WMD, 95% CI: —0.06, —0.64
to 0.51 for trials providing response rate data (13 trials) and
HAMD scores (11 trials), respectively).°” Results were similar
for sub-analysis of the trials comparing H. perforatum
preparations with older antidepressants and comparisons
with newer antidepressants (selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors).

The conclusions drawn from this work were that the
evidence is inconsistent and complex. H. perforatum prepara-
tions and standard antidepressant agents appear to show
similar effects, whereas H. perforatum preparations have only
small benefits over placebo in patients with major depression;
in older studies in patients with mild-to-moderate depression,
H. perforatum preparations appear to be of more benefit than
placebo.) An important point is that there is heterogeneity
not only among the trials and their results, but also among the
different manufacturers! products tested. Products are not
necessarily equally effective, and the results of the analyses
above should not be extrapolated to other H. perforatum
preparations, which may differ considerably in their pharma-
ceutical quality (see Quality of plant material and commercial
products).

One of the trials included in the systematic review was a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre
study comparing an extract of H. perforatum (LI-160,
standardised for hypericin 0.12-0.28%) 900 mg daily with the
SSRI sertraline (which is authorised for the treatment of
ion) at a dose of 50 mg daily in 340 patients with major
essive disorder. The trial was funded by the National
Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine and the
National Institute of Mental Health, USA, and was designed to
assess whether or not H. perforatum extract was superior to
placebo after 8 weeks’ treatment.''? However, at the end of
the study, there were no statistically significant differences in
(changes in HAMD scores
and response rate) not only between H. perforatum extract and
placebo, but also between sertraline and placebo. Thus, this
trial was criticised for lacking the sensitivity at least to detect
the effectiveness of a treatment known to be effective (i.e.
sertraline).

A further issue which arose subsequently relates to
adherence to treatment among participants randomised to
the H. perforatum group. Analysis of blood samples available
for 97 of the 113 H. perforatum recipients revealed that 80
(82%) had detectable concentrations of hyperforin in at least
one sample, whereas 17 (17%) had no detectable hyperforin in
any of their samples.''””) The sensitivity threshold of the assay
was hyperforin 10ng/mL. Furthermore, of 104 of the 116
participants randomised to placebo for whom blood samples
were available, 18 (17%) had detectable concentrations of
hyperforin in at least one sample. By contrast, sertraline and/or
N-desmethylsertraline were detected in at least one sample for
all sertraline recipients for whom blood samples were available
(91 of 111). Reanalysis of the efficacy data using only data from
participants with plasma hyperforin concentrations consistent

the two primary outcome measure:

----- PAGE 567 -----
St John’s Wort

with their treatment allocation did not change the initial
findings."?”

A randomised, double-blind, multicentre trial comparing the
effects of a hydroalcoholic extract of H. perforatum herb (WS-
5570, drug to extract ratio 3-7: 1, standardised for hyperforin
3-6% and hypericin 0.12-0.28%; Schwabe Pharmaceuticals)
with those of paroxetine in the acute treatment of moderate to
severe depression has been published since the revised
Cochrane review was completed. In the study, after a placebo
run-in phase, 251 participants with acute major depre:
received H. perforatum extract 300mg three times daily
(increased to 1800 mg daily in non-responders), or paroxetine
20mg daily (40mg daily for non-responders), for six
8) At the end of the study, the H. perforatum extract
was reported to be at least as effective as paroxetine in reducing
symptoms of moderate to severe depression (mean (standard
deviation) reduction in HAMD scores from baseline values:
14.4 (8.8) and 11.4 (8.6) for H. perforatum and paroxetine,
respectively).

The review described above

on

weeks.'

) was an update of a previous

Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis of 27 rando-
mised controlled trials of H. perforatum preparations in
depressive disorders."? The updated review had stricter and
tighter inclusion and exclusion criteria for trials — only trials
which explicitly stated that the method of treatment allocation
was random and which used a double-blind design were
included, and trials investigating H. perforatum for prevention
of depression, those using combination preparations contain-
ing H. perforatum, comparing H. perforatum with drugs not
explicitly recommended as antidepressant agents, measuring
only physiological parameters and those with a treatment
period of less than four weeks were excluded.?” Thus, the
previous Cochrane review included seven trials which were
excluded from the updated review.

The results of the earlier meta-analysis showed that H.
perforatum preparations were significantly superior to placebo
in the short-term treatment of mild to moderately severe
depressive disorders (rate ratio 2.47 and 95% confidence
interval (95% Cl) 1.69-3.61). and as effective as conventional
antidepressant agents (single preparations, rate ratio 1.01 and
95% CI 0.87-1.16), although for several reasons — for example,
the use of low doses of conventional antidepressants and the
trials involving small numbers of patients — this evidence was
considered inadequate for establishing whether H. perforatum
preparations were as effective as conventional antidepressant
drugs.” Further studies comparing St John's wort prepara-
tions with standard antidepressant agents in well-defined
patient groups and over longer periods were considered
n ary,(!29)

Another earlier meta-analysis employed tighter inclusion
criteria for trials in an effort to increase the validity of the
analysis." It included only randomised, blinded, controlled
trials of St John's wort as a single preparation, which involved
patients with depressive disorders as defined by the standard
criteria ICD-10 (International Statistical Classification of
Diseases and Related Health Problems), DSM-IIIR (Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual) or DSM-IV and which used the
Hamilton Depression (HAMD) Scale for measuring clinical
outcomes. Six such trials involving 651 patients with mainly
mild to moderately severe depressive disorders were included;
two trials were placebo controlled and four compared St John's
wort with standard antidepressants. The studies lasted for 4-6
weeks and the doses of St John's wort extract ranged from 200

to 900 mg daily; the range for total hypericin administered was
0.75-2.7 mg daily.

This meta-analysis showed that the response rate for St
John's wort was significantly greater than that for placebo
(73.2% versus 37.9%, respectively, relative risk 1.48 and 95%
CI 1.03-1.92) and similar to that observed with tricyclic
antidepressants (64% versus 6.4% for St John's wort and
tricyclic antidepressants, respectively, relative risk 1.11 and
95% CI 0.92-1.29)."3 Despite the stringent inclusion criteria
for trials in this meta-analysis, it was concluded that further
studies are required in order to address methodological

problems before it can be concluded that St John's wort is an
(130)

effective antidepressant.

A systematic review of large-scale observational studies of
H. perforatum extracts in patients with depressive disorders is
also available. The review included 16 non-randomised studies
(involving a total of 34804 patients) each involving at least 100
participants with depressive disorders who were treated with
H. perforatum preparations for at least four weeks.“'*” Fifteen
of the studies reported physician-assessed response rates, and
these ranged from 65% to 100% for short-term studies (four to
around six weeks' treatment; 13 studies) and were 60% and
69% for the two long-term studies (52 weeks’ treatment).
Patient-assessed response rates ranged from 63% to 98% (ten
studies). These results suggest that the H. perforatum extracts
ed are effective for mild and moderately severe depre:
disorders, although this conclusion cannot be definitive since
the studies did not include random allocation to treatment and
many had other methodological limitations.''*") Furthermore,
the studies included in the review assessed the effects of 12
different H. perforatum products, with some differences in
how they were standardised, administered at doses ranging
from 360 to 1200 mg extract daily. Thus, the results cannot be
extrapolated directly to other H. perforatum preparations with
a different phytochemical profile.

One of the studies included in the review assessed the effects

as.

ive

of an H. perforatum preparation in children aged under 12
years with symptoms of depression and_psychovegetative
disturbances. This study reported the highest physician- and
patients-assessed response rates (100% and 98%, respec-
tively).
the effects of H. perforatum preparations in children and
adolescents, although the efficacy of such preparations in these
patient groups requires testing in randomised controlled trials.

In a dose-ranging trial involving 348 patients with mild to
moderate depression according to ICD-10 criteria, patients
were randomised to receive St John's wort extract three times
daily equivalent to either 1 mg (7 = 119), 0.33 mg (m = 115) or
0.17 mg (n = 114) hypericin for six weeks." At the end of the
treatment period, there was a significant reduction in HAMD
scores compared with baseline values. The response rates
(according to recognised criteria) were 68%, 65% and 62% for
1, 0.33 and 0.17mg hypericin, respectively; the differences
between groups were not statistically significant. Thus, the
study showed that there was no dose-dependent effect of
hypericin in St John's wort extracts.

) Other open, uncontrolled studies» have explored

Smoking cessation A preliminary, uncontrolled study has

ass

sed the effects of a methanol (80%) extract of H.
perforatum herb (LI-160, standardised for hypericin 900 ug
and a minimum of 2% hyperforin; drug to extract ratio 3-6 : 1)
as an aid to motivational/behavioural support in adult smokers
who wish to stop smoking. The rationale for inve:

----- PAGE 568 -----
perforatum in this indication is that there is an association
between smoking and depression: nicotine may act as an
antidepressant in some smokers, and depress
precipitated by nicotine withdrawal, i.e. smoking cessation.
In the study, point prevalence and continuous abstinence rates
were both 18% at 3 months, and 0% at 12 months (intention-
to-treat analysis); these rates compare poorly with response
rates in placebo groups in controlled clinical studies of other
smoking ces (135)

sation interventions.

Seasonal affective disorder The effects of St John's wort extracts

have been investigated in studies involving subjects with
seasonal affective disorder (SAD),"°% '%” although as yet there
have not been any trials that have included a placebo control
group. Twenty individuals with SAD were randomised to
receive St John's wort (LI 160) (300mg) three times daily
(equivalent to 0.9mg hypericin) with or without bright light
therapy." After four weeks, there were significant reductions
in HAMD scores in both groups compared with baseline values
and there were no statistically significant differences between
groups. Another study evaluated data from individuals with
mild to moderate SAD who had used St John's wort (300 mg)
three times daily (equivalent to 0.9mg hypericin) with (1 =
133) or without light therapy (” = 168) for eight weeks.''*”
The study was not randomised and involved data collection by
postal questionnaires. Data from 301 returned questionnaires
were suitable for analysis. Significant reductions in the mean
SAD scores were observed in both groups compared with
baseline values; the differences in the SAD scores between
groups were statistically non-significant.

Antiviral activity Antiviral activity has been reported for

hypericin against human immunodeficiency _ virus
(HIV)."3*'99) Several uncontrolled studies in HIV-positive
patients who received St John's wort extract have reported
immunologic and clinical benefits, including increases in CD4
cell counts in some patients.“4°'* In a phase I, dose-
escalating study, 30 HIV-positive patients with CD4 cell counts
<350 cells/mm’ received intravenous synthetic hypericin twice
weekly (0.25 or 0.5mg/kg body weight), three times weekly
(0.25 mg/kg) or oral hypericin daily (0.5 mg/kg). Sixteen
patients discontinued treatment early because of toxic effects,
and phototoxicity in several other patients prevented comple-
tion of dose escalation. Antiretroviral activity as assessed by
significant changes in HIV p24 antigen level, HIV titre, HIV
RNA copie:

In contrast, in a phase-I dose-escalation study involving 19
patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection who received
hypericin administered orally at doses of 0.05 and 0.10 mg/kg
daily for eight weeks, there was no evidence of antiviral activity
as determined by median changes in HCV RNA concentrations
in plasma.''*)

and CD4 cell counts was not observed.

Other studies The potential for the use of St John's wort in 20

individuals presenting with fatigue*® and in 19 women with
self-reported premenstrual syndrome''*”) has also been
explored in uncontrolled pilot studies. Significant improve-
ments in perceived fatigue and in symptoms of depression and
anxiety were seen after six weeks' treatment with St John's
wort (equivalent to 0.9mg hypericin daily) compared with
baseline values‘! and in overall premenstrual syndrome
scores after treatment with St John's wort (equivalent to 0.9 mg
hypericin daily) for two menstrual cycles.) Thus, there is

St John’s Wort

scope for conducting randomised controlled trials of St John's
wort in these conditions.''** '*)

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled _ trial
assessed the effects of an 80% methanol extract of St John's
wort (LI-160; containing 300 mg extract, drug to extract ratio
4-7:1) in 175 patients with somatoform disorders (usually
characterised by chronic multiple physical symptoms not
explained by underlying organic pathology). Participants
received St John's wort extract 300mg twice daily (n = 87),
or placebo (m = 88), for six weeks. At the end of the study,
according to an intention-to-treat analysis, St John's wort
recipients, compared with placebo recipients, showed statisti-
cally significant improvements on the six individual variables
comprising the primary efficacy analysis and in the combined
score (p < 0.0001 for all comparisons).

Another randomised, double-blind, parallel-group trial
investigated the effects of LI-160 300mg extract twice daily
to a maximum of 1800 mg extract
daily at the physician's discretion), or placebo, for 12 weeks in
41 individuals with social phobia (social anxiety disorder). At
the end of the study, there was no statistically significant
difference between the two groups in Liebowitz Social Anxiety
Scale scores, the primary outcome measure (p = 0.79).(1*”)

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, 179
women with menopause-related psychovegetative symptoms
received a combination preparation of St John's wort and black
cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa) or placebo for six weeks.
The results indicated that the combination product had a
significantly greater effect on the symptoms than did placebo.

A randomised, double-blind, phase I study involving 55
healthy volunteers who received St John's wort (900 mg) daily
(containing 0.5% hyperforin), St John's wort (900mg) daily
(containing 5.0% hyperforin) or placebo for eight days
investigated the effects on quantitative electroencephalogram
as an indicator of drug-induced pharmacological action.”
Reproducible central pharmacodynamic effects were apparent
in both groups of St John's wort recipients compared with
placebo recipients. The effects were greater in subjects who
received extract containing 5.0% hyperforin than in those who
received extract containing 0.5% hyperforin.

Placebo-controlled, crossover studies investigating the effects
of St John's wort (0.9 and 1.8 mg) on the sleep polysomnogram
of healthy subjects reported that both doses of St John's wort
significantly increased rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
latency compared with placebo, but had no effect on REM
sleep duration or other parameters of sleep architecture.”

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving 23 overweight but otherwise healthy adults, subjects
who received treatment with St John's wort (900mg) daily,
Citrus aurantium extract (975 mg) daily and caffeine (528 mg)
daily lost significantly more body weight than did subjects in
the placebo and no-treatment control groups.5)

A placebo-controlled, crossover study in 19 healthy volun-
teers who received St John's wort for 15 days either alone or in
combination with ethanol (to achieve a blood alcohol
concentration of 0.05%) reported that there were no

differences between the two groups in sense of well-being or
152)

(increased in increments

adverse events.‘

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, six-week
trial involving 72 long-distance runners and triathletes reported
significant improvements in endurance capacity in subjects who
received vitamin E with St John's wort compared with subjects

who received vitamin E alone or placebo.''”*)

----- PAGE 569 -----
St John’s Wort

In a randomised, double-blind trial involving 21 patients
with symmetrical mild to atopic dermatitis,
participants used a topical preparation of H. perforatum
(cream containing 5% of a carbon-dioxide extract; drug to
extract ratio 20-25: 1, containing total 9.9% hyperforins) with
a final hyperforin content of 1.5%, or placebo, twice daily for
Treatment was randomly allocated to be
applied to the left or right side of the body. At the end of the
study, the H. perforatum preparation was found to be superior
to placebo with respect to the primary outcome measure
(clinical intensity of skin lesions; p < 0.022 for H. perforatum
versus placebo).

In a randomised, double-blind, crossover trial involving 54
diabetic and non-diabetic patients with polyneuropathy, the
analgesic effects of an H. perforatum preparation (Calmigen,
Sanopharm; each tablet containing hypericin 900 pig, no further
details of preparation provided) one tablet three times daily
were compared with those of placebo." The rationale for
investigating the effects of H. perforatum on pain was centred

moderate

four weeks."

doses, respectively. Peak plasma

concentrations were seen with

hypericin after 2.0-2.6 hours and with pseudohypericin after 0.4—
0.6 hours. The elimination half-life of hypericin was between 24.8

and 26.5 hours. Repeated doses

daily resulted in steady-state concentrations after four days.'

Oral administration of the St
(300 mg, equivalent to 14.8 mg hy,

of LI 160 (300mg) three times
160)

John's wort extract WS 5572
perforin) resulted in peak plasma

concentrations of 150ng/mL being reached 3.5 hours after

administration.) The

Following repeated doses of
estimated steady-state plasma
100 ng/mL.

oral administration of a single

elimination

half-life 9 hours.
300mg three times daily, the
hyperforin concentrations were

was

In open trials involving 18 healthy male volunteers, following

tablet of a dry extract of H.

perforatum (STW-3, containing 612mg extract equivalent to

ypericin 600g, pseudohyperic

parameters for hypericin,
respectively, were: maximum p!

in 1200ug, hyperforin 13.5 mg,

flavonoids 73.2 mg; drug to extract ratio S—8: 1), pharmacokinetic
pseudohypericin

and _hyperforin,
lasma concentration, 3.14, 8.5

around evidence that the antidepressant effect of H. perfor-
atum preparations is due to effects on monoaminergic systems,
and that effects on such systems may be the mechanism of
action of agents such as tricyclic antidepressants currently used
in painful polyneuropathy. In the study, patients! daily ratings
of pain using numeric rating scales were used as the primary
outcome measure. At the end of the treatment period, there
were no statistically significant differences in total pain score
between the H. perforatum and placebo groups (14 and 15,
respectively; p = 0.05), in individual pain rating scales (p = 0.09
to 0.33), or in participants’ evaluations of pain relief (p =
0.07).

In a double-blind, controlled, crossover study, 12 healthy
volunteers aged 18 to 54 years received tablets containing an
extract of H. perforatum (Hyperiforte, each tablet contained

an

peal

83.5 ng/mL; time to maximum concentration, 8.1, 3.0 and 4.4

ours; elimination half-life, 23.8, 25.4 and 19.6 hours.\!© The
flavonoid compounds quercetin and isorhamnetin showed two

's of maximum plasma concentration, separated by about four

jours (quercetin: 47.7 ng/mL by 1.2 hours and 43.8 ng/mL by 5.5
ours; isorhamnetin: 7.6 ng/mL by 1.5 hours and 9.0 ng/mL by 6.4
ours). The elimination half-life for these constituents was 4.2

and 4.5 hours for quercetin

and isorhamnetin, respectively.

Pharmacokinetic parameters following multiple dosing (STW-3
once daily for 14 days) were similar.'

62)

In an open, randomised, two-way, crossover study involving 12

ealthy voluntee:

s, the bioavailability of hyperforin after a single

ora
dry
fori

administration of a softgel capsule containing H. perforatum
extract 300mg (containing 0.3% hypericin and 5% hyper-
n) was found to be superior to that following a single oral

300 mg extract standardised for

yperforin 3-5 % and hypericin

0.3%). Participants received placebo, and three and six tablets

of the extract as a single

ose in a random order and

undertook a battery of memory tests before and after each

administration. The results in

icated that the H. perforatum

extract did not have nootropic effects, although as a sample
size calculation does not appear to have been carried out, it is

possible that the study did not
to detect any differences.

A preliminary study found tl
from H. perforatum and Cai
surface

area of wounds in

ave adequate statistical power

hat a mixture of oils extracted
lendula arvensis reduced the
women who had undergone

Caesarean section during chi

dbirth, when compared with

control (wheatgerm oil). However, the study did not involve
random allocation to treatment and was not blinded, so the
findings cannot be attributed definitively to the intervention.

The use of intravesical instillation of hypericin as a
photosensitiser in human bladders together with blue light
irradiation and fluorescence detection has been described as a
diagnostic tool for the detection of bladder carcinoma. The
technique had 98.5% specificity in detecting carcinoma in situ
and dysplasia, and had a sensitivity of 93%.)

Pharmacokinetics Detailed pharmacokinetic studies have been
carried out with the hypericin-standardised St John's wort extract
LI 160 and with certain other H. perforatum extracts.'’°!
Administration of single oral doses of LI 160 (300, 900 and
1800 mg) to healthy male volunteers resulted in peak plasma
hypericin concentrations of 1.5, 7.5 and 14.2 ng/mL for the three

administration of a hard gelatin capsule containing the same

extract."'©) The mean (standard

deviation) peak plasma hyper-

forin concentrations were 168.4 (57.8) and 84.3 (33.5) ng/mL

following administration of t

e softgel and hard gelatin capsules,

respectively, although a p value was not reported. Hypericin,

however, was not detectable in a

most half of the participants for

each dosage form. In nine male patients with superficial transition

cell carcinoma of the bladder,

intravesical instillation to the

bladder of 40 mL of a 8 mol/L hypericin solution for 2 to 3 hours

followed by photodynamic diagn

osis of bladder tumours, plasma

concentrations of hypericin in samples taken one hour after the

end of the instillation were belo

1.164)

w the detection limit (<6 nmol/

A method for the simultaneous determination of hypericin and
hyperforin in human plasma using liquid chromatography and
tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS) has been developed and
validated." Using the method, the limits of quantification for

hypericin and hyperforin were

0.05ng/mL and 0.035 ng/mL,

respectively. These low limits may allow detection of ingestion

of hypericin and hyperforin
discontinuation of treatment.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Data relating to the frequency and type

associated with treatment with St John's wort extracts are

available from randomised controlled trials, systematic reviews

for up to several days after

of adverse effects

----- PAGE 570 -----
and meta-analyses of such trials, and from  post-marketing
surveillance and other observational studies. Collectively, the
data indicate that certain St John's wort extracts are well-tolerated
when taken at recommended doses for shorter periods of time
(around eight weeks).34'° Data from the small number of
longer-term (one year) studies support the tolerability of certain St
John's wort extracts, although further investigation of long-term
use is warranted. Adverse events/effects reported are generally
mild and most commonly gastrointestinal symptoms. These
observations, however, are based on data collected in the settings
of formal randomised or observational studies, usually where H.
perforatum has been prescribed under the supervision of a
physician, not taken as self-treatment.

A small number of studies has explored the effects of self-
treatment with St John's wort products. In a cro: tional study
involving 452 members of a depression self-help group (response
rate = 17%), 63 of the 452 respondents (28%) reported adverse
effects, including psychological symptoms, allergic reactions and
visual disturbances, that they believed to be related to use of St
John's wort." The safety of St John's wort products taken as
self-treatment without supervision by a healthcare professional
requires further study.

A Cochrane systematic review included 37 randomised, double-
blind, controlled clinical trials of monopreparations of H.
perforatum and involving a total of 4925 patients with depressive
disorders (see Therapeutic effects, Depression).?* Of the 26
placebo-controlled trials included in the review, data for analysis
of the number of participants withdrawing for any reason were
available from 19 trials, for withdrawing due to adverse effects
from nine trials and for numbers of patients reporting adverse
effects from 16 trials. Compared with placebo recipients, slightly
fewer H. perforatum recipients withdrew from trials for any
reason (odds ratio, 95% Cl: 0.82, 0.64-1.06), withdrew due to
adverse effects (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.61, 0.28-1.31), and reported
adverse effects (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.79, 0.61-1.03). Compared
with SSRIs, H. perforatum extracts were associated with a slightly
lower probability of withdrawing from the study due to advers
effects (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.60, 0.31-1.15; data from six trials)
and reporting of adverse effects (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.75, 0.52-
1.08; data from five trials), whereas overall withdrawal rates were
similar (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.95, 0.65-1.40; data from six
trials).°? Compared with older antidepressant agents, H.
perforatum extracts were associated with a lower probability of
withdrawing for any reason (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.65, 0.46-0.92;
data from seven trials), withdrawing due to adverse effects (odds
ratio, 95% Cl: 0.25, 0.14-0.45; data from six trials) and of
reporting adverse effects (odds ratio, 95% CI: 0.39, 0.31-0.50;
data from seven trials). It is important to consider that there is
qualitative and quantitative variation in the composition of
different manufacturers’ products and the results of the analyses
above should not be extrapolated to other H. perforatum
preparations.

The review described above
inclusion and

» Was an update, with tighter

previous Cochrane
systematic review of 27 randomised controlled trials of H.
perforatum preparations in depressive disorders.” The previous
review reported that, in the trials comparing St John's wort with
standard antidepressants, the proportions of patients reporting
side-effects were 26.3% and 44.7%, respectively (rate ratio 0.57
and 95% CI 0.4-0.69)."??) Another meta-analysis which employed
tight inclusion criteria reported that tricyclic antidepressants were
associated with a higher proportion of side-effects than were St

exclusion criteria, of a

St John’s Wort

John's wort preparations (47% versus 26.4%, respectively, relative
risk 1.72 and 95% CI 1.30-2.14).8

A randomised, double-blind, multicentre trial comparing the
effects of a hydroalcoholic extract of H. perforatum herb (WS-
5570, drug to extract ratio 3-7: 1, standardised for hyperforin 3-
6% and hypericin 0.12-0.28%; Schwabe Pharmaceuticals) with
those of paroxetine in the acute treatment of moderate to severe
depression has been published since the revised Cochrane
review) was completed. In the study, 251 participants with
acute major depression received H. perforatum extract 300mg
three times daily (increased to 1800 mg daily in non-responders),
or paroxetine 20 mg daily (40 mg daily for non-responders), for six
weeks.'®) During the study, 55% of H. perforatum recipients
reported a total of 172 adverse events and 76% of paroxetine
recipients reported a total of 269 adverse events, representing
incidences of 0.035 and 0.060 adverse events per day of exposure
for H. perforatum and paroxetine, respectively. Gastrointestinal
adverse events were the most common adverse events reported for
both groups. Data were not provided on numbers and types of
adverse events considered to be related to treatment.

A systematic review of large-scale observational studies of H.
perforatum extracts in patients with depressive disorders also
provides data on adverse events. The review included 16 non-
randomised studies (involving a total of 34804 patients) each
involving at least 100 participants with depressive disorders who
were treated with H. perforatum preparations for at least four
weeks (see Therapeutic effects, Depression)."'*") Overall, 13
studies reported data on proportions of participants withdrawing
due to adverse events; these ranged from 0% to 2.8% in short-
term studies and from 3.4% to 5.7% in longer-term (one year)
stud: tudies reported data on proportions of partici-
pants with adverse events (range 049.3%) and 12 (not the same
12 studies) reported data on proportions of participants with side-
effects (range 0-5.9%). These data, however, should be inter-
preted cautiously as most of the studies did not describe
adequately how these data were collected, clear definitions for
the terms adverse events and adverse effects were not always
provided, and as no serious adverse events were reported among
the 30000 patients, this raises questions about the methods used
to collect data." The most frequently reported adverse events or
side-effects were gastrointestinal symptoms, followed by increased
sensitivity to light and other skin reactions.

Twelve

Photosensitivity Sensitivity to sunlight following the ingestion of
hypericum or hypericin, the photosensitising agent in H.
perforatum,"°* S is known as hypericism.

Several studies have explored the photosensitising potential of
hypericin-containing H. perforatum extract following oral admin-
istration. In a double-blind, crossover, single-dose study involving
13 healthy volunteers who received placebo or St John's wort
extract (LI 160) (900, 1800 and 3600 mg containing 0, 2.81, 5.62
and 11.25mg total hypericin, respectively), no evidence of
photosensitivity was observed with or without St John's wort
following skin irradiation with both UV-A and UV-B light 4 hours
after dosing.” In a multiple-dose study in which 50 volunteers
received St John's wort (LI 160) (600mg) three times daily
(equivalent to 5.6 mg total hypericin daily) for 15 days, a moderate
increase in UV-A sensitivity was ob
used were higher than those recommended therapeutically. In
another single-dose study, administration of St John's wort (LI
160) (1800 mg, equivalent to 5.4 mg total hypericin) to 12 healthy
volunteers resulted in a mean serum total hypericin concentration
of 43 ng/mL and a mean skin blister fluid concentration of 5.3 ng/

served.) However, the doses

----- PAGE 571 -----
St John’s Wort

mL." After administration of St John's wort (300mg) three
times daily for seven days in order to achieve steady-state
concentrations, the mean serum total hypericin concentration was
12.5ng/mL and the mean skin blister fluid concentration was
2.8ng/mL; these concentrations are below those estimated to be
phototoxic.'”” Further randomised, controlled, single- (six or 12
tablets of LI-160, equivalent to 5.4 and 10.8mg_hypericins,
respectively; n = 48) and multiple-dose studies (three tablets of LI-
160 daily, equivalent to 2.7 mg hypericins daily, for seven da
24) found no statistically significant differenc
erythema threshold doses (of light irradiation), erythema index
and pigmentation index between treated and untreated skin areas
(p > 0.05 for each).(171 17)

Collectively, the evidence indicates that the threshold for
phototoxicity of hypericin is between 100 and 1000ng/mL.\'7)
Since serum and skin concentrations of hypericin after oral
loses are below 100ng/mL,
photosensitivity seems unlikely. However, caution is advised as it is
possible that there may be unusual absorption of hypericin in
some individuals and, particularly in fair-skinned individuals and
after extended periods of solar irradiation, there may be increased
susceptibility to the photosensitising properties of hypericin.‘'”?

A study reported that HIV-positive patients treated with oral
hypericin (0.05 mg/kg) for 28 days developed mild symptoms of
photosensitivity on exposure to sunlight and that two patients
developed intolerable symptoms of photosensitivity when the dose
was increased to 0.16mg/kg."') In a dose-escalating study
involving 30 HIV-infected patients treated with oral (0.5 mg/kg
daily) or intravenous hypericin (starting dosage 0.25 mg/kg twice
or three times weekly), 16 patients discontinued treatment before
completing eight weeks of therapy because of moderate or severe
phototoxicity; severe cutaneous phototoxicity was observed in 11
out of 23 evaluable patients.''*”
laboratory adverse events were infrequent: elevation of alkaline
phosphatas.
than five times normal values was noted in two and three patients,
respectively.

The effects of topical application of H. perforatum extract on
skin sensitivity have also been investigated. In a randomised
controlled trial, 16 healthy volunteers with no history of skin
disease or photosensitivity were treated with H. perforatum oil
(containing hypericin 110pg/mL) or H. perforatum ointment
(containing an alcoholic H. perforatum extract with a final
hypericin concentration of 301g/mL). The oil or ointment was
applied to a two centimetre test area on one forearm of
participants for 24 hours. Controls were an untreated test area
of the same forearm, and the untreated other forearm. After
removal of the oil or ointment, both forearms of participants
received increasing doses of solar simulated irradiation (24, 48, 96
and 144 J/cm). No phototoxic reactions were observed in any of
the participants, and there was no change in the minimal
erythema dose in either the oil or the ointment group,”
although data to support the latter statement were not shown.
There was a significant increase in the erythema index following
treatment with H. perforatum oil (which contained the higher
concentration of hypericin) but not after H. perforatum ointment
(p < 0.01 and p > 0.05, respectively, compared wit
untreated skin), although this may not be clinically relevant since
the minimal erythema dose did not change. The phototoxic
potential of topical application of the H. perforatum preparations
tested appears to be low, although caution is necessary,
particularly as hypericin may penetrate more highly through
broken or lesional skin, and there may be increased susceptibility

5

in minimum

administration of recommended

Other serious clinical or

> and hepatic aminotransferase concentrations to more

values for

to the photosensitising properties of hypericin in fair-skinned
individuals and after extended periods of solar irradiation.’

A case report describes a 45-year-old woman who developed
blisters on two occasions at the treatment site following laser
therapy to her legs for multiple solar keratoses.” It was stated
that the patient revealed that she was taking St John's wort,
although a sample of the product was not obtained and, therefore,
no analysis was undertaken. The blisters resolved and, after
stopping treatment with St John's wort, the patient underwent a
further session of laser treatment without experiencing adverse
effects.

Delayed hypersensitivity or photodermatitis has been docu-
mented for St John's wort following the ingestion of a herbal tea

made from the leaves.”

(177, 178) (179, 180)

Psychiatric effects Cases of mania ) and hypomania
ave been reported in individuals taking St John's wort
preparations. Two cases of mania were reported in patients with
bipolar depression who began self-treatment with standardised St
John's wort extract (900mg) daily"”® and one in a patient
experiencing a moderate depressive episode who was taking both
sertraline and St John's wort (dosage not known).''”) A case of
ypomania was reported in a woman with panic disorder and
unipolar major depression who had_ discontinue
treatment one week before starting St John's wort tincture.
Two cases of hypomania were reported in individuals with no
istory of bipolar disorder.''*”
electroconvulsive therapy and who had previously taken various
antidepressant drugs, including venlafaxine, fluvoxamine, moclo-
bemide and nortriptyline, experienced a hypomanic episode six
weeks after starting St John's wort (dosage not stated). A man
with symptoms of post-traumatic stress s diagnosed
with an acute manic episode after three months of self-treatment
with St John's wort (dosage not stated).

The cases described above, along with five other cases of mania,
one of hypomania, two of schizophrenia, two of delirium and one
of acute anxiety, were included in a review of psychotic events
associated with administration of St John's wort products. Across
the 17 cases, the onset of symptoms ranged from two days to six
months after initiation of St John's wort treatment."'*! The
dosage of St John's wort taken was stated in only
cases; this was within recommended dosages except in one case
where an excessively high dose was reported to have been taken
(18 g; no further details provided). All these reports stated that the
symptoms had resolved after stopping treatment with St John's
wort, although in one case the patient improved but initially
remained agitated des ation of St John's wort."'®” None of
the cases involved rechallenge with St John's wort. Typically, these
cases have involved self-treatment with St John's wort products,
rely on self-report of St John's wort use, have not obtained blood
samples for analysis of constituents of H. perforatum and/or their
metabolites and have not obtained samples of the product for
analysis. Also, in most cases, there were other pharmacological
factors and/or underlying illnesses that could have been respon-
sible for or contributed to the observed events.

sertraline
(179)

A man who had received

disorder wa:

ix of these

ite c

Other effects A case of subacute toxic neuropathy possibly
related to the use of St John's wort and subsequent exposure to
sunlight has been reported."'*” A woman developed stinging pains
in areas exposed to the sun (face and hands) four weeks after
starting treatment with St John's wort (500 mg/day, extract and
hypericin content not stated); the report did not state whether the
woman was using any other products. Her symptoms improved

----- PAGE 572 -----
three weeks after stopping St John's wort and disappeared over the
next two months.

There en reports of sensory nerve hypersensitivity
occurring in individuals who have taken St John's wort prepara-
tions (tablets or tinctures).(!*?

There is an isolated report of confusion, disorientation and
hypertensive crisis (blood pressure 210/140 mmHg) in a 41-year-
old man seven days after he began taking a St John's wort product
for work-related str It was reported that the man had
consumed aged cheese and red wine before onset of the delirium,
which is suggestive of hypertension associated with the use of a
monoamine oxidase inhibitor.“ However, although previous in
vitro experiments have indicated that H. perforatum extracts had
monoamine oxidase inhibitory activity, this has not been
confirmed in subsequent in vitro studies (see Pharmcological
Actions, In vitro and animal studies), and consensus is that St
John's wort is not a monoamine oxidase inhibitor."''® In addition,
no analysis of blood samples or of the St John's product appears
to have been undertaken, thus alternative explanations for the

ave bi

event cannot be ruled out.

St John's wort extract (BNO-1385, containing 255-285 mg
extract equivalent to hypericin 900 tg) 255 to 285 mg three times
daily taken for 14 days had no significant effect on heart rate
variability, cognitive performance and parameters of autonomic
function (vasoconstrictory response of cutaneous blood flow and
skin conductance response following a single deep inspiration)
according to the results of a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, three-arm, crossover trial involving 12 healthy male
volunteers. (Decrease in heart rate variability is an effect observed
with chronic administration of tricyclic antidepressant agents,
although the implications of this for morbidity and mortality in
patients with depression are not yet understood.) '®9 In
contrast, amitriptyline 25mg daily significantly decreased heart
rate variability and significantly influenced the parameters of
autonomic function. The effects of another St John's wort herb
extract (Hyperiforte, 300 mg extract containing hypericin 990 pg,
pseudohypericin 526g and hyperforin 9-151g) 900mg or
1800mg as a single dose on cognitive and psychomotor
performance were compared with those of amitriptyline 25 mg
in a randomised, placebo-controlled, crossover study involving 13
healthy volunteers. Recipients of H. perforatum extract, compared
with placebo, experienced a dose-dependent impairment in one of
the eight tests (digit symbol substitution test), whereas amitripty-
line recipients showed statistically significant impairments in
performance in seven of the eight tests.”

In a case-control study, 37 patients with raised serum thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) (7-20 U/mL)
matched for age and sex to 37 individuals with normal TSH
concentrations (1-3 tU/mL) selected from the same set of patient
records, were interviewed regarding their exposure to St John's
wort products and other prescription and non-prescription
medicines. Four participants with raised TSH concentrations
and two with normal TSH concentrations reported that they had
taken St John's wort products within six months of the TSH test
(odds ratio, 95% CI for raised TSH concentrations associated
with self-reported exposure to St John's wort during the specified
time period: 2.12, 0.36 to 12.36; p > 0.05)."'*® The small sample
size may mean that the study lacked the statistical power to detect
an association between St John's wort exposure and raised TSH
concentrations. Other methodological issues include the possibi-
lity of confounding by indication, since individuals with
hypothyroidism may experience symptoms of depression and,

concentrations

St John’s Wort

88) Further

therefore, be more likely to take St John's wort.
research to assess the possibility of effects of H. perforatum on
thyroid function may be warranted.

There are two isolated reports of sexual dysfunction, including
decreased libido and erectile dysfunction, associated with use of St
John's wort products. In one man, previous symptoms of sexual
dysfunction, possibly related to use of a conventional antidepres-
sant agent which had resolved on stopping treatment, reappeared
one week after initiation of treatment with St John's wort.‘*?)
Another report describes a man who experienced decreased libido
whilst taking St John's wort for nine months.'!”

Preclinical data

The consumption of large quantities of St John's wort by grazing
animals has been associated with the development of photo-
sensitivity???) Mice given 0.2-0.5mg of the herb were
found to develop severe photodynamic effects.'°?” Studies using
cell cultures of human keratinocytes incubated with hypericin or
St John's wort extract and exposed to UV-A resulted in a
reduction in the LCs (lethal concentration) with hypericin, but
only a mild reduction with hypericum."”” From these findings it
as been estimated that at least 30 times the therapeutic dose
ary to produce phototoxic effects in humans.”

It has been shown in in vitro experiments using a human
eratinocyte cell line and quercitrin-free and quercitrin-containing
extracts of H. perforatum that quercitrin reduces the photo-
toxicity of H. perforatum extracts."

Experimental evidence has suggested that a solution of
ypericin can react with visible and UV light to produce free
radical species and that this may lead to damage of proteins in the
ens of the eye.’ Up to October 2005, there were no
spontaneous reports of cataract formation in individuals who
ave taken St John's wort."

A hydromethanolic extract of St John's wort flowering tops
(containing 0.3% hypericin) at concentrations of 1-300 h1g/mL
reduced experimentally induced contractions in rat vas deferens
smooth muscle in a concentration-dependent manner.'!?° The St
John's wort extract and hyperforin also produced a concentration-
dependent inhibition of phenylephrine-induced contractions in
human vas deferens in vitro; mean (standard error of mean) ICso
values for the extract and hyperforin were 13.9 (2.0) and 0.45
(0.04) ptg/mL, respectively.

A number of experimental studies has investigated the
genotoxic potential and mutagenic activity of St John's wort

in vitro and in vivo. In vivo studies and most in vitro
provided negative results, indicating a lack of mutagenic
potential with defined St John's wort extracts.'(©” Mutagenic
activity observed in an in vitro Ames test was attributed to the
presence of quercetin, although other studies have found no
mutagenic potential with a St John's wort extract and it has been
stated that there is no valid evidence for the carcinogenicity of
quercetin in humans.‘¢?°°?)

Dietary administration of St John's wort to rats was found to
have no effect on various hepatic drug-metabolising enzymes (e.g.
aminopyrine, N-demethylase, glutathione S-transferase and epox-
ide hydrolase) or on copper concentrations in the liver (see
Contra-indications, Warnings, Drug interactions). No major
effects were observed on hepatic iron or zinc concentrations and
no significant tissue lesions were found in four rats fed St John's
wort in their daily diet for 119 days (10% for first 12 days and 5%
thereafter because of unpalatability).!!"?

would be nec

----- PAGE 573 -----
St John’s Wort

Cytotoxic constituents related to hyperforin have been isolated
from two related Hypericum species (see Pharmacological
Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Individuals with sensitivity towards St John's wort may experience
allergic reactions. The use of St John's wort is not advised in
known cases of photosensitivity and, in view of the potential of
hypericin as a photosensitising agent, therapeutic UV treatment
should be avoided whilst using St John's wort.'C?)

It has previously been suggested that excessive doses of St
John's wort may potentiate monoamine oxidase inhibitor
therapy."’® However, as monoamine oxidase inhibitory activity
has not been reported in vivo with St John's wort, this warning is
no longer considered necessary. In addition, avoidance of food-
stuffs, such as those containing tyramine (e.g. cheese, wine, meat
and yeast extracts) and medicines containing sympathomimetic
agents (e.g. cough/cold remedies), which interact with MAOIs, is
not considered necessary.

Drug interactions There are important pharmacokinetic
interactions and potential for important pharmacodynamic
interactions between St John's wort preparations and certain
other medicines.(1'® 1992)

Evidence for pharmacokinetic interactions between St John's
wort preparations and certain other medicines, leading to a loss of
or reduction in the therapeutic effect of those medicines, includes
spontaneous reports"? and published case reports.2°° ©”) Drugs
that may be affected include certain anticonvulsants, ciclosporin,
digoxin, indinavir (and other HIV protease inhibitors, and HIV
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors), oral contracep-
tives, theophylline and warfarin. A report involving four cases
describes reduced plasma methadone trough concentrations in

addicts who received St John's wort extract 900 mg daily before
(201)

methadone maintenance treatment.

There have also been reports of increased serotonergic effects (i.
e. pharmacodynamic interactions) in patients taking St John's
wort products concurrently with selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (e.g. sertraline, paroxetine).°°*7°? There are isolated
reports of hypotension during general anaesthesia?” and delayed
emergence following general anaesthesia.”°°) In both cases,
patients had been taking St John's wort before receiving several
anaesthetic agents, including fentanyl and propofol. It has been
suggested that treatment with St John's wort preparations should
be stopped at least five days before undergoing elective surgery.2°

In the year 2000, the UK Committee on Safety of Medicines
(CSM) issued advice to pharmacists, doctors, other healthcare
professionals and patients on the use of St John's wort products
with certain other medicines.°°”?% The CSM's advice for
healthcare professionals regarding patients taking St John's wort
and other medicines concurrently can be summarised as follows.

Warfarin, ciclosporin, digoxin, theophylline and anticonvul-
sants (carbamazepine, phenobarbital and phenytoin)
There is a risk of reduced therapeutic effect, e.g. risk of
transplant rejection, seizures and loss of asthma control.
Advice is to check plasma drug concentrations (with warfarin,
the patient's International Normalised Ratio should be
checked) and to stop St John's wort therapy. In addition,
dose adjustment may be necessary.

HIV protease inhibitors (indinavir, nelfinavir, ritonavir and
saquinavir) and HIV non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitors (efavirenz and nevirapine) There is a risk of
reduced blood concentrations with possible loss of HIV
suppression. Advice is to measure HIV RNA viral load and
to stop St John's wort.

Oral contraceptives There is a risk of reduced blood concentra-
tions, breakthrough bleeding and unintended pregnancy.
Advice is to stop St John's wort.

Triptans (sumatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan and zolmitrip-
tan) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (citalo-
pram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine and sertraline)
There is a risk of increased serotonergic effects with the
possibility of an increased risk of adverse reactions. Advice is to
stop St John's wort.

Patients already taking any of the above drugs should be
advised not to start taking St John's wort and users of other
medicines should be advised to seek professional advice before
using St John's wort. Topical medicines and non-psychotropic
medicines that are excreted renally are not likely to interact
with St John's wort. In addition, topical or homeopathic
preparations of St John's wort are not likely to interact wit!

pr

ribed medicines.
There is further evidence from prospective pharmacokinetic
studies involving patients who have received St John's wort
preparations and other medicines concurrently that there ari
interactions which result in altered pharmacokinetics, includ-
ing reduced plasma concentrations, of amitriptyline,?”
ciclosporin, 71°?! tacrolimus,!”) and irinotecan.?! These
studies have typically been open-label studies (although two
involved a randomised, crossover design) involving small
numbers of patients undergoing treatment with the respective
conventional medicines and who were also treated with single
and/or multiple doses (600 to 900 mg extract daily for around
two weeks) of St John's wort preparations. In one randomised,
crossover study, 10 patients who had undergone renal
transplants were treated concurrently with ciclosporin and St
John's wort extract with a low or high hyperforin content.
Patients experienced altered ciclosporin pharmacokinetics and
required ciclosporin dose increases only whilst taking the
extract with the high content of hyperforin.?!)

Studies with different designs (and varying methodological
quality)?! and involving healthy volunteers have provided
supporting evidence of pharmacokinetic interactions between St
John's wort preparations and digoxin,?!» imatinib," 7"”)
contraceptives,*!**!”) phenprocoumon,”
simvastatin, °”” tacrolimus,” verapamil?” and warfarin.
These and other studies provide evidence indicating that St
John's wort preparations induce the cytochrome P450 (CYP)
drug-metabolising enzyme CYP3A4,72%?°2) well as
affecting P-glycoprotein (a transport protein).2°°> As with
other medicines, whether or not clinically important drug
interactions occur with St John's wort preparations depends on
several factors, including the dosage regimen, route of admin-
istration and pharmaceutical quality of St John's wort prepara-
tions and co-administered medicines. As CYP3A4 is involved in
the metabolism of at least half of all medicinal agents, and as P-
glycoprotein is involved in the transport of many drugs, it is
possible that St John's wort preparations interact with other
medicines in addition to those listed above.'*””

é

) oral

quazepam,
(225)

----- PAGE 574 -----
There is also evidence from studies involving healthy
volunteers, albeit less extensive, that St John's wort prepara-
tions induce CYP2C19.°”) Effects on certain other CYP drug
metabolising enzymes are less clear: one study reported no
effect on CYP2C9 activity???) whereas another study found
that a St John's wort extract did induce CYP2C9 as determined
by effects on the pharmacokinetics of S-warfarin;??>
ing results have also been reported for CYP1A2 with respect to
5) or a lack of induction” by St John's wort

) conflict-

induction
preparations.

In contrast, similar studies have reported a lack of
pharmacokinetic interaction between St John's wort prepara-
tions and carbamazepine,”**) pravastatin,” and theophyl-
line,'3 and several others have reported a lack of significant
effects on CYP isoenzymes,” **” although the numbers of
volunteers may have been too small and the duration of St
John's wort administration too short to exclude definitively an

236, 237, . :
. ) There is evidence from several studies

inductive effect.
involving healthy volunteers that St John's wort preparations
do not influence CYP2D6 activity to an extent likely to be
clinically relevant. 2°78 2% 238)

Randomised, placebo-controlled studies involving healthy
volunteers who received an ethanol extract of St John's wort
with a low hyperforin content (Esbericum capsules containing
60 mg extract, drug to extract ratio 3.5—6.0:1, equivalent to
0.25mg total hypericins and 0.88mg_hyperforin) 240mg
extract daily found no statistically significant effects on the
pharmacokinetics of drugs used as substrates for CYP3A4,
CYP1A2 and CYP2C9. It is not clear whether the lack of effect
is due to the preparation having a low hyperforin content, or to
>) The suggestion
that the occurrence of CYP enzyme induction, or the extent of
induction, may vary depending on the particular St John's wort
preparation is a valid one, since the profile of constituents,
including those influencing CYP enzyme activity, varies
qualitatively and quantitatively between products (see Quality
of plant material and commercial products).

A further randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study involving healthy volunteers (7 = 33) explored the effects
of the CYP enzyme inhibitor cimetidine and the CYP enzyme
inducer carbamazepine on the pharmacokinetics of certain
ituents of St John's wort extracts. Participants received St
John's wort extract (LI-160) 300mg three times daily for 11
days, followed by a further seven days' administration together
with cimetidine 1000 mg daily in divided doses, carbamazepine
400mg each night, or placebo. No statistically significant
differences in the plasma concentration versus time curves from
hours 0 to 24 (AUCo24) were observed between groups;
statistically significant intragroup differences in the AUCp24
were observed for hypericin during cimetidine administration
and for pseudohypericin during carbamazepine administration,
although these effects are unlikely to be of clinical rele-
vance.)

A number of in vitro and animal studies have also explored
the effects of St John's wort preparations on CYP drug
metabolising enzymes. In vitro studies have reported induction
of the CYP enzymes CYP3A4 and CYP1A2 by St John's wort
extracts,7°°3 and of CYP2C9 by hyperforin.*4"?” Results
from in vivo (mice) experiments indicate that hyperforin is
important for induction of CYP3A in the liver.
experiments have shown that hyperforin induction of CYP2C9
is mediated by the pregnane X nuclear receptor." Induction
of P-glycoprotein by St John's wort extract? and hyper-

the low dose of extract used in the studi

cons

” In vitro

St John’s Wort

forin?*)

has been reported following in vitro experiments
using LS180 intestinal carcinoma cells, whereas there are
conflicting results on the induction of P-glycoprotein by
hypericin. 749)

A number of in vitro experiments have described inhibition
of the CYP enzymes CYP3A4 and CYP2C19 by St John's wort
(246,247) and inhibition of P-glycoprotein by hypericin
and hyperforin.°**) A series of in vitro experiments explored
the effects of hypericin on human DNA topoisomerase II
activity. Hypericin appeared to interact with DNA in a manner
which precluded topoisomerase II DNA binding activity and
antagonised the formation of topoisomerase IlI-covalent
cleavage complexes mediated by the topoisomerase II poisons
etoposide and amsacrine. The effects of hypericin and St John's
wort extracts on topoisomerase II cancer chemotherapy require
further investigation.°*”)

Certain groups of users may have little knowledge of safety
aspects, such as drug interactions, related to use of St John's

wort products, and may be particularly vulnerable to certain
250-253)

extracts,

e

adverse effects.‘

Pregnancy and lactation Information on the use of H.
perforatum preparations during pregnancy and breastfeeding is
summarised below. In view of the lack of toxicity data, St John's
wort preparations should not be used during pregnancy and
lactation.

Clinical data In a prospective, cohort study, 33 breastfeeding

women who had made enquiries about the safety of St John's
wort during breastfeeding to a teratogen/toxicology advice
service (and who took St John's wort products) were compared
with 33 age- and parity-matched controls and 101 disease-
matched controls (who had enquired about the safety of St
John's wort products but who did not take any). Three of the
women in the first group had initiated St John's wort treatment
during pregnancy (stage not stated), and the mean (standard
deviation) of infant exposure to St John's wort through
breastfeeding was 2.1 (3.5) months.”>” There were no
statistically significant differences in maternal or infant
demographics, and in women's reasons for enquiring about
use of St John's wort, although significantly more women who
took St John's wort were using conventional antidepressants,
compared with women who inquired about St John's wort but
who did not use it (42.4% versus 17.8%; p < 0.01). No
maternal adverse events were reported in any of the women and
there were no statistically significant differences in the
proportions of women reporting decreased milk volume
(12.1%, 6.9% and 6.1% for St John's wort consumers,
disease-matched controls, and age-/parity-matched controls,
respectively; p = 0.58).°° Five infants born to St John's wort
consumers experienced colic, drowsiness or lethargy, compared
with one report in each of the other two groups, although two
of the former five infants were also exposed to conventional
antidepressant agents during breastfeeding.

The study described above provides only limited information
on the safety of St John's wort products during breastfeeding
(and, to a even lesser extent, pregnancy) as it involved only
small numbers of women so had the statistical power to detect
only very common, acute adverse events. In addition, a report
of the study did not provide any details of the St John's wort
products consumed by the participants. It is likely that several,
perhaps many, different St John's wort products were involved,
all of which are likely to differ in their pharmaceutical quality
and, therefore, in their potential effects on the infant.

S

----- PAGE 575 -----
St John’s Wort

There is a report of a 38-year-old woman who started taking
St John's wort (900 mg/day) at her 24th week of pregnancy,
taking the last dose 24 hours before delivery.** The pregnancy
was unremarkable except for late onset of thrombocytopenia.
Another report described a 43-year-old woman who discon-
tinued fluoxetine and methylphenidate upon becoming preg-
nant and started taking St John's wort (900 mg/day). The
report does not state the outcome of the pregnancy,?*>
although it is assumed that had adverse events occurred, they
would have been stated.

Another case report describes a 33-year-old woman who
presented with post-natal depression at a German psychiatric
service and who had been taking an extract of H. perforatum
(Jarsin) 300mg three times daily from five months  post-
partum. Analysis of breast milk samples indicated that
hyperforin is excreted into breast milk at concentrations below
the lower limit of quantification (0.50 ng/mL).°° No adverse
effects were observed in the infant or the mother, however,
further investigation of the pharmacokinetics of constituents
of H. perforatum extract in breast milk and in mothers’ and
infants' plasma is required.

Preclinical data In a randomised experiment, 40 adult female mice

were given food bars containing 'hypericum herb' (no further
details of plant material provided) at a dose of 180 mg/kg body
weight daily, or placebo, for two weeks before conception and
throughout the gestation period. At the end of the study, there
were no statistically significant differences between the
‘hypericum' and placebo groups in duration of gestation,
number of live pups per litter, body length and head
circumference measurements, dam-—pup interactions, physical
maturation milestones and reproductive capabilities of off-
spring.?*” The only exceptions to this were that male offspring
in the hypericum-exposed group weighed significantly less than
those in the placebo group at birth (p < 0.02), but this difference
was not statistically significant by day three after birth, and
male offspring in the hypericum-exposed group experienced a
temporary delay in appearance of the upper incisors. Since
multiple statistical tests were carried out, this number of
statistically significant results at a level of p < 0.05 is likely. In
similar experiments, 18 adult female rats were given a methanol
extract of St John's wort (containing 0.3% total hypericins) 100
or 1000 mg/kg, or placebo, by gavage for two weeks before
mating, throughout the gestation period and/or for three weeks
during breastfeeding. Histological alterations in the livers and
kidneys of rat pups exposed to St John's wort extract
throughout gestation and/or during breastfeeding; lesions
were more severe in the offspring of rats treated with the
higher dose and in offspring exposed to St John's wort extract
during both the gestation period and breastfeeding.” Slight in
vitro uterotonic activity has been reported for St John's wort
(see Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

pound; Mefedra-N; Mist Expect Stim. Italy: Hiperogyn;
Mithen. Mexico: Nordimenty. Portugal: Cicaderma. Russia:
Prostanorm ([Ipocranopm). South Africa: Cocillana Co;
Contra-Coff; Linctus Tussi Infans. Spain: Natusor Gastrolen;
Natusor Somnisedan. Switzerland: Gel a la consoude; Huile de
millepertuis A. Vogel (huile de St. Jean); Hyperiforce comp;
The a I'avoine sauvage de Vollmer. UK: Allens Chesty Cough;
Balm of Gilead; Buttercup Syrup; Chest Mixture; Covonia
Mentholated; Galloway's Cough Syrup; Honey & Molasses;
Modern Herbals Cough Mixture; Potters Children's Cough
Pastilles; Potters Gees Linctus; Sanderson's Throat Specific;
Sanderson's Throat Specific; St Johnswort Compound. Vene-
zuela: Biomicovo.

References

1 Bombardelli E, Morazzoni P. Hypericum perforatum. Fitoterapia
1995; 66: 43-68.

2 Hélzl J, Petersen M. Chemical constituents of Hypericum spp. In
Ernst E (ed), Hypericum. The genus Hypericum. London, New York:
Taylor and Francis, 2003.

3 Vanhaelen M, Vanhaelen-Fastre R. Quantitative determination of
biologically active constituents in medicinal plant crude extracts by
thin-layer chromatography-densitometry. | Chromatogr 1983; 281:
263-271.

4 Berghéfer R, Hélzl J. Biflavonoids in Hypericum perforatum, part 1.
Isolation of 13,1I8-biapigenin. Planta Med 1987; 53: 216-217.

----- PAGE 576 -----
9

10

cel

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

Berghéfer R, Hdlz! J. Isolation of 13/,118-biapigenin (amentoflavone)
from Hypericum perforatum. Planta Med 1989; 55: 91.

Ollivier B e¢ al. Separation et identification des acides phenols par
chromatographie liquide haute performance et spectroscopie ultra-
violette. Application a la pariétaire (Parietaria officinalis L.) et au
millepertuis (Hypericum perforatum L.). J] Pharm Belg 1985; 40: 173—
177.

Hoelzl J, Ostrowski E. St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum L.).
HPLC analysis of the main components and their variability in a
population. Dtsch Apoth Ztg 1987; 127: 1227-1230.

Dorossiev I. Determination of flavonoids in Hypericum perforatum.
Pharmazie 1985; 40: 585-586.

Brondz | et al. The relative stereochemistry of hyperforin — an
antibiotic from Hypericum perforatum L. Tetrahedron Lett 1982; 23:
1299-1300.

Ayuga C, Rebuelta M. A comparative study of phenolic acids of
Hypericum caprifolium Boiss and Hypericum perforatum L. An Real
Acad Farm 1986; 52: 723-728.

Brondz | et al. n-Alkanes of Hypericum perforatum: a revision.
Phytochemistry 1983; 22: 295-296.

Mathis C, Ourisson G. Etude chimio-taxonomique du genre
Hypericum — Il. Identification de constituants de diverses huiles
essentielles d'Hypericum. Phytochemistry 1964; 3: 115-131.

Mathis C, Ourisson G. Etude chimio-taxonomique du genre
Hypericum — IV. Repartition des sesquiterpenes, des alcools
monoterpeniques et des aldehydes satures dans les huiles essentielles
d'Hypericum. Phytochemistry 1964; 3: 377-378.

Mathis C, Ourisson G. Etude chimio-taxonomique du genre
Hypericum — V. Identification de quelques constituants non volatils
d'Hypericum perforatum L. Phytochemistry 1964; 3: 379.
ConsumerLab. Product Review: St John's wort. (accessed 28 August
2003).

De Los Reyes GC, Koda RT. Determining hyperforin and hypericin
content in eight brands of St John's wort. Am J Health-Syst Pharm
2002; 59: 545-547.

Draves AH, Walker SE. Analysis of the hypericin and pseudohypericin
content of commercially available St John's wort preparations. Can J
Clin Pharmacol 2003; 10(3): 114-118.

Orth HCJ et al. Isolation, purity analysis and stability of hyperforin as
a standard material from Hypericum perforatum L. ] Pharm
Pharmacol 1999; 51: 193-200.

Vaja V et al. Further degradation product of hyperforin from
Hypericum perforatum (St. John's wort). Fitoterapia 2003; 74: 439-
444,

Verotta L et al. Furohyperforin, a prenylated phloroglucinol from St
John's wort (Hypericum perforatum). ] Nat Prod 1999; 62: 770-772.
Verotta L et al. Hyperforin analogues from St John's wort (Hypericum
perforatum). J Nat Prod 2000; 63: 412-415.

Tolonen A et al. Fast high-performance liquid chromatographic
analysis of naphthodianthrones and phloroglucinols from Hypericum
perforatum extracts. Phytochemical Anal 2003; 14: 306-309.

Westerhoff K et al. Biorelevant dissolution testing of St John's wort
products. | Pharm Pharmacol 2002; 54: 1615-1621.

Linde K et al. St John's wort for depression. The Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews, 2005, Issue 3. Art. No. :CD000448.pub2.

Nahrstedt A, Butterweck V. Biologically active and other chemical
constituents of the herb of Hypericum perforatum L.
Pharmacopsychiatry 1997; 30 (Suppl. Suppl.): 129-134.

Butterweck V et al. Plasma levels of hypericin in presence of
procyanidin B2 and hyperoside: a pharmacokinetic study in rats.
Planta Med 2003; 6: 189-192.

Suzuki O e¢ al. Inhibition of monoamine oxidase by hypericin. Planta
Med 1984; 50: 272-274.

Bladt S$, Wagner H. Inhibition of MAO by fractions and constituents
of Hypericum extract. ] Geriat Psychiatr Neurol 1994; 7: $57-59.
Demisch L et al. Identification of MAO-type-A inhibitors in

Hypericum perforatum L. (Hyperforat). Pharmacopsychiatry 1989;
22: 194.

Thiede HM, Walper A. Inhibition of MAO and COMT by

Hypericum extracts and hypericin. J Geriat Psychiatr Neurol 1994; 7:
S54-56.

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S51

52

53

54

St John’s Wort

Cott JM. In vitro receptor binding and enzyme inhibition by
Hypericum perforatum extract. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997; 30 (Suppl.
Suppl.): 108-112.

Miiller WE et al. Effects of hypericum extract (LI 160) in biochemical
models of antidepressant activity. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997; 30
(Suppl. Suppl.): 102-107.

Calapai G et al. Effects of Hypericum perforatum on levels of 5-
hydroxytryptamine, noradrenaline and dopamine in the cortex,
diencephalon and brainstem of the rat. J Pharm Pharmacol 1999; 51:
723-728.

Winkler C et al. St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) counteracts
cytokine-induced tryptophan catabolism in vitro. Biol Chem 2004;
385: 1197-1202.

Zanoli P. Role of hyperforin in the pharmacological activities of St
John's wort. CNS Drug Rev 2004; 10: 203-218.

Chatterjee SS et al. Hyperforin as a possible antidepressant
component of hypericum extracts. Life Sci 1998; 63: 499-510.
Chatterjee SS et al. Antidepressant activity of Hypericum perforatum
and hyperforin: the neglected possibility. Pharmacopsychiatry 1998; 31
(Suppl. Suppl.): 7-15.

Gobbi M et al. Hypericum perforatum L. extract does not inhibit 5-
HT transporter in rat brain cortex. Naunyn-Schmiedebergs Arch
Pharmacol 1999; 360: 262-269.

Jensen AG et al. Adhyperforin as a contributor to the effect of
Hypericum perforatum L. in biochemical models of antidepressant
activity. Life Sci 2001; 68: 1593-1605.

Butterweck V et al. In vitro receptor screening of pure constituents of
St John's wort reveals novel interactions with a number of GPCRs.
Psychopharmacology 2002; 162: 193-202.

Fiebich BL e¢ al. Inhibition of substance P-induced cytokine synthesis
by St John's wort extracts. Pharmacopsychiatry 2001; 34 (Suppl.
Suppl. 1): $26-S28.

Gobbi M et al. In vitro effects of the dicyclohexylammonium salt of
hyperforin on interleukin-6 release in different experimental models.
Planta Med 2004; 70: 680-682.

Butterweck V et al. Step by step removal of hyperforin and hypericin:
activity profile of different Hypericum preparations in behavioral
models. Life Sci 2003; 73: 627-639.

Butterweck V. Mechanism of action of St John's wort in depression:
what is known?. CNS Drugs 2003; 17: 539-562.

Singer A et al. Hyperforin, a major antidepressant constituent of St.
John's wort, inhibits serotonin uptake by elevating free intracellular
Nat. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1999; 290: 1363-1368.

Singer A et al. Hyperforin alters free intracellular H* and Na*
concentration in human platelets (abstract). Paper presented at the
Biocenter Symposium on Drug Therapy. Pharmacology of St. John's
Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.) and its Constituents., February
2000, Frankfurt, Germany.

Treiber K et al. Hyperforin activates nonselective cation channels
(NSCCs). Br J Pharmacol 2005; 145: 75-83.

Uebelhack R, Franke L. In vitro effects of hypericum extract and
hyperforin on SHT uptake and efflux in human blood platelets
(abstract). Paper presented at the Biocenter Symposium on Drug
Therapy. Pharmacology of St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.)
and its Constituents, February 2000, Frankfurt, Germany.

Okpanyi SN, Weischer ML. Animal experiments on the psychotropic
action of a Hypericum extract. Arzneimittelforschung 1987; 37: 10-13.
Gambarana C et al. Efficacy of an Hypericum perforatum (St John'
wort) extract in preventing and reverting a condition of escape deficit
in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology 1999; 21: 247-257.

De Vry J et al. Comparison of hypericum extracts with imipramine
and fluoxetine in animal models of depression and alcoholism. Eur
Neuropsychopharmacol 1999; 9: 461-468.

Butterweck V et al. Flavonoids from Hypericum perforatum show
antidepressant activity in the forced swimming test. Planta Med 2000;
66: 3-6.

Martarelli D et al. Hypericum perforatum methanolic extract inhibits
growth of human prostatic carcinoma cell line orthotopically
implanted in nude mice. Cancer Lett 2004; 210: 27-33.

Hostanska K et al. Aqueous ethanolic extract of St John's wort
(Hypericum perforatum L.) induces growth inhibition and apoptosis
in human malignant cells in vitro. Pharmazie 2002; 57: 323-331.

----- PAGE 577 -----
SS

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

78

79

80

St John’s Wort

Hostanska K et al. Comparison of the growth-inhibitory effect of
Hypericum perforatum L. extracts, differing in the concentration of
phloroglucinols and flavonoids, on leukaemia cells. J Pharm
Pharmacol 2003; 55: 973-980.

Roscetti G et al. Cytotoxic activity of Hypericum perforatum L. on
K562 erythroleukemic cells: differential effects between methanolic
extract and hypericin. Phytotherapy Res 2004; 18: 66-72.

Dona M et al. Hyperforin inhibits cancer invasion and metastasis.
Cancer Res 2004; 64: 6225-6232.

Schempp CM et al. Inhibition of tumour cell growth by hyperforin, a
novel anticancer drug from St John's wort that acts by induction of
apoptosis. Oncogene 2002; 21: 1242-1250.

Hostanska K et al. Hyperforin a constituent of St John's wort
(Hypericum perforatum L.) extract induces apoptosis by triggering
activation of caspases and with hypericin synergistically exerts
cytotoxicity towards human malignant cell lines. Eur J Pharm
Biopharmaceut 2003; 56: 121-132.

Colasanti A et al. Hypericin photosensitization of tumor and
metastatic cell lines of human prostate. J Photochem Photobiol B
Biology 2000; 54: 103-107.

Liu CD et al. Hypericin and photodynamic therapy decreases human
pancreatic cancer in vitro and in vivo. J Surg Res 2000; 93: 137-143.
Delaey E et al. Photocytotoxicity of hypericin in normoxic and
hypoxic conditions. J Photochem Photobiol B Biology 2000; 56: 19-24.
H6pfner M et al. Hypericin activated by an incoherent light source has
photodynamic effects on esophageal cancer cells. Int J Colorectal Dis
2003; 18: 239-247.

Kamuhabwa AR et al. Photodynamic activity of hypericin in human
urinary bladder carcinoma cells. Anticancer Res 2000; 20: 2579-2584.
Carvarga I et al. Photodynamic therapy of murine fibrosarcoma with
topical and systemic administration of hypericin. Phytomedicine 2001;
8: 325-330.

Solar P et al. Effect of azetazolamide on hypericin photocytotoxicity.
Planta Med 2002; 68: 658-660.

MiroSéay A et al. The effect of quercetin on light-induced cytotoxicity
of hypericin. Physiol Res 2001; 50: 635-637.

Schempp CM et al. Phototoxic and apoptosis-inducing capacity of
pseudohypericin. Planta Med 2002; 68: 171-173.

Schempp CM et al. Hypericin photo-induced apoptosis involves the
tumor necrosis factor apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and
activation of caspase-8. FEBS Lett 2001; 493: 26-30.

Ali SM et al. Hypericin and hypocrellin induced apoptosis in human
mucosal carcinoma cells. J Photochem Photobiol B Biology 2001; 65:
59-73.

Pajonk F et al. Hypericin — an inhibitor of proteasome function.
Cancer Chemother Pharmacol 2005; 55: 439-446.

Kamuhabwa AR et al. Cellular photodestruction induced by hypericin
in AY-27 rat bladder carcinoma cells. Photochem Photobiol 2001; 74:
126-132.

Paba V et al. Photo-activation of hypericin with low doses of light
promotes apparent photo-resistance in human histiocytic lymphoma
U937 cells. | Photochem Photobiol B Biology 2001; 60: 87-96.
Varriale L et al. Molecular aspects of photodynamic therapy: low
energy pre-sensitization of hypericin-loaded human endometrial
carcinoma cells enhances photo-tolerance, alters gene expression and
affects the cell cycle. FEBS Lett 2002; 512: 287-290.

Schwarz D et al. St John's wort extracts and some of their constituents
potently inhibit ultimate carcinogen formation from benzo(a)pyrene-
7,8-didhyrodiol by human CYP1A1. Cancer Res 2003; 63: 8062-8068.
Decosterd LA et al. Isolation of new cytotoxic constituents from
Hypericum revolutum and Hypericum calycinum by liquid-liquid
chromatography. Planta Med 1988; 54: 560.

Avato P et al. Extracts from St John's wort and their antimicrobial
activity. Phytotherapy Res 2004; 18: 230-232.

Zakharova NS et al. Action of plant extracts on the natural immunity
indices of animals. Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol 1986; 4: 71—
7S.

Schempp C et al. Antibacterial activity of hyperforin from St John's
wort, against multiresistant Staphylococcus aureus and Gram-positive
bacteria. Lancet 1999; : 2129.

Voss A, Verweij PE. Antibacterial activity of hyperforin from St John's
wort. Lancet 1999; 354: 777.

81 Fiebich B et al. Antibacterial activity of hyperforin from St John's
wort. Lancet 1999; 354: 777.

82. Hiibner AT et al. Treatment with Hypericum perforatum L. does not
trigger decreased resistance in Staphylococcus aureus against
antibiotics and hyperforin. Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 206-208.

83 Negrash AK et al. Comparative study of chemotherapeutic and
pharmacological properties of antimicrobial preparations from
common St John's wort. Fitontsidy Mater Soveshch 1969; 198-200.

84 Sakar MK et al. Antimicrobial activities of some Hypericum species
growing in Turkey. Fitoterapia 1988; 59: 49-52.

85 Dall'Agnol R e¢ al. Antimicrobial activity of some Hypericum species.
Phytomedicine 2003; 10: 511-516.

86 Gibbons $ et al. The genus Hypericum — a valuable resource of anti-
Staphylococcal leads. Fitoterapia 2002; 73: 300-304.

87 Mishenkova EL e¢ al. Antiviral properties of St John's wort and
preparations produced from it. Tr S'ezda Mikrobiol Ukr 1975; 222-
223.

88 Weber ND et al. The antiviral agent hypericin has in vitro activity
against HSV-1 through non-specific association with viral and cellular
membranes. Antiviral Chem Chemother 1994; 5: 83-90.

89 Wood S et al. Antiviral activity of naturally occurring anthraquinones
and anthraquinone derivatives. Planta Med 1990; 56: 651-652.

90 Jia YR et al. In vitro study on the effects of hypericin and lysine
hydrochloride against herpes virus. Chin J Clin Rehab 2004; 8(5): 966—
967.

91 Lavie G et al. Studies of the mechanisms of the antiretroviral agents
hypericin and pseudohypericin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989; 86:
5963-5967.

92 Lopez-Bazzocchi | et al. Antiviral activity of the photoactive plant
pigment hypericin. Photochem Photobiol 1991; 54: 95-98.

93 Meruelo D et al. Therapeutic agents with dramatic antiretroviral
activity and little toxicity at effective doses: aromatic polycyclic diones
hypericin and pseudohypericin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1988; 85:
5230-5234.

94 Hudson JB et al. Antiviral activities of hypericin. Antiviral Res 1991;
1S: 101-112.

95 Taher MM et al. Mood-enhancing antidepressant St John's wort
inhibits the activation of human immunodeficiency virus gene
expression by ultraviolet light. Life 2002; 54: 357-364.

96 Koch E, Chatterjee SS. Hyperforin stimulates intracellular calcium
mobilisation and enhances extracellular acidification in DDT1-MF2
smooth muscle cells (abstract). Paper presented at the Biocenter
Symposium on Drug Therapy. Pharmacology of St. John's Wort
(Hypericum perforatum L.) and its Constituents. February 2000,
Frankfurt, Germany.

97 Rezvani AH et al. Attenuation of alcohol intake by extract of
Hypericum perforatum (St John's wort) in two different strains of
alcohol-preferring rats. Alcohol Alcoholism 1999; 34: 699-705.

98 Wright CW et al. Correlation of hyperforin content of Hypericum
perforatum (St John's wort) extracts with their effects on alcohol
drinking in C57BL/6J mice: a preliminary study. J Psychopharmacol
2003; 17: 403-408.

99 Catania MA et al. Hypericum perforatum attenuates nicotine
withdrawal signs in mice. Psychopharmacology 2003; 169(2): 186-189.

100 Ballenger JC et al. Alcohol and central serotonin metabolism in man.
Arch Gen Psych Scand 1979; 57: 224-227. Cited by Rezvani AH et al.
Alcohol Alcoholism 1999, 3 99-705.

101 Hughes JR et al. Antidepressants for smoking c
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2004,
CD000031.

102 Shipochliev T e¢ al. Anti-inflammatory action of a group of plant
extracts. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 18: 87-94.

103 Bork PS et al. Hypericin as a non-oxidant inhibitor of NF-«B. Planta
Med 1999; 65: 297-300.

104 Takahashi | et al. Hypericin and pseudohypericin specifically inhibit
protein kinase C: possible relation to their antiretroviral activity.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1989; 165: 1207-1212.

105 Agostinis P et al. Photosensitized inhibition of growth factor regulated
protein kinases by hypericin. Biochemical Pharmacol 1995; 49: 1615—
1622.

106 De Witte P et al. Inhibition of epidermal growth factor receptor
tyrosine kinase activity by hypericin. Biochemical Pharmacol 1993; 46:
1929-1936.

tion. The
sue 4. Art. No.:

----- PAGE 578 -----
107 Panossian AG et al. Immunosuppressive effects of hypericin on
stimulated human leucocytes: inhibition of the arachidonic acid
release, leukotriene By and interleukin-1 production and activation of
nitric oxide formation. Phytomedicine 1996; 3: 19-28.

108 Tahara Y et al. The antidepressant hypericin inhibits progression of
experimental proliferative vitreoretinopathy. Curr Eye Res 1999; 19:
323-329.

109 Bezakova L et al. Effect of dianthrones and their precursors from
Hypericum perforatum L. on lipoxygenase activity. Pharmazie 1999;
54: 711.

110 Albert D et al. Hyperforin is a dual inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-1 and
5-lipoxygenase. Biochemical Pharmacol 2002; 64: 1767-1775.

111 Hunt EJ et al. Effect of St John's wort on free radical production. Life
Sci 2001; 69: 181-190.

112 Heilmann J e¢ al. Studies on the antioxidative activity of
phloroglucinol derivatives isolated from Hypericum species. Planta
Med 2003; 69: 202-206.

113 Melzer R et al. Proanthocyanidins from Hypericum perforatum:
effects on isolated pig coronary arteries. Planta Med 1988; 54: 572—
573.

114 Shiplochliev T. Extracts from a group of medicinal plants enhancing
the uterine tonus. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 18: 94-98.

115 Jang M-H et al. Protective effect of Hypericum perforatum Linn (St
John's wort) against hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis on human
neuroblastoma cells. Neuroscience Lett 2002; 329: 177-180.

116 Vasilchenko EA et al. Analgesic action of flavonoids of Rhododendron
luteum Sweet, Hypericum perforatum L., Lespedeza bicolor Turcz.
and L. hedysaroides (Pall.) Kitag. Rastit Resur 1986; 22: 12-21.

117 Grujic-Vasic J et al. The examining of isolated tannins and their
astringent effect. Planta Med 1986; 52 (Suppl. Suppl.): 67-68.

118 Barnes J et al. St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum L.): a review of
its chemistry, pharmacology and clinical properties. J Pharm
Pharmacol 2001; 53: 583-600.

119 Laakman G et al. St John's wort in mild to moderate depression: the
relevance of hyperforin for the clinical efficacy. Pharmacopsychiatry
1998; 31 (Suppl. Suppl.): 54-59.

120 Schroeder C et al. Influence of St John's wort on catecholamine
turnover and cardiovascular regulation in humans. Clin Pharmacol
Ther 2004; 76: 480-489.

121 Franklin M et al. Neuroendocrine evidence for dopaminergic actions
of hypericum extract (LI 160) in healthy volunteers. Biol Psychiatr
1999; 46: 581-584.

122 Laakman G et al. Effects of hypericum extract on adenohypophysial
hormone secretion and catechol amine metabolism (abstract). Paper
presented at the Biocenter Symposium on Drug Therapy.
Pharmacology of St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum L.) and its
Constituents. February 2000, Frankfurt, Germany.

123 Schiile C et al. Endocrinological effects of high-dose Hypericum
perforatum extract WS 5570 in healthy subjects. Neuropsychobiology
2004; 49: 58-63.

124 Anon. Johanniskraut VS. SSRI — neue Erkentnnisse zur Wirksamkeit
und Vertraglichkeit. Nervenheilkunde 2000; 19: 92-93.

125 Philipp M et al. Hypericum extract versus imipramine or placebo in
patients with moderate depression: randomized multicentre study of
treatment for 8 weeks. BMJ 1999; 319: 1534-1539.

126 Hypericum Depression Trial Study Group. Effect of Hypericum
perforatum (St John's wort) in major depressive disorder. A
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2002; 287: 1807-1814.

127 Vitiello B et al. Hyperforin plasma level as a marker of treatment
adherence in the National Institutes of Health Hypericum depression
trial. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2005, 25(3): 243-249.

128 Szegedi A et al. Acute treatment of moderate to severe depression with
hypericum extract WS 5570 (St John's wort): randomised controlled
double blind non-inferiority trial versus paroxetine. BMJ 2005; 330:
503.

129 Linde K et al. St John's wort for depression — an overview and meta-
analysis of randomised clinical trials. BMJ 1996; 313: 253-258.

130 Kim HL et al. St John's wort for depression. A meta-analysis of well-
defined clinical trials. J Nerv Ment Dis 1999; 187: 532-539.

131 Linde K, Kniippel L. Large-scale observational studies of hypericum
extracts in patients with depressive disorders — a systematic review.
Phytomedicine 2005; 12: 148-157.15693723

St John’s Wort

132 Hiibner WD, Kirste T. Experience with St John's wort (Hypericum
perforatum) in children under 12 years with symptoms of depression
and psychovegetative disturbances. Phytotherapy Res 2001; 15: 367—
370.

133 Findling RL et al. An open-label pilot study of St John's wort in
juvenile depression. J] Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2003; 42:
908-914.

134 Lenoir S et al. No dose-dependent effect of hypericin in hypericum
extracts for depression. Phytomedicine 1999; 6: 141-146.

135 Barnes J et al. A pilot, randomised, open, uncontrolled clinical study
of two dosages of St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum L.) herb
extract as an aid to motivational/behavioural support in smoking
cessation. Planta Med 2006; 72(4): 378-382.

136 Kasper S. Treatment of seasonal affective disorder (SAD) with
hypericum extract. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997; 30 (Suppl. Suppl.): 89-
93.

137 Wheatley D. Hypericum in seasonal affective disorder (SAD). Curr
Med Res Opin 1999; 15: 33-37.

138 Hypericin — a plant extract with anti-HIV activity. Scrip 1989; 1415:
29.

139 Anon. Hypericin HIV trial in Thailand. Scrip 1995; 2019: 25.

140 Cooper WC, James J. An observational study of the safety and
efficacy of hypericin in HIV-positive subjects (abstract). Int Conf.
AIDS 1990; 6: 369.

141 Steinbeck-Klose A, Wernet P. Successful long-term treatment over 40
months of HIV-patients with intravenous hypericin (abstract). Int
Conf AIDS 1993; 9: 470.

142 Gulick RM et al. Phase I studies of hypericin, the active compound in
St John's wort, as an antiretroviral agent in HIV-infected adults. Ann
Intern Med 1999; 130: 510-514.

143 Jacobson JM et al. Pharmacokinetics, safety and antiviral effects of
hypericin, a derivative of St John's wort plant, in patients with chronic
hepatitis C virus infection. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2001; 45:
517-524.

144 Stevinson C et al. Hypericum for fatigue — a pilot study.
Phytomedicine 1998; 5: 443-447.

145 Stevinson C, Ernst E. A pilot study of Hypericum perforatum for the
treatment of premenstrual syndrome. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 2000; 107:
870-876.

146 Miiller T et al. Treatment of somatoform disorders with St John's
wort: a randomized, double-blind and placebo-controlled trial.
Psychosomatic Med 2004; 66: 538-547.

147 Kobak KA et al. St John's wort versus placebo in social phobia.
Results from a placebo-controlled pilot study. J Clin Psychopharmacol
2005; 25(1): 51-58.

148 Boblitz N e¢ al. Benefit of a fixed drug combination containing St
John's wort and black cohosh for climacteric patients — results of a
randomised clinical trial (abstract). FACT 2000; 5: 85.

149 Schellenberg R et al. Pharmacodynamic effects of two different
hypericum extracts in healthy volunteers measured by quantitative
EEG. Pharmacopsychiatry 1998; 31 (Suppl. Suppl.): 44-53.

150 Sharpley AL et al. Antidepressant-like effect of Hypericum perforatum
(St John's wort) on the sleep polysomnogram. Psychopharmacology
1998; 139: 286-287.

151 Colker CM et al. Effects of Citrus aurantium extract, caffeine, and St
John's wort on body fat loss, lipid levels, and mood states in
overweight healthy adults. Curr Ther Res 1999; 60: 145-153.

152 Friede M et al. Alltagssicherheit eines pflanzlichen Antidepressivums
aus Johanniskraut. Fortschritte Med 1998; 116: 131-135.

153 Hottenrot K et al. The influence of vitamin E and extract from
hypericum on the endurance capacity of competitors. A placebo-
controlled double-blind study with long-distance runners and
triathletes. Dtsche Zeitschrift Sportmed 1997; 48: 22-27.

154 Schempp CM et al. Topical treatment of atopic dermatitis with St
John's wort cream — a randomized, placebo controlled, double blind
half-side comparison. Phytomedicine 2003; 10 (Suppl. Suppl. IV): 31—
37.

155 Sindrup SH et al. St John's wort has no effect on pain in
polyneuropathy. Pain 2000; 91: 361-365.

156 Ellis KA et al. An investigation into the acute nootropic effects of
Hypericum perforatum L. (St John's wort) in healthy human
volunteers. Behav Pharmacol 2001; 12: 173-182.

----- PAGE 579 -----
St John’s Wort

157 Lavagna SM et al. Efficacy of Hypericum and Calendula oils in the
epithelial reconstruction of surgical wounds in childbirth with
caesarean section. I] Farmaco 2001; 56: 451-453.

158 D'Hallewin MA et al. Fluorescence detection of flat bladder
carcinoma in situ after intravesical instillation of hypericin. J Urol
2000; 164: 349-351.

159 D'Hallewin MA et al. Hypericin-based fluorescence diagnosis of
bladder carcinoma. BJU Int 2002; 89: 760-763

160 Staffeldt B et al. Pharmacokinetics of hypericin and pseudohypericin
after oral intake of the Hypericum perforatum extract LI 160 in
healthy volunteers. J Geriat Psychiatr Neurol 1994; 7: $47-53.

161 Biber A e¢ al. Oral bioavailability of hyperforin from hypericum
extracts in rats and human volunteers. Pharmacopsychiatry 1998; 31
(Suppl. Suppl.1): 36-43.

162 Schulz HU et al. Investigation of the bioavailability of hypericin,
pseudohypericin, hyperforin and the flavonoids quercetin and
isorhamnetin following single and multiple oral dosing of a hypericum
extract containing tablet. Arzneim Forsch 2005; 55(1): 15-22.

163 Agrosi M et al. Oral bioavailability of active principles from herbal
products in humans. A study on Hypericum perforatum extracts using
the soft gelatin capsule technology. Phytomedicine 2000; 7(6): 455-462.

164 Kamuhabwa AR et al. Determination of hypericin in human plasma
by high-performance liquid chromatography after intravesical
administration in patients with transitional cell carcinoma of the
bladder. Eur J Pharmaceut Biopharmaceut 2005; 59: 469-474.

165 Riedel KD e¢ al. Simultaneous determination of hypericin and
hyperforin in human plasma with liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry. J Chromatog B 2004; 813: 27-33.

166 Ernst E et al. Adverse effects profile of the herbal antidepressant St
John's wort (Hypericum perforatum L.). Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1998;
54: 589-594.

167 Dyson R et al. The reported use and effectiveness of Hypericum (St
John's wort) on affective symptoms in a depression self-help group.
Primary Care Psych 2002; 8: 99-102.

168 Duran N, Song P-S. Hypericin and its photodynamic action.
Photochem Photobiol 1986; 43: 677-680.

169 Brockmédller J et al. Hypericin and pseudohypericin: pharmacokinetics
and effects on photosensitivity in humans. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997;
30 (Suppl. Suppl.): 94-101.

170 Schempp C et al. Hypericin levels in human serum and interstitial skin
blister fluid after oral single-dose and steady-state administration of
Hypericum perforatum extract (St John's wort). Skin Pharmacol Appl
Skin Physiol 1999; 12: 299-304.

171 Schempp CM et al. Effect of oral administration of Hypericum
perforatum extract (St. John's wort) on skin erythema and
pigmentation induced by UVB, UVA, visible light and solar simulated
radiation. Phytother Res 2003; 17: 141-146.

172 Schempp CM et al. Single-dose and steady-state administration of
Hypericum perforatum extract (St John's wort) does not influence skin
sensitivity to UV radiation, visible light, and solar-simulated
radiation. Arch Dermatol 2001; 337: 512.

173 Pitisuttithum P et al. Int Conf AIDS 1996; 11: 285. Cited by G50

174 Schempp CM et al. Effect of topical application of Hypericum
perforatum extract (St John's wort) on skin sensitivity to solar
simulated radiation. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 2000;
16: 125-128.

175 Cotterill JA et al. Severe phototoxic reaction to laser treatment in a
patient taking St John's wort. J Cosmetic Laser Ther 2001; 3: 159-160.

176 Benner MH, Lee HJ. Med Lett 1979; 21: 29-30.

177 Barbenel DM et al. Mania in a patient receiving testosterone
replacement post-orchidectomy taking St John's wort and sertraline. J
Psychopharmacol 2000; 14: 84-86.

178 Nierenberg AA et al. Mania associated with St John's wort. Biol
Psychiatr 1999; 46: 1707-1708.

179 Schneck C. St John's wort and hypomania. J Clin Psychiatr 1998; 59:
689.

180 O'Breasil AM, Argouarch $. Hypomania and St John's wort. Can J
Psychiatr 1998; 43: 746-747.

181 Stevinson C, Ernst E. Can St John's wort trigger psychoses? Int J Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2004; 42(9): 473-480.

182 Bove GM. Acute neuropathy after exposure to sun in a patient treated
with St John's wort. Lancet 1998; 352: 1121-1122.

183 Baillie N. Hypericum — four hypersensitivity reactions. Modern
Phytother 1997; 3: 24-26.

184 Patel S et al. Hypertensive crisis associated with St John's wort. Am J
Med 2002; 112: 507-508.

185 Siepmann M et al. The effects of St John's wort extract on heart rate
variability, cognitive function and quantitative EEG: a comparison
with amitriptyline and placebo in healthy men. Br J Clin Pharmacol
2002; 54: 277-282.

186 Siepmann M et al. The effects of St John's wort extract and
amitriptyline on autonomic responses of blood vessels and sweat
glands in healthy volunteers. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2004; 24(1): 79-
82.

187 Timoshanko A e¢ al. A preliminary investigation on the acute
pharmacodynamic effects of hypericin on cognitive and psychomotor
performance. Behav Pharmacol 2001; 12: 635-640.

188 Ferko N, Levine MAH. Evaluation of the association between St
John's wort and elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Pharmacotherapy 2001; 21(12): 1574-1578.

189 Assalian P. Sildenafil for St John-wort induced sexual dysfunction. J
Sex Marital Ther 2000; 26: 357-358.

190 Bhopal JS. St John's wort-induced sexual dysfunction. Can J
Psychiatry 2001; 46: 456-457.

191 Giese AC. Hypericism. Photochem Photobiol 1980; 5: 229-255.

192 Siegers C et al. Zur Frage der Phototoxizitat von Hypericum.
Nervenheilkunde 1993; 12: 320-322.

193 Wilhelm K-P et al. Role of flavonoids in controlling the phototoxicity
of Hypericum perforatum extracts. Phytomedicine 2001; 8(4): 306-
309.

194 Johnston N. Sun trap. New Sci 1999; 24 July: 24.

195 Uppsala Monitoring Centre. Vigibase, WHO Adverse Reactions
database (accessed 24 October, 2005).

196 Capasso R et al. Effects of the antidepressant St John's wort
(Hypericum perforatum) on rat and human vas deferens contractility. J
Urol 2005; 173: 2194-2197.

197 Garrett BJ et al. Consumption of poisonous plants (Senecio jacobaea,
Symphytum officinale, Pteridium aquilinum, Hypericum perforatum)
by rats: chronic toxicity, mineral metabolism, and hepatic drug-
metabolizing enzymes. Toxicol Lett 1982; 10: 183-188.

198 Newall CA et al. Herbal Medicines. A Guide for Health-care
Professionals, 1st edn. London: The Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.

199 Henderson L et al. St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum): drug
interactions and clinical outcomes. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2002; 54: 349—
356.

200 Mannel M. Drug interactions with St John's wort. Drug Saf 2004; 27
(11): 773-797.

201 Eich-Hochli D et al. Methadone maintenance treatment and St John's
wort — a case report. Pharmacopsychiatry 2003; 36: 35-37.

202 Gordon JB. SSRIs and St John's wort: possible toxicity? Am Family
Phys 1998; 57: 950-953.

203 Lantz MS et al. St John's wort and antidepressant drug interactions in
the elderly. J Geriat Psychiatr Neurol 1999; 12: 7-10.

204 Irefin S, Sprung J. A possible case of cardiovascular collapse during
anaesthesia: long-term use of St John's wort. J Clin Anaesthesiol 2000;
12: 498-499.

205 Crowe S, McKeating K. Delayed emergence and St John's wort.
Anaesthesiology 2002; 96: 1025-1027.

206 Ang-Lee MK et al. Herbal medicines and peri-operative care. JAMA
2001; 286: 208-216.

207 Breckenridge A. Herbal Safety News: Important interactions between
St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) preparations and prescribed
medicines. http://www.mhra.gov.uk

208 Anon. CSM advice on St John's wort. Pharm J 2000; 264: 358.

209 Johne A et al. Decreased plasma levels of amitriptyline and its
metabolites on comedication with an extract from St John's wort
(Hypericum perforatum). J Clin Psychopharmacol 2002; 22(1): 46-54.

210 Bauer $ et al. Alterations in cyclosporin A pharmacokinetics and
metabolism during treatment with St John's wort in renal transplant
patients. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2003; 55: 203-211.

211 Mai I et al. Hyperforin content determines the magnitude of the St
John's wort-cyclosporin drug interaction. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004;
76: 330-340.

----- PAGE 580 -----
212 Mai I et al. Impact of St John's wort treatment on the
pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus and mycophenolic acid in renal
transplant patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2003; 18: 819-822.

213 Mathijssen RHJ e¢ al. Effects of St John's wort on irinotecan
metabolism. J Nat Cancer Inst 2002; 94(16): 1247-1249.

214 Mills E et al. Interaction of St John's wort with conventional drugs:
systematic review of clinical trials. BMJ 2004; 329: 27-30.

215 Johne A et al. Pharmacokinetic interaction of digoxin with an herbal
extract from St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum). Clin Pharmacol
Ther 1999; 66: 338-345.

216 Smith P et al. The influence of St John's wort on the pharmacokinetics
and protein binding of imatinib mesylate. Pharmacotherapy 2004; 24
(11): 1508-1514.

217 Frye RF et al. Effect of St John's wort on imatinib mesylate
pharmacokinetics. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004; 76: 323-329.

218 Pfrunder A e¢ al. Interaction of St John's wort with low-dose oral
contraceptive therapy: a randomized controlled trial. Br J Clin
Pharmacol 2003; 56: 683-690.

219 Hall SD et al. The interaction between St John's wort and an oral
contraceptive. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2003; 74: 525-535.

220 Maurer A et al. Interaction of St John's wort extract with
phenprocoumon (abstract). Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1999; 55: A22.

221 Kawaguchi A e¢ al. Drug interaction between St John's wort and
quazepam. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 58: 403-410.

222 Sugimoto K-I et al. Different effects of St John's wort on the
pharmacokinetics of simvastatin and pravastatin. Clin Pharmacol
Ther 2001; 70: 518-524.

223 Hebert MF et al. Effects of St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) on
tacrolimus pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers. J Clin Pharmacol
2004; 44: 89-94,

224 Tannergren C et al. St John's wort decreases the bioavailability of R-
and S-verapamil through induction of the first-pass metabolism. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2004; 75: 298-309.

225 Jiang X et al. Effect of St John's wort and ginseng on the
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of warfarin in healthy
subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 57: 592-599.

226 Kerb R et al. Urinary 6-beta-hydroxycortisol excretion rate is affected
by treatment with hypericum extract. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1992; 52:
607.

227 Roby CA et al. St John's wort impact on CYP3A4 activity. Poster no.
129 presented at the 39th Annual Meeting of the New Clinical Drug
Evaluation Unit Program, June 1999, Florida.

228 Markowitz JS et al. Effect of St John's wort on drug metabolism by
induction of cytochrome P450 3A4 enzyme. JAMA 2003; 290: 1500-
1504.

229 Wang Z et al. The effects of St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum)
on human cytochrome P450 activity. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2001; 70:
317-326.

230 Hennessy M et al. St John's wort increases expression of P-
glycoprotein: implications for drug interactions. Br J Clin Pharmacol
2002; 53: 75-82.

231 Zhou S e¢ al. Pharmacokinetic interactions of drugs with St John's
wort. J Pscychopharmacol 2004; 18: 262-276.

232 Wang L-S et al. St John's wort induces both cytochrome P450 3A4-
catalyzed sulfoxidation and 2C19-dependent hydroxylation of
omeprazole. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2004; 75: 191-197.

233 Burstein AH et al. Lack of effect of St John's wort on carbamazepine
pharmacokinetics in healthy volunteers. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2000;
68: 605-612.

234 Morimoto T e¢ al. Effect of St John's wort on the pharmacokinetics of
theophylline in healthy volunteers. J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 44: 95-101.

235 Ereshefsky B et al. Determination of St John's wort differential
metabolism at CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, using dextromethorphan probe
methodology. Poster no. 130 presented at the 39th Annual Meeting of
the New Clinical Drug Evaluation Unit Program, June 1999, Florida.

236 Gewertz N et al. Determination of the differential effects of St John's
wort on the CYP1A2 and NAT2 metabolic pathways using caffeine

St John’s Wort

probe methodology. Poster no. 131 presented at the 39th Annual
Meeting of the New Clinical Drug Evaluation Unit Program, June
1999, Florida.

237 Markowitz JS et al. Effect of St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum)
on cytochrome P450 2D6 and 3A4 activity in healthy volunteers. Life
Sci 2000; 66(9): 133-139.

238 Wenk M et al. Effect of St John's wort on the activities of CYP1A2,
CYP3A4,CYP2D6, N-acetyltransferase 2, and xanthine oxidase in
healthy males and females. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 57: 495-499.

239 Arold G et al. No relevant interaction with alprazolam, caffeine,
tolbutamide, and digoxin by treatment with a low-hyperforin St John's
wort extract. Planta Med 2005; 71: 331-337.

240 Johne A et al. Impact of cytochrome P-450 inhibition by cimetidine
and induction by carbamazepine on the kinetics of hypericin and
pseudohypericin in healthy volunteers. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 60:
617-622.

241 Komoroski BJ e¢ al. Induction and inhibition of cytochromes P450 by
the St John's wort constituent hyperforin in human hepatocyte
cultures. Drug Metab Disposition 2004; 32: 512-518.

242 Chen Y et al. Induction of human CYP2C9 by rifampicin, hyperforin,
and phenobarbital is mediated by the pregnane X receptor. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther 2004; 308: 495-501.

243 Cantoni L et al. Hyperforin contributes to the hepatic CYP3A-
inducing effect of Hypericum perforatum extract in the mouse.
Toxicol Sci 2003; 75: 25-30.

244 Perloff MD e¢ al. Saint John's wort: an in vitro analysis of P-
glycoprotein induction due to extended exposure. Br J Pharmacol
2001; 134: 1601-1608.

245 Tian R et al. Functional induction and de-induction of P-glycoprotein
by St John's wort and its ingredients in a human colon
adenocarcinoma cell line. Drug Metab Disposition 2005; 33: 547-554.

246 Budzinski JW et al. An in vitro evaluation of human cytochrome P450
3A4 inhibition by selected commercial herbal extracts and tinctures.
Phytomedicine 2000; 7: 273-282.

247 Strandell J et al. An approach to the in vitro evaluation of potential
for cytochrome P450 enzyme inhibition from herbals and other
natural remedies. Phytomedicine 2004; 11: 98-104.

248 Wang E et al. Quantitative characterization of direct P-glycoprotein
inhibition by St John's wort constituents hypericin and hyperforin. J
Pharm Pharmacol 2004; 56: 123-128.

249 Peebles KA et al. Catalytic inhibition of human DNA topoisomerase
Ila by hypericin, a naphthodianthrone from St John's wort
(Hypericum perforatum). Biochemical Pharmacol 2001; 62: 1059-
1070.

250 Martin-Facklam M et al. Undeclared exposure to St John's wort in
hospitalised patients. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 58: 437-441.

251 Redvers A et al. How many patients self-medicate with St John's wort?
Psychiatric Bull 2001; 25: 254-256.

252 Beckman SE et al. Consumer use of St John's wort: a survey on
effectiveness, safety and tolerability. Pharmacotherapy 2000; 20: 568—
S74,

253 Hindmarch M, Oakeshott P. Interactions of the oral contraceptive pill
with antibiotics and St John's wort: knowledge of female college
students. Family Prac 2002; 19(6): 708.

254 Lee A et al. The safety of St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum)
during breastfeeding. J Clin Psychiatry 2003; 64: 966-968.

255 Grush LR et al. St John's wort during pregnancy. JAMA 1998; 280(18):
1566.

256 Klier CM et al. St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) — is it safe
during breastfeeding? Pharmacopsychiatry 2002; 35: 29-30.

257 Rayburn WE et al. Effect of prenatally administered hypericum (St
John's wort) on growth and physical maturation of mouse offspring.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2001; 184: 191-195.

258 Gregoretti B et al. Toxicity of Hypericum perforatum (St John's wort)
administered during pregnancy and lactation in rats. Toxicol Applied
Pharmacol 2004; 200: 201-205.

----- PAGE 581 -----
Stone Root

, ,
appropriateness of medicinal use of stone root should be
considered. Excessive use, at least, should be avoided. Stone
root should not be used during pregnancy and lactation. The
potential for stone root preparations to interact with other
medicines should be considered.

Species (Family)

Collinsonia canadensis L. (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Collinsonia punctata Ell., C. canadensis var. punctata (Ell.) Gray,
Heal-All, Knob Root

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983” ;
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

a

Terpenoids Pentacyclic triterpene caulophyllogenin,'” saponin

glycosides.
Other constituents An unidentified alkaloid, mucilage, resin,
tannins, essential oil.

Other parts of the plant Leaves and stems contain flavonoids
2,5-dihydroxy-6,7-dimethoxyflavanone, baicalein-6,7-dimethyl
ether, norwogenin-7,8-dimethyl ether and tetrochrysin (S-
hydroxy-7-methoxyflavone).”

Food Use

Stone root is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Stone root is stated to possess antilithic, litholytic, mild
diaphoretic and diuretic properties. Traditionally, it has been

used for renal calculus, lithuria, and specifically for urinary
G7, G64)

calculus."

Flavonoids (in leaves and stems)

OH
CH,O. 0. 1@)

CH3O

OH O

OH O

2,5-dihydroxy-6,7-dimethoxyflavanone

norwogenin-7,8-dimethyl ether tetrochrysin
(5-hydroxy-7-methoxyflavone)

Triterpenes

HO

HO.

caulophyllogenin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of stone root.

Figure 2 Stone root (Collinsonia canadensis).

----- PAGE 582 -----
Figure 3 Stone root — dried drug substance (rhizome).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal and older pharmaceutical
reference texts are given below.

Dried root 14g as a decoction three times daily.'©”
Liquid extract 14 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”
Tincture 2-8 mL (1:5 in 40% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Tincture of Collinsonia 2-8 mL.‘0!

Pharmacological Actions

None documented.

Stone Root

Side-effects, Toxicity

None documented. However, there is a lack of clinical and
preclinical safety and toxicity data for stone root and further
investigation of these aspects is required.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. In view of the lack of
information on the constituents of stone root and_ their
pharmacological activities, the potential for stone root prepara-
tions to interact with other medicines administered concurrently
should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of stone root has not been
established. In view of the lack of phytochemical, pharmacological
and toxicological information, the use of stone root during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations
UK: Piletabs.

References

1 Buckingham J, ed. Dictionary of Natural Products on CD-ROM. Boca
Raton: CRC Press, 2005.

2. Stevens JF et al. A novel 2-hydroxyflavanone from Collinsonia
canadensis. ] Nat Prod 1999; 62: 392-394.

----- PAGE 583 -----
a lack of robu al research assessing the efficacy and
safety of tansy. Tansy yields an extremely toxic volatile oil,
which should not be used internally or externally.“¢>® In view
of this, the use of tansy as a herbal medicine is not justified
even though documented studies have supported the
traditional uses of the herb as a choleretic and anthelmintic
agent. Tansy is contra-indicated in pregnancy and lactation.

Species (Family)

Tanacetum vulgare L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Chrysanthemum audiberti (DC.) P. Fourn., C. tanacetum Karsch
non Vis., C. vulgare (L.) Bernh. non (Lam.) Gaterau, Pyrethrum
vulgare (L.) Boiss. Tanacetum audibertii (Req.) DC., Tanacetum

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1983” ;
Martindale 35th edition'@®

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Tansy is not included in the GSL.'*”

Constituents

Steroids {-Sitosterol (major), campesterol, cholesterol, stigmas-
terol and taraxasterol.'”

Terpenoids %-Amyrin (major), B-amyrin, sesquiterpene lactones
including arbusculin-A, tanacetin, germacrene D, crispolide;*>>
tanacetols A and B.°

Volatile oils 0.12-0.18%. Major components as B-thujone (up to
95%) and camphor, others include &-pinene, borneol, 1,8-cineole,
umbellone and sabinene. At least ten different chemotypes have
been identified in which camphor was the most frequently
occurring main component and thujone second.”

Other constituents Gum, mucilage, resin and tannins.

Food Use

Tansy is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that tansy
can be added to foodstuffs in the traditionally accepted manner,
although there is insufficient information for an adequate
assessment of potential toxicity. In addition, the Council of
Europe recommends that the concentration of thujones present in
food products is restricted to 0.5 mg/kg."©'9 Tansy oil is

Monoterpenes

Oo fe)

camphor
6-thujone

Sesquiterpene lactones

sr

HO

arbusculin A

Triterpenes

a-amyrin
Figure 1 Selected constituents of tansy.

prohibited from use as a food flavouring by the Food Additives
and Contaminants Committee (FACC) in view of the thujone
content.'*

Herbal Use

Tansy is stated to possess anthelmintic, carminative and
antispasmodic properties and to act as a stimulant to abdominal
viscera. Traditionally, it has been used for nematode infestation,
topically for scabies (as a decoction) and pruritus ani (as an
ointment), and specifically for roundworm or threadworm
infestation in children.”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 1-2g as an infusion three times daily.'C”

Liquid extract 1-2 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

In vitro antispasmodic activity on rabbit intestine, and in vivo
choleretic activity in the dog have been documented for tansy

----- PAGE 584 -----
Figure 2 Tansy (Tanacetum vulgare).

extracts. It was suggested that the choleretic action might be
attributable to caffeic acid, a known bile stimulant that is present
in tansy.) Anthelmintic activity in dogs has been described for
tansy oil, an ether extract of the oil, and for B-thujone."% Daily
intragastric doses of a tansy extract given to rabbits have been
found to reduce serum lipid concentrations and inhibit further
development of hypercholesterolaemia. In addition, it was noted
that recovery of blood sugar concentrations was inhibited in
animals given twice daily doses. In vitro antifungal activity in 15
pathogenic and non-pathogenic fungi has been reported.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of tansy
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Aqueous infusions and alcoholic extracts have been reported to
be clinically effective bile stimulants in patients with liver and gall
bladder disorders. The treatment alleviated pain and increased
appetite and digestion.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

. . . F G58) ¢
Tansy oil contains the toxic ketone B-thujone.(©°* Symptoms of
tansy oil poisoning are attributable to the thujone content and
include rapid and weak pulse, severe gastritis, violent spasms and

‘S22) Documented fatalities have mainly been asso-

convulsions.
ciated with ingestion of the oil, although fatal cases of poisoning
have occurred with infusions and powders.” The ratio of toxic
to therapeutic dose has been reported as 2.5: 1 and it was noted
that all tansy preparations should be administered with castor
oil. Tansy yields potentially allergenic sesquiterpene lactones
which have been implicated in the aetiology of contact dermatitis.

Instances of contact dermatitis to tansy have been documented.
G51)

Preclinical data

An oral LDso value for tansy oil is stated as 1.15 g/kg body
weight.”

Figure 3 Tansy — dried drug substance (herb).

In vitro and in vivo antitumour activity has been documented
for tansy.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Tansy oil is toxic and should not be used internally or
externally. Fatalities have been reported following ingestion
of infusions and extracts. Tansy contains allergenic sesquiterpene
lactones and may cause an allergic reaction.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of tansy to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence from
preclinical studies that tansy has hypoglycaemic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation ‘Tansy is contra-indicated in
pregnancy and lactation. Tansy is reputed to affect the menstrual

cycle and utero-activity has been documented in animal studies.
The volatile oil contains B-thujone, a known hepatotoxin.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Calmo.

References

1 Chandler RF et al. Herbal remedies of the Maritime Indians: Sterols
and triterpenes of Tanacetum vulgare L. (Tansy). Lipids 1982; 17:
102-106.

2 Chandra A et al. Germacranolides and an alkyl glucoside from
Tanacetum vulgare. Phytochemistry 1987; 26: 1463-1465.

3 Appendino G. Crispolide, an unusual hydroperoxysesquiterpene
lactone from Tanacetum vulgare. Phytochemistry 1982; 21: 1099-1102.

4 Holopainen M et al. A study on tansy chemotypes. Planta Med 1987;
53: 284-287.

5  Appendino G et al. Tanacetols A and B, non-volatile uiterpene
alcohols, from Tanacetum vulgare. Phytochemistry 1983; 22: 509-512.

6 Opdyke DLJ. Tansy oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1976; 14: 869-871.

7 Hardin JW, Arena JM, eds. Human Poisoning from Native and
Cultivated Plants, 2nd edn. North Carolina: Duke University, 1974:
150-153.

----- PAGE 585 -----
; Thyme

standardised thyme extracts based on the phenolic volatile
components may not be appropriate because antispasmodic
actions previously attributed to these compounds may be
attributable to other constituents. Thyme should not be
ingested during pregnancy and lactation in quantities greater
than those found in foods.

Species (Family)

*Thymus vulgaris L.
+Thymus zygis L. (Labiatae/Lamiaceae)

Synonym(s)

Common Thyme, French Thyme, Garden Thyme, Rubbed Thyme
*Thymus ilerdensis Gonz. Frag. ex Costa., T. webbianus Rouy, T:
valentinus Rouy., T. aestivus Reut. ex Willk., T. welwitschii Boiss.

subsp ilerdensis (Gonz. Frag. ex Costa) Nyman
+T. sabulicola Coss., T. sylvestris Hoffman & Link

Monoterpenes
OH |
thymol carvacrol
Flavonoids
OH
Cc) ‘OCH;
CH3O0°
OH O
cirsileneol
OH
H
HO °. OC}
Oo ”
OH O
eriodictyol

Figure 1 Selected constituents of thyme.

Part(s) Used

Flowering top, leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996”)

BP 2007°08°

Complete German Commission EC)
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition’@*”

Ph Eur 20078

WHO volume 1 1999'¢®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSLiC*?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2, G22, G52 and G58.

Volatile oils 0.8-2.6%. Pharmacopoeial standard, not less than
1.2%.'C8 S89) Phenols as major components (20-80%) primarily
thymol and carvacrol; others include p-cymene and y-terpinene
(monoterpenes), linalool, %-terpineol, and thujan-4-ol (alcohols);
biphenyl compounds of monoterpene origin.” A detailed
analysis of the volatile oil components is given elsewhere.'°?”

Flavonoids
eriodictyol.

Cirsilineol, 8-methoxycirsilineol, thymonin and

thymonin

----- PAGE 586 -----
Other constituents Caffeic acid, oleanolic acid, ursolic acid,
rosmarinic acid, resins, saponins and tannins.

Food Use

Thyme is commonly used as a culinary herb, and thyme oil is used
in food flavouring. Previously, thyme has been listed as GRAS
(Generally Recognised As Safe).'@%

Herbal Use

Thyme is stated to possess carminative, antispasmodic, anti-
tussive, expectorant, secretomotor, bactericidal, anthelmintic and
astringent properties. Traditionally, it has been used for dyspepsia,
chronic gastritis, asthma, diarrhoea in children, enuresis in
children, laryngitis, tonsillitis (as a gargle), and specifically for
pertussis and bronchitis.'C? C4 97 G32 G8; 650, G52,C6), The Ger-
man Commission E approved internal use for treating symptoms
of bronchitis, whooping cough and catarrh of the upper
respiratory tract.©?) Thyme is used in various combinations
with anise oil, eucalyptus oil, fennel oil, fennel fruit, Iceland moss,
lime flower, liquorice root, marshmallow root, primrose root and
star anise fruit for catarrh and diseases of the upper respiratory
tract."

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 1-4g as an infusion three times daily;©? 1-
2g, (C3652

Liquid Extract of Thyme (BPC 1949) 0.64.0 mL.
Elixir of Thyme (BPC 1949) 4-8 mL.

Tincture 2-6 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily,“” four

drops.(6?

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Antitussive, expectorant and antispasmodic actions are considered
to be the major pharmacological properties of thyme,” and have
been associated with the volatile oils (e.g. thymol, carvacrol) and
flavonoid constituents. Thyme oil has produced hypotensive and

Figure 2. Thyme (Thymus vulgaris).

LON + ah

Figure 3_ Thyme - dried drug substance (leaf).

respiratory stimulant effects in rabbits following oral or
intramuscular administration, and in cats following intravenous
injection;“*” an increase in rhythmic heart contraction was also
observed in rabbits.‘*?

In vitro antispasmodic activity of thyme and related Thymus
species has been associated with the phenolic components of the
volatile oil and with the flavonoid constituents; their mode of
action is thought to involve calcium-channel blockage.'’* The
flavonoids thymonin, circilineol and 8-methoxycircilineol have
potent spasmolytic activity in guineapig trachea preparations in
vitro.)

Analgesic and antipyretic properties in mice have been reporte:
for a thyme extract.)

Thymol possesses anthelmintic (especially hookworms), anti-
bacterial and antifungal properties.“ Thymol and thyme oi
have antibacterial activity against certain organisms and thymol,
carvacrol and thyme oil have antifungal activity against a range of
organisms.‘

Thyme oil inhibits prostaglandin synthesis; rosmarinic acid has
anti-inflammatory activity, inhibiting complement in rats an
some of the functions of polymorphonucleocytes.'** Rosmarinic
acid reduced oedema produced by cobra venom factor in rats, ani
inhibited passive cutaneous anaphylaxis and impairment of in
vivo activation of mouse macrophages by heat killed Corynebac-

terium parvum.'° Activity may relate to complement inactiva-
« (GSO)
tion.

Clinical studies

Generally, well-designed clinical studies assessing the effects of
thyme are lacking. A randomised, double-blind, controlled trial
involving 60 patients with productive cough compared syrup of
thyme and bromhexine over a five-day period. Both groups were
similar in self-reported symptom relief.“

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for thyme and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Thyme oil is a dermal and mucous membrane irritan
Toxic symptoms documented for thymol include nausea, vomit-
ing, gastric pain, headache, dizziness, convulsions, coma, and
cardiac and respiratory arrest.'°??) Thymol is present in some
toothpaste preparations, and has been reported to cause cheilitis

(O58)

T

----- PAGE 587 -----
T

Thyme

and glossitis. Hyperaemia and severe inflammation have been
described for thyme oil used in bath preparations.'°”

Preclinical data

A concentrated extract of thyme decreased locomotor activity and
caused a slight slowing down of respiration in mice following oral
administration of doses of 0.5-3.0 g/kg, equivalent to 4.3-26.0g
dried plant material.“ In rats, oral LDso values stated for
thyme oil include 2.84 g/kg'C and 4.7 g/kg in rats, and >5 g/kg
following dermal administration. In mice, oral administration
of a concentrated ethanol extract of herb in subacute toxicity tests
resulted in increased weights of liver and testes. Also in mice, a
dose of 0.9 g daily for three months resulted in mortality rates of
30% and 10% in males and females, respectively. Thyme oil had
no mutagenic or DNA-damaging activity in either the Ames test
or Bacillus subtilis rec-assay.'°™

Contra-indications, Warnings

Thyme oil is toxic and should be used with considerable caution.
It should not be taken internally and only applied externally if
diluted in a suitable carrier oil.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of thyme to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation There are no known problems with
the use of thyme during pregnancy and lactation, provided that
doses do not greatly exceed the amounts used in foods.
Traditionally, thyme is reputed to affect the menstrual cycle and,
therefore, large amounts should not be ingested.

Husten (Bpouxunym Macraaxu or Kamas); Tussamag (Tycca-
mar). Switzerland: Thymusin N.

Africa: Cough Elixir. Spain: Natusor Asmaten; Natusor
Farinol; Natusor Gripotul; Natusor Infenol; Natusor Renal;
Natusor Sinulan; Pilka; Wobenzimal; Wobenzimal. Switzer-
land: DemoPectol; DemoPectol; Makaphyt Gouttes antitus-
sives; Makaphyt Sirop; Nican; Pectoral N; Strath Gouttes
contre la toux; Tisane pectorale et antitussive; Tisane pectorale
pour les enfants. Thailand: Solvopret; Solvopret TP. UK: Herb
and Honey Cough Elixir. Venezuela: Codebromil; Mixagel.

References

1 Van Den Broucke CO. The therapeutic value of Thymus species.
Fitoterapia 1983; 4: 171-174.

2 Van Den Broucke CO, Lernli JA. Pharmacological and chemical
investigation of thyme liquid extracts. Planta Med 1981, 41: 129-135.

3 Cruz T et al. The spasmolytic activity of the essential oil of Thymus
baeticus Boiss in rats. Phytother Res 1989; 3: 106-108.

4 Blazquez MA et al. Effects of Thymus species extracts on rat
duodenum isolated smooth muscle contraction. Phytother Res 1989; 3:
41-42.

5 Mohsin A et al. Analgesic, antipyretic activity and phytochemical
screening of some plants used in traditional Arab system of medicine.
Fitoterapia 1989; 60: 174.

6 Opdyke DLJ. Thyme oil, red. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 12: 1003—
1004.

----- PAGE 588 -----
- Uva-Ursi

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of uva-ursi is well documented with
hydroquinone derivatives, especially arbutin, identified as the
major active constituents. Documented pharmacological
actions justify the herbal use of uva-ursi as a urinary antiseptic.
However, clinical information is lacking and further studies are
required to determine the true usefulness of uva-ursi in the
treatment of urinary tract infections. Although hydroquinone
has been reported to be toxic in large amounts,
concentrations provided by the ingestion of therapeutic doses
of uva-ursi are not thought to represent a risk to human
health. Excessive use of uva-ursi and use during pregnancy
and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng. (Ericaceae)

Synonym(s)

Bearberry

Part(s) Used
Leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C”
ESCOP 2003'¢7°
Martindale 35th edition‘
Ph Eur 20078?

G85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'G3?)

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and G6.

Flavonoids Flavonols (e.g. myricetin, quercetin) and_ their
glycosides including hyperin, isoquercitrin, myricitrin and querci-
trin.

Iridoids Asperuloside (disputed), monotropein.

Quinones Total content at least 6%, mainly arbutin (S—15%) and
methyl-arbutin (glycosides), with lesser amounts of piceoside” (a
glycoside), free hydroquinone and free p-methoxyphenol.”)
Tannins 6-7% (range 640%). Hydrolysable-type (e.g. corilagin
pyranoside); ellagic and gallic acids (usually associated with
hydrolysable tannins).

Quinones OR

CH,OH_ SS
HO

HO
R
arbutin H
methylarbutin CH3
piceoside COCH;

Figure 1 Selected constituents of uva-ursi.

Terpenoids  «-Amyrin, g-amyrin acetate, B-amyrin, lupeol,
uvaol, ursolic acid, and a mixture of mono- and di-ketonic o-

amyrin derivatives.

Other constituents Acids (malic, quinic), allantoin, resin (e.g.
ursone), volatile oil (trace) and wax.

Other plant parts The root is reported to contain unedoside
(iridoid glucoside).

Food Use

Uva-ursi is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Uva-ursi is stated to possess diuretic, urinary antiseptic, and
astringent properties. Traditionally, it has been used for cystitis,
urethritis, dysuria, pyelitis, lithuria, and specifically for acute
catarrhal cystitis with dysuria and highly acidic urine.“©?°%°”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses

recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Figure 2. Uva-ursi (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi).

----- PAGE 589 -----
Uva-Ursi

Figure 3 Uva-ursi — dried drug substance (leaf).

Dried leaves 1.54.0 g as an infusion three times daily.'C%°”

Liquid extract 1.5-4.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'C&S?

Concentrated Infusion of Bearberry (BPC 1934) 2-4mL.
Fresh Infusion of Bearberry (BPC 1934) 15-30 mL.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Uva-ursi has exhibited antimicrobial activity towards a variety of
organisms including Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis,
Escherichia coli, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Shigella sonnei and
Shigella flexneri.” The antimicrobial activity of arbutin towards
bacteria implicated in producing urinary tract infections, has been
found to be directly dependent on the B-glucosidase activity of the
infective organism. Highest enzymatic activity was shown by
Enterobacter, Klebsiella and Streptococcus genera, and lowest by
Escherichia coli.® The minimum inhibitory concentration for
arbutin is reported to be 0.4-0.8% depending on the micro-
organism. Aqueous and methanolic extracts have demonstrated
molluscicidal activity against Biomphalaria glabrata, at a

concentration of 50 ppm.

tannin constituents (con

° The activity was attributed to the
lensed and hydrolysable).

Of 915 patients treated for six weeks, success was reported in
about 70%. The design of this study, however, does not allow the
observed effects to be attributed to uva-ursi.

The antiseptic and diuretic properties claimed for uva-ursi can
be attributed to the hydroquinone derivatives, especially arbutin.
The latter is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract virtually
unchanged and during renal excretion is hydrolysed to yield the
active principle, hydroquinone, which exerts an antiseptic and
astringent action on the urinary mucous membranes.''*!*) The
crude extract is reported to be more effective than isolated arbutin
as an astringent and antiseptic."“** This may be due to the other
hydroquinone derivatives, in addition to arbutin, that are present
in the crude extract and which will also yield hydroquinone.
Furthermore, it has been stated that the presence of gallic acid in
the crude extract may prevent B-glucosidase cleavage of arbutin in
the gastrointestinal tract before absorption, thereby increasing the
amount of hydroquinone released during renal excretion.‘

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for uva-ursi and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Hydroquinone is reported to be toxic if ingested in large
quantities: 1g (equivalent to 6-20g plant material) has caused
tinnitus, nausea and vomiting, sense of suffocation, shortness of
breath, cyanosis, convulsions, delirium and collapse.'°**) A dose
of Sg (equivalent to 30-100g of plant material) has proved
fatal.'“*® In view of the high tannin content, prolonged use of
uva-ursi may cause chronic liver impairment.'“*”

Preclinical data

Cytotoxic activity has been documented for hydroquinone (see
Pharmacological Actions, In vitro and animal studies).

Uva-ursi herb can sometimes be adulterated with box leaves
(Buxus sempervirens), which contain toxic steroidal alkaloids.
However, no cases of poisoning as a result of such adulteration
have been reported.'‘“*)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Uva-ursi requires an alkaline urine for it to be effective as a

Anti-inflammatory activity (rat paw oedema tests) has been

urinary antiseptic; an al

aline reaction is needed to yield

documented for uva-ursi

against a variety of chemical inducers

such as carrageenan, histamine and prostaglandins.

Uva-ursi failed to exhibit any in vitro uterotonic action when
tested on rabbit and guinea-pig uteri."

Hydroquinone has been reported to show a concentration-
dependent cytotoxic activity on cultured rat hepatoma cells (HTC
line); arbutin was not found to inhibit growth of the HTC cells.'”)
It was stated that hydroquinone appeared to have greater
cytotoxic activity towards rat hepatoma cells than agents like
azauridin or colchicine, but less than valtrate from valerian
(Valeriana officinalis). The cytoxicity of hydroquinone has also
been tested on L1210, CA-755 and S-180 tumour systems.”

Clinical studies

Clinical research assessing the effects of uva-ursi is limited and
rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

A herbal preparation, whose ingredients included uva-ursi,
hops and peppermint, has been used to treat patients suffering
from compulsive strangury, enuresis and painful micturition.

hydroquinone from the inactive esters such as arbutin.'“ Patients
have been advised to avoid eating highly acidic foods, such as
acidic fruits and their juices. The presence of hydroquinone
may impart a greenish-brown colour to the urine, which darkens
following exposure to air due to oxidation of hydroquinone.

Excessive use of uva-ursi should be avoided in view of the high
tannin content and potential toxicity of hydroquinone.

Prolonged use of uva-ursi to treat a urinary tract infection is
not advisable. Patients in whom symptoms persist for longer than
48 hours should consult their doctor.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of uva-ursi to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Large doses of uva-ursi are reported to
be oxytocic,““*” although in vitro studies have reported a lack of
utero-activity. In view of the potential toxicity of hydroquinone, the
use of uva-ursi during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

----- PAGE 590 -----
Backache; Buchu Backache Compound Tablets; Cascade; De
Witt's K & B Pills; Diuretabs; Fenneherb Cystaid; Fenneherb
Prementaid; HealthAid Boldo-Plus; HRI Water Balance; Kas-
Bah; Modern Herbals Water Retention; Napiers Uva Ursi Tea;
Prementaid; Sciargo; Sciatica Tablets; Tabritis; Tabritis
Tablets; Uvacin; Watershed. USA: CitriMax Plus.

1

2

10

cay

12

13

14

15

Uva-Ursi

References

Jahodar L et al. Investigation of iridoid substances in Arctostaphylos
uva-ursi. Pharmazie 1978; 33: 536-537.

Karikas GA et al. Isolation of piceoside from Arctostaphylos uva-ursi.
Planta Med 1987; 53: 307-308.

Jahodar L, Leifertova I. The evaluation of p-methoxyphenol in the
leaves of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi. Pharmazie 1979; 34: 188-189.
Droliac A. Triterpenes of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi Spreng. Plant Méd
Phytothér 1980; 14: 155-158.

Malterud KE. The non-polar components of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
leaves. Medd Nor Farm Selsk 1980; 42: 15-20.

Jahodar L et al. Unedoside in Arctostaphylos uva-ursi roots.
Pharmazie 1981; 36: 294-296.

Moskalenko SA. Preliminary screening of far-Eastern ethnomedicinal
plants for antibacterial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15: 231-259.
Jahodar L eg al. Antimicrobial action of arbutin and the extract from
the leaves of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi in vitro. Ceskoslov Farm 1985;
34: 174-178.

Schaufelberger D, Hostettmann K. On the molluscicidal activity of
tannin containing plants. Planta Med 1983; 48: 105-107.

Shipochliev T, Fournadjiev G. Spectrum of the antiinflammatory effect
of Arctostaphylos uva ursi and Achillea millefolium, L. Probl Vutr
Med 1984; 12: 99-107.

Shipochliev T. Extracts from a group of medicinal plants enhancing
the uterine tonus. Vet Med Nauki 1981; 18: 94-98.

Assaf MH eft al. Preliminary study of the phenolic glycosides from
Origanum majorana; quantitative estimation of arbutin; cytotoxic
activity of hydroquinone. Planta Med 1987; 53: 343-345.

Lenau H et al. Wirksamkeit und Vertraglichkeit von Cysto Fink bei
Patienten mit Reizblase und/oder Harninkontinenz. Therapiewoche
1984; 34: 6054-6059.

Frohne D. Untersuchungen zur Frage der Harndesinfizierenden
Wirkungen von Barentraubenblatt-Extrakten. Planta Med 1970; 18:
23-25.

Natural drugs with glycosides. In: Stahl E, ed. Drug Analysis in
Chromatography and Microscopy. Ann Arbor: Ann Arbor Scientific
Publishers, 1973: 97.

----- PAGE 591 -----
Valerian

recommended. Excessive consumption of alcohol whils'
receiving treatment with valerian root preparations should
avoided. Patients should seek medical advice if symptoms
worsen beyond two weeks’ continuous treatment with
valerian. Patients with known sensitivity to valerian should not
use valerian root preparations. The potential for preparations
of valerian to interfere with other medicines administered
concurrently, particularly those with similar (such as
barbiturates and other sedatives) or opposing effects, should
be considered.

There are isolated reports of adverse effects, mainly
hepatotoxic reactions, associated with the use of single-
ingredient and combination valerian-containing products.
However, causal relationships for these reports could not be
established as other factors could have been responsible for
the observed effects.

Species (Family)

Valeriana officinalis L. (Valerianaceae)

Synonym(s)

All-Heal, Belgian Valerian, Common Valerian, Fragrant Valerian,
Garden Valerian

Part(s) Used

Rhizome, root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia‘? ©”

BHC 1992'0°

BHP 1996”)

BHMA 20030°°

BP 2007'08)

Complete German Commission EC?)
EMEA HMPC Community Herbal Monograph'°*”
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'**

Ph Eur 20078?

USP29/NF24‘80)

WHO volume 1 1999'¢®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'@”)

Constituents
See also References 1-5.

Alkaloids Pyridine type. Actinidine, chatinine, skyanthine,
valerianine and valerine.

Iridoids (valepotriates) Valtrates (e.g. valtrate, valtrate iso-
valeroxyhydrin, acevaltrate, valechlorine), didrovaltrates (e.g.
didrovaltrate, homodidrovaltrate, deoxydidrovaltrate, homode-
oxydidrovaltrate, isovaleroxyhydroxydidrovaltrate) and isoval-
trates (e.g. isovaltrate, 7-epideacetylisovaltrate). Valtrate and
didrovaltrate are documented as the major components. Valer-
osidate (iridoid glucoside). The valepotriates are unstable and
decompose on storage or processing; the main degradation
products are baldrinal and homobaldrinal. The baldrinals may
react further and are unlikely to be present in finished products.

Steroids .-sitosterol, clionasterol 3-B-O-glucoside and a mixture
of 6'-O-acyl-B-p-glucosyl clionasterols where the acyl moieties are
hexadecanoyl (major), 8E,11E-octadecadienoyl and 14-methyl-
pentadecanoyl.”

Volatile oils 0.5-2%. Numerous identified components include
monoterpenes (e.g. &- and B-pinene, camphene, borneol, eugenol,
isoeugenol) present mainly as esters, sesquiterpenes (e.g. B-
bisabolene, caryophyllene, valeranone, ledol, pacifigorgiol, patch-
ouli alcohol, valerianol, valerenol and a series of valereny] esters,

valerenal, valerenic acid with acetoxy and hydroxy derivatives).
11)

Other constituents Amino acids (e.g. arginine, y-aminobutyric
acid (GABA), glutamine, tyrosine),""'” caffeic and chlorogenic
acids (polyphenolic), methyl 2-pyrrolketone, choline, tannins
(type unspecified), gum and resin.

----- PAGE 592 -----
Monoterpenes

OCOCH;

bornyl acetate

Valerian ‘ser

Iridoids
CH,OR? R! R2 R?
valtrate isovaleryl isovaleryl acetyl
isovaltrate isovaleryl acetyl isovaleryl
acevaltrate _isovaleryl © f-acetoxyvaleryl —_ acetyl
R' R? RS RY
didrovaltrate isovaleryl acetyl isovaleryl H
isovaleryloxy- isovalery! acetyl —2-(isovaleryl OH
R?0' hydroxydidro- -oxy)-isovaleryl
valtrate
(isovalery! = (CH3)2 CH = CH2CO-)
Sesquiterpenes
CH;OCOCH; RP
S
S0'
CHO
baldrinal
R! RI R2
valerenal CHO H
valerenic acid COOH H
acetoxyvalerenic acid COOH OCOCH3

Figure 1 Selected constituents of valerian.

Quality of plant material and commercial products

According to the British and European Pharmacopoeias, valerian
consists of the dried underground parts of V. officinalis L.,
including the rhizome surrounded by the roots and stolons.'@8"
S84) Tr contains not less than 5 mL/kg of essential oil for the whole
drug and not less than 3 mL/kg for the cut drug, both calculated
with reference to the dried drug, and not less than 0.17% of
sesquiterpenic acids expressed as valerenic acid, calculated with
reference to the dried drug.'©*” As with other plants, there can be
variation in the content of active compounds (e.g. valerenic acid
derivatives and valepotriates) found in valerian rhizomes and
roots.) Detailed descriptions of V. officinalis root for use in
botanical, microscopic and macroscopic identification have been
published, along with qualitative and quantitative methods for the
assessment of V. officinalis root raw material.‘¢?

Food Use

Valerian is not generally used as a food. Valerian is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring (root:
category 5) (see Appendix 3, Table 1).'S Previously, valerian has
been listed as GRAS (Generally Recognised As Safe).

Herbal Use

Valerian is stated to possess sedative, mild anodyne, hypnotic,
antispasmodic, carminative and hypotensive properties. Tradi-

tionally, it has been used for hysterical states, excitability,
insomnia, hypochondriasis, migraine, cramp, intestinal colic,
rheumatic pains, dysmenorrhoea, and specifically for conditions
presenting nervous excitability.'C> S% 97 C% SSS) Modern inter-
est in valerian is focused on its use as a sedative and hypnotic.
A Community Herbal Monograph adopted by the European
Medicines Agency's Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products
states the following therapeutic indications for valerian root:

Figure 2 Valerian (Valeriana officinalis).

----- PAGE 593 -----
Valerian

10M 12 13: 15 16
Figure 3. Valerian - dried drug substance (rhizome).

traditional use, for support of mental relaxation and to aid
natural sleep; well-established use, for the relief of mild nervous
tension and difficulty in falling asleep.C*”

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried rhizome/root 1-3 g as an infusion or decoction up to three
times daily.”

Tincture = 3-SmL (1:5; 70% ethanol) up to three times
daily;‘C° 1-3 mL, once to several times daily.'C?

Extracts Amount equivalent to 2-3 g drug, once to several times
daily;'C? 2-6 mL of 1:2 liquid extract daily.“

Doses given in older texts vary. For example: Valerian Liquid
Extract (BPC 1963) 0.3-1.0 mL; Simple Tincture of Valerian (BPC
1949) 4-8mL; Concentrated Valerian Infusion (BPC 1963) 2-
4mL.

Clinical trials inves

igating the effects of valerian root extracts
on sleep parameters have used varying dosages, for example,
valerian extract 400 mg/day (drug to extract ratio of 3:1)" and
1215 mg/day (drug to extract ratio of 5 to 6:1).

Pharmacological Actions

Sedative and hypnotic properties have been described for certain
valerian rhizome/root preparations following preclinical and
clinical studies. However, the available scientific evidence is
strong; also it remains unclear precisely which of the constituents
of valerian are responsible for the observed sedative and hypnotic
properties. Attention had focused on the volatile oil, and then
the valepotriates and their degradation products, as the consti-
tuents responsible. However, it appeared that the effects of the
volatile oil could not account for the whole action of the drug, and
the valepotriates, which degrade rapidly, are unlikely to be present
in finished products in significant concentrations. Current
thinking is that the overall effect of valerian is due to several
different groups of constituents and their varying mechanisms of
action. Therefore, the activity of different valerian preparations
will depend on their content and concentrations of several types of
One mechanism of action is likely to involve
increased concentrations of the inhibitory transmitter GABA in
the brain. Increased concentrations of GABA are associated with a

constituent.

decrease in CNS activity and this action may, therefore, be
involved in the reported sedative activity.

In vitro and animal studies

Sedative properties have been documented for valerian and have
been attributed to both the volatile oil and valepotriate
(1617) Screening of the volatile oil components for
sedative activity concluded valerenal and valerenic acid to be the
most active compounds, causing ataxia in mice at a dose of 50 mg/
kg by intraperitoneal injection.“ Further studies in mice
described valerenic acid as a general CNS depressant similar to
pentobarbitone, requiring high doses (100 mg/kg by intraperito-
neal injection) for activity."® A dose of 400 mg/kg resulted in
muscle spasms, convulsions and death.''*) Valerenic acid was also
reported to prolong pentobarbitone-induced sleep in mice,
resulting in a hangover effect. Biochemical studies have docu-
mented that valerenic acid inhibits the enzyme system responsible
for the central catabolism of GABA." An aqueous extract of
roots and rhizomes of V. officinalis (standardised to 55mg
valerenic acids per 100g extract) inhibited the uptake and
stimulated the release of radiolabelled GABA in_ isolated
synaptosomes from rat brain cortex.?”*" Further work suggested
that this aqueous extract of valerian induces the release of GABA
by reversal of the GABA carrier, and that the mechanism is Na*
dependent and Ca** independent.” The extract contained a high
concentration of GABA (about 5 mmol/L) which was shown to be
sufficient to induce the release of radiolabelled GABA by this type
of mechanism.?” Aqueous and hydroalcoholic (ethanol) extracts
of valerian root displaced radiolabelled muscimol binding to
synaptic membranes (a measure of the influence of drugs on
GABAg receptors). However, valerenic acid (0.1 mmol/L) did not
displace radiolabelled muscimol in this model.°*) Other in vitro
studies using rat brain tissue have shown that hydroalcoholic and
aqueous total extracts of V. officinalis root, and an aqueous
fraction derived from the hydroalcoholic extract, show affinity for
GABA, receptors, although far lower than that of the neuro-
transmitter  itself.°" However, a lipophilic fraction of the
hydroalcoholic extract, hydroxyvalerenic acid and dihydrovaltrate
did not show any affinity for the GABA, receptor in this model.

The effects of valerian extracts on benzodiazepine binding to
rat cortical membranes have also been explored. Very low
concentrations of ethanolic extract of V. officinalis had no effect
on radiolabelled flunitrazepam binding in this model, although
concentrations of 107-'° to 10°-*mg/mL increased radiolabelled
flunitrazepam binding with an ECso of 4.13 x 107 !° mg/mL.)
However, flunitrazepam binding was inhibited at higher concen-
trations (0.5-7.0 mg/mL) of valerian extract (ICs9 4.82 x 10°! mg/
mL). In other investigations, valerian extract potentiated radi-
olabelled GABA release from rat hippocampal slices, and
inhibited synaptosomal GABA uptake, confirming the effects of
valerian extract on GABA, receptors.?°

Radiolabelled ligand binding studies have also shown that
constituents of dichloromethane and petroleum ether extracts of
valerian have strong binding affinities for S-HT;, receptors but
only weak binding affinities for 5-HTs, receptors.°% At
concentrations of S50 ,tg/mL, the petroleum ether and dichlor-
omethane extracts inhibited binding of radiolabelled lysergic acid
diethylamide to 5-HT;, receptors by 86% and 51%, respectively.
Generation of an ICso curve for the petroleum ether extract
produced a biphasic curve. Valerenic acid, a constituent of both
extracts, had an ICso of 17.2 mol/L. In other radiolabelled ligand
binding experiments, a 45% methanol extract of valerian root

fractions.

----- PAGE 594 -----
(drug to extract ratio 4-6: 1; containing valerenic acids 0.388%,
and no valepotriates) had an ICso value of 450 pg/mL at
melatonin-1 (ML) receptors obtained from chicken brain, whereas
a 45% methanol extract of hops' cones (containing flavonoids
0.479%, calculated as rutin) had an ICso value of 71 ttg/mL at
these receptors. A preparation (ZE-91019) containing both
extracts had an ICso value of 97 pg/mL, suggesting a synergistic
action between the two extracts at ML1 receptors.”

CNS-depressant activities in mice following intraperitoneal
injection have been documented for the valepotriates and for their
degradation products, although activity was found to be greatly
reduced following oral administration.°*) A study explored the
effects of a mixture of valepotriates on the behaviour of diazepam-
withdrawn male Wistar rats in the elevated plus-maze test (a
measure of the anxiolytic or anxiogenic properties of drugs).°”)
Rats were given diazepam (up to 5 mg/kg for 28 days) then vehicle
only for three days to induce a withdrawal syndrome. Rats given
diazepam or a mixture of valepotriates (stated to contain
dihydrovaltrate 80%, valtrate 15% and acevaltrate 5%) adminis-
tered intraperitoneally (12 mg/kg) spent a significantly greater
proportion of time in the ‘open’ arms of the maze than did those
in the control group.

Another specific valepotriate fraction, Vpto, has been docu-
mented to exhibit tranquillising, central myorelaxant, anti-
convulsant, coronary-artery dilating and anti-arrhythmic actions
in mice, rabbits, and cats.°°°” The fraction was reported to
prevent arrhythmias induced by Pituitrin vasopressin and barium
chloride, and to exhibit moderate positive inotropic and negative
chronotropic effects.

Antispasmodic activity on intact and isolated guinea-pig ileum
(32)

has been documented for isovaltrate, valtrate and valeranone.
This activity was attributed to a direct action on the smooth
muscle receptors rather than ganglion receptors. Valerian oil has
been reported to exhibit antispasmodic activity on isolated
guinea-pig uterine muscle,°) but proved inactive when tested in
vivo.

In-vitro inactivation of complement activation has been
reported for the valepotriates.°

In-vitro cytotoxicity (inhibition of DNA and protein synthesis,
and potent alkylating activity) has been documented for the
valepotriates, with valtrate stated to be the most toxic
compound. Valepotriates (valtrate and didrovaltrate) isolated
from the related species Valeriana wallichii, and baldrinal (a
degradation product of valtrate) have been tested for their
cytotoxic activity in vitro using cultured rat hepatoma cells.
Valtrate was the most active compound in this system, leading to a
100% mortality of hepatoma cells after 24 hours! incubation at a
concentration of 33pg/mL.°” More detailed studies using the
same system showed that didrovaltrate demonstrated cytotoxic
activity when incubated at concentrations higher than 8 jtg/mL of
culture (1.5 x 10° mol/L) and led to 100% cellular mortality
with 24 hours of incubation at a concentration of 66 g/mL. The
cytotoxic effect of didrovaltrate was irreversible within two hours
of incubation with hepatoma cells. In mice, administration of
intraperitoneal didrovaltrate led to a regression of Krebs II ascitic
tumours, compared with control.°” A subsequent in vivo study,
in which valtrate was administered to mice (by intraperitoneal
injection and by mouth), did not report any toxic effects on
haematopoietic precursor cells when compared with control
groups.°*) The valepotriates are known to be unstable compounds
in both acidic and alkaline media and it has been suggested that
their in vivo toxicity is limited due to poor absorption and/or
© Baldrinal and homobaldrinal, decomposition

distribution.

Valerian

products of valtrate and isovaltrate respectively, have exhibited
direct mutagenic activity against various Salmonella strains in

vitro.)

Clinical studies

Pharmacokinetics There are only limited data on the
pharmacokinetics of valerian preparations and their constituent
compounds. The pharmacokinetic:
explored in a single-dose study involving six healthy adults who
received a 70% ethanol extract of valerian root (LI-156,
Sedonium, Lichtwer Pharma; drug to extract ratio 5:1) 600mg
in the morning. For five participants, maximum serum concentra-
tions of valerenic acid occurred between one and two hours after
valerian administration and ranged from 0.9 to 2.3ng/mL;
valerenic acid concentrations were measurable for at least five

of valerenic acid were

hours after valerian administration.” For one subject, maximum
concentrations occurred at both one and five hours after valerian
administration. The mean (standard deviation (SD)) elimination
half-life (¢1/2) for valerenic acid was 1.1 (0.6) hours and the mean
(SD) area under the plasma concentration time curve was 4.80
(2.96) ttg/mL/hour. Further investigation of the pharmacokinetics
of valerian is required, including those of different manufacturers!
preparations and their constituents.

Sleep disorders, hypnotic activity Numerous studies have
explored the effects of valerian preparations on subjective (e.g.
participants’ self-assessment of sleep quality) and/or objective (e.g.
sleep structure, such as duration of rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep or slow-wave sleep) sleep parameters. Collectively, the
findings of these studies are difficult to interpret, as different
studie: sed different valerian preparations and different
dosages, and some have involved healthy volunteers whereas
others have involved patients with diagnosed sleep disorders. In
addition, other studies have used different subjective and/or

have as

objective outcome measures, and some have been conducted in
sleep laboratories, whereas others have assessed participants
receiving valerian whilst sleeping at home. Overall, several, but
not all, studies have documented a hypnotic effect for valerian
preparations with regard to subjective measures of sleep quality,
and some have documented effects on objective measures of sleep
structure. There is a view that investigating subjective measures of
sleep quality may be the most appropriate or relevant form of
assessment.” Several trials, including the most recent studies,
particularly those involving individuals with sleep disorders rather
than healthy volunteers, are summarised below.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
study involving 16 patients with previously established psycho-
physiological insomnia according to International Clas
of Sleep Disorders (ICSD) criteria and confirmed by polysomno-
graphy assessed the effects of single-dose and longer-term
administration of valerian root extract on objective parameters
of sleep structure and subjective parameters of sleep quality.”
Participants received a 70% ethanol extract of valerian root (LI-
156; drug to extract ratio 5:1) 600mg, or placebo, one hour
before bedtime for 14 days, followed by a wash-out period of 13
days before crossing over to the other arm of the study. There were
no statistically significant effects on objective and subjective
parameters of sleep following single-dose valerian administration.
Similarly, after long-term treatment, there were no statistically
significant differences between groups in sleep efficiency (ratio of
time spent asleep to time spent in bed). There was a statistically
significant difference with valerian on parameters of slow-wave

sification

----- PAGE 595 -----
Valerian

sleep, compared with baseline valu
placebo. However, it is not clear if this difference was significantly
different for valerian, compared with placebo, as no p-value was
given.

The effects of repeated doses of the same valerian root extract
(LI-156) were assessed in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, parallel-group trial involving 121 patients with
insomnia not due to organic causes.” Participants received
valerian extract 600 mg, or placebo, one hour before bedtime for
28 days. At the end of the study, clinical global impression scores
were significantly higher for the valerian group than for the
placebo group.

A crossover study a: ing the same valerian root extract (LI-
156) involved 16 individuals aged 50 to 64 years with mild sleep
complaints (e.g. difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, early
morning awakenings) who received a single 300 mg or 600 mg dose
of the extract, or placebo, at 10 pm on one occasion, with a 6-day
wash-out period before crossing over to each of the other arms of
the study.” Participants underwent a battery of tests designed to
assess objective and subjective measures of sleep at 7.05 am on the
morning after each treatment intervention. There were no
statistically significant differences between the three groups for
any of the outcome variables measured (p > 0.05).

In a randomised, double-blind, pilot study, 14 older women who
were poor sleepers received valerian aqueous extract (Valdispert
forte; drug to extract ratio S—6: 1), or placebo (n = 6), for eight
consecutive days." Valerian 405mg was administered one hour
before sleep for one night in the laboratory, then taken three times
daily for the following seven days. Valerian recipients showed an
increase in slow-wave sleep, compared with baseline values.
However, valerian had no effect on sleep onset time, rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep or on self-rated sleep quality, when
compared with placebo. In another randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study involving older participants, 78 hospital-
ised patients with various chronic conditions in addition to
difficulty sleeping received an aqueous valerian root extract
(Baldrian Dispert) 270 mg daily, or placebo, for 14 days.” At the
end of the study, sleep latency and sleep duration were
significantly improved in the valerian group, compared with the
placebo group (p < 0.001 for both).

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving
128 volunteers explored the effects of an aqueous extract of
valerian root (400mg) and a proprietary preparation of valerian
and hops (Hova) on subjective measures of sleep quality. Each
participant took each of the three preparations at night for three
non-consecutive nights." On the basis of participants’ self-
assessment, valerian significantly reduced sleep latency (time to
onset of sleep) and improved sleep quality, compared with placebo
(p < 0.05). Subgroup analysis suggested that the effects of valerian
were most marked among participants who di
as 'poor' or ‘irregular’ sleepers." It was reported that the
valerian—hops preparation did not significantly affect sleep latency
or sleep quality, compared with placebo, only that the valerian—
hops preparation administration was associated with an increase
in the number of reports of 'feeling more sleepy than usual the
next morning’ (i.e. a 'hangover' effect). The authors were unable to
explain this discrepancy in the results for the two preparations

In a subsequent study, eight individuals wit!
each received aqueous valerian root extract 450mg, 900mg or

placebo, in a random-order experimental design over almost three
(46)

scribed themselves

mild insomnia

weeks.“ The time to the first period of five consecutive minutes
sured using wrist-worn activity meters,

was used as an objective measure of sleep latency. For this

without movement, me

parameter, valerian 450 mg significantly reduced the mean sleep
latency, compared with placebo, although there was no further
reduction in sleep latency with valerian 900mg. Subjective
assessments indicated that participants were more likely to
experience a ‘hangover’ effect with valerian 900 mg.“

The effects of a valerian root/rhizome extract (tablets contain-
ing 225 mg extract equivalent to 1000 mg crude drug, standardised
for total valerenic acids 2.94 mg, valerenal 0.46 mg and valtrates
1.23 mg; Mediherb, Australia) two tablets at night half an hour
before going to bed on self-assessed sleep parameters were
assessed in a series of randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, 'n-of-1' crossover trials involving 24 patients with
chronic insomnia diagnosed by a general practitioner. The trials
were conducted in a general practice setting and involved three
pairs of one-week treatments with valerian extract and placebo (i.
e. each n-of-1 trial lasted for six weeks).
found that participants did not show any response to valerian for
any of the outcome measures either individually or when
individual results were pooled. N-of-1 trials have recognised
limitations, including some which can increase the possibility of
false negative results, although these were taken into considera-
tion during the analysis of these data. Investigation of dosage
regimens involving higher doses of this extract administered for
longer periods may be warranted.”

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial con-
ducted entirely over the Internet, 391 adults who scored at least 40
points on the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) scale and who
reported having sleeping problems on at least two occasions
received two capsules containing valerian extract (each containing
valerenic acids 3.2 mg; no further details of preparation provided)
one hour before bedtime, capsules containing kava extract (each
containing total kavalactones 100mg) one three times daily, or
placebo, for 28 days.*) At the end of the study, there were no
statistically significant differences between valerian and placebo
with respect to the primary outcome measure changes from
baseline in Insomnia Severity Index scores. The study also assessed
effects on anxiety (see Anxiety, depression and other conditions).

The effects of preparations of valerian root extract have been
compared with those of certain benzodiazepines. In a randomised,
double-blind trial, 75 individuals with non-organic and non-
psychiatric insomnia received valerian root extract (drug to extract
ratio 5: 1) 600 mg or oxazepam 10 mg; both treatments were taken
30 minutes before going to bed for 28 days.) At the end of the
treatment period, sleep quality had improved significantly (p <
0.001) in both groups, compared with baseline values, and there
was no statistically significant difference between the two groups
(p= 0.70). The effects of a combination valerian preparation were
compared with those of bromazepam in a three-week, random-
ised, double-blind trial involving patients with ‘environmental!
sleep disorders (temporary dyscoimesis and dysphylaxia) accord-
ing to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM)-IV criteria.°°
The combination preparation, containing valerian 200mg and
hops extract 45.5mg, was reported to be equivalent to
bromazepam 3mg with regard to sleep quality. These findings
require confirmation in rigorous studies designed specifically to
test for equivalence.

Several of the studies summarised above'

) Statistical analyses

14, 15, 43, 45, 46)
° ” were

included in a systematic review of nine randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled trials of monopreparations of valerian.°" All
trials included in the review had different designs and assessed the
effects of different valerian preparations administered according
to different dosage regimens, so the validity of considering their
results collectively is questionnable. The review concluded that the

----- PAGE 596 -----
evidence for valerian as a treatment for insomnia is inconclusive
and that there is a need for further rigorous trials.

Several other studies have assessed the effects of valerian extract
in combination with other herb extracts, such as hops (Humulus
lupulus) and/or melissa (Melissa officinalis), on measures of
sleep. 5°

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-
group trial, 184 adults with mild insomnia received two tablets of
a valerian—hops preparation (each tablet containing 187 mg of a
45% methanol extract of valerian, drug to extract ratio 5-8: 1,
and 42mg of a 45% methanol extract of hops, drug to extract
ratio 7-10: 1; 2 = 59), or placebo (n = 65), each night for 28 days;
a third study arm received diphenhydramine 50 mg each night for
14 days followed by placebo for 14 days (n = 60).°”) At the end of
the study, there was no statistically significant difference in sleep
latency between the valerian—hops group and the placebo group (p
= 0.08). There were no statistically significant differen
groups with respect to the sleep continuity variables, as measured
by polysomnography, nor in the duration of sleep stages 3 and 4,
and REM sleep. The physical component, but not the mental
component, of the quality-of-life measure used was significantly
improved in the valerian—hops group, compared with the placebo
group after 28 days (p = 0.028).

A randomised, double-blind trial involving healthy volunteers

who received Songha Night (V. officinalis root extract 120 mg and
M. officinalis leaf extract 80 mg) three tablets daily taken as one
dose 30 minutes before bedtime for 30 days (1 = 66), or placebo (
= 32), found that the proportion of participants reporting an
improvement in sleep quality was significantly greater for the
treatment group, compared with the placebo group (33.3% versus
9.4%, respectively; p = 0.04).° However, analysi
analogue scale scores revealed only a slight, but statistically non-
significant, improvement in sleep quality in both groups over the
treatment period. Another double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
involving patients with insomnia who received Euvegal forte
tablets (containing valerian extract 160 mg and lemon balm extract
80 mg) two daily for two weeks reported significant improvements
in sleep quality in recipients of the herbal preparation, compared
with placebo recipients.°°) A placebo-controlled study involving
‘poor sleepers’ who received Euvegal forte reported significant
improvements in sleep efficiency and in sleep stages 3 and 4 in the
treatment group, compared with placebo recipients.
In a single-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study involving
12 healthy volunteers, two different single doses of a combination
preparation (ZE-91019) containing extracts of valerian and hops
(valerian 500mg, hops 120mg; valerian 1500mg, hops 360 mg)
ssed for their effects on EEG recordings.” Some slight
on the quantitative EEG were documented following
administration of the higher dose valerian—hops combination,
suggesting effects on the central nervous system. The same
preparation (two or six tablets as a single dose; m = 16), in addition
to caffeine 200 mg, was administered to healthy volunteers in a
controlled (caffeine 200 mg plus placebo; 1 = 16) study which aimed
to determine the pharmacodynamics of co-administration of the
two preparations by measuring EEG responses.) EEG recordings
at one hour after administration indicated that the lower dose of the
valerian—hops preparation reduced caffeine-induced arousal and
the higher dose inhibited the caffeine-induced arousal. It was stated
that this indicates that the valerian—hops combination preparation
8) although which
constituents are responsible for this effect is not known.

The effects of a related species, V. edulis, on sleep parameters
sed in a preliminary randomised, double-blind, placebo-

between

of visual

were assi

effec

acts via a central adenosine mechanism,

were as:

Valerian

controlled, crossover trial involving five male children (7 to 14
years) with intellectual deficits (intelligence quotient < 70).
Participants received tablets containing V. edulis dried crushed
root 500 mg (containing 5.52 mg valtrate/isovaltrate, didrovaltrate
and acevaltrate were absent; Mediherb, Australia), or placebo
(which contained 25 mg dried V. edulis root to achieve blinding for
odour), at a dose of 20mg/kg body weight administered each
night at least one hour before bedtime for two weeks following a
two-week run-in period. Participants underwent a one-week
wash-out period before crossing over to the other arm of the study.
Time awake, total sleep time and sleep quality all improved in the
valerian group, compared with baseline values (p < 0.05 for each),
whereas only sleep quality improved in the placebo group,
compared with baseline values (p = 0.04). However, as no
statistical analyses appear to have been conducted to examine any
differences between the valerian and placebo groups, the’
findings raise the hypothesis that dried V. edulis root has effects
on certain sleep parameters and this requires testing in well-
designed clinical trials involving adequate numbers of partici-
pants. In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial, a
preparation of constituents (Valmane, comprising didrovaltrate
80%, valtrate 15% and acevaltrate 5%; Whitehall Pharmaceu-
ticals) obtained from the root of V. wallichii, another related
species, was assessed for its effects on sleep parameters in 19
individuals who had undergone withdrawal from benzodiaze-
pines. Participants received the valerian preparation at a dose
of 100mg, or placebo, three times daily starting two days after
completing benzodiazepine withdrawal and continuing for 15
days. At the end of the study, wake time after sleep onset was
significantly reduced in the valerian group compared with the
placebo group, whereas sleep latency was significantly improved in
the placebo group, compared with the valerian group (p < 0.05 for
both). The study has methodological limitations, including the
small sample size, and these apparently conflicting findings
require further investigation in well-designed clinical trials
involving adequate numbers of participants.

e

Anxiety, depression and other conditions The effects of a
preparation containing a mixture of valepotriate compounds
(stated to contain dihydrovaltrate 80%, valtrate 15%, acevaltrate
5%) were assessed in a randomised, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, parallel-group trial involving 36 patients with general-
ised anxiety disorder diagnosed according to DSM-III-R (Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders) criteria.'°”
Participants received capsules containing the valepotriate mixture
50 mg, diazepam 2.5 mg, or placebo, for four weeks according to a
flexible dosing regimen (one to three capsules of the active
treatments) depending on the participants! response. At the end of
the study, there were no statistically significant differences
between the three groups for the primary outcome variable
mean total Hamilton Anxiety scale scores (p > 0.05) and for
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) scores. As a sample size
calculation was not carried out, and as the study involved only a
small sample, it is possible that the trial did not have sufficient
statistical power to detect differences (if they exist) between the
three groups.

In another randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial,
conducted entirely over the Internet, 391 adults who scored at least
40 points on the STAI scale and who reported having sleeping
problems on at least two occasions received two capsules
containing valerian extract (each containing valerenic acids
3.2mg; no further details of preparation provided) one hour
before bedtime, capsules containing kava extract (each containing

----- PAGE 597 -----
Valerian

total kavalactones 100 mg) one three times daily, or placebo, for 28
days." At the end of the study, there were no statistically
significant differences
to the primary outcome measure changes from baseline in STAI
anxiety scores. The study also assessed effects on insomnia (see
Sleep disorders, hypnotic activity).

The effects of valerian have also been ass
in laboratory-based studies involving healthy volunteers. In a
randomised controlled trial, 36 participants received valerian root
extract (LI-156) 1200mg (m = 18) or kava root extract (LI-150)
120 mg daily for seven days; a third group of participants acted as
a no-treatment control group.” Participants! heart rate and
blood pressure measurements were taken before, during and after
a mental stress test at baseline and seven days later following
treatment. The results suggested that increases in systolic blood
pressure in response to mental stress were lower in the valerian
group, compared with those in the control group. These results,
however, can only be considered preliminary as the control group
did not receive placebo. Further investigation using a randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial design is required.

The effects of another valerian extract at a dose of 100 mg (no
further details of preparation given), with or without propranolol
20 mg, on activation and performance under experimental social
stress conditions were assessed in a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study involving 48 healthy volunteers.'°?
Valerian was reported to have no statistically significant effect
on physiological activation and to lead to less intensive subjective
feelings of somatic arousal, compared with control.

Several studies have assessed the effects of combinations of
valerian and other herbal ingredients in patients with anxiety or
depression. In a randomised, double-blind study involving 100
patients with anxiety, a combination of valerian and St John's
wort was significantly more effective than diazepam according to
a physician's rating scale and a patient's self-rating scale. In a
randomised, double-blind trial involving 162 patients with
dysthymic disorders, the effects of a valerian and St John's wort
combination preparation (Sedariston) were compared with those
of amitriptyline 75-150 mg.'° Another randomised, double-blind
trial, involving 100 patients with mild-to-moderate depression
compared Sedariston with desipramine 100-150 mg. Pooling
the results of these two studies indicated there were 88 (68%)
treatment responders in the Sedariston group and 66 (50%) in the
group that received standard antidepressants.” This difference
was not statistically significant. As valerian root is not known for
antidepressant effects, it is likely that any antidepressant activity
observed in the studies described above is attributable to St John's
wort.

between valerian and placebo with respect

ssed on mental stress

Several studies have sed the effects of valerian, or herbal
combination products containing valerian, on performance the
morning after treatment (see Side-effects, Toxicity).

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There are only limited clinical data on safety aspects of valerian
preparations from clinical trials. Clinical trials have the statistical
power to detect only common, acute adverse effects and post-
marketing surveillance-type studies are required to establish the
safety of valerian preparations, particularly with long-term use.
Few controlled clinical trials of valerian preparations have
provided detailed information on safety. Where adverse event data
were provided, randomised, placebo-controlled trials involving

healthy volunteers or patients with diagnosed insomnia reported
that adverse events with valerian were mild and transient, and that
the types and frequency of adverse events reported for valerian
were similar to those for placebo.“46479° One study involving
small numbers of patients reported a lower frequency of adverse
events with valerian than with placebo; the authors did not
suggest an explanation for this.?) Studies comparing valerian
preparations with benzodiazepines have reported that valerian
root extract (LI-156) 600 mg daily for 14 days or 28 days”) had
a more favourable adverse effect profile than flunitrazepam 1 mg
daily for 14 days and oxazepam 10mg daily for 28 days,”
respectively.

There is an isolated report of cardiac complications and
delirium associated with valerian root extract withdrawal in a 58-
year-old man with a history of coronary artery disease,
hypertension and congestive heart failure.” The man had been
taking valerian root extract (S30mg to 2g, five times daily),
multiple other medications and had undergone surgery, therefore a
causal link with valerian could not be made. There have been

isolated reports of hepatotoxic reactions following the use of
combination products containing valerian, although these pro-
ducts contained other herbal ingredients which could also be
implicated." @!*S?" Several other reports document hepatotoxic
reactions with single-ingredient valerian products, although it is
possible that these were idiosyncratic reactions.” There is a lack
of data on the safety of the long-term use of valerian.

Cases of individuals who had taken overdoses of valerian or
valerian-containing products have been documented. One case
involved an 18-year-old female who ingested 40-50 capsules of
powdered valerian root 470mg, approximately 20 times thera-
peutic doses.” The patient presented three hours after ingestion
with fatigue, crampy abdominal pain, chest tightness, tremor and
lightheadedness
screen tested positive for tetrahydrocannabinol. The patient was
treated with activated charcoal, and symptoms resolved within 24
hours. Several cases (1 = 47) have been documented of overdose

Liver function test values were normal; a urine

with a combination valerian-containing product ('Sleep-Qik';
valerian dry extract 75mg, hyoscine hydrobromide 0.25 mg,
cyproheptadine hydrochloride 2mg).'”* Individuals had
ingested tablets equivalent to 0.5—-12¢g valerian extract. Liver
function tests were carried out for most patients and yielded
results within normal ranges.

Effects on cognitive and psychomotor performance

Studies assessing the effects of valerian preparations on measures
of performance report conflicting results: some suggest that there
is slight impairment for a few hours following ingestion of single
doses of valerian, whereas other studies report no effects on
performance following administration. As these studies have
assessed the effects of different preparations of valerian, the
conflicting results may simply relate to differences in the chemical
composition of the products tested. Further research is needed to
establish whether or not specific valerian preparations impair
performance following ingestion. In contrast, the few studies
investigating the potential for impaired performance the morning
following treatment (i.e. "hangover" effects) with valerian prepara-
tions have found that such impairment does not occur, at least
with the preparations and dosages tested. Several of the studies
examining these aspects are summarised below.

In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover
study, nine healthy participants each received a 70% ethanol
extract of valerian root (containing valerenic acid 0.25%; drug to

----- PAGE 598 -----
extract ratio 4:1) 500mg, 1000 mg, and triazolam 0.25 mg, as a
single dose with a one-week wash-out period between treatments.
There were no statistically significant differences in the outcomes
of cognitive and psychomotor tests performed before and two,
four and eight hours after each treatment dose between the
valerian and placebo groups.” A similar finding was obtained in
a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study
involving ten healthy participants who underwent assessments of
mood and psychomotor performance before and after receiving a
valerian root extract (LI-156) at doses of 600, 1200 and 1800 mg,
and diazepam 10mg, with a one-week wash-out period between
treatments. Compared with placebo, valerian had no statistically
significant effects on mood or on cognitive and psychomotor
performance.”

The two studies described above involved younger (aged |
than 30 years) participants. Another randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, crossover study involved 14 healthy older
participants (mean age 71.6 years, range 65—89 years) who received
valerian 400mg and 800mg (Jamieson, Canada; subsequently
reported to contain valerenic acid, 1-acetoxyvalerenic acid and 1-
hydroxyvalerenic acid 0.63%), temazepam 15 mg and 30mg, and
diphenhydramine 50mg and 75mg, with a three-day wash-out
period between treatments. No statistically significant differences
on measures of psychomotor performance or sedation were found
for valerian, compared with placebo.”

In a randomised, double-blind trial involving 102 healthy

volunteers, the effects of single-dose valerian extract (LI-156)
600mg on reaction time, alertness and concentration were
compared with those of flunitrazepam 1 mg and placebo.® The
treatment was administered in the evening and psychometric tests
were carried out the next morning. After a one-week wash-out
period, 91 volunteers continued with the second phase of the
study, which comprised 14 days' administration of valerian extract
600 mg or placebo. Single-dose valerian extract administration did
not impair reaction time, concentration or coordination. A
‘hangover' effect was reported by 59% of flunitrazepam recipients,
compared with 32% and 30% of placebo and valerian recipients,
respectively (p < 0.05 for flunitrazepam versus valerian). At the
end of the 14-day study, there was no statistically significant
difference (p = 0.45) between valerian extract and placebo on
mean reaction time (a measure of performance).
A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving
80 volunteers compared the 'hangover' effects of tablets containing
valerian and hops, a syrup containing valerian only, and
flunitrazepam 1mg, all given as a single dose.”* Performance
the morning after treatment, measured both objectively and
subjectively, was impaired only in the flunitrazepam group.”®) Side
effects occurred more frequently in the flunitrazepam group
(50%), compared with the valerian and placebo groups (10%). In
a further placebo-controlled study involving 36 volunteers who
received valerian—hops tablets, valerian syrup, or placebo, and who
underwent a battery of cognitive psychomotor tests 1-2 hours
after drug administration, there was a slight, but statistically
significant, impairment in vigilance with valerian syrup and
impairment in the processing of complex information with
valerian-hops tablets, compared with placebo.®

S

Preclinical data

Toxicological studies documented in the older literature have
reported an LDso of 3.3 mg/kg for an ethanolic extract of valerian
administered intraperitoneally in rats, and that daily doses of 400-
600 mg/kg, administered intraperitoneally for 45 days, did not lead

Valerian

to any changes in weight, blood or urine measurements, compared
) Literature cited in a review of the safety of
valerian describes LDso values of 64 mg/kg for valtrate, 125 mg/kg
for didrovaltrate and 150mg/kg for acevaltrate in mice after
intraperitoneal injection.'©? Another study in mice reported that
valerenic acid 150mg/kg, given by intraperitoneal injection,
caused muscle spasms and that 400 mg/kg caused heavy convul-
8) The latter dose was lethal to six of seven mice.

F 1
with controls.‘

sion:

In vitro cytotoxicity and mutagenicity have been documented
for the valepotriates. The clinical significance of this is unclear,
since the valepotriates are known to be highly unstable and,
therefore, probably degrade when taken orally. Only traces of
valepotriates or their degradation products (in part, baldrinals)
are likely to be found in finished products.'(“*”

In toxicological studies in rats, there were no changes in bile
value and liver enzyme activity in animals treated with a valerian
preparation (Indena, Italy; no further details provided) as a single
dose (0.31 to 18.6 g/kg) or 3.1 g/kg for 28 days. In vitro, incubation
of human hepatoma cells with the same valerian preparation at a
concentration of 20 mg/mL led to increased cell death, compared
with values for control.’ No such effect was seen for the valerian
preparation at a concentration of 2mg/mL, when compared with
control.

A study in rats involved the administration of valepotriates (6,
12 and 24 mg/kg administered orally) during pregnancy up to the
19th day when animals were sacrificed.“° There were no

differences between valepotriate-treated rats and control rats as
determined by fetotoxicity and external examination studies,
although the two highest doses of valepotriates were associated
with an increase in retarded ossification evident on internal
examination.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Intake of valerian preparations immediately (up to two hours)
before driving or operating machinery is not recommended.(C*”
The effect of valerian preparations may be enhanced by
consumption of alcohol, so excessive consumption of alcohol
whilst receiving treatment with valerian root preparations should
be avoided.'©*” Patients should seek medical advice if symptoms
worsen beyond two weeks' continuous treatment with valer-

(G80

ian.‘C® Patients with known sensitivity to valerian should not use

valerian root preparations.“

Drug interactions Only limited data on the potential for
pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic interactions with other
medicines administered concurrently are available for valerian root
preparations. In view of the documented pharmacological actions
of valerian the potential for preparations of valerian to interfere
with other medicines administered concurrently, particularly those
with similar or opposing effects, should be considered. In
particular, co-medication with barbiturates and other sedatives
is not recommended because of the potential for excessive
sedation, ‘C8

In an open-label, fixed-treatment, crossover study, 12 healthy
volunteers received two tablets containing 500mg of a 70%
ethanol extract of valerian root (containing total valerenic acids
5.51 mg per tablet) each night for two weeks.®” The probe drugs
dextromethorphan 30 mg and alprazolam 2 mg were administered
before and after valerian exposure to assess the effects of valerian
on CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 activity, respectively. There were no
statistically significant differences in dextromethorphan pharma-
cokinetics after valerian exposure, compared with baseline values.

----- PAGE 599 -----
588, Valerian

The maximum plasma concentration of alprazolam was sig-
nificantly increased following valerian exposure, compared with
baseline values (p < 0.05) although there were no statistically
significant differences in other pharmacokinetic parameters
measured. Another study involved healthy volunteers who received
valerian root extract (subsequently found to contain quantities of
valerenic acid only at the limits of detection (10ng/mL)) 125 mg
three times daily for 28 days.” No. statistically significant
changes in phenotypic ratios for CYP1A2, CYP2D6, CYP2E1 and
CYP3A4/5 were observed for valerian, although the valerian
product tested may not be representative of other valerian
preparations and their effects on CYP enzymes.” In in-vitro
experiments, aqueous, ethanol and acetonitrile extracts of
commercial monopreparations and combination preparations of
valerian root inhibited cytochrome P450 3A4 activity and P-
glycoprotein transport, as determined by an ATPase assay.°”

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of valerian during
pregnancy and lactation has not been established and, therefore,
its use should be avoided.“°*

Preparations

Proprietary single-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Nervisatis. Australia: Herbal Sleep Formula.
Belgium: Dormiplant; Relaxine; Valerial. Brazil: Noctaval;
Recalm; Sonoripan; Valeriane; Valerimed; Valerin; Valerix;
Valezen; Valmane. Canada: Nytol Natural Source; Sleep-Eze V
Natural; Unisom Natural Source. Chile: Sominex. Czech
Republic: Koren Kozliku Lekarskeho; Valdispert. Finland:
Valrian. Germany: Baldorm; Baldriparan Stark; Baldrivit;
Baldurat; Cefaluna; Dolestan; Euvegal Balance; Luvased
mono; Recvalysat; Sedonium; Sporal mono; Valdispert. Israel:
Relaxine; Valeton. Italy: Ticalma. Mexico: Neolaikan. Nether-
lands: Dormiplant; Valdispert. Portugal: Valdispert. Russia:
Novo-Passit (Hoso-Ilaccur). South Africa: Calmettes. Spain:
Ansiokey; Coenrelax; Valdispert; Valeriana Orto; Valsedan.
Sweden: Baldrian-Dispert; Neurol; Valerecen. Switzerland:
Baldriparan pour la nuit; Natu-Seda; ReDormin; Sedasol eco
natura; Sedonium; Valdispert. UK: Phytorelax; Sedonium.
Venezuela: Floral Pas.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Armonil; Dioxicolagol; Nervocalm; SDN 200;
Sedante Dia; Serenil; Sigmasedan; Valeriana Oligoplex.
Australia: Calmo; Coleus Complex; Dan Shen Compound;
Executive B; Extralife Sleep-Care; Goodnight Formula; Humu-
lus Compound; Lifesystem Herbal Plus Formula 2 Valerian;
Macro Anti-Stress; Multi-Vitamin Day & Night; Natural Dee
Sleep; Pacifenity; Passiflora Complex; Passionflower Plus;
Prosed-X; Relaxaplex; Valerian Plus Herbal Plus Formula 12;
Valerian. Austria: Baldracin; Baldrian AMA; Eryval; Euvekan;
Hova; Nervenruh; Nerventee St Severin; Sedadom; Sedogelat;
Songha; Species nervinae; Thymoval; Valin Baldrian; Wechsel-
tee St Severin. Belgium: Natudor; Seneuval; Songha. Brazil:
Passicalm; Sominex; Sonhare. Canada: Herbal Nerve; Herbal
Relax; Herbal Sleep Aid; Herbal Sleep Well. Chile: Armonyl;
Recalm; Valupass. Czech Republic: Baldracin; Bio-Strath;
Contraspan; Dr Theiss Rheuma Creme; Dr Theiss Schweden-
bitter; Euvekan; Hertz- und Kreislauftee,; Nervova Cajova
Smes; Novo-Passit; Persen; Sanason; Schlaf-Nerventee N;

Songha Night; Species Nervinae Planta; Valofyt Neo; Visinal.
France: Biocarde; Euphytose; Mediflor Tisane Calmante
Troubles du Sommeil No 14; Mediflor Tisane Circulation du
Sang No 12; Neuroflorine; Passinevryl; Spasmine; Sympa-
neurol; Tranquital. Germany: Ardeysedon; Avedorm duo;
Baldrian-Dispert Nacht; Baldriparan N Stark; Biosedon;
Boxocalm; Cefasedativ; Dormarist; Dormeasan; Dormo-Sern;
Dormoverlan; Dr. Scheffler Bergischer Krautertee Nerven- und
Beruhigungstee; Dreierlei; Euvegal Entspannungs- und Eins-
chlaftropfen; Gutnacht; Gutnacht; Heumann Beruhigungstee
Tenerval; Hingfong-Essenz Hofmanns; Hyperesa; Klosterfrau
Beruhigungs Forte; Kytta-Sedativum; Leukona-Beruhigungs-
bad; Luvased; Moradorm S$; Mutellon; Nervendragees; Ner-
venkapseln; | Nervoregin forte; | Neurapas; — Nitrangin
compositum; Oxacant-sedativ; Pascosedon; Phytonoctu; Plan-
tival novo; Pronervon Phyto; Schlaf- und Nerventee; Schwe-
dentrunk Elixier; Sedacur; Sedariston Konzentrat; Sedariston
plus; Sedaselect D; Selon; Sensinerv forte; Tornix; Valdispert
comp; Valeriana comp novum; Valeriana mild; Valverde
Baldrian Hopfen bei Einschlafstorungen und zur Beruhigung;
Vivinox Day. Hungary: Euvekan; Hova. India: Well-Beeing.
Israel: Calmanervin; Calmanervin; Nerven-Dragees; Passiflora
Compound; Passiflora; Songha Night. Italy: Anevrasi; Bio-
calm; Dormiplant; Fitosonno; Florelax; Glicero-Valerovit;
Noctis; Parvisedil; Reve; Sedatol; Sedopuer FE Mexico:
Nervinetas; Plantival. Portugal: Neurocardol; Songha; Vale-
sono. Russia: Doppelherz Vitalotonik (Aonmeasrepy, Buraao-
touuk); Herbion Drops for the Heart (fep6uon Cepaecuunie
Kaman); Persen (Iepcen); Sanason (Canacon). South Africa:
Avena Sativa Comp; Biral; Entressdruppels HM; Helmont-
skruie; Krampdruppels; Restin, Stuidruppels; Wonderkroones-
sens. Spain: Natusor Somnisedan; Nervikan; Relana; Sedasor;
Sedonat; Valdispert Complex. Switzerland: Baldriparan; Dor-
measan; Dormiplant; Dragees pour la detente nerveuse;
Dragees pour le coeur et les nerfs; Dragees pour le sommeil;
Dragees sedatives Dr Welti; Hova; Nervinetten; ReDormin;
Relaxane; Relaxo; Songha Night; Soporin; Strath Gouttes pour
le nerfs et contre l'insomnie; Tisane calmante pour les enfants;
Tisane pour le sommeil et les nerfs; Valverde Coeur; Valverde
Detente dragees; Valverde Sommeil; Valviska; Zeller Sommeil.
UK: Avena Sativa Comp; Bio-Strath Valerian Formula; Boots
Alternatives Sleep Well; Boots Sleepeaze Herbal Tablets;
Calmanite Tablets; Constipation Tablets; Daily Tension &
Strain Relief; Digestive; Fenneherb Newrelax; Fenneherb
Prementaid; Gerard House Serenity; Gerard House Somnus;
Golden Seal Indigestion Tablets; Herbal Indigestion Natur-
tabs; Herbal Pain Relief; HRI Calm Life; HRI Golden Seal
Digestive; HRI Night; Indigestion and Flatulence; Kalms Sleep;
Kalms; Laxative Tablets; Menopause Relief; Modern Herbals
Stress; Napiers Digestion Tablets; Napiers Sleep Tablets;
Napiers Tension Tablets; Natrasleep; Natural Herb Tablets;
Nerfood Tablets; Nervous Dyspepsia Tablets; Newrelax;
Nighttime Herb; Nodoff; Period Pain Relief; PMT Formula;
Prementaid; Quiet Days; Quiet Life; Quiet Nite; Quiet Tyme;
Relax B+; Roberts Alchemilla Compound Tablets; Scullcap &
Gentian Tablets; Sominex Herbal; Stressless; SuNerven; Sure-
Lax (Herbal); Unwind Herbal Nytol; Valerina Day Time;
Valerina Day-Time; Valerina Night-Time; Valerina Night-
Time; Vegetable Cough Remover; Wellwoman; Wind &
Dyspepsia Relief. USA: Calming Aid; Stress Complex;
StressEez. Venezuela: Cratex; Equaliv; Eufytose; Lupassin;
Nervinetas; Pasidor; Pasifluidina; Rendetil.

----- PAGE 600 -----
1

9

10

cel

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

References

Upton R, ed. American Herbal Pharmacopoeia and Therapeutic
Compendium. Valerian root. Valeriana officinalis. Analytical, Quality
Control, and Therapeutic Monograph. Santa Cruz: American Herbal
Pharmacopoeia, 1999.

Houghton PJ. The biological activity of valerian and related plants. J
Ethnopharmacol 1988; 22: 121-142.

Morazzoni P, Bombardelli E. Valeriana officinalis: traditional use and
recent evaluation of activity. Fitoterapia 1995; 66: 99-112.

Houghton PJ. The scientific basis for the reputed activity of valerian. ]
Pharm Pharmacol 1999; 51: 505-512.

Houghton PJ, ed. Valerian. The genus Valeriana. Amsterdam:
Harwood Academic Publishers, 1997.

Inouye H et al. [The absolute configuration of valerosidate and of
didovaltrate]. Tetrahedron Lett 1974; 30: 2317-2325 [German].
Pullela SV e¢ al. New acylated clionasterol glycosides from Valeriana
officinalis. Planta Med 2005; 71(10): 960-961.

Bos R et al. Isolation and identification of valerenane sesquiterpenoids
from Valeriana officinalis. Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 133-135.

Bos R et al. Isolation of the sesquiterpene alcohol (—)-pacifigorgiol
from Valeriana officinalis. Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 1234-1235.

Stoll A et al. New investigations on Valerian. Schweiz Apotheker-
Zeitung 1957; 15-120.

Hendricks H et al. Eugenyl isovalerate and isoeugeny] isovalerate in
the essential oil of Valerian root. Phytochemistry 1977; 16: 1853-1854.
Lapke C et al. Free amino acids in commercial preparations of
Valeriana officinalis L. Pharm Pharmacol Lett 1997; 4: 172-174.
Gao XQ, Bjérk L. Valerenic acid derivatives and valepotriates among
individuals, varieties and species of Valeriana. Fitoterapia 2000; 71:
19-24,

Leathwood PD et al. Aqueous extract of valerian root improves sleep
quality in man. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1982; 17: 65-71.

Schulz H e¢ al. The effect of valerian extract on sleep polygraphy in
poor sleepers: a pilot study. Pharmacopsychiatry 1994; 27: 147-151.
Hendricks H et al. Pharmacological screening of valerenal and some
other components of essential oil of Valeriana officinalis. Planta Med
1981; 42: 62-68.

Wagner H et al. Comparative studies on the sedative action of
Valeriana extracts, valepotriates and their degradation products.
Planta Med 1980; 39: 358-365.

Hendriks H e¢ al. Central nervous depressant activity of valerenic acid
in the mouse. Planta Med 1985; 51: 28-31.

Riedel E et al. Inhibition of y-aminobutyric acid catabolism by
valerenic acid derivatives. Planta Med 1982; 48: 219-220.

Santos MS et al. The amount of GABA present in aqueous extracts of
valerian is sufficient to account for [7H]GABA release in
synaptosomes. Planta Med 1994; 60: 475-476.

Santos MS et al. Synaptosomal GABA release as influenced by valerian
root extract — involvement of the GABA carrier. Arch Int
Pharmacodyn 1994; 327: 220-231.

Santos MS et al. An aqueous extract of valerian influences the
transport of GABA in synaptosomes. Planta Med 1994; 60: 278-279.
Cavadas C et al. In vitro study on the interaction of Valeriana
officinalis L. extracts and their amino acids on GABAg receptor in rat
brain. Arzneimittelforschung/Drug Res 1995; 45: 753-755.

Mennini T e¢ al. In vitro study on the interaction of extracts and pure
compounds from Valeriana officinalis roots with GABA,
benzodiazepine and barbiturate receptors in the brain. Fitoterapia
1993; 64: 291-300.

Ortiz JG et al. Effects of Valeriana officinalis extracts on [*H]
flunitrazepam binding, synaptosomal [*H]GABA uptake, and
hippocampal [H]GABA release. Neurochem Res 1999; 24: 1373—
1378.

Dietz BM et al. Valerian extract and valerenic acid are partial agonists
of the S-HTs, receptor in vitro. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 2005; 138(2):
191-197.

Abourashed EA et al. In vitro binding experiments with a valerian,
hops and their fixed combination extract (Ze91019) to selected central
nervous system receptors. Phytomedicine 2004; 11: 633-638.

Veith J et al. The influence of some degradation products of
valepotriates on the motor activity of light-dark synchronized mice.
Planta Med 1986; 52: 179-183.

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

S51

52

53

54

Valerian

Andreatini R, Leite JR. Effect of valepotriates on the behavior of rats
in the elevated plus-maze during diazepam withdrawal. Eur J
Pharmacol 1994; 260: 233-235.

Petkov V. Plants with hypotensive, antiatheromatous and
coronarodilating action. Am J Chin Med 1979; 7: 197-236.

Petkov V, Manolav P. To the pharmacology of iridoids. Paper
presented at the 2nd Congress of the Bulgarian Society for
Physiological Sciences, Sofia, October 31-November 3, 1974.
Hazelhoff B et al. Antispasmodic effects of Valeriana compounds: an
in vivo and in vitro study on the guinea-pig ileum. Arch Int
Pharmacodyn 1982; 257: 274-287.

Pilcher JD et al. The action of so-called female remedies on the
excised uterus of the guinea-pig. Arch Intern Med 1916; 18: 557-583.
Pilcher JD, Mauer RT. The action of female remedies on the intact
uteri of animals. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1918; 97-99.

Van Meer JH. Plantaardige stoffen met een effect op het
complementsysteem. Pharm Weekbl 1984; 119: 836-942.

Bounthanh C et al. The action of valepotriates on the synthesis of
DNA and proteins of cultured hepatoma cells. Planta Med 1983; 49:
138-142.

Bounthanh C et al. Valepotriates, a new class of cytotoxic and
antitumour agents. Planta Med 1981; 41: 21-28.

Braun R et al. Influence of valtrate/isovaltrate on the hematopoiesis
and metabolic liver activity in mice in vivo. Planta Med 1984; 50: 1-4.
Hude W et al. Bacterial mutagenicity of the tranquillizing constituents
of Valerianaceae roots. Mutat Res 1986; 169: 23-27.

Anderson GD et al. Pharmacokinetics of valerenic acid after
administration of valerian in healthy subjects. Phytotherapy Research
2005; 19(9): 801-803.

Leathwood PD, Chauffard F. Quantifying the effects of mild sedatives.
J Psychiatr Res 1983; 17: 115-122.

Donath F e¢ al. Critical evaluation of the effect of valerian extract on
sleep structure and sleep quality. Pharmacopsychiatry 2000; 33: 47-53.
Vorbach EU et al. Therapie von Insomnien. Wirksamkeit und
Vertraglichkeit eines Baldrianpraparats. Psychopharmakotherapie
1996; 3: 109-115.

Diaper A, Hindmarch I. A double-blind, placebo-controlled
investigation of the effects of two doses of a valerian preparation on
the sleep, cognitive and psychomotor function of sleep-disturbed older
adults. Phytother Res 2004; 18: 831-836.

Kamm-Kohl AV et al. Moderne Baldriantherapie gegen nervose
Stérungen im Senium. Med Welt 1984; 35: 1450-1454.

Leathwood PD, Chauffard F. Aqueous extract of valerian reduces
latency to fall asleep in man. Planta Med 1985; 51: 144-148.
Coxeter PD et al. Valerian does not appear to reduce symptoms for
patients with chronic insomnia in general practice using a series of
randomised n-of-1 trials. Complement Ther Med 2003; 11(4): 215—
222.

Jacobs BP et al. An internet-based randomized, placebo-controlled
trial of kava and valerian for anxiety and insomnia. Medicine 2005; 84
(4): 197-207.

Dorn M. [Baldrian versus oxazepam: efficacy and tolerability in non-
organic and non-psychiatric insomniacs. A randomised, double-blind,
clinical, comparative study]. Forsch Komplement Klass Naturheilkd
2000; 7: 79-84.

Schmitz M, Jackel M. [Comparative study investigating the quality of
life in patients with environmental sleep disorders (temporary
dyscoimesis and dysphylaxia) under therapy with a hop-valerian
preparation and a benzodiazepine preparation.] Wiener Med
Wochenschrift 1998; 148: 291-298 [German].

Stevinson C, Ernst E. Valerian for insomnia: a systematic review of
randomized clinical trials. Sleep Med 2000; 1: 91-99.

Morin CM et al. Valerian-hops combination and diphenhydramine for
treating insomnia: a randomised placebo-controlled clinical trial.
Sleep 2005; 28(11): 1465-1471.

Muller-Limmroth W, Ehrenstein W. Untersuchungen tiber die Wirkung
von Seda-Kneipp auf den Schlaf schlafgéstorter Menschen. Med Klin
1977; 72: 1119-1125.

Cerny A, Schmid K. Tolerability and efficacy of valerian/lemon balm
in healthy volunteers (a double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre
study). Fitoterapia 1999; 70: 221-228.

----- PAGE 601 -----
SS

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

Valerian

Dressing H et al. Verbesserung der Schlafqualitat mit einem
hochdosierten Baldrian-Melisse-Praparat. Eine plazebokontrollierte
Doppelblindstudie. Psychopharmakotherapie 1996; 3: 123-130.
Dressing H et al. Baldrian-Melisse-Kombinationen versus
Benzodiazepin. Bei Schlafstérungen gleichwertig? Therapiewoche
1992; 42: 726-736.

Vonderheid-Guth B et al. Pharmacodynamic effects
hops extract combination (ZE-91019) on the quantitative-
topographical EEG in healthy volunteers. Eur J Med Res 2000; 5: 139-
144.

Schellenberg R et al. The fixed combination of valerian and hops
(Ze91019) acts via a central adenosine mechanism. Planta Med 2004;
70(7): 594-597.

Francis AJP, Dempster RJW. Effect of valerian, Valeriana edulis, on
sleep difficulties in children with intellectual deficits: randomised trial.
Phytomedicine 2002; 9: 273-279.

Poyares DR et al. Can valerian improve the sleep of insomniacs after
benzodiazepine withdrawal? Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psych
2002; 26: 539-545.

Andreatini R et al. Effect of valepotriates (valerian extract) in
generalized anxiety disorder: a randomized placebo-controlled pilot
study. Phytotherapy Res 2002; 16: 650-654.

Cropley M et al. Effect of kava and valerian on human physiological
and psychological responses to mental stress assessed under
laboratory conditions. Phytotherapy Res 2002; 16: 23-27.

Kohnen R, Oswald W-D. The effects of valerian, propranolol, and
their combination on activation, performance, and mood of healthy
volunteers under social stress conditions. Pharmacopsychiatry 1988;
21: 447-448.

Panijel M. Die behandlung mittelschwerer angstzustande.
Therapiewoche 1985; 41: 4659-4668.

Kneibel R, Burchard JM. Zur Therapie depressiver Verstimmungen in
der Praxis. Z Allgemeinmed 1988; 64: 689-696.

Steger W. Depressive Verstimmungen. Z Allgemeinmed 1985; 61: 914—
918.

Linde K et al. St John's wort for depression — an overview and meta-
analysis of randomised clinical trials. BMJ 1996; 313: 253-258.
Kuhlmann J e¢ al. The influence of valerian treatment on 'reaction
time, alertness and concentration’ in volunteers. Pharmacopsychiatry
1999; 32: 235-241.

f valerian and

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

78

79

80

81

82

83

Garges HP et al. Cardiac complications and delirium associated with
valerian root withdrawal. JAMA 1998; 280: 1566-1567.

MacGregor FB et al. Hepatotoxicity of herbal medicines. BMJ 1989;
299: 1156-1157.

Shaw D et al. Traditional remedies and food supplements. A five-year
toxicological study (1991-1995). Drug Safety 1997; 17: 342-356.
Willey LB et al. Valerian overdose: a case report. Vet Human Toxicol
1995; 37: 364-365.

Chan TYK et al. Poisoning due to an over-the-counter hypnotic,
Sleep-Qik (hyoscine, cyproheptadine, valerian). Postgrad Med J 1995;
71: 227-228.

Chan TYK. An assessment of the delayed effects associated with
valerian overdose. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther 1998; 36: 569.

Hallam KT et al. Comparative cognitive and psychomotor effects of
single doses of Valeriana officinalis and triazolam in healthy
volunteers. Hum Psychopharmacol Clin Exp 2003; 18: 619-625.
Gutierrez S et al. Assessing subjective and psychomotor effects of the
herbal medication valerian in healthy volunteers. Pharmacol Biochem
Behav 2004; 78: 57-64.

Glass JR et al. Acute pharmacological effects of temazepam,
diphenhydramine, and valerian in healthy elderly subjects. J Clin
Psychopharmacol 2003; 23: 260-268.

Gerhard U et al. [Effects of two plant-based sleep remedies on
vigilance]. Schweiz Runsch Med Prax 1996; 85: 473-481 [German].
Vo LT et al. Investigation of the effects of peppermint oil and valerian
on rat liver and cultured human liver cells. Clin Exp Pharmacol
Physiol 2003; 30: 799-804.

Tufik S et al. Effects of a prolonged administration of valepotriates in
rats on the mothers and their offspring. J Ethnopharmacol 1994; 41:
39-44.

Donovan JL et al. Multiple night-time doses of valerian (Valeriana
officinalis) had minimal effects on CYP3A4 activity and no effect on
CYP2D6 activity in healthy volunteers. Drug Metab Disp 2004; 32
(12): 1333-1336.

Gurley BJ et al. In vivo effects of goldenseal, kava kava, black cohosh,
and valerian on human cytochrome P450 1A2, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4/5
phenotypes. Clin Pharmacol Ther 2005; 77: 415-426.

Lefebvre T et al. In vitro activity of commercial valerian extracts
against human cytochrome P450 3A4. J Pharm Pharmaceut Sci 2004; 7
(2): 265-273.

----- PAGE 602 -----
- Vervain

Limited chemical, pharmacological and toxicity data are
available for vervain. Documented scientific information does
not justifiy the herbal uses. In view of the lack of data on
pharmacological effects, efficacy and safety, the
appropriateness of medicinal use of vervain should be
considered. Excessive use, at least, should be avoided. Vervain
should not be used during pregnancy and breastfeeding. The
potential for vervain preparations to interact with other
medicines should be considered.

Species (Family)

Verbena officinalis L. (Verbenaceae)

Synonym(s)

Verbena

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

Martindale 35th edition'*®)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G2.

Glycosides Iridoid glycosides: hastatoside, verbenalin (verbanalo-
side), verbenin (aucubin). Phenylpropanoid glycosides: acteoside
2

: : I,
(verbascoside) and eukovoside.'

Volatile oils Monoterpene components include citral, geraniol,
limonene and verbenone.

Other constituents Adenosibe, alkaloid (unspecified), bitters,
carbohydrates (stachyose, mucilage), B-carotene, invertin (sucrose
hydrolytic enzymes), saponin and tannic acid.

Food Use

Vervain is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (category N2). This category indicates that
vervain can be added to foodstuffs in small quantities, with a
possible limitation of an active principle (as yet unspecified) in the
final product.'©!® Previously, vervain was listed by the United
States of America Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) as a
Herb of Undefined Safety.‘©?”

Iridoids
° 7 COOCH3 a» COOCH;
as SS
° °
O-glucose O-glucose
hastoside verbenalin

(cornin, verbenaloside)
Phenylpropanoids

HO.

ion OH
HO" is 70 on met
HO OH

HO
verbascoside

Figure 1 Selected constituents of vervain.
Herbal Use

Vervain is stated to possi
mild diaphoretic and, reputedly, galactogogue propertie

s sedative, thymoleptic, antispasmodic,
Tradi-

tionally, it has been used for depression, melancholia, hysteria,
generalised seizures, cholecystalgia, jaundice, early stages of fever,

and specifically for depression and debility of convalescence after
(G2, G7, G64)

fevers, especially influenza.

Figure 2. Vervain (Verbena officinalis).

----- PAGE 603 -----
Vervain

Figure 3 Vervain — dried drug substance (herb).

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 2-4¢ as an infusion three times daily.”
Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily.“©”

Tincture 5-10 mL (1:1 in 40% alcohol) three times daily.”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Chloroform, methanol and petroleum ether extracts of the aerial
parts of vervain have anti-inflammatory activity in vivo as
determined using the carrageenan-induced paw oedema model.
The chloroform extract was found to exhibit the greatest activity.
Vervain is stated to have several properties, including galacto-
gogue activity and luteinising activity, although the scientific
basis for these statements is not clear.

Verbenalin has been reported to exhibit uterine stimulant
activity.“ A slight laxative action in mice has been documented
for iridoid glycosides.

A total aqueous extract of the aerial parts of the related species
Vervain hastata was found to have sedative properties in
experiments involving male rats.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of vervain
and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for vervain and
further investigation of these aspects is required.

Preclinical data

It is stated that, in frogs, small doses of verbenalin stimulate the
uterus and that high doses paralyse the CNS, following stupor and
convulsions,‘°~ although the scientific basis for these statements

is not known.

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented.

Drug interactions None documented. In view of the lack of
information on the constituents of vervain and their pharmaco-
logical activities, the potential for preparations of vervain to
interact with other medicines taken concurrently should be
considered.

Pregnancy and lactation Vervain is reputed to act as an
abortifacient and oxytocic agent"?
documented (see In vitro and animal studies). In view of this,
vervain should not be taken during pregnancy.

Vervain is stated to act as a galactogogue," although the
scientific basis for this statement is not known. In view of the lack
of information on the safety of vervain during breastfeeding, use
should be avoided during this period.

) with in vivo utero-activity

Australia: Avena Complex; Calmo; Nevaton. Austria: Sinupret.
Czech Republic: Sinupret; Stomatosan. France: Calmophytum;
Vigilia. Germany: Sinupret. Hong Kong: Sinupret. Hungary:
Sinupret. Italy: Neoderma 47. Russia: Sinupret (Cusynper).
Singapore: Sinupret. Switzerland: Sinupret; Tisane pour
nourissons et enfants. Thailand: Sinupret. UK: Athera;
Fenneherb Prementaid; HRI Night; Kalms Sleep; Modern
Herbals Menopause; Modern Herbals Stress; Napiers Sleep
Tablets; Newrelax; Period Pain Relief; Prementaid; Roberts
Alchemilla Compound Tablets; Scullcap & Gentian Tablets;
Stressless; SuNerven.

References

1 Lahloub MF et al. Phenylpropanoid and iridoid glycosides from the
Egyptian Verbena officinalis. Planta Med 1986; 52: 47.

2 Andary C et al. Structures of verbascoside and orobanchoside, caffeic
acid sugar esters from Orobanche rapum-genistae. Phytochemistry
1982; 21: 1123-1127.

3 Deepak M, Handa SS. Antiinflammatory activity and chemical
composition of extracts of Verbena officinalis. Phytotherapy Res 2000;
14(6): 463-465.

4 Oliver-Bever BEP. Medicinal Plants in Tropical West Africa.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.

5 Inouye H et al. Purgative activities of iridoid glycosides. Planta Med
1974; 25: 285-288.

6 Akanmu HA et al.. Hypnotic effects of total aqueous extracts of
Vervain hastata. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2002; 56(3): 309-310.

----- PAGE 604 -----
Wild Carrot

is a lack of robust clinical research assessing the efficacy and
safety of wild carrot. The principal traditional use of wild
carrot is as a diuretic. This activity has not been documented
in animal studies, but the seed oil of wild carrot does contain
terpinen-4-ol, the diuretic principle documented for juniper.
Toxicity data only refer to the oil and indicate low toxicity. In
view of the limited information on safety, excessive use of
wild carrot and use during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Daucus carota L. subsp. carota (Apiaceae/Umbelliferae)

Synonym(s)

Daucus, Daucus carota L. subsp. maximus auct. lusit. non (Desf.)
Ball, D. communis Rouy & E.G. Camus proles communis, Queen
Anne's Lace

Part(s) Used
Herb

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 19920
BHP 1996'0”)
Martindale 35th edition'@**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

Documented constituents refer to the fruit or seeds obtained
from the dried fruit unless otherwise stated.

Flavonoids Flavones (e.g. apigenin, chrysin, luteolin), flavonols
(e.g. kaempferol, quercetin) and various glycosides.”

Furanocoumarin 8-Methoxypsoralen and 5-methoxypsoralen
(0.01-0.02 g/g fresh weight) in fresh plant. Concentrations
increased in the diseased plant.”

Volatile oils 0.66-1.65%." Many components identified; relative
composition varies between different cultivars.) Various compo-
nents include o-pinene, f-pinene, geraniol, geranyl acetate,
limonene, &-terpinen, p-terpinen, o-terpineol, terpinen-4-ol, p-

Sesquiterpenes

<=

daucol B-caryophyllene
Coumarins
5
CO
o NS ~o7 So
psoralen

Figure 1 Selected constituents of wild carrot.

decanolactone (monoterpenes); B-bisabolene, B-elemene, caryo-
phyllene, caryophyllene oxide, carotol, daucol (sesquiterpenes);
asarone (phenylpropanoid derivative).

Other constituents Choline,” daucine (alkaloid), a tertiary base
(uncharacterised),” fatty acids (butyric, palmitic), coumarin,
xylitol (polyol).

Food Use

Wild carrot should not be confused with the common cultivated
carrot, D. carota L. subsp. sativus (Hoffm.) Arcang., which has
the familiar fleshy orange-red edible root. Wild carrot has an
inedible tough whitish root.'“*? Wild carrot is listed by the
Council of Europe as a natural source of food flavouring
(categories N1, N3). Category N1 indicates that for the roots
there are no restrictions on use, whereas category N3 indicates
that there is insufficient information available for an adequate
assessment of potential toxicity.'“!®

Herbal Use

Wild carrot is stated to possess diuretic, antilithic, and
carminative properties. Traditionally, it has been used for urinary
calculus, lithuria, cystitis, gout, and specifically for urinary gravel

or calculus,“6% 67 08 Go)

Dosage
Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 2-4g as an infusion three times daily\C%

Liquid extract 2-4mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily.C%

----- PAGE 605 -----
Wild Carrot

Figure 2 Wild carrot (Daucus carota).

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Significant antifertility activity (60%) in rats has been reported for
wild carrot. In contrast, insignificant antifertility activity was
observed in pregnant rats fed oral doses of up to 4.5 g/kg body
weight from day 1 to day 10 of pregnancy.” Aqueous, alcoholic
and petrol extracts were reported to exhibit 20%, 40% and 10%
activities respectively, Weak oestrogenic activity'*** and inhibi-
tion of implantation” d
extracts.) Oestrogenic activity, demonstrated by the inhibition
of ovarian hypertrophy in hemicastrated rats, has been attributed
to the known constituent coumarin (a weak phytooestrogen).!”

Central effects similar to those of barbiturates have been

have been documented for

documented for the seed oil obtained from D. carota L. var. sativa
DC.) The oil was reported to elicit CNS hypnotic effects in the
rat, hypotension in the dog™ leading to respiratory depression at
higher doses, anticonvulsant activity in the frog, in vitro smooth
muscle relaxant activity reducing acetylcholine-induced contrac-
tions (ileum/uterus, rabbit/rat), antagonism of acetylcholine in
isolated frog skeletal muscle, direct depressant effect on cardiac
muscle in the dog.“!” In vitro cardiotonic activity” and
vasodilation of coronary vessels of the isolated cat heart have
been reported.'!”) Papaverine-like antispasmodic activity has been
documented for a tertiary base isolated from wild carrot seeds.
Activity of approximately one-tenth that of papaverine was noted
in a number of isolated preparations: ileum, uterus, blood vessels
and trachea.) Cholinergic-type actions have also been reported
for wild carrot with in vitro spasmodic actions noted in both
smooth and skeletal muscle.’ This cholinergic activity has been
attributed to choline.''?) The identity of a second quaternary base
isolated was not established.

Terpinen-4-ol is a documented component of the seed oil. This
constituent is considered to be the diuretic principle in juniper (see
Juniper).

Increased resistance to carbon tetrachloride-induced hepato-
toxicity has been reported in rats fed wild carrot.‘

Limited antifungal activity has been documented, with activity
exhibited against only one (Botrytis cinerea) out of nine fungi
tested."

Agglutination of Streptococcus mutans cells has been described
for wild carrot. The agglutinin, found to be heat and trypsin
stable but sensitive to dextranose, was thought to be a dextran."

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research as ng the effects of wild
carrot and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are

required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

There is a lack of clinical safety and toxicity data for wild carrot
and further investigation of these aspects is required.

The oil is reported to be generally non-irritating and non-
sensitising.''” However, hypersensitivity reactions, occupational
dermatitis and positive patch tests have been reported for wild
GS) Wild carrot is reported to have a slight photo-
sensitising effect.” Furanocoumarins are known photosensitisers.

carrot.

Preclinical data

The oil is reported to be of low toxicity. Acute LD so values in mice
(oral) and guinea-pigs (dermal) are reported to exceed 5 g/kg."

Contra-indications, Warnings

Fruit extracts may cause sensitivity reactions similar to those seen
with celery.)

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of wild carrot to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that wild carrot seed extracts have
oestrogenic activity.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of wild carrot has not been
established. In view of this, the use of wild carrot during
pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Preparations

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Argentina: Hepatalgina; Hepatalgina; Metiogen; Palatrobil.
Chile: Natur-Zin; Natursel-C. Italy: Evamilk. Malaysia:
Eyebright Plus. UK: Sciargo; Watershed.

References

1 El-Moghazi AM et al. Flavonoids of Daucus carota. Planta Med 1980;
40: 382-385

2 Ceska O et al. Furocoumarins in the cultivated carrot, Daucus carota.
Phytochemistry 1986; 25: 81-83.

3. Benecke R et al. Vergleichende Untersuchungen tiber den Gehalt an
atherischem Ol] und dessen Zusammensetzung in den Friichten
verschiedener Sorten von Daucus carota L. ssp. sativus (Hoffm.)
Arcang. Pharmazie 1987; 42: 256-259.

4 Gambhir SS e¢ al. Studies on Daucus carota, Linn. Part 1.
Pharmacological studies with the water-soluble fraction of the
alcoholic extract of the seeds: a preliminary report. Indian ] Med Res
1966; 54: 178-187.

----- PAGE 606 -----
10

cel

Gambhir SS et al. Antispasmodic activity of the tertiary base of
Daucus carota, Linn. seeds. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol 1979; 23: 225—
228.

Prakash AO. Biological evaluation of some medicinal plant extracts
for contraceptive efficacy. Contracept Deliv Syst 1984; 5: 9.

Lal R et al. Antifertility effect of Daucus carota seeds in female albino
rats. Fitoterapia 1986; 57: 243-246.

Kant A et al. The estrogenic efficacy of carrot (Daucus carota) seeds. ]
Adv Zool 1986; 7: 36-41.

Sharma MM et al. Estrogenic and pregnancy interceptory effects of
carrot Daucus carota seeds. Indian J Exp Biol 1976; 14: 506-508.
Kaliwal BB, Rao MA. Inhibition of ovarian compensatory
hypertrophy by carrot seed (Daucus carota) extract or estradiol-176 in
hemicastrated albino rats. Indian J Exp Biol 1981; 19: 1058-1060.
Bhargava AK et al. Pharmacological investigation of the essential oil

12
13

14

15

16

17

Wild Carrot

of Daucus carota Linn. var. sativa DC. Indian J Pharm 1967; 29: 127—
129.

Carrot seed oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1976; 14: 705-706.

Gambhir SS et al. Studies on Daucus carota, Linn. Part II.
Cholingergic activity of the quaternary base isolated from water-
soluble fraction of alcoholic extracts of seeds. Indian ] Med Res 1966;
54: 1053-1056.

Handa SS. Natural products and plants as liver protecting drugs.
Fitoterapia 1986; 57: 307-351.

Guérin J-C, Réveillére H-P. Antifungal activity of plant extracts used
in therapy. II Study of 40 plant extracts against 9 fungi species. Ann
Pharm Fr 1985; 43: 77-81.

Ramstorp M et al. Isolation and partial characterization of a
substance from carrots, Daucus carota, with ability to agglutinate
cells of Streptococcus mutans. Caries Res 1982; 16: 423-427.
Opdyke DLJ. Carrot seed oil. Food Cosmet Toxicol 1974; 14: 705.

----- PAGE 607 -----
- Wild Lettuce

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

The chemistry of wild lettuce is well documented, although it
is not clear which constituents represent the active
components. Early reports of hyoscyamine as a constituent
have not been substantiated by subsequent study. No
published information was found to support the traditional
herbal uses of wild lettuce, although a sedative action in toads
has been reported for a related species L. sativa. In view of the
potential allergenicity of wild lettuce and the lack of toxicity
data, excessive use and use during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

Related Lactuca species include Lactuca sativa (Garden
Lettuce), Lactuca serriola L. (Prickly Lettuce), L. quescina L.
subsp. quercina and Lactuca canadensis (Wild Lettuce of
America).

Species (Family)

Lactuca virosa L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)

Bitter Lettuce, Great Lettuce, Lettuce Opium

Part(s) Used

Leaf, latex

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°®
BHP 19960”) :
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents
The following is compiled from several sources, including General
Reference G6.

All parts of the plant contain a milky, white latex (sap) which,
when collected and dried, forms the drug known as lactucar-
ium, (9)

Acids Citric, malic and oxalic (up to 1%) acids; cichoric acid
(phenolic).

Alkaloids — Hyoscyamine, later disputed.**°**) N-methyl-f-
phenethylamine, also disputed.”

Coumarins Aesculin, cichoriin.”

Flavonoids Flavones (e.g. apigenin, luteolin), flavonols (e.g.
quercetin) and their glycosides.”

Terpenoids Bitter principles including the sesquiterpene lactones
lactucin and lactupicrin (lactucopicrin); B-amyrin, germanicol,
and lactucone (lactucerin). Lactucone is a mixture of a- and f-
lactucerol acetates, B-lactucerol being identical to taraxasterol.

Sesquiterpene lactones

fe}
-sitOR
HO
o RB
t
lactucopicrin —-C— on \- OH
lactucin H

Figure 1 Selected constituents of wild lettuce.

Other constituents Mannitol, proteins, resins and sugars.

Food Use

Wild lettuce is not used in foods, although the related species L.
sativa is commonly used as a salad ingredient.

Herbal Use

Wild lettuce is stated to possess mild sedative, anodyne and
hypnotic properties. Traditionally, it has been used for insomnia,
restlessness and excitability in children, pertussis, irritable cough,
priapism, dysmenorrhoea, nymphomania, muscular or articular

pains, and specifically for irritable cough and insomnia.(C% ©” C*
Ga2, Goa)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in older and contemporary standard herbal and
pharmaceutical reference texts are given below.

Dried leaves 0.5-3.0g as an infusion three times daily.'(©®

Figure 2 Wild lettuce (Lactuca virosa).

----- PAGE 608 -----
Figure 3 Wild lettuce - dried drug substance (herb).

Liquid extract 0.5-3.0mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times
daily.'6%

Lactucarium (dried latex extract) (BPC 1934) 0.3-1.0g three
times daily.

Soft extract (BPC 1934) 0.3-1.0g three times daily.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Lactucarium has been noted to induce mydriasis.©® This effect
may be attributable to hyoscyamine, although the dried sap is
reportedly devoid of this alkaloid.

An alcoholic extract of a related species, L. sativa, has exhibited
a sedative effect in toads, causing a reduction in motor activity
and behaviour.) Higher doses resulted in flaccid paralysis. In
addition, an antispasmodic action on isolated smooth and striated
muscle, and in vitro negative chronotropic and inotropic effects on
normal and stressed (tachycardic) hearts were observed. The
antispasmodic action was noted to be antagonised by calcium.

Lactucin, lactupicrin and hyoscyamine have all been proposed
as the sedative components in wild lettuce. However in the above
study,” the active component was uncharacterised and acted
mainly peripherally, not readily crossing the blood-brain barrier.
The suggested mode of action was via interference with basic
excitatory processes common to neural and muscular functions,
and not via a neuromuscular block.

Low amounts (nanograms) of morphine have been detected in
Lactuca species, although the concentrations involved are
considered too low to exert any obvious pharmacological

effect.(C
Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of wild
lettuce and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxi

Clinical data

No side-effects documented for L. virosa. However, there is a lack
of clinical safety and toxicity data for wild lettuce and further
investigation of these aspects is required.Wild lettuce contains

Wild Lettuce

sesquiterpene lactones which are potentially allergenic.“©’”)

Occupational dermatitis has been documented for L. sativa
together with an urticarial eruption after ingestion of the leaves.‘
©°S) The milky sap of L. sativa is reported to be irritant.‘

Preclinical data

Consumption of large amounts of L. scariola has caused
poisoning in cattle, which developed pulmonary emphysema,
severe dyspnoea, and weakness.” Only the immature plants were
reported to be toxic.

L. sativa has been reported to produce only negative responses
when tested for mutagenicity using the Ames test (Salmonella
typhimurium TA98, TA100).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Overdosage may produce poisoning” involving — stupor,
depressed respiration, coma and even death. Wild lettuce may
cause an allergic reaction in sensitive individuals, in particular
those with an existing sensitivity to other members of the
Asteraceae/Compositae family.

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of wild lettuce to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of wild lettuce has not been
established. In view of the lack of toxicity data and the possibility
of allergic reactions, use of wild lettuce during pregnancy and
lactation should be avoided.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Canada: Sirop Cocillana Codeine. Russia: Speman Forte
(Cnemax ®opre). South Africa: Choats Extract of Lettuce
Cough Mixture. UK: Anased; Antibron; Calmanite Tablets;
Gerard House Somnus; HRI Night; Kalms Sleep; Napiers Sleep
Tablets; Nytol Herbal; Quiet Life; Quiet Nite; Slumber;
Unwind Herbal Nytol. Venezuela: Cerylana.

References

1 Rees $, Harborne JB. Flavonoids and other phenolics of Cichorium
and related members of the Lactuceae (Compositae). Bot J Linn Soc
1984; 89: 313-319.

2 Huang Z-J et al. Studies on herbal remedies I: Analysis of herbal
smoking preparations alleged to contain lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.)
and other natural products. J Pharm Sci 1982; 71: 270-271.

3 Gonzalex-Lima F et al. Depressant pharmacological effects of a
component isolated from lettuce, Lactuca sativa. Int J Crude Drug
Res 1986; 24: 154-166.

4 Krook G. Occupational dermatitis from Lactuca sativa (lettuce) and
Cichorium (endive). Contact Dermatitis 1977; 3: 27-36.

5 Rinkel HJ, Balyeat RM. Occupational dermatitis due to lettuce.
JAMA 1932; 98: 137-138.

6 Zeller W et al. The sensitizing capacity of Compositae plants 6.
Guinea pig sensitization experiments with ornamental plants and
weeds using different methods. Arch Dermatol Res 1985; 277: 28-35.

7 Anon. Poisindex CD-ROM 1995; 85. Denver: Micromedex.

8 White RD e¢ al. An evaluation of acetone extracts from six plants in
the Ames mutagenicity test. Toxicol Lett 1983; 15: 26-31.

----- PAGE 609 -----
taken with other salicylate-containing drugs are applicable.
Products containing willow should preferably be standardised
on their salicin content, in view of the considerable variation
in salicylate concentrations between different Salix species.
The use of willow during pregnancy and lactation should be
avoided.

Species (Family)

Several Salix species are used including S. alba L., S. fragilis L., S.
pentandra L., S. purpurea L. (Salicaceae)

Synonym(s)

Salix

Part(s) Used
Bark

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia'*”)

BHC 1992'°®

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'08#

Complete German Commission E@?)
ESCOP 2003'079

Martindale 35th edition'@*

Ph Eur 20078

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G1, G2, G6 and G52.

Glycosides (phenolic) Various phenolic glycosides including
salicin, salicortin, tremulacin, salireposide, picein and triandrin.“?
Acetylated salicin, salicortin, salireposide, and esters of salicylic
acid and salicyl alcohol may also occur.

Salicylates (calculated as salicin) Vary between species, e.g.
0.5% in S. alba, 1-10% in S. fragilis, 3-9% in S. purpurea.”

Flavonoids  Flavanones, eriodictoyl-7-glucoside; naringenin-5S-
glucoside; chalcone; isosalipurposide; catechin.'2 S

Tannins Condensed.

Other constituents Catechins.

There is reported to be no difference between the phenolic
glycoside pattern of the bark and leaf. The latter is also reported
to contain flavonoids, catechins and condensed tannins.»

Food Use

Willow is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Willow is stated to possess anti-inflammatory, antirheumatic,
antipyretic, antihidrotic, analgesic, antiseptic and astringent
properties. Traditionally it has been used for muscular and
arthrodial rheumatism with inflammation and pain, influenza,
respiratory catarrh, gouty arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and
specifically for rheumatoid arthritis and other systemic connective
tissue disorders characterised by inflammatory changes. The
German Commission E approved internal use for diseases
accompanied by fever, rheumatic ailments and headaches.'*

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dry bark

corresponding to 60-120 mg total salicin daily.

1-3g as a decoction three times daily'C%°”

(G3)

Liquid extract
daily(Co%

1-3mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Pharmacological actions documented for salicylates include anti-
inflammatory, antipyretic, hyperglycaemic/hypoglycaemic and

Salicylates
CH,OH

OH
oO. 0.
CH,OR

R
salicin H
fragilin CH3CO
populin benzoyl
fe)

OH

salicortin H
2’-O-acetylsalicortin CH3;CO
tremulacin benzoyl

Figure 1 Selected constituents of willow.

----- PAGE 610 -----
Figure 2 Willow (Salix spp.).

uricosuric/antiuricosuric activities, and increased blood-clotting
time and plasma albumin binding.'©* Anti-inflammatory activity
for salicin and tremulacin (isolated from Populus spp.) has been
assessed in the hen's egg choriollantoic test.-%” The results
indicate that the activity may be due to the metabolites of these
compounds. Salicin is probably the most active anti-inflamma-
tory compound in willow; it is metabolised to salicylic acid. The
enzymatic degradation of salicin, salicortin and tremulacin by B-
glucosidase and by esterase has been investigated.

Tannins are known to have astringent properties.

Clinical studies

Robust clinical research assessing the effects of willow is limited
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Willow bark extract (equivalent to 240mg salicin/day) was
compared with placebo in a two-week, randomised, double-blind
trial involving 78 patients with osteoarthritis.” A difference in
pain dimension in the treated group, compared with placebo, just
reached statistical significance (p = 0.047).

The pharmacological actions of salicylates in humans are well
documented, and are applicable to willow. Salicin is a prodrug
which is metabolised to saligenin in the gastrointestinal tract and
to salicylic acid after absorption.”

Side-effects, To.

Clinical data

Clinical safety and toxicity data for willow are limited and further
investigation of these aspects is required. Minor adverse effects
including stomachache, nausea, dizziness, sweating and rash have
been reported for willow.(C”

Side-effects and signs of toxicity normally associated with
salicylates, such as gastric and renal irritation, hypersensitivity,
blood in the stools, tinnitus, nausea and vomiting, may occur.
Salicin is documented to cause skin rashes.(C

Willow

|
tele I3 S 1 1 78 79

Figure 3 Willow — dried drug substance (bark).

Contra-indications, Warnings

Precautions associated with salicylate therapy are also applicable
to willow. Therefore individuals with known hypersensitivity to
aspirin, asthma, active peptic ulceration, diabetes, gout, haemo-
philia, hypoprothrombinaemia, kidney or liver disease should be
aware of the possible risks associated with the ingestion of
willow.

Drug interactions Drug interactions listed for salicylates are also
applicable to willow and include oral anticoagulants, methotrex-
ate, metoclopramide, phenytoin, probenecid, spironolactone and
valproate. Concurrent administration of willow with other
salicylate-containing products, such as aspirin, should be avoided.
Irritant effects of salicylates on the gastrointestinal tract may be
enhanced by alcohol, and barbiturates an
been documented to enhance salicylate toxicity as well as masking
the symptoms of overdosage.““*?

oral sedatives have

Pregnancy and lactation The safety of willow during pregnancy
and lactation has not been established. Conflicting reports have
been documented concerning the safety of aspirin taken during
pregnancy. Salicylates excreted in breast milk have been reported
to cause macular rashes in breastfed babies.'(“*” In view of this
information, the use of willow during pregnancy and lactation
should be avoided.

Brazil: Zortrix. Germany: Assalix; Assplant; Rheumakaps;
Rheumatab Salicis. Switzerland: Assalix.

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Arthritic Pain Herbal Formula 1; Bioglan Arthri
Plus; Extralife Migrai-Care; Extralife PMS-Care; Guaiacum
Complex; Lifesystem Herbal Formula 1 Arthritic Aid; Prost-1.
Austria: Digestodoron. Brazil: Calman; Calmiplan; Floriny;
Pasalix; Passi Catha; Passiflorine. Czech Republic: Antirevma-
ticky Caj; Erkaltungstee; Valofyt Neo. France: Arkophytum;
Mediflor Tisane Circulation du Sang No 12. Germany:
Digestodoron; Dr Wiemanns Rheumatonikum. Italy: Biothy-
mus DS; Biothymus DS; Bodyguard; Donalg; Influ-Zinc;
Nevril; Passiflorine. Malaysia: Celery Plus. Mexico: Ifupasil.
Portugal: Neurocardol. South Africa: Digestodoron. Spain:

----- PAGE 611 -----
Willow

Relief; Roberts Black Willow Compound Tablets; St Johnswort
Compound. Venezuela: Passiflorum.

References

1

Meier B e¢ al. Identifikation und Bestimmung von je acht
Phenolglykosiden in Salix purpurea und Salix daphnoides mit
moderner HPLC. Pharm Acta Helv 1985; 60: 269-274.

Meier B et al. Pharmaceutical aspects of the use of willows in herbal
remedies. Planta Med 1988: 54: 559-560.

Karl C et al. Flavonoide aus Salix alba, die Struktur des terniflorins

und eines Weiteren Acylflavonoides. Phytochemistry 1976; 15: 1084—
1085.

Albrecht M et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of flavonol glycosides
and salicin derivatives from the leaves of Populus tremuloides. Planta
Med 1990; 56: 660.

Meier B, Liebi M. Salicinhaltige pflanzliche Arzneimittel-
Uberlegungen zu wirksamkeit und unbedenklichkeit. Z Phytother
1990; 11: 50-58.

Julkunen-Tiitto R, Meier B. The enzymatic decomposition of salicin
and its derivatives obtained from salicaceae species. J Nat Prod 1992;
SS: 1204-1212.

Schmid B et al. Efficacy and tolerability of a standardized willow bark
extract in patients with osteoarthritis: randomized placebo-
controlled, double blind clinical trial. Phytother Res 2001; 15: 344—
350.

Baker S, Thomas PS. Herbal medicine precipitating massive
haemolysis. Lancet 1987; i: 1039-1040.

----- PAGE 612 -----
- Witch Hazel

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Witch hazel is characterised by its tannin constituents and
astringent properties. The documented herbal uses are
related to these astringent properties. There is limited
evidence from clinical studies to indicate that witch hazel
used topically is effective in the treatment of haemorrhoids,
but its use in the treatment of eczema and dermatitis is more
controversial. There are no known problems associated with
the use of topical preparations of witch hazel during
pregnancy and lactation.

Species (Family)

Hamamelis virginiana L. (Hamamelidaceae)

Synonym(s)

Hamamelis, Virginian Witch Hazel, Witchazel

Part(s) Used
Bark, leaf

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 1996'0”)

BP 2007°08

Complete German Commission E'C”
ESCOP 2003'°7?
Martindale 35th edition'@
Ph Eur 20078?
USP29/NF24‘C80)

85)

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'O*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including
Reference 1 and General References G2 and G52.

Flavonoids (leaf) Flavonols (e.g. kaempferol, quercetin) and their
glycosides including astragalin, quercitrin, afzelin and myricitrin.

Tannins, catechins Pharmacopoeial standard, not less than
3% (868) Hamamelitannin (hydrolysable), lesser amounts of
condensed tannins (bark). (+)-catechin, (+)-gallocatechin, (—)-
epicatechingallate, (—)-epigallocatechingallate, proanthocyanidin
oligomers of cyanidin and delphinidin type.

Volatile oils About 0.5%. Hexen-2-ol, hexenol, o- and B-ionones,
eugenol, safrole and sesquiterpenes.

Other constituents Fixed oil (about 0.6%), resin (hamamelin,
hamamamelitannin), wax, saponins, choline, free gallic acid and
free hamamelose.

Sugars
CH,OH
HO sO
OH
HO OH

hamamelose

Figure 1 Selected constituents of witch hazel.

Food Use

Witch hazel is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source
of food flavouring (category N3). This category indicates that

there is insufficient information available for an adequate
(G16)

assessment of potential toxicity.

Herbal Use

Witch hazel is stated to possess astringent, antihaemorrhagic and
anti-inflammatory properties. Traditionally, it has been used for
diarrhoea, mucous colitis, haemorrhoids, haematemesis, haemop-
tysis, and externally for external haemorrhoids, bruises and
localised inflamed swellings. The German Commission E

approved use for minor skin injuries, local inflammation of skin
(G3)

and mucous membranes, haemorrhoids and varicose veins.

Dosage

Dosages for oral (unless otherwise stated) administration (adults)
for traditional uses recommended in older and contemporary
standard herbal and pharmaceutical reference texts are given

Figure 2. Witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana).

----- PAGE 613 -----
Figure 3 Witch hazel — dried drug substance (bark).

below. While doses for oral administration are given in older
literature, modern use of witch hazel is by topical application.

Dried leaves 2 as an infusion three times daily.'C®

Hamamelis Liquid Extract (BPC 1973) 2-4mL (1:1 in 45%

alcohol) three times daily.'‘C®
Hamamelis Water (BPC 1973) for local application, undiluted or
1:3 dilution for external use.'°?)

Decoction 5-10 g in 250 mL water for compresses.'©*

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Witch hazel is known to possess astringent and haemostatic
properties, which have been attributed to the tannin constituents.
Vasoconstriction was reduced in the hindquarters of rabbits when
arteries were perfused with aqueous or ethanolic extracts of witch
hazel leaf. A 70% ethanolic extract of leaf (1:5, 200 mg/kg,
administered orally) significantly inhibited the chronic phase of
carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema over a period of 19 days,
compared with control (p < 0.05). An aqueous ethanolic extract
of witch hazel bark yielded a fraction rich in polymeric
proanthocyanins after ultracentrifugation.?) This fraction was
significantly active against herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1). It
also showed radical scavenging properties, inhibited B-glucosidase
and human leukocyte elastase activity, and was active in the croton
oil ear oedema test in mice. In other studies, 3-O-galloyl-
epicatechin-(4B,8)-catechin, a catechin oligomer and hamameli-
tannin isolated from witch hazel bark had ICso values of 6.6, 8.8
and 1.0,mol/L, respectively, for inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase.
The oligomer was active in the microsomal lyso-PAF:acetyl-CoA-
acetyltransferase inhibition assay, with an ICso value of 9.4 tmol/
L, whereas hamamelitannin was inactive.

Clinical studies

Robust clinical research assessing the effects of witch hazel is
limited and rigorous randomised clinical trials are required. A
double-blind, controlled trial involving 90 patients with haemor-
thoids compared the effects of witch hazel bark salve with those
of other salves. Witch hazel was reported to be superior in relief of
symptoms. ‘°°

In a study involving 30 volunteers who received topical
applications of a hydroglycolic extract of witch hazel leaf, skin

temperature was significantly reduced, compared with baseline
values. This was interpreted as a possible vasoconstrictor effect of
witch hazel.‘ The effects of an after-sun lotion containing 10%
hamamelis distillate were assessed in 30 healthy volunteers using a
modified UV-B erythema test for inflammation. It was reported
that erythema suppression ranged from 20% at seven hours to
27% at 48 hours.

In a two-week, randomised, double-blind trial, 72 patients with
moderately severe eczema were treated with either a hamamelis
distillate cream (5.35g distillate with 0.64g ketone/100g),
hydrocortisone cream 0.5%, or drug-free cream. All three
treatments significantly reduced itching, erythema and scaling
after one week. Hydrocortisone cream was more effective than
hamamelis cream.

Several clinical studies of witch hazel in the treatment of eczema
have been reviewed.'©™ A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
of witch hazel salve (25% water distillate from leaf) involving 80
patients with toxic and degenerative eczema and 31 patients with
endogenous eczema found that atopic dermatitis responded to the
treatment to a greater extent than to placebo, but that there was
no significant effect on primary irritant contact dermatitis. An
uncontrolled study involving 22 patients with atopic eczema who
were treated with witch hazel (4g leaf provided 25 mL distillate/
100g salve) applied to affected arms over a three-week period
reported improvements in symptoms, compared with baseline
‘G5 Uncontrolled studies provide preliminary data only
and the observed effects cannot be attributed definitively to witch
hazel. An uncontrolled study involving 37 patients treated with a
witch hazel leaf cream twice daily for two weeks reported
improvements in eczema and neurodermatitis.

values.

Side-effects, Toxicity

The volatile oil contains safrole, a known carcinogen (see
Sassafras), but in amounts too small to cause concern. Stomach
irritation may occur in susceptible patients after oral treatment.
Four of 1032 patients tested reacted to an ointment containing
25% witch hazel extract, but two of these patients were sensitive

to wool fat in the ointment base.'©”

Contra-indications, Warnings

None documented for witch hazel. In view of the tannin
constituents, excessive ingestion of witch hazel is not recom-
mended.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of information on
the safety of witch hazel preparations administered orally, their
use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided. There are
no known problems associated with topical use of witch hazel
during pregnancy and lactation.

“Preparations

Proprietary single-ingredient preparations

Australia: Optrex Original; Witch Doctor. Austria: Hametum.
Canada: Optrex. Chile: Sperti Preparacion H Clear Gel.
France: Optrex. Germany: Hamasana; Hametum; Posterine;
Venoplant top. Italy: Acqua Virginiana; Derminiol; Optrex.
Malaysia: Optrex. Mexico: Tia Puppy. New Zealand: Optrex.
Singapore: Optrex. Spain: Derminiol; Hametol; Hemo Dermi-
niol; Optrex. Switzerland: Mavena Anal-Gen; Optrex. Thai-

----- PAGE 614 -----
Luminique; Nevril; Proctopure; Sacnel; Salviette H; Steril Zeta;
Varicogel; Venactive; Venoplus. Mexico: Almodin; Prespir;
Supranettes Naturalag. New Zealand: Lacto Calamine; Optrex

Witch Hazel

References

Zeylstra H. Hamamelis virginiana. Br J Phytother 1998; 5: 23-28.
Duwiejua M et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of Polygonum bistorta,
Guaiacum officinale and Hamamelis virginiana in rats. J Pharm
Pharmacol 1994; 46: 286-290.

Erdelmeier CAJ e¢ al. Antiviral and antiphlogistic activities of
Hamamelis virginiana. Planta Med 1996, 62: 241-245.

Hartisch C et al. Dual inhibitory activities of tannins from Hamamelis
virginiana and related polyphenols on S-lipoxygenase and lyso-PAF:
acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase. Planta Med 1997; 63: 106-110.
Hughes-Formella BJ et al. Anti-inflammatory effect of hamamelis
lotion in a UVB erythema test. Dermatology 1998; 196: 316-322.
Korting HC et al. Comparative efficacy of hamamelis distillate and
hydrocortisone cream in atopic eczema. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1995;
48: 461-465.

----- PAGE 615 -----
Yarrow

efficacy and safety of yarrow is limited. Yarrow is considered
to be relatively non-toxic although allergic reactions in
susceptible individuals have been documented. The volatile
oil is contra-indicated in pregnancy and in view of the lack of
safety information, use of yarrow should be avoided during
lactation.©>®)

Species (Family)

Achillea millefolium L. (Asteraceae/Compositae)

Synonym(s)
Milfoil, Millefolium

Part(s) Used
Flowerhead

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHC 1992'°%

BHP 19960”)

BP 2007'°8)

Complete German Commission EO
Martindale 35th edition'°*”

Ph Eur 200708”

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL'°*?

Constituents

The following is compiled from several sources, including General
References G2 and Gé.

Acids Amino acids (e.g. alanine, aspartic acid, glutamic acid
histidine, leucine, lysine, proline, valine),'"? fatty acids (e.g.
rr rrr a ~ y (3,4) ar

> > > 5 >
linoleic, myristic, oleic, palmitic, stearic) and others including
ascorbic acid,” caffeic acid, folic acid, salicylic acid and
succinic acid."?

Alkaloids/bases Betonicine and stachydrine (pyrrolidine),
trigonelline (pyridine) ,“"” betaine and choline  (bases).'”
Uncharacterised alkaloids include achiceine, achilleine® (possible
synonym for L-betonicine), which is stated to yield achilletine'” on
alkaline hydrolysis, and moscatine/moschatine,” stated to be an

ill-defined glucoalkaloid.

(1,7)

Flavonoids Predominantly flavone glycosides apigenin- and
luteolin-7-glycosides,°) with lesser quantities of artemetin,
casticin, 5-hydroxy-3,6,7,4-tetramethoxyflavone and isorhamne-
tin. Rutin (a flavonol glycoside).

0)

Tannins Condensed and hydrolysable, !® with glucose as the

carbohydrate component of the latter”)

Volatile oils Numerous identified components include borneol,
bornyl acetate (trace), camphor, 1,8-cineole, eucalyptol, limonene,
sabinene, terpinen-4-ol, terpineol and a-thujone (monoterpenes),
caryophyllene (a sesquiterpene), achillicin, achillin, millefin and
millefolide (sesquiterpene lactones), azulene and chamazulene
(sesquiterpene lactone- derived) and isoartemisia ketone. The
relative composition of the components varies greatly between
Achillea species, especially the azulene content. Azulene has been
reported as the major component.''? However, true yarrow (A.
millefolium) is thought to be hexaploid and azulene-free, whereas
closely related species, such as Achillea lanulosa Nutt. and
Achillea collina Becker, are tetraploid and contain up to 50%
azulene in their volatile oil. '%! It is possible that the tetraploid

Monoterpenes
OH

|

camphor

linalool

Sesquiterpenes

achillicin

chamazulene fe)

+t OCOCHg

ay

CH;CO.0

svnatt

millefin

leukodin O

Acetylenes
CH3-(C=C)3-CH=CH— CH-CH -CH=CHp pontica epoxide

CH3-(C=C)3-CH==CHCO.CH, matricaria ester

Alkaloids e
Coo
HO, ° ° ZA
coo coo |
Oy Oo Xuy >
Ny, Ni, NO
cHY ‘CHs cHY ‘CHs GH,
betonicine stachydrine trigonelline

Figure 1 Selected constituents of yarrow.

----- PAGE 616 -----
species may be supplied for A. millefolium. The azulenes are not
present in the fresh herb: they are formed as artefacts during
steam distillation of the oil, from unstable precursors called
proazulenes (e.g. achillin and achillicin), via equally unstable

azulene-carboxylic acid intermediates.”

Other constituents Unknown cyanogenetic compound," sugars
including arabinose, galactose, dextrose, dulcitol, glucose,

oe : 1,2)
inositol, maltose, mannitol and sucrose.¢~

Food Use

Yarrow is listed by the Council of Europe as a natural source of
food flavouring (herb, flowers, essential oil and other prepara-
tions: category 4, with limits on camphor, eucalyptol and thujone)
(see Appendix 3).‘C'” Previously, in the USA, yarrow was only

approved for use in alcoholic beverages, and the finished product
G41)

had to be thujone free."

Herbal Use

Yarrow i

tated to possess diaphoretic, antipyretic, hypotensive,
astringent, diuretic and urinary antiseptic properties. Tradition-
ally, it has been used for bruises, swellings, strains, fevers,
common cold, essential hypertension, amenorrhoea, dysentery,
diarrhoea, and specifically for thrombotic conditions with

hypertension, including cerebral and coronary thromboses.(C* °°
G7, G8, G64)

Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.

Dried herb 24g as an infusion three times daily.C°%°?

Liquid extract 24mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times

daily. (G6, G7)

Tincture 2-4mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(C%°”

Figure 2. Yarrow (Achillea millefolium).

Yarrow 605,

Figure 3 Yarrow - dried drug substance (flowerhead).

Pharmacological Actions

Some activities documented for yarrow are associated with the
azulene constituents, although it is now thought that azulene is
absent from true yarrow (see Constituents). It is possible that
some of the documented pharmacological studies have used

Achillea species other than A. millefolium.?

In vitro and animal studies

Anti-inflammatory activity has been documented for an aqueous
extract of yarrow using mouse" and rat" paw oedema models,
5) and various inflammatory
including histamine, carrageenan and prostaglan-
din. In mouse studies, the active fraction was reported as a series
of protein-carbohydrate complexes. Topical anti-inflammatory
activity in rabbits has also been documented for the aqueous
extract." In general, anti-inflammatory properties are associated
with azulenes (see Chamomile, German). Anti-inflammatory
activity has been described for the azulene components docu-

mented for the volatile oil of yarrow.)

with inflammation induced by yeast

substances,

A diuretic effect was also noted in mice administered an
aqueous extract of yarrow," but only at a dose more than double
that required for an anti-inflammatory effect.) Terpinen-4-ol,
the diuretic principle in juniper, has been reported as a component
of yarrow volatile oil.

CNS-depressant activity has been documented for the volatile
oil: a dose of 300 mg/kg decreased the spontaneous activity of
mice and lowered the body temperature of rats. In addition, 300-
600 mg/kg doses inhibited pentetrazole-induced convulsions and
prolonged sleep induced by a barbiturate preparation.”

Moderate antibacterial activity has been documented for an
erb against Staphylococcus aureus,
Bacillus subtilis, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Escherichia coli,
Shigella sonnei and Shigella flexneri.) Antimicrobial properties
have been documented for the sesquiterpene lactone fraction.

Achilleine 0.5 g/kg by intravenous injection has been noted to
decrease the blood clotting time in rabbits by 32%. The
haemostatic action persis
toxic effects.

Antispasmodic activity on the isolated rabbit intestine has been
documented for a flavonoid-containing fraction of yarrow.)
Antispasmodic activity is generally associated with azulene
constituents (see Chamomile, German).

Antipyretic and hypotensive actions have been reported for the
basic fraction (alkaloid/base);‘“"" the sesquiterpene lactone

ethanolic extract of the

ed for 45 minutes with no observable

----- PAGE 617 -----
Yarrow

fraction is stated to possess cytotoxic activities,’ although no
further details were located. Tannins are known to possess
astringent activity.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of yarrow
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

Allergic reactions to yarrow (e.g. dermatitis) have been documen-
ted, and positive patch tests have been produced in individuals
sensitised to other plants.°°°* An instance of yarrow tea
causing a generalised eruption in a sensitised individual was
reported in 1929. The allergenic properties of some sesquiterpene
lactones are well documented, although none of those present in
yarrow are recognised sensitisers.'“° Yarrow has been suspected
of being a photosensitiser, although extracts have been reported to
lack phototoxicity and to be devoid of psoralens, compounds with
known photosensitising properties.‘

Preclinical data

Yarrow is considered to be of low toxicity. In mice LDso values
have been reported of up to 3.65 g/kg (by mouth), 3.1 g/kg (by
intraperitoneal injection), and greater than or equal to 1 g/kg (by
subcutaneous injection). ” In rats, an LDso (subcutaneous
injection) has been recorded as 16.86 g/kg, with corresponding
LD and LD 49 values reported as 12 and 20 g/kg, respectively."
By comparison, an ED); for anti-inflammatory activity has been
estimated as about 0.43 g/kg."

The known toxic principle thujone has been documented as a
minor component of yarrow volatile oil, although concentrations
present are probably too low to represent a risk to human
health.

A single report of animal poisoning has been documented for
yarrow in which a calf died following the ingestion of a single
plant. No additional reports of animal toxicity were located.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Yarrow may cause an allergic reaction in sensitive individuals,
especially those with an existing hypersensitivity to other
members of the Asteraceae/ Compositae.'”

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of yarrow to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. There is limited evidence
from preclinical studies that achilleine, a constituent of yarrow,
has anticoagulant activity, although the clinical relevance of this, if
any is not clear.

Pregnancy and lactation Yarrow should not be taken during
pregnancy. It is reputed to be an abortifacient and to affect the
menstrual cycle,“ and the volatile oil contains trace amounts
(0.3%) of the abortifacient principle thujone. In view of the lack
of safety information use of yarrow should be avoided during
lactation.

Lozione Same Urto; Pik Gel. Portugal: Cicaderma; Fade
Cream. Russia: Liv 52 (Aus 52); Liv 52 (Aus 52); Original
Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opurunaapupii Boapmoti Baan3sam
Burrnepa); Tonsilgon N (Tousmaron H). South Africa: Amara;
Clairo; Menodoron. Spain: Jaquesor; Menstrunat; Natusor
Circusil; Natusor Gastrolen; Natusor Jaquesan. Switzerland:
Gastrosan; Kernosan Heidelberger Poudre; Pommade au
Baume; Tisane hepatique et biliaire; Tisane pour l'estomac.
UK: Catarrh-eeze; Drops of Life Tablets; Rheumatic Pain
Remedy; Rutin Compound Tablets; Tabritis; Tabritis Tablets;
Wellwoman.

References

1 Ivanov Ch, Yankov L. Composition of Achillea millefolium. 1.
Preparation of the total extracts and composition of the part of the
alcoholic extracts soluble in alcohol and water. God Vissh
Khimikotekhnol Inst Sofia 1967; 14: 195-222.

2 Ivanov Ch, Yankov L. Composition of Achillea millefolium. Ul.
Composition of the parts soluble in water and insoluble in alcohol.
God Vissh Khimikotekhnol Inst Sofia 1967; 14: 223-241.

3 Ivanov Ch, Yankov L. Composition of Achillea millefolium. Il.
Composition of the acidic, water-insoluble part of the alcoholic
extract. God Vissh Khimikotekhnol Inst Sofia 1967; 14: 61-72.

4 Ivanov Ch, Yankov L. Composition of Achillea millefolium. V.
Composition and structure of the components of neutral fraction
insoluble in the aqueous part of the alcoholic extract. God Vissh
Khimikotekhnol Inst Sofia 1967; 14: 73-101.

5S Chandler RF et al. Ethnobotany and phytochemistry of yarrow,
Achillea millefolium, Compositae. Economic Bot 1982; 36: 203-223.

6 Falk AJ et al. Isolation and identification of three new flavones from
Achillea millefolium L. ] Pharm Sci 1975; 64: 1838-1842.

7 Zirvi KA, Ikram M. Alkaloids of some of the plants of the
Compositae. Pakistan J Sci Ind Res 1975; 18: 93-101.

8 Miller FM, Chow LM. Alkaloids of Achillea millefolium L. 1.
Isolation and characterization of Achilleine. | Am Chem Soc 1954; 76:
1353-1354.

9 Hoerhammer L. Flavone concentration of medical plants with regard
to their spasmolytic action. Congr Sci Farm Conf Commun 21st Pisa
1961; 578-588.

10 Falk AJ et al. The constituents of the essential oil from Achillea
millefolium L. Lloydia 1974; 37: 598-602.

11 Haggag MY et al. Thin layer and gas-chromatographic studies on the
essential oil from Achillea millefolium. Planta Med 1975; 27: 361-366.

12. Sticher O. Plant mono-, di- and sesquiterpenoids with
pharmacological and therapeutical activity. In: Wagner H, Wolff P,
eds. New Natural Products with Pharmacological Biological or
Therapeutical Activity. Berlin: Springer Verlag, 1977: 137-176.

13. Seigler DS. Plants of the Northeastern United States that produce
cyanogenic compounds. Economic Bot 1976; 30: 395-407.

----- PAGE 618 -----
14

15

16

Chandler F. Vindication of maritime Indian herbal remedies. J
Ethnopharmacol 1983; 9: 323-327.

Goldberg AS et al. Isolation of anti-inflammatory principles from
Achillea millefolium (Compositae). ] Pharm Sci 1969; 58: 938-941.
Shipochliev T, Fournadjiev G. Spectrum of the antiinflammatory effect
of Arctostaphylos uva ursi and Achilea millefolium, L. Probl Vutr Med
1984; 12: 99-107.

17

18

19

Yarrow

Kudrzycka-Bieloszabska FW, Glowniak K. Pharmacodynamic
properties of oleam chamomillae and oleum millefolii. Diss Pharm
Pharmacol 1966; 18: 449-454.

Moskalenko SA. Preliminary screening of far-Eastern ethnomedicinal
plants for antibacterial activity. J Ethnopharmacol 1986; 15: 231-259.
Mathias CGT et al. Plant dermatitis — patch test results (1975-78).
Note on Juniperus extract. Contact Dermatitis 1979; 5: 336.

----- PAGE 619 -----
- Yellow Dock

Summary and Pharmaceutical Comment

Limited chemical, pharmacological, and toxicity information
is available for yellow dock. Documented anthraquinone
constituents justify the reputed purgative action. However,
there is a lack of robust clinical research assessing the efficacy
and safety of yellow dock. Although the purgative effect of
yellow dock is reputed to be gentle, the use of unstandardised
anthraquinone-containing preparations should be avoided
since their pharmacological effect is unpredictable and may
cause abdominal cramp and diarrhoea. The use of yellow
dock should be avoided during pregnancy and lactation.

Species (Family)

Rumex crispus L. (Polygonaceae)

Synonym(s)

Curled Dock, Rumex odontocarpus 1. Sandor

Part(s) Used

Root

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

BHP 19830” :
Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)
GSL)
Constituents

Anthraquinones
physcion (aglycones).

24%. Chrysophanol, emodin, nepodin,
(1-3)
Tannins Catechol 5% (condensed-type).

Other plants parts The plant constituents documented include
oxalic acid, oxalates, chrysophanic acid, emodin, tannin, and a

complex volatile oil (more than 60 components identified).

Anthraquinones

OH O OH
el ,
°
R! R?
chrysophanol H  CHg
aloe-emodin H  CH20H
emodin OH CH3
physcion OCH; CH3

Figure 1

Selected constituents of yellow dock.

Food Use

Yellow dock is not used in foods.

Herbal Use

Yellow dock is stated to possess gentle purgative and cholagogue
properties. Traditionally, it has been used for chronic skin disease,

obstructive jaundice, constipation, and specifically for psoriasis
(G7, G64)

with constipation.

Figure 2 Yellow dock (Rumex crispus).

Figure 3 Yellow dock — dried drug substance (root).

----- PAGE 620 -----
Dosage

Dosages for oral administration (adults) for traditional uses
recommended in standard herbal reference texts are given below.
Dried root 24g as a decoction three times daily.'©”

Liquid extract 2-4 mL (1:1 in 25% alcohol) three times daily©”

Tincture 1-2 mL (1:5 in 45% alcohol) three times daily.(©”

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

None documented for the root. Slight antibacterial activity has
been reported for herb extracts, which exhibited activity towards
both Gram-positive (Staphylococcus aureus, Mycobacterium
smegmatis) and Gram-negative (Escherichia coli, Shigella sonnei,
Shigella flexneri) organisms.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of yellow
dock and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are
required.

Side-effects, Toxicity

Clinical data

No side-effects documented. However, there is a lack of clinical
safety and toxicity data for yellow dock and further investigation
of these aspects is required.. In view of the documented
anthraquinone constituents, side-effects generally associated
with laxatives are also applicable to yellow dock. Overuse may
cause abdominal cramps and diarrhoea, and prolonged use may
lead to intestinal atrophy and hypokalaemia.

Preclinical data

Dermatitis has been reported in livestock following the ingestion
of plant material in large quantities.(©*” Oxalic acid is known to
be a toxic plant acid that forms insoluble calcium salts which

Yellow Dock

cause a disturbance in calcium concentrations and hence affect the
: (G33)
blood coagulation mechanism. ‘“??)

Contra-indications, Warnings

Warnings generally associated with stimulant laxatives are also
applicable to yellow dock (see Senna). Therefore, yellow dock
should not be taken when there is existing intestinal obstruction,
and excessive use should be avoided (see Side-effects, Toxicity).

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of yellow dock to interact with other medicines
administered concurrently, particularly those with similar or
opposing effects, should be considered. Drug interactions listed
for other stimulant laxatives are applicable to yellow dock (see
Senna).

Pregnancy and lactation In general, unstandardised stimulant
laxatives are not recommended for use during pregnancy. The use
of yellow dock should therefore be avoided in favour of a
standardised preparation that is recommended for the treatment
of constipation during pregnancy. The use of yellow dock by
breastfeeding women should also be avoided, since it has been
documented that anthraquinones can be secreted into the breast
milk (see Senna).

Proprietary multi-ingredient preparations

Australia: Colax; Colax; Dermaco; Herbal Cleanse; Trifolium
Complex. Canada: Herborex. UK: Skin Eruptions Mixture.

References

1. de Siqueira NCS et al. Hydroxyanthraquinones in Rumex crispus L.
(of southern Rio Grande). Rev Cent Cienc Biomed 1977; 5: 69-74.

2 Midiwo JO, Rukunga GM. Distribution of anthraquinone pigments in
Rumex species of Kenya. Phytochemistry 1985; 24: 1390-1391.

3. Fairbairn JW, El-Muhtadi FJ. Chemotaxonomy of anthraquinones in
Rumex. Phytochemistry 1972; 11: 263-268.

4 Miyazawa M, Kameoka H. Constituents of essential oil from Rumex
crispus. Yakugaku Zasshi 1983; 32: 45-47.

----- PAGE 621 -----
Yucca

a , Such as pain and ess, and reduce
pressure and serum triglyceride and cholesterol
concentrations. However, robust clinical research assessing
the efficacy and safety of yucca is lacking. The traditional use
of yucca as a foodstuff would indicate it to be of low toxicity.
However there is a lack of information on the safety of
medicinal use of yucca. In view of this excessive use of yucca
and use during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Species (Family)

Various Yucca species (Asparagaceae) including
*Yucca schidigera Roezl ex Ortgies

+Yucca brevifolia Engelm.

Yucca glauca Nutt.

Synonym(s)

*Mohave Yucca, Yucca mohavensis Sarg.
tJoshua Tree, Yucca arborescens Trel.

Part(s) Used
Whole plant

Pharmacopoeial and Other Monographs

Martindale 35th edition'**

Legal Category (Licensed Products)

Yucca is not listed in the GSL.

Constituents

Terpenoids Various saponins have been isolated from different
Yucca species, including tigogenin and chlerogenin,”) sarsasapo-
genin, markogenin, higogenin, neo-tigogenin, neo-gitogenin,

hecogenin, gloriogenin, and diosgenin (trace)” and smilagenin.

Food Use

The yucca plant has been used traditionally as a major foodstuff
by Indian tribes. Previously, in the USA, both Y. schidigera and Y.
brevifolia have been approved for food use.'“*?

Herbal Use

Yucca has been used for the treatment of arthritis, diabetes and
stomach disorders. Concentrated plant juice has been used
topically to soothe painful joints.

Dosage

None documented.

Pharmacological Actions

In vitro and animal studies

Yucca saponin extract, from Y. schidigera, is reported to exhibit
approximately half the haemolytic activity of commercial soap
bark saponin.

Antitumour activity against B16 melanoma has been documen-
ted for a polysaccharide-containing extract of Y. glauca.°) The
extract was found to be inactive towards L1210 or P388
leukaemias.

Clinical studies

There is a lack of clinical research assessing the effects of yucca
and rigorous randomised controlled clinical trials are required.

A saponin-containing yucca extract has been reported to reduce
symptoms of swelling, pain and stiffness in approximately 75 of
150 arthritic patients given the extract in a double-blind study.
The onset of a positive response was found to vary from days to
weeks or months. A saponin-containing yucca extract has also
been documented to reduce blood pressure, abnormal triglyceride,
and high cholesterol concentrations in a double-blind study
involving 212 arthritic and hypertensive patients.’ Optimum
results were obtained in conjunction with diet and exercise. Yucca
extracts have also been reported to provide relief from headaches
and to improve circulation and gastrointestinal function."*»

Side-effects, Toxicity

There is a lack of clinical and preclinical safety and toxicity data
for yucca and further investigation of these aspects is required.

sarsasapogenin

Figure 1 Selected constituents of yucca.

----- PAGE 622 -----
A saponin-containing yucca extract was given to more than 700
arthritic patients with no signs of toxicity documented. The
yucca saponins are regarded to be a safe food supplement since
they are not thought to be absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tract, thereby reducing the dangers of systemic haemolytic
activity.

Contra-indications, Warnings

Drug interactions None documented. However, the potential for
preparations of yucca to interact with other medicines adminis-
tered concurrently, particularly those with similar or opposing
effects, should be considered.

Pregnancy and lactation In view of the lack of information on
the constituents, pharmacology and toxicology of yucca, its use
during pregnancy and lactation should be avoided.

Yucca

Australia: Prost-1. Brazil: Bronquiogem.

References

1 Dewidar AM, El-Munajjed D. The steroid sapogenin constituents of
Agave americana, A. variegata and Yucca gloriosa. Planta Med 1970;
19: 87-91.

2. Stohs SJ et al. Steroidal sapogenins of Yucca glauca seeds. Lloydia
1973; 36: 443.

3 Ali MS e¢ al. Isolation of antitumor polysaccharide fractions from
Yucca glauca Nutt. (Liliaceae). Growth 1978; 42: 213-223.

4 Bingham R e¢ al. Yucca plant saponin in the management of arthritis.
J Appl Nutr 1975; 27: 45-51.

5S Bingham R et al. Yucca plant saponin in the treatment of hypertension
and hypercholesterolemia. J App! Nutr 1978; 30: 127-136.

----- PAGE 623 -----
Appendix 1

Until the emergence of reports of important interactions between
St John's wort (Hypericum perforatum L.) and certain conven-
tional drugs (see St John's Wort), very few interactions involving
herbal products had been reported in the medical literature.
Furthermore, there has been very little experimental and clinical
research in this area.

The following list of potential drug—herb interactions has been
compiled on the basis of known herbal constituents and their
reported pharmacological actions. It should be emphasised that
many drug interactions are harmless and many of those that are

Table 1 Potential drug—herb interactions
Drug/therapeutic category affected
Gastrointestinal system

Antacids, ulcer-healing drugs

Antidiarrhoeal drugs

Herbal ingredients interacting

Herbal ingredients irritant to gastrointestinal
tract. See Appendix 2, Table 12

Herbal ingredients with laxative activity.

Potential Drug—Herb Interactions

potentially harmful occur only in a small proportion of patients
and may then vary in severity from patient to patient. Healthcare
professionals should be alert to undeclared use of herbal
medicines as a possible cause of unexplained toxicity or lack of
effect of conventional medicines.

Suspected drug-herb interactions involving licensed or unli-
censed herbal products should be reported to the regulatory
authorities, as for any other suspected adverse reaction to herbal
or 'conventional' medicines.

Possible effects

Exacerbation of symptoms. Risk of
systemic side-effects

Antagonism

See Appendix 2, Table 1

Laxatives

Herbal ingredients with laxative activity.

Potentiation; increased risk of side-effects

See Appendix 2, Table 1

Cardiovascular system

Cardiac glycosides
2, Table 2

Herbal ingredients containing

Cardioactive herbal ingredients. See Appendix Potentiation; increased risk of side-effects

Potentiation; increased risk of side-effects

hydroxyanthracene laxatives. See Appendix 2,

Table 1
St John’s wort

Diuretics

Herbal ingredients containing

Risk of reduced therapeutic effect of
digoxin

Potentiation; increased risk of

hydroxyanthracene laxatives. See Appendix 2, hypokalaemia

Table 1

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Herbal ingredients with hypotensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients containing

Anti-arrhythmic activity

Potentiation; increased risk of
hypokalaemia

Difficulty in controlling diuresis;
hypotension

Interference with existing therapy;

hydroxyanthracene laxatives. See Appendix 2, increased risk of hypokalaemia

Table 1

Cardioactive herbal ingredients. See Appendix Interference/antagonism with existing

2, Table 2

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.

therapy

Antagonism if hypokalaemia occurs

See Appendix 2, Table 3

Beta-adrenoceptor blocking drugs
2, Table 2

Cardioactive herbal ingredients. See Appendix Potential antagonism

table continues

----- PAGE 624 -----
Table 1 continued

Drug/therapeutic category affected

Antihypertensive therapy

Lipid-lowering drugs

Nitrates and calcium-channel blockers

Sympathomimetics

Anticoagulants

Respiratory system

Terfenadine

Potential Drug—Herb Interactions os

Herbal ingredients interacting

Herbal ingredients with significant amine
content or sympathomimetic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 15

Herbal ingredients with hypertensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients with mineralocorticoid
activity See Appendix 2, Table 9

Herbal ingredients with hypotensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients with significant amine
content or sympathomimetic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 15

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Herbal ingredients with hypolipidaemic
activity. See Appendix 2, Table 6

Cardioactive ingredients. See Appendix 2,
Table 2

Herbal ingredients with hypertensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients with anticholinergic activity

Herbal ingredients with significant
sympathomimetic amine content.
See Appendix 2, Table 15

Herbal ingredients with hypertensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients with hypotensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients with coagulant/
anticoagulant activity. See Appendix 2, Table 5

Herbal ingredients containing coumarins with
anticoagulant activity. See Appendix 2, Table
16

Herbal ingredients with significant salicylate
concentrations. See Appendix 2, Table 5

Cranberry juice
Garlic

Ginkgo

Horse-chestnut

St John’s wort

St John’s wort

Herbal ingredients that are potentially
allergenic. See Appendix 2, Table 11

Cardioactive herbal ingredients. See Appendix
2, Table 2

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Possible effects

Potential risk of severe hypertension

Antagonism
Antagonism
Potentiation

Antagonism

Risk of potentiation/ interference with
existing therapy

Additive effect
Interference with therapy
Antagonism

Reduced sublingual absorption of glyceryl
trinitrate

Potentiation; increased risk of
hypertension

Increased risk of hypertension
Antagonism
Risk of antagonism or potentiation

Risk of potentiation

Risk of potentiation

Raised INR reported in patients receiving
warfarin

Raised INR reported in patients receiving
warfarin

Antiplatelet activity; increased risk of
bleeding, particularly in patients receiving
warfarin and other anticoagulant or
antiplatelet agents

Plasma protein binding

Risk of reduced therapeutic effect of
warfarin

Risk of reduced therapeutic effect of
theophylline

Risk of allergic reaction

May increase arrhythmogenic potential of
terfenadine

Electrolyte imbalance may increase
arrhythmogenic potential of terfenadine

----- PAGE 625 -----
4 Appendix 1

Table 1 continued
Drug/therapeutic category affected

Allergic disorders

Central nervous system

Hypnotics and anxiolytics

Antipsychotics

Antidepressants

Drugs used in nausea and vertigo

Analgesics

Antiepileptics

Drugs for parkinsonism

Infections

Antifungal drugs

Herbal ingredients interacting

Herbal ingredients claimed to have sedative
activity. See Appendix 2, Table 7

Herbal ingredients claimed to have sedative
activity. See Appendix 2, Table 7

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Herbal ingredients with anticholinergic activity

Evening primrose

Herbal ingredients containing
sympathomimetic amines. See Appendix 2,
Table 15

Ginseng (Panax)

Herbal ingredients containing tryptophan
White horehound
Herbal ingredients with sedative activity.

See Appendix 2, Table 7
St John’s wort

Herbal ingredients with sedative activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 7

Herbal ingredients with anticholinergic activity

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Herbal ingredients with corticosteroid activity.

See Appendix 2, Table 9

Herbal ingredients with sedative activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 7

St John’s wort

Herbal ingredients with sedative activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 7

Borage
Evening primrose oil
Sage

Herbal ingredients with significant salicylate
content. See Appendix 2, Table 5

Herbal ingredients with significant folic acid
content

St John’s wort

Herbal ingredients with anticholinergic activity

Herbal ingredients with cholinergic activity

Herbal ingredients with anticholinergic activity

Possible effects

Potentiation of drowsiness associated with
antihistamines

Potentiation

Potentiation of lithium therapy; increased
risk of toxicity; diuretics reported to
reduce lithium clearance

Risk of interference with therapy;
anticholinergic drug reported to reduce
plasma phenothiazine concentrations

Potential risk of seizures

Risk of hypertensive crisis with
monoamine-oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs)

Suspected phenelzine interaction

Risk of CNS excitation and confusional
states with MAOIs

5-Hydroxytryptamine antagonism, in vitro,
in vivo

May potentiate sedative side-effects

Risk of increased serotonergic effects in
patients taking selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)

May potentiate sedative side-effects

Antagonism

Increased risk of toxicity with anti-
inflammatory analgesics

Possible reduction in plasma-aspirin
concentrations

May potentiate sedative side-effects

Risk of increased serotonergic effects, with
possibility of increased risk of side-effects

May potentiate sedative side-effects

May increase risk of seizure
May increase risk of seizure
May increase risk of seizure

Transient potentiation of phenytoin
therapy may occur

Plasma phenytoin concentration may be
reduced

Risk of reduced therapeutic effect of
anticonvulsants (carbamazepine,
phenobarbitone, phenytoin)

Potentiation; increased risk of side-effects

Antagonism

Risk of reduced absorption of
ketoconazole

----- PAGE 626 -----
Table 1 continued

Drug/therapeutic category affected

HIV protease inhibitorsHIV non-nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors

Endocrine system

Antidiabetics

Drugs for hypo- and hyperthyroidism

Corticosteroids

Sex hormones

Obstetrics and gynaecology

Oral contraceptives

Malignant disease and immunosuppression
Irinotecan

Methotrexate

Drugs affecting immune response

Musculoskeletal and joint diseases
Systemic lupus erythematosus

Probenecid

Eye

Acetazolamide

Skin

Anaesthetics

General anaesthetics
Competitive muscle relaxants

Depolarising muscle relaxants

Potential Drug—Herb Interactions ois.

Herbal ingredients interacting

St John’s wort

Herbal ingredients with hypo- or
hyperglycaemic activity. See Appendix 2,
Table 8

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Herbal ingredients with significant iodine
content.

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Herbal ingredients with corticosteroid activity.

See Appendix 2 Table 9

Herbal ingredients with hormonal activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 9

Herbal ingredients with hormonal activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 9

St John’s wort

St John’s wort

Herbal ingredients with significant salicylate
content. See Appendix 2, Table 5

Herbal ingredients with immunomodulatory
activity. See Appendix 2, Table 10

St John’s wort

Alfalfa

Herbal ingredients with significant salicylate
content. See Appendix 2, Table 5

Herbal ingredients with significant salicylate
content. See Appendix 2, Table 5

Herbal ingredients with potential allergenic
activity. See Appendix 2, Table 11

Herbal ingredients with phototoxic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 11

Herbal ingredients with hypotensive activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 4

Herbal ingredients with diuretic activity.
See Appendix 2, Table 3

Cardioactive herbal ingredients.
See Appendix 2, Table 2

Possible effects

Risk of reduced blood concentrations of
anti-HIV drugs, with possible loss of HIV
suppression

Potentiation/antagonism of activity

Antagonism

Interference with therapy

Risk of increased potassium loss
Increased risk of side-effects, e.g. water

and sodium retention

Possible interaction with existing therapy

Possible interaction with existing therapy;
may reduce effectiveness of oral
contraceptive

Risk of reduced blood concentrations of
oral contraceptives, breakthrough
bleeding and unintended pregnancy

Risk of altered irinotecan pharmacokinetics

Increased risk of toxicity
Potentiation or antagonism

Risk of reduced therapeutic effect of
ciclosporin

Antagonism; contra-indicated

Risk of inhibition of probenecid

Increased risk of toxicity
Allergic reaction; exacerbation of existing
symptoms

Phototoxic reaction; exacerbation of
existing symptoms

Potentiation of hypotensive effect
Risk of potentiation if hypokalaemia occurs

Risk of arrhythmias

----- PAGE 627 -----
Appendix 2
Pharmacological Activities and
Constituents of Herbal Ingredients

Table 1 Laxatives

Drug

Aloes

Cascara

Frangula
Horehound, White
Ispaghula

Plantain

Rhubarb

Senna

Yellow Dock

Comment

Hydroxyanthracene constituents
Hydroxyanthracene constituents
Hydroxyanthracene constituents
Large doses
Bulk laxative
Bulk laxative
Hydroxyanthracene constituents
Hydroxyanthracene constituents

Hydroxyanthracene constituents

Table 2 Cardioactive agents

Drug

Broom
Butterbur

Calamus
Cereus

Cola
Coltsfoot
Devil’s Claw
Fenugreek

Figwort

Fumitory
Ginger
Ginseng, Panax
Golden Seal

Hawthorn

Horehound, White
Lime Flower

Maté

Mistletoe

Motherwort

Comment

Alkaloid constituents: cardiac depressant
activity

S-petasin: negative chronotropic activity
in vivo, negative inotropic activity ex vivo

Anti-arrhythmic activity

Tyramine: cardiotonic amine

Caffeine

Cardiac calcium-channel blocking activity
Activity in vivo

Activity in vitro

Cardioactive glycoside constituents,
activity in vitro

Alkaloid constituent: cardioactive
Activity in vivo

Activity in vivo

Berberine: cardioactive alkaloid

Tyramine: cardiotonic amine; activity in
vivo

Activity in vivo

Activity reputed with excessive ingestion
Caffeine

Viscotoxin, negative inotropic effect in vivo

Cardiac glycoside constituents; activity in
vitro

table continues

Table 2 continued

Drug

Pleurisy Root

Prickly Ash, Northern
Prickly Ash, Southern
Quassia

Rhodiola

Shepherd’s Purse
Squill
Wild Carrot

Table 3 Diuretics
Drug
Agrimony
Artichoke
Boldo
Broom
Buchu
Burdock
Celery
Corn Silk
Couchgrass
Dandelion
Elder
Guaiacum
Java Tea
Juniper
Nettle
Pokeroot
Shepherd’s Purse
Squill
Uva-Ursi

Yarrow

Comment

Cardenolides, active in vitro and in vivo
Interaction with Na*K* ATPase
Interaction with Na*K* ATPase
Activity in vitro

Inotropic, anti-arrhythmic and other
cardiac effects ex vivo, confirmation
required

Activity in vitro
Cardiac glycoside constituents

Depressant activity in vivo

Comment
Activity in vivo
Reputed action
Reputed action, oil
Reputed action
Reputed action
Reputed action
Reputed action
Reputed action
Activity in vivo
Activity in vivo
Activity in vivo
Reputed action

Activity in vivo

Reputed action; terpinen-4-ol
Activity in humans.

Activity in vivo

Activity in vivo

Activity in vivo

Reputed action

Activity in vivo

----- PAGE 628 -----
Pharmacological Activities and Constituents of Herbal Ingredients 7

Table 4 Hypotensives and hypertensives

Drug

Hypotensive
Agrimony
Asafoetida
Avens

Butterbur

Calamus

Cat’s Claw

Corn Silk
Cowslip

Devil’s Claw
Elecampane
Fenugreek

Fucus

Fumitory

Garlic

Ginger

Ginseng, Panax
Golden Seal
Hawthorn
Horehound, White
Horse-chestnut
Horseradish

Java Tea

Juniper

Mistletoe

Nettle

Parsley

Plantain
Pokeroot

Prickly Ash, Northern
Prickly Ash, Southern
Sage

Shepherd's Purse
Squill

St John’s Wort
Thyme

Vervain

Wild Carrot
Yarrow
Hypertensive
Bayberry

Broom

Capsicum

Cohosh, Blue

Comment

Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo

Hypotensive, in vivo; S-petasin, iso-5-
petasin

Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, then hypertensive in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive

Hypotensive

Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, human and in vivo
Hypotensive

Hypotensive, human and in vivo
Hypotensive, alkaloid effect
Hypotensive, in vivo
Vasodilator (volatile oil)
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive

Hypotensive

Vasodilator, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive, in vivo
Hypotensive

Hypotensive, in vivo

Hypotensive, in vivo

Hypertensive, myricitrin mineralocorticoid
side-effect

Hypertensive, alkaloid effect

Hypertensive, increased catecholamine
secretion

Hypertensive, alkaloid effect

table continues

Table 4 continued
Drug
Cola
Coltsfoot
Ephedra
Ginger
Ginseng, Panax

Liquorice

Maté

Vervain

Comment

Hypertensive, caffeine

Hypertensive, pressor activity 2

Hypertensive, human and in vivo
Hypertensive
Hypertensive, human and in vivo

Hypertensive, mineralocorticoid side-
effect

Hypertensive, caffeine

Hypertensive

Table 5 Anticoagulants and coagulants

Drug

Anticoagulants

Bilberry

Cat’s Claw
Clove
Feverfew
Fucus

Garlic

Ginger
Ginkgo
Ginseng, Panax

Horseradish

Liquorice
Meadowsweet
Poplar

Willow
Coagulants
Golden Seal
Mistletoe

Yarrow

Comment

Inhibits platelet aggregation, human, in
vivo, in vitro

Inhibits platelet aggregation, in vitro
Eugenol inhibitor of platelet activity
Inhibits platelet aggregation
Anticoagulant action

Inhibits platelet aggregation, humans in
vivo

Inhibition of platelet activity
Inhibition of platelet activity
Reduction of blood coagulation

Peroxidase stimulates synthesis of
arachidonic acid metabolites

Inhibition of platelet activity
Salicylate constituents
Salicylate constituents

Salicylate constituents

Heparin antagonist
Lectins, agglutinating activity

Coagulant, in vivo

Table 6 Hypolipidaemic and hyperlipidaemic agents

Drug

Comment

Hypocholesterolaemic

Alfalfa
Artichoke
Bilberry
Capsicum
Cohosh, Black
Fenugreek

Garlic

Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, human, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, human, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, human, in vivo
table continues

----- PAGE 629 -----
8 Appendix 2

Table 6 continued
Drug
Ginger
Ispaghula
Milk thistle
Myrrh
Plantain
Scullcap
Senega

Tansy

Hydrocotyle

Table 7 Sedatives
Drug

Calamus

Celery

Centaury
Chamomile, German
Couchgrass
Elecampane

Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus;
Ginseng, Panax

Golden Seal

Hawthorn

Hops
Hydrocotyle
Jamaica Dogwood
Kava

Nettle
Passionflower
Sage

Scullcap

Senega
Shepherd’s Purse
Valerian

Wild Carrot
Wild Lettuce

Comment

Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, human
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypolipidaemic, human, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypolipidaemic, in vivo
Hypocholesterolaemic, in vivo
Hypercholesterolaemic

Hypercholesterolaemic, in vivo

Comment

Potentiates barbiturate sleeping time
In vivo

Reputed action

Human

In vivo

In vivo

CNS depressant and stimulant

In vivo

CNS depressant; potentiates barbiturate
sleeping time

In vivo

In vivo

In vivo

Conflicting results in vivo
CNS depression, in vivo
In vivo

In vivo

Reputed action

CNS depressant, in vivo
Potentiates barbiturate sleeping time
Human, in vivo

In vivo

In vivo, related species

Table 8 Hypoglycaemics and hyperglycaemics

Drug
Hypoglycaemic
Agrimony
Alfalfa

Aloes/Aloe vera

Comment

Hypoglycaemic, in vivo
Manganese, human
In vivo

table continues

Table 8 continued
Drug

Burdock
Celery

Corn Silk
Damiana
Dandelion
Devil’s Claw
Elecampane
Eucalyptus
Fenugreek
Garlic
Ginger

Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus

Ginseng, Panax
Ispaghula

Java Tea
Juniper
Marshmallow
Myrrh

Nettle

Sage

Senega

Tansy
Hyperglycaemic
Elecampane
Ginseng, Panax
Hydrocotyl

Rosemary

Comment

In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
Human
Human, in vivo,
In vivo

In vivo

Human
Human
In vivo
In vivo
Human, in vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo
In vivo

In vivo

In vivo
Human, in vivo
Human

In vivo

Table 9 Hormonally active agents

Drug

Agnus Castus
Alfalfa
Aniseed
Bayberry
Butterbur

Cohosh, Black

Fucus
Ginkgo

Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus;
Ginseng, Panax

Horseradish

Comment

Oestrogenic, in vitro; conflicting results
Oestrogenic, in vivo

Oestrogenic, in vivo

Mineralocorticoid, in vivo

S-petasin, inhibition of testosterone
release, in vivo, in vitro

Oestrogenic, in vivo, in vitro; conflicting
results

Hyper-/hypothyroidism reported
Oestrogenic, in vitro

Oestrogenic, in vivo, in vitro

May depress thyroid activity; conflicting
results

table continues

----- PAGE 630 -----
Table 9 continued
Drug

Liquorice

Motherwort
Pleurisy Root
Red Clover

Saw Palmetto
Vervain

Wild Carrot

Table 10
Drug
Alfalfa

Boneset

Calendula

Cat’s Claw
Celandine, Greater
Chamomile, German
Drosera

Echinacea

Ephedra

Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus

Mistletoe

Saw Palmetto

Pharmacological Activities and Constituents of Herbal Ingredients 619

Comment

Mineralocorticoid activity, human;
oestrogenic in vivo, in vitro

Oxytocic, in vitro; conflicting results
Oestrogenic, in vivo; conflicting results
Oestrogenic in vivo; conflicting results

Oestrogenic and anti-androgenic in vivo;
human use in prostate cancer

Inhibition of gonadotrophic activity;
conflicting results

Oestrogenic, in vivo

Immunomodulating agents

Comments

In vitro
In vitro
In vitro
In vitro
In vitro
In vitro
In vitro

In vitro, in vivo, conflicting results in
humans

Inhibits complement pathway, in vitro

Human in vivo, in vitro

Human, in vivo, in vitro

In vivo

Table 11 Allergenic and photosensitising agents

Drug

Agnus Castus

Angelica
Aniseed

Apricot
Arnica
Artichoke
Asafoetida
Boneset

Calendula
Cassia

Celery
Chamomile, German

Chamomile, Roman

Comment

Allergic effects reported

Furanocoumarins, photosensitivity,
contact allergy

Furanocoumarins, photosensitivity,
contact allergy

Contact allergy, kernels

Contact allergy

Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
Irritant gum, contact allergy
Sesquiterpene lactone constituents

Individuals sensitive to plants from the
Compositae/Asteraceae families

Allergic reactions, mainly contact
dermatitis

Furanocoumarins, photosensitivity
Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
Sesquiterpene lactone constituents

table continues

Table 11 continued
Drug
Cinnamon
Corn Silk
Cowslip
Dandelion

Echinacea

Elecampane
Feverfew
Fucus

Garlic

Ginger
Ginkgo

Gravel Root
Guaiacum
Holy Thistle
Hops
Hydrangea
Hydrocotyle
Ispaghula
Juniper
Kava

Lady’s Slipper
Mistletoe

Motherwort
Parsley
Pilewort
Plantain
Pleurisy Root
Pulsatilla
Rosemary

St John’s Wort
Tansy

Wild Carrot

Yarrow

Table 12 Irritants

Drug
Alfalfa
Arnica
Asafoetida
Blue Flag
Bogbean
Boldo

Comment

Contact allergy

Allergic reactions 2
Allergic reactions

Sesquiterpene lactone constituents

Individuals sensitive to plants from the
Compositae/Asteraceae families

Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
lodine may aggravate/trigger acne

Sulfur-containing compounds, allergic
reaction

Dermatitis in sensitive individuals

Fruit pulp and seeds: severe allergic
reactions

Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
Irritant resin

Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
Contact allergy

Contact allergy

Photosensitivity

Rare cases of allergy

Contact allergy

Cases of allergic skin reactions
Contact allergy

Injection site reactions, rare cases of
anaphylactic reactions

Dermatitis, photosensitisation
Furanocoumarins, photosensitivity
Contact allergy, protanemonin
Contact allergy

Contact allergy

Contact allergy, protoanemonin
Dermatitis, photosensitisation
Photodermatitis, hypericin
Sesquiterpene lactone constituents
Furanocoumarins, photosensitivity

Sesquiterpene lactone constituents

Comment

Canavanine in seeds

Irritant to mucous membranes
Irritant gum

Irritant gum and oil

Irritant to Gl tract

Irritant oil

table continues

----- PAGE 631 -----
620 Appendix 2

Table 12 continued
Drug
Buchu

Capsicum

Cassia

Celandine, Greater
Cinnamon
Cohosh, Blue

Cowslip
Drosera
Eucalyptus
False Unicorn
Figwort
Garlic
Ground Ivy
Guaiacum

Horse-chestnut

Horseradish
Hydrangea
Jamaica Dogwood
Juniper

Lemon Verbena
Lime Flower
Mistletoe
Nettle

Parsley
Pennyroyal
Pilewort
Pleurisy Root
Pokeroot
Pulsatilla
Queen’s Delight
Sage
Sarsaparilla
Senega

Skunk Cabbage
Squill

Thyme

Willow

Witch Hazel

Comment

Irritant oil

Capsaicinoids, mucosal irritants
Irritant to mucous membranes; oil
Irritant juice

Irritant to mucous membranes; oil

Irritant to mucous membranes;
spasmogenic in vitro

Irritant saponins

Plumbagin

Irritant oil

Large doses may cause vomiting
Purgative effect

Raw clove

Irritant oil

Avoid if inflammatory condition

Saponin constituents, contra-indicated in
existing renal disease

Irritant oil

May cause gastro-enteritis, hydrangin
Irritant to humans

Irritant oil

Irritant oil

Irritant to kidney, oil

Injection site reactions

Tea irritant to stomach

Irritant oil

Toxic and irritant oil

Irritant sap

Gastrointestinal irritant

Irritant saponins

Irritant to mucous membranes
Diterpene constituents

Irritant oil

Saponins

Saponins

Inflammatory and blistering to skin
Saponins

Irritant oil

Salicylates

Irritant to stomach

Table 13 Anti-inflammatory agents

Aloe Vera, Angelica, Arnica, Bilberry, Bloodroot, Blue Flag, Boldo,
Boneset, Borage, Buchu, Butterbur, Calendula, Cassia, Cat’s Claw,
Celandine (Greater), Centaury, Chamomile (German),
Chamomile (Roman), Cohosh (Black), Coltsfoot, Comfrey,
Cowslip, Dandelion, Devil’s Claw, Echinacea, Elder, Ephedra,
Evening Primrose, Feverfew, Figwort, Gentian, Ginger, Ground
Ivy, Horse-chestnut, Hydrocotyle, Java tea, Juniper, Liquorice, Milk
Thistle, Myrrh, Nettle, Passionflower, Plantain, Pokeroot, Prickly
Ash (Southern), Rosemary, Sarsaparilla, Shepherd's Purse, St
John’s wort, Uva-Ursi, Willow, Yarrow, Yucca

Table 14 Antispasmodics

Angelica, Aniseed, Asafoetida, Butterbur, Calendula, Capsicum,
Cassia, Celandine (Greater), Celery, Chamomile (German),
Cinnamon, Clove, Cohosh (Blue), Cowslip, Devil’s claw,
Elecampane, Euphorbia, Hops, Jamaica Dogwood, Lime Flower,
Raspberry, Chamomile (Roman), Rosemary, Sage, Scullcap,
Tansy, Thyme, Valerian

Table 15 Herbal ingredients containing amines or alkaloids, or with
sympathomimetic action

Drug Comment

Agnus Castus Dopamine agonist (labdane diterpenes),

in vitro
Alfalfa Alkaloids
Aniseed Anethole, sympathomimetic
Arnica Betaines, choline
Bloodroot Alkaloids
Bogbean Alkaloids
Boldo Alkaloids
Borage Alkaloids
Broom Alkaloids, amines
Butterbur Alkaloids
Calamus Amines
Capsicum Sympathomimetic
Cat’s Claw Alkaloids
Celandine, Greater Alkaloids
Centaury Alkaloids
Cereus Tyramine
Cohosh, Black Alkaloids
Cohosh, Blue Alkaloids
Cola Alkaloids
Coltsfoot Alkaloids
Comfrey Alkaloids
Corn Silk Amines
Ephedra Alkaloids
Eyebright Alkaloids
Fenugreek Choline, trigonelline
Fumitory Alkaloids
Gentian Alkaloids
Ginkgo Seed: alkaloids; leaf: MAOI activity

table continues

----- PAGE 632 -----
Pharmacological Activities and Constituents of Herbal Ingredients 621

Table 15 continued

Drug Comment

Ginseng, Panax MAOI potentiation, suspected phenelzine
interaction

Golden Seal Alkaloids

Gravel Root Alkaloids

Hawthorn Tyramine

Horehound, White Alkaloids

Hydrocotyle Alkaloids

Ispaghula Alkaloids

Jamaica Dogwood Alkaloids

Kava Alkaloids; possible dopamine antagonist
effects

Liferoot Alkaloids

Lobelia Alkaloids

Maté Alkaloids, amines

Mistletoe Amines, alkaloids (possible)

Motherwort Alkaloids

Nettle Choline

Parsley Myristicin, sympathomimetic

Passionflower Alkaloids (traces or absent)

Plantain Alkaloids

Pleurisy Root Sympathomimetic

Pokeroot Betalains

Prickly Ash, Northern Alkaloids
Prickly Ash, Southern Alkaloids

Quassia Alkaloids

Sassafras Alkaloids

Shepherd's Purse Choline, tyramine

Skunk Cabbage Alkaloids

Stone Root Alkaloids

Valerian Alkaloids

Vervain Sympathomimetic

Yarrow Betonicine, stachydrine, betaine

Table 16 Herbal ingredients containing coumarins

Alfalfa, Angelica, Aniseed, Arnica, Asafoetida, Bogbean, Boldo,
Buchu, Capsicum, Cassia, Celery, Chamomile (German),
Chamomile (Roman), Dandelion, Fenugreek, Ginseng
(Eleutherococcus), Horse-chestnut, Horseradish, Java tea,
Liquorice, Meadowsweet, Nettle, Parsley, Prickly Ash (Northern),
Quassia, Wild Carrot, Wild Lettuce

Coumarin constituents detected so far in these herbal ingredients do not
possess the minimum structural requirements (a C-4 hydroxyl substituent and
a C-3 non-polar carbon substituent)‘©®” for anticoagulant activity.

Table 17 Herbal ingredients containing flavonoids

Agnus Castus, Agrimony, Angelica, Aniseed, Apricot, Arnica,
Artichoke, Bayberry, Bilberry, Bogbean, Boldo, Boneset, Broom,
Buchu, Burdock, Burnet, Butterbur, Calendula, Celandine
(Greater), Celery, Cereus, Chamomile (German), Chamomile
(Roman), Chaparral, Clivers, Cohosh (Black), Coltsfoot, Corn Silk,
Couchgrass, Cowslip, Damiana, Dandelion, Devil’s Claw, Drosera,
Elder, Ephedra, Eucalyptus, Euphorbia, Eyebright, Fenugreek,
Feverfew, Figwort, Frangula, Fumitory, Ginkgo, Gravel Root,
Ground Ivy, Hawthorn, Hops, Horehound (Black), Horehound
(White), Horse-chestnut, Hydrangea, Hydrocotyle, Java Tea,
Juniper, Kava, Lemon Verbena, Lime Flower, Liquorice,
Marshmallow, Maté, Meadowsweet, Melissa, Milk thistle,
Mistletoe, Motherwort, Nettle, Parsley, Passionflower, Plantain,
Pulsatilla, Raspberry, Red Clover, Rhodiola, Rhubarb, Rosemary,
Sage, Sarsaparilla, Saw Palmetto, Scullcap, Senna, Shepherd’s
Purse, Squill, St John’s Wort, Stone Root, Thyme, Uva-Ursi, Wild
Carrot, Wild Lettuce, Willow, Witch Hazel, Yarrow

Table 18 Herbal ingredients containing iridoids

Agnus Castus, Bilberry, Bogbean, Centaury, Clivers, Devil’s Claw,
Eyebright, Figwort, Gentian, Ispaghula, Motherwort, Plantain,
Scullcap, Uva-Ursi, Valerian, Vervain

Table 19 Herbal ingredients containing saponins

Alfalfa, Aloe Vera, Bogbean, Burnet, Calendula, Chaparral,
Cohosh (Blue), Corn Silk, Cowslip, False Unicorn, Fenugreek,
Ginseng (Eleutherococcus), Ginseng (Panax), Hawthorn,
Horehound (White), Horse-chestnut, Hydrangea, Hydrocotyle,
Jamaica Dogwood, Lime Flower, Milk Thistle, Mistletoe, Pokeroot,
Pulsatilla, Red Clover, Sarsaparilla, Senega, Senna, Stone Root,
Thyme, Vervain, Witch Hazel, Yucca

Table 20 Herbal ingredients containing tannins

Agrimony, Apricot, Arnica, Artichoke, Avens, Bayberry, Bilberry,
Blue Flag, Boldo, Borage, Burnet, Butterbur, Calamus, Cascara,
Cassia, Chamomile (German), Cinnamon, Clivers, Cola, Coltsfoot,
Comfrey, Corn Silk, Cowslip, Damiana, Drosera, Elder, Ephedra,
Eucalyptus, Eyebright, Feverfew, Frangula, Gentian, Ground lvy,
Hawthorn, Holy Thistle, Hops, Horse-chestnut, Ispaghula, Juniper,
Lady’s Slipper, Lime Flower, Marshmallow, Meadowsweet,
Motherwort, Nettle, Pilewort, Plantain, Poplar, Prickly Ash
(Northern), Prickly Ash (Southern), Queen’s Delight, Raspberry,
Rhubarb, Sage, Sassafras, Saw Palmetto, Scullcap, Slippery Elm,
Squill, St. John’s Wort, Stone Root, Tansy, Thyme, Uva-Ursi,
Valerian, Vervain, Willow, Witch Hazel, Yarrow, Yellow Dock

Table 21 Herbal ingredients containing essential oils

Agnus Castus, Agrimony, Angelica, Aniseed, Arnica, Artichoke,
Asafoetida, Avens, Blue Flag, Boldo, Boneset, Buchu, Burdock,
Burnet, Butterbur, Calamus, Calendula, Capsicum, Cassia, Celery,
Chamomile (German), Chamomile (Roman), Chaparral,
Cinnamon, Clove, Coltsfoot, Couchgrass, Damiana, Elder,
Elecampane, Ephedra, Eucalyptus, Eyebright, Feverfew, Garlic,
Gentian, Ginger, Ginseng (Eleutherococcus), Ginseng (Panax),
Golden Seal, Ground Ivy, Holy Thistle, Hops, Horehound (Black),
Horseradish, Hydrocotyle, Java Tea, Juniper, Lemon Verbena,
Lime Flower, Liquorice, Lobelia, Meadowsweet, Melissa,
Motherwort, Myrrh, Parsley, Pennyroyal, Prickly Ash (Northern),
Queen’s Delight, Red Clover, Rhodiola, Rosemary, Sage, Sassafras,
Saw Palmetto, Senna (trace), Skunk Cabbage, Squill, St John’s
Wort, Stone Root, Tansy, Thyme, Uva-Ursi, Valerian, Vervain, Wild
Carrot, Witch Hazel, Yarrow

----- PAGE 633 -----
Table 1

Appendix 3
Council of Europe — Categories for
Natural Sources of Flavourings

Council of Europe. categories for natural sources of flavourings (Report No. 1. Strasbourg: Council of Europe, 2000)

Category Natural source of flavouring

1

Plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof, normally consumed as food items, herbs or spices in
Europe for which it is considered that there should be no restrictions on use.Flavouring preparations, which are not themselves
consumed as food but which are derived from plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof,
normally consumed as food items, herbs or spices in Europe. These preparations, on the basis of the information available, are not
considered a risk to health in the quantities used.

Plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof, and preparations derived therefrom, not normally
consumed as food items, herbs or spices in Europe.These source materials and preparations, on the basis of the information
available, are not considered to constitute a risk to health in the quantities used.

Plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof, normally consumed as food items, herbs or spices in
Europe which contain defined ‘active principles’ or ‘other chemical components’ requiring limits on use levels.Flavouring
preparations, which are not themselves consumed as food but which are derived from plants, animals and other organisms, and
parts of these or products thereof, normally consumed as food items, herbs or spices in Europe which contain defined ‘active
principles’ or ‘other chemical components’ requiring limits on use levels.

These source materials and preparations are not considered to constitute a risk to health in the quantities used provided that the
limits set for the ‘active principles’ or ‘other chemical components’ are not exceeded.

Plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof, and preparations derived therefrom, not normally
consumed as food items, herbs or spices in Europe which contain defined ‘active principles’ or ‘other chemical components’
requiring limits on use levels. These source materials and preparations are not considered to constitute a risk to health in the
quantities used provided that the limits set for the ‘active principles’ or ‘other chemical components’ are not exceeded.

Plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof, and preparations derived therefrom, for which
additional toxicological and/or chemical information is required.These could temporarily be acceptable provided that any limits
set for the ‘active principles’ or the ‘other chemical components’ are not exceeded.

Plants, animals and other organisms, and parts of these or products thereof, and preparations derived therefrom, which are
considered to be unfit for human consumption in any amount.

Reproduced with permission of Council of Europe.

----- PAGE 634 -----
Appendix 4

Preparations Directory

Introduction

Appendix 4 contains an alphabetical listing of selected
preparations from over 35 countries. Information on products
believed to be currently available was gathered from standard
compendia and specific supplier literature and websites. The
inclusion of a supplier or product is not intended as an
endorsement of that supplier or its products; similarly, the
omission of a supplier or product is not intended to reflect
adversely on that supplier or product. Preparations are
arranged in two sections. The first section lists preparations
that have a single herbal ingredient which is included in
Herbal Medicines. The second section lists preparations that
contain multiple ingredients. Only those herbal ingredients
included as monographs in Herbal Medicines are shown. It
should be noted that these preparations may contain other
ingredients, possibly not just herbal ingredients, that are not
shown in this listing. Preparations are listed by proprietary
name (product name), supplier, country, herbal ingredient(s).
Preparations without a proprietary name that are identified by
a supplier by the herbal ingredient name (e.g. angelica) are
indicated with a e symbol. Contact details for the supplier are
shown in Appendix 5.

Single-ingredient preparations

TA)

aar gamma N aar pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)
aar vir aar pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)

ABC Beiersdorf GmbH, Austria, Capsicum (p. 125)

Abfuhrtee N Bad Heilbrunner Naturheilmittel GmbH & Co., Germany, Senna
(p. 537)

Abnobaviscum Abnoba Heilmittel GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Abolibe Sidefarma SA, Portugal, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Acorus Zeppenfeldt Pharma GmbH, Germany, Couchgrass (p. 193)

Acqua Virginiana Kelemata S.p.A., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Adprex Hebron S.A. Industria Quimica e Farmacéutica, Brazil, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

A-E-R Birchwood Laboratories Inc., USA, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Aescorin Forte Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut
(p. 363)

Aesculaforce Aponova Pharma Handels GmbH, Austria, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

AesculaMed Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Aescusan Jenapharm GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Aescuven Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Agarol Extra Numark Laboratories Inc., USA, Senna (p. 537)

Agarol with Sennosides Numark Laboratories Inc., USA, Senna (p. 537)
Agiobulk Altana Madaus Pty Ltd, South Africa, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Agiocur Madaus GmbH, Austria, Ispaghula (p. 374) Meda Oy, Finland, Ispaghula
(p. 374) Madaus AG, Germany, Ispaghula (p. 374) Trinity Trading Co. Ltd, Hong

and Salomon, Levin, & Elstein Ltd, Israel, Ispaghula (p. 374) Neo-Farmacéutica,
Lda, Portugal, Ispaghula (p. 374) Oui Heng Import Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Agiofibe Knoll Australia, Australia, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Agiofibra Altana Pharma Ltda, Brazil, Ispaghula (p. 374) Altana Pharma S.A. de C.
V., Mexico, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Agiofibras Laboratorios Phoenix S.A.1.C.F., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Agiofibre Madaus S.r.1., Italy, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Agiogel Altana Madaus Pty Ltd, South Africa, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Agiolax mite Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Agnofem Madaus GmbH, Austria, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Agnolyt Madaus AG, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36) Max Zeller Sohne AG,
Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Agno-Sabona Sabona GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Agnucaston Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Bionorica AG, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36) AS! Budapest Kft, Hungary, Agnus
Castus (p. 36) Zuellig Pharma Ltd, Thailand, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Agnucaston (Arnyxacron) Bionorica AG, Russia, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Agnufemil Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Agnukliman Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Agnumens Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

e Agnus Castus (p. 36)
UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd

 Agrimony (p. 42)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Ajomast Monserrat y Eclair S.A., Argentina, Garlic (p. 279)

Ajuta Hermes Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Akipic Laboratoires Asepta, Monaco, Aloes (p. 50), Calendula (p. 121)
Alcachofa Plus Tecnonat S.A., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67)

Alcodin Alcon Italia S.p.A., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Alepa Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

© Alfalfa (p. 45)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Alho Rogoff Crefar, Lda, Portugal, Garlic (p. 279)
Alliocaps Lab. Dr. Madaus & Co. SA, Argentina, Garlic (p. 279)
Allya Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

© Aloe Vera (p. 48)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Nature’s Bounty

Alrinte Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Rosemary (p. 508)

Alz CuraMED Pharma GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Amenicil Laboratorios Phoenix S.A.I.C.F., Argentina, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Anastil Dr. Friedrich Eberth Arzneimittel, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

© Angelica (p. 53)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Animic Vinas, Spain, St John's Wort (p. 549)
© Aniseed (p. 57)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Ansiokey Inkeysa, Spain, Valerian (p. 580)
Ansiopax Hebron S.A. Industria Quimica e Farmacéutica, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)
Antares Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Czech Republic, Kava (p. 389)

----- PAGE 635 -----
Appendix 4

Anxium Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Aperisan Dentinox Gesellschaft fur Pharmazeutische Praparate Lenk & Schuppan,
Germany, Sage (p. 512)

Apihepar Madaus GmbH, Viatris Pharma GmbH, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Aplause Marjan Industria e Comércio Ltda, Brazil, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Ardey-aktiv Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Ardeycholan Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Ardeycordal mono Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Ardeyhepan Emonta Pharma GmbH, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Ardeypharm
GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Aristo Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Aristoforat Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Arkocapsulas Hiperico Arkochim Esparia, Spain, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Arnican Coopération Pharmaceutique Francaise, France, Arnica (p. 64)
Arnigel Prisfar, SA, Portugal, Arnica (p. 64)

Arnikaderm Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Arnica (p. 64)

Arnikatinktur Chemische Fabrik Dr. Hetterich GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Arnica
(p. 64)

Arsen Arlex de México, S.A.deC.V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537)

Arthrodynat N Ziethen, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Arthrosenex AR Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)
Arthrosetten H Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Arthrotabs Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

© Artichoke (p. 67)
UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Asendra Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Aspecton Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Assalix Bionorica AG, Germany, Willow (p. 598) Biomed AG, Switzerland, Willow
(p. 598)

Assplant Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Willow (p. 598)
Aubeline Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Avala Laboratorios DHU Ibérica, S.A., Spain, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Azuprostat Sabal Sandoz Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Azuprostat Urtica Sandoz Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

CB)

Baldorm Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

Baldrian-Dispert Solvay Pharma AB, Sweden, Valerian (p. 580)

Baldriparan pour la nuit Whitehall-Robins AG, Switzerland, Valerian (p. 580)
Baldriparan Stark Whitehall-Much GmbH, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)
Baldrivit Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

Baldurat G. Pohl-Boskamp GmbH & Co., Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

Balsamo Nordin Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Arnica
(p. 64)

Basticrat Bastian-Werk GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Bazoton Abbott GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Bekunis Schuilke & Mayr GmbH, Austria, Senna (p. 537) Dexxon, Israel, Senna
(p. 537) Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537) Merz Pharma
(Schweiz) AG, Switzerland, Senna (p. 537)

Bekunis Herbal Tea Thursday Plantation laboratories Ltd, Australia, Senna
(p. 537)

Bekunis Instant Thursday Plantation laboratories Ltd, Australia, Senna (p. 537)
roha Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)

Bekunis Plantaardig roha Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Bekunis Senna roha Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Bekunis-Krautertee N roha Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Beltrax Uno Lab. Baliarda S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
beni-cur Sabona GmbH, Germany, Garlic (p. 279)

Benylin Energy Boosting Pfizer Consumer Healthcare, Division of Pfizer Canada
Inc., Canada, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Bericard Provita Pharma GmbH, Austria, Hawthorn (p. 346)

© Bilberry (p. 79)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Quest Vitamins
Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Biloban Cipan, Companhia Industrial Produtora de Antibioticos SA, Portugal,
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Bilobene Ratiopharm Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH, Austria, Fumitory (p. 276)
Merckle GmbH, Germany, Fumitory (p. 276) ratiopharm Hungaria Kft, Hungary,
Fumitory (p. 276)

Bilobil (Buvodua) KRKA d.d., Russia, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Bilogink Productos Maver S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Binko Hexal do Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Bio Star Ferrer Farma, Spain, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Bio-Dermis Laboratorios Sidus S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Biofem Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
BioGinkgo Pharmanex Inc., USA, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Bioglan Liver-Vite Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Bioglan Pro-Guard Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Bioglan Stress-Relax Bioglan Ltd, Australia, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Biolid Rovi, Spain, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Biorevit Gel Laboratorio DNR Farma SRL, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Biotuss W. Spitzner, Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Black-Draught Chattem Consumer Products, USA, Senna (p. 537)
Blancaler Galderma Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Yarrow (p. 604)
Blastoestimulina Almirall Prodesfarma S.A., Spain, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

© Blue Flag (p. 87)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

e Boldo (p. 91)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett

Bomarthros Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

e Boneset (p. 94)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Borage (p. 96)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers
USA: Sundown

Born Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Brefus Hebron S.A. Industria Quimica e Farmacéutica, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411)

Bronchicum Husten (Bponxuxym Macruaxn or Kamas) Sanofi-Aventis, Russia,
Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchicum Husten-Pastillen Aventis Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Thyme
(p. 574)

Bronchicum Pastillen Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Bronchipret Bionorica AG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Bukosan Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Rhubarb (p. 506)

e Burdock (p. 102)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett

Butt-Out Paradise Promotions Ltd, Canada, Marshmallow (p. 418)

@

Caj z Hlohu Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Caj z Kvetu Bezu Cerneho Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237)
Caj z Listu Senny Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537)

Caj ze Salveje Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Sage (p. 512)

Calendolon Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Calendula (p. 121)

Calendula (p. 121)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Calendulene Laboratoires Théa, France, Calendula (p. 121)

Calendumed Dr Peithner KG nunmehr GmbH & Co., Austria, Calendula (p. 121)
Calmettes Solvay Pharma (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Valerian (p. 580)

Calmonex Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)

Capistan Pierre Fabre Medicament sro, Czech Republic, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Capsamol Worwag Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Capsicum (p. 125)
Capson Pharmatrix, Div. de Therabel Pharma S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Cardiocalm Pharmastra, Usines Chimiques et Pharmaceutiques de Strasbourg,
France, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Cardiplant Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Hawthorn
(p. 346) Schwabe Pharma AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346)

----- PAGE 636 -----
Carito mono MaxMedic Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)
Carvicum Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Dandelion (p. 204)

e Cascara (p. 128)
USA: Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Castufemin Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

© Cat’s Claw (p. 132)
UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Holland and Barrett; Worldwide
Health Corp. Ltd

Cefacynar Cefak KG, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cefakliman mono Cefak KG, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168) Vicis Pharma Kft,
Hungary, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Cefalektin Cefak KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Cefaluna Cefak KG, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

Cefanorm Cefak KG, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36) Vicis Pharma Kft, Hungary,
Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Cefasept Cefak KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Cefasliymarin Cefak KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Cefatec Cefak KG, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

e Celery (p. 146)
UK: Biocare Ltd

Celulase Laboratorios Rider SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Celulase Plus Laboratorios Rider SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Cenat Madaus, Spain, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Centabel Laboratorios Silesia SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

 Centaury (p. 149)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Centellase Aventis Pharma S.p.A., Italy, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) Polymedic Trading
Enterprise Pte Ltd, Singapore, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Centella-Vit Fontovit Laboratérios Ltda, Brazil, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Centica Zyfas Medical Co, Singapore, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Cerebokan Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ceremin Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Cesradyston Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Chofitol Laboratorios Millet-Franklin S.A., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67)
Cholagogum Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)
Cholax Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Senna (p. 537)

Chophytol Produtos Farmacéuticos Millet Roux Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67)
Laboratoires Rosa-Phytopharma, France, Artichoke (p. 67) Laboratoire Golaz SA,
Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67)

Chophytol (Xocurox) FIC Medical, Russia, Artichoke (p. 67)
Chronocard N Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Cicloplant Abbott Laboratories de Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Agnus Castus
(p. 36)

Cimifemine Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Cohosh,
Black (p. 168)

Cimipax Laboratoires IPRAD, France, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Cimisan APS Pharma GmbH, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

e Cinnamon (p. 162)
UK: Healthy Direct

Cinnamon Extract Natrol, USA, Cinnamon (p. 162)

Ciruela Fibra Lab. Garden House S.A., Argentina, Senna (p. 537)

Ciruelax Comp /vax Pharmaceuticals Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537)
Ciruelax TE Ivax Pharmaceuticals Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537)
Citranacea Nutravite, Canada, Echinacea (p. 217)

Citromel Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Melissa (p. 425)

Clarvix Laboratorios Beta S.A., Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Clibium Laboratorios Klinger do Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Clifemin Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Climadil Marjan Industria e Comercio Ltda, Brazil, Red Clover (p. 498)
Climavita Permamed AG, Switzerland, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Coenrelax A.S.A.C. Pharma, Spain, Valerian (p. 580)

Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct;

Holland and Barrett; Medic Herb UK Ltd; Quest Vitamins Ltd
USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Colofiber Madaus Pharma SA, Belgium, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Preparations Directory

Colonorm Mundipharma GmbH, Austria, Senna (p. 537)

Concentrin ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Contre-Coups de I’Abbe Perdrigeon Laboratoires Pionneau, France, Aloes
(p. 50)

Cordapur Novo APS Pharma GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Coriosta Vitaltonikum N Dr Niedermaier GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Corocrat biomo Pharma GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

 Couchgrass (p. 193)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Craegium Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Cran Max Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Cranberry (p. 197)

Cranberry (p. 197)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct; Holland
and Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Sundown; Walgreens Finest Natural

Crataegan Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Crataegisan Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Crataegitan Amino AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Crataegutt Dr Peithner KG nunmehr GmbH & Co., Austria, Hawthorn (p. 346) Dr
Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346) AS! Budapest Kft,
Hungary, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Crataegysat F Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Cratae-Loges Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Crataepas Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Cratenox Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Cuassicum Prevent 2 en 1 Nucleopharm SRL, Argentina, Quassia (p. 491)
Cynacur Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cynalip duo Sabona GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cynarex Lab. Roux-Ocefa S.A., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cynarix Montavit GmbH, Austria, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cynarix N Sabona GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cystinol Akut Hoyer-Madaus GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

[D)

e Damiana (p. 201)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Dandelion (p. 204)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett

Darlin Nycomed Christiaens, Belgium, Senna (p. 537)

Darmol Dr A & L Schmidgall, Austria, Senna (p. 537) Iromedica AG, Switzerland,
Senna (p. 537)

Dekatin Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Demodon Neo Vifor SA, Switzerland, Senna (p. 537)

Demonatur Ginkgo Vifor SA, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Depiderm Laboratoires Dermatologiques Uriage, France, Liquorice (p. 411)
Deprim Lek Pharma sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Deprim (Acnpum) Lek, Russia, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Depuran Woelm Pharma GmbH & Co., Germany, Senna (p. 537) Aspen
Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Senna (p. 537)

Depuratif des Alpes Laboratoires Sodia, France, Frangula (p. 270)

Derminiol Marvecs Services Srl, Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Laboratorios DHU
Ibérica, S.A., Spain, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Dermum Laboratoires du Dermophil Indien, France, St John's Wort (p. 549)

e Devil’s Claw (p. 207)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct;
Holland and Barrett; Medic Herb UK Ltd; Quest Vitamins Ltd

Dexol Laboratorios SMB Farma SA, Chile, Borage (p. 96)

Difrarel Sigma-Tau Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Bilberry (p. 79) Tecnifar, SA,
Portugal, Bilberry (p. 79)

Digitalysat Scilla-Digitaloid Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Dinaton Asta Medica Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Dismegyn Gynea Laboratorios, Spain, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Diurevit Mono Bional Pharma Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Java Tea
(p. 381)

----- PAGE 637 -----
Appendix 4

Doc FIT Pharma GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)

Dolestan Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)
Dolo-Arthrodynat Ziethen, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Dolo-Arthrosetten H Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Dolorub Capsico Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Capsicum (p. 125)

Doloteffin Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

Dormiplant VSM Belgium, Belgium, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580) VSM
Geneesmiddelen BV, Netherlands, Valerian (p. 580)

Dosaflex Shire Pharmaceuticals, USA, Senna (p. 537)

Dr Theiss Ringelblumen Salbe Naturwaren OHG, Czech Republic, Calendula
(p. 121)

Duiwelsdrekdruppels Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Asafoetida
(p. 72)

Duogink Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)
durasilymarin Merck dura GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
dysto-lux Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

CE)

Ebamin Ebewe Pharma (ASIA) Ltd, Hong Kong, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Echan Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echifit Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Echiherb Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinacea Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217) Natrol, USA,
Echinacea (p. 217)

© Echinacea (p. 217)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown; Walgreens Finest Natural

Echinacin Thursday Plantation laboratories Ltd, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)
Madaus GmbH, Austria, Echinacea (p. 217) Madaus Pharma SA, Belgium,
Echinacea (p. 217) Madaus AG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217) Apivita SA, Greece,
Echinacea (p. 217) Naturprodukt Kft, Hungary, Echinacea (p. 217) Madaus, Spain,
Echinacea (p. 217) Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland,
Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinaforce Aponova Pharma Handels GmbH, Austria, Echinacea (p. 217) Bioforce
GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217) Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Echinacea (p. 217)
Bioforce UK Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)

EchinaMed Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinapur Dr Scheffler Nachf. GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Echinatur Dr. E. Ritsert GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Edual Laboratorios Recalcine SA, Chile, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Ekian Laboratorios Diviser-Aquilea S.L., Spain, Echinacea (p. 217)

Elagen Eladon Ltd, UK, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Eleu Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Eleu-Kokk Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Ginseng,

Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Eleutheroforce Bioforce GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)
Eleutherokokk Arko Pharma GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)
Eleutherosan Alpa sro, Czech Republic, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Elixir frangulae compositum G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Frangula (p. 270)
Emotival Laboratorios Klinger do Brasil Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Emoton Tentan AG, Switzerland, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Enax Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea (p. 217)

Enelbin-Salbe Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)
Enziagil Magenplus Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Gentian (p. 290)
Episcorit Sanum-Kehlbeck GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Epitaloe Mediwhite Srl, Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Equilibra Darrow Laboratorios $.A., Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Equinacea Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea (p. 217)
Equitam Eurofarma Laboratdrios Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Esbericard novo Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Esbericum Europharm, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549) Schaper & Bruimmer GmbH
& Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Esberitox mono Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea
(p. 217)

Escar T Laboratorio Prater SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Essaven Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Estimul Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Arnica (p. 64)
EuMunil Madaus S.r./., Italy, Echinacea (p. 217)

Eurixor Richter Pharma, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429) biosyn Arzneimittel GmbH,
Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Euromucil Laboratorios Saval SA, Chile, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Euvegal Balance Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

Evana Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Agnus Castus
(p. 36)

e Evening Primrose (p. 251)

UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct; Worldwide Health
Corp. Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Eviprostat-S Pharmazeutische Fabrik Evers & Co. GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Ex-Lax Novartis Consumer Health, UK, Senna (p. 537) Novartis Consumer Health
Inc., USA, Senna (p. 537)

Experience Awareness Corp., Canada, Senna (p. 537)
Exprep Mundipharma Oy, Finland, Senna (p. 537)

@

Falquilax Falqui Prodotti Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Senna (p. 537)
Farmakava Laboratorio Farmaervas Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)

Faros Lichtwer Pharma AG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346) Vifor SA, Switzerland,
Hawthorn (p. 346)

Felis Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Femi Sabona GmbH, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Femicine Vifor SA, Switzerland, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Femicur N Schaper & Bruimmer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Femikliman uno Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Femilla N Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Feminon A Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Feminon C Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Femiplante Farmasierra S.A., Spain, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Femisana gyn Cheplapharm Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168)

Femisana mens Cheplapharm Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus
(p. 36)

 Fenugreek (p. 260)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett

Fenugrene Laboratoires Legras, France, Fenugreek (p. 260)

 Feverfew (p. 263)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Holland and
Barrett; Medic Herb UK Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Sundown

Fiberall Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp., USA, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Fibrasol Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Fibrelief Manx Pharma Ltd, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fibrolax Giuliani S.p.A., Italy, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fibromucil Productos Farmaceuticos Collins 5.4. de C.V., Mexico, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Fiotan Altana Pharma Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Fitokey Ginkgo /Inkeysa, Spain, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Fitokey Harpagophytum /nkeysa, Spain, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Flebostasin Sankyo Pharma Italia S.p.A., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Fletchers Castoria Mentholatum Inc., USA, Senna (p. 537)

Flexal Brennessel Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
flexi-loges Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

Floral Pas Productos Gache S.A., Venezuela, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Florilax Floris, Israel, Senna (p. 537)

Florsalmin Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Sage (p. 512)

Flosa Merckle GmbH, Germany, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Flosine Bittermedizin Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH, Germany, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Ford Fibre Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fuca Melisana SA, Belgium, Senna (p. 537)

----- PAGE 638 -----
Fuca N Melisana AG, Switzerland, Senna (p. 537)

Fybogel Reckitt Benckiser Pharmaceuticals, Australia, Ispaghula (p. 374) Reckitt
Benckiser, Ireland, Ispaghula (p. 374) Zuellig Pharma Pte Ltd, Singapore, Ispaghula
(p. 374) Reckitt Benckiser Pharmaceuticals (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Reckitt Benckiser (Thailand) Ltd, Thailand, Ispaghula (p. 374) Reckitt Benckiser plc,
UK, Ispaghula (p. 374)

@

Gal Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Senna (p. 537)

Gallentee Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic, Calendula (p. 121),
Dandelion (p. 204), Liquorice (p. 411), Yarrow (p. 604)

Garlic (p. 279)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct;
Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Sundown; Walgreens Finest Natural

Garlimega The Cantassium Company, UK, Garlic (p. 279)
GarliPure Natrol, USA, Garlic (p. 279)
Garlix Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Garlic (p. 279)

Gastrovegetalin Verla-Pharm, Arzneimittelfabrik, Apotheker H.J.v. Ehrlich GmbH
& Co. KG, Germany, Melissa (p. 425)

Gelobronchial G. Pohl-Boskamp GmbH & Co., Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Gentian (p. 290)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Geriaforce Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Gerimax Ginseng (Tepumaxc 7Kenpmenn) Sanofi-Aventis, Russia, Ginseng, Panax

Gerimax Tonique Merck Lipha Santé, France, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Gibilon Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginbiloba Bunker Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Gincare Y.S.P. Industries (M) Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Gincoben Ipsen Portugal, SA, Portugal, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gincolin Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Gincuran Bioplanta Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginemaxim Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Ginger (p. 293)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Holland and Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Sundown

Gingiloba 1 A Pharma GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gingium Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299) Hexal Hungaria
Kft, Hungary, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gingivitol N Hennig Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Golden Seal (p. 337)
Gingobeta betapharm Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Gingohexal Hexal Pharma GmbH, Austria, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gingol F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gingopret Bionorica AG, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gingosol Ecosol AG, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkapran Zyfas Medical Co, Singapore, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkgo (p. 299)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Medic Herb UK Ltd; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp.
Ltd

USA: Natrol; Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown; Walgreens Finest Natural

Ginkgold AS/ Budapest Kft, Hungary, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkoba Quimica E Farmacéutica Nikkho do Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Fher, Divisione della Boehringer Ingelheim, Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkobil Infabra Industria Farmacéutica Brasileira Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
ratiopharm GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkodilat Sandoz Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkofarma Laboratorio Farmaervas Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkoftal Davi Farmacéutica, Lda, Portugal, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkogink Beaufour Ipsen Pharma, France, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkogreen Greenpharma Quimica e Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkokan Farmasan Arzneimittel GmbH & Co., Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkolab Multilab Ind. e Com. Prods. Farmacéuticos Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkolin Weston Pharmaceutical Ltd, Hong Kong, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkoplus Fontovit Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkopur W. Spitzner, Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Preparations Directory

Ginkosen Polymedic Trading Enterprise Pte Ltd, Singapore, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkovital Pharmadass Ltd, UK, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginsana Boehringer Ingelheim S.A., Argentina, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer
Ingelheim Austria GmbH, Austria, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim
SA/NV, Belgium, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim do Brasil Quim. e
Farm. Ltda, Brazil, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd,
Canada, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim sro, Czech Republic,
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany,
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Fher, Divisione della Boehringer Ingelheim, Italy, Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim, Division Diethelm Malaysia Sdn Bhd,
Malaysia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim, Lda, Portugal, Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325) Diethelm Singapore Pte Ltd, Singapore, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) GPL
Ginsana Products Lugano SA, Tochterunternehmen der Pharmaton SA,
Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325) Boehringer Ingelheim (Thai) Ltd, Thailand,
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Ginsana (Iuncana) Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH, Russia, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

e Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct;
Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
UK: Biocare Ltd; Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd
USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Ginsex Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Ginsroy Schumit 1967 Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
GNC Herbal Laxative General Nutrition Canada, Canada, Senna (p. 537)

Golden Seal (p. 337)
UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd
USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty

Grafic Retard Microsules y Bernabo S.A., Argentina, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Grains de Vals Nouvelle formule F. Uhimann-Eyraud SA, Switzerland, Senna
(p. 537)

Gravel Root (p. 340)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Gravol Natural Source Carter Horner Inc., Canada, Ginger (p. 293)

Ground lvy (p. 342)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Gyncobem Cifarma Cientifica Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Gyndelta Laboratoires CCD, France, Cranberry (p. 197)
Gynocastus Fritz Zilly GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

cH)

Hamasana Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Hamburg Tea Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Senna (p. 537)
Hametol Dr W Schwabe, Spain, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Hametum Dr Peithner KG nunmehr GmbH & Co., Austria, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Dr
Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., W. Spitzner, Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH, Germany,
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Harpadol Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Harpagocid Laboratoires Phytomedica, France, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Harpagofito Orto Normon S.A., Spain, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

Harpagoforte Asmedic Dyckerhoff Pharma GmbH & Co., Germany, Devil's Claw
(p. 207)

HarpagoMega Astrid Twardy GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Harpagosan Neopharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

e Hawthorn (p. 346)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Holland and
Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd

USA: Sundown

Hebucol Will-Pharma SA, Belgium, Artichoke (p. 67)
Hegrimarin Strathmann Ag & Co Képviselete, Hungary, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Helarium Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Bionorica AG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549) ASI Budapest Kft, Hungary, St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Helarium (Teaapuym) Bionorica AG, Russia, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Helixor Germania Pharmazeutika GmbH, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Helixor
Heilmittel GmbH & Co., Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Hemo Derminiol Laboratorios DHU Ibérica, S.A., Spain, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
HepaBesch S$ Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

----- PAGE 639 -----
Appendix 4

Hepagallin N Homéopathisches Laboratorium A. Pfluger GmbH, Germany,
Artichoke (p. 67)

Hepa-Loges Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Hepanephrol Laboratoires Zambon France, France, Artichoke (p. 67)
Hepar SL Sertuirner Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Hepar-Pasc Pascoe Pharmazeutische Praparate GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Hepar-POS Croma-Pharma GmbH, Austria, Artichoke (p. 67) Ursapharm
Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Heparstad Stada GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Hepa-S Vifor SA, Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67)

Hepatos Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Heplant W. Spitzner, Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Herbaccion Bioenergizante /nstituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.I.C., Argentina,
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Herbaccion Venotonico Instituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.1.C., Argentina,
Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Herbal Eye Care Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79)
Herbal Headache Relief Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Feverfew (p. 263)
Herbal Liver Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Herbal Premens SwissHealth, UK, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Herbal Sleep Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Valerian (p. 580)
Herbal Stress Relief Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Hevert-Aktivon Mono Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325)

Heverto Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Hevertogyn Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Hewechol Artischockendragees Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG,
Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Hewepsychon uno Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Heweven Phyto Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut
(p. 363)

Hipax Lab. Baliarda S.A., Argentina, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hiperex Eurofarma Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hipericin Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hiperico Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Laboratorios Diviser-Aquilea S.L., Naytsal, Spain, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hiperifarma Laboratorio Farmaervas Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hiperikan Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hiperil Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hiperinat Lab. Natufarma, Argentina, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hipersac Bunker Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hloh-List S Leros sro, Czech Republic, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Hoevenol Carl Hoernecke GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Hops (p. 354)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Horehound, Black (p. 358)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Hormolax Laboratorios Hormona S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ispaghula (p. 374)

e Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett
USA: Sundown

Hox Alpha Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Hustagil Thymian-Hustensaft Dentinox Gesellschaft fur Pharmazeutische
Prdparate Lenk & Schuppan, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Hustagil Thymiantropfen Dentinox Gesellschaft fuir Pharmazeutische Prdparate
Lenk & Schuppan, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Husties Eu Rho OTC Pharma GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Hydrocil Instant Numark Laboratories Inc., USA, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Hyneurin Korhispana, Spain, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hypercircin Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Hyperforat Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hypericaps Duopharm GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hyperico Viternat Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hyperiforce Bio-Garten GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549) Bioforce AG,
Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hyperiforte Blackmores Ltd, Australia, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hyperigreen Greenpharma Quimica e Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

HyperiMed Bioforce AG, Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hyperimerck Merck dura GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hyperiplant VSM Belgium, Belgium, St John's Wort (p. 549) Schwabe Pharma AG,
Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hyperprost Uno Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Hyperpur Alpharma-lsis GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hyperval Sidroga AG, Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Hyzum N Merckle GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)

IL HWA allcura Naturheilmittel GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Ilja Rogoff Forte Roche Consumer Health Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Garlic
(p. 279)

Immunal Lek Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Echinacea (p. 217)

Immunal (Haaynaa) Lek, Russia, Echinacea (p. 217)

Immunorm (Hsimynopm) Ratiopharm Group, Russia, Echinacea (p. 217)
Imunnal Herbarium Laboratdrio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea (p. 217)
Imunocel Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea (p. 217)

Imunogreen Greenpharma Quimica e Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea
(p. 217)

Inmune Booster Solara Farmaceutica SA de CV, Mexico, Echinacea (p. 217)
Inspirol P Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Myrrh (p. 449)
Iperisan Marjan Industria e Comercio Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Iscador Weleda GmbH & Co. KG, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Weleda AG-
Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Weleda AG, Switzerland, Milk
Thistle (p. 429)

Isephca S$ /so-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Isogel GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals (India) Ltd, India, Ispaghula (p. 374)
GlaxoSmithKline, New Zealand, Ispaghula (p. 374) Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Isoginkgo Merck dura GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Isorel Novipharm GmbH, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Ispagel LPC Medical (UK) Ltd, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374)

oO

Jarsin F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549) Laboratorios Biosintetica
Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549) Lichtwer Pharma AG, Germany, St John's Wort
(p. 549) Vifor SA, Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Jinda F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Cohosh, Black (p. 168) Riemser Arzneimittel AG,
Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Johanicum Apomedica GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Johni Interpharm GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Jo-Sabona Sabona GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Jucurba Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Capsicum (p. 125), Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Jungborn Taro Pharmaceutical International, Israel, Senna (p. 537)

e Juniper (p. 386)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

@

Kalter Laboratorios Phoenix S.A.I.C.F., Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Kava (p. 389)
UK: Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd
USA: Natrol

Kavakan Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)
Kavalac Fontovit Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)

Kavasedon Novaquimica Sigma Pharma-Nature’s Plus Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)
Horna Business Service, Czech Republic, Kava (p. 389) Laboratorios Cofasa S.A.,
Venezuela, Kava (p. 389)

Kaveri Lichtwer Pharma AG, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Kiadon Merck S.A. Industrias Quimicas, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299) Merck Quimica
Chilena Ltda, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299) Merck S.A., Venezuela, Ginkgo (p. 299)

KintaVital Sanofi-Aventis (Schweiz) AG, Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

----- PAGE 640 -----
Kira F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549) Lichtwer Pharma, Canada, St
John's Wort (p. 549) Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, St John's Wort (p. 549) Grupo Farma S.A., Venezuela, St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Kirsan Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Klimadynon Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Bionorica AG, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168) Jacobson Medical (Hong Kong) Ltd,
Hong Kong, Cohosh, Black (p. 168) MBD Marketing (5S) Pte Ltd, Singapore, Cohosh,
Black (p. 168)

Klimadynon (Kaumaannon) Bionorica AG, Russia, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Klosterfrau Nervenruh Dragees Melisana AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354)

Kneipp Pflanzen-Dragees Weissdorn Kneipp-Werke, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Kolob Unipharm de Mexico SA de CV, Mexico, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Konstitutin CytoChemia AG, Germany, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Konsyl GlaxoSmithKline S.A., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374) Pharmateam
Marketing, Israel, Ispaghula (p. 374) Konsyl Pharmaceuticals, USA, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Konsyl-D Konsyl Pharmaceuticals, USA, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Kontryhelova Nat Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Parsley Piert (p. 459)
Koprivovy Caj, Koprivova Nat Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Nettle (p. 452)
Koren Kozliku Lekarskeho Leros sro, Czech Republic, Valerian (p. 580)
Koren Puskvorce Leros sro, Czech Republic, Calamus (p. 118)

Koro-Nyhadin Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Korseng Self-Care Products Ltd, UK, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Krauterlax Dolorgiet GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Aloes (p. 50)
Kvet Bazy Ciernej Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237)
Kvet Lipy Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Lime Flower (p. 409)

Kwai F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Garlic (p. 279) Lichtwer Pharma, Canada, Garlic
(p. 279) Lichtwer Pharma AG, Germany, Garlic (p. 279) Solvay Pharma S.p.A., Italy,
Garlic (p. 279) Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, Garlic (p. 279) Grupo Farma S.A.,
Venezuela, Garlic (p. 279)

Kyolic Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Garlic (p. 279) JDH
Pharmaceutical Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Garlic (p. 279) Quest Vitamins Ltd, UK, Garlic
(p. 279)

Kytta Pommade /romedica AG, Switzerland, Comfrey (p. 188)
Kytta-Cor Merck KGaA, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Kytta-Plasma f Merck KGaA, Germany, Comfrey (p. 188)
Kytta-Salbe f Merck KGaA, Germany, Comfrey (p. 188)

@

Laci Echinacea with Hint of Mint Natrol, USA, Echinacea (p. 217)
Lagenbach Representaciones Mex-America S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537)

Lagosa Worwag Pharma GmbH & Co, Czech Republic, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Worwag Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Laif Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Laitan Altana Pharma Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)

Lakinal Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425)

Laxabene Alter, Spain, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Laxal Gulf Pharmaceutical Industries, Julphar, United Arab Emirates, Senna (p. 537)
Laxamucil Orion-yhtymd Oyj, Finland, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Laxans Schuilke & Mayr GmbH, Austria, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Laxante Bescansa Normal Bescansa, Spain, Senna (p. 537)

Laxante Olan Puerto Galiano, Spain, Senna (p. 537)

Laxante Salud Boots Healthcare, Spain, Senna (p. 537)

Laxikal Forte Teva Pharmaceuticals Ind. Ltd, Israel, Senna (p. 537)
Laxiplant Soft Schwabe Pharma AG, Switzerland, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Laxiruela Ciruela Fibra Lab. Garden House S.A., Argentina, Senna (p. 537)
Laxolen Laboratorios Basi, Portugal, Cascara (p. 128)

Laxucil Novopharm Ltd, Canada, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Legalon Madaus GmbH, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Madaus Pharma SA,
Belgium, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Altana Pharma Ltda, Brazil, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Laboratoires Madaus, France, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Madaus AG, Germany, Milk
Thistle (p. 429) Naturprodukt Kft, Hungary, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Madaus S.r.l.,
Italy, Milk Thistle (p. 429) Neo-Farmacéutica, Lda, Portugal, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Legapas Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Cascara (p. 128)

Preparations Directory

Leikan Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Kava (p. 389)
Lektinol Madaus AG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Libeprosta Pharma Fabre Hellas S.A., Greece, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Libertin Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Lipei Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)
Lipovy Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Lime Flower (p. 409)
Liquidepur Woelm Pharma GmbH & Co., Germany, Senna (p. 537)

e Liquorice (p. 411)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett; Medic Herb UK Ltd

List Medvedice Lecive Leros sro, Czech Republic, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

List Salveje Lekarske Leros sro, Czech Republic, Sage (p. 512)

List Senny Leros sro, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537)

List Vachty Trojliste Leros sro, Czech Republic, Bogbean (p. 89)

Litonate Laboratorios Biotech C.A., Venezuela, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Lomacard Lomapharm, Rudolf Lohmann GmbH KG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Lomaherpan Madaus GmbH, Austria, Melissa (p. 425) Lomapharm, Rudolf
Lohmann GmbH KG, Germany, Melissa (p. 425)

Lomahypericum Lomapharm, Rudolf Lohmann GmbH KG, Germany, St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Losapan Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)
Lostamucil Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Lubovnik Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Lucilium Ecosol AG, Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Lunare /nterpharm GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Lunelax Nycomed Pharma AS, Norway, Ispaghula (p. 374) AstraZeneca Sverige
AB, Sweden, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Lutene Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Luvased mono Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)
Lymphozil Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)

@

Macro Garlic Wyeth Pharmaceuticals, Division of Wyeth Australia P/L, Australia,
Garlic (p. 279)

Madecassol Bayer Austria GmbH, Austria, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) Roche SA/NV,
Belgium, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) Bayer SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) Laboratoires
Roche Nicholas, France, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) A. Nikolakopoulos & Co. O.E, Greece,
Hydrocotyle (p. 371) CNW (Hong Kong) Ltd, Hong Kong, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Sanofi-Synthelabo de Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) Confar,
Lda, Portugal, Hydrocotyle (p. 371) Laboratorios Politecnicos Nacionales C.A.,
Venezuela, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Makatussin Saft Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Makatussin Saft Drosera Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Drosera
(p. 215)

Makatussin Tropfen Drosera Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany,
Drosera (p. 215)

Mariendistel Curarina Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany,
Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Marshmallow (p. 418)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett

Matai Engelhard Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Mavena Anal-Gen Psorimed AG, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Maxifem Ecosol AG, Switzerland, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Maximum Relief Ex-Lax Novartis Consumer Health Inc., USA, Senna (p. 537)

e Meadowsweet (p. 423)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Medovka Lekarska Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425)
Medunkovy, Medunkova Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425)
Medvedice Leciva as, Czech Republic, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Melissa (p. 425)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Medic Herb UK Ltd

Melrosum Hustensirup Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme
(p. 574)

Memfit Boehringer Ingelheim SA/NV, Belgium, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Memokit Laboratorio Ximena Polanco, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Mencirax Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Menofem Boehringer Ingelheim S.A., Argentina, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

----- PAGE 641 -----
Appendix 4

Menoflavon Cedar Health Ltd, UK, Red Clover (p. 498)

Menoliv Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Mensana Darrow Laboratorios S.A., Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Mensifem Boehringer Ingelheim, Chile, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Me-Sabona Sabona GmbH, Germany, Melissa (p. 425)

Mesickovy Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Calendula (p. 121)

Metamucil Procter & Gamble Interamericanos Inc., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Procter & Gamble Australia P/L, Australia, Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter & Gamble
Austria GmbH, Austria, Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter & Gamble do Brasil S.A., Brazil,
Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter & Gamble Inc., Canada, Ispaghula (p. 374) Laboratorios
Recalcine SA, Chile, Ispaghula (p. 374) Wick Pharma Zweigniederlassung der
Procter & Gamble GmbH, Germany, Ispaghula (p. 374) Pharmacia Asia Ltd, Hong
Kong, Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter & Gamble de Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico,
Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter € Gamble Pharmaceuticals, Netherlands, Ispaghula

(p. 374) Procter & Gamble NPD, Inc., New Zealand, Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter
Gamble, Spain, Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter & Gamble AG, Switzerland, Ispaghula
(p. 374) Pfizer (Thailand) Ltd, Thailand, Ispaghula (p. 374) Procter & Gamble, USA,
Ispaghula (p. 374)

jidro Wolfs SA, Belgium, Senna (p. 537) Midro Vertrieb AG, Switzerland, Senna
37)

lidro Abfuhr Midro Lorrach GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Midro Tee Midro Lorrach GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)

e Milk Thistle (p. 429)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp.
Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Milperinol Dolisos SA, Belgium, St John's Wort (p. 549)
lis Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Bilberry (p. 79)
Mirfusot Merckle GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Mirtilene Forte Societd Industria Farmaceutica Italiana S.p.A., Italy, Bilberry
(p. 79)

Mirtilene Forte (Mupruacue ®opre) Schering-Plough Central East AG, Russia,
Bilberry (p. 79)

Mistel Curarina Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Milk
Thistle (p. 429)

Mistel-Krautertabletten Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co
KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Misteltropfen Bio-Didt-Berlin GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Misteltropfen Hofmanns Hofmann & Sommer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Milk
Thistle (p. 429)

Modern Herbals Sleep Aid G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Passionflower
(p. 461)

e Motherwort (p. 447)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Motional Laboratorios Beta S.A., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Motiven Fontovit Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Movana Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Mucilag Quimica y Farmacia, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Mucilar Spirig Pharma AG, Switzerland, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Mucilax Douglas Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New Zealand, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Mucilin Polymedic Trading Enterprise Pte Ltd, Singapore, Ispaghula (p. 374) Berlin
Pharmaceutical Industry Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Mucillium Pharmascience Inc., Canada, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Mucinum Confar, Lda, Portugal, Cascara (p. 128)

Mucivital Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Ispaghula (p. 374) Pharma Guri,
Israel, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Mucofalk Lab. Cevallos Salud S.R.L., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374) Dr. Falk
Pharma GmbH, Germany, Ispaghula (p. 374) Jacobson Medical (Hong Kong) Ltd,
Hong Kong, Ispaghula (p. 374) JDH Pharmaceutical Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Ispaghula
(p. 374) Tramedico BV, Netherlands, Ispaghula (p. 374) Dr. Falk Pharma Portugal
Lda, Portugal, Ispaghula (p. 374) JDH Pharmaceutical Division, Singapore,
Ispaghula (p. 374)

@ Myrrh (p. 449)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Myrtaven Institut Biochimique SA, Switzerland, Bilberry (p. 79)

®

Nadem Ivax Argentina SA, Argentina, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Nat Cubetu Benediktu Leros sro, Czech Republic, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Nat Jmeli Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Nat Rebricku Leros sro, Czech Republic, Yarrow (p. 604)

Nat Repiku Lekarskeho Leros sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42)

Nat Salveje Lekarske Leros sro, Czech Republic, Sage (p. 512)

Nat Trezalky Leros sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Nat Zemezluce Leros sro, Czech Republic, Centaury (p. 149)

Natracalm Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461)

Natucor Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Natu-fem Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Natu-Hepa Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67) Vita Health
Care AG, Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67)

Natulax Lab. Natufarma, Argentina, Cascara (p. 128)

Natu-lind Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Natu-prosta Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Naturest G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461)

Naturlax Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Senna (p. 537) Great Eastern Healthcare
Ltd, Hong Kong, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Naturreiner Kneipp-Werke, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67)

Natu-Seda Vita Health Care AG, Switzerland, Valerian (p. 580)

Natuzilium Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Kava (p. 389)

Neda Fruchtewurfel Novartis Consumer Health GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Negrustin (Herpycruu) Hexal AG, Russia, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Neolaikan Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Valerian (p. 580)
Nephronorm med APS Pharma GmbH, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)

Nervaxon Fidia Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Nervei Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Nervisatis Lab E J Gezzi SRL, Argentina, Valerian (p. 580)

Neurol Abigo Medical AB, Sweden, Valerian (p. 580)

Neuroplant Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Neurosporal Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik Goppingen Carl Muller,
Apotheker, GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Neurovegetalin Verla-Pharm, Arzneimittelfabrik, Apotheker H.J.v. Ehrlich GmbH
& Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Neutrogena Drying Neutrogena Corp., USA, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Nimopect Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Noctaval Novaquimica Sigma Pharma-Nature’s Plus Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)
Nodoff Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461)

Nokatar Laboratorio Prater SA, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Noricaven Bionorica AG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Normurol CuraMED Pharma GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Novo-Mucilax Novopharm Ltd, Canada, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Novo-Passit (Hoso-Iaccrr) Ivax AC, Russia, Elder (p. 237), Hawthorn (p. 346),
Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), St John's Wort (p. 549),
Valerian (p. 580)

Nylax with Senna Crookes Healthcare Ltd, UK, Senna (p. 537)

Nytol Natural Source GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare, Canada, Valerian
(p. 580)

©

Oddibil Gerot-Pharmazeutika GmbH, Austria, Fumitory (p. 276) Aventis Pharma
Ltda, Brazil, Fumitory (p. 276) Coopération Pharmaceutique Francaise, France,
Fumitory (p. 276)

Oprane Vifor SA, Switzerland, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Optrex Schering-Plough Healthcare Products Canada Inc., Canada, Witch Hazel
(p. 601) Laboratoires Pierre Fabre, France, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Boots Healthcare S.
p.A., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Boots Trading (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd, Malaysia,
Witch Hazel (p. 601) Boots Healthcare New Zealand Ltd, New Zealand, Witch
Hazel (p. 601) The Boots Company (Far East) Pte Ltd, Singapore, Witch Hazel

(p. 601) Boots Healthcare, Spain, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Boots Healthcare
(Switzerland) AG, Hermal, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Olic (Thailand) Ltd,
Thai-land, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Crookes Healthcare Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Optrex Original Boots Healthcare Australia P/L, Australia, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Orgaplasma Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Orthangin novo Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn

(p. 346)

Orthosiphonblatter Indischer Nierentee FidesLine Biologische Heilmittel Heel
GmbH, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)

----- PAGE 642 -----
Oxacant-mono Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

CP)

Parche Leon Fortificante Beiersdorf SA, Chile, Capsicum (p. 125)
Pargo Bio-Didt-Berlin GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

© Parsley Piert (p. 459)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Pascomucil Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Pascotox forte-Injektopas Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdaparate GmbH, Germany,
Echinacea (p. 217)

Pascotox mono Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Echinacea
(p. 217)
Passelyt Gebro Pharma SA, Switzerland, Passionflower (p. 461)

Passiflora Curarina Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany,
Passionflower (p. 461)

Passiflorin Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Passionflower (p. 461)
Perika VSM Belgium, Belgium, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Perikan Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Peristaltine Novartis Santé Familiale SA, France, Cascara (p. 128)
Permicaps Laboratorios Bago S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Permixon Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Germania
Pharmazeutika GmbH, Austria, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Laboratoires Pierre Fabre,
France, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Medibrands, Israel, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Pierre Fabre
Italia S.p.A., Italy, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Pierre Fabre Farma de Mexico S.A. de C.V.,
Mexico, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Pierre Fabre Médicament Portugal, Lda, Portugal,
Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Pierre Fabre Iberica, Spain, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Robapharm
SA, Switzerland, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) B/C Trading Co Ltd, Thailand, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521) Laboratorio Leti S.A.V., Venezuela, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Permixon (IMepamxcon) Pierre Fabre Medicament, Russia, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Pertussin medphano Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Petadolex Weber & Weber GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Butterbur (p. 107)
Petaforce V Bioforce GmbH, Germany, Butterbur (p. 107)

Pharmadose teinture d’arnica Laboratoires Gilbert, France, Arnica (p. 64)
Phlebostasin Altana Pharma Ltd, Switzerland, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Phytocalm Arkopharma UK Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461)

Phytocold Arkopharma UK Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)

Phytohepar Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Phytohustil Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Marshmallow
(p. 418)

Phytorelax Arkopharma UK Ltd, UK, Valerian (p. 580)

 Pilewort (p. 472)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Plantaben Altana Pharma SA, Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374) Altana Pharma Ltda,
Brazil, Ispaghula (p. 374) EciFarma SA, Chile, Ispaghula (p. 374) Altana Pharma S.A.
de C.V., Mexico, Ispaghula (p. 374) Madaus, Spain, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Planten Whitehall Italia S.p.A., Italy, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Plantivenol Dr W Schwabe, Spain, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Planturol Farmasan Arzneimittel GmbH & Co., Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

e Pleurisy Root (p. 477)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Plissamur Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Plod Jalovce Leros sro, Czech Republic, Juniper (p. 386)

 Pokeroot (p. 479)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Pollivita Permamed AG, Switzerland, Butterbur (p. 107)
Posterine Dr Kade Pharmazeutische Fabrik GmbH, Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Prazen Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Prefemine Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Agnus
Castus (p. 36)

PreMens Phytotec Hungaria Kft, Hungary, Agnus Castus (p. 36) Max Zeller Schne
AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Preparation H Clear Gel Wyeth Laboratories, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

e Prickly Ash, Northern (p. 484)
UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Primadrill Laboratoires Pierre Fabre, France, Marshmallow (p. 418)
Probeks Hebron S.A. Industria Quimica e Farmacéutica, Brazil, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Procalm Productos Maver S.A. de C.V., Mexico, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Preparations Directory

Procalmil Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Prodiem Plain Novartis Consumer Health Canada Inc., Canada, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Proginkgo Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Prol Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Promensil Novogen Laboratories P/L, Australia, Red Clover (p. 498)
Pro-Sabona Uno Sabona GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Proserem Arkofarm S.r.1., Italy, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Prosta Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prosta Urgenin Uno Hoyer-Madaus GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Prostafort Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostaforton Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Prostagalen Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Prostagutt mono Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Prostagutt uno Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Prostaherb N Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Prostakan AS/ Budapest Kft, Hungary, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostakan Mono Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic,
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostalium Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
ProstaMed Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostamed Urtica Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Prostamol Uno Berlin-Chemie Menarini Group, Czech Republic, Saw Palmetto
(p. 921) Berlin-Chemie Képviselet, Hungary, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostamol Uno (Ipocramoa Yuo) Berlin-Pharma ZAO Moscow, Russia, Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostaplant Bioplanta Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostasan Biofarma Natural CMD SA de CV, Mexico, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostaserene Therabel Pharma SA, Belgium, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostata Stada GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Prostatal Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prosta-Truw Truw Arzneimittel Vertriebs GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Prosta-Urgenin Madaus GmbH, Austria, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Madaus Pharma
SA, Belgium, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Madaus AG, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prosta-Urgenine Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostawern Pharma Wernigerode GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Prosteren Cornelli Consulting Sas, Italy, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostess TAD Pharma GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostex Productos Medix S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostiva Aneid, Lda, Portugal, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Protat Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Corn Silk (p. 191)
Provenen HWS-OTC-Service GmbH, Austria, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Prunasine Nycomed Christiaens, Belgium, Senna (p. 537)

Psychotonin Madaus GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549) Steigerwald
Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Psylia Techni-Pharma, Monaco, Ispaghula (p. 374)

© Pulsatilla (p. 489)
UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Pursennid Novartis Finland Oy, Finland, Senna (p. 537) Novartis Sverige AB,
Sweden, Senna (p. 537)

@

e Quassia (p. 491)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Quetzal A.S.A.C. Pharma, Spain, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Quiens Marco Antonetto S.p.A., Italy, St John's Wort (p. 549)

@

Raigin Gelcaps Exp. de Mexico SA de CV, Mexico, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Ramend Queisser Pharma GmbH & Co., Germany, Senna (p. 537)

Raspberry (p. 495)
UK: Holland and Barrett

----- PAGE 643 -----
Appendix 4

Rebrickovy Caj, Rebrickova Nat Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Yarrow (p. 604)
Recalm Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)
Recvalysat Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

Red Clover (p. 498)
UK: Biocare Ltd; Holland and Barrett

Red Kooga Peter Black Healthcare Ltd, UK, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

ReDormin Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Valerian
(p. 580)

Regripax Biofarma Natural CMD SA de CV, Mexico, Echinacea (p. 217)
Regucol Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals, Netherlands, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Regulacor-POS Ursapharm Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Regulan Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals UK Ltd, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Regulatum Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Regulax Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537)
Regulax N Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)

Reguloid Watson Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Relaxine Laboratoires Pharmaceutiques Trenker SA, Belgium, Valerian (p. 580)
Trima, Israel, Valerian (p. 580)

Remifemin Schaper & Bruimmer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Cohosh, Black

(p. 168) Phytotec Hungaria Kft, Hungary, Cohosh, Black (p. 168) Bionax Singapore
Pte Ltd, Singapore, Cohosh, Black (p. 168) Farmasierra S.A., Spain, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168) Diethelm & Co. Ltd, Thailand, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Remiprostan uno Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Remotiv Torrex Pharma GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549) Phytotec Hungdria
Kft, Hungary, St John's Wort (p. 549) Abbott Laboratories de Mexico S.A. de C.V.,
Mexico, St John's Wort (p. 549) Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Remotive Sigma Tau S.p.A., Italy, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Renopen Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Repha Orphon Repha GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)
Repik Lekarsky Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42)

Repikovy Caj, Repikova Nat Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42)
Resistan mono Truw Arzneimittel Vertriebs GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Resplant W. Spitzner, Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)

ReBalance Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Rheogen Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Aloes (p. 50)
Rheuferm Phyto Wiedemann Pharma GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Rheuma-Hek Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Rheumakaps Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Willow (p. 598)
Rheuma-Sern Truw Arzneimittel Vertriebs GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Rheuma-Stada Stada GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Rheumatab Salicis Schuck GmbH, Germany, Willow (p. 598)

Rhodiola (p. 500)
UK: Biocare Ltd; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Quest Vitamins Ltd

Rilaprost Laboratori Guidotti S.p.A., Italy, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Rivoltan Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

Rokan Laboratorios Andromaco SA, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299) W. Spitzner,
Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

e Rosemary (p. 508)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Rutying Super Mayoreo Naturista S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

CS)

Saba Lampugnani Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Sabacur uno Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Sabal uno Apogepha Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Sabalin Medic Herb UK Ltd, UK, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Lichtwer Pharma UK,

Sabalvit Bional Pharma Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Sabal Duopharm GmbH, Stada GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
SabCaps Vifor SA, Switzerland, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Sabonal Uno Sabona GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Saforelle Avanderm Mexico, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Burdock (p. 102) Biosaude
Produtos Farmaceuticos SA, Portugal, Burdock (p. 102)

Sage (p. 512)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Medic Herb UK Ltd

Salbei Curarina Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Sage
(p. 512)

Salus Mistel-Tropfen Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co KG,
Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Salvejova Nat Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Sage (p. 512)

Salvysat Mayrhofer Pharmazeutika, Austria, Sage (p. 512) Johannes Burger
Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Sage (p. 512)

Sanjin Royal Jelly Super Mayoreo Naturista S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Sanopinwern Pharma Wernigerode GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Sanvita Immun Sanamed GmbH, Austria, Echinacea (p. 217)
Sapec Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Garlic (p. 279)

Sarai Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, Agnus Castus
(p. 36)

 Sarsaparilla (p. 515)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Holland and Barrett; Medic Herb UK Ltd

Saugella Dermoliquido Rottapharm S.r.l., Italy, Sage (p. 512)

e Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Holland and Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp.
Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Scottopect Nycomed Austria GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)

 Scullcap (p. 530)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Sedante Noche La Serranita, Lab. de Esp. Medic. y Cosmet., Argentina,
Passionflower (p. 461)

Sedasol eco natura Ecosol AG, Switzerland, Valerian (p. 580)
Sedinfant Sabona GmbH, Germany, Melissa (p. 425)

Sedonium Lichtwer Pharma AG, Germany, Valerian (p. 580) Vifor SA, Switzerland,
Valerian (p. 580) Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, Valerian (p. 580)

Sedovegan Dr. August Wolff Arzneimittel GmbH & Co., Germany, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Senan Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Senna (p. 537)
Senicor Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

e Senna (p. 537)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Quest Vitamins Ltd

Senna-Gen /vax Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA, Senna (p. 537)
Sennalax Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Senna (p. 537)
Sennaprep Pharmascience Inc., Canada, Senna (p. 537)
Sennapur Pharmia Oy, Finland, Senna (p. 537)

Sennatab Pharmascience Inc., Canada, Senna (p. 537)

Sennocol Viatris BV, Netherlands, Senna (p. 537)

Sennove Lusky Leros sro, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537)
Sennovy List Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537)

Senokot Purdue Pharma, Canada, Senna (p. 537) Viatris, France, Senna (p. 537)
Reckitt Benckiser Hong Kong Ltd, Hong Kong, Senna (p. 537) mundipharma AS,
Norway, Senna (p. 537) Zuellig Pharma Pte Ltd, Singapore, Senna (p. 537) Reckitt
Benckiser plc, UK, Senna (p. 537) The Purdue Frederick Co., USA, Senna (p. 537)

Senokotxtra The Purdue Frederick Co., USA, Senna (p. 537)

Sensivision au plantain Laboratoires Chauvin Bausch & Lomb, France, Plantain
(p. 474)

Sereprostat Robapharm Espana, Spain, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Serpens Lisapharma S.p.A., Italy, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Seven Seas Cranberry Forte Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Cranberry (p. 197)

Silegon Biogal-Teva Pharma Rt, Hungary, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Silibene Merckle GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Silicur Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Silimarin Benedetti S.p.A., Italy, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Silimarit Bionorica AG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Siliver Laboratorio Americano de Farmacoterapia $/A, Brazil, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Silmar Hennig Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Siludane Laboratorios Dermatologicos Darier S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Silvaysan Sanum-Kehlbeck GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Silyhexal Hexal Pharma GmbH, Austria, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

----- PAGE 644 -----
Silymarin Phytosome Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Sinei Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168)

Sita Hoyer-Madaus GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Skin Clear Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)
Sklerovenol N Febena Pharma GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Sleep-Eze V Natural Medtech Lab, Canada, Valerian (p. 580)

© Slippery Elm (p. 545)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Snore Calm British Snoring & Sleep Apnoea Association Ltd, UK, Eyebright (p. 256)
Soflax Cipla-Medpro (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Senna (p. 537)

Sogoon Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, Devil's Claw
(p. 207)

Solaguttae Emonta Pharma GmbH, Austria, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Solarcaine Aloe Vera Balmar, New Zealand, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Solcosplen C Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Soledum Hustensaft Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Soledum Hustentropfen Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme
(p. 574)

Solevita Permamed AG, Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Sominex Laboratorio Prater SA, Chile, Valerian (p. 580)

Sonoripan Marjan Industria e Comercio Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)
Spagulax Laboratoires Pharmafarm, France, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Spagulax Mucilage Laboratoires Pharmafarm, France, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Spalda Sabal Leo Pharma A/S, Denmark, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Spartiol Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Broom (p. 98)

Spasmosedine Laboratoires DB Pharma, France, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Sperti Preparacion H Clear Gel Wyeth Consumer Healthcare, Chile, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Sporal mono Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik Goppingen Carl Muiller,
Apotheker, GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)

St John’s Wort (p. 550)

UK: Biocare Ltd; Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd;
Healthy Direct; Medic Herb UK Ltd; Quest Vitamins Ltd; Worldwide Health Corp.
Ltd

USA: Natrol; Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown; Walgreens Finest Natural

Steicorton Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Steiprostat Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Stenocrat mono Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Sthenorex Laboratoires Pharmygiéne-SCAT, France, Fenugreek (p. 260)

Strogen Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Strogen Uno Strathmann Ag & Co Képviselete, Hungary, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Strongus franconpharm Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Garlic (p. 279)

Strotan Strathmann AG & Co., Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Styptysat Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Senna (p. 537)
Sure-Lax Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Senna (p. 537)

Sweatosan N Novartis Consumer Health GmbH, Germany, Sage (p. 512)
Syllact MedPointe Healthcare Inc, USA, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Symfona Medichemie AG, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Syxal Syxyl GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

oO

Takata Madariaga, Spain, Senna (p. 537)
Talso Sanofi-Synthelabo GmbH, Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Tanacain Ipsen EpE, Greece, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tanacet Ashbury Biologicals Inc., Canada, Feverfew (p. 263) Herbal Laboratories
Ltd, UK, Feverfew (p. 263)

Tanaceto Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Feverfew (p. 263)
Tanakan Laboratorios Phoenix S.A.I.C.F., Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299) Ipsen NV,
Belgium, Ginkgo (p. 299) Knoll SA Produtos Quimicos e Farmacéuticos, Brazil,
Ginkgo (p. 299) Beaufour Ipsen Pharma, France, Ginkgo (p. 299) IDS (Hong Kong)
Ltd Healthcare Division, Hong Kong, Ginkgo (p. 299) Europharm Trade Kft,
Hungary, Ginkgo (p. 299) Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ginkgo
(p. 299) Sime Darby Marketing, A Division of Sime Darby Singapore Ltd, Singapore,
Ginkgo (p. 299) Pacific Healthcare (Thailand) Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Laboratorio Leti S.A.V., Venezuela, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tanakan (Tanaka) Beaufour Ipsen International SNC, Russia, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Preparations Directory

Tanakan Antah Pharma Sdb Bhd, Emerging Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Ginkgo
(p. 299)

Tanakene Ipsen Pharma, Spain, Ginkgo (p. 299) F. Uhlmann-Eyraud SA,
Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tavonin VSM Belgium, Belgium, Ginkgo (p. 299) VSM Geneesmiddelen BV,
Netherlands, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tebofortan Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Ginkgo (p. 299) ASI
Budapest Kft, Hungary, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tebokan Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Ginkgo
(p. 299) Vianex S.A., Greece, Ginkgo (p. 299) Schwabe Pharma AG, Switzerland,
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tebonin Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Ginkgo (p. 299) Altana Pharma
Ltda, Brazil, Ginkgo (p. 299) Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Ginkgo
(p. 299) AS! Budapest Kft, Hungary, Ginkgo (p. 299) Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de
CV., Mexico, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Tegens Sanofi-Synthelabo S.p.A., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Teltonal Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207)
Tenag Marjan Industria e Comércio Ltda, Brazil, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Tenliv Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Feverfew (p. 263)

Tensiane Greenpharma Quimica e Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168)

Tesalin Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Butterbur
(p. 107)

Tetesept Erkaltungs tetesept Pharma GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Teufelskralle&xref details= ratiopharm GmbH, Stada GmbH, Germany, Devil's
Claw (p. 207)

Texx Krewel Meuselbach GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Thankgod Panacea Biotec Ltd, India, Euphorbia (p. 249)
Thermo Burger Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Capsicum (p. 125)

© Thyme (p. 574)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Thymi Syrup Vitamed Ltd, Israel, Thyme (p. 574)
Thymipin N Novartis Consumer Health GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Thymiverlan Verla-Pharm, Arzneimittelfabrik, Apotheker H.J.v. Ehrlich GmbH &
Co. KG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Thymusin N G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Thyme (p. 574)

Tia Puppy Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Ticalma Kelemata S.p.A., Italy, Valerian (p. 580)
Tisana Kelemata Kelemata S.p.A., Italy, Senna (p. 537)

Tisane laxative H nouvelle formulation Hadnseler AG, Switzerland, Senna
(p. 537)

Tisasen ICN Czech Republic as, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537)
Tonizin betapharm Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Tramisal Beaufour Ipsen Pharma, France, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Transilane Laboratoires Innotech International, Sté du groupe Innothéra, France,
Ispaghula (p. 374)

Transix Nycomed Christiaens, Belgium, Senna (p. 537)

Traumaplant F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Comfrey (p. 188) Horna Business Service,
Czech Republic, Comfrey (p. 188) Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH,
Germany, Comfrey (p. 188) Laboratorios Cofasa S.A., Venezuela, Comfrey (p. 188)

Travacalm Natural Hamilton Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ginger (p. 293)
Travel Sickness The Cantassium Company, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

Trezalka v Nalevovych Sacchich Leros sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Trezalkova Nat Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Trezalkovy Caj Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Triativ Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Triffadiane Laboratorios Politecnicos Nacionales C.A., Venezuela, Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Trinovin Novogen Laboratories P/L, Australia, Red Clover (p. 498)
Trio D Laboratoires d’Evolution Dermatologique, France, Liquorice (p. 411)
Triple Blend Echinacea Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Echinacea (p. 217)

Turineurin Schering sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549) Jenapharm
GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Tussamag Hustensaft N ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Tussamag Hustentropfen N ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Tussamag (Tyccamar) Ratiopharm Group, Russia, Thyme (p. 574)

----- PAGE 645 -----
Appendix 4

Tussiflorin Thymian Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany,
Thyme (p. 574)

CU)

Unisom Natural Source Pfizer Consumer Healthcare, Division of Pfizer Canada
Inc., Canada, Valerian (p. 580)

Uricleanse Douglas Pharmaceuticals Australia Ltd, Australia, Cranberry (p. 197)
Urogutt Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Uro-POS Croma-Pharma GmbH, Austria, Nettle (p. 452) Ursapharm Arzneimittel
GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Urtivit Bional Pharma Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
utk TAD Pharma GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)
Uvalysat Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

e Uva-Ursi (p. 577)
UK: Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd

Uvavid Productos Maver S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

@

Valdispert Solvay Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Valerian (p. 580) Solvay
Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Valerian (p. 580) Solvay Pharma BV, Netherlands,
Valerian (p. 580) Solvayfarma, Lda, Portugal, Valerian (p. 580) Solvay Pharma,
Spain, Valerian (p. 580) Solvay Pharma AG, Switzerland, Valerian (p. 580)

Valerecen Abigo Medical AB, Sweden, Valerian (p. 580)
Valerial Zambon SA, Belgium, Valerian (p. 580)

Valerian (p. 580)

UK: Culpeper and Napiers; Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd; Healthy Direct;
Holland and Barrett; Quest Vitamins Ltd

USA: Nature Made; Nature’s Bounty; Sundown

Valeriana Orto Normon S.A., Spain, Valerian (p. 580)

Valeriane Quimica E Farmacéutica Nikkho do Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)
Valerimed Cimed Industria de Medicamentos Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)
Valerin Fontovit Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)

Valerix Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)

Valeton Rekah Ltd, Israel, Valerian (p. 580)

Valezen Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)

Valmane Solvay Farma Ltda, Brazil, Valerian (p. 580)

Valrian Oy Leiras Finland AB, Finland, Valerian (p. 580)

Valsedan Cederroth, Spain, Valerian (p. 580)

Valverde Artischocke Novartis Consumer Health GmbH, Germany, Artichoke
(p. 67)

Valverde Boutons de fievre creme Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Melissa (p. 425)

Valverde Monchspfeffer bei Menstruationsbeschwerden Novartis Consumer
Health GmbH, Germany, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Valverde Prostate capsules Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Nettle (p. 452)
Varicid Lacer, Spain, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Varilise Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Varison Grunenthal Lda, Grunenthal Lda, Portugal, Bilberry (p. 79)
Vasactife Ferring Portuguesa, Lda, Portugal, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Vasodil Altana Pharma S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Venafort Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venalot novo Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut
(p. 363)

Venastat Boehringer Ingelheim S.A., Argentina, Horse-chestnut (p. 363) Boehringer
Ingelheim, Chile, Horse-chestnut (p. 363) Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma
Magyarorszdgi Kereskedelmi Képviselet, Hungary, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Boehringer Ingelheim Promeco, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venavit N UB Interpharm SA, Switzerland, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venen-Dragees ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venen-Fluid ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venen-Tabletten Stada GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venentabs ratiopharm GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venen-Tropfen N Bioforce GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venitan Lek Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Veno-biomo biomo Pharma GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venodura Merck dura GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venoplant VSM Belgium, Belgium, Horse-chestnut (p. 363) Dr Willmar Schwabe
GmbH & Co., Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venoplant top Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Venopyronum Abbott GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venosin Fujisawa GmbH, Austria, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venostasin Quimica Ariston S.A.C.I.F., Argentina, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Fujisawa GmbH, Austria, Horse-chestnut (p. 363) Ariston Industrias Quimicas e
Farm. Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363) Fujisawa Deutschland GmbH, Germany,
Horse-chestnut (p. 363) Altana Pharma Ltd, Switzerland, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Veraskin Laboratoires Mazal Pharmaceutique, France, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

e Vervain (p. 591)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Vibtil Therabel Pharma SA, Belgium, Lime Flower (p. 409) SERP, Monaco, Lime
Flower (p. 409)

Viru-Salvysat Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Sage (p. 512)
Viscysat Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Vi-Siblin Pfizer ApS Danmark, Denmark, Ispaghula (p. 374) Pfizer Oy, Finland,
Ispaghula (p. 374) Nycomed Pharma AS, Norway, Ispaghula (p. 374) Recip AB,
Sweden, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Vitacor UB Interpharm SA, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Vitalium Farma Lepori, Spain, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Vitenon Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Agnus Castus (p. 36)

Vitex Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Agnus Castus (p. 36)
Volcolon Pfizer BV, Netherlands, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Vulcase Teofarma, Italy, Aloes (p. 50)

@

Wiedimmun Wiedemann Pharma GmbH, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)

Wild Lettuce (p. 596)
UK: Culpeper and Napiers

Witch Doctor C.B. Fleet Co. (Australia) P/L, Australia, Witch Hazel (p. 601) E.C. De
Witt & Co. Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Witch Sunsore E.C. De Witt & Co. Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

@

X-Prep Mundipharma GmbH, Austria, Senna (p. 537) Purdue Pharma, Canada,
Senna (p. 537) Mundipharma GmbH, Czech Republic, Senna (p. 537) Lavipharm
Group, Greece, Senna (p. 537) Viatris S.p.A., Italy, Senna (p. 537) Ferring S.A. de C.
V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537) mundipharma AS, Norway, Senna (p. 537) Viatris
Farmacéutica SA, Portugal, Senna (p. $37) Mundipharma Medical Co, Switzerland,
Senna (p. 537) The Purdue Frederick Co., USA, Senna (p. 537)

@

Yakona Tentan AG, Switzerland, St John's Wort (p. 549)

@

Zihlava Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Nettle (p. 452)
Zinaxin Vita Healthcare Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

Zintona Herbalist & Doc Gesundheitsgesellschaft mbH, Germany, Ginger (p. 293)
Chrisana GmbH, Switzerland, Ginger (p. 293)

Zortrix Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Willow (p. 598)

Multiple-ingredient preparations

©

A Saude da Mulher EMS Ind. Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Passionflower (p. 461)
Abanta Laboratorios Columbia de Argentina SA, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Abdomilon Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Angelica (p. 53),
Calamus (p. 118), Frangula (p. 270), Gentian (p. 290), Melissa (p. 425), Rhubarb
(p. 506)

Abdomilon N Caesaro Med GmbH, Austria, Angelica (p. 53), Calamus (p. 118),
Gentian (p. 290), Melissa (p. 425) Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany,
Angelica (p. 53), Calamus (p. 118), Gentian (p. 290), Melissa (p. 425)
Abfuhr-Heilkrautertee Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic,
Calendula (p. 121), Frangula (p. 270), Juniper (p. 386), Nettle (p. 452), Senna (p. 537)
Abfuhrtee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Senna (p. 537),
Yarrow (p. 604)

Absorbine Arthritis WF Young Inc., Canada, Capsicum (p. 125)
Acetoben Productos Ronava C.A., Venezuela, Senega (p. 533)

----- PAGE 646 -----
Acidosis Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Gentian (p. 290), Meadowsweet
(p. 423), Meadowsweet (p. 423), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Acne Oral Spray Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Burdock (p. 102)

Acnetrol Lagos Laboratorios Argentina S.R.L., Argentina, Calendula (p. 121),
Rosemary (p. 508), Sage (p. 512)

Ac-Sal /sdin Chile Ltda, Chile, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Acti Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Artichoke (p. 67), Fumitory (p. 276)
Actimind Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Activex 40 Plus Adcock Ingram Pharmaceuticals Ltd, South Africa, Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325)

Acuaderm Laboritorios Felipe Bajer S.A.I.C., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Adiantine Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Adios DDD Ltd, UK, Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion (p. 204)

Ad-Muc Merz Pharmaceuticals GmbH, Germany, Myrrh (p. 449) Weston
Pharmaceutical Ltd, Hong Kong, Myrrh (p. 449)

Adult Citrex Multivitamin + Ginseng + Omega 3 Pharmaniaga Marketing
Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Aescusan Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Aforinol Rekah Ltd, Israel, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

After Burn Tender Corporation, Czech Republic, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Aftil Laboratorios Elmor S.A., Venezuela, Cinnamon (p. 162)

Agiolax Laboratorios Phoenix S.A.I.C.F., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna

(p. 537) Knoll Australia, Australia, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Madaus GmbH,
Austria, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Madaus Pharma SA, Belgium, Ispaghula
(p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Altana Pharma Ltda, Brazil, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna

(p. 537) Meda Oy, Finland, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Laboratoires Madaus,
France, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Madaus AG, Germany, Ispaghula (p. 374),
Senna (p. 537) Trinity Trading Co. Ltd, Hong Kong, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)
Salomon, Levin, & Elstein Ltd, Israel, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Madaus S.r.
L, Italy, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Altana Pharma S.A. de C.V., Mexico,
Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Byk Nederland BV, Netherlands, Ispaghula

(p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Meda A/S, Norway, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Neo-
Farmacéutica, Lda, Portugal, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Altana Madaus Pty
Ltd, South Africa, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Madaus, Spain, Ispaghula

(p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Meda AB, Sweden, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Max
Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna

(p. 537) Oui Heng Import Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537) Zuoz
Pharma S.A., Venezuela, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Agua del Carmen Fardi, Spain, Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Lemon
Verbena (p. 405), Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425)

Ajo 1000 + C Lab. Garden House S.A., Argentina, Garlic (p. 279)

Ajolip Lab. Natufarma, Argentina, Garlic (p. 279), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Akildia Laboratoires Asepta, Monaco, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Alasenn Pharma Schworer GmbH, Germany, Dandelion (p. 204), Senna (p. 537),
Yarrow (p. 604)

Albizia Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Feverfew (p. 263), Scullcap (p. 530)
Alcafelol Luper Indvistria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)
Alcaflor Luper Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)
Alkagin Istituto Ganassini S.p.A. di Ricerche Biochimiche, Italy, Calendula (p. 121),
Lime Flower (p. 409) Dermoteca, SA, Portugal, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Calendula (p. 121),
Lime Flower (p. 409)

Allens Chesty Cough Allens & Co. (Anglesey) Ltd, UK, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Allens Dry Tickly Cough Allens & Co. (Anglesey) Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125)
Allens Pine & Honey Allens & Co. (Anglesey) Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411)
Allercept Jamieson Laboratories, Canada, Nettle (p. 452)

AllerClear Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic (p. 279)
Allium Plus Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Garlic

(p. 279), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Almodin Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Aloe Grande Gordon Laboratories, USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Aloe Vera Plus GNLD International P/L, Australia, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Aloebel Lab. Fortbenton Co. S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Aloelax Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Aloes (p. 50)

Alofedina Coll Farma, Spain, Aloes (p. 50)

Althaea Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Marshmallow

(p. 418), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Alvear con Ginseng Specialitd Igienico Terapeutiche S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79),
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Preparations Directory

Alvisan Neo Leros sro, Czech Republic, Hawthorn (p. 346), Melissa (p. 425), Milk
Thistle (p. 429), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Amara Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Centaury (p. 149), Dandelion
(p. 204), Gentian (p. 290), Juniper (p. 386), Sage (p. 512), Yarrow (p. 604)

Amara-Pascoe Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Cinnamon
(p. 162), Gentian (p. 290)

Amara-Tropfen Weleda AG-Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany, Centaury (p. 149),
Dandelion (p. 204), Gentian (p. 290), Juniper (p. 386), Sage (p. 512), Yarrow (p. 604)

Amaro Medicinale Giuliani S.p.A., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Gentian
(p. 290), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Amerigel Amerx Health Care Corp., USA, Meadowsweet (p. 423)

Amersan Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Agrimony (p. 42), Bilberry
(p. 79), Yarrow (p. 604) Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic,
Agrimony (p. 42), Bilberry (p. 79), Yarrow (p. 604)

Amphodyn Fujisawa Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
anabol-loges Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Anaemodoron Weleda GmbH & Co. KG, Austria, Nettle (p. 452)

Anased Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Ispaghula (p. 374),
Passionflower (p. 461), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Anastim con RTH Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Andrographis Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)

Andrographis Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217),
Sculleap (p. 530)

Anevrasi Donini S.r.1., Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Angioton GD Tecnologie Interdisciplinari Farmaceutiche S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry
(p. 79), Ginkgo (p. 299), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Angocin Anti-Infekt N Repha GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel, Germany,
Horseradish (p. 367)

Antiacneicos Ac-Sal Isdin Lda, Portugal, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Antibron Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Coltsfoot (p. 185), Euphorbia (p. 249),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Pleurisy Root (p. 477), Senega (p. 533), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Antiestrias Isdin Lda, Portugal, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Antifect Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic (p. 279)

Antiglan Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Hydrangea (p. 369), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Antihypertonicum S$ Schuck GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346), Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Antioxidant Forte Tablets Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Antirevmaticky Caj Leros sro, Czech Republic, Devil's Claw (p. 207),
Meadowsweet (p. 423), Willow (p. 598)

Antitis Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Clivers (p. 164),
Couchgrass (p. 193), Senna (p. 537), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Antitos Lab. Pharma del Plata S.R.L., Argentina, Senega (p. 533)
Antomiopic Novartis Farmaceutica, Spain, Bilberry (p. 79)

Anusol Pfizer P/L, Australia, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Apaisance Laboratoires Liérac, France, Lime Flower (p. 409), Pilewort (p. 472)
Apergan Farmaceutici G.B. Panzera S.r.I., Italy, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Aphloine P Laboratoires DB Pharma, France, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Aphtagone Trima, Israel, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Api Baby Sanitalia S.n.c. di Battaglia & C., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Appetiser Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Gentian (p. 290)
Aptha-X C.T.S. Chemical Industries Ltd, Israel, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Aqua Ban Herbal G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers
(p. 164), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Aqualette Medic Herb UK Ltd, UK, Dandelion (p. 204) Lichtwer Pharma UK,

Aqualibra Medice, Arzneimittel Putter GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Java Tea
(p. 381)

Arbum Laboratoires Jaldes, France, Burdock (p. 102)

Arceligasol Lab E J Gezzi SRL, Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Coltsfoot (p. 185)
Arctuvan Fujisawa Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)
Ardeysedon Ardeypharm GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Argeal Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Laboratoires
Pierre Fabre, France, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Arheumacare Health Perception Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293)
Aristaloe Neo Dermos S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Arkophytum Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Willow
(p. 598)

----- PAGE 647 -----
Appendix 4

Armonil Ivax Argentina SA, Argentina, Lime Flower (p. 409), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Armonyl Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Arnicadol Laboratoires Phytomedica, France, Arnica (p. 64)

Arnicet Metochem-Pharma GmbH, Austria, Arnica (p. 64), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Arnicon Pan Quimica Farmaceutica, Spain, Arnica (p. 64)

Arnidol Horna Business Service, Czech Republic, Arnica (p. 64)

Arowash Zydus Cadila Group, India, Liquorice (p. 411)

Arterase Laboratoires Clément-Thékan, France, Garlic (p. 279), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363)

Arterosan Plus Doetsch Grether AG, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299), Hawthorn
(p. 346), Melissa (p. 425)

Arthriforte Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Devil's Claw (p. 207)

Arthritic Pain Herbal Formula 1 Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Celery (p. 146),
Devil's Claw (p. 207), Juniper (p. 386), Willow (p. 598)

Artin Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Aloes (p. 50), Frangula (p. 270)
Artrex MD Pharmaceuticals Pte Ltd, Singapore, Ginger (p. 293)

Asa Tones Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Drosera (p. 215), Euphorbia
(p. 249), Hawthorn (p. 346), Liquorice (p. 411)

Asic Cesam, Lda, Portugal, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)
Asmatiron /befar Inst. Brasileiro de Esp. Ftcas. Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)
Asparagus-P Plantina Biologische Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Parsley (p. 456)

Asthma & Catarrh Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Asthmatee EF-EM-ES FF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Aniseed (p. 57),
Arnica (p. 64)

Astragalus Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Astrijesan Farmo Quimica del Pacifico SA, Chile, Myrrh (p. 449)

Athera G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Clivers (p. 164), Parsley (p. 456), Senna
(p. 537), Vervain (p. 591)

Avedorm duo Dr. Friedrich Eberth Arzneimittel, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian
(p. 580)

Avena Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Rosemary (p. 508), Vervain (p. 591)

Avena Sativa Comp Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580) Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Avenoc Boiron CZ sro, Czech Republic, Pilewort (p. 472)
Avensyl Laboratorios Elmor S.A., Venezuela, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Aviril H Leciva as, Czech Republic, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

CB)

B-100 Complex Natrol, USA, Alfalfa (p. 45)
Baby Paste + Chamomile Vitamed Ltd, Israel, Sage (p. 512)
Babygella Rottapharm S.r.1., Italy, Calendula (p. 121)

Backache Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Burdock (p. 102),
Clivers (p. 164), Dandelion (p. 204), Gravel Root (p. 340), Hydrangea (p. 369), Juniper
(p. 386), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Backache Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Parsley Piert (p. 459),
Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Bacopa Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)
Bagohepat Laboratorios Bago S.A., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67)

Baldracin Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425),
Valerian (p. 580) Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Hops
(p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Baldrian AMA F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Baldrian-Dispert Nacht Solvay Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354),
Valerian (p. 580)

Baldriparan Whitehall-Robins AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425),
Valerian (p. 580)

Baldriparan N Stark Whitehall-Much GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Balm of Gilead Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Marshmallow (p. 418), St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Balsamo Analgesico Sanitas Upsifarma, Lda, Portugal, Capsicum (p. 125)

Balsamo Branco Laboratorio Catarinense S.A., Brazil, Aniseed (p. 57), Cinnamon
(p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Melissa (p. 425)

Balsoclase Compositum UCB Pharma BV, Netherlands, Thyme (p. 574)
Banoftal Alcon Cusi, Spain, Calendula (p. 121), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Bebimix Sella A. Lab. Chim. Farm. S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Bekunis Complex Diafarm, Spain, Senna (p. 537)

Bentasil Licorice with Echinacea Carter Horner Inc., Canada, Liquorice (p. 411)
Bentasil Licorice with Echina-cea Carter Horner Inc., Canada, Echinacea (p. 217)

Benylin First Defense Pfizer Consumer Healthcare, Division of Pfizer Canada
Inc., Canada, Echinacea (p. 217)

Benzomel Casa Granado Lab. Farmacias e Drogarias S.A., Brazil, Passionflower
(p. 461)

Berberis Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion (p. 204)
Berggeist Kur- und Stadtapotheke, Austria, Arnica (p. 64), Nettle (p. 452)

Betaine Digestive Aid GNLD International P/L, Australia, Liquorice (p. 411),
Rhubarb (p. 506)

Bicholate Sabex Inc., Canada, Cascara (p. 128)
Bilaxil Bayer SA, Chile, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Bilberry Plus Eye Health Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo
(p. 299)

Bilbery 40mg Natrol, USA, Bilberry (p. 79)
Bilidren Lab. Lafage S.R.L., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Cascara (p. 128)

Bilifel Neckerman Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara
(p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Bilifuge Laboratoires Plan SA, Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67), Java Tea (p. 381)

Biliosan Compuesto Lab. Hexa-Medinova S.A., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67),
Boldo (p. 91)

Bilisan Duo Repha GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel, Germany, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Biocalm Lizofarm S.r.l., Italy, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Biocarde Laboratoires Lehning, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Melissa (p. 425),
Motherwort (p. 447), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

BioCyst CytoChemia AG, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)

Bioglan 3B Beer Belly Buster Bioglan Ltd, Australia, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Bioglan Arthri Plus Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Willow (p. 598)
Bioglan Bioage Peripheral Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Bioglan Cirflo Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Pulsatilla (p. 489),
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Bioglan Cranbiotic Super Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Cranberry
(p. 197), Dandelion (p. 204), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Bioglan Ginger-Vite Forte Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Ginger (p. 293)

Bioglan Ginsynergy Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315),
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Bioglan Joint Mobility Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Capsicum (p. 125)

Bioglan Mens Super Soy/Clover Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Damiana (p. 201), Red
Clover (p. 498), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Bioglan Psylli-Mucil Plus Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Ginger (p. 293), Ispaghula
(p. 374), Slippery Elm (p. 545)

Bioglan Pygno-Vite Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79)
Bioglan Soy Power Plus Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Red Clover (p. 498)

Bioglan The Blue One Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Capsicum (p. 125), Damiana
(p. 201)

Bioglan Vision-Eze Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Bioglan Zellulean with Escin Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299), Horse-
chestnut (p. 363)

Biolactine Sella A. Lab. Chim. Farm. S.r.1., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Biomicovo Laboratorio Biotecnoquimica, Venezuela, Arnica (p. 64), Calendula
(p. 121), St John's Wort (p. 549), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Biophase Shampoo Ecofarm Group Srl, Italy, Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166)
bioplant-Kamillenfluid Serumwerk Bernburg AG, Germany, Calendula (p. 121)

Biosedon Sabona GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Bio-Strath Bio-Strath AG, Czech Republic, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Bio-Strath Artichoke Formula Cedar Health Ltd, UK, Artichoke (p. 67), Holy
Thistle (p. 352)

Bio-Strath Valerian Formula Cedar Health Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Bio-Strath Willow Formula Cedar Health Ltd, UK, Cowslip (p. 195), Willow
(p. 598)

Biotene with Calcium Laclede Inc., USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

----- PAGE 648 -----
Biothymus DS Biochimici PSN S.p.A., Italy, Nettle (p. 452), Willow (p. 598)
Biothymus M Urto Biochimici PSN S.p.A., Italy, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Bioton Sella A. Lab. Chim. Farm. S.r.l., Italy, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Biotussil Biomedica sro, Czech Republic, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian
(p. 290), Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme (p. 574)

Biovital Roche (Magyarorszdg) Kft, Hungary, Hawthorn (p. 346), Motherwort
(p. 447)

Biovital Roche (Magyarorszdg) Kft, Hungary, Motherwort (p. 447)

Biovital Aktiv Roche Consumer Health Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346), Hawthorn (p. 346), Motherwort (p. 447)

Biovital Classic Roche Consumer Health Deutschland GmbH, Germany,
Hawthorn (p. 346), Motherwort (p. 447)

Biovital Ginseng Bayer (Schweiz) AG, Pharma, Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Biral Altana Madaus Pty Ltd, South Africa, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)
Bisuisan DM Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Rhubarb (p. 506)

Black Cohosh Natrol, USA, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Blackoids du Docteur Meur SERP, Monaco, Liquorice (p. 411)

Blahungstee N Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic, Aniseed
(p. 57), Calendula (p. 121), Cinnamon (p. 162), Melissa (p. 425)

Blasen- und Nierentee Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic,
Calendula (p. 121), Liquorice (p. 411), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Blastoestimulina Almirall Prodesfarma S.A., Spain, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Bodi Kleen Geritrex Corp., USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Bodyguard Sanitalia S.n.c. di Battaglia & C., Italy, Devil's Claw (p. 207),
Echinacea (p. 217), Willow (p. 598)

Bolcitol Laboratoires Gabriel Lesourd, France, Boldo (p. 91), Fumitory (p. 276),
Sage (p. 512)

Boldex Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion (p. 204)
Boldina Lab. Pharma del Plata S.R.L., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Boldocynara Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion
(p. 204)

Boldopeptan Laboratorio Neo Quimica Comercio e Industria Ltda, Brazil, Boldo
(p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Boljuprima Laboratorios Prima Ltda, Brazil, Boldo (p. 91)

Bolus Laxans EGIS Pharmaceuticals, Hungary, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)
Bomacorin Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Bonningtons Irish Moss GlaxoSmithKline, New Zealand, Liquorice (p. 411)
Boots Alternatives Easy Digest Alliance Boots plc, UK, Artichoke (p. 67)
Boots Alternatives Laxative Alliance Boots plc, UK, Senna (p. 537)

Boots Alternatives Premenstrual Alliance Boots plc, UK, Evening Primrose
(p. 251)

Boots Alternatives Sharp Mind Alliance Boots plc, UK, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Boots Alternatives Sleep Well Alliance Boots plc, UK, Hops (p. 354), Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Boots Sleepeaze Herbal Tablets Alliance Boots plc, UK, Hops (p. 354), Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Borage Oil Natrol, USA, Borage (p. 96)
Borsdruppels Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Liquorice (p. 411)

Borstol Cough Remedy Group Laboratories SA (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Buchu
(p. 100), Senega (p. 533)

Boswellia Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Celery (p. 146), Ginger (p. 293)

Boswellia Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Ginger
(p. 293), Guaiacum (p. 344)

Botanica Hayfever Pacific Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd, New Zealand, Melissa
(p. 425)

Boxocalm Cheplapharm Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian
(p. 580)

Brady’s-Magentropfen Brady C. KG, Austria, Aniseed (p. 57), Cinnamon (p. 162),
Gentian (p. 290), Myrrh (p. 449)

Bromidrastina /befar Inst. Brasileiro de Esp. Ftcas. Ltda, Brazil, Golden Seal
(p. 337), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Bromocod N G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215)

Broncafect Mediherb P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Ginger (p. 293), Liquorice
(p. 411), Pleurisy Root (p. 477), Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchial £-Z-EM Canada Inc., Canada, Senega (p. 533)

Bronchialtee N Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic, Cowslip
(p. 195), Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme (p. 574)

Preparations Directory

Bronchicum Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme
(p. 574) Aventis Pharma, Netherlands, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchicum Elixir Aventis Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme
(p. 574)

Bronchicum Elixir $ Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchicum Husten (Bpornxuxym Cupon or Kamas) Sanofi-Aventis, Russia,
Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchicum Hustensirup Aventis Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchicum Pflanzlicher Hustenstiller Aventis Pharma sro, Czech Republic,
Drosera (p. 215)

Bronchicum Sekret-Loser Aventis Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchicum Tropfen Aventis Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Thyme (p. 574)
Bronchicum (Bponxuxym) Sanofi-Aventis, Russia, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchipret Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574) Bionorica
AG, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Bronchithym Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme
(p. 574)

Bronchostop Metochem-Pharma GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)
Bronchozone DC Labs Ltd, Canada, Liquorice (p. 411), Senega (p. 533)

Bronco Asmol Herbes Universelles, Canada, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Broncofenil Zurita Laboratorio Farmacéutico Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)
Broncol Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, Ginger (p. 293)

Broncosedina F.A.M.A. Istituto Chimico Biologico S.r.l., Italy, Juniper (p. 386),
Thyme (p. 574)

Broncovital Puerto Galiano, Spain, Drosera (p. 215), Senega (p. 533)

Bronpul Soria Natural, Spain, Elecampane (p. 240), Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Bronquidex Farmalab Industrias Quimicas e Farmacéuticas Ltda, Brazil,
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Bronquiogem Prodotti Laboratorio Farmacéutico Ltda, Brazil, Passionflower
(p. 461), Yucca (p. 610)

Brontoss Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)
Brown Mixture British Dispensary, Thailand, Liquorice (p. 411)

Brunavera Euroderm Laboratorios S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Calendula
(p. 121)

Brust- und Hustentee Bad Heilbrunner Naturheilmittel GmbH & Co., Germany,
Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Brust- und Hustentee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria,
Elecampane (p. 240), Thyme (p. 574)

Buchu Backache Compound Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd,
UK, Buchu (p. 100), Parsley Piert (p. 459), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Buco Regis Reig Jofre, Spain, Myrrh (p. 449)

Bulgarolax Laboratorios Chile SA, Chile, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128)
Bupleurum Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Bupleurum Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Burgerstein TopVital Antistress AG, Gesellschaft fur Gesundheitsschutz,
Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Bushi Laboratorios Andromaco S.A.1.C.I., Argentina, Calendula (p. 121)
Buttercup Syrup Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125), St John's Wort (p. 549)

@

Cadifen Ca.Di.Group S.r.I., Italy, Aniseed (p. 57), Liquorice (p. 411)
Cadimint Ca.Di.Group S.r.., Italy, Aniseed (p. 57), Liquorice (p. 411)

Cajova Smes pri Nachlazeni Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237), Lime
Flower (p. 409), Liquorice (p. 411)

Cajova Smes pri Redukcni Diete Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Liquorice
(p. 411), St John's Wort (p. 549), Yarrow (p. 604)

Cal Alkyline Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ginger (p. 293), Slippery Elm
(p. 545)

Cal 520 Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Alfalfa (p. 45)
Calcium with Magnesium Natrol, USA, Cranberry (p. 197)

Calendula Concreta Laboratorio Simées Ltda, Brazil, Calendula (p. 121)
Calendula Nappy Change Cream Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Calendula (p. 121)
Califig Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Senna (p. 537)

----- PAGE 649 -----
Appendix 4

Calman Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Willow (p. 598)

Calmanervin Meditec/Sam-On Ltd, Israel, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Calmanite Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354),
Pulsatilla (p. 489), Valerian (p. 580), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Calmapax Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Calmatol Farmo Quimica del Pacifico SA, Chile, Lime Flower (p. 409)

Calmazin /befar Inst. Brasileiro de Esp. Ftcas. Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461)

Calming Aid Sundown, USA, Kava (p. 389), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)
Calmiphase Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Calmiplan Bunker Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Willow (p. 598)

Calmo Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Gentian (p. 290), Milk Thistle
(p. 429), Passionflower (p. 461), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Scullcap (p. 530), Tansy (p. 572),
Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Calmophytum Laboratoires Holistica International, France, Lime Flower (p. 409),
Vervain (p. 591)

Camolyn Laboratorios L.O. Oftalmi C.A., Venezuela, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Canephron Bionorica AG, Germany, Centaury (p. 149), Rosemary (p. 508)

Canephron N (Kanedpou H) Bionorica AG, Russia, Centaury (p. 149), Rosemary
(p. 508)

Canephron novo Bionorica AG, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)
Canol Laboratoires Jolly-jatel, France, Artichoke (p. 67)

Capill Pharma Italia Laboratori Farmaceutici S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79), Horse-
chestnut (p. 363), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Capill Venogel Pharma Italia Laboratori Farmaceutici S.r.1., Italy, Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Capso Euroderm-RDC S.p.A., Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Capsules-vital Biomed AG, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Caramelle alle Erbe Digestive Giuliani S.p.A., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Gentian
(p. 290), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Caramelos Agua del Carmen Fardi, Spain, Melissa (p. 425)
Cardiaforce Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346), Melissa (p. 425)
Cardioace Vitabiotics Ltd, UK, Garlic (p. 279)

Cardiodoron Weleda GmbH & Co. KG, Austria, Cowslip (p. 195) Weleda AG-
Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195) Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South
Africa, Cowslip (p. 195)

Cardio-Longoral Artesan Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Cassella-med GmbH & Co.
KG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Carilax Mag. Dr. Till Strallhofer, Austria, Senna (p. 537)
Carmicide Indoco Remedies Ltd, India, Cinnamon (p. 162), Ginger (p. 293)
Carmol Iromedica AG, Switzerland, Melissa (p. 425)

Carmol Magen-Galle-Darm Omegin Dr Schmidgall GmbH & Co. KG, Germany,
Artichoke (p. 67), Dandelion (p. 204)

Cascade G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers (p. 164), Uva-
Ursi (p. 577)

Cascara Sagrada Bouzen Bouzen S.A.C,.I.F.A.F., Argentina, Cascara (p. 128)
Cascara-Salax Ferring Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Cascara (p. 128)

Castanha de India Composta Infabra Industria Farmacéutica Brasileira Ltda,
Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Catarrh Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Blue Flag (p. 87), Boneset
(p. 94), Burdock (p. 102), Capsicum (p. 125)

Catarrh Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217),
Lobelia (p. 416), Pokeroot (p. 479)

Catarrh-eeze Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Elecampane (p. 240), Yarrow (p. 604)

Catiz Plus Merck Quimica Argentina S.A.1.C., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Cats Claw Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)

Cayenne Plus Nutravite, Canada, Ginger (p. 293)

Cefadrin Cefak KG, Germany, Ephedra (p. 243), Thyme (p. 574)

Cefasabal Cefak KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Cefasedativ Cefak KG, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Cefawell Cefak KG, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Calendula (p. 121)

Celery Plus Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Burdock (p. 102), Celery
(p. 146), Devil's Claw (p. 207), Willow (p. 598)

Celltech Gold Laboratorios Recalcine SA, Chile, Borage (p. 96), Ginkgo (p. 299)
Celu-Atlas Atlas Farmaceutica, Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Celulase Con Neomicina Laboratorios Rider SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Cemalyt Saros Laboratorios, Spain, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Centella Complex Peter Italia sas, Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Hydrocotyle
(p. 371), Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Centella Queen Complex Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Centella Queen Reductora Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Centellase de Centella Queen Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Ginkgo
(p. 299), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Centellase Gel Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Centeril H Errekappa Euroterapici S.p.A., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363),
Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Cervusen Australian Medic-Care Co. Ltd, Hong Kong, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Cerylana Laboratorios Intra S.A., Venezuela, Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Chamberlains Cough Remedy Regular Pfizer Laboratories (Pty) Ltd, South
Africa, Liquorice (p. 411)

Chap Stick Whitehall, New Zealand, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Chase Coldsorex Stella Pharmaceutical Canada Inc., Canada, Myrrh (p. 449)

Chase Kolik GripeWater Stella Pharmaceutical Canada Inc., Canada, Ginger
(p. 293)

Chest Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Marshmallow (p. 418), Pleurisy
Root (p. 477), Senega (p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Chesty Cough Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Coltsfoot (p. 185), Liquorice
(p. 411), Senega (p. 533)

China-Eisenwein Mayrhofer Pharmazeutika, Austria, Centaury (p. 149),
Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian (p. 290)

Chlorophyl liquid Coradol-Pharma GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Chlorophyllin Salbe Coradol-Pharma GmbH, Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Choats Extract of Lettuce Cough Mixture Pfizer Laboratories (Pty) Ltd, South
Africa, Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Chofabol Allen Laboratorios, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Chofranina De Mayo Industrias Quimicas e Farmacéuticas Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke
(p. 67), Cascara (p. 128)

Cholagol Ivax-CR a s Kozvetlen Kereskedelmi Képviselet, Hungary, Frangula
(p. 270) Ivax-CR as, Ivax-CR as, Czech Republic, Frangula (p. 270)

Cholagutt Korangi S.A., Portugal, Calamus (p. 118), Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Cholasyn II Rolmex International Inc., Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. 537)
Cholhepan N Schuck GmbH, Germany, Aloes (p. 50), Milk Thistle (p. 429)
Chol-Kugeletten Neu Dolorgiet GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Aloes (p. 50)
Cholosom SL Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Dandelion (p. 204)

Cholosom-Tee Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Dandelion
(p. 204), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Cicaderma Boiron CZ sro, Czech Republic, Calendula (p. 121), Pulsatilla (p. 489), St
John's Wort (p. 549), Yarrow (p. 604) Prisfar, SA, Portugal, Calendula (p. 121), St
John's Wort (p. 549), Yarrow (p. 604)

Cicapost Isdin Chile Ltda, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Cimicifuga Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Cional Nycomed Austria GmbH, Austria, Arnica (p. 64), Sage (p. 512)

Circanetten Eversil Produtos Farmacéuticos Industria e Comércio Ltda, Brazil,
Senna (p. 537) Sriprasit Dispensary R O P, Thailand, Senna (p. 537)

Circulan Adroka AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461)
Ciruelax Jalea [vax Pharmaceuticals Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Senna (p. 537)
Cirulaxia Altana Pharma SA, Argentina, Senna (p. 537)

Cito-Guakalin Stada GmbH, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)

Citos Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Drosera (p. 215)
CitriMax Plus Natrol, USA, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Citrimax Plus with ChromeMate Natrol, USA, Cascara (p. 128)

Citro-C Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Echinacea (p. 217)

Clairo Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Aniseed (p. 57), Centaury (p. 149),
Clove (p. 166), Senna (p. 537), Yarrow (p. 604)

Cleansa Plus Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Burdock (p. 102), Nettle
(p. 452), Passionflower (p. 461), Red Clover (p. 498), Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

Cleansing Herbs Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Elder (p. 237), Senna (p. 537)
Clearasil Double Clear Procter & Gamble, USA, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Clevosan Lab. Baliarda S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

----- PAGE 650 -----
Climaxol Laboratoires Lehning, France, Golden Seal (p. 337), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Climil Complex Wassen Italia S.r.1., Italy, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Climil-80 Wassen Italia S.r.1., Italy, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)
Clogar Self-Care Products Ltd, UK, Garlic (p. 279)

Coci-Fedra MPL, Marching Pharmaceutical Ltd, Hong Kong, Senega (p. 533), St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Cocillana Christo Christo Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Hong Kong, Euphorbia (p. 249),
Senega (p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Cocillana Co Adcock Ingram Pharmaceuticals Ltd, South Africa, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Cocillana Compound Synco (HK) Ltd, Hong Kong, Euphorbia (p. 249), Senega
(p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549) Universal Pharmaceutical Lab Ltd, Hong Kong,
Euphorbia (p. 249), Senega (p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549) Vida Laboratories Ltd,
Hong Kong, Euphorbia (p. 249), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Cocillana-Etyfin Ellem Lakemedel AB, Sweden, Senega (p. 533)

Codebromil Laboratorios Vincenti C.A., Venezuela, Drosera (p. 215), Thyme
(p. 574)

Codelum Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)
Colachofra EMS Ind. Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Coladren Cooperativa Farmaceutica Soc. (CoFa Farmaceutici), Italy, Boldo (p. 91),
Cascara (p. 128)

Colax Mediherb P/L, Australia, Cascara (p. 128), Dandelion (p. 204), Yellow Dock
(p. 608) Mediherb P/L, Officina Farmaceutica Fiorentina S.r.l. Istituto Biochimico,
Italy, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Cold and Flu Relief Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)
Cold Sore Lotion DC Labs Ltd, Canada, Myrrh (p. 449)

Coleus Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Hawthorn (p. 346), Valerian (p. 580)
Colimax Qualiphar SA, Belgium, Thyme (p. 574)

Colimil Milte Italia S.p.A., Italy, Melissa (p. 425)

Collypan Vifor SA, Switzerland, Eyebright (p. 256), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Colosan plus Vifor SA, Switzerland, Frangula (p. 270)

Combudoron Weleda AG-Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Nettle
(p. 452) Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Arnica (p. 64), Nettle (p. 452)
Weleda AG, Switzerland, Arnica (p. 64), Nettle (p. 452)

Comfrey Plus Concept for Pharmacy Ltd, Israel, Comfrey (p. 188)

Composto Anticelulitico Infabra Industria Farmacéutica Brasileira Ltda, Brazil,
Ginkgo (p. 299), Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Composto Emagrecedor Viternat Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67),
Cascara (p. 128), Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Passionflower (p. 461)

Compound Laxative Syrup of Figs Alliance Boots plc, UK, Senna (p. 537)

Concentrated Milk of Magnesia-Cascara Roxane Laboratories Inc., a
Subsidiary of Boehringer Ingelheim, USA, Cascara (p. 128)

Confetti Lassativi CM Giuliani S.p.A., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Senna
(p. 537)

Confortel Forder Lab. Esp. Dermatologicas, Argentina, Pilewort (p. 472)
Constipation Nobel Pharm Enrg, Canada, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

Constipation Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Aloes (p. 50),
Senna (p. 537), Valerian (p. 580)

Contra-Coff Universal Pharmaceuticals (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Contraspan Ivax-CR as, Ivax-CR as, Czech Republic, Valerian (p. 580)
Control Les Laboratoires Bio-Santé, Canada, Cascara (p. 128)

Controlacne Pharmalab, Division de Stonglass SA, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48),
Calendula (p. 121)

Contusin Lacer, Spain, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Convallocor-SL Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Convastabil Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Cosylan Pfizer AS, Norway, Cascara (p. 128)

Cough Elixir Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Aniseed (p. 57), Drosera
(p. 215), Marshmallow (p. 418), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Thyme (p. 574)

Cough Relief Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Nettle (p. 452), Thyme (p. 574)

Cough-eeze Perrigo, UK, Elecampane (p. 240)
Covonia Mentholated Thornton & Ross Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411), St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Cran Support Natrol, USA, Cat's Claw (p. 132), Corn Silk (p. 191), Cranberry
(p. 197)

Preparations Directory

CranAssure Nature Made, USA, Cranberry (p. 197)
Cranberry Natrol, USA, Cranberry (p. 197)

Cranberry Complex Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Cranberry
(p. 197), Uva-Ursi (p. 577) Mediherb P/L, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Cranberry
(p. 197), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Cran-C Holista Health Corp, Canada, Cranberry (p. 197)

Cratex Corporacion de Salud C.A., Venezuela, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Creme Rap Laboratoires IPRAD, France, Arnica (p. 64), Broom (p. 98), Horse-
chestnut (p. 363)

Cremor cap: comp Pharmachemie BV, Netherlands, Capsicum (p. 125)
Cremor Capsici compositus ratiopharm GmbH, Germany, Capsicum (p. 125)

Crislaxo Quimifar, Spain, Aloes (p. 50), Aniseed (p. 57), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb
(p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Critichol Aziende Chimiche Riunite Angelini Francesco S.p.A., Italy, Boldo (p. 91),
Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Cuassicum Nucleopharm SRL, Argentina, Quassia (p. 491)

Culpeper After Dinner Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Chamomile, German
(p. 152)

Culpeper DeTox Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Dandelion (p. 204), Liquorice
(p. 411), Nettle (p. 452)

Cuscutine Geymonat S.p.A., Italy, Senna (p. 537)

Cycloven Forte N ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Cynarix comp Montavit GmbH, Austria, Artichoke (p. 67)

Cynaro Bilina Nutridiver SL, Spain, Aloes (p. 50), Artichoke (p. 67)

Cynarosan Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Artichoke (p. 67),
Dandelion (p. 204), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Cynarzym N Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Artichoke (p. 67),
Boldo (p. 91)

Cystinol Hoyer-Madaus GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

[D)

Daily Fatigue Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Damiana (p. 201), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Daily Tension & Strain Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Asafoetida (p. 72),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Dam Laboratorio Terapeutico M.R. S.r.., Italy, Cinnamon (p. 162), Damiana
(p. 201)

DAM Antacidum Corifel SA, Switzerland, Liquorice (p. 411)

Damiana and Kola Tablets Dorwest Herbs Ltd, UK, Damiana (p. 201), Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Damiana-Sarsaparilla Formula Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada,
Damiana (p. 201), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325), Liquorice (p. 411), Sarsaparilla (p. 515),
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Dan Shen Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Hawthorn (p. 346), Valerian
(p. 580)

Dandelion Complex Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Artichoke (p. 67),
Burdock (p. 102), Capsicum (p. 125), Dandelion (p. 204), Ginger (p. 293)

Davilla Rekah Ltd, Israel, Cinnamon (p. 162), Rhubarb (p. 506)
De Witt’s K & B Pills E.C. De Witt & Co. Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

De Witts New Pills C.B. Fleet Co. (Australia) P/L, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Uva-
Ursi (p. 577)

De Witts Pills Regional Health Ltd, New Zealand, Buchu (p. 100), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)
Decon Ovuli /P Farma Sas, Italy, Calendula (p. 121), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Dekar 2 Pentamedical S.r.1., Italy, Quassia (p. 491)

Dellova Laboratoires Clément-Thionville, France, Java Tea (p. 381)

Demo Elixir pectoral N Vifor SA, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215)

Demonatur Capsules contre les refroidissements Vifor SA, Switzerland,
Echinacea (p. 217)

Demonatur Dragees pour les reins et la vessie Vifor SA, Switzerland,
Echinacea (p. 217), Java Tea (p. 381), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Demonatur Gouttes pour le foie et la bile Vifor SA, Switzerland, Artichoke
(p. 67), Dandelion (p. 204), Gentian (p. 290), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

DemoPectol Vifor SA, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195), Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme
(p. 574)

DemoPectol Vifor SA, Switzerland, Thyme (p. 574)
DemotTussil Vifor SA, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215), Liquorice (p. 411)
Demoven N Vifor SA, Switzerland, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

----- PAGE 651 -----
Appendix 4

Dentinox Altana Pharma GmbH, Austria, Myrrh (p. 449)
Dentosan Carie & Alito Pfizer Italiana S.r.l., Italy, Bloodroot (p. 84)

Depuratif Parnel Laboratoires Phytoprevent, France, Burdock (p. 102), Fumitory
(p. 276)

Depurativo Richelet Vitafarma, Spain, Gentian (p. 290)

Depuratum Laboratoires Lehning, France, Fumitory (p. 276), Juniper (p. 386),
Rosemary (p. 508), Thyme (p. 574)

Derma Care Fischer Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Israel, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Dermaco Mediherb P/L, Australia, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers (p. 164), Sarsaparilla
(p. 515), Yellow Dock (p. 608)

Dermaglos Plus Laboratorios Andromaco SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Dermaloe Forder Lab. Esp. Dermatologicas, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Derm’attive 10 Sidone Induistria e Comercio Ltda., Brazil, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Derm/’attive Solaire Sidone Industria e Comercio Ltda., Brazil, Aloe Vera (p. 48),
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Dermilia Flebozin Depofarma S.r.1., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79), Echinacea (p. 217),
Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Dermitina Donini S.r.1., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Dermocica Laboratoires Phytomedica, France, Arnica (p. 64)
Dermol Laboratorio Simdes Ltda, Brazil, Arnica (p. 64)
Dermoprolyn Infosint S.p.A., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Dermtex HC with Aloe Pfeiffer Company, USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Dermvien Hautel S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Desitin Creamy Pfizer Pte Ltd, Singapore, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Detska Cajova Smes Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Detsky Caj s Hermankem Leros sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237), Hops (p. 354),
Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Devils Claw Plus Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Celery (p. 146), Devil's
Claw (p. 207)

Diabesor Soria Natural, Spain, Burdock (p. 102), Sage (p. 512)

Diabetan Leros sro, Czech Republic, Bilberry (p. 79), Burdock (p. 102), Dandelion
(p. 204), Liquorice (p. 411), Sage (p. 512)

Diabeticka Cajova Smes-Megadiabetin Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic,
Bilberry (p. 79), Dandelion (p. 204), Nettle (p. 452), Sage (p. 512)

Diacure Laboratoires Lehning, France, Bilberry (p. 79), Centaury (p. 149),
Dandelion (p. 204)

Diaparene Corn Starch Personal Care Group Inc., USA, Aloes (p. 50)
Dicalmir Dicofarm S.p.A., Italy, Aniseed (p. 57), Liquorice (p. 411)

Difrarel Laboratoires Leurquin Mediolanum, France, Bilberry (p. 79) Sigma-Tau
Ethifarma B.V., Netherlands, Bilberry (p. 79)

Difrarel E Laboratoires Leurquin Mediolanum, France, Bilberry (p. 79) Ubepharm,
Hungary, Bilberry (p. 79)

Digelax Balverda Srl, Italy, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128),
Rhubarb (p. 506)

Digest Mediherb P/L, Australia, Dandelion (p. 204), Echinacea (p. 217), Gentian
(p. 290), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Digestaid Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Gentian (p. 290) Healthy Direct,
UK, Gentian (p. 290)

Digestar Brasmedica S.A. Industrias Farmacéuticas, Brazil, Gentian (p. 290)

Digestive Dorwest Herbs Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293), Golden Seal (p. 337), Rhubarb
(p. 506), Valerian (p. 580)

Digestive Aid Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Slippery
Elm (p. 545)

Digestodoron Weleda GmbH & Co. KG, Austria, Willow (p. 598) Weleda AG-
Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany, Willow (p. 598) Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South
Africa, Willow (p. 598)

Digestovital Puerto Galiano, Spain, Aniseed (p. 57)

Digestron Lopes Produtos Farmaceuticos S.A., Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Holy
Thistle (p. 352), Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Dilaescol Dr. Kolassa & Merz GmbH, Austria, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Dioptec Laboratoires Dergam, France, Calendula (p. 121)
Diovol Forte DGL Wallace Pharmaceuticals Ltd, India, Liquorice (p. 411)

Dioxicolagol Lab. Fabra S.R.L., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91),
Valerian (p. 580)

Dis-Cinil Complex A. Menarini Industrie Farmaceutiche Riunite S.r.l., Italy, Boldo
(p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Disogel Concept Pharmaceuticals Ltd, India, Liquorice (p. 411)

Diu Venostasin Fujisawa Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Diuretabs Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Parsley Piert (p. 459),
Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Diurette Cederroth, Spain, Dandelion (p. 204)
Diurinat Soria Natural, Spain, Corn Silk (p. 191), Couchgrass (p. 193)

Doans Backache Pills Mentholatum South Africa (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Buchu
(p. 100)

Docrub Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Buchu (p. 100)

Doktor Mom Herbal Cough Lozenges (Aoxrop Mom Pacrureapunie MacruaKkn
Or Kamas) Unique Pharmaceutical Laboratories, Russia, Ginger (p. 293), Liquorice
(p. 411)

Doktor Mom (Aoxrop Mom) Unique Pharmaceutical Laboratories, Russia, Aloes
(p. 50), Ginger (p. 293), Liquorice (p. 411)

Dolo-cyl Pharma Liebermann GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)
Dolodent OBA Pharma ApS, Denmark, Myrrh (p. 449)
Dolokey Inkeysa, Spain, Capsicum (p. 125)

Dolosul Soria Natural, Spain, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Meadowsweet (p. 423), Willow
(p. 598)

Domuderm Lab. Fortbenton Co. S.A., Argentina, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Donalg Dynacren Laboratorio Farmaceutico del Dott. A. Francioni e di M. Gerosa
S.rL, Italy, Ginger (p. 293), Sage (p. 512), Willow (p. 598)

Dong Quai Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Agnus Castus (p. 36), Cohosh,
Black (p. 168)

Doppelherz Ginseng Aktiv (Aomeasrepr, 7Kenpmien Axru) Queisser Pharma
GmbH. & Co., Russia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Doppelherz Melissa (Aommeasrepry Meancca) Queisser Pharma GmbH.& Co.,
Russia, Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Melissa (p. 425)

Doppelherz Vitalotonik (Aonmeasrepy Buraxoronux) Queisser Pharma GmbH. &
Co., Russia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325), Hawthorn (p. 346), Hops (p. 354), Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Dormarist Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Dormeasan Bioforce GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580) Bioforce
AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Dormil Milte Italia S.p.A., Italy, Passionflower (p. 461)

Dormiplant Marvecs Services Srl, Italy, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580) Schwabe
Pharma AG, Switzerland, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Dormo-Sern Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Dormoverlan Verla-Pharm, Arzneimittelfabrik, Apotheker H.J.v. Ehrlich GmbH &
Co. KG, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Dorofen Liptis Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Doulax Les Laboratoires Bio-Santé, Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. 537)

Dr. Scheffler Bergischer Krautertee Blasen- und Nierentee Dr Scheffler
Nachf. GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)

Dr. Scheffler Bergischer Krautertee Nerven- und Beruhigungstee Dr
Scheffler Nachf. GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower

(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Dr Scurr’s Zinopin Healthy Direct, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

Dr Theiss Beinwell Salbe Naturwaren OHG, Czech Republic, Comfrey (p. 188)
Dr Theiss Rheuma Creme Naturwaren OHG, Czech Republic, Aloes (p. 50),
Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Myrrh (p. 449),
Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537), Valerian (p. 580)

Dr Theiss Schweden Krauter Naturwaren OHG, Czech Republic, Aloes (p. 50),
Angelica (p. 53), Gentian (p. 290), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)
Dr Theiss Schwedenbitter Naturwaren OHG, Czech Republic, Aloes (p. 50),
Angelica (p. 53), Calamus (p. 118), Cinnamon (p. 162), Cohosh, Black (p. 168),
Gentian (p. 290), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537), Valerian (p. 580)
Dr Wiemanns Rheumatonikum Beethoven-Pharma Dr Wiemann GmbH,
Germany, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Willow (p. 598)

Dragees antirhumatismales Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, Passionflower (p. 461), Willow (p. 598)

Dragees aux figues avec du sene Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, Butterbur (p. 107), Senna (p. 537)

Dragees Fuca Laboratoires Fuca, France, Cascara (p. 128), Frangula (p. 270)

Dragees pour la detente nerveuse Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, Butterbur (p. 107), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

----- PAGE 652 -----
Dragees pour le sommeil Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Dragees pour le coeur et les nerfs Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Dragees pour le sommeil Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel,
Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Dragees S pour les reins et la vessie Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Uva-Ursi
(p. 577)

Dragees sedatives Dr Welti Dr Heinz Welti AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Dragees Vegetales Rex Laboratoires Lehning, France, Cascara (p. 128), Frangula
(p. 270)

Drainactil Laboratoires Aérocid, France, Boldo (p. 91)

Draverex Istituto di Medicina Omeopatica S.p.
(p. 270)

Dreierlei Hofmann & Sommer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Valerian (p. 580)
Drenocol Lab. Lafage S.R.L., Argentina, Boldo (p. 91)

Drops of Life Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Yarrow
(p. 604)

Drosana Resiston avec vitamine C Vifor SA, Switzerland, Echinacea (p. 217)

Drosithym-N Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Drosera (p. 215), Thyme (p. 574)

Dual-Lax Extra Strong G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Cascara (p. 128),
Senna (p. 537)

Dual-Lax Normal Strength G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Aloes (p. 50),
Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. 537)

Ductoveran Lab. Ducto Ind. Farm. Ltda, Brazil, Boldo (p. 91)

Duolaxan Pharmacia Italia S.p.A., Italy, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Dynamisan Novartis Argentina S.A., Argentina, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Dynexan Nycomed Austria GmbH, Austria, Arnica (p. 64), Sage (p. 512) Adcock
Ingram Pharmaceuticals Ltd, South Africa, Arnica (p. 64), Sage (p. 512)
Dystolise Laboratoires Motima, France, Angelica (p. 53), Melissa (p. 425)

Dyzco Mediherb P/L, Australia, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Cohosh, Blue (p. 180),
Ginger (p. 293)

., Italy, Cascara (p. 128), Frangula

CE)

Echinaboost Medic Herb UK Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinacea Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217), Fumitory (p. 276)
Echinacea 4000 Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinacea ACE + Zinc Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinacea Complex Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)
Echinacea Golden Seal Natrol, USA, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinacea Goldenseal Formula Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada,
Echinacea (p. 217), Golden Seal (p. 337)

Echinacea Lozenge Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217)

Echinacea Plus Zuellig Pharma Sdn Bhd, Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia,
Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic (p. 279)

Eciclean EciFarma SA, Chile, Sage (p. 512)

Ecnagel Valuge S.A., Argentina, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Eczema Relief Mediherb P/L, Australia, Calendula (p. 121), Myrrh (p. 449)
Efcamon (cpxamon) Nizhpharm OAO, Russia, Capsicum (p. 125)
Efluvium Anti-caspa Dermoteca, SA, Portugal, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Efluvium Anti-seborreico Dermoteca, SA, Portugal, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Ehrlich Balsamo Laboratorios Politecnicos Nacionales C.A., Venezuela, Capsicum
(p. 125)

Eicebaer Merck GmbH, Austria, Senega (p. 533), Thyme (p. 574)

Ekseme Laboratoires Monin-Chanteaud, France, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Ektrofil Farmaceutici Ecobi s.a.s., Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Elixir Bonjean Laboratoires Dexo, France, Aniseed (p. 57), Melissa (p. 425)

Elixir Damiana and Saw Palmetto Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Corn Silk
(p. 191), Damiana (p. 201), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Elixir de Inhame Laboratorios Goulart S.A., Brazil, Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

Elixir de Marinheiro Laboratorio Phos-Kola Ltda, Brazil, Sarsaparilla (p. 515)
Elixir de Passiflora Laboratorio Sinterapico Industrial e Farmacéutico Ltda, Brazil,
Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461)

Elixir Grez Laboratoires Monin-Chanteaud, France, Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian
(p. 290)

Preparations Directory

Elixir Spark Laboratoires Phytoprevent, France, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)
Elovera Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Ltd, India, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Elovera-SPF Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Ltd, India, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Emagrevit Viternat Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91),
Cascara (p. 128), Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Passionflower (p. 461), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Embrocacion Gras Quimifar, Spain, Capsicum (p. 125)
—Em-medical Dr. C. Soldan GmbH, Germany, Aniseed (p. 57), Thyme (p. 574)

Emmenoiasi Ferlito Farmaceutici, Divisione Palmares S.p.A., Italy, Couchgrass
(p. 193), Hops (p. 354), Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Melissa (p. 425)

Emulax AstraZeneca Sverige AB, Sweden, Cascara (p. 128)
Encypalmed Trima, Israel, Frangula (p. 270), Rhubarb (p. 506)
Energy Plus Nutravite, Canada, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Energy Support Sundown, USA, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315), Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325)

Energysor Soria Natural, Spain, Damiana (p. 201), Ginseng, Eleutherococcus
(p. 315), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Entertainer’s Secret KL/ Corp., USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Entressdruppels HM Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Asafoetida
(p. 72), Valerian (p. 580)

Entschlackender Abfuhrtee EF-EM-ES EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria,
Elder (p. 237), Senna (p. 537)

Enzian Anaemodoron Drops Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Gentian
(p. 290), Nettle (p. 452)

Epagest Lampugnani Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Artichoke (p. 67), Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Eparema Altana Pharma Ltda, Brazil, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb
(p. 506) Specialitd Igienico Terapeutiche S.r.1., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128),
Rhubarb (p. 506)

Eparema-Levul Specialitd Igienico Terapeutiche S.r.1., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara
(p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

EP&C Essence Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Bayberry (p. 77), Elder (p. 237)

Ephepect-Pastillen N Bolder Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Thyme
(p. 574)

Ephydrol Laboratoires CS Dermatologie, France, Plantain (p. 474)
Epilobin Leros sro, Czech Republic, Buchu (p. 100), Calendula (p. 121)

Equaliv Meyer Productos Terapéuticos S.A., Venezuela, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Equisil N Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Erkaltungstee Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237),
Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme (p. 574), Willow (p. 598)

Erpecalm Prisfar, SA, Portugal, Melissa (p. 425), Plantain (p. 474)
Eryange Laboratoires Klorane, France, Calendula (p. 121)

Eryval Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Centaury (p. 149), St John's Wort (p. 549),
Valerian (p. 580)

Esberitop Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Echinacea
(p. 217)

Esberitox Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Esberitox N Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea (p. 217)
Escar T-Neomicina Laboratorio Prater SA, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Escotussin G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215)

Esculeol P Quimica Medical Arg. S.. L, Argentina, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Espol (Scroa) Nizhpharm OAO, Russia, Capsicum (p. 125)

Essens Amara of Groen Amara Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Holy
Thistle (p. 352), Quassia (p. 491)

Estomafitino Jofadel Ind. Farmacéutica S.A., Brazil, Gentian (p. 290), Senna
(p. 537)

Estri-Atlas Atlas Farmaceutica, Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Estrocare Pharmanex Inc., USA, Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Eucarbon F Trenka Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik GmbH, Austria, Rhubarb
(p. 506), Senna (p. 537) Tetra Pharm, Israel, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. $37) Giuliani
S.p.A,, Italy, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Eucarbon Herbal F Trenka Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik GmbH, Austria,
Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Euceta avec camomille et arnica Novartis Consumer Health Schweiz AG,
Switzerland, Arnica (p. 64)

Eufytose Productos Roche S.A., Venezuela, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Eugastrin Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Calamus (p. 118),
Melissa (p. 425), St John's Wort (p. 549)

----- PAGE 653 -----
Appendix 4

Euka Pharmonta Mag. pharm. Dr Fischer, Austria, Aniseed (p. 57), Rosemary
(p. 508)

Eulatin NN Riemser Arzneimittel AG, Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Eulux Mediwhite Sri, Italy, Eyebright (p. 256), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Eupatol Donini S.r.., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Euphorbia Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Euphorbia (p. 249), Passionflower
(p. 461), Thyme (p. 574)

Euphrasia Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Capsicum (p. 125), Echinacea
(p. 217), Eyebright (p. 256), Golden Seal (p. 337)

Euphrasia Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Capsicum (p. 125), Eyebright
(p. 256), Sculleap (p. 530)

Euphytose Laboratoires Roche Nicholas, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Euproctol N Sanopharm AG, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Eurocolor Post Solar Euroderm Laboratorios S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48),
Calendula (p. 121)

Europrotec Post Solar Euroderm Laboratorios S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera
(p. 48), Calendula (p. 121)

Euvegal Entspannungs- und Einschlaftropfen Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH &
Co., Germany, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Euvekan Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian
(p. 580) Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic, Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580) AS! Budapest Kft, Hungary, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian
(p. 580)

Evacrine Laboratoires Motima, France, Ginger (p. 293)
Evamilk Laboratori Gambar S.r.1., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79), Wild Carrot (p. 593)

Evarose Laboratoires Bailly SPEAB, France, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut (p. 363),
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Evening Primrose Oil Natrol, USA, Evening Primrose (p. 251)

Eviprostat Eversil Produtos Farmacéuticos Indtistria e Comercio Ltda, Brazil,
Pulsatilla (p. 489) Nippon Shinyaku Co. Ltd, Japan, Pulsatilla (p. 489) Wellchem
Pharmaceuticals Pte Ltd, Singapore, Pulsatilla (p. 489)

Eviprostat N Pharmazeutische Fabrik Evers & Co. GmbH, Germany, Pulsatilla
(p. 489)

Exail Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Garlic (p. 279)
Excess Neo-Farmacéutica, Lda, Portugal, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Executive B Mayne Pharma P/L, Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Ex-Lax Gentle Strength Novartis Consumer Health Canada Inc., Canada, Senna
(p. 537)

Expectal-Tropfen Dr. Kolassa & Merz GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)
Expectobron Hebron S.A. Industria Quimica e Farmacéutica, Brazil,
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Expectol Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)
Expectomel Cazi Quimica Farmacéutica Industria e Comércio Ltda, Brazil, Senega
(p. 533)

Expectosan Hierbas y Miel Laboratorios Excelentia S.A., Argentina, Cowslip
(p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)

Expectysat N Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Extralife Arthri-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Devil's Claw
(p. 207), Feverfew (p. 263), Ginger (p. 293)

Extralife Extra-Brite Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299),
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Extralife Eye-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79),
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Extralife Flow-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Nettle (p. 452),
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Extralife Fluid-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Dandelion

(p. 204), Parsley (p. 456), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Extralife Leg-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79),
Ginkgo (p. 299), Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Extralife Liva-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Artichoke (p. 67),
Dandelion (p. 204), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Extralife Meno-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168)

Extralife Migrai-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Feverfew

(p. 263), Willow (p. 598)

Extralife PMS-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168), Uva-Ursi (p. 577), Willow (p. 598)

Extralife Sleep-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Gentian (p. 290),
Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Extralife Uri-Care Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L, Australia, Buchu (p. 100),
Cranberry (p. 197), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Eye Dew Crookes Healthcare Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Eye Health Herbal Plus Formula 4 Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Eyebright
(p. 256), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Eye Support Formula Natrol, USA, Pulsatilla (p. 489)

Eye Support Formula Herbal Blend Natrol, USA, Bilberry (p. 79), Eyebright
(p. 256)

Eyebright Plus Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Eyebright (p. 256), Wild
Carrot (p. 593)

@

Fade Cream Cosmofarma, Lda (Laboratorios Cosmos), Portugal, Yarrow (p. 604)
Fadiamone Laboratoires CS Dermatologie, France, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Fagorutin Rosskastanien-Balsam N GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare
GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Famel Boots Healthcare (Switzerland) AG, Hermal, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215)
Fam-Lax Typharm Ltd, UK, Rhubarb (p. 506)

Fam-Lax Senna Typharm Ltd, UK, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Fave di Fuca Roche S.p.A., Italy, Cascara (p. 128), Frangula (p. 270)

Feminine Herbal Complex GNLD International P/L, Australia, Agnus Castus
(p. 36), Dandelion (p. 204), Ginger (p. 293), Liquorice (p. 411), Sage (p. 512), Sculleap
(p. 530), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Fenneherb Cystaid Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Clivers (p. 164),
Couchgrass (p. 193), Shepherd's Purse (p. 541), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Fenneherb Monthly Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Raspberry (p. 495)

Fenneherb Newrelax Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Hops (p. 354), Scullcap
(p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Fenneherb Prementaid Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Motherwort (p. 447),
Pulsatilla (p. 489), Uva-Ursi (p. 577), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Fenneherb Slim Aid Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion
(p. 204), Fucus (p. 273)

Fenneherb Sweetdreams Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Passionflower (p. 461)
Fen-y-Tos Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Drosera (p. 215)
Ferroplex-frangula ERA Medical ApS, Denmark, Frangula (p. 270)

Fiberfull Ponce & Benzo Sucesores C.A., Venezuela, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fibralax Ponce & Benzo Sucesores C.A., Venezuela, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna

(p. 537)

Fibre Dophilus Pharmadass Ltd, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fibre Plus Pharmadass Ltd, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Fibrolax Complex Giuliani S.p.A., Italy, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)
Figatil Laboratorio Catarinense S.A., Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Figen ERA Medical ApS, Amternes Laegemiddelregistreringskontor |/S, Denmark,
Senna (p. 537)

Filigel Laboratoires Codifra, France, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fishogar Self-Care Products Ltd, UK, Garlic (p. 279)

Fitacnol Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Burdock (p. 102), Nettle (p. 452)
Fitolax Instituto de Medicamentos e Alergia IMA Ltda, Brazil, Senna (p. 537)

Fitosonno Pharbenia S.r.1., Societa del Gruppo Bayer, Italy, Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Fitotos Laboratorio Koni-Cofarm SA, Chile, Drosera (p. 215)

Flatulence Gastulence Greater Pharma Ltd Part, Thailand, Asafoetida (p. 72),
Capsicum (p. 125), Cascara (p. 128), Ginger (p. 293)

Flavion Laboratorio Terapeutico M.R. S.r.1., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Flavo-C Primal Chemical Co. Ltd, Hong Kong, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Flavons Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Boneset (p. 94), Echinacea (p. 217),
Yarrow (p. 604)

Flebior Therasophia, France, Bilberry (p. 79)
Flebitol Laboratorios Phoenix S.A.I.C.F., Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Flebolider Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.I., Italy, Arnica (p. 64), Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Flexi-muv Zydus Cadila Group, India, Capsicum (p. 125), Celery (p. 146)

Floradix Multipretten N Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co
KG, Germany, Aniseed (p. 57), Yarrow (p. 604)

Florelax Sanofi-Synthelabo S.p.A., Italy, Angelica (p. 53), Valerian (p. 580)

----- PAGE 654 -----
Floriny Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Willow (p. 598)

Florlax Cazi Quimica Farmacéutica Industria e Comercio Ltda, Brazil, Senna
(p. 537)

Fluid Loss Vitaplex Products, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Celery (p. 146), Dandelion
(p. 204), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Fluido Spineda, Pérez y Hnos. Y Cia SRL, Argentina, Arnica (p. 64)

Fluon Laboratoires Aérocid, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Fon Wan Ginsenergy Giuliani S.p.A., Italy, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Fontlax Fontovit Laboratorios Ltda, Brazil, Senna (p. 537)

Fontolax Fontovit Laboratdrios Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411)

For Peripheral Circulation Herbal Plus Formula 5 Mayne Pharma P/L,
Australia, Capsicum (p. 125), Ginkgo (p. 299), Hawthorn (p. 346)

Fortacet /nterdelta SA, Switzerland, Arnica (p. 64)

Forticrin Farmaceutici G.B. Panzera S.r.l., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325), Yarrow (p. 604)

Fosfarsile Forte Fitobucaneve S.r./., Italy, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Four-Ton Body Spring S.r.l., Italy, Damiana (p. 201), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Fovysat Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Ginger (p. 293), Hawthorn
(p. 346)

Fray Romano Laboratorio Ximena Polanco, Chile, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Fre-bre Self-Care Products Ltd, UK, Parsley (p. 456)

Frugelletten Herbert Bregenzer, Austria, Senna (p. 537)

Frutalax Hexal do Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Fruttasan Graf Fruttasan AG, Switzerland, Senna (p. 537)

Fybogel Mebeverine Reckitt Benckiser, Ireland, Ispaghula (p. 374) Reckitt
Benckiser plc, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Fytokliman Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Hawthorn (p. 346), Hops (p. 354),
Melissa (p. 425), Parsley Piert (p. 459), St John's Wort (p. 549)

@

Galium Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Calendula (p. 121), Clivers (p. 164),
Echinacea (p. 217)

Gallemolan forte Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Dandelion
(p. 204)

Gallen- und Lebertee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria,
Agrimony (p. 42), Dandelion (p. 204), Yarrow (p. 604)

Gallesyn Mr J W Wenig GmbH, Austria, Frangula (p. 270)

Gallexier Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co KG, Germany,
Artichoke (p. 67), Bogbean (p. 89), Dandelion (p. 204), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger
(p. 293), Holy Thistle (p. 352), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Yarrow (p. 604)

Galloway’s Cough Syrup Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Gameral Productos Gache S.A., Venezuela, Cascara (p. 128)
Garcinol Max Lab. Garden House S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Garlic Allium Complex GNLD International P/L, Australia, Garlic (p. 279),
Rosemary (p. 508)

Garlic and Horseradish + C Complex Mayne Pharma P/L, Mayne Pharma P/L,
Australia, Fenugreek (p. 260), Garlic (p. 279), Horseradish (p. 367), Marshmallow
(p. 418)

Garlic, Horseradish, A & C Capsules Vitaplex Products, Australia, Horseradish
(p. 367)

GarLife Nature Made, USA, Garlic (p. 279)
Gartech Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic (p. 279)
Gastripan Ratiopharm Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH, Austria, Liquorice (p. 411)

Gastritol Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Angelica (p. 53), Holy Thistle (p. 352),
Liquorice (p. 411), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Gastrosan Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Angelica (p. 53), Centaury (p. 149), Dandelion
(p. 204), Gentian (p. 290), Holy Thistle (p. 352), Melissa (p. 425), Yarrow (p. 604)

Gastrosecur Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian (p. 290),
Ginger (p. 293)

Gastrotuss DMG Italia S.r.1., Italy, Marshmallow (p. 418)
GB 100 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299)
GB Tablets Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Burdock (p. 102)

Gel a la consoude Phytomed AG, Switzerland, Calendula (p. 121), Comfrey
(p. 188), Echinacea (p. 217), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Gelax Laboratorios Sidus S.A., Argentina, Senna (p. 537)

Gelconordin Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Aloe Vera
(p. 48)

Preparations Directory

Gelovis Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.1., Italy, Capsicum (p. 125), Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Gem /Iromedica AG, Switzerland, Liquorice (p. 411)

Gengivario Giovanni Ogna & Figli S.p.A., Italy, Myrrh (p. 449)
Genolaxante Craveri S.A.1.C., Argentina, Aloes (p. 50)

Gentaplex Liptis Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Gentlees Delamac Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Genurat Soria Natural, Spain, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Gerard House Reumalex Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Guaiacum
(p. 344), Sarsaparilla (p. 515), Willow (p. 598)

Gerard House Serenity Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Gerard House Skin Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Burdock (p. 102)

Gerard House Somnus Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580), Wild
Lettuce (p. 596)

Gerard House Water Relief Tablets Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Burdock (p. 102),
Clivers (p. 164), Ground Ivy (p. 342)

Geri Gisand AG, Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Geri-Lav Free Geritrex Corp., USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Gerimax Plus Nycomed Austria GmbH, Austria, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Gerin EMS Ind. Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Ginal Cent Laboratorios Beta S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Gincosan Boehringer Ingelheim, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Boehringer Ingelheim sro, Czech Republic, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Pharmaton SA, Switzerland, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Gingisan Teva Pharmaceuticals Ind. Ltd, Israel, Liquorice (p. 411)

Gingo A Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus (p. 315), Hawthorn (p. 346), Liquorice (p. 411)

Ginkan Lab. Baliarda S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Ginkgo Biloba Plus Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299),
Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325), Hawthorn (p. 346)

Ginkgo Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325), Hawthorn (p. 346)

Ginkgo Plus Herbal Plus Formula 10 Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ginger
(p. 293), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkgo-PS Usana, Singapore, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkoba Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325)

Ginkoba Active Fher, Divisione della Boehringer Ingelheim, Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkoftal Tubilux Pharma S.p.A., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ginkor Beaufour Ipsen Pharma, France, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkor Fort Beaufour Ipsen International, Czech Republic, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Beaufour Ipsen Pharma, France, Ginkgo (p. 299) IDS (Hong Kong) Ltd Healthcare
Division, Hong Kong, Ginkgo (p. 299) Europharm Trade Kft, Hungary, Ginkgo

(p. 299) Pacific Healthcare (Thailand) Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkor Fort (Munxop opr) Beaufour Ipsen International SNC, Russia, Ginkgo
(p. 299)

Ginkor Fort Antah Pharma Sdb Bhd, Emerging Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia,
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginkor Gel (Mumkop ean) Beaufour Ipsen International SNC, Russia, Ginkgo
(p. 299)

Ginkoret Tubilux Pharma S.p.A., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Ginoxil Ecoschiuma Euroderm-RDC S.p.A., Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Ginsana Ton Fher, Divisione della Boehringer Ingelheim, Italy, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Ginseng-Complex Coradol-Pharma GmbH, Germany, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325),
Hawthorn (p. 346)

Gin-Vita Zyfas Medical Co, Singapore, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Glicero-Valerovit Teofarma, Italy, Valerian (p. 580)

Glycoplex Vitaplex Products, Australia, Dandelion (p. 204), Liquorice (p. 411)
Glycyrrhiza Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325),
Liquorice (p. 411)

Golatux Laboratorio di Chimica Medica dell’ Antipiol S.n.c., Italy, Echinacea

(p. 217)

Gold Bond Medicated Triple Action Relief Chattem Consumer Products, USA,
Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Golden Seal Indigestion Tablets Richard Lane’s, UK, Ginger (p. 293), Golden
Seal (p. 337), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Valerian (p. 580)

----- PAGE 655 -----
Appendix 4

Gonaxine Laboratoires Motima, France, Alfalfa (p. 45), Parsley Piert (p. 459), Sage
(p. 512), Yarrow (p. 604)

Goodnight Formula Vitaplex Products, Australia, Passionflower (p. 461), Sculleap
(p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Goodypops Health Imports Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)

Gotas Digestivas Bunker Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Boldo (p. 91),
Gentian (p. 290)

Gotas Nican Laboratorios Prima Ltda, Brazil, Passionflower (p. 461) Laboratorios
Andromaco SA, Chile, Drosera (p. 215)

Gothaplast Rheumamed AC Gothaplast Verbandpflasterfabrik GmbH,
Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Capsicum (p. 125)

Gouttes contre la toux Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215)

Grains de Vals Qualiphar SA, Belgium, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128), Frangula
(p. 270) Laboratoires Nogues, France, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. $37)

Grani di Vals Geymonat S.p.A., Italy, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128)

Granocol Schering P/L, Australia, Frangula (p. 270) Schering (NZ) Ltd, New
Zealand, Frangula (p. 270)

Granu Fink Prosta GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare GmbH & Co. KG,
Germany, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) GlaxoSmithKline, Switzerland, Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Gripaleta Productos Maver S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Echinacea (p. 217)

Grippetee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Elder (p. 237), Lime
Flower (p. 409)

Guaiacum Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Celery (p. 146), Devil's Claw
(p. 207), Feverfew (p. 263), Guaiacum (p. 344), Willow (p. 598)

Gutnacht Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co KG, Germany,
Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), St John's Wort (p. 549),
Valerian (p. 580)

Gynastan Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Parsley Piert (p. 459)
Gynosoja Laboratoires Codifra, France, Alfalfa (p. 45)

cH)

Hactos Hubert A.C. Thomas & Co., UK, Capsicum (p. 125)
Haemocortin G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Haemolan G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Hansaplast Herbal Heat Plaster Beiersdorf UK Ltd, UK, Arnica (p. 64), Capsicum
(p. 125)

Happy’tizer Zydus Cadila Group, India, Fenugreek (p. 260), Ginger (p. 293)
Harntee STADA Stada GmbH, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Harntee-Steiner Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany, Java
Tea (p. 381)

Harzer Hustenloser Pharma Wernigerode GmbH, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Hawaiian Tropic Cool Aloe with I.C.E. Tanning Research Labs Inc., USA, Aloe
Vera (p. 48)

Hay Fever & Sinus Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217), Elder
(p. 237), Garlic (p. 279)

Hayfever & Sinus Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217), Elder
(p. 237), Garlic (p. 279)

HDG Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67)

HealthAid Boldo-Plus Pharmadass Ltd, UK, Boldo (p. 91), Clivers (p. 164),
Dandelion (p. 204), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Healthy Eyes Sundown, USA, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo (p. 299)
Heart Health Sundown, USA, Garlic (p. 279), Ginger (p. 293), Hawthorn (p. 346)
Hebert Caramelos Fed. Arg. de Coop. Farm., Argentina, Senega (p. 533)

HEC Laboratoires Chauvin Bausch & Lomb, France, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Bausch &
Lomb Swiss AG, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Hecrosine B12 Ortoquimica Ind. Quimico Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke
(p. 67)

Hederix Laboratoires Plan SA, Switzerland, Elecampane (p. 240), Senega (p. 533)
Heemex G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Heilsalbe Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Calendula (p. 121)

Helmontskruie Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Aloes (p. 50), Gentian
(p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Valerian (p. 580)

Hemocane Key Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Hemodotti Prodotti Laboratdrio Farmacéutico Ltda, Brazil, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Hemofissural Farmoquimica Baldacci, SA, Portugal, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Hemolax B L Hua & Co. Ltd, Thailand, Cascara (p. 128)

Hemoral Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Yarrow (p. 604)
Hemorid For Women Chattem Consumer Products, USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Hemorid Pharmamagist Kft, Wagner Pharmafax Kft, Hungary, Yarrow (p. 604)

Hemorrogel Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Calendula (p. 121), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Pilewort (p. 472)

Hemorroidex Medic Industrial Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363),
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Hepabene Ratiopharm Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH, Austria, Fumitory (p. 276),
Milk Thistle (p. 429) Ratiopharm CZ sro, Czech Republic, Fumitory (p. 276), Milk
Thistle (p. 429) ratiopharm Hungaria Kft, Hungary, Fumitory (p. 276), Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Hepabene (Iena6ene) Ratiopharm Group, Russia, Fumitory (p. 276), Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Hepabil Instituto Sanitas SA, Chile, Boldo (p. 91)
Hepaclem Laboratoires Clément-Thionville, France, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)
Hepacur Quimica Medical Arg. S.A.C.I., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Heparfelien G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91),
Buchu (p. 100), Dandelion (p. 204), Juniper (p. 386)

Heparin Comp Sanidom Handels-GmbH, Austria, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363) ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Heparin-Gel Pharma Funcke, Czech Republic, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363)

Hepatalgina Altana Pharma SA, Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91), Wild
Carrot (p. 593)

Hepatodirectol Instituto Sanitas Arg. SACIPQ y M., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67),
Boldo (p. 91), Hawthorn (p. 346)

Hepatofalk Jacobson Medical (Hong Kong) Ltd, Hong Kong, Artichoke (p. 67),
Dandelion (p. 204), Frangula (p. 270), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Hepatofalk Planta /DH Pharmaceutical Division, Singapore, Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Hepatoregius Farmoterapica Dovalle Induistria Quimica Farmacéutica Ltda,
Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Hepatos Teofarma, Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128)
Hepatos B12 Teofarma, Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128)
Hepatoum Laboratoires Hépatoum, France, Pulsatilla (p. 489)

Hepax Laboratoires Tradiphar, France, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91), Rosemary
(p. 508)

Hepedren Laboratorios Parggon S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo
(p. 91)

Herb and Honey Cough Elixir Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Aniseed (p. 57), Elder
(p. 237), Marshmallow (p. 418), Thyme (p. 574)

Herbaccion Celfin Instituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.I.C., Argentina, Ginkgo
(p. 299), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Herbaccion Ginseng Y Magnesio /nstituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.1.C.,
Argentina, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Herbaccion Memory Instituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.1.C., Argentina,
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Herbal Anxiety Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Passionflower (p. 461)
Herbal Arthritis Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Devil's Claw (p. 207),
Ginkgo (p. 299)

Herbal Capillary Care Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299), Horse-
chestnut (p. 363)

Herbal Cleanse Vitaplex Products, Australia, Aloes (p. 50), Burdock (p. 102),
Clivers (p. 164), Dandelion (p. 204), Echinacea (p. 217), Ginger (p. 293), Golden Seal
(p. 337), Ispaghula (p. 374), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Sarsaparilla (p. 515), Slippery Elm
(p. 545), Yellow Dock (p. 608)

Herbal Cold & Flu Relief Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic
(p. 279), Liquorice (p. 411)

Herbal Cold Relief Jamieson Laboratories, Canada, Ephedra (p. 243)

Herbal Digestive Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ginger (p. 293),
Liquorice (p. 411)

Herbal Diuretic Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Buchu (p. 100), Celery
(p. 146), Juniper (p. 386), Parsley (p. 456), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Herbal Diuretic Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Dandelion (p. 204), Uva-
Ursi (p. 577)

Herbal Energy Sundown, USA, Ginger (p. 293)

Herbal Indigestion Naturtabs The Cantassium Company, UK, Myrrh (p. 449),
Sculleap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Herbal Laxative Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Gentian
(p. 290), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

----- PAGE 656 -----
Herbal Laxative Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Aloe Vera
(p. 48), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Herbal Nerve Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Gentian (p. 290), Liquorice
(p. 411), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Herbal Pain Relief The Cantassium Company, UK, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580), Willow (p. 598)

Herbal PMS Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79), Cohosh,
Black (p. 168), Liquorice (p. 411)

Herbal Relax Wampole Brands Inc., Canada, Valerian (p. 580)

Herbal Sleep Aid Wampole Brands Inc., Canada, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Herbal Sleep Well Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Hops (p. 354), Lime
Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Herbal Throat Jamieson Laboratories, Canada, Parsley (p. 456), Slippery Elm
(p. 545), Thyme (p. 574)

Herbalax Santé Naturelle (AG) Ltée, Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Frangula (p. 270),
Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Herbelix G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Marshmallow (p. 418)

Herbesan Laboratoires Pfizer, France, Aniseed (p. 57), Couchgrass (p. 193), Senna
(p. 537)

Herbheal Ointment Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Marshmallow (p. 418)

Herbion Drops for the Gallbladder (Mep6uon Kanan 7Keaueronnie) KRKA d.d.,
Russia, Agrimony (p. 42), Artichoke (p. 67)

Herbion Drops for the Heart (Iep6uon Cepacanie Kanan) KRKA d.d., Russia,
Hawthorn (p. 346), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Valerian (p. 580)

Herbion Drops for the Stomach (Iep6uon 7Keayaounmie Karan) KRKA d.d.,
Russia, Centaury (p. 149), Gentian (p. 290)

Herbion Urological Drops (I'ep6u0H Vpoaornueckue Kanan) KRKA d.d., Russia,
Parsley (p. 456), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Herbion Urtica (Mep6u0on Vprixa) KRKA d.d., Russia, Nettle (p. 452)

Herborex Rolmex International Inc., Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Yellow Dock
(p. 608)

Herbulax Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Dandelion (p. 204), Frangula (p. 270)

Hertz- und Kreislauftee Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic,
Calendula (p. 121), Hawthorn (p. 346), Melissa (p. 425), Rosemary (p. 508), Valerian
(p. 580), Yarrow (p. 604)

Heumann Beruhigungstee Tenerval Lichtenstein Pharmazeutica GmbH & Co.,
Germany, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Heumann Bronchialtee Solubifix T Lichtenstein Pharmazeutica GmbH & Co.,
Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Heumann Magentee Solu-Vetan Lichtenstein Pharmazeutica GmbH & Co.,
Germany, Liquorice (p. 411)

Heumann Verdauungstee Solu-Lipar Lichtenstein Pharmazeutica GmbH &
Co., Germany, Boldo (p. 91), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Heumann’s Bronchialtee Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Cowslip (p. 195),
Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Hevert-Blasen-Nieren-Tee N Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany,
Couchgrass (p. 193), Java Tea (p. 381)

Heweberberol-Tee Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Java Tea
(p. 381), Liquorice (p. 411)

Hewenephron duo Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Echinacea
(p. 217)

Himcolin (Xum«xoanm) Transatlantic International, Russia, Cinnamon (p. 162)
Himelan Soria Natural, Spain, Angelica (p. 53), Melissa (p. 425)

Hingfong-Essenz Hofmanns Hofmann & Sommer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany,
Valerian (p. 580)

Hiperogyn Madaus S.r.1., Italy, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Hipoglos Cremoso Industria Farmacéutica Andromaco, S.A. de C.V., Mexico,
Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Histo-Fluine P Laboratoires Richard, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Pulsatilla
(p. 489), Senna (p. 537), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Honey & Molasses G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125),
Liquorice (p. 411), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Horehound and Aniseed Cough Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK,
Elecampane (p. 240), Marshmallow (p. 418), Pleurisy Root (p. 477), Skunk Cabbage
(p. 543)

Horseradish Plus Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Fenugreek (p. 260), Garlic
(p. 279), Horseradish (p. 367), Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Hot Flashex Natrol, USA, Chamomile, German (p. 152), Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Preparations Directory

Hova Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580) Sager
Pharma Kft, Hungary, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580) Gebro Pharma SA,
Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

HRI Calm Life Jessup Marketing, UK, Hops (p. 354), Ispaghula (p. 374), Sculleap
(p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

HRI Clear Complexion Jessup Marketing, UK, Blue Flag (p. 87), Burdock (p. 102),
Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

HRI Golden Seal Digestive Jessup Marketing, UK, Ginger (p. 293), Golden Seal
(p. 337), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Valerian (p. 580)

HRI Night Jessup Marketing, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580), Vervain (p. 591), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

HRI Water Balance Jessup Marketing, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Dandelion (p. 204),
Parsley Piert (p. 459), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Huile de millepertuis A. Vogel (huile de St. Jean) Bioforce AG, Switzerland, St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Humulus Compound Phytomedicine P/L, Australia, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Hydracur Léro, France, Dandelion (p. 204)

Hydrastis Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Golden Seal (p. 337), Liquorice
(p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Hyperesa Dolorgiet GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian
(p. 580)

Hyperiforce comp Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Hypotonicka Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Hawthorn (p. 346), Melissa (p. 425),
Milk Thistle (p. 429)

H6fels Echinacea and Rosehip Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)
Hofels One-A-Day Cardiomax Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Garlic (p. 279)
H6fels One-A-Day Garlic Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Garlic (p. 279)

H6fels One-A-Day Garlic with Parsley Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Garlic (p. 279),
Parsley (p. 456)

H6fels One-A-Day Ginge Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

H6fels One-A-Day Ginger, Ginkgo and Garlic Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Garlic
(p. 279), Ginger (p. 293)

Iberogast Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Angelica (p. 53),
Liquorice (p. 411), Melissa (p. 425), Milk Thistle (p. 429) Hdnseler AG, Switzerland,
Angelica (p. 53), Liquorice (p. 411), Melissa (p. 425), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Ideolaxyl Laboratoires GlaxoSmithKline, France, Aloes (p. 50), Senna (p. 537)
Ifuchol Laboratorios Ifusa S.A., Mexico, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91)

Ifupasil Laboratorios Ifusa S.A., Mexico, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Willow (p. 598)

IgeE Les Grands Espaces Thérapeutiques, France, Raspberry (p. 495)

Ilja Rogoff Roche Consumer Health Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Garlic (p. 279),
Hawthorn (p. 346), Hops (p. 354), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Imegul Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Cascara (p. 128), Ispaghula (p. 374)
Immumil Milte Italia S.p.A., Italy, Echinacea (p. 217), Thyme (p. 574)
Immune Insurance Healthy Direct, UK, Echinacea (p. 217)

Immune Support Sundown, USA, Echinacea (p. 217), Golden Seal (p. 337)
Imugins Schumit 1967 Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Imuvit Boots Healthcare (Switzerland) AG, Hermal, Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325) Sriprasit Dispensary R O P, Thailand, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Inconturina OTW-Naturarzneimittel Regneri GmbH & Co KG, Germany, Clove
(p. 166)

Indian Brandee OTC Concepts, UK, Capsicum (p. 125) Potter’s (Herbal Supplies)
Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125), Ginger (p. 293), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Indigestion and Flatulence The Cantassium Company, UK, Myrrh (p. 449),
Valerian (p. 580)

Indigestion Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Gentian (p. 290),
Meadowsweet (p. 423)

Indigestion Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125), Ginger (p. 293)
Infant Calm Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Passionflower (p. 461)

Infant Tonic Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Angelica (p. 53), Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325), Nettle (p. 452), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Inflamase Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.I., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Inflamol Healthy Direct, UK, Scullcap (p. 530)

Influ-Zinc Wassen Italia S.r.1., Italy, Echinacea (p. 217), Willow (p. 598)
Influ-Zinc Gola Wassen Italia S.r.1., Italy, Liquorice (p. 411)

----- PAGE 657 -----
Appendix 4

Inotyol Brady C. KG, Austria, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Perrigo Ltd, Israel, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Intim /CIM International S.r.1., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Intradermi Dr. Friedrich Eberth Arzneimittel, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Intrait de Marron d’Inde P Laboratoires Aérocid, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

lodeto de Potassio Sedar Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow
(p. 418)

lodeto dePotassio Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)
lol Quimioterapica Brasileira Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)

lolin Quimioterapica Brasileira Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)

Ipasin Vifor SA, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346), Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Ipecarin Ivax-CR as, Ivax-CR as, Czech Republic, Liquorice (p. 411)

Iridil Montefarmaco S.p.A., Italy, Eyebright (p. 256), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

lrontona Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Angelica (p. 53), Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325), Nettle (p. 452), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Isalax Fibras Instituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.1.C., Argentina, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

I-Sight Healthy Direct, UK, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo (p. 299)
Ixana Quimica Medical Arg. S.A.C.1., Argentina, Senega (p. 533)

oO

Jacksons Herbal Laxative Anglian Pharma Plc, UK, Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb
(p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Jamaican Sarsaparilla Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125),
Liquorice (p. 411), Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

Jaquesor Soria Natural, Spain, Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425), Willow
(p. 598), Yarrow (p. 604)

Jarabe de Manzanas Laboratorios Ifusa S.A., Mexico, Senna (p. 537)
Jarabe Manceau Alcor, Spain, Senna (p. 537)

Jecopeptol Alpharma France, France, Boldo (p. 91)

Jengimiel Jengimiel C.A., Venezuela, Ginger (p. 293)

Joint & Muscle Relief Cream Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Arnica
(p. 64), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Jouvence de I’Abbe Soury Laboratoires Chefaro-Ardeval, France, Calamus
(p. 118), Ispaghula (p. 374), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Jukunda Melissen-Krautergeist N /ukunda Naturarzneimittel Dr Ludwig
Schmitt GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Melissa (p. 425)

Jungborn Taro Pharmaceutical International, Israel, Aniseed (p. 57), Lime Flower
(p. 409), Senna (p. 537), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Jurubileno /befar Inst. Brasileiro de Esp. Ftcas. Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67),
Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128)

@

Kalms G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Gentian (p. 290), Hops (p. 354), Valerian
(p. 580)

Kalms Sleep G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Kamfeine Wolfs SA, Belgium, Marshmallow (p. 418)

Kamillan Plus Pharma Wernigerode GmbH, Germany, Yarrow (p. 604)
Kamilotract Tamar Marketing, Israel, Sage (p. 512)

Kanormal German Remedies Ltd, India, Frangula (p. 270)

Kas-Bah Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Clivers (p. 164),
Couchgrass (p. 193), Senna (p. 537), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Katapekt Vitabalans Oy, Finland, Thyme (p. 574)

Kavatrol Natrol, USA, Chamomile, German (p. 152)

Keli-med Permamed AG, Switzerland, Garlic (p. 279)

Kelual DS Laboratoires Pierre Fabre, France, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Keppur Drossapharm SA, Switzerland, Comfrey (p. 188)

Keracnyl Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Laboratoires Pierre Fabre, France, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Keracnyl eau nettoyante Laboratoires Pierre Fabre, France, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Kernosan Elixir E Kern AG, Pharmazeutische Krauterspezialitaten, Switzerland,
Aniseed (p. 57), Calamus (p. 118), Cowslip (p. 195), Horseradish (p. 367), Liquorice
(p. 411), Plantain (p. 474)

Kernosan Heidelberger Poudre E Kern AG, Pharmazeutische
Krauterspezialitdten, Switzerland, Aniseed (p. 57), Juniper (p. 386), Yarrow (p. 604)

Kilkof Bell, Sons & Co. (Druggists), UK, Capsicum (p. 125)

Kinder Em-eukal Hustensaft Dr. C. Soldan GmbH, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

KLB6 Fruit Diet Natural Life S.A., Argentina, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Klorane Shampooing Antipelliculaire Laboratoires Klorane, France, Bilberry
(p. 79)

Klosterfrau Beruhigungs Forte Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau
Vertriebsgesellschaft mbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Klosterfrau Melisana Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau Vertriebsgesellschaft
mbH, Germany, Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Elecampane
(p. 240), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Melissa (p. 425)

Korodin Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Krampdruppels Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Valerian (p. 580)

Krauter Hustensaft Apomedica GmbH, Austria, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237),
Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme (p. 574)

Kronolax Altana Pharma SA, Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)
Kruidvat Spierbalsem Pharmethica BV, Netherlands, Capsicum (p. 125)
KW Lagos Laboratorios Argentina S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Kyolic 101 Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Garlic (p. 279)
Kyolic 102 Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Garlic (p. 279)
Kyolic 103 Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Garlic (p. 279)

( )

( )

Kyolic 104 Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Garlic (p. 279)
Kyolic 106 Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada, Garlic (p. 279)
Kytta Baume /romedica AG, Switzerland, Comfrey (p. 188)
Kytta-Balsam f Merck KGaA, Germany, Comfrey (p. 188)

Kytta-Sedativum Merck KGaA, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

@

Laci Le Beau Super Dieter’s Tea Natrol, USA, Marshmallow (p. 418), Senna
(p. 537)

Laci Le Beau Throat Care Natrol, USA, Slippery Elm (p. 545)
Laci Supplement Power Time Natrol, USA, Echinacea (p. 217)

Laci Throat Care Soothing Citrus Natrol, USA, Chamomile, German (p. 152),
Echinacea (p. 217)

Lacto Calamine CSL (NZ) Ltd, New Zealand, Witch Hazel (p. 601) Schering-
Plough Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Lactolas /nfosint S.p.A., Italy, Frangula (p. 270), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Lane’s Sage and Garlic Catarrh Remedy Richard Lane’s, UK, Garlic (p. 279),
Liquorice (p. 411), Sage (p. 512)

Lapidar 10 Krauterpfarrer Kunzle AG, Switzerland, Frangula (p. 270), Liquorice
(p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Lassatina Kedrion S.p.A., Italy, Aniseed (p. 57), Cascara (p. 128), Liquorice (p. 411),
Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Lassativi Vetegali&xref details= Giovanni Ogna & Figli S.p.A., Zeta
Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Aloes (p. 50), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Lavandula Oligoplex Lab. Dr. Madaus & Co. SA, Argentina, Calendula (p. 121),
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Laxacaps Gelcaps Exp. de Mexico SA de CV, Mexico, Senna (p. 537)
Laxaco Jamieson Laboratories, Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. 537)

Laxalpin F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Elder (p. 237), Frangula (p. 270), Liquorice
(p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Laxante Bescansa Aloico Bescansa, Spain, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Laxante Sanatorium Santiveri, Spain, Aloes (p. 50), Aniseed (p. 57), Senna (p. 537)

Laxarine Farmion Laboratorio Brasileiro de Farmacologia Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice
(p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Laxative Nobel Pharm Enrg, Canada, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128)
Laxative Comp Teva Pharmaceuticals Ind. Ltd, Israel, Aloes (p. 50)

Laxative Tablets Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128), Senna
(p. 537), Valerian (p. 580)

Laxolind Metochem-Pharma GmbH, Austria, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)
Laxomax Soria Natural, Spain, Aniseed (p. 57), Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Laxtam Merck S.A. Industrias Quimicas, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Lefkaflam Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Arnica (p. 64)

Lenicalm Laboratoires Dolisos Italia S.r.l., Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346), Lime Flower
(p. 409)

Lenirose Novogaleno S.r.l., Italy, Calendula (p. 121)
Lepisor Soria Natural, Spain, Java Tea (p. 381)

----- PAGE 658 -----
Leukona-Beruhigungsbad Dr. Atzinger Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany,
Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Leukona-Wundsalbe Dr. Atzinger Pharmazeutische Fabrik, Germany, Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Lewensessens Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Aloes (p. 50), Gentian
(p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Lexat Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Aloes (p. 50), Bloodroot (p. 84), Boldo
(p. 91)

Lice Blaster Douglas Pharmaceuticals Ltd, New Zealand, Echinacea (p. 217)
Lidersoft Higaté Medical Argentina, Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Lido Tea Trima, Israel, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (j 7)

Life Drops Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125), Elder (p. 237)

Lifechange Circulation Aid Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299),
Hawthorn (p. 346)

Lifechange Menopause Formula Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Red Clover
(p. 498)

Lifechange Mens Complex with Saw Palmetto Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Lifechange Multi Plus Antioxidant Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Ginkgo
(p. 299)

Lifesystem Herbal Formula 1 Arthritic Aid Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Celery (p. 146), Devil's Claw (p. 207), Juniper (p. 386), Willow (p. 598)

Lifesystem Herbal Formula 4 Women’s Formula Mayne Pharma P/L,
Australia, Agnus Castus (p. 36), Angelica (p. 53), Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Cohosh,
Blue (p. 180), Pulsatilla (p. 489)

Lifesystem Herbal Formula 6 For Peripheral Circulation Mayne Pharma P/L,
Australia, Capsicum (p. 125), Ginkgo (p. 299), Hawthorn (p. 346)

Lifesystem Herbal Formula 7 Liver Tonic Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Artichoke (p. 67), Dandelion (p. 204), Garlic (p. 279), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Lifesystem Herbal Plus Formula 2 Valerian Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Lifesystem Herbal Plus Formula 5 Eye Relief Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Eyebright (p. 256), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Lifesystem Herbal Plus Formula 8 Echinacea Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Echinacea (p. 217)

Lifesystem Herbal Plus Formula 11 Ginkgo Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Ginger (p. 293), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Lightning Cough Remedy Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411)

Linctus Tussi Infans Adcock Ingram Pharmaceuticals Ltd, South Africa, St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Lindofluid N Lindopharm GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Melissa (p. 425)
Linimento Naion Puerto Galiano, Spain, Capsicum (p. 125), Rosemary (p. 508)

Linkus (Ausxac) Herbion Pakistan PVT Ltd, Russia, Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Linoforce Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)
LinoMed Bioforce AG, Switzerland, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

Lion Cleansing Herbs Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Elder (p. 237), Senna
(p. 537)

Lipidavit Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH, Germany, Garlic (p. 279)

Lipograsil Uriach, Spain, Artichoke (p. 67), Cascara (p. 128)

Li id Elderberry with Ester-C Natrol, USA, Elder (p. 237)

Lisian Laboratorio lodo Suma Ltda, Brazil, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Lisotox Cifarma Cientifica Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67)

Liv 52 (Ans 52) Transatlantic International, Russia, Yarrow (p. 604)

Liver Formula Natrol, USA, Ginger (p. 293), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Liver Formula Herbal Blend Natrol, USA, Burdock (p. 102), Dandelion (p. 204)

Liver Tonic Herbal Formula 6 Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Artichoke (p. 67),
Dandelion (p. 204), Garlic (p. 279), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Livstim Mediherb P/L, Australia, Artichoke (p. 67), Dandelion (p. 204), Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Livton Complex Mediherb P/L, Australia, Artichoke (p. 67), Dandelion (p. 204),
Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Llantusil Soria Natural, Spain, Coltsfoot (p. 185), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Logicin Natural Lozenges Sigma Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Echinacea
(p. 217)

Lomal Lomapharm, Rudolf Lohmann GmbH KG, Germany, Drosera (p. 215),
Thyme (p. 574)

Lorasil Feminine Hygeine Medispec (M) Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Preparations Directory

Lotio Pruni Comp cum Cupro Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Arnica
(p. 64), Burdock (p. 102), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Lozione Same Urto Savoma Medicinali S.p.A., Italy, Coltsfoot (p. 185), Yarrow
(p. 604)

Lupassin Laboratorios Elmor S.A., Venezuela, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Lustys Herbalene G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Elder (p. 237), Frangula
(p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

Luuf-Hustentee Apomedica GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)

Luvased Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)
LX-30 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Lycia Luminique Artsana S.p.A., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

@

Macro Anti-Stress Whitehall Laboratories Australia P/L, Australia, Valerian
(p. 580)

Madecassol C Sanofi-Synthelabo de Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Madecassol N Sanofi-Synthelabo de Mexico S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Hydrocotyle
(p. 371)

Madecassol Neomicina Productos Roche Ltda, Chile, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Madecassol NeomycineHydrocortisone Laboratoires Roche Nicholas, France,
Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Mag Kottas Krauterexpress Abfuhrtee Kottas-Heldenberg Mag. R.u. Sohn,
Austria, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

Mag Kottas May-Cur-Tee Kottas-Heldenberg Mag. R.u. Sohn, Austria, Frangula
(p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

Magen- und Darmtee N Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic,
Cinnamon (p. 162), Liquorice (p. 411)

Magentee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Centaury (p. 149),
Dandelion (p. 204), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Magisbile Magis Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128),
Rhubarb (p. 506)

Mailen Investi Farma S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Majocarmin-Tee Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Aniseed (p. 57)

Makaphyt Gouttes antitussives Gebro Pharma SA, Switzerland, Drosera
(p. 215), Liquorice (p. 411), Senega (p. 533), Thyme (p. 574)

Makaphyt Sirop Gebro Pharma SA, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215), Liquorice
(p. 411), Senega (p. 533), Thyme (p. 574)

Makatussin Tropfen Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany, Thyme
(p. 574)

Makatussin Tropfen forte Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH, Germany,
Drosera (p. 215)

Malvaliz Soria Natural, Spain, Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Malvatricin Natural Laboratorio Daudt Oliveira Ltda, Brazil, Calendula (p. 121),
Echinacea (p. 217)

Malvatricin Natural Organic Laboratorio Daudt Oliveira Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea
(p. 217), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Malveol Laboratoires Magistra SA, Switzerland, Marshmallow (p. 418)
Manevac Galen Ltd, UK, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Manolio Brasmedica S.A. Industrias Farmacéuticas, Brazil, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Manzan Lab E J Gezzi SRL, Argentina, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Maraslavin (Mapacaasun) Sopharma AO, Russia, Clove (p. 166), Ginger (p. 293),
Thyme (p. 574)

Mariazeller Apotheke zur Gnadenmutter, Austria, Bogbean (p. 89), Centaury
(p. 149), Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Holy
Thistle (p. 352), Juniper (p. 386), Melissa (p. 425), Yarrow (p. 604)

Massage Balm with Calendula Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Calendula (p. 121)

Matikomp Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Arnica (p. 64), Calendula
(p. 121)

Mavena Proctal-Gen Psorimed AG, Switzerland, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Maximum Strength Flexall 454 Chattem Consumer Products, USA, Aloe Vera
(p. 48)

Medalginan Laboratorio Medinfar, SA, Portugal, Capsicum (p. 125)

Mediflor no 11 Draineur Renal et Digestif Merck Lipha Santé, France, Boldo
(p. 91)

Mediflor Tisane Antirhumatismale No 2 Merck Lipha Santé, France,

Couchgrass (p. 193), Frangula (p. 270), Juniper (p. 386), Lime Flower (p. 409),
Meadowsweet (p. 423), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

----- PAGE 659 -----
Appendix 4

Mediflor Tisane Calmante Troubles du Sommeil No 14 Merck Lipha Santé,
France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Mediflor Tisane Circulation du Sang No 12 Merck Lipha Santé, France,
Frangula (p. 270), Hawthorn (p. 346), Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Melissa (p. 425), Milk
Thistle (p. 429), Valerian (p. 580), Willow (p. 598), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Mediflor Tisane Contre la Constipation Passagere No 7 Merck Lipha Santé,
France, Liquorice (p. 411), Rosemary (p. 508), Senna (p. 537)

Mediflor Tisane Digestive No 3 Merck Lipha Santé, France, Angelica (p. 53),
Aniseed (p. 57), Elecampane (p. 240), Rosemary (p. 508)

Mediflor Tisane Hepatique No 5 Merck Lipha Santé, France, Boldo (p. 91),
Elecampane (p. 240), Liquorice (p. 411), Rosemary (p. 508), Senna (p. 537)

Mediflor Tisane No 4 Diuretique Merck Lipha Santé, France, Couchgrass
(p. 193), Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418), Meadowsweet (p. 423), Uva-Ursi
(p. 577)

Medilaxan Laboratorios Beta S.A., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Medinat Esten Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Angelica (p. 53), Cohosh, Black (p. 168),
Damiana (p. 201), Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Medinat PMT-Eze Bioglan Ltd, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Parsley (p. 456), Uva-
Ursi (p. 577)

Mefedra-N Medipharma Ltd, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Euphorbia (p. 249), Senega
(p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Melaton Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425)
Melipass Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Melissa (p. 425)

Melissa Comp. Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove
(p. 166), Melissa (p. 425)

Melissengeist Hofmann & Sommer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Angelica (p. 53),
Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Melissa (p. 425), Rosemary (p. 508), Sage (p. 512),
Thyme (p. 574) Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon
(p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Melissa (p. 425)

Meloids Olic (Thailand) Ltd, Thailand, Capsicum (p. 125), Cinnamon (p. 162),
Liquorice (p. 411)

Memoactive Euroderm S.r.l., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Memorandum Lampugnani Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Memovisus Pharmacia Italia S.p.A., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Menabil Complex Menarini, Spain, Artichoke (p. 67), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb
(p. 506)

Menodoron Weleda GmbH & Co. KG, Austria, Nettle (p. 452), Senna (p. 537),
Yarrow (p. 604) Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Nettle (p. 452), Senna
(p. 537), Yarrow (p. 604)

Menopace Plus Vitabiotics Ltd, UK, Sage (p. 512)

Menopause Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Lime Flower (p. 409), Motherwort
(p. 447), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Valerian (p. 580) Walgreens Finest Natural, USA,
Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Menopause Support Sundown, USA, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Menstrunat Soria Natural, Spain, Calendula (p. 121), Sage (p. 512), Yarrow (p. 604)

Mental Clarity Sundown, USA, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Mentania Laboratorios Saval SA, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Mento-O-Cap Rekah Ltd, Israel, Capsicum (p. 125)
Mentopin Brady C. KG, Austria, Capsicum (p. 125), Nettle (p. 452), Sage (p. 512)

Mepalax Istituto Biologico Chemioterapico SpA, Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara
(p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Mermelax Lab. Argenfarma S.R.L., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Me-Sabona plus Sabona GmbH, Germany, Melissa (p. 425), St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Mesatil Soria Natural, Spain, Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425), Rosemary
(p. 508), Willow (p. 598)

Metiogen Quimica Medical Arg. S.A.C.1., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo
(p. 91), Wild Carrot (p. 593)

lalgan Qualicare AG, Switzerland, Capsicum (p. 125)

Midro Laboratori Italiani Vaillant S.r.1., Italy, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Crefar, Lda, Portugal, Clove (p. 166), Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Midro Tee Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Midro-Tea ProMedico Ltd, Israel, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Mielocol Herbes Universelles, Canada, Bloodroot (p. 84)

Milk Thistle Nutravite, Canada, Artichoke (p. 67), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Milk Thistle Extract Formula Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd, Canada,
Dandelion (p. 204), Liquorice (p. 411), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Mint-Lysoform Lysoform Dr. Hans Rosemann GmbH, Germany, Myrrh (p. 449)

Mirfulan Ratiopharm Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH, Austria, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Merckle GmbH, Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Mirorroidin Laboratorio Sedabel Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Miroton Abbott GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Mirtilene Societd Industria Farmaceutica Italiana S.p.A., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)
Mirtilus Llorens, Spain, Bilberry (p. 79)

Mirtilux Mediwhite Srl, Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Mist Expect Stim Vida Laboratories Ltd, Hong Kong, Liquorice (p. 411), Senega
(p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Mithen Fidia Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, St John's Wort (p. 549)
Mixagel Productos Naturissima de Venezuela, Venezuela, Thyme (p. 574)

Mixed Vegetable Tablets Dorwest Herbs Ltd, UK, Celery (p. 146), Horseradish
(p. 367), Parsley (p. 456)

MM Expectorante Laboratorio Americano de Farmacoterapia S/A, Brazil,
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Modane Cooperation Pharmaceutique Francaise, France, Senna (p. 537)

Modern Herbals Cold & Catarrh G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Echinacea
(p. 217), Elder (p. 237), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Modern Herbals Cold & Congestion G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK,
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Modern Herbals Cough Mixture G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, St John's
Wort (p. 549)

Modern Herbals Laxative G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Cascara (p. 128),
Senna (p. 537)

Modern Herbals Menopause G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Clivers
(p. 164), Parsley (p. 456), Senna (p. 537), Vervain (p. 591)

Modern Herbals Pile G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Cascara (p. 128),
Slippery Elm (p. 545), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Modern Herbals Rheumatic Pain G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Bogbean
(p. 89), Celery (p. 146), Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Modern Herbals Stress G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Motherwort (p. 447),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Modern Herbals Water Retention G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Burdock
(p. 102), Clivers (p. 164), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Montana Pharmonta Mag. pharm. Dr Fischer, Austria, Cinnamon (p. 162),
Dandelion (p. 204), Hops (p. 354)

Montana N Pharmonta Mag. pharm. Dr Fischer, Austria, Centaury (p. 149),
Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian (p. 290)

Mon-tana Pharmonta Mag. pharm. Dr Fischer, Austria, Gentian (p. 290)

Moradorm S$ Apotheker Walter Bouhon GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hops
(p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Moragen Euroderm Laboratorios S.R.L., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Moultons Herbal Extract Pharmaceutical Enterprises (Pty) Ltd, South Africa,
Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Mr Pacific Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd, New Zealand, Borage (p. 96), Melissa
(p. 425)

MSM with Glucosamine Creme Natrol, USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Arnica (p. 64),
Capsicum (p. 125), Chamomile, German (p. 152), Comfrey (p. 188)

Mucilar Avena Spirig Pharma AG, Switzerland, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Mucinum Sabex Inc., Canada, Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. 537)

Mucinum a |’Extrait de Cascara Laboratoires Innotech International, Sté du
groupe Innothéra, France, Anisced (p. 57), Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Senna
(p. 537)

Mucinum Cascara Wing Wai Trading Co., Hong Kong, Aniseed (p. 57), Boldo
(p. 91), Cascara (p. 128), Senna (p. 537)

Muc-Sabona Sabona GmbH, Germany, Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme (p. 574)
Multilim RG Atlantic Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Multi-Mam Compressas Farmalight, Lda, Portugal, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Multi-Vitamin Day & Night Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Muscle Rub Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Arnica (p. 64), Capsicum
(p. 125)

Mutellon Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Motherwort (p. 447), Valerian (p. 580)
My Defense Natrol, USA, Cranberry (p. 197)

My Favorite Multiple Natrol, USA, Ginger (p. 293), Hawthorn (p. 346)
My Favorite Multiple Energizer Natrol, USA, Alfalfa (p. 45)

My Favorite Multiple Iron-Free Natrol, USA, Bilberry (p. 79)

----- PAGE 660 -----
My Favorite Multiple Original Natrol, USA, Bilberry (p. 79)
My Favorite Multiple Prime Multi Vitamin Natrol, USA, Bilberry (p. 79)
My Favorite Multiple Take One Natrol, USA, Alfalfa (p. 45), Bilberry (p. 79)

My Favorite Multiple Take One Iron-Free Natrol, USA, Alfalfa (p. 45), Bilberry
(p. 79)

Myrrhinil-Intest Repha GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel, Germany, Myrrh (p. 449)

LN]

Nadem Forte /vax Argentina SA, Argentina, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Napiers Back Ache Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Pulsatilla (p. 489)
Napiers Backache Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Celery (p. 146)

Napiers Breathe Easy Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Clivers (p. 164), Plantain
(p. 474)

Napiers Cold Tablets Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Garlic (p. 279)

Napiers Digestion Tablets Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Ginger (p. 293), Myrrh
(p. 449), Valerian (p. 580)

Napiers Echinacea Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Calendula (p. 121), Echinacea
(p. 217), Liquorice (p. 411), Melissa (p. 425), Nettle (p. 452), Sage (p. 512)

Napiers Monthly Calm Tea Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Chamomile, German
(p. 152), Ginger (p. 293), Pulsatilla (p. 489)

Napiers Skin Tablets Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Blue Flag (p. 87), Burdock
(p. 102), Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

Napiers Sleep Tablets Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580),
Vervain (p. 591), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Napiers Slimming Tablets Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion
(p. 204), Fucus (p. 273)

Napiers Tension Tablets Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Hops (p. 354), Scullcap
(p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Napiers Uva Ursi Tea Natrol, UK, Corn Silk (p. 191) Culpeper and Napiers, UK,
Couchgrass (p. 193), Marshmallow (p. 418), Meadowsweet (p. 423), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Nappy Rash Relief Cream Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Calendula
(p. 121), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Nasal-Ease Hi-Tech Pharmacal, USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Calendula (p. 121)
Natrasleep Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)
Natravene Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Dandelion (p. 204), Frangula (p. 270)

Natrol Complete Balance for Menopause AM/PM Formula Natrol, USA,
Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Natudor Dolisos SA, Belgium, Hawthorn (p. 346), Lime Flower (p. 409), Valerian
(p. 580) Laboratoires Plantes et Médecines, France, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461)

Natural Deep Sleep Naturopathica, Australia, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Natural Herb Tablets Dorwest Herbs Ltd, UK, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128),
Dandelion (p. 204), Senna (p. 537), Valerian (p. 580)

Natural Herbal Water Tablets Sundown, USA, Alfalfa (p. 45), Couchgrass
(p. 193), Juniper (p. 386), Parsley (p. 456)

Natural HRT Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Agnus Castus (p. 36), Burdock
(p. 102), Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Red Clover (p. 498)

Nature Complex Reduct-Te Laboratorio Prater SA, Chile, Boldo (p. 91), Lime
Flower (p. 409)

Nature’s Garden Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd, UK, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo
(p. 299)
Naturident Memsep sro, Czech Republic, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Naturland Grosser Swedenbitter Naturland Czech Republic sro, Czech
Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Bogbean (p. 89), Centaury (p. 149), Clove (p. 166),
Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Liquorice (p. 411), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Rosemary
(p. 508)

Naturlax Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Natursel-C Laboratorio Ximena Polanco, Chile, Wild Carrot (p. 593)
Natur-Zin Laboratorio Ximena Polanco, Chile, Wild Carrot (p. 593)

Natusor Aerofane Soria Natural, Spain, Melissa (p. 425)

Natusor Artilane Soria Natural, Spain, Nettle (p. 452)

Natusor Asmaten Soria Natural, Spain, Elecampane (p. 240), Thyme (p. 574)
Natusor Astringel Soria Natural, Spain, Agrimony (p. 42), Liquorice (p. 411)

Natusor Broncopul Soria Natural, Spain, Elecampane (p. 240), Marshmallow
(p. 418)

Natusor Circusil Soria Natural, Spain, Yarrow (p. 604)

Natusor Farinol Soria Natural, Spain, Agrimony (p. 42), Marshmallow (p. 418),
Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574)

Preparations Directory

Natusor Gastrolen Soria Natural, Spain, Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow
(p. 418), St John's Wort (p. 549), Yarrow (p. 604)

Natusor Gripotul Soria Natural, Spain, Elder (p. 237), Lime Flower (p. 409),
Thyme (p. 574)

Natusor Harpagosinol Soria Natural, Spain, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Meadowsweet
(p. 423), Willow (p. 598)

Natusor Hepavesical Soria Natural, Spain, Boldo (p. 91), Centaury (p. 149),
Fumitory (p. 276), Rosemary (p. 508)

Natusor High Blood Pressure Soria Natural, Spain, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Natusor Infenol Soria Natural, Spain, Thyme (p. 574)

Natusor Jaquesan Soria Natural, Spain, Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425),
Willow (p. 598), Yarrow (p. 604)

Natusor Low Blood Pressure Soria Natural, Spain, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus
(p. 315), Liquorice (p. 411), Rosemary (p. 508), Sage (p. 512)

Natusor Malvasen Soria Natural, Spain, Marshmallow (p. 418), Senna (p. 537)
Natusor Renal Soria Natural, Spain, Meadowsweet (p. 423), Thyme (p. 574)

Natusor Sinulan Soria Natural, Spain, Elder (p. 237), Lime Flower (p. 409),
Rosemary (p. 508), Thyme (p. 574)

Natusor Somnisedan Soria Natural, Spain, Hawthorn (p. 346), Lime Flower
(p. 409), St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Neda Fruchtewurfel Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Senna (p. 537)

Negacne Wierhom Pharma S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Coltsfoot (p. 185)
Nenegloss Laboratorios Maver SA, Chile, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Neo Baby Gripe Mixture Alinter Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

Neo Gripe Mixture Alinter Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

Neo Urgenin Madaus, Spain, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Neo-Atropan Laboratorios Quim-Far C.A., Venezuela, Aniseed (p. 57)

Neo-Cleanse GNLD International P/L, Australia, Alfalfa (p. 45), Aniseed (p. 57),
Liquorice (p. 411), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Neo-Codion Laboratoires Bouchara-Recordati, France, Senega (p. 533)

Neo-Codion Babies (Heo-Koauon Aas Maaaennes) FIC Medical, Russia, Senega
(p. 533)

Neoderma 47 Neovita S.a.s. di G. Pirotta & C., Italy, Vervain (p. 591)
Neoform Pietrasanta Pharma S.r.l., Italy, Frangula (p. 270), Rhubarb (p. 506)
Neo-Healar Antah Pharma Sdb Bhd, Malaysia, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Neompyrt Plus Baif International Products, New York S.n.c., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79),
Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Neoplex Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Liquorice (p. 411)
Neoplus Laboratorio Terapeutico M.R. S.r.l., Italy, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Neostrata Lab Medstyle SA, Chile, Liquorice (p. 411)

nephro-loges Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, Parsley (p. 456)

Nephronorm med Mauermann-Arzneimittel, Franz Mauermann oHG, Germany,
Calendula (p. 121), Java Tea (p. 381)

Nephrosal Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Nettle (p. 452)

Nephroselect M Dreluso Pharmazeutika, Dr Elten & Sohn GmbH, Germany, Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Nephrubin-N Weber & Weber GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Java Tea (p. 381)
Nerex Farmanova AFM S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)

Nerfood Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Asafoetida (p. 72),
Valerian (p. 580)

Nervatona Plus Braver Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, False Unicorn (p. 258),
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325), Passionflower (p. 461)

Nervendragees ratiopharm GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Nerven-Dragees ProMedico Ltd, Israel, Hawthorn (p. 346), Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Nervenkapseln ratiopharm GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Nervenruh Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau GmbH, Austria, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Nerventee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Hops (p. 354), St
John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Nervikan Laboratorios DHU Ibérica, S.A., Spain, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Nervinetas Comercial GFC SA de CV, Mexico, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)
Grunenthal Venezolana C.A., Venezuela, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)
Nervinetten Zellaforte Vertriebsanstalt, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Valerian
(p. 580)

Nervinfant N RubiePharm Vertriebs GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461)

----- PAGE 661 -----
Appendix 4

Nervocalm Lab. Garden House S.A., Argentina, Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa
(p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Nervoregin forte Homdopathisches Laboratorium A. Pfluger GmbH, Germany,
Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Nervous Dyspepsia Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK,
Dandelion (p. 204), Ginger (p. 293), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Valerian
(p. 580)

Nervova Cajova Smes Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian
(p. 580)

Nesfare Madaus, Spain, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Nesthakchen Schuilke & Mayr GmbH, Austria, Aniseed (p. 57), Liquorice (p. 411)

Neurapas Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Passionflower
(p. 461), St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Neurocardol Confar, Lda, Portugal, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580), Willow (p. 598)

Neuroflorine Laboratoires Fuca, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Neuropax SERP, Monaco, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461)

Nevaton Mediherb P/L, Australia, Damiana (p. 201), Scullcap (p. 530), St John's
Wort (p. 549), Vervain (p. 591)

Nevril Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.I., Italy, Calendula (p. 121), Devil's Claw
(p. 207), Willow (p. 598), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

New Patecs A Hong Kong Medical Supplies Ltd, Hong Kong, Arnica (p. 64)

Newrelax Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Scullcap (p. 530),
Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Nican F. Uhlmann-Eyraud SA, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215), Thyme (p. 574)

Nico Hepatocyn Uriach, Spain, Aloes (p. 50), Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo (p. 91),
Cascara (p. 128)

Nicoprive Laboratoires DB Pharma, France, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Nighttime Herb Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Nigroids Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411)

Ninfagin Ricerca, Produzione e Commercializzazione di Prodotti Farmaceutici e
Cosmetici Srl, Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Nitrangin compositum Alpharma-lsis GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Valerian
(p. 580)

Noctis Bouty SpA, Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Nocvalene Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Noditran Naturland, Hungary, Yarrow (p. 604)

Nodoff Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Ispaghula (p. 374),
Passionflower (p. 461), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

No-Gras Higaté Medical Argentina, Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Nontusyl Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Lime Flower
(p. 409), Marshmallow (p. 418), Melissa (p. 425), Thyme (p. 574)

Nordimenty Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Melissa
(p. 425), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Normacol Schering Mexicana S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Frangula (p. 270)
Normacol Forte Norgine de Esparia, Spain, Frangula (p. 270)

Normacol Plus Norgine P/L, Australia, Frangula (p. 270) Norgine SA, Belgium,
Frangula (p. 270) Treasure Mountain Development Co. Ltd, Hong Kong, Frangula
(p. 270) United Drug, Ireland, Frangula (p. 270) Angelini, Portugal, Frangula (p. 270)
Grafton Pharmasia Pte Ltd, Singapore, Frangula (p. 270) Norgine (Pty) Ltd, South
Africa, Frangula (p. 270) Norgine Pharmaceuticals Ltd, UK, Frangula (p. 270) CSL
(NZ) Ltd, Zuellig Pharma, New Zealand, Frangula (p. 270)

Normoprost Plus Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Nostress Laboratoires Robert Schwartz, France, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325), Hops
(p. 354)

No-Tos Adultos Quimica Medical Arg. S.A.C.1., Argentina, Liquorice (p. 411),
Senega (p. 533)

No-Tos Infantil Quimica Medical Arg. S.A.C.I., Argentina, Liquorice (p. 411),
Senega (p. 533)

Notosil Grunenthal Chilena Ltda, Chile, Drosera (p. 215)

Novarrutina Zurita Laboratorio Farmacéutico Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Novicarbon C.T.S. Chemical Industries Ltd, Israel, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)
Novocholin Adler-Apotheke, Austria, Agrimony (p. 42), Rhubarb (p. 506)
Novo-Passit Ivax-CR as, lvax-CR as, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237), Hawthorn
(p. 346), Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), St John's Wort

(p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Noxivid Biofarma Natural CMD SA de CV, Mexico, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

N-T-Tus Zydus Cadila Group, India, Liquorice (p. 411)
Nucolox Sigma Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Nytol Herbal GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare, UK, Hops (p. 354), Ispaghula
(p. 374), Passionflower (p. 461), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

©

Obeflorine Laboratoires Lehning, France, Couchgrass (p. 193)

Oculosan Novartis Pharma Schweiz AG, Switzerland, Eyebright (p. 256), Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Ocusense Natrol, USA, Bilberry (p. 79)

Oddispasmol Ratiopharm Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH, Austria, Fumitory
(p. 276)

Odisor Soria Natural, Spain, Boldo (p. 91), Centaury (p. 149), Fumitory (p. 276)
Odontal G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166)

Odontobiotic Higaté Medical Argentina, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Calendula
(p. 121)

Odor Eze Novartis New Zealand Ltd, New Zealand, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Odourless Garlic Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Garlic (p. 279), Parsley (p. 456)
Vitaplex Products, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic (p. 279)

Ojosbel Dermofarm, Spain, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Oleum Rhinale Nasal Oil Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Calendula
(p. 121)

Olocynan Makros Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67)
Omega Dr A & L Schmidgall, Austria, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Omega-3 Complex Natrol, USA, Borage (p. 96)

Omega-3 Glucosamine Natrol, USA, Borage (p. 96)

One Drop Spray Laboratorios Politecnicos Nacionales C.A., Venezuela, Myrrh
(p. 449), Sage (p. 512)

Onguent aux herbes Keller UB Interpharm SA, Switzerland, Arnica (p. 64),
Calendula (p. 121)

Onopordon Comp B Weleda (UK) Ltd, UK, Cowslip (p. 195)
Onrectal Herbes Universelles, Canada, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Ophtalmine Coopération Pharmaceutique Francaise, France, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Opobyl Spedrog Caillon S.A.l.y C., Argentina, Boldo (p. 91) Laboratoires Bailly
SPEAB, France, Aloes (p. 50), Boldo (p. 91) Uriach, Spain, Aloes (p. 50), Boldo (p. 91)

Opo-Veinogene Alpharma France, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Opplin TNP Health Care Co. Ltd, Thailand, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Optimina Plus Lab. Temis Lostald S.A., Argentina, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Optrex Boots Healthcare Australia P/L, Australia, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Optrex compresses Boots Healthcare (Switzerland) AG, Hermal, Switzerland,
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Optrex Red Eyes Crookes Healthcare Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

OptrexRed-Eye Relief Boots Healthcare New Zealand Ltd, New Zealand, Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Orafilm Laboratorios Rowe-Fleming C.A., Venezuela, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Oralsone Topic Laboratorios Gramon, Argentina, Rhubarb (p. 506)
OraMagicRx MPM Medical Inc., USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Original Grosser Bittner Balsam (Opurnnaapuniii Boanmofi Baansam Burrnepa)
Herbs Trading GmbH, Russia, Aloes (p. 50), Angelica (p. 53), Aniseed (p. 57),
Bogbean (p. 89), Calamus (p. 118), Centaury (p. 149), Clove (p. 166), Elecampane
(p. 240), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Holy Thistle (p. 352), Liquorice (p. 411),
Myrrh (p. 449), Yarrow (p. 604)

Original Herb Cough Drops Ricola, Canada, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574), Yarrow (p. 604)

Original Schwedenbitter Riviera Handelsgesellschaft.m.b.h., Austria, Angelica
(p. 53), Calamus (p. 118), Dandelion (p. 204), Gentian (p. 290), Myrrh (p. 449)

Ortisan Cabassi & Giuriati S.p.A., Italy, Senna (p. 537)
Osmogel Alphrema S.r.1., Italy, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Ottovis Laboratorio Fitolife S.r.1., Italy, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Out-of-Sorts Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128),
Dandelion (p. 204), Senna (p. 537)

Ovumix Laboratorio Elea S.A.C.I.F.yA., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Oxacant-sedativ Dr Gustav Klein, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346), Melissa (p. 425),
Motherwort (p. 447), Valerian (p. 580)

CP)

30 Plus Ranbaxy (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

----- PAGE 662 -----
Pacifenity Vitaplex Products, Australia, Gentian (p. 290), Hops (p. 354), Milk
Thistle (p. 429), Motherwort (p. 447), Passionflower (p. 461), Scullcap (p. 530),
Valerian (p. 580)

Padma-Lax Padma AG, Switzerland, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128), Frangula
(p. 270), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Padmed Laxan Padma AG, Switzerland, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128),
Elecampane (p. 240), Frangula (p. 270), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Rhubarb
(p. 506)

Palatrobil Monserrat y Eclair $.A., Argentina, Artichoke (p. 67), Wild Carrot
(p. 593)

Palmetto Plus Usana, Singapore, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Paltomiel Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Aniseed (p. 57)

Paltomiel Plus Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Echinacea (p. 217),
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Panax Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Alfalfa (p. 45), Fenugreek (p. 260),
Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Pansoral Teething (Mancopaa Mepssie 3y6s1) Pierre Fabre Medicament, Russia,
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Panxeol Laboratoires IPRAD, France, Passionflower (p. 461)

Paracodin Abbott GmbH, Austria, Marshmallow (p. 418), Thyme (p. 574)
Paradenton Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Myrrh (p. 449), Sage (p. 512)
Parapsyllium Laboratoires IPRAD, France, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Paratonico Multilab Ind. e Com. Prods. Farmacéuticos Ltda, Brazil, Aloes (p. 50),
Cinnamon (p. 162), Myrrh (p. 449)

Parche Negro Belladona Quimica y Farmacia, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Capsicum
(p. 125)

Parodium Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A., Argentina, Rhubarb (p. 506) Laboratoires
Pierre Fabre, France, Rhubarb (p. 506)

Parodium (TMapoauym) Pierre Fabre Medicament, Russia, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Parodontal Serumwerk Bernburg AG, Germany, Sage (p. 512)

Parodontax GlaxoSmithKline Pharma, Austria, Echinacea (p. 217), Myrrh (p. 449)
GlaxoSmithKline Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Echinacea (p. 217), Myrrh (p. 449)

Parodontax Fluor GlaxoSmithKline S.A., Argentina, Echinacea (p. 217), Myrrh
(p. 449), Sage (p. 512)

Parogencyl prevention gencives Sanofi Synthelabo OTC, France, Ginkgo
(p. 299)

Parvisedil Specialitd Igienico Terapeutiche S.r.I., Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Pasalix Marjan Industria e Comercio Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Willow (p. 598)

Pascosedon Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354),
Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Pasidor CAFAR (Compania Anonima Farmaceutica), Venezuela, Hawthorn
(p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Pasifluidina Productos Gache S.A., Venezuela, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Pasinordin Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Passionflower
(p. 461)

Passacanthine Lab. Lafage S.R.L., Argentina, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Passaneuro Bunker Induistria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Melissa (p. 425),
Passionflower (p. 461)

Passedan Dr Peithner KG nunmehr GmbH & Co., Austria, Cinnamon (p. 162)
Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461)

Passelyt Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461)

Passi Catha Laboratorio Sedabel Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Willow (p. 598)

Passicalm Laboratorios Gemballa Ltda, Brazil, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Passiflora Tamar Marketing, Israel, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Passiflora Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower
(p. 461), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Passiflora Composta Infabra Industria Farmacéutica Brasileira Ltda, Brazil,
Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461)

Passiflora Compound Vitamed Ltd, Israel, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Passiflorine Produtos Farmacéuticos Millet Roux Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Willow (p. 598) Laboratoires Jolly-Jatel, France, Hawthorn

Preparations Directory

(p. 346) Laboratoires Jolly-Jatel, France, Passionflower (p. 461) Teofarma, Italy,
Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461), Willow (p. 598) Chiesi Esparia, Spain,
Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461)

Passiflorum Zuoz Pharma S.A., Venezuela, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Willow (p. 598)

Passilex Luper Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Passin Georg Simons GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461)

Passinevryl Laboratoires Clément-Thionville, France, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Passionflower Plus Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Pastillas Pectoral Kely Boots Healthcare, Spain, Liquorice (p. 411), Senega (p. 533)

Pastilles bronchiques $ nouvelle formule Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Drosera
(p. 215), Liquorice (p. 411)

Pastilles Monleon Laboratoires Toulade, France, Drosera (p. 215), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Pastilles pectorales Demo N Vifor SA, Switzerland, Drosera (p. 215), Plantain
(p. 474)

Pazbronquial Cinfa, Spain, Drosera (p. 215), Marshmallow (p. 418)
PC 30 V Terra-Bio-Chemie GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

PC Regulax Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Ginger (p. 293), Ispaghula (p. 374), Slippery
Elm (p. 545)

Pectal Laboratorio Sedabel Ltda, Brazil, Senega (p. 533)
Pectobron Laboratorios Sidus S.A., Argentina, Senega (p. 533)
Pectocalmine Vifor SA, Switzerland, Senega (p. 533)

Pectoral N Mepha Pharma AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195), Plantain (p. 474),
Senega (p. 533), Thyme (p. 574)

Pectoral Pasteur Laboratorios Pasteur Ltda, Chile, Drosera (p. 215), Liquorice
(p. 411)

Pedicrem Laboratorios Prieto S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Peerless Composition Essence Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Bayberry
(p. 77)

Pegina Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Calamus (p. 118), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Peitoral Angico Pelotense Companhia Industrial Farmacéutica, Brazil, Liquorice
(p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Peking Ginseng Royal Jelly N Peking Royal Jelly Deutschland BOELL
HandelsKontor, Germany, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Penaten Johnson & Johnson/Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals of Canada,
Canada, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Pentol Laboratorios Sidus S.A., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Pepsitase B L Hua & Co. Ltd, Thailand, Gentian (p. 290)
Peptochol Laboratorios Grossman S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Boldo (p. 91)

Percutane Douglas Pharmaceuticals Australia Ltd, Australia, Aloe Vera (p. 48),
Arnica (p. 64), Burdock (p. 102)

Perdiem Novartis Consumer Health Inc., USA, Ispaghula (p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Period Pain Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, False Unicorn (p. 258), Motherwort
(p. 447), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Peritone Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128), Ginger (p. 293),
Senna (p. 537)

Perivar [psen Pharma GmbH, Germany, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Perospir Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Coltsfoot (p. 185), Elder (p. 237),
Nettle (p. 452), Thyme (p. 574), Yarrow (p. 604)

Persen Lek Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)
Persen (Tepcen) Lek, Russia, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)
Perskindol Cool Arnica Vifor SA, Switzerland, Arnica (p. 64)

Petites Pilules Carters Laboratoires Fumouze, France, Aloes (p. 50)

Phlebosedol Laboratoires Lehning, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Phol-Tux /nterdelta SA, Switzerland, Senega (p. 533)
Photoderm Flush Bioderma, France, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Phyto Corrective Gel Dispolab Farmaceutica SA, Chile, Thyme (p. 574)

Phytobronchin Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Phyto-Ease Great Liaison Ltd, Hong Kong, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Phytoestrin Usana, Singapore, Agnus Castus (p. 36), Cohosh, Black (p. 168),
Liquorice (p. 411)

Phyto-Laxia Phytopharma SA, Switzerland, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

----- PAGE 663 -----
Appendix 4

Phytolaxin Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Aloes (p. 50), Frangula (p. 270), Senna
(p. 537)

Phytomed Cardio Phytomed AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Rosemary (p. 508)

Phytomelis Laboratoires Lehning, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Phytonoctu Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH, Germany, Melissa (p. 425),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Pi-Fedrin Laboratorios Flupal C.A., Venezuela, Drosera (p. 215)

Pik Gel Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.1., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79), Devil's Claw (p. 207),
Ginger (p. 293), Ginkgo (p. 299), Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Hydrocotyle (p. 371),
Meadowsweet (p. 423), Yarrow (p. 604)

Pildoras Zeninas Puerto Galiano, Spain, Aloes (p. 50), Cascara (p. 128)
Pileabs G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Cascara (p. 128), Slippery Elm (p. 545)

Piletabs Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Agrimony (p. 42), Cascara (p. 128),
Pilewort (p. 472), Stone Root (p. 570)

Pilka Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Drosera (p. 215), Thyme (p. 574) Novartis Ltd,
Israel, Drosera (p. 215), Thyme (p. 574) Ferrer Farma, Spain, Drosera (p. 215),
Thyme (p. 574)

Pilka F Novartis Consumer Health, Lda, Portugal, Drosera (p. 215)
Pilka Forte Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Drosera (p. 215), Thyme (p. 574)

Pilulas De Witt’s Companhia Industrial Farmacéutica, Brazil, Cascara (p. 128),
Juniper (p. 386), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Pilulas Ross GlaxoSmithKline Brasil Ltda, Brazil, Capsicum (p. 125)

Pinvex Laboratorios Cofasa S.A., Venezuela, Rhubarb (p. 506)

Piodermina Farmachimici S.r.l., Italy, Thyme (p. 574)

Planta Lax Hoeveler Mag. & Co. GmbH, Austria, Frangula (p. 270), Senna (p. 537)

Plantax Farmion Laboratorio Brasileiro de Farmacologia Ltda, Brazil, Ispaghula
(p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Plantiodine Plus Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Alfalfa (p. 45)

Plantival Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian
(p. 580)

Plantival novo Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Melissa (p. 425),
Valerian (p. 580)

Pleumolysin /vax-CR as, lvax-CR as, Czech Republic, Thyme (p. 574)
PMS Control Natrol, USA, Evening Primrose (p. 251), Parsley (p. 456)
PMS Support Vitaplex Products, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Ginger (p. 293)

PMT Complex Mayne Pharma P/L, Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Agnus Castus
(p. 36), Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Ginger (p. 293)

PMT Formula Vitalia Health Ltd, UK, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)
Pneumopan Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)

Pneumopect Gebro Pharma GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)

Poliseng Laboratorio Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda, Brazil, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Polypirine Laboratoires Lehning, France, Meadowsweet (p. 423)

Pommade au Baume Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland,
Guaiacum (p. 344), Myrrh (p. 449), Yarrow (p. 604)

Postopyl Laboratoires d’Evolution Dermatologique, France, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Potassium lodide and Stramonium Compound J. McGloin P/L, Australia,
Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Potter’s Catarrh Pastilles Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd, UK, Marshmallow (p. 418)

Potters Children’s Cough Pastilles Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd, UK, St John's Wort
(p. 549)

Potters Gees Linctus Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd, UK, St John's Wort (p. 549)

Potters Sugar Free Cough Pastilles Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd, UK, Liquorice
(p. 411)

PR21 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prementaid Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Motherwort (p. 447), Pulsatilla
(p. 489), Uva-Ursi (p. 577), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Preparation H Cooling Gel Whitehall-Robins Inc., Canada, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Wyeth Consumer Healthcare Inc., USA, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Prespir Representaciones Mex-America S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Prinachol Zurita Laboratorio Farmacéutico Ltda, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo
(p. 91)

sen Thornton & Ross Ltd, UK, Senna (p. 537)

Prisoventril Laboratorio Simées Ltda, Brazil, Cascara (p. 128)

ProAktiv Boehringer Ingelheim Austria GmbH, Austria, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Probigol Omeofarma S.r.I., Italy, Echinacea (p. 217)

ProBrain Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Procold Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Euphorbia (p. 249), Garlic (p. 279), Horseradish
(p. 367)

Proctoplex Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Proctopure Dermofarma Italia S.r.1., Italy, Calendula (p. 121), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Liquorice (p. 411), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Proctosan Kley Hertz SA, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Proctosor Soria Natural, Spain, Golden Seal (p. 337), Senna (p. 537)

Prodiem Plus Novartis Consumer Health Canada Inc., Canada, Ispaghula
(p. 374), Senna (p. 537)

Proesten Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Garlic (p. 279),
Passionflower (p. 461), Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

Profelan M & A Pharmachem Ltd, UK, Arnica (p. 64)

Proflo Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Profluid Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Dandelion (p. 204), Juniper (p. 386), Parsley
Piert (p. 459), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Projimava Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537),
Yarrow (p. 604)

Prolax Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Senna (p. 537)

Pronervon Phyto Dr Scheffler Nachf. GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Melissa
(p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Prophthal Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79), Ginkgo (p. 299)

Prosed-X Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Prosgutt Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Nettle (p. 452), Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Prost-1 Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Devil's Claw (p. 207), Willow (p. 598), Yucca
(p. 610)

Prosta-Caps Chassot N Doetsch Grether AG, Switzerland, Echinacea (p. 217),
Java Tea (p. 381), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostagutt Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Nettle (p. 452), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Prostagutt forte Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co., Germany, Nettle (p. 452),
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostagutt-F Schwabe Pharma AG, Switzerland, Nettle (p. 452), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Prostaid Healthy Direct, UK, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostakan Forte Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech Republic,
Nettle (p. 452), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostanorm (Tpocrasopm) Farm Vilar ZAO, Russia, Echinacea (p. 217), Liquorice
(p. 411), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Prostaplant Marvecs Services Srl, Italy, Nettle (p. 452), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostate Ease Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd, Canada, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Prostate Health Sundown, USA, Nettle (p. 452), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
ProstatExcell Natrol, USA, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostatonin Madaus GmbH, Austria, Nettle (p. 452) Boehringer Ingelheim sro,
Czech Republic, Nettle (p. 452) Pharmaton SA, Switzerland, Nettle (p. 452)

Prostease Jamieson Laboratories, Canada, Cranberry (p. 197), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521) Universal Pharmaceutical Lab Ltd, Hong Kong, Cranberry (p. 197), Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Prostem Plus Laboratorios Baldacci S.A., Brazil, Nettle (p. 452)
ProstGard Holista Health Corp, Canada, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Protecor Duopharm GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Protemp Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Juniper (p. 386), Parsley Piert (p. 459), Uva-Ursi
(p. 577)

Protol Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Garlic (p. 279)

Proyeast Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Chaparral (p. 159), Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic
(p. 279)

Pruduskova Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Lime Flower (p. 409), Liquorice
(p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Pruina Faes Farma, Spain, Senna (p. 537)

Prunacolon Nycomed BV, Netherlands, Senna (p. 537)

Prunasine Nycomed BV, Netherlands, Senna (p. 537)

Psor-Asist Sunspot Products P/L, Australia, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Psorasolv Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Clivers (p. 164), Pokeroot (p. 479)
Pulmagol Laboratorios Pasteur Ltda, Chile, Drosera (p. 215), Marshmallow (p. 418)
Pulmofasa Generfarma, Spain, Senega (p. 533)

Pulmoforte Laboratorios Osorio de Moraes Ltda, Brazil, Marshmallow (p. 418)

----- PAGE 664 -----
Pulmoran Leros sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237), Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Nettle (p. 452), Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574)

Pulmotin Serumwerk Bernburg AG, Germany, Thyme (p. 574)
Pulsalux Novartis Farma S.p.A., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Puma Cough Balsam Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Liquorice
(p. 411)

Puntualax Pharbenia S.r.1., Societa del Gruppo Bayer, Italy, Aloes (p. 50), Rhubarb
(p. 506)

Puraloe Neo Dermos S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Pykno Biovital Pty Ltd, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79)

Pyralvex Laboratorio Dr. Lazar & Cia. S.A., Argentina, Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine
P/L, Australia, Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine Pharma GmbH, Austria, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Norgine SA, Belgium, Rhubarb (p. 506) Laboratoires Norgine Pharma, France,
Rhubarb (p. 506) Faran Laboratories S.A., Greece, Rhubarb (p. 506) Treasure
Mountain Development Co. Ltd, Hong Kong, Rhubarb (p. 506) United Drug,
Ireland, Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine Italia S.r.1., Italy, Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine BV,
Netherlands, Rhubarb (p. 506) Angelini, Portugal, Rhubarb (p. 506) Grafton
Pharmasia Pte Ltd, Singapore, Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine (Pty) Ltd, South Africa,
Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine AG, Switzerland, Rhubarb (p. 506) Zuellig Pharma Ltd,
Thailand, Rhubarb (p. 506) Norgine Pharmaceuticals Ltd, UK, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Grupo Farma S.A., Venezuela, Rhubarb (p. 506) Gervasi Farmacia, Norgine de
Esparia, Spain, Rhubarb (p. 506)

@

Quelodin F Quimica Ariston S.A.C.I.F., Argentina, Dandelion (p. 204), Milk Thistle
(p. 429)

Quiet Days The Cantassium Company, UK, Hops (p. 354), Scullcap (p. 530),
Valerian (p. 580)

Quiet Life G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Motherwort (p. 447),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Quiet Nite The Cantassium Company, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Quiet Tyme The Cantassium Company, UK, Gentian (p. 290), Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Sculleap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Quinisedine Laboratoires Sodia, France, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Quintonine Laboratoires GlaxoSmithKline, France, Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian
(p. 290), Quassia (p. 491)

@

Rabro N Teofarma, Italy, Liquorice (p. 411)
Radicura Laboratorio Walker S.R.L., Argentina, Boldo (p. 91)

Ramend Krauter Queisser Pharma GmbH & Co., Germany, Aniseed (p. 57), Senna
(p. 537)

Ramistos Laboratorios Pasteur Ltda, Chile, Drosera (p. 215), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Rapilax Fibras Merck Quimica Argentina S.A..C., Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374),
Senna (p. 537)

Recalm Sanofi Aventis, Chile, Lime Flower (p. 409), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Rectovasol Qualiphar SA, Belgium, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Red Kooga Co-Q-10 and Ginseng Peter Black Healthcare Ltd, UK, Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325)

ReDormin Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Hops
(p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Redseng Polivit Korhispana, Spain, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Reducing (Slimming) Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK,
Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion (p. 204), Fucus (p. 273)

Reduc-Te Laboratorio Ximena Polanco, Chile, Boldo (p. 91), Lime Flower (p. 409)
Redudiet Laboratorio A.M. Farma Activ, Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Reduktan Leros sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237), Frangula (p. 270), Liquorice
(p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Refrane P Neo Dermos S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Refrane Plus Neo Dermos S.R.L., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Regamint Soria Natural, Spain, Liquorice (p. 411)

Regina Royal Concorde Regina Health Ltd, UK, Damiana (p. 201), Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Regulador Xavier N-2 Laboratorio Hepacholan S.A., Brazil, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Rekiv Rekah Ltd, Israel, Calamus (p. 118), Frangula (p. 270)
Relana Cederroth, Spain, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Relax B+ Vitalia Health Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Preparations Directory

Relaxane Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Butterbur
(p. 107), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Relaxaplex Vitaplex Products, Australia, Gentian (p. 290), Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Relaxo UB Interpharm SA, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Remifemin plus Europharm, Austria, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), St John's Wort
(p. 549) Schaper & Bruimmer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Cohosh, Black (p. 168), St
John's Wort (p. 549)

Rendetil Laboratorio Biotecnoquimica, Venezuela, Valerian (p. 580)

Renob Blasen- und Nierentee Dr R. Pfleger Chemische Fabrik GmbH, Germany,
Couchgrass (p. 193), Liquorice (p. 411)

Renusor Soria Natural, Spain, Corn Silk (p. 191), Couchgrass (p. 193)
Rendetil Laboratorio Biotecnoquimica, Venezuela, Passionflower (p. 461)
Repha-Os Repha GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel, Germany, Myrrh (p. 449)

Resolutivo Regium Laboratorios Diviser-Aquilea S.L., Spain, Boldo (p. 91),
Melissa (p. 425), Rosemary (p. 508)

Resource Rhubagil Laboratoires Novartis Nutrition, France, Rhubarb (p. 506)
Restin Adcock Ingram Pharmaceuticals Ltd, South Africa, Valerian (p. 580)

Retinovit /ndustria Terapeutica Splendore - Oftalmoterapica ALFA, Italy, Bilberry
(p. 79)

Retterspitz Ausserlich Retterspitz GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)
Retterspitz Quick Retterspitz GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64)
Reudol Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Arnica (p. 64)

Reve Istituto di Medicina Omeopatica S.p.A., Italy, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Revitan Ranbaxy Unichem Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Revitonil Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, Aniseed (p. 57), Clove (p. 166), Echinacea
(p. 217), Liquorice (p. 411)

Rheuma Weleda GmbH & Co. KG, Austria, Arnica (p. 64)

Rheumatic Pain The Cantassium Company, UK, Bogbean (p. 89), Celery (p. 146),
Dandelion (p. 204), Guaiacum (p. 344)

Rheumatic Pain Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Bogbean (p. 89), Capsicum
(p. 125), Guaiacum (p. 344)

Rheumatic Pain Remedy Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Bogbean (p. 89),
Burdock (p. 102), Guaiacum (p. 344), Yarrow (p. 604)

Rheumatic Pain Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Bogbean
(p. 89), Celery (p. 146)

Rhinodoron Laboratoires Weleda, France, Aloe Vera (p. 48) Weleda AG-
Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Rhuaka OTC Concepts, UK, Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Rhus Opodeldoc Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Rosemary (p. 508),
Thyme (p. 574)

Rhus-Rheuma-Gel N Deutsche Homoopathie-Union, Germany, Comfrey (p. 188)
Ribovir Plants, Laboratorio della Dott.ssa Luisa Coletta, Italy, Echinacea (p. 217)
Rilastil Dermo Solar Dermoteca, SA, Portugal, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Rob-Bron Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Horehound,
White (p. 361), Liquorice (p. 411)

Roberts Acidosis Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK,
Meadowsweet (p. 423)

Roberts Alchemilla Compound Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries)
Ltd, UK, Motherwort (p. 447), Pulsatilla (p. 489), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Roberts Anti-Irritant Ointment Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK,
Pilewort (p. 472)

Roberts Black Willow Compound Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries)
Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Corn Silk (p. 191), Parsley Piert (p. 459), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521), Willow (p. 598)

Roidhemo Pan Quimica Farmaceutica, Spain, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Romarene Beaufour Ipsen Pharma, France, Dandelion (p. 204), Rosemary (p. 508)
Romarinex Laboratoires Aérocid, France, Rosemary (p. 508)

Rooilavental Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Cinnamon (p. 162)
Roteroblong Maagtabletten /mgroma BV, Netherlands, Frangula (p. 270)
Ruscimel Soria Natural, Spain, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Rutin Compound Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Ginkgo
(p. 299), Yarrow (p. 604)

Rutiviscal Sanidom Handels-GmbH, Austria, Garlic (p. 279), Hawthorn (p. 346),
Milk Thistle (p. 429)

----- PAGE 665 -----
Appendix 4

CS)

Sabal Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Laboratoires
Pierre Fabre, France, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Sabatif Apomedica GmbH, Austria, Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)
Sacnel Teofarma, Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Sadeltan F Hautel S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Sagittaproct Sagitta Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Salhumin Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Capsicum (p. 125)

Salmiak Dr. C. Soldan GmbH, Germany, Liquorice (p. 411)

Salus Herz-Schutz-Kapseln Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH &
Co KG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Salutaris Lab. Incaico SA, Argentina, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Salviette H Whitehall Italia S.p.A., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Sambucus Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Elder (p. 237),
Euphorbia (p. 249), Eyebright (p. 256), Golden Seal (p. 337)

Sanaderm Febena Pharma GmbH, Germany, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Sanason Lek Pharma sro, Czech Republic, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)
Sanason (Canacon) Lek, Russia, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Sanderson’s Throat Specific Sandersons (Chemists) Ltd, UK, Capsicum (p. 125),
Quassia (p. 491), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Sanicut Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Calendula (p. 121)

Sanogencive Laboratoires Plan SA, Switzerland, Horseradish (p. 367), Myrrh
(p. 449)

Saugella Laboratoires Rottapharm, France, Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574)
Saugella Attiva Rottapharm S.r.1., Italy, Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574)
Saugella Dermolatte Rottapharm S.r.l., Italy, Sage (p. 512)

Saugella Fitothym Rottapharm S.r.l., Italy, Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574)
Saugella Poligyn 7 Rottapharm S.r.l., Italy, Thyme (p. 574)

Saugella Salviettine Rottapharm S.r.I., Italy, Sage (p. 512)

Saugella Solido ph 3.5 Rottapharm S.r.1., Italy, Sage (p. 512)

Saugella Uomo Rottapharm S.r.l., Italy, Clove (p. 166)

Schlaf- und Nerventee Bad Heilbrunner Naturheilmittel GmbH & Co., Germany,
Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Schlaf-Nerventee N Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic, Hops
(p. 354), Liquorice (p. 411), Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Schoum Laboratoires Pharmygiéne-SCAT, France, Fumitory (p. 276), Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Schweden-Mixtur H nouvelle formulation Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Aloes
(p. 50), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Schwedentrunk Elixier Pharmazeutische Fabrik Infirmarius-Rovit GmbH,
Germany, Angelica (p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian (p. 290), Valerian (p. 580)

Sciargo Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Clivers (p. 164), Senna (p. 537), Uva-Ursi
(p. 577), Wild Carrot (p. 593)

Sciatica Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Bogbean (p. 89),
Celery (p. 146), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Sciroppo Berta Berta S.r.l., Italy, Liquorice (p. 411)

Sclerovis H Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.1., Italy, Borage (p. 96), Echinacea (p. 217),
Evening Primrose (p. 251)

Scottopect Nycomed Austria GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)

Scullcap & Gentian Tablets Dorwest Herbs Ltd, UK, Gentian (p. 290), Scullcap
(p. 530), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

SCV 300 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299)

SDN 200 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)
Sebium AKN Dispolab Farmaceutica SA, Chile, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Sebulex Lab. Panalab S.A. Argentina, Argentina, Capsicum (p. 125)

Sedacur Schaper & Brummer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Melissa
(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedadom Sanidom Handels-GmbH, Austria, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedalin Laboratorio Dinafarma Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Sedante Dia La Serranita, Lab. de Esp. Medic. y Cosmet., Argentina, Lime Flower
(p. 409), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedariston Konzentrat Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft,
Germany, St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedariston plus Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft, Germany,
Melissa (p. 425), St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedaselect D Dreluso Pharmazeutika, Dr Elten & Sohn GmbH, Germany, Hops
(p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedasor Soria Natural, Spain, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Sedatif Tiber Laboratoires Phytoprevent, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Sedatol £G Laboratori EuroGenerici S.p.A., Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346), Ispaghula
(p. 374), Ispaghula (p. 374), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedinal Melisana SA, Belgium, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461)

Sedofit Body Spring S.r.l., Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346), Lime Flower (p. 409),
Passionflower (p. 461)

Sedogelat Metochem-Pharma GmbH, Austria, Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedonat Soria Natural, Spain, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Sedopal Laboratoires Lehning, France, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Sedopuer F Specialitd Igienico Terapeutiche S.r.I., Italy, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Sedotus Laboratorios Andromaco SA, Chile, Drosera (p. 215)

Sedovent Pharma Schworer GmbH, Germany, Cinnamon (p. 162), Gentian
(p. 290), Yarrow (p. 604)

Selon Truw Arzneimittel Vertriebs GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian
(p. 580)

Senagar Sigma Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Senega (p. 533)
Senalsor Soria Natural, Spain, Marshmallow (p. 418), Senna (p. 537)

Sene Composta /nfabra Induistria Farmacéutica Brasileira Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice
(p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Senega and Ammonia /. McGloin P/L, Australia, Liquorice (p. 411), Senega
(p. 533)

Seneuval Qualiphar SA, Belgium, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Senna Prompt Konsy! Pharmaceuticals, USA, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Senna-S Tanta Pharmaceuticals Inc., Canada, Senna (p. 537)
Senokot con Fibra Grupo Farma S.A., Venezuela, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Senokot-S Purdue Pharma, Canada, Senna (p. 537) The Purdue Frederick Co.,
USA, Senna (p. 537)

Sensinerv forte Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hops (p. 354),
Valerian (p. 580)

Se-Power The Cantassium Company, UK, Bilberry (p. 79), Eyebright (p. 256)
Septacord Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik Goppingen Carl Muiller, Apotheker,
GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346)

Sequals G Lagos Laboratorios Argentina S.R.L., Argentina, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Rosemary (p. 508)

Serenil Lab. Natufarma, Argentina, Lime Flower (p. 409), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Serenoa Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Saw Palmetto

(p. 521)

Serenus Biolab Sanus Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461)

Seven Seas Evening Primrose Oil and Starflower Oil Seven Seas Ltd, UK,
Evening Primrose (p. 251)

Seven Seas Ginseng Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Sigmafem Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Angelica (p. 53), Ginseng,
Eleutherococcus (p. 315), Sage (p. 512)

Sigmafen Free Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Sage (p. 512)
Sigman-Haustropfen Sigmapharm Arzneimittel GmbH & Co KG, Austria,
Gentian (p. 290), Liquorice (p. 411)

Sigmasedan Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian

(p. 580)

Silberne Brady C. KG, Austria, Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Silybum Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Dandelion (p. 204), Garlic (p. 279),
Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Sinotar G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Echinacea (p. 217), Elder (p. 237),
Marshmallow (p. 418)

Sinuforton Lichtenstein Pharmazeutica GmbH & Co., Germany, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Sinupret Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237),
Gentian (p. 290), Vervain (p. 591) Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH, Czech
Republic, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian (p. 290), Vervain (p. 591)

Bionorica AG, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian (p. 290), Vervain

----- PAGE 666 -----
(p. 591) Jacobson Medical (Hong Kong) Ltd, Hong Kong, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder
(p. 237), Gentian (p. 290), Vervain (p. 591) AS! Budapest Kft, Hungary, Cowslip
(p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian (p. 290), Vervain (p. 591) MBD Marketing (S) Pte
Ltd, Singapore, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian (p. 290), Vervain (p. 591)
Biomed AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian (p. 290), Vervain
(p. 591) Zuellig Pharma Ltd, Thailand, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian
(p. 290), Vervain (p. 591)

Sinupret (Cunynper) Bionorica AG, Russia, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237),
Gentian (p. 290), Vervain (p. 591)

Sinus and Hay Fever Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK,
Echinacea (p. 217), Garlic (p. 279)

Sirop Cocillana Codeine Laboratoire Atlas, Canada, Euphorbia (p. 249), Senega
(p. 533), St John's Wort (p. 549), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Sirop pectoral contre la toux S Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195),
Drosera (p. 215), Liquorice (p. 411)

Sirop S contre la toux et la bronchite Hdnseler AG, Switzerland, Cowslip
(p. 195), Drosera (p. 215), Liquorice (p. 411)

Skin Cleansing The Cantassium Company, UK, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers (p. 164),
Fumitory (p. 276), Senna (p. 537)

Skin Eruptions Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Blue Flag (p. 87),
Buchu (p. 100), Burdock (p. 102), Cascara (p. 128), Sarsaparilla (p. 515), Yellow Dock
(p. 608)

Skin Hair Nails Natrol, USA, Burdock (p. 102)

Skin Healing Cream Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Calendula (p. 121),
St John's Wort (p. 549)

Sleepezy Healthy Direct, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Scullcap (p. 530)

Slippery Elm Skin Soap Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Slippery
Elm (p. 545)

Slippery Elm Stomach Tablets Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Slippery Elm
(p. 545)

Slumber Seven Seas Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Ispaghula (p. 374), Passionflower
(p. 461), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

SM-33 Adult Formula Bayer Australia Ltd (Pharmaceutical Business Group),
Australia, Rhubarb (p. 506)

Snella Vag Wierhom Pharma S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Sofderm Cipla Ltd, India, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Soflax Douglas Pharmaceuticals Australia Ltd, Australia, Senna (p. 537)
Solarcaine Aloe Extra Burn Relief Schering-Plough Corp., USA, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Solarcaine Aloe Vera Gel Laboratorio Schering-Plough, Chile, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Solenil Post Solar Lab. Fortbenton Co. S.A., Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Solubitrat Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Java Tea (p. 381)

Solucion Schoum Expanscience, Spain, Boldo (p. 91), Fumitory (p. 276), Golden
Seal (p. 337), Ispaghula (p. 374), Melissa (p. 425), Rhubarb (p. 506), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Solution Stago Diluee Pharma Développement, France, Boldo (p. 91)
Soluzione Schoum Aventis Pharma S.p.A., Italy, Fumitory (p. 276), Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Solvipect Nycomed Pharma AS, Norway, Liquorice (p. 411)

Solvipect comp Nycomed Pharma AS, Norway, Liquorice (p. 411)

Solvobil Laboratorio Americano de Farmacoterapia S/A, Brazil, Artichoke (p. 67),
Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128) Recordati Industria Chimica e Farmaceutica S.p.a.,
Italy, Boldo (p. 91), Cascara (p. 128)

Solvopret Bionorica AG, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Elder (p. 237), Gentian

(p. 290) Zuellig Pharma Ltd, Thailand, Thyme (p. 574)

Solvopret TP Zuellig Pharma Ltd, Thailand, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme (p. 574)
Sominex EMS Ind. Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Sominex Herbal Thornton & Ross Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Songha F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580) Boehringer
Ingelheim SA/NV, Belgium, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580) Boehringer Ingelheim,
Lda, Portugal, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Songha Night Boehringer Ingelheim sro, Czech Republic, Melissa (p. 425),
Valerian (p. 580) Pharmashalom Ltd, Israel, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)
Pharmaton SA, Switzerland, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Sonhare Boehringer Ingelheim do Brasil Quim. e Farm. Ltda, Brazil, Melissa

(p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Soporin Herbamed AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Soy Forte with Black Cohosh Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168)

Preparations Directory

Spagulax au Citrate de Potassium Laboratoires Pharmafarm, France, Ispaghula
(p. 374)

Spagulax au Sorbitol Laboratoires Pharmafarm, France, Ispaghula (p. 374)
Spagymun Spagyros AG, Switzerland, Echinacea (p. 217)

Spagyrom Spagyros AG, Switzerland, Echinacea (p. 217)

Spasmine Laboratoires Jolly-Jatel, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Valerian (p. 580)

Spasmo-Urgenin Madaus GmbH, Austria, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto

(p. 521) Neo-Farmacéutica, Lda, Portugal, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Madaus, Spain, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Oui Heng Import Co. Ltd,
Thailand, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Species Cholagogae Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42),
Elecampane (p. 240), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Species Diureticae Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Parsley (p. 456)

Species nervinae F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Melissa (p. 425), St John's Wort (p. 549),
Valerian (p. 580)

Species Nervinae Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Hops (p. 354), Melissa
(p. 425), St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Species Pectorales Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Coltsfoot (p. 185), Liquorice
(p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418)

Species Urologicae Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Elder (p. 237), Nettle
(p. 452), Parsley (p. 456), Uva-Ursi (p. 577), Yarrow (p. 604)

Speman Forte (Cneman ®opre) Transatlantic International, Russia, Wild Lettuce
(p. 596)

Spiritus Contra Tussim Drops Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Angelica
(p. 53), Cinnamon (p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Melissa (p. 425)

Sportino Akut Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Arnica
(p. 64)

Sportupac M Terra-Bio-Chemie GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

St Bonifatius-Tee Dr. Kolassa & Merz GmbH, Austria, Boldo (p. 91), Juniper
(p. 386), Lime Flower (p. 409)

St Johns wort Compound Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Scullcap (p. 530)

St Johnswort Compound Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Cohosh, Black
(p. 168), St John's Wort (p. 549), Willow (p. 598)

St Mary’s Thistle Plus Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Bilberry (p. 79),
Dandelion (p. 204), Milk Thistle (p. 429)

Steril Zeta Zeta Farmaceutici S.p.A., Italy, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Stibium Comp Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Horse-chestnut (p. 363),
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Stimolfit Body Spring S.r.1., Italy, Cascara (p. 128), Rhubarb (p. 506), Senna (p. 537)

Stodal Boiron CZ sro, Czech Republic, Drosera (p. 215), Senega (p. 533) Prisfar, SA,
Portugal, Senega (p. 533)

Stoffwechseltee N Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH, Czech Republic, Liquorice
(p. 411), Nettle (p. 452)

Stomach Mixture Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Dandelion (p. 204), Gentian
(p. 290), Rhubarb (p. 506)

Stomachysat N Johannes Burger Ysatfabrik GmbH, Germany, Yarrow (p. 604)
Stomacine Laboratoires Plan SA, Switzerland, Quassia (p. 491)

Stomaran Leros sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Angelica (p. 53), Calamus
(p. 118), Centaury (p. 149), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Stomargil Laboratoires Motima, France, Bilberry (p. 79)

Stomatosan Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Clove (p. 166), Comfrey (p. 188),
Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574), Vervain (p. 591), Yarrow (p. 604)

Stop-Itch Plus Sime Darby Marketing, A Division of Sime Darby Singapore Ltd,
Singapore, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Stoptussin-Fito (Cromryccun-dpuro) Ivax AC, Russia, Thyme (p. 574)

Strath Gouttes contre la toux Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195),
Thyme (p. 574)

Strath Gouttes pour le coeur Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461)

Strath Gouttes pour le foie et la bile Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Artichoke
(p. 67)

Strath Gouttes pour le nerfs et contre l’insomnie Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland,
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Strath Gouttes pour les muqueuses Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Sage (p. 512)
Strath Gouttes pour les reins et la vessie Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland,
Dandelion (p. 204), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Strath Gouttes pour les veines Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195),
Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Strath Gouttes pour I’estomac Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Gentian (p. 290),
Liquorice (p. 411)

----- PAGE 667 -----
Appendix 4

Strath Gouttes Rhumatisme Bio-Strath AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195),
Willow (p. 598)

Strength Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Damiana (p. 201), Saw Palmetto
(p. 521)

Strength Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Damiana (p. 201),
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Strepsils Echinacea Defence Boots Healthcare New Zealand Ltd, New Zealand,
Echinacea (p. 217)

Stress Complex Natrol, USA, Valerian (p. 580)
StressEez Nature Made, USA, Valerian (p. 580)

Stressless DDD Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain
(p. 591)

Stuidruppels Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Asafoetida (p. 72),
Valerian (p. 580)

Stullmaton Pharma Stulln GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Centaury (p. 149),
Melissa (p. 425)

Succus Cineraria Mari

a Walker Pharmacal, USA, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Sulgan 99 Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau GmbH, Austria, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Sulgan 99 Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau GmbH, Austria, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Summertime Tea Blend Culpeper and Napiers, UK, Chamomile, Roman (p. 156),
Elder (p. 237), Eyebright (p. 256), Liquorice (p. 411), Nettle (p. 452)

SuNerven G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Motherwort (p. 447), Passionflower
(p. 461), Valerian (p. 580), Vervain (p. 591)

Supa-Tonic Tablets Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Damiana
(p. 201), Rosemary (p. 508), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Supositorio Hamamelis Composto Laboratorio Simoes Ltda, Brazil, Horse-
chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Supradyn Vital 50+ Bayer (Schweiz) AG, Pharma, Switzerland, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Supranettes Alcon Pharmaceutical C.A., Venezuela, Calendula (p. 121), Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Supranettes Naturalag Alcon Laboratorios, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Calendula
(p. 121), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Supravital Liferpal MD, S.A. de C.V., Mexico, Garlic (p. 279)

Sure-Lax (Herbal) Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Aloes (p. 50), Holy Thistle (p. 352),
Valerian (p. 580)

Swarm J. Pickles & Sons, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Swiss Herb Cough Drops Ricola, Canada, Burnet (p. 105), Marshmallow (p. 418),
Parsley Piert (p. 459), Thyme (p. 574)

$X-22 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Echinacea (p. 217)

Sympaneurol Sanofi-Aventis, France, Hawthorn (p. 346
Valerian (p. 580)

Sympathy Laboratoires Innotech International, Sté du groupe Innothéra, France,
Hawthorn (p. 346)

Sympavagol Novartis Santé Familiale SA, France, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Passionflower (p. 461)

oO

Tabritis Potter's (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers (p. 164), Elder
(p. 237), Senna (p. 537), Uva-Ursi (p. 577), Yarrow (p. 604)

Tabritis Tablets Potter’s Herbal Medicines, UK, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers (p. 164),
Elder (p. 237), Poplar (p. 482), Prickly Ash, Northern (p. 484), Uva-Ursi (p. 577),
Yarrow (p. 604)

Talowin Costec S.R.L. Esp. Dermatocosmeéticas, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48)
Tamaril Marjan Industria e Comércio Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)
Tamarine Barrenne Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna
(p. 537) Barrenne Industria Farmacéutica Ltda, GlaxoSmithKline, Chile, Senna

(p. 537) Laboratoires GlaxoSmithKline, France, Senna (p. 537) Whitehall Italia S.p.
A, Italy, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Tamarix Hebron S.A. Indtistria Quimica e Farmacéutica, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411),
Senna (p. 537)

Tampositorien mit Belladonna Provita Pharma GmbH, Austria, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Tandpyndruppels Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Capsicum (p. 125)
Tea Tree & Witch Hazel Cream G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Tealine Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Java Tea (p. 381)

Tendro Tentan AG, Switzerland, Eyebright (p. 256), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

), Passionflower (p. 461),

Tensiben Soria Natural, Spain, Hawthorn (p. 346)
Tereonsit Hautel S.A., Argentina, Sage (p. 512)
Thalgo Tonic Lab Thalgo Nutrition, France, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

The a l’avoine sauvage de Vollmer Dr Duinner SA, Switzerland, Nettle (p. 452),
St John's Wort (p. 549)

The Chambard-Tee Brady C. KG, Austria, Calendula (p. 121), Marshmallow
(p. 418), Melissa (p. 425), Senna (p. 537)

The Salvat Leros sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion
(p. 204), Frangula (p. 270)

Thermocream Laboratoires Belges Pharmacobel SA, Belgium, Capsicum (p. 125)
Throat Discs GlaxoSmithKline, USA, Capsicum (p. 125)
Thymomel /vax-CR as, Czech Republic, Thyme (p. 574)

Thymoval EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme
(p. 574), Valerian (p. 580)

Thyreogutt Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH, Austria, Motherwort (p. 447)

Tickly Cough & Sore Throat Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411),
Senega (p. 533)

Tisana Kelemata Kelemata S.p.A., Italy, Aniseed (p. 57), Couchgrass (p. 193),
Melissa (p. 425), Sarsaparilla (p. 515), Senna (p. 537)

Tisane antirhumatismale Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Passionflower (p. 461),
Willow (p. 598)

Tisane calmante pour les enfants Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354),
Melissa (p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Tisane contre les refroidissements Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Elder (p. 237),
Lime Flower (p. 409)

Tisane Diuretique Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Nettle (p. 452)

Tisane favorisant I’allaitement Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Aniseed (p. 57),
Melissa (p. 425)

Tisane Hepatique de Hoerdt Laboratoires Michel Iderne, France, Agrimony
(p. 42), Bogbean (p. 89), Boldo (p. 91), Centaury (p. 149), Couchgrass (p. 193), Sage
(p. 512), Yarrow (p. 604)

Tisane hepatique et biliaire Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Artichoke (p. 67), Boldo
(p. 91), Dandelion (p. 204), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Yarrow (p. 604)

Tisane laxative Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Liquorice (p. 411), Senna (p. 537)

Tisane pectorale et antitussive Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Plantain (p. 474), Sage (p. 512), Thyme (p. 574)

Tisane pectorale pour les enfants Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Cowslip (p. 195),
Liquorice (p. 411), Marshmallow (p. 418), Plantain (p. 474), Thyme (p. 574)

Tisane pour le coeur et la circulation Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn
(p. 346), Melissa (p. 425), Motherwort (p. 447)

Tisane pour le sommeil et les nerfs Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354),
Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Tisane pour les problemes de prostate Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Cinnamon
(p. 162), Clove (p. 166), Ginger (p. 293), Nettle (p. 452)

Tisane pour les reins et la vessie Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Java Tea (p. 381),
Juniper (p. 386), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Tisane pour l’estomac Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Calamus (p. 118), Centaury
(p. 149), Melissa (p. 425), Yarrow (p. 604)

Tisane pour nourissons et enfants Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Lime Flower
(p. 409), Melissa (p. 425), Vervain (p. 591)

Tisane Provencale No 1 F. Uhimann-Eyraud SA, Switzerland, Marshmallow
(p. 418), Senna (p. 537)

Ton Was Chiesi Espana, Spain, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Tonactil Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Tonimax Soria Natural, Spain, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

Tonsilgon Bionorica AG, Germany, Dandelion (p. 204), Marshmallow (p. 418),
Yarrow (p. 604)

Tonsilgon N (Tousuaron H) Bionorica AG, Russia, Dandelion (p. 204),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Yarrow (p. 604)

Topaceta G. Streuli & Co. AG, Switzerland, Arnica (p. 64)

Tormentan Leros sro, Czech Republic, Bilberry (p. 79), Burnet (p. 105), Liquorice
(p. 411), Sage (p. 512)

Tornix Steierl Pharma GmbH, Germany, Hawthorn (p. 346), Passionflower (p. 461),
Valerian (p. 580)

Total Magnesiano con Ginseng Lab. Temis Lostalo S.A., Argentina, Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325)

Total Magnesiano con Vitaminas y Minerales Lab. Temis Lostald S.A.,
Argentina, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

----- PAGE 668 -----
Tranquil Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Capsicum (p. 125)

Total Man Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Damiana (p. 201), Echinacea
(p. 217), Garlic (p. 279), Ginger (p. 293), Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325),
Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Liquorice (p. 411), Parsley (p. 456), Sarsaparilla (p. 515), Saw
Palmetto (p. 521)

Tranquil Pharmadass Ltd, UK, Hawthorn (p. 346), Lime Flower (p. 409)

Tranquital Novartis Santé Familiale SA, France, Hawthorn (p. 346), Valerian
(p. 580)

Trauma-cyl Pharma Liebermann GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Trauma-Salbe warmend Mayrhofer Pharmazeutika, Austria, Capsicum (p. 125)

Traumed Herbarium Laboratorio Botanico Ltda, Brazil, Arnica (p. 64), Ginkgo
(p. 299), Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Travelaide Yauyip P/L, Australia, Ginger (p. 293), Slippery Elm (p. 545)
Traveleeze Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

Triallin Iromedica AG, Switzerland, Garlic (p. 279), Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng,
Panax (p. 325), Hawthorn (p. 346)

Trifolium Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Burdock (p. 102), Dandelion
(p. 204), Red Clover (p. 498), Yellow Dock (p. 608)

TriMune Nature Made, USA, Echinacea (p. 217)

Tucks Pfizer Consumer Healthcare, Division of Pfizer Canada Inc., Canada, Witch
Hazel (p. 601) Pfizer Inc., USA, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Tummy Ease Zydus Cadila Group, India, Asafoetida (p. 72), Ginger (p. 293)
Turulington Tincture Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Aloes (p. 50)

Tuscalman F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Elder (p. 237), Marshmallow (p. 418) Desma
Healthcare BV, Switzerland, Marshmallow (p. 418)

Tussamag Montavit GmbH, Austria, Thyme (p. 574)
Tussidoron Laboratoires Weleda, France, Drosera (p. 215), Thyme (p. 574)

Tussiflorin Hustensaft Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany,
Cowslip (p. 195)

Tussiflorin Hustentropfen Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany,
Cowslip (p. 195)

Tussilen Ivax-CR as, Ivax-CR as, Czech Republic, Drosera (p. 215)

Tussimont Pharmonta Mag. pharm. Dr Fischer, Austria, Senega (p. 533), Thyme
(p. 574)

TUSSinfant N RubiePharm Vertriebs GmbH, Germany, Cowslip (p. 195), Thyme
(p. 574)

Tussol Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79), Lime Flower (p. 409),
Liquorice (p. 411), Thyme (p. 574)

Tussucalman /befar Inst. Brasileiro de Esp. Ftcas. Ltda, Brazil, Liquorice (p. 411)
Tux Pfizer SA, Belgium, Senega (p. 533), Senna (p. 537)
Tyroseng Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ginseng, Eleutherococcus (p. 315)

CU)

Ulcu-Pasc Pascoe Pharmazeutische Prdparate GmbH, Germany, Liquorice (p. 411)
Ulgastrin Oui Heng Import Co. Ltd, Thailand, Liquorice (p. 411)

Ultimate Antioxidant Formula Natrol, USA, Artichoke (p. 67), Bilberry (p. 79),
Calendula (p. 121)

Ultra Quercitin Jamieson Laboratories, Canada, Nettle (p. 452)

Ultracal Lab. Baliarda S.A., Argentina, Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Ultravisin Farmigea Industria Chimico Farmaceutica S.p.A., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79)
Ungolen Slovakofarma sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42), Dandelion (p. 204),
Holy Thistle (p. 352), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Yarrow (p. 604)

Unguentum lymphaticum PGM Pharmazeutische Gesellschaft mbH & Co.
Munchen, Germany, Calendula (p. 121)

Unwind Herbal Nytol GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare, UK, Hops (p. 354),
Valerian (p. 580), Wild Lettuce (p. 596)

Urapro Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Golden Seal (p. 337), Nettle (p. 452),
Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Urcyston Planta Leros sro, Czech Republic, Bilberry (p. 79), Elder (p. 237), Thyme
(p. 574), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Urelium Neu £uropharm, Austria, Dandelion (p. 204)

Urgenin Thursday Plantation laboratories Ltd, Australia, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw
Palmetto (p. 521) Madaus GmbH, Austria, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)
Madaus Pharma SA, Belgium, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Trinity
Trading Co. Ltd, Hong Kong, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Salomon,

Levin, & Elstein Ltd, Israel, Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521) Madaus, Spain,
Echinacea (p. 217), Saw Palmetto (p. 521)

Preparations Directory

Urinase Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Echinacea (p. 217),
Golden Seal (p. 337), Saw Palmetto (p. 521), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Urinefrol Lab. Lafage S.R.L., Argentina, Liquorice (p. 411), Sarsaparilla (p. 515)

Urinex E Kern AG, Pharmazeutische Krauterspezialitdten, Switzerland, Buchu
(p. 100), Calamus (p. 118), Calendula (p. 121), Meadowsweet (p. 423), Uva-Ursi
(p. 577)

Urisor Soria Natural, Spain, Java Tea (p. 381), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Urologicka Cajova Smes Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Parsley (p. 456), Uva-
Ursi (p. 577)

Uromil Laboratoires IPRAD, France, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Urophytum Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Buchu (p. 100), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)
Uropurat F. Joh. Kwizda, Austria, Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Uvacin Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, Dandelion (p. 204), Uva-Ursi (p. 577) Medic Herb
UK Ltd, UK, Dandelion (p. 204)

Uva-Ursi Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Buchu (p. 100), Clivers (p. 164),
Dandelion (p. 204), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Uva-Ursi Plus Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Dandelion (p. 204), Parsley
(p. 456), Uva-Ursi (p. 577)

Uze Active Dist. Ofar S.A., Argentina, Quassia (p. 491)

@

Vagicural Plus Lab. Raymos S.A.I.C., Argentina, Hydrocotyle (p. 371)
Vagisil Combe Inc., USA, Aloes (p. 50)

Vagostabyl Laboratoires Leurquin Mediolanum, France, Hawthorn (p. 346),
Melissa (p. 425)

Vagostesyl Laboratorio Gross S.A., Brazil, Passionflower (p. 461)

Valdispert comp Solvay Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian
(p. 580)

Valdispert Complex Solvay Pharma, Spain, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Valerian Vitaplex Products, Australia, Capsicum (p. 125), Motherwort (p. 447),
Sculleap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580)

Valerian Plus Herbal Plus Formula 12 Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia,
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Valeriana comp novum Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Valerian
(p. 580)

Valeriana mild Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG, Germany, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Valeriana Oligoplex Lab. Dr. Madaus & Co. SA, Argentina, Melissa (p. 425),
Valerian (p. 580)

Valerina Day Time Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)
Valerina Day-Time Medic Herb UK Ltd, UK, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Valerina Night-Time Lichtwer Pharma UK, UK, Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425),
Valerian (p. 580) Medic Herb UK Ltd, UK, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Valesono Laboratorio J. Neves, Lda, Portugal, Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian
(p. 580)

Valin Baldrian Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Valerian (p. 580)

Valofyt Neo Leros sro, Czech Republic, Angelica (p. 53), Hawthorn (p. 346), Hops
(p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580), Willow (p. 598)

Valupass Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda, Chile, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Valverde Baldrian Hopfen bei Einschlafstorungen und zur Beruhigung
Novartis Consumer Health GmbH, Germany, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Valverde Coeur Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Hawthorn (p. 346), Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Valverde Constipation dragees Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Butterbur (p. 107),
Senna (p. 537)

Valverde Constipation sirop Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Senna (p. 537)

Valverde Detente dragees Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Butterbur (p. 107), Melissa
(p. 425), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Valverde Sommeil Sidroga AG, Switzerland, Hops (p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)
Valviska Tentan AG, Switzerland, Melissa (p. 425), Valerian (p. 580)

Varicell Eversil Produtos Farmacéuticos Industria e Comércio Ltda, Brazil, Senna
(p. 537)

Varicofit Body Spring S.r.l., Italy, Bilberry (p. 79), Dandelion (p. 204), Ginkgo
(p. 299), Hydrocotyle (p. 371)

Varicogel Alfa Wassermann S.p.A., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Varicose Ointment Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

----- PAGE 669 -----
Appendix 4

Varicylum-S Pharma Liebermann GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Varisedan Wierhom Pharma S.A., Argentina, Garlic (p. 279)

Varizol Laboratorio Simées Ltda, Brazil, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Varizol Laboratorio Simées Ltda, Brazil, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Vasobrain Errekappa Euroterapici S.p.A., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Vasobrain Plus Errekappa Euroterapici S.p.A., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)
Vasopt Bausch & Lomb Oftal SpA, Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Vegetable Cough Remover Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Capsicum
(p. 125), Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Elecampane (p. 240), Liquorice (p. 411),
Marshmallow (p. 418), Pleurisy Root (p. 477), Scullcap (p. 530), Skunk Cabbage
(p. 543), Valerian (p. 580)

Vegetex G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd, UK, Bogbean (p. 89), Celery (p. 146),
Cohosh, Black (p. 168)

Veinophytum Laboratoires Arkopharma, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Veinostase Merck Lipha Santé, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel
(p. 601)

Veinotonyl Merck Lipha Santé, France, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venactive Euroderm S.r.l., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Hydrocotyle (p. 371),
Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Venen Krauter NT Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co KG,
Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venengel ratiopharm GmbH, Germany, Arnica (p. 64), Horse-chestnut (p. 363)
Venen-Salbe N ct-Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Horse-chestnut (p. 363)

Venocur Triplex Knoll SA Produtos Quimicos e Farmacéuticos, Brazil, Horse-
chestnut (p. 363)

Venofit Arkochim Espana, Spain, Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Venoful Lab. Garden House S.A., Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299), Horse-chestnut
(p. 363), Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Venoplus Also S.p.A., Italy, Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Witch
Hazel (p. 601)

Ventre Livre Companhia Industrial Farmacéutica, Brazil, Cascara (p. 128)

ventri-loges N Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH, Germany, Calamus (p. 118), Gentian
(p. 290)

Veracolate Laboratorio Elea S.A.C.I.F.yA., Argentina, Cascara (p. 128) Pfizer
(Thailand) Ltd, Thailand, Cascara (p. 128)

Verbascum Complex Blackmores Ltd, Australia, Liquorice (p. 411), Pleurisy Root
(p. 477)

Versterkdruppels Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Gentian (p. 290),
Quassia (p. 491)

Vertiginkgo Midax Italia S.r.1., Italy, Ginkgo (p. 299)

Vethoine Wolfs SA, Belgium, Cascara (p. 128)

Viadent Colgate Palmolive Canada, Canada, Bloodroot (p. 84)

Vicks Baby Balsam Procter & Gamble Srl, Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

Vida Brown Mixture Vida Laboratories Ltd, Hong Kong, Liquorice (p. 411)
Vifortol Laboratorio Elea S.A.C.I.F.yA., Argentina, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Vig Key Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Ginkgo (p. 299), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Vigilia Les Grands Espaces Thérapeutiques, France, Lime Flower (p. 409), Vervain
(p. 591)

Vigortonic Arkochim Espana, Spain, Cinnamon (p. 162), Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)
Virgilocard Sanova Pharma GmbH, Austria, Hawthorn (p. 346)
jin S Recip AB, Sweden, Ispaghula (p. 374)

Visinal Stada Pharma International os, Czech Republic, Hops (p. 354),
Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

Visionom Unido Quimica Farmacéutica Nacional S.A., Brazil, Witch Hazel (p. 601)
Vitace Prisfar, SA, Portugal, Echinacea (p. 217)

Vital Eyes Novartis Consumer Health, UK, Eyebright (p. 256), Witch Hazel (p. 601)
VitAmour Healthy Direct, UK, Damiana (p. 201)

Vitanox Mediherb P/L, Australia, Rosemary (p. 508)

Vitatona Brauer Natural Medicine P/L, Australia, Angelica (p. 53), Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325), Nettle (p. 452), St John's Wort (p. 549)

Vitegin Capsules Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) Ltd, UK, Ginseng, Panax
(p. 325)

Vivinox Day Dr Gerhard Mann, Chem.-pharm. Fabrik GmbH, Germany, Hops
(p. 354), Passionflower (p. 461), Valerian (p. 580)

VNS 45 Laboratorios Sigma, Argentina, Ginkgo (p. 299), Horse-chestnut (p. 363),
Hydrocotyle (p. 371), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Vocalzone Kestrel Healthcare Ltd, UK, Liquorice (p. 411), Myrrh (p. 449)

Vollmers praparierter gruner N Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf.
GmbH & Co KG, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Vulnopur Devergé Medicina e Medicalizzazione S.r.l., Italy, Aloe Vera (p. 48)

@

Wala Echinacea Wala Schweiz GmbH, Switzerland, Calendula (p. 121), Echinacea
(p. 217), Sage (p. 512)

Wala Pulmonium suc contre la toux Wala Schweiz GmbH, Switzerland,
Butterbur (p. 107)

Waldheim Abfuhrdragees forte Sanochemia Pharmazeutika AG, Austria, Aloes
(p. 50)

Waldheim Abfuhrdragees mild Sanochemia Pharmazeutika AG, Austria, Aloes
(p. 50), Frangula (p. 270)

Wampole Bronchial Cough Syrup Wampole Brands Inc., Canada, Bloodroot
(p. 84), Senega (p. 533)

Water Naturtabs Larkhall Laboratories, UK, Burdock (p. 102), Clivers (p. 164),
Ground Ivy (p. 342)

Water Pill Natrol, USA, Buchu (p. 100), Juniper (p. 386)

Watershed Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Buchu (p. 100), Clivers (p. 164),
Juniper (p. 386), Parsley Piert (p. 459), Uva-Ursi (p. 577), Wild Carrot (p. 593)

Wecesin Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Arnica (p. 64), Calendula (p. 121),
Echinacea (p. 217)

Wechseltee St Severin EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co., Austria, Hawthorn
(p. 346), Hops (p. 354), Melissa (p. 425), Milk Thistle (p. 429), Passionflower (p. 461),
St John's Wort (p. 549), Valerian (p. 580)

Weight Loss Aid Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Boldo (p. 91), Dandelion (p. 204)

Weleda Hamorrhoidalzapfchen Weleda AG-Heilmittelbetriebe, Germany,
Horse-chestnut (p. 363), Witch Hazel (p. 601)

Well-Beeing Panacea Biotec Ltd, India, Ginger (p. 293), Valerian (p. 580)
Wellman Vitabiotics Ltd, UK, Ginseng, Panax (p. 325)

Wellwoman Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd, UK, Lime Flower (p. 409), Motherwort
(p. 447), Scullcap (p. 530), Valerian (p. 580), Yarrow (p. 604)

Winar Apogepha Arzneimittel GmbH, Germany, Nettle (p. 452)

Wind & Dyspepsia Relief Herbal Concepts Ltd, UK, Dandelion (p. 204), Ginger
(p. 293), Golden Seal (p. 337), Myrrh (p. 449), Rhubarb (p. 506), Valerian (p. 580)

Wobenzimal Vitafarma, Spain, Thyme (p. 574)

Women’s Formula Herbal Formula 3 Mayne Pharma P/L, Australia, Agnus
Castus (p. 36), Angelica (p. 53), Cohosh, Black (p. 168), Cohosh, Blue (p. 180),
Pulsatilla (p. 489)

Women’s Menopause Formula Natrol, USA, Agnus Castus (p. 36), Cohosh,
Black (p. 168), Damiana (p. 201), Raspberry (p. 495), Red Clover (p. 498)

Wonderkroonessens Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd, South Africa, Aloes (p. 50),
Elecampane (p. 240), Gentian (p. 290), Ginger (p. 293), Rhubarb (p. 506), Valerian
(p. 580)

Wood Sap Ointment Richard Lane’s, UK, Rosemary (p. 508), Slippery Elm (p. 545)

@

Xarope de Macas Rainetas Sociedade Farmacéutica Gestafarma, Lda, Portugal,
Senna (p. 537)

Xarope lodo-Suma Laboratorio lodo Suma Ltda, Brazil, Gentian (p. 290)
X-Prep Bowel Evacuant Kit-1 The Purdue Frederick Co., USA, Senna (p. 537)

@

Yalu Lab. Lacefa S.A.I.C.A., Argentina, Quassia (p. 491)

Yerba Diet Instituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.1.C., Argentina, Passionflower
(p. 461)

Ymea Chefaro UK Ltd, UK, Hops (p. 354)
Yuyo Lab. Incaico SA, Argentina, Aloe Vera (p. 48), Cascara (p. 128)

@

Zaludecni Cajova Smes Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Liquorice (p. 411), St
John's Wort (p. 549), Yarrow (p. 604)

Zeller Sommeil Max Zeller Sohne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel, Switzerland, Hops
(p. 354), Valerian (p. 580)

Zeniac Laboratoires d’Evolution Dermatologique, France, Burdock (p. 102)
Zeniac LP Laboratoires d‘Evolution Dermatologique, France, Burdock (p. 102)
Zero Flush Niacin 400mg Natrol, USA, Alfalfa (p. 45)

----- PAGE 670 -----
Preparations Directory

Zinaxin Plus Diethelm & Co. Ltd, Thailand, Ginger (p. 293) JDH Pharmaceutical Zlucnikova Cajova Smes Megafyt-R sro, Czech Republic, Agrimony (p. 42),
Sdn Bhd, Diethelm Malaysia Sdn Bhd, Malaysia, Ginger (p. 293) Rhubarb (p. 506)

Zinc Zenith Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L, Australia, Alfalfa (p. 45) Zotrim Sigma Chemical Co. Ltd, UK, Damiana (p. 201)
Zinopin Pynogin GmbH, Gee Lawson Distribution Centre, UK, Ginger (p. 293)

----- PAGE 671 -----
Appendix 5

Suppliers Directory

LA)

1A Pharma GmbH Keltenring 1 + 3, 82041 Oberhaching, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 61388250 Fax: +49 (0) 89 613882525

Email: medwiss@ lapharma.de Web: www.lapharma.de

A. Menarini Industrie Farmaceutiche Riunite S.r.I. Via Sette Santi 3, 50131
Florence, Italy.

Tel: +39 055 56801

Web: www.menarini.com

A. Nikolakopoulos & Co. O.E 115 Galatsiou Ave, 111 46 Athens, Greece.
Tel: +30 1 2918671 Fax: +30 1 2922581

aar pharma GmbH & Co. KG Alleestr. 11, 42853 Remscheid, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2191 923013 Fax: +49 (0) 2191 923028

Email: info@aar.de Web: www.aarde

Abbott GmbH Perfektastrasse 86, A-1230 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 891220 Fax: +43 (0) 1 8912244

Web: www.abbott.com

Abbott GmbH & Co. KG Max-Planck-Ring 2, 65205 Wiesbaden, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6122 580 Fax: +49 (0) 6122 581244

Web: www.abbott.de

Abbott Laboratories de Mexico S.A. de C.V. Av. Coyoacan 1622, Benito
Juarez del Valle, 03100 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 57264600 Fax: +52 55 57264601

Web: www.abbott.com

Abbott Laboratories Ltd 20/F AIA Tower, 183 Electric Rd, North Point, Hong
Kong.

Tel: +852 25668711
Web: www.abbott.com
Abbott South Africa (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 7208, Weltevredenpark, Johannesburg
1715, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 8582000
Web: www.abbott.com
Abigo Medical AB , 436 32 Askim, Sweden.

Tel: +46 (0) 31 7484950 Fax: +46 (0) 31 683951

Email: pharma@abi Web: www.abigo.com

Abnoba Heilmittel GmbH Hohenzollernstr. 16, 75177 Pforzheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7231 316478 Fax: +49 (0) 7231 358714

Email: info@abnoba.de Web: www.abnoba.de

Abtswinder Naturheilmittel GmbH , Czech Republic.

A.C.P. S.C Rue Georges Moreau 174, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 3848711 Fax: +32 (0) 2 3847711
Email: direx@direx.be

Fax: +39 055 582771

Fax: +852 28072917

Fax: +27 (0) 11 8582070

Adcock Ingram Pharmaceuticals Ltd Adcock Ingram Park, 17 Harrison Ave,
Bryanston 2021, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 7099300
Web: www.adcock.co.za

Adler-Apotheke Wahringer Strasse 149, A-1180 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 4793320 Fax: +43 (0) 1 470978430

Adroka AG Postfach, 4123 Allschwil, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 4863600 Fax: +41 (0) 61 4863636

Email: info@adroka.ch Web: www.adroka.ch

AFOM Medical S.p.A. Via S Cristoforo 97, 20090 Trezzano S/Naviglio (MI),
Italy.

Tel: +39 02 48463151 Fax: +39 02 48401787

Alcon Cusi Camil Fabra 58, El Masnou, 08320 El Masnou Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 4977000 Fax: +34 93 4977010

Web: www.alconlabs.com

Alcon Italia S.p.A. Viale Giulio Richard 1/B, 20143 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 818031 Fax: +39 02 8910550
Web: www.alconlabs.com

Fax: +27 (0) 11 7099332

Alcon Laboratorios Argentina S.A. Estados Unidos 5335, 1667 Tortuguitas,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 3327 443400
Web: wwwaalconlabs.com
Alcon Laboratorios, S.A. de C.V. Adolfo Prieto 1644, Benito Juarez del Valle,
03100 Mexico D.F., Mexico.
Tel: +52 55 52001100

Web: wwwaalconlabs.com

Fax: +54 (0) 3327 443557

Fax: +52 55 55245264

Alcon Pharmaceutical C.A. Av. Diego Cisneros, Edificio Siemens, Torre Sur,
Mezzanina, Los Ruices, Caracas 1070, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 Fax: +58 (0) 212

Web: wwwaalconlabs.com

Alcor P Del Prado 14 1 C, 28014 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 4204032 Fax: +34 91 3694788

Alfa Wassermann S.p.A. Contrada Sant’Emidio, 65020 Alanno (PE), Italy.

Tel: +39 085 85711 Fax: +39 085 8541625

Alinter Ltd New Abbey Court, 51-53 Stert St, Abingdon, OX14 3HB, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1235 538700 Fax: +44 (0) 1235 538800

Email: info@alinter.co.uk Web: wwwaalinter.co.uk

allcura Naturheilmittel GmbH Reichendaker 7, 97877 Wertheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 9342 96110 Fax: +49 (0) 9342 961196

Email: info@allcura.de Web: wwwaallcura.de

Allen Laboratorios, S.A. de C.V. Av. Instituto Politécnico Nacional No. 4728,
Gustavo A Madero, Tlacamaca, 07380 Mexico D.F, Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55678027 Fax: +52 55 55678027

Allens & Co. (Anglesey) Ltd Freshwinds, Pentraeth, Isle of Anglesey, LL75 8YF,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1248 450604

Email: info@allenshealthcare.co.uk
Allergan Produtos Farmacéuticos Ltda Av. Cardoso de Melo 1955 13 andar,
4548005 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Alliance Boots plc 4th Floor, 361 Oxford Street, Sedley Place, London, WIC 2JL,
UK.

Web: wwwaallianceboots.com

Allmedica Arzneimittel GmbH Schillerstr. 4, 37269 Eschwege, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 5651 60356 Fax: +49 (0) 5651 70888

Almirall Prodesfarma S.A. Rda Gral Mitre 151, 08022 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 2913000 Fax: +34 93 2913180

Web: www.almirall.es

Alpa sro , Velke Mezirici, Czech Republic.

Alpharma France 40 rue Lecuyer, 93300 Aubervilliers, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 48110820 Fax: +33 (0) 1 48339662

Web: www.alpharma.fr

Alpharma-lsis GmbH & Co. KG Elisabeth-Selbert-Str. 1, 40764 Langenfeld,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2173 16740 Fax: +49 (0) 2173 1674205

Email: info.de@alpharma.de Web: www.alpharma.de

Alphrema S.r.I. Via 4 Novembre 92, 20021 Bollate (Ml), Italy.

Tel: +39 (0) 23506945 Fax: +39 (0) 238306418

Alsitan GmbH & Co. KG Am Buhl 16-18, 86926 Greifenberg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 8192 93010 Fax: +49 (0) $192 7827

Web: wwwalsitan.com

Also S.p.A. Viale Monte Rosa 96, 20149 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 485631 Fax: +39 02 4984727

Altana Madaus Pty Ltd 7st Floor, Uplands 12, The Woodlands, ZA-2080
Woodmead, Sandton, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 9042914

Web: wwwaltana.com

Altana Pharma Deutschland GmbH Moltkestr. 4, 78467 Constance, Germany.
Email: customerservice@altanapharma.de

Web: www.altanapharma.de

Fax: +44 (0) 1248 450822
Web: www.allenshealthcare.co.uk

Fax: +27 (0) 11 3152125

----- PAGE 672 -----
Altana Pharma GmbH Ketzergasse 2000, A-1235 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 866530 Fax: +43 (0) 1 86653430

Altana Pharma Ltd Bachstrasse 10, 8280 Kreuzlingen, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 71 6771333 Fax: +41 (0) 71 6771334

Email: mail@altanapharma.ch

Altana Pharma Ltda Rua do Estilo Barroco 721, Santo Amaro, 04709-011 Sdo
Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 51884400
Web: www.altana.com
Altana Pharma SA Tronador 4890, 1430 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Altana Pharma S.A. de C.V. Av Primero de Mayo No. 130, Col. San Andres
Atoto, 53519 Naucalpan de Juarez., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 53879330 Fax: +52 55 53590108

Web: www.altana.com

Alter Mateo Inurria 30, 28036 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 3592000 Fax: +34 91 3501165

Email: informacion@alter.es Web: wwwaalter.es

Amerx Health Care Corp. 1150 Cleveland St, Suite 410, Clearwater, Fl 33755,
USA.

Amino AG Althofstrasse 12, 5432 Neuenhof, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 56 4061264 Fax: +41 (0) 56 4061764

Email: info@amino.ch

Amnol Chimica Biologica S.r.1. C.so della Vittoria 12/b, 28100 Novara (NO),
Italy.

Tel: +39 0321 499199
Web: www.amnol.net

Fax: +55 (0) 11 51834361

Fax: +39 0321 499202

Amternes Laegemiddelregistreringskontor I/S Amstrddsforeningen,
Dampfaergevej 22 (postboks 2593), 2100 Copenhagen O, Denmark.
Tel: +45 35298151 Fax: +45 35298333

Email: alis@arf.dk

Andrae GmbH Marinonigasse 2-6, A-1210 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 29215590 Fax: +43 (0) 1 2921559

Aneid, Lda Rua José Florindo, Quinta da Pedra, Bloco B, R/C A, 2750-401
Cascais, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4849620
Email: info@aneid.pt

Angelini Rua Jodo Chagas 53, Piso 3, 1495-072 Alges, Portugal.
Tel: +351 214 148300 Fax: +351 214 142981
Anglian Pharma Plc P.O. Box 161, Hitchin, SG4 7WE, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1438 743070 Fax: +44 (0) 1438 743080
Web: www.anglianpharma.com

Antah Pharma Sdb Bhd 3 Jin 19/1, 46300 Petaling Jaya, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 79567677 Fax: +60 (0) 3 79552007

Antistress AG, Gesellschaft fur Gesundheitsschutz Fluhstrasse 30, 8640
Rapperswil, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 55 2201212 Fax: +41 (0) 55 2201213

Email: services@antistress.ch Web: www.antistress.ch

Al SA 3 Koletti St, 144 52 Metamorfosi Attikis, Greece.

Tel: +30 210 2856350 Fax: +30 210 2843580

Web: www.apivita.
Apogepha Arzneimittel GmbH Kyffhauserstr. 27, 01309 Dresden, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 351 33633 Fax: +49 (0) 351 3363440

Email: apo@apogepha.de Web: www.apogepha.de

Apomedica GmbH Roseggerkai 3, A-8011 Graz, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 316 823533 Fax: +43 (0) 316 82353352

Aponova Pharma Handels GmbH Niederhart 100, A-6253 Hart, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 5288 64885 Fax: +43 (0) 5288 64885-5

Apotheke zur Gnadenmutter Hauptplatz 4, A-8630 Mariazell, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 3882 2102 Fax: +43 (0) 3882 210222

Apotheker Walter Bouhon GmbH & Co. KG Walter-Bouhan-Str 4, 90427
Nurnberg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 911 936700
Email: info@freioel.de
APS Pharma GmbH Angelsrieder Feld 22, 82234 Wessling, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8153 90810 Fax: +49 (0) 8153 908130

Ardeypharm GmbH Loerfeldstr. 20, 58313 Herdecke, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2330 977677 Fax: +49 (0) 2330 977697

Email: office@ardeypharm.de Web: www.ardeypharm.de

Ariston Industrias Quimicas e Farm. Ltda Rua Adherbal Stresser 84, 05566-
000 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 37838000

Fax: +351 21 4849629
Web: wwwaneid.pt

om

Fax: +49 (0) 911 3071780
Web: www.freioel.de

Suppliers Directory

Arko Pharma GmbH Bajurwarenring 12, 82041 Oberhaching, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 6281710 Fax: +49 (0) 89 62817177

Email: info@arkopharma.de Web: www.arkopharma.com

Arkochim Espafia Meneses 2, 28045 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 5271512 Fax: +34 91 5279991

Email: marketing@arkochim.es Web: www.arkochim.es

Arkofarm S.r.1. Via Limone Piemonte 13/D, 18039 Ventimiglia (IM), Italy.

Tel: +39 0184 236611 Fax: +39 0184 230900

Web: www.arkopharma-italia.com

Arkopharma UK Ltd 6 Redlands Centre, Redlands, Coulsden, CRS 2HT, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 20 8763 1414 Fax: +44 (0) 20 8763 2124

Email: info@arkopharma.co.uk Web: www.arkopharma.com

Arlex de México, S.A.deC.V. Puerto Acapulco No.35, Col. Piloto, Deleg. Alvaro
Obregon, 01290 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 56435099 Fax: +52 55 56435099

Artesan Pharma GmbH & Co. KG Wendlandstr. 1, 29439 Luchow, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 5841 9390 Fax: +49 (0) 5841 939200

Email: artesan@t-online.de Web: wwwaartesan.de

Artsana S.p.A. Via Saldarini Catelli 1, 22070 Grandate (CO), Italy.

Tel: +39 031 382111 Fax: +39 031 382400

Arzneimittel Schwabe International GmbH Cestmirova 1, 140 00 Prague 4,
Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 6913971
Email: asi@login.cz
A.S.A.C. Pharma Sagitario 14, 03006 Alicante, Spain.

Tel: +34 96 5286700 Fax: +34 96 5286434

Email: asac@asac.net Web: www.asac.net

Ashbury Biologicals Inc. 349 Wildcat Rd, Toronto, M3) 253, Canada.

Tel: +1 416 6670555 Fax: +1 416 6612108

Email: ashbury@dalton.com Web: www.ashburybio.com

ASI Budapest Kft Ulldi u 91/b I/7, 1091 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 2150672

Aspen Pharmacare (Pty) Ltd P. O. Box 1587, Gallo Manor 2052, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 2396100 Fax: +27 (0) 11 2396111

Web: www.aspenpharmacare.co.za

Asta Medica Ltda Rua Santo Antonio 184 19 degrees andar, 01314-900 Sdo
Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: (0) 11 32436800
Email: cac@astamedica.com.br
AstraZeneca GmbH , 22876 Wedel, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 4103 7080 Fax: +49 (0) 4103 7083293

Email: azinfo@astrazeneca.com Web: www.astrazeneca.de

AstraZeneca Sverige AB Storgatan 42, 151 85 Sodertdlje, Sweden.

Tel: +46 (0) 8 55326000 Fax: +46 (0) 8 55328920

Web: www.astrazeneca.se

Astrid Twardy GmbH Liebigstr. 18, 65439 Florsheim/Main, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6145 5930 Fax: +49 (0) 6145 593210

Email: info@twardy.de Web: www.twardy.de

Ativus Farmacéutica Ltda Rua Fonte Mecia 2050, 13270000 Valinhos, Brazil.
Tel: (0) 19 38498600
Web: www.ativus.com.br
Atlantic Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd 2038 Sukhumvit Rd, Bangkok 10250,
Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 311 O111

Email: atlantic@mozart.inet.co.th
Atlas Farmaceutica /V Gonzalez 2456, 1417 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Australian Medic-Care Co. Ltd Suite 2810, Metroplaza Tower 2, 223 Hing Fong
Rd, Kwai Fong, Kwai Chung, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 24804822 Fax: +852 24804866
Austroplant-Arzneimittel GmbH Richard-Strauss-Strasse 13, A-1232 Vienna,
Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 61626440 Fax: +43 (0) 1 616264418

Avanderm Mexico, S.A. de C.V. Patricio Saenz 1582, Del Valle, 3100 Mexico D.
F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55249250 Fax: +52 55 55341456

Aventis Pharma Bijenviucht 30, 3871 JJ Hoevelaken, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 33 2533911 Fax: +31 (0) 33 2535017

Web: www.aventis.nl

Aventis Pharma Ltda Avenida Marginal do Rio Pinheiros 5200, 05693-000 Sao
Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 37596000
Web: www.aventispharma.com.br

Fax: +420 (0) 2 6913541

Fax: +55 (0) 11 31072291
Web: www:astamedica.com.br

Email: ativus@ativus.com.br

Fax: +66 2 331 5697
Web: wwwaatlanticlab.com

Fax: +55 (0) 11 2476640

----- PAGE 673 -----
Appendix 5

Aventis Pharma (Pty) Ltd Private Bag X207, Midrand 1683, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 2563700 Fax: +27 (0) 11 2563722
Web: ww

Aventis Pharma S.A. de C.V. Ay. Universidad No. 1738, Col. Coyoacan, 04000
Mexico D.F., Mexico.

.sanofi-aventis.com

Fax: +52 55 54804113

Tel: +39 (0) 2937661

Fax: +39 (0) 293766046
Web:

Aventis Pharma sro Novodvorskd 994, 142 21 Prague 4, Czech Republic.
Tel: +420 (0) 2 44043355 Fax: +420 (0) 2 44044110
Web: www.aventis.com

Awareness Corp. 210-9087B-198th Street, Langley, VIM 3B1, Canada.

Aziende Chimiche Riunite Angelini Francesco S.p.A. Viale Amelia 70, 00100
Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39 06 780531

CB)

B L Hua & Co. Ltd 2 Somdej Chaopraya Rd, Klongsan, Bangkok 10600,
Thailand.
Tel: +66 2 437 0154 Fax: +66 2 437 S655

Bad Heilbrunner Naturheilmittel GmbH & Co. Am Krebsenbach 5-7, 83670
Bad Heilbrunn, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8046 91990

Email: info@bad-heilbrunner.de

Baif International Products, New York S.n.c. Via XX Setembre 20/68, 16121
Genoa, Italy.
Tel: +39 010 566251 Fax: +39 010 566252

Balmar P.O. Box 41-014, St Lukes, Auckland, New Zealand.
Tel: +64 (0) 9 8151020 Fax: +64 (0) 9 8151036
Web: www.balmar.co.nz

Balverda Srl Via Robert Kock 1.2, 20152 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 (0) 248381 Fax: +39 (0) 248382734

Barrenne Industria Farmacéutica Ltda Rua Antunes Maciel 86, Sdo Cristovao,
20940-010 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 25898973

Web:

Bastian-Werk GmbH August-Exter-Str. 4, 81245 Munich, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 89 820930 Fax: +49 (0) 89 8209359
Email: bastian@bastian-werk.de Web: www.bastian-werk.de

Bausch & Lomb Oftal SpA Corso Italia 141, 95127 Catania (CT), Italy.
Tel: +39 (0) 957221322 Fax: +39 (0) 957223856

Bausch & Lomb Swiss AG Sumpfstrasse 3, 6312 Steinhausen, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 41 7471060 Fax: +41 (0) 41 7471069

Bayer Argentina S.A. Ricardo Gutierrez 3652, 1605 Munro, Buenos Aires,

Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47627000
Web: www.bayer.com.ar

eww.aventispharma.it

Fax: +39 06 78053291

Fax: +49 (0) 8046 919999
Web: www:bad-heilbrunner.de

Fax: +55 (0) 21 25891364
yww:barrene.com.br

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47627100

Bayer Australia Ltd (Pharmaceutical Business Group) P.O. Box 903, Pymble,
NSW 2073, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 93916000
Web: www.bayer.com

Bayer Austria GmbH Am Heumarkt 10, Postfach 10, 1037 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1711460 Fax: +43 (0) 1 711462788
Web: www.bayer.at

Fax: +61 (0) 2 93916061

Bayer SA Carlos Fernandez 260, San Joaquin, Santiago, Chile.

Bayer (Schweiz) AG, Pharma Postfach, Grubenstrasse 6, 8045 Zurich,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 1 4658111
Web: www.bayer.ch

Fax: +41 (0) 1 4620754

Beaufour Ipsen International U platenice 10, 150 00 Prague 5, Czech Republic.
Tel: +420 (0) 2 57324660 Fax: +420 (0) 2 57324660
Email: bii@tnet.cz

Beaufour Ipsen International SNC Mosenka Park Tower, Taganskaya ul. 19,
109004 Moscow, Russia.
5 2585400

Tel: +7 0 Fax: +7 095 2585401

Beaufour Ipsen Pharma 24 rue Erlanger, 75781 Paris cdx 16, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 44961313 Fax: +33 (0) 1 44961199
Web: www.beaufour-ipsen.com

Beethoven-Pharma Dr Wiemann GmbH Steinthalstr. 1, 90455 Nurnberg,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 911 880044 Fax: +49 (0) 911 880255

Beiersdorf GmbH Laxenburger Strasse 151, A-1101 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 614000 Fax: +43 (0) 1 61400391

Email: contact@vienna.beiersdorf.com — Web: www.beiersdorf.com
Beiersdorf SA Lo Espejo 501, Maipu, Santiago, Chile.

Beiersdorf UK Ltd 2010 Solihull Parkway, Birmingham Business Park,
Birmingham, B37 7YS, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 121 3298800
Web: www.beiersdorf.com
Bell, Sons & Co. (Druggists) P.O. Box 62, Tanhouse Lane, Widnes, WA8 OSA,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 151 422 1200 Fax: +44 (0) 151 420 1211

Email: brianlunt@bells-healthcare.com = Web: www.bells-healthcare.com
Benedetti S.p.A. Vicolo de’ Bacchettoni 3, 51100 Pistoia (PT), Italy.

Tel: +39 0573 536496 Fax: +39 0573 534673

Email: ledisar@tin.it

Berlin Pharmaceutical Industry Co. Ltd 359 New Rd, Bangkok 10100,
Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 223 1011 Fax: +66 2 225 4260

Email: berlinin@lox1.loxinfo.co.th Web: www.berlinpharm.com
Berlin-Chemie Képviselet Vdci ut 113, 1138 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 3296808 Fax: +36 3409352

Berlin-Chemie Menarini Group Komarkovd 27, 148 00 Prague 4, Czech
Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 71913199
Email: office@berlin-chemie.cz
Berlin-Pharma ZAO Moscow ul. Kashirskoe 22-3, Str. 3, 115201 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 4928709

Email: info@berlin-pharma.ru
Berta S.r.l. Via Andrea Doria 7, 20124 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 6694750 Fax: +39 02 6693828

Bescansa PI. Inds. Tambre-via Pasteur 8, Santiago de Compostela, 15890 La
Coruna, Spain.

Tel: +34 981 958002

Email: labbescansa@telefonica.net
betapharm Arzneimittel GmbH Kobelweg 95, 86156 Augsburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 821 748810 Fax: +49 (0) 821 74881420

Email: info@betapharm.de Web: www.betapharm.de

Biocare Ltd Lakeside, 180 Lifford Lane, Kings Norton, Birmingham, B30 3NU, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 121 433 8725 Fax: +44 (0) 121 433 8705

Email: sales@biocare.co.uk Web: www.biocare.co.uk

Biochimici PSN S.p.A. Via Viadagola 30, 40050 Quarto Inferiore (BO), Italy.
Tel: +39 051 767015 Fax: +39 051 767154

Email: psn@biochimici it

Biocur Arzneimittel GmbH Otto-von-Guericke-Allee 1, 39179 Barleben,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8024 9080
Email: medwiss@biocur.de
Bioderma 75 cours Albert-Thomas, 69447 Lyon cdx 03, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 472114800 Fax: +33 (0) 4 78538254

Web: www.bioderma.com

Bio-Diat-Berlin GmbH Selerweg 43-45, 12169 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 795201112 Fax: +49 (0) 30 7967233

Email: info@bio-diaet-berlin.de Web: www. bio-diaet-berlin.de
Biofarma Natural CMD SA de CV Industria Hulera 97 Fracc. Indust., 45130
Zapopan Norte Zapopan, Mexico.

Bioforce AG Postfach 76, 9325 Roggwil/TG, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 71 4546161 Fax: +41 (0) 71 4546162

Email: info@bioforce.ch Web: www.bioforce.ch

Bioforce GmbH Bruhlstr. 15, 78465 Constance, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7533 93010 Fax: +49 (0) 7533 930130

Email: bioforce@bioforce.de Web: www.bioforce.de

Bioforce UK Ltd 2 Brewster Place, Irvine, KA11 5DD, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1294 277344 Fax: +44 (0) 1294 277922

Email: enquires@bioforce.co.uk Web: www.bioforce.co.uk

Biogal-Teva Pharma Rt Robert Karoly krt 66, 1134 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 2886400 Fax: +36 2886410

Bio-Garten GmbH Triesterstrasse 14/1, A-2351 Wiener Neudorf, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 2236 865901 Fax: +43 (0) 2236 86590122

Fax: +44 (0) 121 329 8801

Fax: +420 (0) 27929742

Fax: +7 095 7975958
Web: www.berlin-chemie.ru

Fax: +34 981 552745

Fax: +49 (0) 8024 9081290
Web: www:biocur.de

----- PAGE 674 -----
Bioglan Ltd 8/10 Yalgar Rd, Yalgar Business Park, Kirrawee, NSW 2232,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 95451165
Web: www.bioglan.com.au

Fax: +61 (0) 2 95451067

Biolab Sanus Farmacéutica Ltda Av. dos Bandeirantes 5386, Planalto Paulista,
04071-900 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 11 55862000

Web: www.biolabfarma.com.br
Biomed AG Uberlandstrasse 199, Postfach, 8600 Dubendorf 1, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 44 8021616 Fax: +41 (0) 44 8021600

Email: biomed@biomed.ch Web: www.biomed.ch

Biomedica sro , Prague, Czech Republic.

biomo Pharma GmbH Lendersbergstrasse 86, 53721 Siegburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 2241 385081 Fax: +49 (0) 2241 387007

Bional Pharma Deutschland GmbH & Co. KG Heidsieker Heide 144, 33739
Bielefeld, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 5206 704433
Email: info@bional.de
Bionax Singapore Pte Ltd 99 Bukit Timah Rd, Alfa Centre 03-06, S 229835,
Singapore.

Tel: +65 6333 3432 Fax: +65 6339 7875

Email: bionax@pacific.net.sg

Bionax (Thailand) Ltd 10 Fl, Unit A, Lake Rajada Office Complex, 193/35 New
Rachadapisek Rd, Kwaeng Klongtoey, Khet Klongtoey, Bangkok 10110, Thailand.
Tel: +66 2 661 9208 Fax: +66 2 264 0316

Bionorica AG Kerschensteinerstr. 11-15, 92318 Neumarkt/Opf, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 9181 23190 Fax: +49 (0) 9181 231265

Email: info@bionorica.de Web: www.bionorica.de

Bionorica AG Udaltsova 52, 119607 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 5029019 Fax: +7 095 7341200

Email: bionorica@co.ru Web: www:bionorica.de
Bio-Pharmaceuticals Sdn Bhd C-5-8, Block C, Centre Point Business Park, 5 Jin
26/53, Seksyen 26, 400000 Shah Alam, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 51011450 Fax: +60 (0) 3 51912025

Bioplanta Arzneimittel GmbH Bahnhofstr. 5, 76275 Ettlingen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7243 939845 Fax: +49 (0) 7243 939846

Bioprogress S.p.A. Via Aurelia 58, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 39383101 Fax: +39 06 39382134

Biosatde Produtos Farmaceuticos SA Rua Ramalho Ortigdo 454, 1070-228
Lisbon, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 3191280

Bio-Strath AG , Czech Republic.

Bio-Strath AG Muhlebachstrasse 25, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 1258151 Fax: +41 (0) 1 2624326

biosyn Arzneimittel GmbH Schorndorfer Str. 32, 70734 Fellbach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 711 5753200 Fax: +49 (0) 711 5753299

Email: info@biosyn.de Web: www.biosyn.de

Biovital Pty Ltd 24/10 Yalgar Road, Kirrawee, NSW 2232, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 95451899 Fax: +61 (0) 2 95451992

Birchwood Laboratories Inc. 7900 Fuller Rd, Eden Prairie, MN 53344-2195,
USA.

Tel: +1 952 937 7943

Email: medical@birchlabs.com
Bittermedizin Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH Taku-Fort-Str. 20, 81827
Munich, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 4306841

Email: info@bittermedizin.com
BJC Trading Co Ltd 99 Soi Rubia, Sukhumvit 42 Rd, Bangkok 10110, Thailand.
Tel: +66 2 367 1274 Fax: +66 2 381 4551

Email: bjcpharma@berlijucker.co.th Web: www.bje.co.th

Blackmores Ltd P.O. Box 258, Balgowlah, NSW 2093, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 99510111 Fax: +61 (0) 2 99491954

Web: www.blackmores.com.au

Body Spring S.r.1. Via Parco della Rimembranza 27, 00041 Albano Laziale (RM),
Italy.

Tel: +39 (0) 718091 Fax: +39 (0) 71809440

Boehringer Ingelheim Carlos Fernandez 260, San Joaquin, Santiago, Chile.
Boehringer Ingelheim Prat d ela Riba S/N, Sector Turo de Can Matas, Sant
Cugat del Valles, 08190 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4045100 Fax: +34 93 4045580

Email: webmaster@boehringer-ingelheim.es

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.es

Fax: +55 (0) 11 55840376

Fax: +49 (0) 5206 704443
Web: www:bional.de

Fax: +351 21 3191289

Fax: +1 952 937 7979
Web: www.birchlabs.com

Fax: +49 (0) 89 4304043
Web: www:bittermedizin.com

Suppliers Directory

Boehringer Ingelheim Austria GmbH Dr Boehringer-Gasse 5-11, A-1121
Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 801050

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.at

Boehringer Ingelheim (Canada) Ltd 5780 South Service Rd, Burlington, L7L
5H4, Canada.

Tel: +1 905 6390333

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.ca

ion Diethelm Malaysia Sdn Bhd P.O. Box 3031,

Fax: +43 (0) 1 8040823

Fax: +1 905 6393769

Boehringer Ingelheim, Di
47620 Subang Jaya, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 80246088

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Fax: +60 (0) 3 80249088

Boehringer Ingelheim do Brasil Quim. e Farm. Ltda Av. Maria Coelho Aguair
215, Bl. F. 3 degrees andar, 05805-000 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 37412181 Fax: +55 (0) 11 37411678

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.com.br

Boehringer Ingelheim France 37-9 rue Boissiére, 75116 Paris, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 44346565 Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.fr

Boehringer Ingelheim Italia S.p.A. Via Lorenzini 8, 20139 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 53551 Fax: +39 02 5355222
Web: www:boehringer-ingelheim.it

Boehringer Ingelheim, Lda Av. Antonio Augusto de Aguiar 104, 1069-029
Lisbon, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 3135300

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Fax: +351 21 3135303

Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH Moscow Office, Donskaya ul. 39/9, Str.
1, 119049 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 4117801

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG Binger Str. 173, 55216
Ingelheim, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 1805 779090 Fax: +49 (0) 6132 729999

Email: webmaster. bipd@boehringer-ingelheim.com

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.de

Fax: +7 095 4117802

Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma Magyarorszagi Kereskedelmi Képviselet
Dobsinai u 19, 1124 Budapest, Hungary.
Tel: +36 2247120 Fax: +36 2247121

Boehringer Ingelheim Promeco, S.A. de C.V. Calle del Maiz No. 49, Col.
Xaltocan, Deleg. Xochimilco, 16090 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 56298300 Fax: +52 55 56765866

Email: webmaster@mex.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.com.mx

Boehringer Ingelheim S.A. Av. del Libertador 7208, 1429 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47048600

Web: www.bai.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47048630

Boehringer Ingelheim SA/NV Ave Ariane 16, 1200 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 7733311 Fax: +32 (0) 2 7733300

Email: external@bru.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.be

Boehringer Ingelheim sro Lublariskd 21, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.
Tel: +420 (0) 2 21983111 Fax: +420 (0) 2 21983222

Email: info@boehringer-ingelheim.cz. Web: www:boehringer-ingelheim.cz
Boehringer Ingelheim (Thai) Ltd 12 Fl, Charn Issara Tower Il, 2922/207-208
New Petchburi Rd, Bangkapi, Huay Kwang, Bangkok 10310, Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 308 8500 Fax: +66 2 308 2117

Web: www.boehringer-ingelheim.com

Boiron CZ sro Vikovd 40, 130 00 Prague 3, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 22722350 Fax: +420 (0) 2 22721139

Email: office@boiron.cz

Bolder Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Koblenzer Str. 65, 50968 Cologne,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 221 376520 Fax: +49 (0) 221 3765225

Email: info@bolder.de Web: www.bolder.de

Boots Healthcare Doctor Zamenhof 36 Dup 2, 28027 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 7433930 Fax: +34 91 3249527

Email: info@bhi.com Web: www.bootshealthcare.es

Boots Healthcare Australia P/L Locked Bag 2067, North Ryde, NSW 1670,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 98706000
Web: www.skinexpert.net

Fax: +61 (0) 2 98706100

5

----- PAGE 675 -----
Appendix 5

Boots Healthcare New Zealand Ltd P.O. Box 27-341, Wellington 1, New
Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 4 4733859
Web: www.skinexpert.net
Boots Healthcare (SA) (Pty) Ltd 20 Zulberg Close, Building A, Entrance 2,
Johannesburg 2198, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 6165544

Web: www.skinexpert.net

Boots Healthcare S.p.A. Via Tarantelli 13/15, 22076 Mozzate (CO), Italy.
Tel: +39 0331 838111 Fax: +39 0331 821450

Web: www.skinexpert.net

Boots Healthcare (Switzerland) AG, Hermal Untermuli 11, 6300 Zug,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 41 7632575
Web: www.skinexpert.net
Boots Trading (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd Level 4, Wisma Samudra, 1 JIn Kontraktor
U1/14, Hicom-Glenmarie Industrial Park, 40150 Shah Alam, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 55695418 Fax: +60 (0) 3 55695452

Web: www.skinexpert.net

Bouty SpA V.le Casiraghi 471, 20099 Sesto S Giovanni (Ml), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 262891 Fax: +39 02 26221305

Bouzen S.A.C,.1.F.A.F. Calle 36 No. 165/67, 1900 La Plata, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 4839908
Bracco S.p.A. Via E. Folli 50, 20134 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 21771 Fax: +39 02 26410678
Web: www.bracco.com

Brady C. KG Horlgasse 5, A-1092 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 3106960

Brasmedica S.A. Industrias Farmacéuticas Avenida Miguel Stefano 2278,
04301-002 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Brauer Natural Medicine P/L P.O. Box 234, Tanunda, SA 5352, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 8 85632932 Fax: +61 (0) 8 85633398

Email: admin@brauer.com.au Web: www.brauer.com.au

Bristol-Myers Squibb 3 rue Joseph-Monier, 92506 Rueill-Malmaison cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 58836000 Fax: +33 (0) 1 58836001

Email: infomed@bms.com Web: www.bms.com

British Dispensary 272 Moo 1 Soi Pattanasuk, Teparak Rd, Samutprakarn
10270, Thailand.

Tel: +66 (0) 2755 7300 Fax: +66 (0) 2755 7315

Email: customerservice@britishdispensary.com

British Snoring & Sleep Apnoea Association Ltd 2nd Floor Suite, 52 Albert Rd
North, Reigate, RH2 9EL, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1737 245638

Email: info@britishsnoring.co.uk
Bucca Juan Alvarez Mendizabal 43, 28008 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 5473463 Fax: +34 91 5473463

Bunker Industria Farmacéutica Ltda Rua Anibal dos Anjos Carvalho 212,
04810-050 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 56660266 Fax: +55 (0) 11 56660739

Byk Nederland BV Weerenweg 29, 1161 AG Zwanenburg, Netherlands.
Tel: +31 (0) 20 4079400 Fax: +31 (0) 20 4976117

@

Cabassi & Giuriati S.p.A. Via Uruguay 20/22, Z.1. Padua, 35127 Padua, Italy.
Tel: +39 049 8705870 Fax: +39 049 8700783

Email: giuriati@tin.it Web: www.cabassi-giuriati.it
Ca.Di.Group S.r.1. Via Pieve Tesino 75, 00124 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 52363403 Fax: +39 06 52363401

Email: cadigroup@cadigroup.it Web: www.cadigroup.it

Caesaro Med GmbH Raidenstrasse 46, A-4060 Leonding, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 732 677164 Fax: +43 (0) 732 6771649

CAFAR (Compania Anonima Farmaceutica) Avenida M. Perez Pisanti, Sector
Industrial Los 3 puentes, Urb. El Tambor Los Teques, Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 3231811 Fax: +58 (0) 212 3231974

Email: cafar2000@cantv.net Web: www.cafar.com.ve

Capo Sole S.r.l. Via Edison 60, 20019 Settimo Milanese (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 33512309 Fax: +39 02 33500602

Carl Hoernecke GmbH Halberstadter Chaussee 22, 39116 Magdeburg,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 391 635460
Email: info@hoernecke.com

Fax: +64 (0) 4 4722706

Fax: +27 (0) 11 6160710

Fax: +41 (0) 41 7632576

Web: www.bouzensa.com.ar

Fax: +44 (0) 1737 248744
Web: wwwbritishsnoring.co.uk

Fax: +49 (0) 391 6354627
Web: www:hoernecke.com

Carter Horner Inc. 6600 Kitimat Rd, Mississauga, LSN 1L9, Canada.

Tel: +1 905 8266200 Fax: +1 905 8260389

Casa Granado Lab. Farmacias e Drogarias S.A. Travessa do Comércio 17,
20010-080 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 2031212

Web: www.granado.com.br
Cassella-med GmbH & Co. KG Gereonsmuhlengasse 1, 50670 Cologne,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 221 120157
Email: cmed@cassella-med.de

Fax: +55 (0) 21 2215589

Fax: +49 (0) 221 124495

Cazi Quimica Farmacéutica Industria e Comércio Ltda Rua Anténio Lopes 17,
06600-000 Jandira, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 47075155 Fax: +55 (0) 11 47075144

C.B. Fleet Co. (Australia) P/L P.O. Box 716, Braeside, VIC 3195, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 3. 95802755 Fax: +61 (0) 3 95802899

Email: cbfleet@hyperlink.net.au Web: www.ozpages.comcbfleet

C.B. Fleet Co. Inc. 4615 Murray Pl., P.O. Box 11349, Lynchburg, VA 24506,
USA.

Tel: +1 804 528 4000
Web: www.cbfleet.com
Cedar Health Ltd Pepper Rd, Bramhall Moor Lane, Hazel Grove, Stockport, SK7
SBW, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 161 483 1235
Email: customerservices

Fax: +1 804 847 4219

Fax: +44 (0) 161 456 4321
darhealth.co.uk

Web: www.cedarhealth.co.uk

Cederroth C/Jose Bardasano Baos 9, Edificio Gorbea 3, 28016 Madrid, Spain.
Tel: +34 91 3836171 Fax: +34 91 3836197

Email: info@cederroth.es Web: www.cederroth.com

Cefak KG Ostbahnhofstr. 15, 87437 Kempten, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 831 574010 Fax: +49 (0) 831 5740148

Email: cefak@cefak.com Web: www.cefak.com

Cesam, Lda Rua de Ceuta 4, Piso, 2795-056 Linda-a-Velha, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4142880 Fax: +351 21 4199496

Cesra Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Braunmattstr. 20, 76532 Baden-Baden,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7221 95400
Email: cesra@cesra.de

Ceutical Trading Co. Ltd Rm 24, 12/F, Goldfield Industrial Ctr, 1 Sui Wo Rd, Fo
Tan, Shatin, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 26065262 Fax: +852 26917214

Chattem Consumer Products 1715 West 38th St, Chattanooga, TN 37409,
USA.

Tel: +1 615 821 4571
Chauvin ankerpharm GmbH Brunsbutteler Damm 165-173, 13581 Berlin,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 33093300

Email: ankerpharm@bausch.com
Chefaro UK Ltd 7 Tower Close, St Peters Industrial Park, Huntingdon, PE29 7DH,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1480 421800
Email: enquiries@chefaro.co.uk
Chemische Fabrik Dr. Hetterich GmbH & Co. KG Gebhardtstr. 5, 90762
Furth/Bayern, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 911 97706
Web: www.hetterich.de

Fax: +49 (0) 7221 54026
Web: www:cesra.de

Web: www.chattem.com

Fax: +49 (0) 30 33093350

Fax: +44 (0) 1480 434861
Web: wwwchefaro.com

Fax: +49 (0) 911 9770755

Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik Géppingen Carl Miiller, Apotheker,
GmbH & Co. KG Bahnhofstr. 33-35 & 40, 73033 Goppingen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7161 6760 Fax: +49 (0) 7161 676298

Email: info@mueller-goeppingen.de Web: www.mueller-goeppingen.de
Cheplapharm Arzneimittel GmbH Bahnhofstr 1a, 17498 Mesekenhagen,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 38351 53690
Web: www.cheplapharm.de
Chiesi Espafia Berlin 38-48, 7 planta, 08029 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 4948000 Fax: +34 93 4948030
Email: chiesi@chiesi.es Web: www.chiesigroup.com

Fax: +49 (0) 38351536925

Chrisana GmbH Ruggenstrasse 31, 8903 Birmensdorf, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 17370069 Fax: +41 (0) 1 7370061
Web: www.chrisana.ch

Christo Pharmaceuticals Ltd Blk A-D, 14/F, Stage 2, Superluck Industrial Ctr, 57
Sha Tsui Rd, Tsuen Wan, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 24140146 Fax: +852 24935666

----- PAGE 676 -----
Cifarma Cientifica Farmacéutica Ltda Av. das Industrias 3651, 33040-130
Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 31 36414100
Web: www.cifarma.com.br

Email: cifarma@uai.com.br

Cimed Industria de Medicamentos Ltda Rua Engenheiro Prudente 119,
01550-000 Sdo Paulo Vila Monumento, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 11 69159090

Cinfa Olaz-Chipi 10, Poligono Areta, Huarte-Pamplona, 31620 Navarra, Spain.
Tel: +34 948 335005 Fax: +34 948 330367
Email: cinfa@cinfa.com Web: www.cinfa.com

Web: www.cimed.ind.br

Cipan, Companhia Industrial Produtora de Antibioticos SA Vala do
Carregado, Apartado 60, 2600-733 Castanheira do Ribatejo, Portugal.

Tel: +351 263 856800 Fax: +351 263 855020

Web: www.cipan.pt

Cipla Ltd Mumbai Central, Mumbai 400 008, India.

Tel: +91 (0) 22 23082891 Fax: +91 (0) 22 23070013

Web: www.cipla.com

Cipla-Medpro (Pty) Ltd Rosen Heights, Rosen Park, Bellville 7530, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 21 9140520 Fax: +27 (0) 21 9140247

Email: medical@ciplamedpro.co.za Web: www.ciplamedpro.co.za

CNW (Hong Kong) Ltd Rm 606, 6/F, Fo Tan Industrial Ctr, 26-28 Au Pui Wan
St, Fo Tan, Shatin, Hong Kong.
Tel: +852 23882933

Email: cnw@cnw-hk.com
Colgate Palmolive Canada 99 Vanderhoof Ave, Toronto, M4G 2H6, Canada.
Tel: +1 416 4216000 Web: www.colgate.com

Coll Farma Napoles 166, 08013 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2314505

Combe Inc. 1701 Westchester Ave, White Plains, NY 10604, USA.

Tel: +1 914 694 5454 Fax: +1 800 431 2610

Email: combe@combe.com Web: www.combe.com

Comercial GFC SA de CV Blvd Juan A de Torres 220, 37360 Leon Gto Vibar,
Mexico.

Fax: +852 27712138
Web: www.cnwhk.com

Companhia Industrial Farmacéutica Rua Figueira de Melo 301, 20941-001 Rio
de Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 30823535

Web: www.cif-farmaceutica.com.br
Concept for Pharmacy Ltd P.O. Box 2105, Kfar Sava 44643, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 9 7667890 Fax: +972 (0) 9 7667899

Email: info@concept-rx.co.il Web: www.concept-rx.co.il

Concept Pharmaceuticals Ltd 167 C.S.T. Rd, Santacruz (E), Mumbai 400 098,
India.

Confar, Lda Rua Sebastido e Silva 25, Zona Industrial de Massama, 2745-838
Queluz, Portugal.
Tel: +351 214 371009
Email: med@confar.pt

Fax: +55 (0) 21 30823527

Fax: +351 214 387489

Coopération Pharmaceutique Francaise , 77020 Melun cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 64872000 Fax: +33 (0) 1 64872087

Cooperativa Farmaceutica Soc. (CoFa Farmaceutici) Via Passione 8, 20122
Milan, Italy.
Tel: +39 02 784141 Fax: +39 02 781308

Coradol-Pharma GmbH Ludwig-Erhard-Str. 10, 50129 Bergheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 2238 940251 Fax: +49 (0) 2238 940258
Email: info@coradol.de Web: www.coradol.de

Corifel SA Via Clemente Maraini 9, 6907 Lugano 7, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 91 9239657 Fax: +41 (0) 91 9210807

Cornelli Consulting Sas Corso Indipendenza 1, 20129 Milan, Italy.
Tel: +39 (0) 2714904 Fax: +39 (0) 2714904
Email: info@cornelliconsulting.it Web: www.cornelliconsulting.it

Corporacion de Salud C.A. Av. J. M. Vargas, Edif. Artico Piso 1 Oficina 15B, Sta.
Fe Norte Caracas, Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 9795945 Fax: +58 (0) 212 9795945
Cosmofarma, Lda (Laboratérios Cosmos) Rua Arco do Carvalhdo 14, 1070
Lisbon, Portugal.

Costec S.R.L. Esp. Dermatocosméticas Av. Corrientes 1296 Piso 7 Dto.76,
1043 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43818729 Fax: +54 (0) 11 43818729

Craveri S.A.I.C. Arengreen 830, 1405 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 51670555 Fax: +54 (0) 11 51670505
Web: www.craveri.com.ar

Suppliers Directory

Crefar, Lda Rua da Madalena 171, 1149-032 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 8824690 Fax: +351 21 8862546
Email: mail@crefar.pt

Croma-Pharma GmbH /ndustriezeile 6, A-2100 Leobendorf, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 2262 684680 Fax: +43 (0) 2262 6846815

Crookes Healthcare Ltd D6 Building, Nottingham, NG90 6BH, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 115 968 8922 Fax: +44 (0) 115 968 8923
Email: medicalinfo@crookes.co.uk Web: www.crookes.co.uk

CSL (NZ) Ltd P.O. Box 62590, Central Park, Auckland 6, New Zealand.
Tel: +64 (0) 9 5798105 Fax: +64 (0) 9 5798106
Web: www.

ct-Arzneimittel GmbH Lengeder Str. 42A, 13407 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 4090080 Fax: +49 (0) 30 40900821

Email: office@ct-berlin.de Web: wwwact-berlin.de

C.T.S. Chemical Industries Ltd 4 Haharosh St, P.O.Box 10, Hod-Hasharon
45240, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 9 7626333
Web: www.cts.co.il

I.com.au

ct

Fax: +972 (0) 9 7626300

Culpeper and Napiers Bourton Industrial Park, , Bourton-On-The-Water, GL54
2HQ, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1451 812 341 Fax: +44 (0) 1451 812 349

Email: wholesale@culpeperandnapier.co.uk

CuraMED Pharma GmbH Pforzheimer Str. 5, 76227 Karlsruhe, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 721 402089 Fax: +49 (0) 721 4005530

CytoChemia AG Im Burgerstock 7, 79241 Ihringen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7668 99220 Fax: +49 (0) 7668 992233

Email: info@cytochemia.de Web: www.cytochemia.de

[D)

Darrow Laboratérios S.A. Rua Marques de Olinda 69, 22251-040 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 25538150 Fax: +55 (0) 21 25532551

Davi Farmacéutica, Lda Estrada da Barrosa, Elospark, Arm. 8, Algueirdo, 2725-
193 Mem Martins, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 9229720 Fax: +351 21 9229729

DC Labs Ltd 795 Pharmacy Ave, Toronto, MIL 3K2, Canada.

DDD Ltd 94 Rickmansworth Rd, Watford, WD1 7/JJ, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1923 229251 Fax: +44 (0) 1923 220728
Email: info@dddltd.co.uk Web: www.dddgroup.co.uk

De Mayo Industrias Quimicas e Farmacéuticas Ltda Rua Bardo de Petropolis
109, 20251-061 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 22931409

Defuen S.A. Av. Dorrego 331, 1414 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 48551249 Fax: +54 (0) 11 48562895

Delamac Pharmaceuticals P/L Suite 1/14 Hill Street, Spring Hill, Qld 4000,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 7 38321432

Email: delamac@healthnut.com.au

Fax: +61 (0) 7 38326623

Dentinox Gesellschaft fiir Pharmazeutische Praparate Lenk & Schuppan
Nunsdorfer Ring 19, 12277 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 7200340 Fax: +49 (0) 30 7211038

Email: dentinox@dentinox.de Web: www.dentinox.de

Depofarma S.r.I. Via Guindazzi 44/54, 80040 Pollena Trocchia (NA), Italy.
Tel: +39 081 5305468 Fax: +39 081 5302124
Email: info@dermilia.it

Dermofarm Can Sant Joan, Rubi, 08191 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 6026026 Fax: +34 93 6026036
Email: email@dermofarm.com Web: www.dermofarm.com

Dermofarma Italia S.r.l. Via Beata Francesca 10, 83100 Avellino, Italy.
Tel: +39 0825 30263 Fax: +39 0825 30263

Dermoteca, SA Estrada Nacional 117, 2720 Alfragide, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4718322 Fax: +351 21 4718381

Desma Healthcare BV Corso San Gottardo 32, 6830 Chiasso, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 91 6831506 Fax: +41 (0) 91 6831509

Deutsche Homéopathie-Union Ottostr. 24, 76227 Karlsruhe, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 721 409301 Fax: +49 (0) 721 4093263
Web: www.dhu.de

Devergé Medicina e Medicalizzazione S.r.l. C.so Casale 206, 10132 Turin,
Italy.

Tel: +39 O11 8993844 Fax: +39 011 8995514

----- PAGE 677 -----
Appendix 5

Dexxon P.O. Box 50, Hadera 38100, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 6 6364000 Fax: +972 (0) 6 6364004

Email: info@dexcel.com Web: www.dexxon.co.il

Diafarm Avda Arraona 119-123, Barbera del Valles, 08210 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 7192120 Fax: +34 93 7192104

Email: info@diafarm.es Web: www.diafarm.es

Dicofarm S.p.A. Via Vitorchiano 151, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 3322891 Fax: +39 06 3332172

Email: dicofarm@dicofarm.it Web: www.dicofarm.it

Diethelm & Co. Ltd Pharmaceutical Division, 280 New Rd, Bangkok 10100,
Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 221 1121
Email: ditco@loxinfo.co.th
Diethelm Malaysia Sdn Bhd 74 JIn Universiti, 46700 Petaling Jaya, Malaysia.
Tel: +60 (0) 3 79660288 Fax: +60 (0) 3 79576649

Web: www.
Diethelm Singapore Pte Ltd 34 Boon Leat Terrace, $ 119866, Singapore.
Tel: +65 6471 0888 Web: www.diethelm.com.sg

Dispolab Farmaceutica SA Santa Victoria 213, Providencia, Santiago, Chile.
Dist. Ofar S.A. Salom 651, 1277 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43018687

DM Inddstria Farmacéutica Ltda Av. Piracema 155, 06460-030 Barueri, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 11 41952122 Fax: +55 (0) 11 41914855

DMG Italia S.r.1. Via Campello sul Clitunno 34, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 78359715 Fax: +39 06 78359719

Email: info@dmgit.com

Doetsch Grether AG , 4002 Basle, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 2873411 Fax: +41 (0) 61 2873413

Web: www.doetschgrether.ch

Dolisos SA Rue Carli 5, 1140 Brussels, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 2 2406770 Fax: +32 (0) 2 2406771

Dolorgiet GmbH & Co. KG Otto-von-Guericke-Str. 1, 53757 St. Augustin/Bonn,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2241 3170 Fax: +49 (0) 2241 317390

Donini S.r.1. Via Ecce Homo 18, 37054 Nogara (VR), Italy.

Tel: +39 0442 88922 Fax: +39 0442 50537

Dorwest Herbs Ltd Shipton Gorge, Bridport, DT6 4LP, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1308 987272 Fax: +44 (0) 1308 987929

Email: info@dorwest.co.uk Web: www.dorwest.co.uk

Douglas Pharmaceuticals Australia Ltd P.O. Box 7004, Baulkham Hills
Business Centre, Baulkham Hills, NSW 2153, Australia.

Tel: +61 1800 678 302 Fax: +61 (0) 2 88182122

Web: www.douglas.com.au

Douglas Pharmaceuticals Ltd P.O. Box 45-027, Auckland, New Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 9 8350660 Fax: +64 (0) 9 8350665

Web: www.douglas.co.nz

DP-Medica SA, Pharmazeutische Produkte Case postale 238, Fribourg,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 26 4929370 Fax: +41 (0) 26 4929371

Dr A & L Schmidgall Wolfganggasse 45-7, A-1121 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 81158 Fax: +43 (0) 1 811587

Dr A & M Kropf Promenade, 3780 Gstaad, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 33 7488626 Fax: +41 (0) 33 7488620

Email: apotheke.kropf@gstaad.ch

Dr. Atzinger Pharmazeutische Fabrik Dr. Atzinger Str. 5, 94036 Passau,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 851 955210 Fax: +49 (0) 851 9552155

Dr. August Wolff Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. Sudbrackstr. 56, 33611 Bielefeld,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 521 880805

Email: info@wolff-arzneimittel.de
Dr AW Gubler Petersgraben 5, 4051 Basle, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 2612026 Fax: +41 (0) 61 2616513
Dr. C. Soldan GmbH Herderstr. 5-9, 90427 Nurnberg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 911 327801 Fax: +49 (0) 911 3278159
Web: www.soldan.com

Fax: +66 2 224 8475
Web: www.diethelmpharma-thailand.com

iethelmkeller.com

Fax: +49 (0) 521 8808334
Web: www.wolff-arzneimittel.de

Dr Dinner SA Artherstrassec 60, 6405 Immensee, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 41 8544600 Fax: +41 (0) 41 8544603

Dr. E. Ritsert GmbH & Co. KG Klausenweg 12, 69412 Eberbach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6271 92210 Fax: +49 (0) 6271 922155

Email: info@ritsert.de Web: wwwaritsert.de

Dr. Falk Pharma GmbH Leinenweberstr. 5, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 761 15140 Fax: +49 (0) 761 1514321
Email: zentrale@drfalkpharma.de Web: www.drfalkpharma.de

Dr. Falk Pharma Portugal Lda Av. José Gomes Ferreira 11, Edificio Atlas Il - 3
Piso, Sala 33, Miraflores, 1495-139 Algés, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4126170 Fax: +351 21 4126179

Dr. Friedrich Eberth Arzneimittel Hohenburger Str. 39, 92289 Ursensollen,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 9628 91368
Email: info@eberth.de

Dr Gerhard Mann, Chem.-pharm. Fabrik GmbH Brunsbutteler Damm 165-
73, 13581 Berlin, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 30 330930
Email: dmp@bausch.com

Dr Grandel GmbH Pfladergasse 7-13, 86150 Augsburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 821 32020 Fax: +49 (0) 821 3202229
Web: www.grandel.de

Dr Grossmann AG, Pharmaca Hardstrasse 25, Postfach 914, 4127 Birsfelden/
Basle, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 3775000 Fax: +41 (0) 61 3775050

Email: administration@grossmannpharma.com

Web: www.grossmannpharma.com

Fax: +49 (0) 9628 91399
Web: www:eberth.de

Fax: +49 (0) 30 33093350
Web: www:mannpharma.de

Dr Gustav Klein Steinenfeld 3, 77736 Zell am Harmersbach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7835 63550 Fax: +49 (0) 7835 634685

Email: info@klien-phytopharma.de Web: www.klein-phytopharma.de
Dr Heinz Welti AG Althofstrasse 12, 5432 Neuenhof, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 56 4062994 Fax: +41 (0) 56 4061764

Email: info@drwelti.ch

Dr. Hobein & Co. Nachf. GmbH Arzneimittel Grenzstr. 2, 53340
Meckenheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 2225 $8940
Email: info@eubos.de
Dr Kade Pharmazeutische Fabrik GmbH Rigistr. 2, 12277 Berlin, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 30 720820 Fax: +49 (0) 30 72082200

Email: info@kade.de Web: www.kade.de

Dr. Kolassa & Merz GmbH Gastgebgasse 5-13, A-1230 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 8691604 Fax: +43 (0) 1 869160418

Dr. Loges & Co. GmbH Schutzenstr. 5, 21423 Winsen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 4171 7070 Fax: +49 (0) 4171 707100

Email: info@loges.com Web: wwwloges.com

Dr med G Knobel AG Bahnhofstrasse 9, 8730 Uznach, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 55 2804020

Dr Niedermaier GmbH Taufkirchner Str. 59, 85662 Hohenbrunn bei Munich,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 6607970

Email: info@niedermaier-pharma.de
Dr. Ottolenghi & C. S.r.I. Via Cuneo 5, 10028 Trofarello (TO), Italy.

Tel: +39 011 6481028 Fax: +39 011 6497132

Email: info@ottolenghi.it Web: www.ottolenghi.it

Dr Peithner KG nunmehr GmbH & Co. Richard-Strauss-Strasse 13, A-1232
Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 61626440 Fax: +43 (0) 1 616264418

Dr R. Pfleger Chemische Fabrik GmbH , 96045 Bamberg, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 951 60430 Fax: +49 (0) 951 604329

Email: info@dr-pfleger.de Web: www.dr-pfleger.de

Dr Scheffler Nachf. GmbH & Co. KG Senefelderstr. 44, 51469 Bergisch
Gladbach, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2202 1050 Fax: +49 (0) 2202 105344

Dr W Schwabe Pol Ind Francoli, Parcela 3, Nave 2, 43006 Tarragona, Spain.
Tel: +34 977 550542 Fax: +34 977 550848

Web: www.schwabepharma.com

Fax: +49 (0) 2225 889466
Web: www:eubos.de

Fax: +49 (0) 89 66079750
Web: www:niedermaier-pharma.de

Dr. Werner Janssen Nachf. Chem.-pharm. Produkte GmbH Grenzstr. 2,
53340 Meckenheim, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2225 $8940 Fax: +49 (0) 2225 889466

Dr Wild & Co. AG Lange Gasse 4, 4002 Basle, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 2799000 Fax: +41 (0) 61 2799009

Email: info@wild-pharma.com Web: www.wild-pharma.com

Dr Willmar Schwabe GmbH & Co. Willmar-Schwabe-Str. 4, 76227 Karlsruhe,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 721 40050
Web: www:schwabe.de

Fax: +49 (0) 721 4005500

----- PAGE 678 -----
Dreluso Pharmazeutika, Dr Elten & Sohn GmbH Marktplatz 5, 31840
Hessisch Oldendorf, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 5152 94240

Web: www.dreluso.de

Drossapharm SA Postfach 2660, 4002 Basle, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 61 7021000 Fax: +41 (0) 61 7021005
Email: info@drossapharm.ch Web: www.drossapharm.ch

Fax: +49 (0) 5152 3408

Duopharm GmbH Grassingerstr. 9, 83043 Bad Aibling, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 8061 931400 Fax: +49 (0) 8061 931425
Email: info@duopharm.de Web: www.duopharm.de

Dyckerhoff Pharma GmbH & Co. Robert-Perthel-Str. 49, 50739 Cologne,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 221 9574370

Web: www.dyckerhoff-pharma.de

Fax: +49 (0) 221 95743745

Dynacren Laboratorio Farmaceutico del Dott. A. Francioni e di M. Gerosa
S.r.1. Via P Nenni 12, Loc Malpensa, 28053 Castelletto Ticino (NO), Italy.

Tel: +39 0331 924205 Fax: +39 0331 913415

Email: dynacren@dyneren.it Web: www.dynacren.it

CE)

E Kern AG, Pharmazeutische Krauterspezialitaten Hauptstrasse 23, 8867
Niederumen, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 55 6102727

Email: kern.pharma@bluewin.ch

Eagle Pharmaceuticals P/L P.O. Box 927, Castle Hill, NSW 1765, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 98999099 Fax: +61 (0) 2 98996564

Eastern Pharmaceuticals Ltd Coomb House, St. Johns Rd, Isleworth, TW7 6NA,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 20 8569 8174 Fax: +44 (0) 20 8569 8175

Email: sales@eastern-pharmaceuticals.co.uk

Web: www.eastern-pharmaceuticals.co.uk

Ebewe Pharma (ASIA) Ltd 8/F Eastwood Ctr, 5 A Kung Ngam Village Rd,
Shaukeiwan, Hong Kong.
Email: asia@ebewe.com.hk

E.C. De Witt & Co. Ltd Tudor Rd, Manor Park, Runcorn, WA7 1SZ, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1928 579029 Fax: +44 (0) 1928 579712
Email: info@ecdewitt.com Web: www.ecdewitt.co.uk

Fax: +41 (0) 55 6102508

EciFarma SA Carmen Covarrubias 271, Nunoa, Santiago, Chile.

Ecofarm Group Srl Via F Vezzani 99/r, 16159 Genoa Rivarolo, Italy.
Tel: +39 (0) 107261682 Fax: +39 (0) 107268296
Email: ecofarmgroup@tin.it

Ecosol AG Hinterbergstrasse 24, 6330 Cham, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 41 7483080 Fax: +41 (0) 41 7483081
Email: contact@ecosol.ch Web: www.ecosol.ch

Edmond Pharma S.r.I. Via dei Giovi 131, 20037 Paderno Dugnano (MI), Italy.
Tel: +39 02 9100111 Fax: +39 02 91001351

EF-EM-ES - Dr Smetana & Co. Scheidlstrasse 28, A-1180 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 4792142 Fax: +43 (0) 1 4700746

EG Laboratori EuroGenerici S.p.A. Via Domenico Scarlatti 31, 20124 Milan,
Italy.
Tel: +39 02 8310371 Fax: +39 02 83103776

EGIS Pharmaceuticals Hungaria krt 179-187, 1146 Budapest, Hungary.
Tel: +36 4692222 Fax: +36 3839257

Eladon Ltd P.O. Box 111, Bangor, LLS7 1ZB, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1248 370059 Fax: +44 (0) 1248 364208
Web: www.elagen.com

Elhoim S.R.L. Independencia 2809 Piso 6 Dto. A, 1225 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 48151105

Ellem Lakemedel AB Svdrdvdgen 13, 182 12 Danderyd, Sweden.
Tel: +46 (0) 8 54496030 Fax: +46 (0) 8 54496049
Email: info@ellem.nu Web: www.ellem.nu

Elvetium S.A. Catulo Castillo 2437, 1261 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 43081474 Fax: +54 (0) 11 49415980

Emerging Pharma Sdn Bhd Phileo Damansara II, Lot 3A03, Block B, No 15, JIn
16/11, Off JIn Damansara, 46350 Petaling Jaya, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 79560658 Fax: +60 (0) 3 79552260

Email: info@emergingp.com Web: www.emergingp.com

Emonta Pharma GmbH Weidelstrasse 21, A-1100 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 6892035 Fax: +43 (0) 1 6892037

Suppliers Directory

EMS Ind. Farmacéutica Ltda Rodovia SP 101, Km 08, 13186-481 Hortolandia,
Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 19 38879800 Fax: +55 (0) 19 38879824

Email: departamentomedico@ems.com.br

Web: www.ems.com.br

Engelhard Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Herzbergstr. 3, 61138
Niederdorfelden, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6101 539300
Email: info@engelhard-am.de
ERA Medical ApS Storeholm 25, 2670 Greve, Denmark.

Tel: +45 46151677 Fax: +45 43600301

Ernest Jackson & Co. Ltd 29 High St, Crediton, EX17 3AP, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1363 633000 Fax: +44 (0) 1363 636063

Web: www.ejackson.co.uk

Errekappa Euroterapici S.p.A. Via C. Menotti 1/A, 20129 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 7491345 Fax: +39 02 715734

Esp. Medicinales Northia S.A.C.I.F.1.A. Madero 135, 1408 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46440911 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46427975

esparma GmbH Lange Gohren 3, 39171 Osterweddingen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 39205 420 Fax: +49 (0) 39205 42240

Email: info@esparma.de Web: www.esparma.de
Esplanade-Apotheke Esplanade 18, A-4820 Bad Ischl, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 6132 23427 Fax: +43 (0) 6132 2342716

Eu Rho OTC Pharma GmbH Kamen Karree 32-34, 59174 Kamen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 2307 2020 Fax: +49 (0) 2307 202155

Euroderm Laboratorios S.R.L. Emilio Mitre 1790/94, 1424 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 49213310 Fax: +54 (0) 11 49248090

Euroderm S.r.l. V.le Italia 147, 19126 La Spezia, Italy.

Tel: +39 0187 777276 Fax: +39 0187 778424

Web: www.euroderm.net

Euroderm-RDC S.p.A. P.le Aquileia 8, 20144 Milan (Ml), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 335728 Fax: +39 02 33572818

Eurofarma Laboratorios Ltda Rua Bardo do Triunfo 1440, 04602-005 Sdo
Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 50908600

Email: euroatende@eurofarma.com.br

Fax: +49 (0) 6101 539315
Web: www:engelhard-am.de

Fax: +55 (0) 11 50908742
Web: www.eurofarmalaboratorio.com.br
Europharm Jochen-Rindt-Strasse 23, A-1230 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 61684250 Fax: +43 (0) 1 616842510

Europharm Trade Kft Kovirdzsa ut 5, 1163 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 4024204 Fax: +36 4024205

Eversil Produtos Farmacéuticos Industria e Comércio Ltda Rua Agostinho
Teixeira de Lima 344, 04826-230 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 59284199
Expanscience Pol. Ind. Los Olivos, Adaptacidn 33, Getafe, 28906 Madrid, Spain.
Tel: +34 91 6011070 Fax: +34 91 6011076

Email: infomustela@expanscience.es Web: www.mustela.com

E-Z-EM Canada Inc. 17 065 L-H Lafontaine, Anjou, H1) 2Z4, Canada.

Tel: +1 514 3535820 Fax: +1 514 3533450

Email: info@ezemcanada.com Web: www.ezemeanada.com

CF)

F. Joh. Kwizda Fffingergasse 21, A-1160 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 48855 Fax: +43 (0) 1 48855320

F Trenka Chemisch-Pharmazeutische Fabrik GmbH Goldeggassee 5, A-1040
Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 50503410 Fax: +43 (0) 1 505034131

F, Uhlmann-Eyraud SA 28 chemin du Grand-Puits, 1217 Meyrin 2/Geneva,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 22 9893100 Fax: +41 (0) 22 9893105

Faes Farma Alpedrete 24, 28045 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 4680800 Fax: +34 91 4685934

Web: www.faes.es

Falqui Prodotti Farmaceutici S.p.A. Via Fabio Filzi 8, 20124 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 67078288 Fax: +39 02 6694509

F.A.M.A. Istituto Chimico Biologico S.r.1. Via A. Sauli 21, 20127 Milan, Italy.
Tel: +39 02 2846802 Fax: +39 02 26824535

Faran Laboratories S.A. Achaias & Troizinias, 145 64 N. Kifisia, Greece.

Tel: +30 210 6269200 Fax: +30 210 8071688

Email: faran@faran.gr Web: www.faran.gr

Web: www.eversil.com.br

----- PAGE 679 -----
Appendix 5

Fardi Grassot 16, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2073751 Fax: +34 93 4570717

Email: lab@fardi.es Web: www.fardi.es

Farm Vilar ZAO Grina ul. 7, 117216 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 7121081 Fax: +7 095 7121072

Web: www.farmvilar.ru

Farma Lepori Osi 7-9, 08034 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2534500 Fax: +34 93 3940900

Email: farmalepori@finaf92.¢s Web: wwwfarmalepori.com
Farmaceutici Ecobi s.a.s. Via E. Bazzano 26, 16019 Ronco Scrivia (GE), Italy.
Tel: +39 010 935280 Fax: +39 010 9350679

Email: ecobi@aleph.it

G.B. Panzera S.r.l. Via de Sanctis 71, 20141 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 89502462 Fax: +39 02 89502459

Farmachimici S.r.1. Via Mercanti 36, 84121 Salerno, Italy.

Tel: +39 089 252389 Fax: +39 081 5552728

Email: info@farmachimici.it Web: www.farmachimici.it

Farmalab Industrias Quimicas e Farmacéuticas Ltda Av. BrigADEIRO Faria
Lima 1811, 12 degrees andar, 01451-001 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 30970012 Fax: +55 (0) 11 30952357

Email: cientifico@farmalabchiesi.com.br Web: www.farmalabchiesi.com.br
Farmalight, Lda Rua Padre Américo 18, Escritorio 1, 1600-548 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 7122240 Fax: +351 21 7122245

Email: farmalight@farmalight.pt Web: www.farmalight.pt

Farmanova AFM S.r.|. Via Flaminia 287 Sc. A. int.10, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 3210307 Fax: +39 06 3212996

Email: farmanova@tiscali.it Web: www.farmanova.org

Farmasan Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. Pforzheimer Str. 5, 76227 Karlsruhe,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 721 40050 Fax: +49 (0) 721 4005500

Farmasierra S.A. Ctra de Irun Km 26.2, San Sebastian de Los Reyes, 28100
Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 6570659

Email: farmasierra@farmasierra.com
Farmasur Pol Store C/H 28-A, 41008 Seville, Spain.

Farmigea Industria Chimico Farmaceutica S.p.A. Via G. Oliva n. 8, 56121
Ospedaletto-Pisa, Italy.
Tel: +39 050 31211
Email: info@farmigea.it
Farmila-Thea Farmaceutici S.p.A. Via E. Fermi 50, 20019 Settimo Milanese
(Ml), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 335501 Fax: +39 02 3285160

Web: www.farmila.it

Fax: +34 91 6539805
Web: www.farmasierra.com

Fax: +39 050 3121.
Web: www-farmigea.it

Farmion Laboratério Brasileiro de Farmacologia Ltda Avenida Celso dos
Santos 579, 04658-240 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 55620742 Fax: +55 (0) 11 55620742

Farmo Quimica del Pacifico SA Av. Grecia 2208, Nunoa, Santiago, Chile.

Farmoquimica Baldacci, SA Rua Duarte Galvdo 44, 1549-005 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 7783031 Fax: +351 21 7785457

Farmoterapica Dovalle Industria Quimica Farmacéutica Ltda Rodovia SC
438 Km 3, 88701970 Tubarao, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 48 6280337

Febena Pharma GmbH Oskar-Jager-Str. 115, 50825 Cologne, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 221 9544770 Fax: +49 (0) 221 9544775

Email: info@febena.de Web: www.febena.de

Fed. Arg. de Coop. Farm. Av. Pte. Peron 2742, 1754 San Justo, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 44825522 Fax: +54 (0) 11 44825549

Felton, Grimwade & Bickford P/L P.O. Box 74, Oakleigh South, VIC 3167,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 3 95627711
Web: www.fgb.com.au
Ferlito Farmaceutici, Divisione Palmares S.p.A. Via E Ramarini 31-33, 00016
Monterotondo Scalo (RM), Italy.
Tel: +39 06 9060327

Email: ferlitoromaced@kosmos.it
Ferrer Farma Edifici L’illa, Diagonal 549. 5a planta, 08029 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 6003700 Fax: +34 93 4907078

Email: ferrerfarma@ferrergrupo.com Web: wwwferrergrupo.com

Ferring Arzneimittel GmbH Wienerbergstrasse 11, A-1100 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 60808 Fax: +43 (0) 1 6080880

Web: www.ferring.com

Fax: +61 (0) 3 95627291

Fax: +39 06 9060932
Web: www.ferlitofarmaceutici.it

Ferring Portuguesa, Lda Rua Professor Henrique de Barros, Edificio Sagres, 8 -
Sala A, 2685-338 Prior Velho, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 9405190

Web: www.ferring.com

Ferring S.A. de C.V. Av. Nemesio Diez Riega Mza. 2 Lote 15, Col. Parque
Industrial Cerrillo Il, 52000 Lerma, Mexico.

Tel: +52 728 2825636 Fax: +52 728 2825635

Web: www.ferring.com

Fher,
Italy.
Tel: +39 055 86501 Fax: +39 055 8650222

FIC Medical Krasnopresnenskaya nab. 12, Gostinitsa International-2, Of. 742,
123610 Moscow, Russia.
Tel: +7 095 2582006
Email: fmv@aha.ru
FidesLine Biologische Heilmittel Heel GmbH Dr.-Reckeweg-Str. 2-4, 76532
Baden-Baden, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7221 501200
Web: www.fides.de

Fidia Farmaceutici S.p.A. Via Ponte della Fabbrica 3/A, 35031 Abano Terme
(Padua), Italy.

Tel: +39 049 8232111 Fax: +39 049 810653

Fischer Pharmaceuticals Ltd P.O. Box 39071, Tel Aviv 61390, Israel.

Tel: +972 3 6772081 Fax: +972 3 6776959

Email: info@dr-fischer.com Web: www.dr-fischer.com

FIT Pharma GmbH Humboldstr. 4, 32756 Detmold, Germany.

Email: info@docsalbe.de Web: www.docsalbe.de

Fitobucaneve S.r.I. Via Galvani 25/27, 20018 Sedriano (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 90111001 Fax: +39 02 90111003

Flordis Pty Ltd Level 2, 3 Carlingford Rd, Epping, NSW 2121, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 98694111 Fax: +61 (0) 2 98694155

Email: flordis@flordis.com.au Web: www.flordis.com.au

Floris , Misgav 20179, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 4 9991333 Fax: +972 (0) 4 9991336

Fontovit Laboratorios Ltda Rua Antdnio das Chagas 862, 04714-001 Sdo
Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 51829655

Email: fontovit@fontovit.com.br
Forder Lab. Esp. Dermatologicas Rivadavia 5747 Piso 5 Dto.A, 1406 Cdad.,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 44319702 Fax: +54 (0) 11 44319702
franconpharm Arzneimittel GmbH Alexandrinenstr. 1, 96450 Coburg,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 9561 20615 Fax: +49 (0) 9561 20617

Frank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries) LtdFrank Roberts (Herbal Dispensaries
Ltd) Dean Street, , Bristol, BS2 8FR, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 117 942 8704 Fax: +44 (0) 117 944 1297

Email: info@robertsherbalmedicines.co.uk

Web: www.robertsherbalmedicines.co.uk

Fritz Zilly GmbH Eckbergstr. 18, 76534 Baden-Baden, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7221 73734 Fax: +49 (0) 7221 73733

Fujisawa Deutschland GmbH Berg-am-Laim-Str. 129, 81673 Munich,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 454401

Email: info@fujisawa-deutschland.de
Fujisawa GmbH Linzerstrasse 221/E0.2, A-1140 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 87726680 Fax: +43 (0) 1 8771636
Web: wwwfujisawa.at

@

G. Pohl-Boskamp GmbH & Co. Kieler Str. 11, 25551 Hohenlockstedt, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 4826 590 Fax: +49 (0) 4826 59109

Web: www.pohl-boskamp.de

G. Streuli & Co. AG , 8730 Uznach, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 55 2859292 Fax: +41 (0) 55 2859290
Galactopharm Hans Sanders Sudstr. 10, 49751 Sogel, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 5952 9250 Fax: +49 (0) 5952 9251

Email: infos@galactopharm.de Web: www.galactopharm.de
Galderma Mexico S.A. de C.V. Jose Maria Ibarraran No. 20, Col. San Jose
Insurgentes, 03900 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55934355 Fax: +52 55 55933420

Web: www-galderma.com.mx

Fax: +351 21 9405199

ione della Boehringer Ingelheim Casella Postale, 50100 Florence,

Fax: +7 095 2582007
Web: www.aha.ru

Fax: +49 (0) 7221 501160

Fax: +55 (0) 11 51829604
Web: www.fontovit.com.br

Fax: +49 (0) 89 45441329
Web: www.fujisawa-deutschland.de

----- PAGE 680 -----
Galen Ltd Seagoe Industrial Estate, Craigavon, BT63 SUA, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 28 3833 4974 Fax: +44 (0) 28 3835 0206

Email: galen@galen.co.uk Web: wwwgalenple.com

GD Tecnologie Interdisciplinari Farmaceutiche S.r.l. Via Augusto Gaudenzi
29, 00163 Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39 06 66418170
Web: www.gditalia.biz
Gebro Pharma GmbH , A-6391 Fieberbrunn, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 5354 53000 Fax: +43 (0) 5354 53500710

Email: pharma@gebro.com Web: www.gebro.com

Gebro Pharma SA Postfach 397, 4410 Liestal, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 9268833 Fax: +41 (0) 61 9268844

Email: info@gebro.ch Web: www.gebro.com

Gelcaps Exp. de Mexico SA de CV Circuito Centro Civico 27, 53100 Naucalpan
de Juarez Ciudad Satel, Mexico.

General Nutrition Canada 6299 Airport Td, Ste 201, Mississauga, L4V 1N3,
Canada.

Fax: +39 06 66415358

Generfarma Los Centelles 7, 46006 Valencia, Spain.
Tel: +34 96 3742212 Fax: +34 96 3951982

Georg Simons GmbH Bunsenstr. 1, 82152 Planegg/Martinsried, Germany.
Tel: £49 (0) 89 8991620 Fax: +49 (0) 89 8575742
Email: simons@merz.de Web: www.simons.de

Geritrex Corp. 144 Kingsbridge Rd East, Mt Vernon, NY 10550, USA.

Tel: +1 914 668 4003 Fax: +1 914 668 4047

Email: info@geritrex.com Web: wwwageritrex.com

German Remedies Ltd Shivsagar Estate ‘A’, Dr Annie Besant Rd, Worli, Mumbai
400 018, India.

Tel: +91 (0) 22 4935528 Fax: +91 (0) 22 4950327

Web: www.germanremedies.com

Germania Pharmazeutika GmbH Schuselkagasse 8, A-1150 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 9823399 Fax: +43 (0) 1 982339924
Gerot-Pharmazeutika GmbH Arnethgasse 3, A-1160 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 48535050 Fax: +43 (0) 1 4857773
Gervasi Farmacia C/Juan XXIII 15-19, 08950 Brcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 4809911
Geymonat S.p.A. Via S. Anna 2, 03012 Anagni (FR), Italy.
Tel: +39 0775 768081 Fax: +39 0775 768082
Giovanardi Farmaceutici S.n.c. del Dr Benito Giovanardi e Figli Via Sapeto
28, 16131 Genoa, Italy.
Tel: +39 010 381651
Email: info@giovanardi.net
i S.p.A. Via Figini 41, 20053 Muggio (MI), Italy.
Fax: +39 039 2782958
Web: www.ogna.it

Fax: +39 010 393248
Web: www.giovanardi.net
Giovanni Ogna & Fi:
Tel: +39 039 2782954
Email: ogna@ogna.it
Gisand AG Schlaflistrasse 14, 3013 Berne, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 31 3323113

Giuliani S.p.A. Via Palagi 2, 20129 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 20541 Fax: +39 02 2054297

GlaxoSmithKline Av. Andres Bello 2687, Las Condes, Santiago, Chile.
GlaxoSmithKline Private Bag 10-6600, Downtown, Aukland, New Zealand.
Tel: +64 (0) 9 3672900 Fax: +64 (0) 9 3672910

Web: www.gsk.co.nz

GlaxoSmithKline Talstrasse 3-5, 3053 Munchenbuchsee, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 31 8622111 Fax: +41 (0) 31 8622200

Web: www.glaxosmithkline.ch

GlaxoSmithKline 5 Moore Drive, P.O. Box 13398, Research Triangle Park, NC
27709, USA.

Tel: +1 215 751 4000
GlaxoSmithKline Brasil Ltda Estrada dos Bandeirantes 8464, 22783-110 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 21 24446000
Web: www.gsk.com.br
GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare 2030 Bristol Circle, Oakville, L6H 5V2,
Canada.

Tel: +1 905 8292030
Web: wwwegsk.ca
GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare 980 Great West Rd, Brentford, TW8
9BD, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 20 8047 5000
Web: www.gsk.com

Web: www.gsk.com

Fax: +55 21 24446001

Fax: +1 905 8296064

Fax: +44 (0) 20 8990 4328

Suppliers Directory

GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare GmbH & Co. KG Bussmatten 1,
77815 Buhl, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7223 760

Web: www.gsk-consumer.de
GlaxoSmithKline Mexico S.A. de C.V. Calz. Mexico-Xochimilco No. 4900,
Deleg. Tlalpan San Lorenzo Huipulco, 14370 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 4838300 Fax: +52 55 54838629

Web: www.gsk.com.mx

GlaxoSmithKline Pharma Albert-Schweitzer-Gasse 6, A-1140 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 970750 Fax: +43 (0) 1 97075198
Web: www.gsk.com

GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals (India) Ltd Dr Annie Besant Rd, Mumbai
400 025, India.

Tel: +91 (0) 22 4933871
Web: www.gsk.com

GlaxoSmithKline S.A. Carlos Casares 3690, 1644 Victoria, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47258900
Web: www.gsk.com

Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Ltd 801-813, 8th Floor, Mahalaxmi Chambers, 22
Bhulabhai Desai Rd, Mumbai 400 026, India.

Tel: +91 (0) 22 4964893 Fax: +91 (0) 22 4932648

Web: www.glenmarkpharma.com

GNLD International P/L P.O. Box 419, Beenleigh, Qld 4207, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 7 38053499 Fax: +61 (0) 7 38052728
Web: www.gnld.com.au

Gordon Laboratories 6801 Ludlow St, Upper Darby, PA 19082-2408, USA.
Tel: +1 610 734 2011 Fax: +1 800 347 5678

Web: www.gordonlabs.com

Gothaplast Verbandpflasterfabrik GmbH Postfach: 100132, 99851 Gotha/
Thuringen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 3621 30650 Fax: +49 (0) 3621 306530

Email: gothaplast@aol.com Web: www.gothaplast.de

GPL Ginsana Products Lugano SA, Tochterunternehmen der Pharmaton
SA Postfach, 6903 Lugano, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 91 6103111 Fax: +41 (0) 91 6103211

Web: www.pharmaton-sa.ch

G.R. Lane Health Products Ltd Sisson Rd, Gloucester, GL1 3QB, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1452 524012 Fax: +44 (0) 1452 507930
Web: www.laneshealth.com

Graf Fruttasan AG Untere Etzmatten 16, 4467 Rothenfluh/BL, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 61 9959595 Fax: +41 (0) 61 9959590
Email: info@fruttasan.ch Web: www.fruttasan.ch

Grafton Pharmasia Pte Ltd 66 Tannery Lane, 01-05A Sindo Building, S 347805,
Singapore.

Tel: +65 6841 3606

Web: www.grafton.com.sg

Great Eastern Healthcare Ltd 9/F, Blk A Kerry BCI Godown, 3 Kin Chuen St,
Kwai Chung, Hong Kong.
Tel: +852 24818832

Email: gehl@gehl.com.hk

Great Liaison Ltd Unit 705, Fibres & Fabrics Industrial Ctr, 7 Shing Yip St, Kwun
Tong, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

Tel: 4-852 28516662 Fax: +852 28505314

Greater Pharma Ltd Part 46, 46/1-2 Soi Charansanitwongs 40, Bangyikhan,
Bangkok 10700, Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 433 0256

Email: greater@mozart.inet.co.th

Fax: +49 (0) 7223 764000

Fax: +91 (0) 22 4935358

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47460244

Fax: +65 6841 7526

Fax: +852 26101483

Fax: +66 2 433 0076

Greenpharma Quimica e Farmacéutica Ltda Quadra 2-A Modulos 32/35
DAIA, 75133-600 Anapolis, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 62 3106400 Fax: +55 (0) 62 3106401

Email: greenpharma@greenpharma.com.br

Web: www.greenpharma.com.br

Group Laboratories SA (Pty) Ltd 27 Wrench Rd, Isando, South Africa.
Grunenthal Chilena Ltda Av. Providencia 727, Providencia, Santiago, Chile.

Griinenthal Lda Rua Alfredo da Silva no 16, 2610-016 Amadora, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4726300 Fax: +351 21 4710910

Web: www.grunenthal.com

Griinenthal Venezolana C.A. Av. 1, Torre Centro Profesional Los Samanes Piso
6, Urb. Los Samanes, Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 9498511 Fax: +58 (0) 212 9450201

Email: info@grunenthal.com.ve Web: www.grunenthal.com.ve

----- PAGE 681 -----
Appendix 5

Grupo Farma S.A. Av. Principal, Los Ruices, Edif. Farma, Urb. Los Ruices, Caracas
1071, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2026200
Web: www.grupofarma.com
Gulf Pharmaceutical Industries, Julphar P.O. Box 997, Ras Al Khaimah, United
Arab Emirates.

Tel: +971 7 2461461
Web: wwwjulphar.com

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2377456

Fax: +971 7 2462462

Gynea Laboratorios Avda Cataluna 127 B, 08184 Palau-Solita i Plegamans,
Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 8639560
Email: gynea@gynea.com

cH)

Hamilton Pharmaceuticals P/L P.O. Box 7, Adelaide, SA 5001, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 8 82232957 Fax: +61 (0) 8 82321480
Email: enquire@hamiltonlabs.com.au Web: www.hamiltonlabs.com.au

Fax: +34 93 8646853
Web: www.gynea.com

Hanseler AG Industriestrasse 35, 9100 Herisau, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 71 3535858 Fax: +41 (0) 71 3535800
Web: www.haenseler.ch

Harras Pharma Curarina Arzneimittel GmbH Am Harras 15, 81373 Munich,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 7473670
Email: mail@harraspharma.de
Hautel S.A. Warnes 829 Dto. A, 1414 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 48556753

Health Imports Ltd Binbrook Mill, Young Street, Bradford, BD8 9RE, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1274 488511

Health Perception Ltd Lakeside Business Park, Swan Lane, Sandhurst, GU47
9DN, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1252 861454 Fax: +44 (0) 1252 861455
Email: queries@health-perception.co.uk Web: www:health-perception.co.uk

Fax: +49 (0) 89 74736719
Web: www:harraspharma.de

Healthy Direct Unit C, Empress Park, 179 Empress Road, Southampton, SO14
OJX, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 800 107 5757

Email: customercare@healthydirect.co.uk

Fax: +44 (0) 800 O11 1132

Hebron S.A. Industria Quimica e Farmacéutica Rua Ribeiro de Brito 573, 6
andar, 51021-310 Recife, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 81 34649294

Email: hebron@hebron.com.br

Fax: +55 (0) 81 34649268
Web: www:hebron.com.br

Helago-Pharma GmbH Rheinallee 11, 53173 Bonn, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 228 956940 Fax: +49 (0) 228 956949

Email: helago@t-online.de Web: wwwhelago.de

Helixor Heilmittel GmbH & Co. Fischermuhle 1, 72348 Rosenfeld, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7428 9350 Fax: +49 (0) 7428 935102

Email: mail@helixor.de Web: www.helixor.de

Hennig Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Liebigstr. 1-2, 65439 Florsheim am
Main, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6145 5080

Email: medwiss@hennig-am.de
Herbal Concepts Ltd 2 Park St., Woburn, MK17 9PG, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1525 292345 Fax: +44 (0) 1525 292346

Email: contactus@herbal-concepts.co.uk Web: www.herbal-concepts.co.uk

Herbal Laboratories Ltd Malew House, 21 Malew St., Castletown, IM9 1AD, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1624 827885 Fax: +44 (0) 1624 824623

Web:
Herbalist & Doc Gesundheitsgesellschaft mbH Waldseeweg 6, 13467 Berlin,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 40008100
Email: info@herbalist-doc.com
Herbamed AG Untere Au, 9055 Buhler, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 71 7918050 Fax: +41 (0) 71 7933720

Email: herbamed@access.ch Web: www.herbamed.ch

Herbarium Laboratério Botanico Ltda Rua Maua 838, 80030-200 Curitiba,
Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 41 2545450 Fax: +55 (0) 41 2546511

Email: decex@herbarium.net Web: www.herbarium.com.br

Fax: +49 (0) 6145 508140
Web: www:hennig-am.de

ywwherballaboratories.com

Fax: +49 (0) 30 40008500
Web: www:herbalist-doc.com

Herbert Bregenzer Am Damm 20, A-6820 Frastanz, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 5522 51127 Fax: +43 (0) 5522 5112721

Herbes Universelles 7, 70e Ave O, Blainville, J7C 1R7, Canada.
Tel: +1 514 4357514

Herbion Pakistan PVT Ltd Miklukho-Maklaya ul. 8, str. 3, 117198 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 7812073
Web: wwwherbion.com
Herbs Trading GmbH Novinskii boulevard, d.3, str. 1, 121099 Moscow, Russia.
Tel: +7 095 7979660 Fax: +7 095 7979661

Web: www bittner.ru

Hermes Arzneimittel GmbH Georg-Kalb-Str. 5-8, 82049 Grosshesselohe/
Munich, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 791020

Web: www.hermes-arzneimittel.de
Herron Pharmaceuticals P/L P.O. Box 95, Brisbane Market, QLD 4106,
Australia.

Fax: +61 (0) 7 38483650
Hevert-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG /n der Weiherwiese 1, 55569 Nussbaum,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6751 9100
Email: info@hevert.de
Hexal AG 3, ul. Kulneva, 121170 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 787-85-88 Fax: +7 095 787-85-92
Email: hexal@hexal.ru Web: www.hexal.ru

Fax: +7 095 7814569

Fax: +49 (0) 89 79102280

Web: www.herron.com.au

Fax: +49 (0) 6751 910150
Web: www:hevert.de

Hexal Argentina S.A. Paseo Colyn 221 Piso 7, 1063 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 43342080 Fax: +54 (0) 11 43342084

Web: www.hexal.com.ar

Hexal do Brasil Ltda Av. Itaborai 1425, 04135-001 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 11 55917600 Fax: 11 55946485

Email: hexal.brasil@hexal.com.br Web: www.hexal.com.br

Hexal Hungaria Kft Timdr u 20, 1034 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 4302890 Fax: +36 4302899

Hexal Pharma GmbH Wilhelminenstrasse 91/II F, A-1160 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 4869622 Fax: +43 (0) 1 486962233

Web: www.hexal.at

Higaté Medical Argentina Av. Eva Peron 3052, 1650 San Marten Villa Libertad,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45126841

Hilary's Distribution Ltd 145 Idema Rd, Markham, L3R 1A9, Canada.

Tel: +1 905 4755446 Fax: +1 905 4750377

Hind Wing Co. Ltd Unit No 11038, 11/F, Block B, Seaview Estate, 2-8 Watson
Rd, North Point, Hong Kong.
Tel: +852 25410909

Email: hindwing@netvigator.com
Hi-Tech Pharmacal 369 Bayview Ave, Amityville, NY 11701, USA.

Tel: +1 631 789 8228 Web: www.hitechpharm.com
Hoeveler Mag. & Co. GmbH Mosham 40, A-4943 Geinberg, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 7723 42305 Fax: +43 (0) 7723 4230515
Hofmann & Sommer GmbH & Co. KG Lindenstr. 11, 07426 Konigsee,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 36738 42762 Fax: +49 (0) 36738 42798

Email: hofmannundsommer@t-online.de Web: www.hofmannundsommer.de
Holista Health Corp PO Box 57525, Coquitlam, V3K SY9, Canada.

Tel: +1 604 4223500 Fax: +1 888 6684252

Web: www.holistahealth.com

Fax: +852 28540695

Holland and Barrett Samuel Ryder House, Townsend Drive, Attleborough Fields,
Nuneaton, CV11 6XW, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 870 606 6606

Email: healthinformation@hollandandbarrett.com

Web: www.hollandandbarrett.com

HomGopathisches Laboratorium A. Pfliiger GmbH Bielefelder Str. 17, 33378
Rheda-Wiedenbruck, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 5242 92820
Email: info@pflueger.de

Fax: +49 (0) 5242 55932
Web: www:pflueger.de

Hong Kong Medical Supplies Ltd 7/F China Aerospace Centre, 143 Hoi Bun Rd,
Kwun Tong, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 28063112

Email: info@hkmedsup.com.hk

Horna Business Service Narcisovd 2/850, 106 00 Prague 10, Czech Republic.
Tel: +420 (0) 2 72654588

Hoyer-Madaus GmbH & Co. KG Alfred-Nobel-Str. 10, 40789 Monheim,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2173 483100

Email: information@hoyer-madaus.de

Fax: +852 28873425

Fax: +49 (0) 2173 483198
Web: www:hoyer-madaus.de

----- PAGE 682 -----
HPC Harras Pharma Curarina Worbstrasse 221, 3073 Gumligen, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 31 9513313 Fax: +41 (0) 31 9516465

Hubert A.C. Thomas & Co. Burry Port, SA16 OTB, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1554 835512

HWS-OTC-Service GmbH Steindorf 65, A-5570 Mauterndorf, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 6472 20076 Fax: +43 (0) 6472 2007641

Ibefar Inst. Brasileiro de Esp. Ftcas. Ltda Rua Franca Pinto 1357, 04016-035
Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 55718855 Fax: +55 (0) 11 5571 2343

ICIM International S.r.l. Via Peloritana 28, 20024 Garbagnate Milanese (Ml),
Italy.

Tel: +39 02 9947931 Fax: +39 02 99479340

ICN Czech Republic as Truhldrskd 13-15, 110 00 Prague 1, Czech Republic.
Tel: +420 (0) 2 21434111 Fax: +420 (0) 2 21434214

Email: info@icnpharm.cz Web: www.ienpharm.cz

IDS (Hong Kong) Ltd Healthcare Division 14/F Lifung Ctr, 2 On Ping St, Siu
Lek Yuen, Shatin, Hong Kong.
Tel: +852 26355555

Web: www.idsmarketing.com
Imgroma BV Aldebert van Scharnlaan 170 A-2, 6224 JX Maastricht,
Netherlands.

Indoco Remedies Ltd Indoco House, 166 CST Rd, Santacruz (East), Mumbai
400 098, India.

Tel: +91 (0) 22 6541851
Web: www:indoco.com

Fax: +852 26375818

Fax: +91 (0) 22 6523976

Industria Farmacéutica Andrémaco, S.A. de C.V. Andromaco No. 104, Col.
Ampliacién Granada, Deleg. Miguel Hidalgo, 11520 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55457285 Fax: +52 55 55450727

Web: www.andromaco.com.mx

Industria Terapeutica Splendore - Oftalmoterapica ALFA Via F.Ili Bandiera
26, 80026 Casoria (NA), Italy.
Tel: +39 081 5846060

Email: alfaintes@alfaintes.it

Fax: +39 081 5842526

Infabra Industria Farmacéutica Brasileira Ltda Av. das Americas 8.445
Conj.803, 22793-080 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 24876305 Fax: +55 (0) 21 24876309

Web: www.infabra.com.br

Infosint S.p.A. C. Dir. Colleoni, Pal. Pegaso 2, 20041 Agrate Brianza (Ml), Italy.
Tel: +39 039 6892207 Fax: +39 039 6892246

Email: infosint@tiscalinet.it

Inkeysa Juan XXIII 15, Esplugas de Llobregat, 08950 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4809911 Fax: +34 93 3726551
Email: inkeysa@inkeysa.es Web: www:inkeysa.es

Institut Biochimique SA Via del Piano, 6915 Pambio-Noranco, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 91 9857776 Fax: +41 (0) 91 9857686
Email: info@ibsa.ch Web: www.ibsa.ch

Instituto de Medicamentos e Alergia IMA Ltda Rua Araujo Leitao 193,
20715-310 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 25010248 Fax: +55 (0) 21 22181651

Instituto Sanitas Arg. SACIPQ y M. Saladillo 2452, 1440 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46873663 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46874065

Instituto Sanitas SA Avda Americo Vespucio 1260, Quilicura, Santiago, Chile.
Instituto Seroterapico Argentino S.A.I.C. Av. Larrazabal 1848, 1440 Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46838888 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46838888

Instituto Terapeutico Delta Ltda Rua Engenheiro Guilherme Cristiano Frendez
827, 03477-000 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 67245311 Fax: +55 (0) 11 67246480

Interdelta SA Case postale 791, 1701 Fribourg, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 26 4665126 Fax: +41 (0) 26 4667400

Interpharm GmbH Fffingergasse 21, A-1160 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 48855 Fax: +43 (0) 1 48855320

Intersan GmbH EFinsteinstr. 30, 76275 Ettlingen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7243 1840 Fax: +49 (0) 7243 18439

Investi Farma S.A. Lisandro de la Torre 2160, 1440 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 43342080 Fax: +54 (0) 11 43342080

IP Farma Sas Via Vigna 6, 80078 Pozzuoli (NA), Italy.
Tel: +39 (0) 815269226 Fax: +39 (0) 815269899

Suppliers Directory

Ipsen EpE 63 AG. Dimitriou St., 174 56 Alimos, Greece.

Tel: +30 210 9843324 Fax: +30 210 9887911

Web: www.ipsen.com

Ipsen NV Guldensporenpark 87, 9820 Merelbeke, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 9 2439600 Fax: +32 (0) 9 2204473

Web: www.ipsen.com

Ipsen Pharma Ctra Laurea Miro 395, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, 08980 Barcelona,
Spain.

Tel: +34 93 6858100
Web: www.ipsen.com
Ipsen Pharma GmbH EFinsteinstr. 30, 76275 Ettlingen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7243 18480 Fax: +49 (0) 7243 18439

Email: info@ipsen-pharma.de Web: www.ipsen-pharma.de

Ipsen Portugal, SA Rua General Ferreira Martins, Alameda Ferndo Lopes 16-11,
Miraflores, 1495-136 Algés, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4123550

Web: www.beaufour-ipsen.com
Iromedica AG Haggenstrasse 45, 9014 St Gallen, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 71 2741800 Fax: +41 (0) 71 2741801

Email: info@iromedica.ch Web: www.iromedica.ch

Isdin Chile Ltda Carmencita 25 Of. 82, Las Condes, Santiago, Chile.

Isdin Lda Rua da Ilha dos Amores, Lote 4.08.01,X, Parque das Na¢oes - Zona
Norte, Santa Maria dos Olivais, 1990-118 Lisbon, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 8950084 Fax: +351 21 8950101

Iso-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Bunsenstr. 6-10, 76275 Ettlingen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7243 10603 Fax: +49 (0) 7243 106169

Email: info@iso-arznei.de Web: www:iso-arznei.de

Istituto Biologico Chemioterapico SpA Via Crescentino 25, 10154 Turin, Italy.
Tel: +39 (0) 112440011 Fax: +39 (0) 112485341

Email: info@abcfarmaceutici.it Web: www.abcfarmaceutici.it

Istituto di Medicina Omeopatica S.p.A. Via Vincenzo Monti 6, 20123 Milan,

Italy.
Tel: +39 02 909313250 Fax: +39 02 909313211

Web: www.omeoimo.it

Fax: +34 93 6851011

Fax: +351 21 4123551

Email: imo@omeoimo.it
Istituto Ganassini S.p.A. di Ricerche Biochimiche Via Gaggia 16, 20139
Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 5357041

Email: istituto@ganassini.it
Ivax AC Dmitrovskii per. 9, Business-Centre Stoleshniki, et. 5, 103031 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 2349713
Web: www.ivax.com

Ivax Argentina SA J/ Castelli 6701, 1605 Munro, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Ivax Pharmaceuticals Inc. 4400 Biscayne Blvd, Miami, FL 33137, USA.

Tel: +1 305 575 6000 Web: www.ivaxpharmaceuticals.com
Ivax Pharmaceuticals Mexico S.A. de C.V. Calz de Hueso 859, Ex-Hacienda
Coapa, 14100 Mexico D.F., Mexico.
Tel: +52 55 5990000

Web: www.ivax.com

Ivax-CR a s Kézvetlen Kereskedelmi Képviselet Berlini ut 47-49, 1045
Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 3993343 Fax: +36 3993494

Ivax-CR as Pod Habrovou 3, 152 00 Prague 5, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 51007111 Fax: +420 (0) 2 51007110

Web: www.ivax.cz

Oo

J. McGloin P/L P.O. Box 294, Kings Grove, NSW 2208, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 95023777 Fax: +61 (0) 2 95022054

J. Pickles & Sons Beech House, 62 High St, Knaresborough, HGS OEA, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1423 867314 Fax: +44 (0) 1423 869177

Email: enquiries@jpickleshealthcare.com Web: www.jpickleshealthcare.com
Jacobson Medical (Hong Kong) Ltd 15/F China Trade Ctr, 122-124 Wai Yip St,
Kwun Tong, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 28271616 Fax: +852 25072829

Email: Jacobson@jacobsonmedical.com.hk

Jamieson Laboratories 4025 Rhodes Drive, Windsor, N8W 5B5, Canada.

Tel: +1 519 9748482 Fax: +1 519 9744742

JDH Pharmaceutical Division 279 Jalan Ahmad Ibrahim, 03-01, S 639938,
Singapore.

Tel: +65 6566 1188

Email: jdhpharm@sg_lfdis.com

Fax: +39 02 534106
Web: www:ganassini.it

Fax: +7 095 2349711

Fax: +52 55 6170038

Fax: +65 6861 7307

----- PAGE 683 -----
Appendix 5

JDH Pharmaceutical Sdn Bhd Lifung Centre, Lot 6, Persiaran Perusahaan
Seksyen 23, Kawasan Perusahaan Shah Alam, 40300 Shah Alam, Malaysia.
Tel: +60 (0) 3 55417748 Fax: +60 (0) 3 55421486

Jenapharm GmbH & Co. KG Otto-Schott-Str. 15, 07745 Jena, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 3641 645 Fax: +49 (0) 3641 646085
Email: jenapharm@jenapharm.de Web: www.jenapharm.de

Jengimiel C.A. Calle Capitolio, Edificio Indelca, piso 3, local E, Boleita Sur,
Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2354715

Email: informacion@jengimiel.com
Jessup Marketing 27 Old Gloucester St, London, WCIN 3XX, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1932 854825 Fax: +44 (0) 1923 850519

Email: mail@jessup.co.uk Web: www.jessup.co.uk

Jofadel Ind. Farmacéutica S.A. Av. Jose da Frota Vasconcelos 100, 37062-500
Varginha, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 35 2141522
Web: www.jofadel.com.br
Johannes Biirger Ysatfabrik GmbH Herzog-Julius-Str. 83, 38667 Bad
Harzburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 5322 4444
Email: info@ysat.de

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2388302
Web: www:jengimiel.com

Fax: +55 (0) 35 2142380

Fax: +49 (0) 5322 780229

Johnson & Johnson Consumer Products Co. 199 Grandview Rd, Skillman, NJ
08558-9418, USA.
Tel: +1 732 524 0400

Johnson & Johnson/Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals of Canada 890
Woodlawn Rd W, Guelph, N1K 1AS, Canada.

Tel: +1 519 8266300 Fax: +1 519 8266202

Web: www.jnjgateway.com

Jukunda Naturarzneimittel Dr Ludwig Schmitt GmbH & Co. KG Hofmarkstr.
35, 82152 Planegg, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 8993450
Email: info@jukunda.de

@

Kameliya NPP OOO Gostinichnyi prospekt d. 6, korp. 2, 127106 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 2219202
Web: www.kamelia.ru

Web: www.jnj.com

Fax: +49 (0) 89 89934520
Web: www.jukunda.de

Email: kamelia@astelit.ru

Kedrion S.p.A. Localita ai Conti Barga, 55020 Castelvecchio Pascoli (LU), Italy.
Tel: +39 0583 19691 Fax: +39 0583 766121

Kelemata S.p.A. Via S Quintino 28, 10121 Turin, Italy.
Tel: +39 011 5160411 Fax: +39 O11 9976512

Kemiprogress S.r.l. Via Aurelia 58, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39 06 39383101 Fax: +39 06 39383131

Kestrel Healthcare Ltd Ashfield House, Resolution Rd, Ashby de la Zouch, LE65
THW, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1530 562301
Email: kestrel @ventiv.co.uk

Key Pharmaceuticals P/L P.O. Box 121, Concord West, NSW 2138, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 97363811 Fax: +61 (0) 2 97363316

Email: orc@keypharm.com.au Web: www:keypharm.com.au

Kley Hertz SA Rua Comendador Azevedo 224, 90220-150 Porto Alegre, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 51 33468488 Fax: +55 (0) 51 33468488

Web: www.grupohertz.com

KLI Corp. 1119 Third Ave SW, Carmel, IN 46032, USA.

Tel: +1 317 846 7452 Fax: +1 317 846 1676
Email: info@entertainers-secret.com Web: wwwentertainers-secret.com

Fax: +44 (0) 1530 562430

Kneipp (Schweiz) GmbH Schwarzackerstrasse 2, 8304 Wallisellen, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 1 8833860 Fax: +41 (0) 1 8833864
Email: info@kneipp-schweiz.ch Web: www.kneipp-schweiz.ch

Kneipp-Werke , 97064 Wurzburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 931 80020 Fax: +49 (0) 931 8002104
Email: info@kneipp.de Web: www.kneip.de

Knoll Australia 15 Orion Road, Lane Cove, NSW 2066, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 94279900

Knoll Lusitana, Lda Rua Alfredo da Silva 3 C/D, 1300-040 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 3616350 Fax: +351 21 3616378

Knoll SA Produtos Quimicos e Farmacéuticos Estrada dos Bandeirantes 2400,
27710-104 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 24442525 Fax: +55 (0) 11 24442517

Konsyl Pharmaceuticals 8050 Industrial Park Rd, Easton, MD 21601, USA.
Tel: +1 410 822 5192 Fax: +1 410 820 7032
Email: sales@konsyl.com Web: www.konsyl.com

Korangi S.A. Parque Empresarial Primovel Edificio A1, r/c Albarraque, 2635-595
Rio de Mouro, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 9251901 Fax: +351 21 9251905

Korhispana PS/ Can Politic 17 3, Hospitalet de Llobregat, 08907 Barcelona,
Spain.

Tel: +34 93 3358167

Web: wwwkorhispana.com
Kotra Pharma (M) Sdn Bhd No. 7 Jin TTC 12, Cheng Industrial Estate, 75250
Melaka, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 6 3362222

Web: www.kotrapharma.com

Fax: +34 93 3351822

Fax: +60 (0) 6 3366122

Kottas-Heldenberg Mag. R.u. Sohn Bavernmarkt 24, A-1014 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 531210

Krauterpfarrer Kunzle AG , 6573 Magadino, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 91 7430340 Fax: +41 (0) 91 7434034

Krewel Meuselbach GmbH Krewelstr. 2, 53783 Eitorf, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2243 870 Fax: +49 (0) 2243 87175

Email: medzin@krewel-meuselbach.de | Web: www.krewel-meuselbach.de

Krewel Meuselbach GmbH Nam. gen. Kutlvasra 6, 140 00 Prague 4, Czech
Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 41404181
KRKA d.d. ul. 2-ya Zvenigorodskaya, d. 13, Str. 41, et. 5, 125009 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 7396600
Email: info@krka.ra
Kur- und Stadtapotheke Oberer Stadtplatz 5, A-6060 Hall in Tirol, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 5223 57216 Fax: +43 (0) 5223 43316

@

La Serranita, Lab. de Esp. Medic. y Cosmet. Calle 49 3752, 1653 Villa
Ballester, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47674297 Fax: +54 (0) 11 47644891

Lab. Argenfarma S.R.L. LLavallol 2649, 1417 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45029504 Fax: +54 (0) 11 45029504

Lab. Baliarda S.A. Alberti 1283, 1247 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43081450 Fax: +54 (0) 11 43080281

Web: www.baliarda.com.ar

Lab. Cevallos Salud S$.R.L. Zapiola 2836/40, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 45433335 Fax: +54 (0) 11 45440637

Lab. Dr. Madaus & Co. SA Av. Luis Maria Campos 585, 1426 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47711734 Fax: +54 (0) 11 47754380

Lab. Ducto Ind. Farm. Ltda Rua VPR 3 Quadra 2-A, Modulos 20/21 DAIA,
75133-600 Anapolis, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 62 3105700
Email: ducto@ducto.com.br

Lab E J Gezzi SRL 14 de Julio 855 OB Dto. 2, 1427 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Lab. Fabra S.R.L. Carlos Villate 5271, 1605 Munro, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 47567293 Fax: +54 (0) 11 47564153

Lab. Ferro Av. Mate de Luna 4333, 4000 S.M. de Tucuman, Tucuman,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 381 4350214 Fax: +54 (0) 381 4355281

Lab. Fortbenton Co. S.A. Escalada 133, 1407 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 46829376 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46829314

Web: www.fortbenton.com.ar

Lab. Garden House S.A. Estomba 1058/60, 1427 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 4: Fax: +54 (0) 11 45547749

Lab. Hexa-Medinova S.A. Helguera 254/58, 1406 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 46116845 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46133013

Lab. Incaico SA Montiel 156, 1408 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46413632 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46417310

Lab. Lacefa S.A.I.C.A. Ladines 2263/7, 1419 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45740444 Fax: +54 (0) 11 45713103

Lab. Lafage S.R.L. J. E. Uriburu 61, 1027 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 49539168 Fax: +54 (0) 11 49538076

Lab Medstyle SA Monsenor Felix Cabrea 42 Of. 1, Providencia, Santiago, Chile.

Email: krewel@vol.cz

Fax: +7 095 7396601
Web: wwwkrka.ru

Fax: +55 (0) 62 3105757
Web: www.ducto.com.br

----- PAGE 684 -----
Lab. Natufarma Av. Cordoba 1745, 3080 Esperanza, Santa Fe, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 3496 420153 Fax: +54 (0) 3496 420153

Web: www.natufarma.com.ar

Lab. Panalab S.A. Argentina Av. Del Libertador 6250 Piso 2, 1428 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47885717

Lab. Pharma del Plata S.R.L. Valentin Torra 5450, 3100 Pque.Ind.G. Belgrano,
Entre Rios, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 343 4262104

Lab. Primula S.A. Andonaegui 1141, 1427 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45230031

Lab. Raymos S.A.1.C. Vuelta de Obligado 2775, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 47812552 Fax: +54 (0) 11 47882625

Web: www.raymos.com

Lab. Roux-Ocefa S.A. Montevideo 79/81, 1019 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43830067 Fax: +54 (0) 11 43814661

Lab. Serch S.R.L. Av. Arturo Illia 668, 1706 Haedo, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 46588456 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46586876

Lab. Temis Lostalé S.A. Zepita 3178, 1285 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 63441300 Fax: +54 (0) 11 63441390

Web: www.temislostalo.com.ar

Lab Thalgo Nutrition Domaine des Chdtaigniers, 83520 Roquebrune-sur-
Argens, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 94197373
Web: www.thalgo.com

Laboratoire Atlas 900 Blvd des Sciences, Suite 200, St-Leonard, H1H 1H1,
Canada.

Tel: +1 514 2547188 Fax: +1 514 2543006

Laboratoire Golaz SA Case postale 1067, 1701 Fribourg-Moncor, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 26 4076111 Fax: +41 (0) 26 4011485

Laboratoire RTA SA chemin du Signal 18, 1071 Chexbres, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 21 9643430 Fax: +41 (0) 21 9643431

Email: rta.jlv@bluewin.ch

Fax: +33 (0) 4 94816012

Laboratoires Aérocid 248 bis, rue Gabriel-Peri, 94230 Cachan, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 41986700 Fax: +33 (0) 1 45479445

Laboratoires Arkopharma B.P. 28, 06511 Carros cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 4 93291128 Fax: +33 (0) 4 93291162
Web: www.arkopharma.com

Laboratoires Asepta 17 bd Prince-Héréditaire-Albert, MC 98000, Monaco.
Tel: +377 92057551 Fax: +377 92052484
Web: www.asepta.com

Laboratoires Bailly SPEAB 60 rue Pierre-Charron, 75008 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 44951495 Fax: +33 (0) 1 44951490
Laboratoires Belges Pharmacobel SA Ave de Scheut 46-50, 1070 Brussels,
Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 2 5243966 Fax: +32 (0) 2 5216071

Laboratoires Besins International 13 rue Perier, 92120 Montrouge, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 47353510 Fax: +33 (0) 1 47353891
Laboratoires Bio2 99 bvd des Belges, 69006 Lyon, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 472740785 Fax: +33 (0) 4 78523890

Email: info@bio2labo.com Web: www.bio2labo.com
Laboratoires Biocom 44 bd Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.
Laboratoires Bouchara-Recordati 68 rue Marjolin, 92302 Levallois-Perret,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 45191000

Laboratoires CCD 60 rue Pierre-Charron, 75008 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 44951495 Fax: +33 (0) 1 44951490

Web: www.ccd-lab.com

Laboratoires Chauvin Bausch & Lomb 416 rue Samuel-Morse, B.P. 1174,
34009 Montpellier cdx 1, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 4 67123030

Web: www.bausch.com

Fax: +33 (0) 4 67123031

Laboratoires Chefaro-Ardeval 2-4 rue de Chaintron, 92542 Montrouge cdx,
France.

Laboratoires Clément-Thékan 2-4 rue Chaintron, B.P. 850, 92542 Montrouge
cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 55481800 Fax: +33 (0) 1 55481801

Laboratoires Clément-Thionville 6 rue Joffre, B.P. 60028, 57101 Thionville
cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 82827673 Fax: +33 (0) 3 82827677

Suppliers Directory

Laboratoires Codifra 18 av. Dutarte, 78150 de Chesney, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 39238920 Fax: +33 (0) 1 39439659

Laboratoires CS Dermatologie 35 rue d’Artois, 75008 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 53761111 Fax: +33 (0) 1 53761212

Laboratoires d’Evolution Dermatologique 7 rue d’Aguesseau, 75008 Paris,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 44560007 Fax: +33 (0) 1 44560008

Laboratoires DB Pharma 1 bis, rue du Cdt-Riviére, 94210 La Varenne-St-Hilaire,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 48832514 Fax: +33 (0) 1 48832757

Laboratoires Dergam 6 rue Saint-Nicolas, 75012 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 43437911 Fax: +33 (0) 1 43437911

Email: dergam@wnandoo.fr

Laboratoires Dermatologiques Uriage 98 av de la Republique, 92400
Courbevoie, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 55701900
Laboratoires Dexo 179 bureaux de la Colline, 92213 Saint-Cloud cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 41121700 Fax: +33 (0) 1 41121701

Laboratoires Dolisos 45 place Abel Gance, 92100 Boulogne, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 5 62477700
Laboratoires Dolisos Italia S.r.l. Via Pontina Vecchia km 34,200, 00040 Ardea
(Rome), Italy.

Tel: +39 06 91602810
Email: dolisos@dolisos.it
Laboratoires du Dermophil Indien B.P. 9, 61600 La Ferte-Mace, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 2 33306550 Fax: +33 (0) 2 33380632

Laboratoires Fournier SA 153 rue de Buzenval, 92380 Garches, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 47108800 Fax: +33 (0) 1 47108801

Web: www.groupe-fournier.com

Laboratoires Fuca 7 bis, rue de Plaisance, 94732 Nogent-sur-Marne cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 43247070

Laboratoires Fumouze Le Malesherbes, 110-114 rue Victor-Hugo, 92303
Levallois-Perret cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 49684100

Laboratoires Gabriel Lesourd 6 rue Ste-Isaure, 75018 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 46064108

Laboratoires Gilbert av. du Général-de-Gaulle, B.P.115, 14204 Heérouville-
Saint-Clair cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 2 31471515
Web: www.groupebatteur.fr
Laboratoires GlaxoSmithKline 100 rte de Versailles, 78163 Marly-le-Roi cdx,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 39178000
Web: wwwgsk.fr
Laboratoires Hépatoum 8B.P. 5, 03270 Saint-Yorre, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 70588400

Laboratoires Holistica International 465 chemin des Jalassiéres, 13510
Equilles, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 42951717
Web: www.holistica.fr

Web: www:labo-uriage.com

Web: www.dolisos.fr

Fax: +39 06 91821345
Web: www.dolisos.it

Fax: +33 (0) 2 31439500

Fax: +33 (0) 1 39171758

Fax: +33 (0) 4 42951718

Laboratoires Innotech International, Sté du groupe Innothéra 7-9 av
Francois-Vincent-Raspail, B.P. 32, 94111 Arcueil cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 46152920 Fax: +33 (0) 1 45464015

Email: innotech@innotechinternational.fr

Web: www.innotechinternational.fr

Laboratoires IPRAD 42-52 rue de I’Aqueduc, 75010 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 40051188

Laboratoires Jaldes 10 ac de Poussan, B.P. 30, 34770 Gigean cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 4 67789898 Fax: +33 (0) 4 67781087
Laboratoires Jolly-Jatel 28 av. Carnot, 78100 Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 34510083

Laboratoires Klorane Les Cauquillous, B.P. 100, 81506 Lavaur cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 5 63588800 Fax: +33 (0) 5 63588672
Laboratoires Legras 114 Bis, rue Michel-Ange, 75016 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 47047852

Laboratoires Lehning 1-3 rue du Petit-Marais, 57640 Sainte-Barbe, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 3 87767224 Web: www.lehning.com

Laboratoires Leurquin Mediolanum 68/88 rue Ampere, 93330 Neuilly-sur-
Marne, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 49442929
Web: www.mediolanum-farma.com

Fax: +33 (0) 1 49442914

----- PAGE 685 -----
Appendix 5

Laboratoires Liérac 35 av Franklin-Roosevelt, 75008 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 53939906 Fax: +33 (0) 1 53939901

Laboratoires Madaus 55 bis, quai de Grenelle, Immeuble Mercure Ill, 75015
Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 56771900 Fax: +33 (0) 1 56771919

Laboratoires Magistra SA 28 Chemin du Grand-Puits, Case postale 122, 1217
Meyrin 2/Geneva, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 22 7825542 Fax: +41 (0) 22 7850443

Laboratoires Mazal Pharmaceutique 117 rue Rontgen, B.P. 1309, 29000
Quimper cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 2 98535455

Laboratoires Médix 18 rue Saint-Mathieu, 78550 Houdan, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 30881600 Fax: +33 (0) 1 30881380

Laboratoires Michel Iderne Parc d’activités Rosenmeer, 67560 Rosheim,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 88480055

Laboratoires Monin-Chanteaud Parc Euromedecine Il, rue de la Valsiére, 34099
Montpellier cdx 5, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 67041106

Laboratoires Motima 19 rue de Passy, 75016 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 42249873 Fax: +33 (0) 1 45203814

Email: motima@club-internet.fr

Laboratoires Nogués 43 rue de Neuilly, 92000 Nanterre, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 47241501

Laboratoires Norgine Pharma 23 av. de Neuilly, 75116 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 44174888 Fax: +33 (0) 1 44174896

Email: norgine.pharma.france@norgine.com

Web: www.norgine.com

Laboratoires Novartis Nutrition B.P. 29, 31250 Revel, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 5 62187283 Fax: +33 (0) 5 62187284

Web: www.novartisnutrition.com

Laboratoires Pfizer 23-25 av. du Dr-Lannelongue, 75668 Paris cdx 14, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 58073000 Fax: +33 (0) 1 58073440

Web: www.pfizer.com

Laboratoires Pharmaceutiques Trenker SA Ave Dolez 480-482, 1180 Brussels,
Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 2 3740253
Email: info@trenker.be
Laboratoires Pharmafarm 73 av de la Porte d’Italie, 75648 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 46461920 Fax: +33 (0) 1 46461922

Laboratoires Pharmygiéne-SCAT 2-4 rue Chaintron, B.P. 850, 92542
Montrouge cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 55481800 Fax: +33 (0) 1 55481801

Laboratoires Phytomedica Z/ Les Milles, B.P. 5000, Parc d’activités de Pichaury,
13791 Aix-en-Provence cdx 3, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 4 42245624

Email: info@phytomedica.com
Laboratoires Phytoprevent 75 av. de Segur, 75007 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 53868600 Fax: +33 (0) 1 56582152
Laboratoires Pierre Fabre 45 place Abel-Gance, 92100 Boulogne, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 5 63714500 Fax: +33 (0) 5 63725066

Web: ww
Laboratoires Pionneau , 33870 Vayres, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 5 57748501

Laboratoires Plan SA Chemin de la Verseuse 1, Case postale 208, 1219 Aire-
Geneva, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 22 7961585
Email: pharma@plansa.com
Laboratoires Plantes et Médecines Le Payrat, 46000 Cahors, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 5 63516800 Fax: +33 (0) 5

Laboratoires Richard rue du Progrés, ZI des Reys de Saulce, 26270 Saulce-sur-
Rhone, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 75631720 Fax: +33 (0) 475632007

Laboratoires Robert Schwartz Parc d‘Innovation, Illkirck, 67400 Strasbourg,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 88673232 Fax: +33 (0) 3 88661129

Laboratoires Roche Nicholas 33 Rue de I|Industrie, 74240 Gaillard, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 4 50877070 Fax: +33 (0) 4 50877077

Web: www.roche.com

Laboratoires Rosa-Phytopharma 68 rue Jean-jaques-Rousseau, 75001 Paris,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 45080242

Fax: +32 (0) 2 3746881
Web: wwwtrenker.be

Fax: +33 (0) 4 42245628
Web: www:phytomedica-labo.com

ierre-fabre.com

Fax: +41 (0) 22 7961586

Laboratoires Rottapharm 83-85 bd Vincent-Auriol, 75013 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 56619461 Fax: +33 (0) 1 56619462

Web: www.rotta.com

Laboratoires Sodia av. Robert Schuman, 51100 Reims, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 26790000 Fax: +33 (0) 3 26790009

Email: sodia@wanadoo.fr

Laboratoires Théa 12 rue Louis-Bleriot, 63016 Clermont-Ferrand cdx 2, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 473981436 Fax: +33 (0) 4 73981438

Web: www.laboratoires-thea.fr

Laboratoires Theratech 6 rue Dubais, 27000 Evreux, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 2 32311714

Laboratoires Toulade av. du Docteur-Aubry, 76280 Criquetot-L’Esneval, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 2 35287874 Fax: +33 (0) 2 35287872

Laboratoires Tradiphar 176 rue de I’Arbrisseau, 59000 Lille, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 20971370 Fax: +33 (0) 3 20970970

Email: contact@tradiphar.com Web: www.tradiphar.com

Laboratoires Weleda 9 rue Eugene-Jung, 68330 Huningue, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 89696800 Fax: +33 (0) 3 89696899

Web: www.weleda.com

Laboratoires Zambon France 13 rue René-Jaques, 92138 Issy-les-Moulineaux,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 58044141
Web: www.zambongroup.com

Fax: +33 (0) 1 58044100

Laboratori Gambar S.r.1. Via Bolognola 45, 00138 Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39 06 8804548 Fax: +39 06 8804537

Laboratori Guidotti S.p.A. Via Livornese 897, 56010 Pisa La Vettola (PI), Italy.
Tel: +39 050 971011 Fax: +39 050 9710306
Web: wwwilabguidotti.it

Laboratori Italiani Vaillant S.r.1. Via Cavalieri V. Veneto 241, 21040 Cislago
(VA), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 96382620 Fax: +39 02 96380208

Laboratorio A.M. Farma Activ Italia 743, 2000 Rosario, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 341 4255580

Laboratério Americano de Farmacoterapia S/A Rua Nova York 245, 04560-
908 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 50496200 Fax:
Web: www.farmasa.com.br

5S

(0) 11 50496266

Laboratorio Biotecnoquimica Calle 10 con 5 Edif. Walpirema, Piso 1, La
Urbina, Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2410545 Fax: +58 (0) 212 2427662

Email: btq@biotecnoquimica.com Web: www.biotecnoquimica.com
Laboratério Catarinense S.A. Rua Doutor Jodo Colin 1053, 89204-001
Joinville, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 47 4519036
Email: sac@labeat.com.br
Laboratério Daudt Oliveira Ltda Rua Simoes da Mota 57, 21540-100 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 24502878
Email: odontis@odontis.com.br
Laboratorio di Chimica Medica dell’ Antipiol S.n.c. Via S. Benigno 26, 10154
Turin, Italy.

Tel: +39 (0) 11 201141 Fax: +39 (0) 11 2428028

Laboratério Dinafarma Ltda Avenida Major Alvim 155, 12942550 Atibaia,
Brazil.

Fax: +55 (0) 11 44131814

Laboratorio DNR Farma SRL Hipolito Vieytes 147, 1603 Villa Martelli, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Laboratorio Dr. Lazar & Cia. S.A. Av. Velez Sarsfield 5855, 1605 Carapachay,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 47620181
Web: www.lazar.com.ar
Laboratorio Elea S.A.C.1.F.yA. Sanabria 2353 Piso 1, 1417 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43794300

Web: www.laboratorioelea.com.ar
Laboratorio Esp. Med. Knop Ltda Av. Lib. Bdo. O’higgins 1671, Santiago,
Chile.

Laboratorio Farmaceutico Master SA Av. /rarrazaval 2821, Torre A, Of. 1001,
Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorio Farmaervas Ltda Rua Saldanha Marinho 161, 3055020 Sdo
Paulo, Brazil.

Fax: +55 (0) 47 4519090
Web: wwwilabcat.com.br

Fax: +55 (0) 21 3901772
Web: www:odontis.com.br

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47620181

Fax: +54 (0) 11 43794333

----- PAGE 686 -----
Laboratorio Fitolife $.r.1. Via Domiziana km 55, 80072 Arco Felice Pozzuoli
(NA), Italy.

Tel: +39 081 8042385
Email: info@fitolife.it
Laboratério Gross S.A. Rua Padre Ildefonso Penalba 389, 20775-020 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 25973112
Email: gross@gross.com.br
Laboratério Hepacholan S.A. Av. Manoel Monteiro de Araujo 1051, Vila
Jaguara, 05113-020 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 36214122 Fax: +55 (0) 11 36219595

Laboratério lodo Suma Ltda Rua Maximiliano Fraga 35, 36880-000 Muriae,
Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 32 7223155

Laboratério J. Neves, Lda Parque Industrial do Seixal, 2840-069 Paio Pires,
Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 2134800

Email: evazlabjneves@mail.eunet.pt

Laboratorio Koni-Cofarm SA Crescente Errazuriz 2077, Nunoa, Santiago, Chile.

Fax: +39 081 8042838
Web: www.fitolife.it

Fax: +55 (0) 21 25973112
Web: www.gross.com.br

Fax: +351 21 2134899

Laboratorio Leti $.A.V. 2a Av., Parcela 3, Manzana | Edif. Leti, Guarenas,
Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 3622424
Email: myanez@leti.com.ve

Fax: +58 (0) 212 3624545
Web: www.leti.com.ve

Laboratorio Medinfar, SA Rua Manuel Ribeiro da Pavia 1 - 1, Venda Nova,
2700-547 Amadora, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 4748228

Web: www.medinfar.pt

Fax: +351 21 4751736

Laboratério Neo Quimica Comércio e Industria Ltda Rua VPR 1 Quadra 2-A,
Modulo 4 DAIA, 75133-600 Anapolis, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 62 3102500 Fax: +55 (0) 62 3161022

Web: www.neoquimica.com.br

Laboratério Phos-Kola Ltda Rua das Laranjeiras 984, 49010-000 Aracaju,
Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 79 2119798

Laboratorio Prater SA Av. P Aguirre Cerda 5291, Cerrillos, Santiago, Chile.
Laboratorio Schering-Plough Burgos 80, Las Condes, Santiago, Chile.
Laboratério Sedabel Ltda Rodovia Washington Luiz 1308 Km 4.5, 25085-000
Duque de Caxias, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 26713636
Web: www.sedabel.com.br
Laboratorio Sim6es Ltda Rua Pereira de Almeida 102, 20260-100 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 501055: Fax: +55 (0) 21 5027000

Laboratério Sinterapico Industrial e Farmacéutico Ltda Rua Olegario Cunha
Lobo 25, 12940-000 Atibaia, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 44110333 Fax: +55 (0) 11 44133313

Laboratorio Terapeutico M.R. S.r.l. Via Domenico Veneziano 13, 50143
Florence, Italy.

Tel: +39 055 714724
Email: labtermr@tin.it
Laboratério Teuto-Brasileiro Ltda VP 7-D Modulo 11 Quadra 13, 75133-600
Anapolis, Brazil.

Email: trade@teuto.com.br
Laboratorio Walker S.R.L. E. Zeballos 249, 2000 Rosario, Santa Fe, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 341 4492945
Laboratorio Wunderpharm S.R.L. Remedios 5322, 1440 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46356078 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46352891
Laboratorio Ximena Polanco Dresden 4640, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios Andromaco SA Av. Quilin 5273, Penalolen, Santiago, Chile.

Email: sedabel@sedabel.com.br

Fax: +39 055 708371
Web: www.mr-online.it

Web: www.teutointernational.com

Web: www.laboratoriowalker.com.ar

Laboratorios Andrémaco S.A.1.C.I. Ingeniero Huergo 1145, 1107 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43076000
Web: www.andromaco.com.ar

Fax: +54 (0) 11 43620725

Laboratorios Bagé S.A. Bernardo de Irigoyen 248, 1072 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43442000
Web: www.bago,com.ar
Laboratérios Baldacci $.A. Rua Pedro de Toledo 520, 04039-001 Sdo Paulo,
Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 50854444

Fax: +54 (0) 11 43442086

Suppliers Directory

Laboratorios Basi R.do do Padrdo 98, 3000-312 Coimbra, Portugal.
Tel: +351 239 827021 Fax: +351 239 492845
Email: basi@basi.com.pt

Laboratorios Beta S.A. Av. San Juan 2266, 1232 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 59216200 Fax: +54 (0) 11 59216299
Web: www.betalab.com.ar

Laboratérios Biosintetica Ltda Av das Nacdes Unidas 22.428, Predio 30,
04795-916 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 55466822 Fax: +55 (0) 11 55466812

Email: biosintetica@biosintetica.com.br_ Web: www.biosintetica.com.br

Laboratorios Biotech C.A. Calle del Arenal Edif. Biotech, Urb. La Trinidad,

Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 9035400 Fax: +58 (0) 212 9035690 5
Web: www.biotech.com.ve

Laboratorios Chile SA Av. Marathon 1315, Nunoa, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios Cofasa $.A. Urbanizacion Industrial Lebrun, Edificio Cofasa, 4to.
Piso, Caracas, Venezuela.
Tel: +58 (0) 212 2566344
Email: info@laboratoriocofasa.com

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2568464
Web: www:laboratoriocofasa.com

Laboratorios Columbia de Argentina SA Cervantes 2950, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Laboratorios Dermatologicos Darier S.A. de C.V. Av. Insurgentes sur 3579
Torre 3, Piso 8, M Hidalgo La Joya Olimpica, 14020 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 53505555 Fax: +52 55 53505538

Email: atencionaclientes@darier.com.mx Web: www.darier.com.mx

Laboratorios DHU Ibérica, S.A. Pol Ind Francolm Parcela 3, Nave 1-2, Apartado
de Correos 1082, 43006 Tarragona, Spain.

Tel: +34 977 550542 Fax: +34 977 550848

Email: marketing@dhu.es Web: www.dhu.es

Laboratorios Diviser-Aquilea S.L. Pont Reixat 5, Saint Just Desvern, 08960
Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4733000 Fax: +34 93 4332092

Email: aquilea@aquilea.com Web: www.aquilea.com

Laboratorios Elmor S.A. Av. Eugenio Mendoza, Centro Letonia, Piso 16, La
Castellana, Apartado Postal 80444, Caracas 1062, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2638233 Fax: +58 (0) 212 2672910

Email: servicioalcliente@elmor.com.ve | Web: www.laboratorioselmor.com.ve

Laboratorios Excelentia S.A. Santo Domingo 4088, 1437 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 49119114 Fax: +54 (0) 11 49119114

Laboratorios Farmasa, S.A. de C.V. Bufalo No. 27, Col. del Valle, 03100 Mexico
D.F., Mexico.
Tel: +52 55 55247451 Fax: +52 55 55246789

Laboratorios Flupal C.A. Parcelamiento Industrial La Fe Parcel a Nro. B23,
Macarao, Caracas 1000 A, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 4319360 Fax: +58 (0) 212 4335482

Laboratérios Gemballa Ltda Avenida Sete de Setembro 50, 89160-000 Rio do
Sul, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 47 5318040 Fax: +55 (0) 47 5318002

Laboratérios Goulart S.A. Rua Aguape 56, Parada de Lucas, 21010-080 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 24851960

Laboratorios Gramén /ntendente Amaro Avalos 4208, 1605 Munro, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47627600

Web: www.gramon.com.ar
Laboratorios Grisi Hermanos, S.A. de C.V. Calle Amores No. 1746, Col. del

Valle, Deleg. Benito Juarez, 03100 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 56299902 Fax: +52 55 55341003

Web: www.grisi.com.mx

Laboratorios Grossman S.A. de C.V. Blvd Manuel Avila Camacho 40, P.20 T.Es,
Miguel Hidalgo Lomas de Chapulte, 11000 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Laboratorios Hochstetter SA Dardignac 6, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios Hormona S.A. de C.V. Blvd. M. Avila Camacho No.470, Col. San
Andres Atoto, 53500 Naucalpan de Juarez, Mexico.
Tel: +52 55 55762511 Fax: +52 55 55765467

Laboratorios Ifusa S.A. Francisco Lorenzana 20, Col. San Rafael, Deleg.
Cuauhtemoc, 06470 Mexico D.F., Mexico.
Tel: +52 55 57051410 Fax: +52 55 55353961

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47627605

----- PAGE 687 -----
Appendix 5

Laboratérios Inibsa, SA Sintra Business Park, Zona Industrial da Abrunheira,
Edificio 1 - 2, 2710-089 Sintra, Portugal.

Tel: +351 219 112730 Fax: +351 219 112023

Email: inibsa@inibsa.pt Web: www.inibsa.com

Laboratorios Intra S.A. Av. Principal 50-75, Barrio Los Estanques Maracaibo,
Zulia, Venezuela.
Tel: +58 (0) 61 348826 Fax: +58 (0) 61 343357

Laboratorios Klinger do Brasil Ltda Rua Assahy 45, Rudge Ramos, 09633-010
Sdo Bernardo do Campo, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 11 43624660

Web: wwwlabklinger.com.br
Laboratorios L.O. Oftalmi C.A. Edificio Santo Domingo, Calle 6, Zona Industrial
La Urbina, Apto 66285, Caracas 1061-A, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2424747 Fax: +58 (0) 212 2427446
Web: www.oftalmi.com

Email: marketing@labklinger.com.br

Laboratorios Maver SA Emilio Vaisse 574, Providencia, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios Millet-Franklin S.A. Thames 121 Piso 1 of. 2, 1609 Boulogne,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 47665848
Web: www.milletfranklin.com

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47664774

Laboratérios Osorio de Moraes Ltda Avenida Cardeal Eugenio Pacelli 2281,
32210-001 Contagem, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 31 33610844 Fax: +55 (0) 31 33618045

Laboratorios Parggon S.A. de C.V. Av. Vallarta 7000, Zapopan San Juan de
Ocotan, 45019 Jalisco, Mexico.

Tel: +52 33 36820388

Laboratorios Pasteur Ltda Ignacio Serrano 568, Concepcidn, Santiago, Chile.
Laboratorios Phoenix $.A.1.C.F. Humahuaca 4065, 1192 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43794200
Web: www.phoenix.com.ar

Fax: +54 (0) 11 43794244

Laboratorios Politecnicos Nacionales C.A. Cipreses a Hoyo 109-11, Pso.1 Edif.
El Viejo, Urb. Sta. Rosalia Caracas, Caracas, Venezuela.
Tel: +58 (0) 212 5423384 Fax: +58 (0) 212 5423548

Laboratorios Prieto S.A. Maza 1869/73, 1240 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 49210365 Fax: +54 (0) 11 49210419
Laboratérios Prima Ltda Rua Juparana 62, 20510-040 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 25723855 Fax: +55 (0) 21 25713198

Email: sac@primalab.com.br Web: www.laboratoriosprima.com.br

Laboratorios Quim-Far C.A. Chacaito-Quinta Nueva Segovia, Urb. Bello Monte
Caracas, Caracas, Venezuela.
Tel: +58 (0) 212 9512679 Fax: +58 (0) 212 9513246

Laboratorios Recalcine SA San Eugenio 567, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios Rider SA Placer 1348, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios Rowe-Fleming C.A. Av.La Habana con calle Quito Edif. Vizcaya,
Los Caobos Entrada B Pent House, Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 7932080 Fax: +58 (0) 212 7933404

Laboratorios Saval SA Avenida Presidente Eduardo Frei Montalva 4600,
Santiago, Chile.
Email: lab@saval.cl
Laboratorios Sidus S.A. Av. del Libertador 742, 1638 Vicente Lopez, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47966800
Web: www:sidus.com.ar

Web: www.saval.cl

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47966860

Laboratorios Sigma Chaco 667, 5000 Cordoba Capital, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 351 4224716

Laboratorios Silesia SA Av. Chile Espana 325, Santiago, Chile.

Laboratorios SMB Farma SA Av. Bulnes 377, Dpto 305, Santiago, Chile.
Laboratorios Vincenti C.A. Urb. Industrial Santa Cruz, Calle Roma, Edif., Centro
Proa, Piso 2 Guarenas, Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 3632455 Fax: +58 (0) 212

Email: info@vincentilab.com Web: vincentilab.com

Laboritorios Felipe Bajer S.A.1.C. Alfredo R. Bufano 1265, 1416 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45827920
Lacer Sardenya 350, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4465300 Fax: +34 93 3479009
Web: wwwlacer.es

Laclede Inc. 2030 East University Drive, Rancho Dominguez, CA 90220, USA.

Web: www.laclede.com

Web: www:bajer.com.ar

Lagos Laboratorios Argentina S.R.L. Jorge Newbery 1829, 1426 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47727599
Web: wwwlagoslab.com.ar
Lampugnani Farmaceutici S.p.A. Via Gramsci 4, 20014 Nerviano (Milan),
Italy.

Tel: +39 0331 587354

Email: info@lampugnanifarmaceutici.it
Larkhall Laboratories Forest Road, Charlbury, Chipping Norton, OX7 3HH, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1608 811539 Fax: +44 (0) 1608 811834

Lavipharm Group Agias Marinas St, 190 02 Peania Attica, Greece.

Tel: +30 210 6691106 Fax: +30 210 6691208

Email: comm@lavipharm.gr Web: wwwlavipharm.ge

Leciva as U Kabelorny 130, 10237 Prague 10, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 67241111 Fax: +420 (0) 2 72702402

Email: leciva@leciva.cz Web: wwwleciva.cz

Lek Starokonyushennyi per. 10/10 str. 1, 119002 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 2588484 Fax: +7 095 2588485

Lek Pharma sro Jeseniovd 30, 130 00 Prague 3, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 21421611 Fax: +420 (0) 2 21421629

Email: lekpharma@lek-cz.cz

Leo Pharma A/S Industriparken 55, 2750 Ballerup, Denmark.

Tel: +45 44923800 Fax: +45 44943040.

Web: www.leo-pharma.com

Léro 65 bd du Mal-de-Lattre-de-Tassigny, 92150 Suresnes, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 40991433 Fax: +33 (0) 1 45062764

Leros sro U Narodni galerie 460, 156 15 Prague 5, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 57898111 Fax: +420 (0) 2 57922200

Email: leros@leros.cz Web: wwwleros.cz

Les Grands Espaces Thérapeutiques B.P. 6054, 34030 Montpellier cdx 01,
France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 67070071

Les Laboratoires Bio-Santé 3564 Griffith St, St-Laurent, H4C 1A7, Canada.
Tel: +1 514 7377343 Fax: +1 514 7376878

Lichtenstein Pharmazeutica GmbH & Co. /ndustriestrasse 26, 56218
Mulheim-Karlich, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 261 809030

Web: wwwilichtenstein-pharma.de
Lichtwer Pharma 145 Idema Road, Markham, Ontario, L3R 1A9, Canada.
Tel: +1 905 475 5446 Fax: +1 905 475 0377

Web: wwwilichtwer.de

Lichtwer Pharma AG Wallenroder Str. 8-10, 13435 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 403700 Fax: +49 (0) 30 40370103

Email: info@lichtwer.de Web: www.lichtwer.de

Lichtwer Pharma UK Regency House, Mere Park, Dedmere Rd, Marlow, SL7 1F],
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1628 487780
Web: wwwilichtwer.co.uk
Liferpal MD, S.A. de C.V. Refineria No. 1266, Col. Alamo Industrial, 44490
Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico.

Tel: +52 33 36661228 Fax: +52 33 36661073

Lindopharm GmbH Neustr. 82, 40721 Hilden, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2103 2065 Fax: +49 (0) 2103 206600

Web: www.lindopharm.de

Liptis Pharmaceuticals Inc. 89417 Atlanta Ave., Huntington Beach, CA 92648,
USA.

Email: mail@liptis.com
Lisapharma S.p.A. Via Licinio 11, 22036 Erba (Como), Italy.

Tel: +39 031 641257 Fax: +39 031 644182

Email: lisapharma@lisapharma.it

Lizofarm S.r.l. Via S. Gottardo 37, 20052 Monza (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 039 3900277 Fax: +39 039 389671

Llorens Ciudad de Balaguer 7-11, 08022 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2125312 Fax: +34 93 4174741

Lomapharm, Rudolf Lohmann GmbH KG Langes Feld 5, 31860 Emmerthal,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 5155 63200
Email: service@lomapharm.de
Lopes Produtos Farmaceuticos S.A. Rodovia BR 491, Km 5, Caixa Postal:62,
37002-970 Varginha, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 35 32221233

Fax: +54 (0) 11 47747587

Fax: +39 0331 585588

Fax: +49 (0) 261 8090321

Fax: +44 (0) 1628 487781

Web: wwweliptis.com

Fax: +49 (0) 5155 63210
Web: www:lomapharm.de

----- PAGE 688 -----
LPC Medical (UK) Ltd 30 Chaul End Lane, Luton, LU4 8EZ, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1582 560393 Fax: +44 (0) 1582 560395
Email: info@lpepharma.com Web: www.lpcpharma.com

Luper Inddstria Farmacéutica Ltda Rua Doutor Clementino 608, 03059-030
Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 2917344
Email: luper@luper.com.br

Lysoform Dr. Hans Rosemann GmbH Kaiser-Wilhelm-Str. 133, 12247 Berlin,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 779920
Email: kontakt@lysoform.de

@

M & A Pharmachem Ltd Allenby Laboratories, Wigan Rd, Westhoughton,
Bolton, BL6 2LA, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1942 816184

Email: buy@mapharmachem.co.uk

Fax: +55 (0) 11 66930498
Web: www:luper.com.br

Fax: +49 (0) 30 77992219
Web: wwwilysoform.de

Fax: +44 (0) 1924 813937
Web: www:mapharmachem.co.uk

Madariaga Electronica, 7, Poligono Urtinsa II, Alcorcon, 28923 Madrid, Spain.
Tel: +34 91 6437500 Fax: +34 91 6433990

Madaus FOC 68-82, 08038 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 2988200 Fax: +34 93 2231652
Email: info@madaus.es Web: www.madaus.es

Madaus AG Colonia-Allee 15, 51067 Cologne, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 221 89980 Fax: +49 (0) 221 8998701
Email: info@madaus.de Web: www.madaus.de

Madaus GmbH Lienfeldergasse 91-93, A-1171 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 48016000 Fax: +43 (0) 1 480160025

Madaus Pharma SA Rue des Trois Arbres 16, 1180 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 3704777 Fax: +32 (0) 2 3704774
Email: madaus.pharma@skynet.be Web: www.masaus.com

Madaus S.r.l. Rivera Francia 3/A, 35127 Padua, Italy.
Tel: +39 0496989211 Fax: +39 0496989204
Email: info@madaus.it

Mag. Dr. Till Strallhofer St-Veit-Gasse 56, A-1130 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 8770699 Fax: +43 (0) 1 877069916

Magis Farmaceutici S.p.A. Via Cacciamali 34-36-38, Zona Ind. (Loc. Noce),
25125 Brescia, Italy.
Tel: +39 030 349761 Fax: +39 030 349352

Makros Industria Farmacéutica Ltda Rua Riachuelo 410, 20230-013 Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 22325851

Manx Pharma Ltd Manx House, Spectrum Business Estate, Bircholt Rd,
Maidstone, ME15 9YP, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1622 766389
Web: www.manxhealthcare.com

Fax: +44 (0) 1622 761435

Marco Antonetto S.p.A. Via Arsenale 29, 10121 Turin, Italy.
Tel: +39 011 5613031 Fax: +39 011 5628190

Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau GmbH Doerenkampgasse 11, A-1105
Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 6882161 Fax: +43 (0) 1 688216127

Maria Clementine Martin Klosterfrau Vertriebsgesellschaft mbH , 50606
Cologne, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 221 16520
Web: www:klosterfrau.de

Fax: +49 (0) 221 1652430

Marjan Industria e Comércio Ltda Rua Gibraltar 165, 04755-070 Sdo Paulo,
Brazil.

5 (0) 11 56429888
sac@marjan.com.br

Fax: +55 (0) 11 56416009
Web: www:marjan.com.br

Marvecs Services Srl Via Paracelso 26, 20041 Agrate Brianza, Italy.
Tel: +39 039684641 Fax: +39 039664300

Mauermann-Arzneimittel, Franz Mauermann oHG Heinrich-Knote-Str. 2,
82343 Pocking, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8157 1002

Email: info@mauermann-arznei.de

Fax: +49 (0) $157 4208

Mavena AG Birkenweg 1-8, 3123 Belp, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 31 8185588 Fax: +41 (0) 31 8185590

Mavena GmbH Haubachstrasse 33, 10585 Berlin, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 30 3450693 Fax: +49 (0) 30 34506950
Web: www.mavena.com

Suppliers Directory

Max Zeller S6hne AG, Pflanzliche Heilmittel Seeblickstrasse 4, Postfach 29,
8590 Romanshorn, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 71 4660500
Email: zeller@zellerag.ch

MaxMedic Pharma GmbH & Co. KG Amalienstr. 71, 80799 Munich, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 89 2889060 Fax: +49 (0) 89 28890620

Email: info@maxmedic.de Web: www.maxmedic.de

Mayne Pharma P/L Level 6, 390 St Kilda Road, Melbourne, VIC 3004, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 3 98680700 Web: www.maynegroup.com

Mayrhofer Pharmazeutika Melissenweg 15, A-4021 Linz, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 732 76590 Fax: +43 (0) 732 7659100

MBD Marketing (S) Pte Ltd 371 Beach Rd, 03-30 KeyPoint, S 199597,
Singapore.

Tel: +65 6391 5915

Email: mbdmktg@singnet.com.sg

MD Pharmaceuticals Pte Ltd 896 Dunearn Rd, 04-03 Sime Darby Centre, S
589472, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6460 2753

Email: md777@singnet.com.sg

Meda AB Box 906, 170 09 Solna, Sweden.
Tel: +46 (0) 8 6301900 Fax: +46 (0) 8 6301950
Email: info@meda.se Web: www.meda.se

Fax: +41 (0) 71 4635007
Web: wwwzellerag.ch

Fax: +65 6392 3929

Fax: +65 6469 8979

Meda A/S Bjerkas Industriomrade, 3470 Slemmestad, Norway.
Tel: +47 31294500 Fax: +47 31294545
Web: www.meda.se

Meda Oy Lemminkdisenkatu 32, 20520 Turku, Finland.
Tel: +358 (0) 2 2849900 Fax: +358 (0) 2 2849929
Web: www.meda.fi

Medibrands P.O. Box 531, Yokneam 20692, Israel.
Tel: +972 (0) 4 9590131 Fax: +972 (0) 4 9590028

Medic Herb UK Ltd PO Box 2835, Brewery Courtyard, Draymans Lane, Marlow,
SL7 2XG, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1628 400 608 Fax: +44 (0) 1628 891 701

Email: customercare@medicherb.co.uk | Web: www.medicherb.co.uk

Medic Industrial Farmacéutica Ltda Rua Conselheiro Mayrink 362, 20960-140
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 22414436

Medice, Arzneimittel Putter GmbH & Co. KG Kuhloweg 37, 58638 Iserlohn,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2371 9370
Email: info@medice.de
Medichemie AG Bruhlstrasse 50, 4107 Ettingen, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 7262200 Fax: +41 (0) 61 7262205

Mediherb P/L P.O. Box 713, Warwick, QLD 4370, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 7 46610700 Fax: +61 (0) 7 46610788

Web: www.mediherb.com.au

Medika Lizenz Pharmaz. Praparate Am Alten Weg 20, 82041 Oberhaching,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 6131786 Fax: +49 (0) 89 2606384

Medipharma Homburg GmbH Michelinstr. 10, 66424 Homburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6841 709246 Fax: +49 (0) 6841 709265

Medipharma Ltd, Hong Kong Unit 2409, Tsuen Wan Industrial Ctr, 220-248
Texaco Rd, Tsuen Wan, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 24089171 Fax: +852 24076092

Medispec (M) Sdn Bhd No 55 & 57 Lorong Sempadan 2, Off Boundary Rd,
11400 Ayer Itam, Malaysia.
Tel: +60 (0) 4 827 3450
Web: www.medispec.com.my
Meditec/Sam-On Ltd P.O. Box 1224, Bat-Yam 59602, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 5511925 Fax: +972 (0) 3 5526453
Web: www.meditec.co.il

Fax: +49 (0) 2371 937329
Web: www.medice.de

Fax: +60 (0) 4 827 3453

Medi-Test Imm Azur, 4 rue Rene-Razel, 91400 Saclay, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 1 69411000 Fax: +33 (0) 1 69412241
Web: www.medi-test.fr

Mediwhite Srl Via del Forte Bravetta 98, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Medopharm Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Grunwalderstr. 22, 79098
Freiburg, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7633 909500
Email: info@medopharm.de

Fax: +49 (0) 7633 909505
Web: www:medopharm.de

----- PAGE 689 -----
Appendix 5

medphano Arzneimittel GmbH Maienbergstr. 10, 15562 Rudersdorf,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 33638 7490
Email: info@medphano.de
MedPointe Healthcare Inc 265 Davidson Ave , Suite 300 , Somerset , NJ
08873-4120 , USA.
Tel: +1 732 564 2200
Medtech Lab 120 Harry Walker Parkway N, New Market, L3Y 7B2, Canada.
Megafyt-R sro , Vrané nad Vitavou, Czech Republic.

Melisana AG Ankerstrasse 53, Postfach, 8026 Zurich, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 44 2454350 Fax: +41 (0) 44 2454355
Melisana SA Ave du Four d Briques 1, 1140 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 7261565 Fax: +32 (0) 2 7262970
Email: webmaster@melisana.be Web: www.melisana.be
Memsep sro Strakonickd 1134/13, 150 00 Prague 5, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 57321621

Menarini Alfonso XII 587, Badalona, 08918 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4628800 Fax: +34 93 4628820

Email: info@menarini.es Web: www.menarini.es

Mentholatum Inc. 707 Sterling Dr., Orchard Park, NY 14127, USA.

Tel: +1 716 677 2500 Web: www.mentholatum.com
Mentholatum South Africa (Pty) Ltd 80 Bonza Bay Rd, Beacon Bay 5241,
South Africa.

Web: www.mentholatum.com

Mepha Pharma AG Postfach 445, 4147 Aesch/BL, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 7054343 Fax: +41 (0) 61 7054385

Email: contact@mepha.ch Web: www.mepha.ch

Merck & Co. 7 Merck Dr, White House Station, NJ 08889-1000, USA.

Tel: +1 908 423 1000 Web: www.merck.com

Merck dura GmbH Postfach: 100635, 64206 Darmstadt, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6151 723400 Fax: +49 (0) 6151 723409

Email: merck-dura@merck.de Web: www.merck-dura.de

Merck GmbH Zimbagasse 5, A-1147 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 57600 Fax: +43 (0) 1 5773370

Email: merck-wien@merck.at Web: www.merck.at

Merck KGaA Frankfurter Str. 250, 64271 Darmstadt, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6151 720 Fax: +49 (0) 6151 723250

Email: medizinpartner@merck.de Web: www.medizinpartner.de

Merck Lipha Santé 37 rue St-Romain, 69008 Lyon, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 72782525 Fax: +33 (0) 4 78753905

Web: www.mercksante.fr

Merck Quimica Argentina $.A.1.C. Panamericana Plaza Tronador 4890 Piso 5,
1430 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 45468100
Web: www.merck.com.ar
Merck Quimica Chilena Ltda Francisco de Paula Taforo 1981, Nunoa,
Santiago, Chile.

Merck S.A. Hans Neumann Ed.Corimon p3, Los Cortijos de Lou., Caracas,
Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2351379
Web: www.merck.com
Merck S.A. Industrias Quimicas Estrada dos Bandeirantes 1099, 22710-571
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 24442000
Email: farma@merck.com.br
Merckle GmbH Graf-Arco-Str. 3, 89079 Ulm, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 731 4027426 Fax: +49 (0) 731 4024141

Email: service@merckle.de Web: www.merckle.de

Merz Pharma (Schweiz) AG Postfach, 4123 Allschwil, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 4863600 Fax: +41 (0) 61 4863636

Email: info@merz.ch Web: www.merz.ch

Merz Pharmaceuticals GmbH Eckenheimer Landstr. 100, 60318 Frankfurt
(Main), Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 69 15031

Email: arzneimittelservice@merz.de
Metochem-Pharma GmbH Jochen-Rindt-Strasse 23, A-1230 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 61684250 Fax: +43 (0) 1 616842510

Meyer Productos Terapéuticos S.A. Urb. Ind. Boleita Norte Calle E, Edif. Meyer,
Aptdo. 70008, Caracas 1071-A, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2382633 Fax: +58 (0) 212 2341918

Email: general@meyer.com.ve Web: www.meyer.com.ve

Fax: +49 (0) 33638 74977
Web: www.medphano.de

Web: www.medpointeine.com

Fax: +54 (0) 11 45468199

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2377632

Fax: +55 (0) 21 24452263
Web: www:merck.com.br

Fax: +49 (0) 69 5962150
Web: www.merz.de

Microsules y Bernabo S.A. Terrada 2346, 1416 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 45013278 Fax: +54 (0) 11 45016426
Web: www.microsulesybernabo.com.ar

Midax Italia S.r.1. Via Piave 5, 35010 San Pietro in Gu (PD), Italy.
Tel: +39 049 9455636 Fax: +39 049 9459434
Midro Lorrach GmbH Barenfelser Str. 7, 79539 Lorrach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7621 46415 Fax: +49 (0) 7621 87664
Email: mail@midro.de Web: www.midro.de

Midro Vertrieb AG Uferstrasse 90, 4019 Basle, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 3027036 Fax: +41 (0) 61 3020750
Web: www.midro.com

Milte Italia S.p.A. Via Tadino 29/A, 20124 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 29517803 Fax: +39 02 29517938
Web: www.milte.it

Monserrat y Eclair S.A. Virrey Cevallos 1625/7, 1135 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 43044524

Montavit GmbH Salzbergstrasse 96, A-6060 Absam, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 5223 57926 Fax: +43 (0) 5223 5792611

Web: www.montavit.com

Montefarmaco S.p.A. Via G. Galilei 7, 20016 Pero (Ml), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 39171 Fax: +39 02 33911205

Email: info@montefarmaco.com Web: www.montefarmaco.com

MPL, Marching Pharmaceutical Ltd Units 2,4,8-12, 9/F Block B Vigor Ind Bldg,
14-20 Cheung Tat Rd, Tsing Yi, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 24326993 Fax: +852 24323522

Email: info@marching.com.hk Web: www.marching.com.hk

MPM Medical Inc. 2301 Crown Ct, Irving, TX 75038, USA.

Web: www.mommedicalinc.com

Mr J W Wenig GmbH Van der Nullgasse 22, A-1100 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 604149018

Multilab Ind. e Com. Prods. Farmacéuticos Ltda RS 407 Km 30 No. 1009,

96700-000 Sdo Jeronimo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 51 32304006 Fax:
Web: www:multilab.com.br

55 (0) 51 32304007

mundipharma AS Postboks 218, 1326 Lysaker, Norway.

Tel: +47 67518900 Fax: +47 67518901

Web: www.mundipharma.com

Mundipharma GmbH Apollogasse 16-18, A-1072 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 52325050 Fax: +43 (0) 1 523250544

Web: www.mundipharma.co.uk

Mundipharma GmbH Turisticka 36, 621 00 Brno, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 5 775062 Email: mundipharma@iol.cz
Mundipharma GmbH Mundipharma Str. 2, 65549 Limburg (Lahn), Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6431 7010 Fax: +49 (0) 6431 74272

Email: mundipharma@mundipharma.de Web: www.mundipharma.de
Mundipharma Medical Co St Alban-Rheinweg 74, 4020 Basle, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 61 2051111 Fax: +41 (0) 61 2051187

Email: info@mundipharma.ch Web: www.mundipharma.ch
Mundipharma Oy Rajatorpantie 41 B, 01640 Vantaa, Finland.

Tel: +358 (0) 9 85202065 Fax: +358 (0) 9 85202062

Web: www.mundipharma.com

®

NAM Neukénigsférder Arzneimittel GmbH Moorbeker Strasse 35, 26197
Grossenkneten, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 4435 5067
Email: info@nam.de
Natrol 21471 Prairie Street, , Chatsworth, CA 91311, USA.

Tel: +1 818 739 6000 Email: customer-service@natrol.com
Web: www.natrol.com

Fax: +49 (0) 4435 6166
Web: www:nam.de

Natural Life S.A. Tucuman 3516, 1189 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 41279300 Fax: +54 (0) 11 41279317
Nature Made PO Box 9606, , Mission Hills, CA 91346-9606, USA.
Tel: +1 800 276 2878
Nature’s Bounty 90 Orville Drive, , Bohemia, NY 11716, USA.

Tel: +1 800 433 2990 Email: info@naturesbounty.com
Web: www.naturesbounty.com

Web: www.naturemade.com

Nature’s Resources , , USA.
Nature Made

Naturland Csillagvirdg u 8, 1106 Budapest, Hungary.
Tel: +36 4312040

----- PAGE 690 -----
Naturland Czech Republic sro Kartouzskd 4/200, 15 000 Prague 5, Czech
Republic.

Naturopathica P.O. Box 7096, Sydney, NSW 2001, Australia.

Fax: +61 (0) 2 92790464 Web: www.naturopathica.com.au
Naturpharma SA Sd route des Jeunes, Case postale 8, 1211 Geneva 26,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 22 3004740 Fax: +41 (0) 22 3001396

Naturprodukt Kft DEPO Pf: 8, 2046 Tordkbdlint, Hungary.
Tel: +36 23 336331 Fax: +36 23 336333

Naturwaren OHG , Czech Republic.

Naytsal C/ Molino 2, Meco, 28880 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 8876055 Fax: +34 91 8876054

Email: natysal@pasanet.es Web: www.natysal.com

Neckerman Industria Farmacéutica Ltda Rua das Perobeiras 157, 05879-470
Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 58732890 Fax: +55 (0) 11 58734788

Neo Dermos S.R.L. Francisco Bilbao 1927, 1406 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel: +54 (0) 11 46320717 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46335670
Neo-Farmacéutica, Lda Avenida D Jodo Il, 1990-090 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 7812300 Fax: +351 21 7812390

Email: neofarmaceutica@mail.telepac.pt Web: www.neo-farmaceutica.pt

Neopharm Ltd 8 Hashiloach St, P.O. Box 7063, Petach Tikva 49170, Israel.
Tel: +972 (0) 3 9373737 Fax: +972 (0) 3 9373770

Email: hana.c@neopharmisrael.com Web: www.neopharmisrael.com
Neopharma GmbH & Co. KG Kirchstr. 10, 83229 Aschau i. Chiemgau,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8052 306

Email: neopharma@t-online.de

Neovita S.a.s. di G. Pirotta & C. Via Solferino 4, 21040 Uboldo (VA), Italy.
Tel: +39 02 96780394 Fax: +39 02 96780394

Email: neogiul@tin.it

Neutrogena Corp. 5760 W 96th St, Los Angeles, CA 90045-5595, USA.
Tel: +1 310 647 1150 Web: www.neutrogena.com

Nippon Shinyaku Co. Ltd 14 Nishinosho-Monguchi-cho, Kisshoin, Minami-ku,
Kyoto 601-8550, Japan.

Tel: +81 (0) 75 3211111 Fax: +81 (0) 75 3210678

Nizhpharm OAO 7 Salganskaya ul., GSP-459, 603950 Nizhny Novgorod,
Russia.

Tel: +7 8312 788000
Email: med@nizhpharm.ra

Nobel Pharm Enrg 2615 pl. Chasse, Montreal, H1Y 2C3, Canada.
Tel: +1 514 5223187

Norgine AG Neue Bahnhofstrasse 160, 4132 Muttenz, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 61 4610868 Fax: +41 (0) 61 4610875
Email: norgine.switzerland@norgine.com Web: www.norgine.com

Norgine BV Hogehilweg 7, 1101 CA Amsterdam Zuid-Oost, Netherlands.
Tel: +31 (0) 20 5670900 Fax: +31 (0) 20 5670999

Email: norgine.netherlands@norgine.com Web: www.norgine.com

Norgine de Espafia Maudes, 517 8 Pl., 28003 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 3956350 Fax: +34 91 3956396

Email: norgine.spain@norgine.com Web: www.norgine.com

Norgine GmbH /m Schwarzenborn 4, 35041 Marburg, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6421 98520 Fax: +49 (0) 6421 985230

Email: info@norgine.de Web: www.norgine.de

Norgine Italia S.r.1. Via Prina 15, 20154 Milan (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 33614476 Fax: +39 02 315625

Email: norgine.italy@norgine.com Web: www.norgine.com

Norgine Pharma GmbH Haidestrasse 4, A-1110 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 8178120 Fax: +43 (0) 1 7436370

Email: norgine.pharma.austria@norgine.com

Web: www.norgine.com

Norgine Pharmaceuticals Ltd Chaplin House, Moorhall Rd, Harefield, Uxbridge,
UB9 6NS, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1895 826600
Email: norgine.uk@norgine.com
Norgine P/L 3/14 Rodborough Road, Frenchs Forest, NSW 2086, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 99727500 Web: www.norgine.com

Norgine (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 781247, Gauteng, Sandton 2146, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 8835630 Fax: +27 (0) 11 7831712

Email: norgine.south.africa@norgine.com

Web: www.norgine.com

Fax: +49 (0) 8052 5429

Fax: +7 8312 307213
Web: www:nizhpharm.com

Fax: +44 (0) 1895 825865
Web: www:norgine.com

Suppliers Directory

Norgine SA Haasrode Research Park, Romeinsestraat 10, 3001 Heverlee,
Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 16 392710 Fax: +32 (0) 16 392720

Email: norgine_info@norgine.com Web: www.norgine.com

Normon S.A. Ronda de Valdecarrizo 6, Tres Cantos, 28760 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 8065240 Fax: +34 91 8065256

Web: www.normon.com

Novag Infancia S.A. de C.V. Claz. de Tlalpan No. 3417, Col. Sta. Ursula Coapa-
Coyoacan, 04650 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 56664120 Fax: +52 55 56067076

Novaquimica Sigma Pharma-Nature’s Plus Ltda Rodovia SP101 (Campinas a
Monte Mor) Km 08, 13186-481 Hortolandia, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 19 8871209 Fax: +55 (0) 19 8872242

Novartis Argentina S.A. Ramallo 1851, 1429 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47037000 Fax: +54 (0) 11 47037251

Web: www.ar.novartis.com

Novartis Consumer Health Wimblehurst Rd, Horsham, RH12 4AB, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1403 210211 Fax: +44 (0) 1403 323939

Web: www.novartis.co.uk

Novartis Consumer Health Canada Inc. 2233 Argentia Rd, Suite 205,
Mississauga, LSN 2X7, Canada.
Tel: +1 905 8124100

Web: www.ca.novartis.com
Novartis Consumer Health GmbH Zielstattstr. 40, 81379 Munich, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 89 78770 Fax: +49 (0) 89 7877444

Email: munich_de@ch.novartis.com Web: www.novartis-consumerhealth.de
Novartis Consumer Health Inc. 200 Kimball Drive, Parsippany, NJ 07054-
0622, USA.

Tel: +1 973 503 8000
Web: www.novartis.com
Novartis Consumer Health, Lda Av Poeta Mistral 2-2, 1069-172 Lisbon,
Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 7811010

Web: www.consumer-health.novartis.com
Novartis Consumer Health Schweiz AG Monbijoustrasse 118, 3001 Berne,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 31 3776111

Web: www.novartis-consumer-health.ch
Novartis Farma S.p.A. Largo Umberto Boccioni 1, 21040 Origgio (VA), Italy.
Tel: +39 02 96541 Fax: +39 02 96542910

Web: www.novartis.it

Novartis Farmaceutica Gran Via Corts Catalanes 764, 08013 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 3064200 Fax: +34 93 3064290

Web: ww
Novartis Finland Oy Metsdnneidonkuja 10, 02130 Espoo, Finland.

Tel: +358 (0) 9 61332211 Fax: +358 (0) 9 61332200

Web: www.novartis.fi

Novartis (Hellas) A.E.B.E. 120 chim. Ethnikis Odou Athinon-Lamias, 144 51
Metamorfosi, Greece.
Tel: +30 210 2811712
Web: www.novartis.gr
Novartis Ltd Hasivim 23, Petach Tikva, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 9201111 Fax: +972 (0) 3 9229230

Web: www.novartis.com

Novartis New Zealand Ltd Private Bag 19-999, Avondale, Auckland, New
Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 9 8283149
Web: www.novartis.com

Fax: +1 905 8214058

Fax: +1 973 503 8400

Fax: +351 21 7811011

Fax: +41 (0) 31 3776100

es.novartis.com

Fax: +30 210 2812014

Fax: +64 (0) 9 8286565

Novartis Pharma Schweiz AG Monbijoustrasse 118, Postfach, 3001 Berne,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 31 3775111
Web: www.novartis.ch
Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp. One Health Plaza, East Hanover, NJ 07936-
1080, USA.

Tel: +1 862 778 8300

Web: www.pharma.us.novartis.com
Novartis Santé Familiale SA 14 bd Richelieu, B.P. 440, 92845 Rueil-Malmaison
cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 55478000

Novartis South Africa (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 92, ZA-Kempton Park, Isando 1600,
South Africa.

Tel: +27 (0) 11 9299111
Web: www.novartis.com

Fax: +41 (0) 31 3775211

Fax: +1 973 781 8265

Fax: +27 (0) 11 9292544

----- PAGE 691 -----
Appendix 5

Novartis Sverige AB Box 1150, 183 11 Tdby, Sweden.
Tel: +46 (0) 8 7323200 Fax: +46 (0) 8 7.
Email: info.se@pharma.novartis.com Web: www.novartis.s
Novipharm GmbH Klagenfurter Strasse 164, A-9210 Portschach, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 4272 2751 Fax: +43 (0) 4272 3119

Novogaleno S.r.1. Largo Sermoneta 24, 80123 Naples, Italy.

Tel: +39 081 7613117 Fax: +39 081 7613117

Email: novogaleno@hotmail.com

Novogen Laboratories P/L 140 Wicks Rd, North Ryde, NSW 2113, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 98780088 Fax: +61 (0) 2 98780055

Web: www.novogen.com

Novopharm Ltd 30 Novopharm Court, Toronto, M1B 2K9, Canada.

Tel: +1 416 2918888 Fax: +1 416 2911874

Web: www.novopharm.com

Nucleopharm SRL Av. Remedios 5341/49, 1440 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Numark Laboratories Inc. 164 North Field Ave, Edison, NJ 08818, USA.

Tel: +1 732 417 1870 Web: www.numarklabs.com

Nutravite 1470 Leathead Rd, Unit 2, Kelowna, V1X 7/6, Canada.

Tel: +1 250 7120600 Fax: +1 250 7120617

Web: www.nutravite.com

Nutridiver SL C/del Pont Reixat 5, 08960 Sant Just Desvern, Barcelona, Spain.
Nycomed Austria GmbH St Peter-Strasse 25, A-4020 Linz, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 732 69190 Fax: +43 (0) 732 655568

Nycomed BV Nikkelstraat 5, 4823 AE Breda, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 76 5481600 Fax: +31 (0) 76 5412197

Web: www.nycomed.nl

Nycomed Christiaens Chris Juliam, Gentsesteenweg 615, 1080 Brussels,
Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 2 4640611
Web: www.nycomed.be
Nycomed Pharma AS Hagalokkv. 13, Postboks 205, 1372 Asker, Norway.
Tel: +47 67763030 Fax: +47 67763040

Web: www.nycomed.no

(0)

OBA Pharma ApS Kronprinsessegade 26 A (postboks 117), 1004 Copenhagen K,
Denmark.

Tel: +45 33326647 Fax: +45 33126647

Officina Farmaceutica Fiorentina S.r.|. Istituto Biochimico Quart. Varignano
12-14, 55049 Viareggio (Lucca), Italy.
Tel: +39 0584 392353

Email: info@off-biolabs.it

Olic (Thailand) Ltd 280 New Rd, Bangkok 10100, Thailand.

Tel: +66 (0) 2220 9000 Fax: +66 (0) 2220 9009

Email: info@olic-thailand.com Web: www.olic-thailand.com
Omegin Dr Schmidgall GmbH & Co. KG Industriepark 210, 78244
Gottmadingen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7731 98250
Omeofarma S.r.|. Via di Morena 12/a, 00043 Ciampino (Rome), Italy.
Tel: +39 06 7903101 Fax: +39 06 79031208

Email: omeofarmaciampino@tiscalinet.it

Orient Europharm Pte Ltd 7 Sophia Rd, 04-12 Peace Centre, $ 228149,
Singapore.

Tel: +65 6339 8820

Email: orienteuro@pacific.net.sg
Orion-yhtyma Oyj Kalkkipellontie 2, 02601 Espoo, Finland.

Tel: +358 (0) 10 4291 Fax: +358 (0) 10 4293939

Email: etunimi.sukunimi@orionpharma.com

Web: www.orionpharma.com

Ortoquimica Ind. Quimico Farmacéutica Ltda Av. Magalhdes de Castro 800,
05502-001 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 38135052

OTC Concepts , UK.
OTW-Naturarzneimittel Regneri GmbH & Co KG Carl-Zeiss-Str. 4, 76275

Ettlingen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7243 5100 Fax: +49 (0) 7243 510100

Oui Heng Import Co. Ltd 46, 46/2 Soi Charansanitwongs 40,
Charansanwitwongs Rd, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 433 0061 Fax: +66 2 883 1842

Oy Leiras Finland AB PL 1406, 00101 Helsinki, Finland.

Tel: +358 (0) 20 7465000 Fax: +358 (0) 20 7465090
Email: etunimi.sukunimi@leirasfinland.fi Web: www.leiras.fi

Fax: +32 (0) 2 4640699

Fax: +39 0584 388374

Web: www.omegin.de

Fax: +65 6339 5272

[P)

Pacific Healthcare (Thailand) Co. Ltd 229/1 South Sathorn Rd, Bangkok
10120, Thailand.
Tel: +66 2 211 5142
Email: phc@phe.co.th
Pacific Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd P.O. Box 11-183, Ellerslie, Auckland, New
Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 9 5792792 Fax: +64 (0) 9 5797072

Padma AG Wiesenstrasse 5, 8603 Schwerzenbach, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 43 3434444 Fax: +41 (0) 43 3434443

Email: mail@padma.ch Web: www.padma.com

Pan Quimica Farmaceutica Rufino Gonzalez 50, 28037 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 3756230 Fax: +34 91 3047881

Panacea Biotec Ltd B-1 Extn. A-27,, Mohan Co-op. Industrial Estate, Mathura
Rd, New Delhi 110 044, India.
Tel: +91 (0) 11 26945270

Web: www.panacea-biotec.com

Paradise Promotions Ltd 13 George St, Novar, POA 1R0, Canada.

Parsenn-Produkte AG, Abt. Pharmazeutik Klus, 7240 Kublis, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 81 3003333 Fax: +41 (0) $1 3003339

Pascoe Pharmazeutische Praparate GmbH Schiffenberger Weg 55, 35394
Giessen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 641 79600
Email: webmaster@pascoe.de
Peking Royal Jelly Deutschland BOELL HandelsKontor Am Kirchberg 3,
86666 Burgheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 8432 94010
Email: info@boell-peking.de
Pentamedical S.r.I. Via G. Mazzini 1, 20021 Bollate (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 02 38302445 Fax: +39 02 38302790

Permamed AG Ringstrasse 29, Postfach 360, 4106 Therwil, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 7252020 Fax: +41 (0) 61 7252040

Email: permamed@permamed.ch Web: www.permamed.ch

Perrigo Wrafton Laboratories Ltd., Wrafton, Braunton, EX33 2DL, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1271 815815 Fax: +44 (0) 1271 818997

Web: www.wrafton.com

Perrigo Ltd 29 Lehi Street, Bnei Brak 51200, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 5773700 Fax: +972 (0) 3 5773500

Web: www.perrigo.com

Personal Care Group Inc. 225 Summit Ave, Montvale, NJ 07645-1574, USA.
Tel: +1 201 573 5633

Peter Black Healthcare Ltd William Nadin Way, Swadlincote, DE11 OBB, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1283 228300 Fax: +44 (0) 1283 228328

Email: info.pbh@peterblack.co.uk Web: www.peterblack.co.uk

Peter Italia sas Via Tommaso Silvestri 22, 00135 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 3380459 Fax: +39 06 30601489

Email: peteritalia@linet.it Web: www.medicinaestetica.it

Pfeiffer Company 65-71 University Ave, P.O. Box 4447, Atlanta, GA 30302,
USA.

Tel: +1 404 614 0255 Web: www:pfeifferpharmaceuticals.com
Pfizer ApS Danmark Lautrupvang 8, 2750 Ballerup, Denmark.

Tel: +45 44201100 Fax: +45 44201101

Web: wwwepfizer.dk

Pfizer AS Postboks 3, 1324 Lysaker, Norway.

Tel: +47 67526100 Fax: +47 67526196

Web: www.pfizer.no

Pfizer BV Roer 266, 2908 AA Capelle a/d ljssel, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 10 4064200 Fax: +31 (0) 10 4064299

Web: wwwpfizer.com

Pfizer Consumer Healthcare, Division of Pfizer Canada Inc. 2200 Eglinton
Ave E, Toronto, MIL 2N3, Canada.
Tel: +1 416 2882200

Web: wwwepfizer.ca

Pfizer GmbH Pfizerstr. 1, 76139 Karlsruhe, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 721 61019000 Fax: +49 (0) 721 62039000
Email: info@pfizer.de Web: wwwpfizer.de
Pfizer Inc. 235 East 42nd St, New York, NY 10017-5755, USA.
Tel: +1 212 733 2323 Web: www.pfizer.com
Pfizer Italiana S.r.1. Via Valbondione 113, 00188 Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39 06 331821 Fax: +39 06 33626019
Web: wwwopfizer.it

Fax: +66 2 212 5323
Web: www:phe.co.th

Fax: +91 (0) 11 26974600

Fax: +49 (0) 641 7960119
Web: www:pascoe.de

Fax: +49 (0) 8432 940126
Web: www:boell-peking.de

Fax: +1 416 2882588

----- PAGE 692 -----
Pfizer Laboratories (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 2271, Cape Town 8000, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 21 4063224 Fax: +27 (0) 21 4063459
Web: wwwpfizer.co.za

Pfizer Ltd Walton Oaks, Dorking Rd, Tadworth, KT20 7NS, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1304 616161 Fax: +44 (0) 1304 656221
Web: wwwpfizer.co.uk

Pfizer Oy PL 36, 00331 Helsinki, Finland.
Tel: +358 (0) 9 430040 Fax: +358 (0) 9 43004400
Web: wwwpfizer.fi

Pfizer P/L P.O. Box 57, West Ryde, NSW 2114, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 98503333 Fax: +61 (0) 2 98581347
Web: www:pfizer.com.au

Pfizer Pte Ltd 152 Beach Rd, 29-00 Gateway East, S$ 189721, Singapore.
Tel: +-65 6311 3688 Fax: +65 6311 3698
Web: www.pfizer-singapore.com

Pfizer SA Boulevard de la Plaine 17, 1050 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 5546211 Fax: +32 (0) 2 5546660
Web: wwwpfizer.com

Pfizer SA Scharenmoosstrasse 99, 8052 Zurich, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 43 4957111 Fax: +41 (0) 43 4957280
Web: www.pfizer.ch

Pfizer (Thailand) Ltd 36-38 Fl, 42 Fl, United Center Building, 323 Silom Rd,
Kwang Silom, Khet Bangrak, Bangkok 10500, Thailand.

Tel: +66 (0) 2665 4666 Fax: +66 (0) 2635 5471

Web: www.pfizer.co.th

PGM Pharmazeutische Gesellschaft mbH & Co. Miinchen Fiirstenstr 6,
80333 Munich, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 89 284633

Email: info@pgm-muenchen.de

Pharbenia S.r.I., Societa del Gruppo Bayer V‘le Certosa 130, 20156 Milan,
Italy.
Tel: +39 02 39781 Fax: +39 02 39782109

Pharma Développement 40 rue des Bergers, 75015 Paris, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 1 45752200

Pharma Fabre Hellas S.A. 85 Lavriou Ave , , 190 02 Paiania , Greenland.
Tel: +30 210 6683000 Fax: +30 210 6683250

Pharma Funcke , Czech Republic.

Pharma Guri P.O. Box 15164, Rishon Le Zion 75105, Israel.
Tel: +972 (0) 8 9205888 Fax: +972 (0) 8 9205999
Email: pharma_g@inter.net.il Web: www.pharmaguri.co.il

Fax: +49 (0) 89 2809703
Web: www:pgm-muenchen.de

Pharma Italia Laboratori Farmaceutici S.r.l. Via Vittor Pisani 93, 70033
Corato (BA), Italy.

Tel: +39 080 3593060

Email: info@pharmaitalia.com

Fax: +39 080 3580238
Web: www:pharmaitalia.com

Pharma Liebermann GmbH Hauptstr. 27, 89423 Gundelfingen/Do., Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 9073 958930 Fax: +49 (0) 9073 9589355
Email: info@pharma-liebermann.de Web: www.pharma-liebermann.de

Pharma Schworer GmbH Goethestr. 29, 69257 Wiesenbach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6223 4347 Fax: +49 (0) 6223 47438
Email: info@pharma-schwoerer.de Web: www.pharma-schwoerer.de

Pharma Selz GmbH Leininger Ring 65a, 67278 Bockenheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6359 943610 Fax: +49 (0) 6359 943636
Web: www.pharmaselz.de

Pharma Stulln GmbH Werksstr. 3, 92551 Stulln, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 9435 30080 Fax: +49 (0) 9435 300899
Email: info@pharmastulln.de Web: www.pharmastulln.de

Pharma Wernigerode GmbH Dornbergsweg 35, 38855 Wernigerode/Harz,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 3943 5540

Email: info@pharmawernigerode.de

Fax: +49 (0) 3943 554183
Web: www.pharmawernigerode.de

Pharmaceutical Enterprises (Pty) Ltd Howards Drive, Pinelands, Howard Place
7405, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 21 5311341 Fax: +27 (0) 21 5312692

Pharmachemie BV Swensweg 5, 2031 GA Haarlem, Netherlands.
Tel: +31 (0) 23 5147147 Fax: +31 (0) 23 5312879
Web: www.pharmachemie.com

Pharmachoice (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 291, Fourways 2055, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 4653647 Fax: +27 (0) 11 4653696
Email: info@pharmachoice.co.za Web: www.pharmachoice.co.za

Suppliers Directory

Pharmacia Asia Ltd 16/F Stanhope House, 738 Kings Rd, North Point, Hong
Kong.

Tel: +852 28119711

Web: www.pharmacia.com
Pharmacia GmbH Am Wolfsmantel 46, 91058 Erlangen, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 9131 620 Fax: +49 (0) 9131 621202

Web: www.pharmacia.de

Pharmacia Italia S.p.A. Via Robert Koch 1.2, 20152 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 48381 Fax: +39 02 48382734

Web: www.pharmaciaitalia.it

Pharmacia Singapore Pte Ltd 707 Thomson Rd, 31-04/05 United Square, S
307591, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6354 9828

Web: www.pharmacia.com
Pharmacie du Collége, Dr Cl & A Behringer rue du Lac 42, 1400 Yverdons-les-
Bains, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 24 4252107 Fax: +41 (0) 24 4258910

Pharmadass Ltd HealthAid House, Marlborough Hill, Harrow, HA1 1UD, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 20 8426 3400 Fax: +44 (0) 20 8426 3434

Email: sales@pharmadass.com Web: www.pharmadass.com

Pharmalab, Di ion de Stonglass SA Av. Santa Fe 3312, Piso 7 C, 1425
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Fax: +852 25790599

Fax: +65 6354 9501

Pharmamagist Kft Patakhegyi ut 83-85, 1028 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 3975174 Fax: +36 3975175

Pharma-Natura (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 494, Bergvlei 2012, South Africa.

Tel: +27 (0) 11 4456000 Fax: +27 (0) 11 4456089

Email: healthcare@pharma.co.za Web: www.pharma.co.za

Pharmanex Inc. 74 West Center, Provo, UT 84601, USA.

Tel: +1 801 345 9800 Fax: +1 801 345 2850

Email: productsupport@pharmanex.com Web: www.pharmanex.com
Pharmaniaga Marketing Sdn Bhd P.O. Box 2030, Pusat Business Bukit Raja,
40800 Shah Alam, Malaysia.
Tel: +60 (0) 3 33429999

Web: www.pharmaniaga.com.my
Pharmascience Inc. 6111 Royalmount Ave, Suite 100, Montreal, H4T 2T4,
Canada.

Tel: +1 514 3401114

Web: www.pharmascience.com

Fax: +60 (0) 3 33417777

Fax: +1 514 3427764

Pharmasette di Paolo Donati e C. S.a.s. Via Lusitania 15/A, 00183 Rome, Italy.
Tel: +39 06 58232820 Fax: +39 06 58232820

Pharmashalom Ltd 27 Hamelaha St, Park Afek, Rosh Ha‘ayin, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 9031424 Fax: +972 (0) 3 9031358

Pharmastra, Usines Chimiques et Pharmaceutiques de Strasbourg 40 rue
du Canal, 67460 Souffelweyersheim, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 3 88200212 Fax: +33 (0) 3 88339347

Email: info@pharmastra.com Web: www.pharmastra.com

Pharmateam Marketing P.O. Box 405, Jerusalem, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 2 5712140 Fax: +972 (0) 2 5712235

Email: ptm@pharmateam-mktg.co.il Web: www.pharmateam.co.il
Pharmaton SA , 6934 Bioggio, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 91 6103111 Fax: +41 (0) 91 6103211

Pharmatrix, Div. de Therabel Pharma S.A. Arenales 259, 1704 Ramos Mejia,
Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46561816
Web: www.pharmatrix.com.ar

Fax: +54 (0) 11 46583557

Pharmazeutische Fabrik Evers & Co. GmbH Siemensstr. 4, 25421 Pinneberg,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 4101 73800
Email: evco@pharmaevers.de
Pharmazeutische Fabrik Infirmarius-Rovit GmbH Eislinger Str. 66, 73084
Salach, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7162 930800

Email: info@infirmarius-rovit.de
Pharmethica BV Ronde Tocht 11, 1507 CC Zaandam, Netherlands.
Pharmia Oy Kalliotie 2, 04360 Tuusula, Finland.

Tel: +358 (0) 9 8254030 Fax: +358 (0) 9 8709715
Email: info@pharmia.fi Web: www.pharmia.fi

Fax: +49 (0) 4101 73889
Web: www:pharmaevers.de

Fax: +49 (0) 7162 9308091
Web: www.infirmarius-rovit.de

Pharmonta Mag. pharm. Dr Fischer Montanastrasse 7, A-8112 Gratwein,
Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 3124 51368
Email: pharmonta@sime.at

Fax: +43 (0) 3124 5136821
Web: www:pharmonta.com

----- PAGE 693 -----
Appendix 5

Phytomed AG Tschamerie 25, 3415 Hasle/Burgdorf, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 34 4602211 Fax: +41 (0) 34 4614163
Email: info@phytomed.ch

Phytomedicine P/L P.O. Box 1995, Dee Why, NSW 2099, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 2 99391380 Fax: +61 (0) 2 99391333
Email: cust.serv@phytomedicine.com.au Web: www.phytomedicine.com.au

Phytopharma SA Chemin des Golettes 4a, 1666 Grandvillard, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 26 9281549 Fax: +41 (0) 26 9282149
Email: phytopharma@bluewin.ch Web: www.phytopharma.ch

Phytotec Hungaria Kft Lotz Kdroly u 3, 1026 Budapest, Hungary.
Tel: +36 3920385 Fax: +36 3980192

Pierre Fabre Argentina S.A. Marcelo T de Alvear 684, piso 7, 1058 Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43189600
Web: www.pierre-fabre.com.ar

Pierre Fabre Farma de Mexico S.A. de C.V. Blvd Manuel Avila Camacho 191,
Piso 4 In, Polanco Los Morales, 11510 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 21223700 Web: www.pierre-fabre.com

Pierre Fabre Iberica Ramon Trias Fargas 7-11, Edifico Marina Village, 08005
Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4833000
Email: info@pierre-fabre.es

Fax: +54 (0) 11 43189626

Fax: +34 93 4833059

Web: www.pierre-fabre.es

Pierre Fabre Italia S.p.A. Via G.G. Winckelmann 1, 20146 Milan, Italy.
Tel: +39 02 477941 Fax: +39 02 425589

Web: www.pierre-fabre.com

Pierre Fabre Medicament Usacheva ul. 33, 119048 Moscow, Russia.
Tel: +7 095 7452650 Fax: +7 095 7452654
Web: www.pierre-fabre.com

Pierre Fabre Médicament Portugal, Lda Rua Rodrigo da Fonseca 178 - 2 Esq,
1099-067 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 3815320

Web: www.pierre-fabre.com
Pierre Fabre Medicament sro Radimovd 36, 160 00 Prague 6, Czech Republic.
Tel: +420 (0) 2 20516778 Fax: +420 (0) 2 20517415

Email: all@pfm.cz

Pietrasanta Pharma S.r.I. Loc. S. Rocchino, 55054 Massarosa (LU), Italy.

Tel: +39 0584 49855 Fax: +39 0584 45190

Email: pietrasantapharma@interbusiness.it

Web: www.pietrasantapharma.it

Fax: +351 21 3860370

Plantina Biologische Arzneimittel AG Jochbergweg 1, 82418 Murnau,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8841 48880
Email: info@plantina.de

Fax: +49 (0) 8841 488820
Web: www.plantina.de

Plants, Laboratorio della Dott.ssa Luisa Coletta Viaria C, Zona Industriale,
98040 Giammoro (ME), Italy.

Tel: +39 090 9387033 Fax: +39 090 9387237

Polymedic Trading Enterprise Pte Ltd 7150 Kampong Ampat, 06-07 KA Centre,
S 368324, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6283 6826

Email: polymed@starhub.net.sg

Fax: +65 6382 4948

Polypharm GmbH Bad Nauheimer Str. 4, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6151 601980 Fax: +49 (0) 6151 6019820

Email: email@polypharm.de

Ponce & Benzo Sucesores C.A. Edificio Ponce & Benzo, 2da. Avenida, Urb.
Santa Eduvigis, Caracas, Venezuela.
Tel: +58 (0) 212 2863822

Email: info@ponce-benzo.com

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2833389

Web: www.ponce-benzo.com

Potter’s Herbal Medicines 7 Botanic Court, Martland Park, Wigan, WNS 0JZ,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1942 219 960

Email: info@pottersherbals.co.uk

Fax: +44 (0) 1942 219 966
Web: www.pottersherbals.co.uk
Potter’s (Herbal Supplies) Ltd Unit 5b, Chipchase Court, Seaham Grange
Industrial Estate, Seaham, SR7 OPP, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 191 5236578

Email: info@herbal-direct.com
Presselin-Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Heinkelstr. 8a, 76461 Muggensturm,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7222 96930

Email: webmaster@presselin.de

Fax: +44 (0) 191 5236059
Web: www:herbal-direct.com

Fax: +49 (0) 7222 969325

Web: www.presselin.de

Primal Chemical Co. Ltd Flat A, 7/F, Hoi Bun Industrial Bldg, 6 Wing Yip St,
Kwun Tong, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 23433212 Fax: +852 27978595

Prisfar, SA Rua Antero de Quentel 629, 4200-068 Porto, Portugal.

Tel: +351 22 5573600 Fax: +351 22 5504207

Web: www.prisfar.pt

Procter & Gamble / or 2, Procter & Gamble Plaza, Cincinnati, OH 45201, USA.
Tel: +1 513 983 1100 Web: www.pg.com

Procter & Gamble AG 47 rue de Saint-Georges, 1213 Petit-Lancy 1,
Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 22 7096111
Web: www.pg.com
Procter & Gamble Australia P/L Locked Bag 75, Parramatta, NSW 2124,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 96854400
Web: www.pg.com
Procter & Gamble Austria GmbH Guglgasse 7-9, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 58857400 Fax: +43 (0) 1 588575400

Web: www.pg.com

Procter & Gamble de Mexico S.A. de C.V. Loma Florida 32, Lomas de
Vistahermosa, Del. Cuajimalpa, 05100 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 57242000 Fax: +52 55 57242331

Web: www.pg.com.mx

Procter & Gamble do Brasil S.A. Av. Maria Coelho Aguiar 251, Bloco E- Andares
4./5, Jd Sdo Luiz, 05805-000 Paulo, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 11 37480264 Fax:
Web: www.procter.com.br

Procter & Gamble (Health & Beauty Care) Ltd The Heights, Brooklands,
Weybridge, KT13 OXP, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1923 896000
Email: ukmisc.im@pg.com
Procter & Gamble Inc. P.O. Box 355, Station A, Toronto, MSW 1CS5, Canada.
Tel: +1 416 7304711 Fax: +1 416 7306049

Web: www.pg.com

Procter & Gamble Interamericanos Inc. Suipacha 664 Piso 2, 1008 Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43230600
Web: www.pg.com
Procter & Gamble NPD, Inc. 7th Floor, Acer Building, 10-12 Scotia Place,
Auckland, New Zealand.
Tel: +64 (0) 9 3561800
Web: www.pg.com
Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals Watermanweg 100, 3067 GG Rotterdam,
Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 10 2863100
Web: www.pg.com
Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals UK Ltd Rusham Park Technical Centre,
Whitehall Lane, Egham, TW20 9NW, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1784 474900 Fax: +44 (0) 1784 495253

Email: ukmisc.im@pg.com Web: www.uk.pg.com

Procter & Gamble Srl Viale C Pavese 385, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 50971 Fax: +39 06 SO11881

Web: www.pg.com

Procter Gamble Av. del Partenon 16-18, Campo de las Naciones, 28042
Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 7222100
Web: www.pg.com
Prodotti Laboratério Farmacéutico Ltda Avenida Jodo Dias 1084, Santo
Amaro, 04724-001 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 55419344 Fax: +55 (0) 11 55228718

Productos Farmaceuticos Collins S.A. de C.V. Cipres No. 1677, Col. del
Fresno, 44900 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico.

Tel: +52 33 38115171 Fax: +52 33 3811Si71

Web: www.collins.com.mx

Productos Gache S.A. Calle La Industria, Ed. Lemar P.B., Urb. Palo Verde,
Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2510964 Fax: +58 (0) 212 2512662

Productos Maver S.A. de C.V. Av. Oleoducto No. 2804, Fracc. Industrial El
Alamo, 44490 Tlaquepaque, Jalisco, Mexico.

Tel: +52 33 36661873 Fax: +52 33 36662773

Productos Medix S.A. de C.V. Calz. del Hueso No. 39, Col. Ejido Santa Ursula
Coapa, Deleg. Coyoacan, 04910 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55992800 Fax: +52 55 56795652

Productos Naturissima de Venezuela Calle del Arenal Edif. Biotech, Urb. La
Trinidad, Caracas, Venezuela.
Tel: +58 (0) 212 9035400

Fax: +41 (0) 22 7096855

Fax: +61 (0) 2 96854777

5 (0) 11 37480244

Fax: +44 (0) 1923 896200
Web: wwwuk.pg.com

Fax: +54 (0) 11 43230781

Fax: +64 (0) 9 3561818

Fax: +31 (0) 10 2863131

Fax: +34 91 7222411

Fax: +58 (0) 212 9035690

----- PAGE 694 -----
Productos Roche Ltda Av. Quilin 3750, Macul, Santiago, Chile.
Productos Roche S.A. Edificio Roche, Av. Diego Cisneros/Los Ruices, Caracas
1062, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2734611
Web: www:roche.com.ve

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2398191

Productos Ronava C.A. Final calle Mara, Edif.Ronava Zona Ind. El Marqué,
Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 2396413
Email: ventas@ronava.com.ve
Produtos Farmacéuticos Millet Roux Ltda Praia de Botafogo 440, 25 andar,
22250-040 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 21 25390608

Email: milletroux@milletroux.com.br
ProMedico Ltd 4 Baltimor St, Petach Tikva 49510, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 9265965 Fax: +972 (0) 3 9248548

Web: www.promedico.co.il

Protina Pharmazeutische Gesellschaft mbH Adalperostr. 90, 85737
Ismaning, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 89 9965530
Email: info@protina.de
Provita Pharma GmbH Seidengasse 33-35, A-1070 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 14709631 Fax: +43 (0) 1 4796463

Psorimed AG Postfach, 5401 Baden, Switzerland.

Puerto Galiano Calle ’S’, 4, Parque Europolis, Las Rozas, 28230 Madrid, Spain.
Tel: +34 91 7105047 Fax: +34 91 6371989

Email: okal@puertogaliano.com Web: www.puertogaliano.com

Purdue Pharma 575 Granite Court, Pickering, LIW 3W8, Canada.

Tel: +1 905 4206400 Fax: +1 905 4200385

Pynogin GmbH, Gee Lawson Distribution Centre Unit 15 South Nottingham
& Wilford Industrial Estate, Wilford, Nottingham, NG11 7EP, UK.

@
Qualicare AG Florenz-Strasse 7, 4142 Muinchenstein, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 3330085 Fax: +41 (0) 61 3330086

Email: mail@qualicare.ch Web: www.qualicare.ch

Qualiphar SA Rijksweg 9, 2880 Bornem, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 3 8891721 Fax: +32 (0) 3 8896913

Web: www.qualiphar.be

Queisser Pharma GmbH.& Co. Lyusinovskaya ul. 36, Of. 73, 113093 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 3635051
Email: office@queisser.ru
Queisser Pharma GmbH & Co. Schleswiger Str. 74, 24941 Flensburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 461 99960 Fax: +49 (0) 461 9996110

Email: lorenzen@queisser.de Web: www.queisser.de

Quest Vitamins Ltd 8 Venture Way, Aston Science Park, Birmingham, B7 4AP,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 121 359 0056
Email: info@questvitamins.co.uk
Quimica Ariston S.A.C.I.F. O’Connor 550/5, 1707 V. Sarmiento, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 46583051 Fax: +54 (0) 11 46587290

Quimica E Farmacéutica Nikkho do Brasil Ltda Rua Jaime Perdigao 431-435,
21920-240 Ilha do Governador, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 21 3934266 Fax: +55 (0) 21 3931343

Quimica Franco Mexicana Nordin S.A. de C.V. Paseo Lomas Atlas No. 292,
Col. Lomas del Valle, 45120 Zapopan, Jal., Mexico.

Tel: +52 33 36423030 Fax: +52 33 36428833

Web: www.nordin.com.mx

Quimica Knoll de Mexico S.A. de C.V. La Candelaria No.186, Col. Atlantida,
Deleg. Coyoacan, 04370 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55493740 Fax: +52 55 56898256

Quimica Medical Arg. S.A.C.I. Int. Amaro Avalos 4208, 1605 Munro, Buenos
Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 47627600 Fax: +54 (0) 11 47627664

Quimica y Farmacia, S.A. de C.V. Av. Insurgentes sur 619 Desp 602, Benito
Juarez Napoles, 3810 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 53402230

Quimifar Comadran 37, Pol Ind Can Salvatella, Barbera del Valles, 08210
Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 7297900
Email: info@quimifares

Fax: +58 (0) 212 2397186
Web: www.ronava.com.ve

Fax: +55 (0) 21 22861076
Web: www.milletroux.com.br

Fax: +49 (0) 89 963446
Web: www:protina.de

Fax: +7 095 3635057
Web: www.queisser.ru

Fax: +44 (0) 121 359 0313
Web: www.questvitamins.co.uk

Fax: +34 93 7297901
Web: www:quimifar.es

Suppliers Directory

Quimioterapica Brasileira Ltda Rua Sdo Januario 712, Tubalina, 38400-410
Uberlandia, Brazil.
Tel: +55 (0) 34 32383111

@

Ranbaxy (Malaysia) Sdn Bhd Box #8, Wisma Selangor Dredging, Sth Floor,

South Block, 142-A Jalan Ampang, 50450 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 21614181 Fax: +60 (0) 3 21627589

Web: www.ranbaxy.com

Ranbaxy Unichem Co. Ltd 3 Fl, Rm 374-8, Phayathai Building, 31 Phayathai

Rd, Rajathevi, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 246 3300 Fax: +66 2 246 4727

Email: saleserv@ranbaxy.co.th Web: www.ranbaxy.com 5
Ratiopharm Arzneimittel Vertriebs-GmbH Albert-Schweitzer-Gasse 3, A-1140

Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 97007
Web: www.ratiopharm.at
Ratiopharm CZ sro Belehradskd 54, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 51021122 Fax: +420 (0) 2 51021123

Email: ratiopharm@ratiopharm.cz

ratiopharm GmbH Graf-Arco-Str. 3, 89079 Ulm/Donautal, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 731 40202 Fax: +49 (0) 731 4027329

Email: info@ratiopharm.de Web: www.ratiopharm.de

Ratiopharm Group Vspolny per. 19/20, str. 2, 123001 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 2321247 Fax: +7 095 2321369

Email: moscow@ranbaxy.ru Web: www.ranbaxy.com

ratiopharm Hungaria Kft Uzsoki u 36/a, 1145 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 2732730 Fax: +36 2732731

Recip AB Brdnningevdgen 12, 120 54 Arsta, Sweden.

Tel: +46 (0) 8 6025200 Fax: +46 (0) 8 818703

Email: info@recip.se Web: www.recip.se

Reckitt Benckiser Pharmapark, Chapelizod, Dublin 20, Ireland.

Tel: +353 (0) 1 630 5420 Fax: +353 (0) 1 630 5430

Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com

Reckitt Benckiser Hong Kong Ltd 1203-5 Allied Kajima Bldg, 138 Gloucester
Rd, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 25980328
Web: www.reckitt.com
Reckitt Benckiser (Overseas) Ltd Unit No 1101, Level 11, Uptown 2, 2 JIn SS
21-37, Damansara Uptown, 47400 Petaling Jaya, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 77253042 Fax: +60 (0) 3 77253008

Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com

Reckitt Benckiser Pharmaceuticals P.O. Box 138, West Ryde, NSW 2114,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 93254000

Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com
Reckitt Benckiser Pharmaceuticals (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 164, Isando 1600,
South Africa.

Tel: +27 (0) 11 8711611

Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com
Reckitt Benckiser plc Dansom House, Hull, HU8 7DS, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1482 326151 Fax: +44 (0) 1482 582526

Email: miu@reckittbenckiser.com Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com
Reckitt Benckiser SA/NV Allée de Ia Recherche 20, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 5261811 Fax: +32 (0) 2 5200230

Email: reckitt@skynet.be Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com
Reckitt Benckiser (Thailand) Ltd 9 Fl, Vanissa Building, 29 Soi Chidlom,
Ploenchit Rd, Patumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 252 3149 Fax: +66 2 252 3195

Web: www.reckittbenckiser.com

Fax: +43 (0) 1 9700766

Fax: +852 25980808

Fax: +61 (0) 2 93254018

Fax: +27 (0) 11 8711831

Recordati Industria Chimica e Farmaceutica S.p.a. Via Civitali 1, 20148
Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 487871 Fax: +39 02 40073747

Regina Health Ltd NLA Tower, 12-16 Addiscombe Rd, Croydon, CRO OXT, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 20 8410 2550 Fax: +44 (0) 20 8686 0807

Email: regina@netcom.uk.co.uk Web: www.reginahealthcare.com
Regional Health Ltd P.O. Box 101-104, North Shore Mail Centre, Auckland,
New Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 9 9686688
Email: info@regional.co.nz
Reig Jofre Gran Capitan 10, Sant Joan Despi, 08970 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 4806715 Fax: +34 93 4806721

Web: www.teigjofre.com

Fax: +64 (0) 9 9686689
Web: www.regional.co.nz

----- PAGE 695 -----
Appendix 5

Rekah Ltd P.O. Bos 25, Azor 58190, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 5581233 Fax: +972 (0) 3 5565919
Email: info@rekah.co.il Web: www.rekah.co.il
Repha GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel Alt-Godshorn 87, 30855
Langenhagen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 511 786100
Email: info@repha.de
Representaciones Mex-America S.A. de C.V., Diagonal 20 de Noviembre No.
264, Col. Obrera, Deleg. Cuauhtemoc, 06800 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 55783570 Fax: +52 55 55783090

Web: www.remexa.com

Retterspitz GmbH Laufer Str. 17-19, 90571 Schwaig, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 911 507000 Fax: +49 (0) 911 5070045

Web: www.retterspitz.de

Fax: +49 (0) S11 7861099
Web: www:repha.de

Ricerca, Produzione e Commercializzazione di Prodotti Farmaceutici e
Cosmetici Srl Via Grottole 80/B, 81020 Castel Morrone (CE), Italy.

Tel: +39 (0) 823399187 Fax: +39 (0) 823399870

Richard Lane’s 47 Mayflower Street, , Plymouth, PL1 1QL, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1752 665 175 Fax: +44 (0) 1752 255 212

Email: herbals@richardlanes.co.uk Web: www.richardlanes.co.uk
Richter Pharma Feldgasse 19, A-4600 Wels, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 7242 4900 Fax: +43 (0) 7242 49015

Ricola , Canada.

Ridupharm Emil Frey-Strasse 99, 4142 Munchenstein, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 61 4114385 Fax: +41 (0) 61 4139757

Riemser Arzneimittel AG An der Wiek 7, 17493 Greifswald/Insel Riems,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 38351 760
Email: info@riemser.de
Riviera Handelsgesellschaft.m.b.h. Penzingerstrasse 54, A-1140 Vienna,
Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 8943366 Fax: +43 (0) 1 894336622

Robapharm Espafia Ramon Trias Fargas 7-11, Edificio Marina Village, 08005
Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4833000 Fax: +34 93 4833059

Robapharm SA Gewerbestrasse 18, 4123 Allschwil, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 4878888 Fax: +41 (0) 61 4878899

Email: info@robapharm.ch Web: www.robapharm.ch

Robugen GmbH Pharmazeutische Fabrik Alleenstr. 22-6, 73730 Esslingen,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 711 366016
Email: robugen@robugen.de
Roche Consumer Health Deutschland GmbH Valterweg 24-5, 65817
Eppstein-Bremthal, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6198 3000

Email: rch.deutschland-gmbh@roche.com

Fax: +49 (0) 38351 308
Web: www.riemser.de

Fax: +49 (0) 711 367450
Web: www.robugen.de

Fax: +49 (0) 6198 30035

Web: www.roche.de

Roche (Magyarorszag) Kft Edison u 1, 2040 Budaors, Hungary.

Tel: +36 23 446800 Fax: +36 23 446860

Roche SA/NV Rue Dante 75, 1070 Brussels, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 2 5258211 Fax: +32 (0) 2 5258201

Email: brussels.internet@roche.com Web: www.roche.be

Roche S.p.A. Viale G.B. Stucchi 10, 20052 Monza (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 039 2471 Fax: +39 039 2474328

Web: www.roche.com

Rodisma-Med Pharma GmbH Kolner Str. 48, 51149 Cologne, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 2203 91200 Fax: +49 (0) 2203 9120300

Web: www.rodisma.de

roha Arzneimittel GmbH Rockwinkeler Heerstr. 100, 28355 Bremen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 421 25790 Fax: +49 (0) 421 2579280

Web: www.roha-bremen.de

Rolmex International Inc. 1351 rue Gay-Lussac, Boucherville, /4B7K1, Canada.
Rottapharm S.r.l. Via Valosa di Sopra 9, 20052 Monza (MI), Italy.

Tel: +39 039 73901 Fax: +39 039 7390446

Web: www.rotta.com

Rovi Julian Camarillo 35, 28037 Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 3756230 Fax: +34 91 3047881

Email: rovi@rovi.es Web: www.rovi.es

Roxane Laboratories Inc., a Subsidiary of Boehringer Ingelheim P.O. Box
16532, Columbus, OH 43216, USA.

Tel: +1 614 276 4000
Web: www.roxane.com

Fax: +1 614 279 5517

RubiePharm Vertriebs GmbH Bruder-Grimm-Str. 121, 36396 Steinau an der
Strasse, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6663 96040
Email: hallo@rubiepharm.de
Rye Pharmaceuticals Unit 1, Block F, 25-7 Paul St North, North Ryde, NSW
2113, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 98573830

Email: rye@ryepharmaceuticals.com

cS)

Sabex Inc. 145 Jules-Leger St, Boucherville, J4B 7K8, Canada.
Tel: +1 514 5960000 Fax: +1 514 5960003
Sabona GmbH Gutenbergstr. 1, 83052 Bruckmuhl, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 8062 904837 Fax: +49 (0) $062 904827
Email: sabona@t-online.de Web: www.sabona.de

Fax: +49 (0) 6663 960432
Web: www:rubiepharm.de

Fax: +61 (0) 2 98573831
Web: www:ryepharmaceuticals.com

Sager Pharma Kft Pdlya u 9, 1012 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 2146559 Fax: +36 2146561

Sagitta Arzneimittel GmbH Fruhlingstr. 7, Postfach: 1262, 83618 Feldkirchen-
Westerham, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8063 97010 Fax: +49 (0) $063 970111

Salomon, Levin, & Elstein Ltd P.O. Box 8077, Kiryat Nordau, Netanya, Israel.
Tel: +972 (0) 9 8927878 Fax: +972 (0) 9 8854766

Salus France B.P. 104 Principal, 83403 Hyéres cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 94126060 Fax: +33 (0) 4 94574724

Email: salus.france@wanadoo.fr

Salus-Haus Dr. med. Otto Greither Nachf. GmbH & Co KG Bahnhofstr. 24,
83052 Bruckmuhl/Mangfall (Obb.), Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8062 9010 Fax: +49 (0) $062 901352

Email: info@salus.de Web: www.salus.de

Salutas Pharma GmbH Otto-von-Guericke-Allee 1, 39179 Barleben, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 39203 710 Fax: +49 (0) 39203 71777

Sanamed GmbH Rudolf Waisenhorngasse 32, A-1230 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 8886338 Fax: +43 (0) 1 8898395

Sandersons (Chemists) Ltd 37 Oakwood Rise, Heaton, Bolton, BL1 SEE, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1204 841285

Sandoz Pharmaceuticals GmbH Carl-Zeiss-Ring 3, 85737 Ismaning, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 89 244040 Fax: +49 (0) 89 24404100

Email: info@sandoz.de Web: www.sandoz.de

Sanidom Handels-GmbH Sundlweg 2, A-8045 Graz, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 316 694944 Fax: +43 (0) 316 6949444

Sanitalia S.n.c. di Battaglia & C. Strada dei Tadini 5, 10131 Turin, Italy.

Tel: +39 011 6603246

Sankyo Pharma Italia S.p.A. Via Reno 5, 00100 Rome, Italy.

Tel: +39 06 852551 Fax: +39 06 85255235
Email: sankyo@sankyo-pharma.it Web: www:sankyo-pharma.com

Sanochemia Pharmazeutika AG Boltzmanngasse 9a-11, A-1091 Vienna,
Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 31914560
Email: office@sanochemia.at

Fax: +43 (0) 1 319145644
Web: www:sanochemia.at

Sanofi Aventis Coyancura 2283 Piso 13, Providencia, Santiago, Chile.

Sanofi Synthelabo OTC 9 rue du President-Allende, 94258 Gentilly cdx, France.
Tel: +33 (0) 8 25088352 Web: www.sanofi-synthelabo.com

Sanofi-Aventis 174 av de France, 75013 Paris, France.
Tel: +33 1 53774000 Fax: +33 1 53779157
Web: www.sanofi-aventis.fr

Sanofi-Aventis Ulansky Pereulok 4, 101000 Moscow, Russia.
Tel: +7 095 9265703 Fax: +7 095 9265710
Web: www.sanofi-aventis.com

Sanofi-Aventis (Schweiz) AG 17 rue de Veyrot, 1217 Meyrin 1/GE, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 22 9890147 Fax: +41 (0) 22 7839255
Web: www.sanofi-aventis.ch

Sanofi-Synthelabo de Mexico S.A. de C.V. Km 37.5 Autopista Mexico-Qro,
54730 Cuautitlan Izcali, Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 50623300 Fax: +52 55 50627514

Email: contacto@sanofi-synthelabo.com.mx

Web: www.sanofi-synthelabo.com.mx

Sanofi-Synthelabo GmbH Potsdamer Str. 8, 10785 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 25752000 Fax: +49 (0) 30 25752001

Email: info.deutschland@de.sanofi-synthelabo.com

Web: www.sanofi-synthelabo.de

----- PAGE 696 -----
Sanofi-Synthelabo S.p.A. Via GB Piranesi 38, 20137 Milan, Italy.
Tel: +39 02 73941 Fax: +39 02 76110389
Web: www.sanofi-synthelabo.com

Sanol GmbH Alfred-Nobel-Str. 10, 40789 Monheim, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 2173 485857 Fax: +49 (0) 2173 485851
Web: www.sanol.de

Sanopharm AG Via dei Ciossi 8, 6648 Minusio, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 91 7446862 Fax: +41 (0) 91 7446863
Email: sanopharm@econophone.ch

Sanova Pharma GmbH Postfach 3, A-1110 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 801040 Fax: +43 (0) 1 8042904
Santé Naturelle (AG) Ltée 369 Charles Péguy, La Prairie, J5R 3E8, Canada.
Tel: +1 450 6597723 Fax: +1 450 6599791
Web: www.santenaturelle.ca

Santiveri Encuny 8, 08038 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2986800 Fax: +34 93 2986819

Email: informacion@santiveri.es Web: www.santiveri.es
Sanum-Kehlbeck GmbH & Co. KG Hasseler Steinweg 9-12, 27318 Hoya,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 4251 93520

Email: sanum-kehlbeck@t-online.de
Saros Laboratorios FOC 68, 08038 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2988200 Fax: +34 93 2231652

Savoma Medicinali S.p.A. Via Baganza 2/A, 43100 Parma, Italy.

Tel: +39 0521 963890 Fax: +39 0521 968408

Email: savoma@tin.it

Schaper & Brimmer GmbH & Co. KG Bahnhofstr. 35, 38259 Salzgitter
(Ringelheim), Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 5341 3070

Email: info@schaper-bruemmer.de
Schering Mexicana S.A. de C.V. Calz. Mexico Xochimilco No. 5019, Tlalpan
San Lorenzo Huipulco, 14370 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 56277000 Fax: +52 55 56717053

Email: info@scheringmexicana.com Web: www.schering.com.mx

Schering (NZ) Ltd P.O. Box 101-691, North Shore Mail Centre, Auckland 10,
New Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 9 4152850
Web: www.schering.com
Schering P/L 27-31 Doody Street, Alexandria, NSW 2015, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 93178666 Fax: +61 (0) 2 93172138

Web: www.schering.com

Schering sro Safarikovd 17, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 71730661 Fax: +420 (0) 2 71730657

Email: schering@mbox.vol.cz

Schering-Plough Central East AG Usacheva ul. 33, str.1, 119048 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 9167100

Web: www.schering-plough.ru
Schering-Plough Corp. Galloping Hill Rd, Kenilworth, NJ 07033-0530, USA.
Tel: +1 908 298 4000 Web: www.schering-plough.com
Schering-Plough Healthcare Products Canada Inc. 6400 Northam Drive,
Mississauga, L4V 1]1, Canada.
Tel: +1 905 6736242

Web: www.schering-plough.com
Schering-Plough Ltd Schering-Plough House, Shire Park, Welwyn Garden City,
AL7 1TW, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1707 363636
Email: medinfo@spcorp.com
Schering-Plough S.A. de C.V. Av. 16 de Septiembre No. 301, Col. Xaltocan,
Deleg. Xochimilco, 16090 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 57284444 Fax: +52 55 56530926

Web: www.schering-plough.com

Schéning Pharmazeutische Praparate GmbH & Co. KG Porschestr. 22-24,
12107 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 7007760

Email: schoeningberlin@aol.com
Schuck GmbH /ndustriestr. 11, 90571 Schwaig b. Nurnberg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 911 500185 Fax: +49 (0) 911 508802

Email: info@schuck-arzneimittel.de Web: www.schuck-arzneimittel.de
Schiilke & Mayr GmbH Zieglergasse 8/3, A-1070 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 5232501 Fax: +43 (0) 1 523903579
Web: www:schuelke-mayr.com

Fax: +49 (0) 4251 935290
Web: www:sanum.com

Fax: +49 (0) 5341 307124
Web: www:schaper-bruemmer.de

Fax: +64 (0) 9 4156497

Fax: +7 095 9167094

Fax: +1 905 6710686

Fax: +44 (0) 1707 363763

Web: www:schering-plough.com

Fax: +49 (0) 30 7417003
Web: www.schoeningberlin.de

Suppliers Directory

Schumit 1967 Co. Ltd 73 Soi Latphrao 91, Latphrao Rd, Wangthonglaeng,
Bangkok 10310, Thailand.
Tel: +66 2 542 1791

Email: schumit@kse.th.com
Schwabe Pharma AG Friistrasse 2, Postfach, 6403 Kussnacht a.R., Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 41 8541960 Fax: +41 (0) 41 8541861

Email: info@schwabepharma.ch Web: www.schwabepharma.com
Schwabe S.A.C.1. Tte. Gral. Peron 1666, 1037 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 43727772 Fax: +54 (0) 11 43826267
Schwarzwalder Natur-Heilmittel Marktplatz 4, 93183 Kallmunz, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 9473 457 Fax: +49 (0) 9473 8769

Seber Portuguesa Farmacéutica, SA Rua Norberto de Oliveira 1-5, 2620-111 5

Fax: +66 2 542 0325

Povoa de St Adrido, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 9381500 Fax: +351 21 9374237

Email: medicamentos@seber-farmaceutica.pt

Sedar Industria Farmacéutica Ltda Rodovia BR 101 Sul Km 18, Distr. Ind. dos
Prazeres, 50950-000 Recife, Brazil.

Self-Care Products Ltd 30 Sycamore Rd, Amersham, HP6 SDR, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1494 722741

Sella A. Lab. Chim. Farm. S.r.l. Via Vicenza 67, 36015 Schio (Vicenza), Italy.
Tel: +39 0445 670088 Fax: +39 0445 673537

Email: info@sellafarmaceutici.it Web: www.sellafarmaceutici.it

SERP le Triton, 5 rue du Gabian, MC 98000, Monaco.

Tel: +377 97778705 Fax: +377 92167827

Email: serp@monaco377.com

Sertiirner Arzneimittel GmbH Wallenroder Str. 8-10, 13435 Berlin, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 30 4037070 Fax: +49 (0) 30 40370103

Email: info@sertuerner.de Web: www.sertuerner.de

Serumwerk Bernburg AG Hallesche Landstr. 105 b, 06406 Bernburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 3471 8600 Fax: +49 (0) 3471 860130

Email: swb-ag@t-online.de Web: www.serum-werk.de

Seven Seas Ltd Hedon Rd, Marfleet, Hull, HU9 SNJ, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1482 375234 Fax: +44 (0) 1482 374345

Email: info@seven-seas.Itd.uk Web: www.seven-seas.Itd.uk

Shaklee Canada Inc. 952 Century Dr, Burlington, L7L 5P2, Canada.

Tel: +1 905 681 1422
Shire Pharmaceuticals 725 Chesterbrook Blvd, Wayne, PA 19087-5637, USA.
Tel: +1 484 595 8800 Fax: +1 484 595 8900

Email: medinfo@us.shire.com Web: www.shire.com

Sidefarma SA Rua da Guine 26, 2689-514 Prior Velho, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 9426100 Fax: +351 21 9416205

Sidone Industria e Comércio Ltda. Rua Sdo Francisco Xavier 930, 38412-080
Uberlandia, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 34 32175352

Sidroga AG Postfach, 4800 Zofingen, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 62 7461777 Fax: +41 (0) 62 7461707

Email: administration@sidroga.com Web: wwwsidroga.com

Sigma Chemical Co. Ltd 7 Colonial Way, North Watford Industrial Estate, North
Watford, WD2 4P}, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1923 444999
Email: info@sigpharm.co.uk
Sigma Pharmaceuticals P/L 96 Merrindale Drive, Croydon, VIC 3136, Australia.
Tel: +61 (0) 3 98392800 Fax: +61 (0) 3 98392801

Web: www.sigmaco.com.au

Web: www.shaklee.ca

Fax: +44 (0) 1923 444998
Web: www:sigpharm.co.uk

Sigma Tau Espana Poligono Azque, Apt. do 1144, Alcald de Henares, 28815
Madrid, Spain.

Tel: +34 91 8883600
Email: sigmatau@nauta.es
Sigma Tau S.p.A. Via Pontina Km. 30,400, 00040 Pomezia (Rome), Italy.
Tel: +39 06 91391 Fax: +39 06 91393980

Web: www.sigma-tau.it

Sigmapharm Arzneimittel GmbH & Co KG Leystrasse 129, A-1204 Vienna,
Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 3300671

Email: sigmapharm@sigmapharm.at
Sigma-Tau Arzneimittel GmbH Shadowstr. 44, 40212 Dusseldorf, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 211 3694993 Fax: +49 (0) 211 161527

Email: sigmatau@cww.de Web: www.sigma-tau.it

Sigma-Tau Ethifarma B.V. Postbus 10072, 9400 CB Assen, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 592 333000 Fax: +31 (0) 592 333009

Web: www.sigma-tau.it

Fax: +34 91 8883616
Web: www:sigma-tau.com

Fax: +43 (0) 1 330067138
Web: www:sigmapharm.at

----- PAGE 697 -----
Appendix 5

Sime Darby Marketing, A Division of Sime Darby Singapore Ltd 896
Dunearn Rd, 04-03 Sime Darby Centre, S 589472, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6469 8877 Fax: +65 6468 4928

Email: simemktg@singnet.com.sg,

Skills in Farmacia S.r.1. Piazza Buonarroti 32, 20145 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 4675111 Fax: +39 02 46751160

Email: info@skillsfarmacia.it Web: www.skillsfarmacia.it
Slovakofarma sro Machovd 18, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 96530102 Fax: +420 (0) 2 96530112

Email: info@slofa.sk

Sociedade Farmacéutica Gestafarma, Lda Rua Dr. Alvaro de Castro 65-7,
1600-058 Lisbon, Portugal.

Tel: +351 21 7961158

Societa Industria Farmaceutica Italiana S.p.A. Via Ercole Patti 36, 95025
Lavinao-Aci S. Antonio (CY), Italy.

Tel: +39 095 7922111 Fax: +39 095 7893435

Solara Farmaceutica SA de CV Av Paseo de las Palmas 330 PB, 11000 Lomas de
Chapultepec, Mexico.

Solvay Arzneimittel GmbH Hans-Bockler-Allee 20, 30173 Hannover, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 511 8572400 Fax: +49 (0) 511 8573120

Email: solvay.arzneimittel@solvaycom — Web: www-solvay-arzneimittel.de
Solvay Farma Ltda Rua Sergipe 120, 1243000 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Solvay Pharma Avda Diagonal 507-509, 08029 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 4954500 Fax: +34 93 4052492

Email: atencli.pharma@solvay.com Web: www.solvaypharma.es

Solvay Pharma & Cie S.N.C. Blue Planet Building, Ave Bourgemestre E.
Demunter 3, 1090 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 4222711

Email: pharma.be@solvay.com
Solvay Pharma AB Sisjo Kullegata 8, 421 32 Vdstra Frolunda, Sweden.

Tel: +46 (0) 31 689030 Fax: +46 (0) 31 689040

Email: info@solvay-pharma.se Web: www.solvaypharmaceuticals.com
Solvay Pharma AG Untermattweg 8, 3027 Bern, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 31 9969600 Fax: +41 (0) 31 9969699

Email: solvay-bern@solvaycom Web: www.solvaypharmaceuticals.com
Solvay Pharma BV C / Van Houtenlaan 36, 1381 CP Weesp, Netherlands.
Tel: +31 (0) 294 479000 Fax: +31 (0) 294 432189

Web: www.solvaypharmaceuticals.com

Solvay Pharma GmbH Donaustrasse 106, A-3400 Klosterneuburg, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 2243 25620 Fax: +43 (0) 2243 2562040

Web: www.solvaypharma.at

Solvay Pharma (Pty) Ltd P.O. Box 5278, halfway House 1685, South Africa.
Tel: +27 (0) 11 3139803 Fax: +27 (0) 11 3139804

Web: www.solvaypharmaceuticals.com

Solvay Pharma S.p.A. Via della Liberta 30, 10095 Grugliasco (TO), Italy.
Tel: +39 011 4027911 Fax: +39 O11 783955

Web: www.solvaypharmaceuticals.com

Solvay Pharma sro Bieblovd 19, 150 00 Prague 5, Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 2 51562156 Fax: +420 (0) 2 51561588

Email: solvay@solvay-pharma.cz

Solvayfarma, Lda Av. Marechal Gomes da Costa 33, 1800-255 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 8315800 Fax: +351 21 8315860

Web: www.solvaypharmaceuticals.com

Sopharma AO Taganskaya ul. 19, et. 10, 109147 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 7995511

Soria Natural Pol Ind La Sacea 1, Garray, 42162 Soria, Spain.

Tel: +34 975 252046 Fax: +34 975 252267

Email: soria@sorianatural.es Web: www.sorianatural.es

Spagyros AG Tannackerstrasse 7, 3073 Gumlingen, Switzerland.

Fax: +32 (0) 2 4222799
Web: www:solvaypharmaceuticals.com

vw

Tel: +41 (0) 31 9595580 Fax: +41 (0) 31 9595581
Specialita Igienico Terapeutiche S.r.l. C.so Cavour 70, 27035 Mede (Pavia),
Italy.

Tel: +39 0384 820416 Fax: +39 0384 822133

Email: sit@sit-farmaceutici.com

Spedrog Caillon S.A.ly C. Alte. Feo. J. Segui 2106, 1416 Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45820411 Fax: +54 (0) 11 45852929

Spineda, Pérez y Hnos. Y Cia SRL Zado 3735, 1431 Villa Urquiza, Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45722902 Fax: +54 (0) 11 45730529

Spirig Pharma AG Postfach 111, 4622 Egerkingen, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 62 3878787 Fax: +41 (0) 62 3878799

Sriprasit Dispensary R O P 617 Charoen Rath Rd, Klongsarn, Bangkok 10600,
Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 437 0343
Email: sipasit@tcc.or.th
Stada GmbH Stadastr. 2-18, 61118 Bad Vilbel, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6101 6030 Fax: +49 (0) 6101 603259
Email: info@stada.de Web: www.stada.de

Fax: +66 2 438 8060

Stada Pharma International os Hnevkovskd 58, 148 00 Prague 4, Czech
Republic.

Stanley Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Division of Vita Health Products Ltd 150
Beghin Ave, Winnipeg, R2] 3W2, Canada.

Tel: +1 204 6618386 Fax: +1 204 6638386

Steierl Pharma GmbH Muhlfelder Str. 48, 82211 Herrsching, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 8152 93220 Fax: +49 (0) $152 932244

Email: info@steierl.de Web: wwwsteierl.de

Steigerwald Arzneimittelwerk GmbH Havelstr. 5, 64295 Darmstadt,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6151 33050
Web: www.steigerwald.de

Fax: +49 (0) 6151 3305410

Steiner & Co. Deutsche Arzneimittel Gesellschaft Ostpreussendamm 72/74,
12207 Berlin, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 30 710940

Email: info@steinerarznei-berlin.de
Stella Pharmaceutical Canada Inc. 407-220 Duncan Mill Rd, Don Mills, M3B
3)5, Canada.

Tel: +1 416 4430636
Web: www.nutribar.com
Strathmann AG & Co. Sellhopsweg 1, 22459 Hamburg, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 40 559050 Fax: +49 (0) 40 5509253
Email: info@strathmann.de Web: www.strathmann.de

Fax: +49 (0) 30 7125012
Web: wwwisteinerarznei-berlin.de

Fax: +1 416 4438504

Strathmann Ag & Co Képviselete /poly u 5/f, 1133 Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 3202865 Fax: +36 3202867

Sundown 6111 Broken Sound Parkway NW, , Boca Raton, FL 33487, USA.

Tel: +1 561 241 9400 Email: info@sundownnutrition.com

Web: www.sundownnutrition.com

Sunspot Products P/L Level 3, Suite 303, 20 Bungan St, Mona Vale, NSW 2103,
Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 99797333

Email: enquires@sunspot.com.au
Super Mayoreo Naturista S.A. de C.V. Calle 3 No. 13 Local 4, Fracc. Industrial
Alce Blanco, Naucalpan de Juarez, 53370 Mexico D.F., Mexico.

Tel: +52 55 53594180 Fax: +52 55 53594181

Web: www.smn.com.mx

Swiss Bio Pharma Sdn Bhd 2nd Fl, Bik E, No 10, Jin Bersatu 13/4, 46200
Petaling Jaya, Malaysia.
Tel: +60 (0) 3 79573873
Swiss Herbal Remedies Ltd 35 Leek Cres, Richmond Hill, L4B 4C2, Canada.
Tel: +1 905 8869500 Fax: +1 905 8865434

Web: www.swissherbal.com

SwissHealth , UK.

Synco (HK) Ltd Bik D, 3/F, Sun View Industrial Bldg, 3 On Yip St, Chaiwan, Hong
Kong.

Tel: +852 25560157
Email: info@synco.com.hk

Fax: +61 (0) 2 99978647
Web: www:sunspot.com.au

Email: enquiries@vitahealth.com.my

Fax: +852 28972582
Web: www:synco-pharma.com

Syxyl GmbH & Co. KG Gereonsmuhlengasse 5, 50670 Cologne, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 221 1652630 Fax: +49 (0) 221 1652631

oO

TAD Pharma GmbH Heinz-Lohmann-Str. 5, 27472 Cuxhaven, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 4721 6060 Fax: +49 (0) 4721 606333

Email: info@tad.de Web: www.tad.de

Tamar Marketing , Rishon-Lezion 75652, Israel.

Tanning Research Labs Inc. P.O. Box 265111, Daytone Beach, FL 32126-5111,
USA.

Tel: +1 386 677 9559
Web: wwwhtropic.com
Tanta Pharmaceuticals Inc. 1009 Burns St East, Whitby, LIN 6A6, Canada.
Tel: +1 905 4308440 Fax: +1 905 4308449

Taro Pharmaceutical International 74 Hakitor St, P.O. Box 10347, Haifa Bay
26110, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 4 8475700

Fax: +1 386 677 9595

Web: www.taro.co.il

----- PAGE 698 -----
Techni-Pharma 7 rue de I‘Industrie, B.P. 717, MC 98014, Monaco.

Tel: +377 92057510 Fax: +377 92057710

Teclapharm GmbH Heilgenthalar Str. 4, 21335 Luneburg, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 4131 404100 Fax: +49 (0) 4131 43380

Web: www.teclapharm.de

Tecnifar, SA Rua Tierno Galvan, Torre 3, 12 Piso, 1099-036 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 0330700 Fax: +351 21 0330709

Tecnonat S.A. 24 de Noviembre 368, 1170 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 49322600 Web: www.tecnonat.com

Tender Corporation , Czech Republic.

Tentan AG Brunnliweg 16, 4433 Ramlinsburg, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 9313874 Fax: +41 (0) 61 9313876

Email: info@tentan.ch Web: www.tentan.ch

Teofarma Via F.lli Cervi 5, 27100 Valle Salimbene (PV), Italy.

Tel: +39 0382 422008 Fax: +39 0382 525845

Web: www.teofarma.it

Terra-Bio-Chemie GmbH Lindenbergstr. 5, 79199 Kirchzarten, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7661 90320 Fax: +49 (0) 7661 903279

Email: info@terra-bio.de Web: www.terra-bio.de

tetesept Pharma GmbH Marschnerstr. 10, 60318 Frankfurt, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 69 15031 Fax: +49 (0) 69 5962150

Email: merzpr@merz.de Web: www.merz.de

Tetra Pharm 7 Azrieli Center, Round Bldg, 24 floor, Tel Aviv 67021, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 3 6911688 Fax: +972 (0) 3 6911686

Email: info@sebocalm.co.il Web: www.sebocalm.co.il

Teva Pharmaceuticals Ind. Ltd P.O. Box 8077, Kiryat Nordau, Netanya, Israel.
Tel: +972 (0) 9 8639777 Fax: +972 (0) 9 8653764

Web: www.tevapharm.com

The Boots Company (Far East) Pte Ltd 180-B Bencoolen St, 09-03 The
Bencoolen, S 189648, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6332 9230 Fax: +65 6837 0285

The Cantassium Company Larkhill Farm, Putney, UK.

The Purdue Frederick Co. One Stamford Forum, 201 Tresser Blvd, Stamford, CT
06901-3431, USA.
Tel: +1 203 588 8000
Web: www.pharma.com
Therabel Pharma SA Rue Egide Van Ophem 108, 1180 Brussels, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 2 3704611 Fax: +32 (0) 2 3704690
Web: www:therabel.com

Fax: +1 203 588 8850

Therasophia 630 route des Dolines, 06560 Valbonne, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 4 93755955 Fax: +33 (0) 4 93755716

Email: infos@therasophia.com Web: www.therasophia.com
Thornton & Ross Ltd Linthwaite Laboratories, Huddersfield, HD7 5QH, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 1484 842217 Fax: +44 (0) 1484 847301

Email: mail@thorntonross.com Web: www.thorntonross.com

Thuna Herbal Remedies Ltd 298 Danforth Ave, Toronto, M4K 1N6, Canada.
Tel: +1 416 4653511

Thursday Plantation laboratories Ltd Pacific Highway, Gallen’s Road, Ballina,
NSW 2478, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 66867273

Web: www.thursdayplantation.com.au
Tilman SA/NV Zoning Industriel 15, 5377 Baillonville, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 84 320360 Fax: +32 (0) 84 320375

Email: export@tilman.be Web: www.tilman.be

TNP Health Care Co. Ltd 94/7 Soi Yimprakrob, Ngamwongwan Rd, Nonthaburi
11000, Thailand.

Tel: +66 (0) 2951 8008

Email: thainakorn@thainakorn.com
Torrex Pharma GmbH Lange Gasse 76/12, A-1080 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 4073919 Fax: +43 (0) 1 40739194
Tramedico BV Postbus 192, 1380 AD Weesp, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 294 461122 Fax: +31 (0) 294 461170
Web: www:tramedico.nl

Fax: +61 (0) 2 66867458

Fax: +66 (0) 2589 2729
Web: www:thainakorn.com

Transatlantic International Ulof Palme ul. 1, Section 5, 119590 Moscow,
Russia.

Tel: +7 095 7753938

Email: office@transatlantic.ru

Fax: +7 095 5141054

Web: www.transatlantic.ru

Treasure Mountain Development Co. Ltd 19/F Chit Lee Commercial Bldg, 30-
36 Shaukeiwan Rd, Hong Kong.
Tel: +852 25677983

Email: tmdcl@netvigator.com

Fax: +852 25672600
Web: www.tmdel.com.hk

Suppliers Directory

Trima , Kibbutz Ma‘abarot 40230, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 9 8982862 Fax: +972 (0) 9 8982879

Email: info@trima.co.il Web: www.trima.co.il

Trinity Trading Co. Ltd Unit 7A-B, 39/F Cable TV Tower, 9 Hoi Shing Rd, Tsuen
Wan, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 23856044 Fax: +852 27701508

Truw Arzneimittel Vertriebs GmbH Ziethenstr. 8, 33330 Gutersloh, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 5241 300740 Fax: +49 (0) 5241 3007415

Email: info@truw.de Web: www.truw.de

Tubilux Pharma S.p.A. Via Costarica 20/22, 00040 Pomezia (RM), Italy.

Tel: +39 06 911831 Fax: +39 06 91183410

Email: tubilux@tubilux.it

Typharm Ltd 14D Wendover Rd, Rackheath Industrial Estate, Norwich, NR13
6LH, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1603 735200 Fax: +44 (0) 1603 735217

Email: customerservices@typharm.com Web: www:typharm.com

CU)

UB Interpharm SA 36 av Cardinal-Mermillod, 1227 Carouge/GE, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 22 3001734 Fax: +41 (0) 22 3003679

Ubepharm Bodor u 8 1/6, 1138 Budapest, Hungary.
Tel: +36 3597113

UCB Pharma BV Druivenstraat 5, 4816 KB Breda, Netherlands.
Tel: +31 (0) 76 5879222 Fax: +31 (0) 76 5875264
Web: www.ucbpharma.com

Uniao Quimica Farmacéutica Nacional S.A. Avenida dos Bandeirantes 5386,
04071-900 Sdo Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 55862000 Fax: +55 (0) 11 55859755

Email: faleconosco@uniaoquimica.com.br

Web: www.uniaoquimica.com.br

Uniderm Farmaceutici S.r.l. P.le F. il Macedone 140, 00124 Casalpalocco (RM),
Italy.

Tel: +39 06 50930618
Email: uniderm@uniderm.it
Union Medical (Thailand) Co. Ltd 513/199-200 Jaransanitwong Rd, Soi 37
Bangkoknoi, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.
Tel: +66 2 412 1915

Email: ume@unionmedical.co.th

Unipharm de Mexico SA de CV Tamarindos XV-A Lote 10 y 11, 91697
Veracruz C Ind. Bruno Pagliai, Mexico.

Fax: +39 06 50930587
Web: www.uniderm.it

Fax: +66 2 412 5927
Web: www.unionmedical.co.th

Uni-Pharma Kleon Tsetis, Pharmaceutical Laboratories $.A. 14th km
National Rd 1, 145 64 Kifissia, Greece.
Tel: +30 210 8072512

Email: unipharma@uni-pharma.gr

Fax: +30 210 8078907
Web: www:uni-pharma.gr

Unique Pharmaceutical Laboratories Sadovaya-Kudrinskaya ul. 3, 123242
Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 2547579
Email: unique@relline.ru

United Drug United Drug House, Belgard Rd, Tallaght, Dublin 24, Ireland.
Tel: +353 (0) 1459 8877 Fax: +353 (0) 1 459 6893
Email: info@united-drug.ie Web: www.united-drug.ie

Universal Pharmaceutical Lab Ltd Eastern Ctr, G/F & 1/F, Unit 1-5, 1065 King’s
Rd, Quarry Bay, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 25628131 Fax: +852 25657913

Universal Pharmaceuticals (Pty) Ltd 7 Browning St, Jeppe, Johannesburg,
South Africa.

Upsifarma, Lda S. Domingos d Lapa 8, Letra H, 1200-835 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 3953644 Fax: +351 21 3954765

Uriach Avdaa. Cami Real 51-57, Pol. Industrial Riera de Caldes, Palau-Solita i
Plegamans, 08184 Barcelona, Spain.
Tel: +34 93 3471511

Email: corp@uriach.com
Ursapharm Arzneimittel GmbH & Co. KG Industriestr., 66129 Saarbrucken,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 6805 92920
Email: info@ursapharm.de

Fax: +7 095 2548382

Fax: +34 93 8646606
Web: www.uriach.com

Fax: +49 (0) 6805 929288
Web: www.ursapharm.de
Usana , Singapore.

Usana Hong Kong Ltd Unit 2504-06, 25/F, World Trade Centre, 280 Gloucester
Rd, Causeway Bay, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 21621818 Fax: +852 21621228

----- PAGE 699 -----
Appendix 5

@

Valuge S.A. Cuyo 2870, 1640 Martinez, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 48363636

Verla-Pharm, Arzneimittelfabrik, Apotheker H.J.v. Ehrlich GmbH & Co. KG
Hauptstr. 98, 82327 Tutzing, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 8158 2570

Email: info@verla.de

Vianex S.A. Tatoiou Str., 18th Km Lamia National Rd, 146 10 Nea Erythrea,
Greece.

Tel: +30 210 8009111
Email: mailbox@vianex.gr

Fax: +49 (0) 8158 257250
Web: www.verla.de

Fax: +30 210 8071573

Web: wwwvianex.gr

Viatris Av J.F. Kennedy, 33701 Meérignac cdx, France.

Tel: +33 (0) 5 56553535 Fax: +33 (0) 5 56341328

Email: info@viatris.fr Web: www.viatris.fr

Viatris BV Verriin Stuartweg 60, 1112 AX Diemen, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 20 5198300 Fax: +31 (0) 20 6906435

Email: info@viatris.nl Web: www.viatris.nl

Viatris Farmacéutica SA Rua do Centro Cultural 13, 1749-066 Lisbon, Portugal.
Tel: +351 21 8420300 Fax: +351 21 8492042

Email: info@viatris.pt Web: www.viatris.pt

Viatris Pharma GmbH Liesinger Flur-Gasse 2C, A-1230 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1 863900 Fax: +43 (0) 1 863903161

Email: info@viatris.at Web: www.viatris.at

Viatris S.p.A. Viale Brenta 18, 20139 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 700671 Fax: +39 02 716574

Email: info@viatris.it Web: www.viatris.com

Vicis Pharma Kft Kapds u 11-15, Buda Business Center, 1027 Budapest,
Hungary.

Tel: +36 4579921

Vida Laboratories Ltd Unit 919 Vanta Industrial Ctr, 21 Tai Lin Pai Rd, Kwai
Chung, Hong Kong.

Tel: +852 24236333

Email: mail-box@vidalab.com
Vifor SA Route de Moncor 10, 1752 Villars-sur-Gldne, Switzerland.
Tel: +41 (0) 26 4076111 Fax: +41 (0) 26 4011485
Email: info@vifor.ch Web: www.vifor.ch

Fax: +852 24236232
Web: www.vidalab.com

Vifias Provenza 386, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

Tel: +34 93 2070512 Fax: +34 93 2071932

Vita Health Care AG , 3177 Laupen, Switzerland.

Vita Healthcare Ltd Palladium House, 1-4 Argyll St, London, W1V 2LD, UK.
Tel: +44 (0) 20 73289797 Fax: +44 (0) 20 73288555

Email: addresse@vitahealthcare.com

Vitabalans Oy Varastokatu 8, 13500 Hdmeenlinna, Finland.

Tel: +358 (0) 3 615600 Fax: +358 (0) 3 6183902

Email: etunimi.sukunimi@yitabalans.fi_ Web: www.vitabalans.fi

Vitabiotics Ltd 7 Apsley Way, , London, NW2 7HE, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 20 8955 2600 Fax: +44 (0) 20 8955 2601

Web: www.vitabiotics.com

Vitafarma C/Florida 29, Hernani, 20120 Guipuzcoa, Spain.

Tel: +34 943 335273 Fax: +34 943 335269

Email: d.comercial@vitafarma.es Web: www.vitafarma.es

Vitalia Health Ltd P.O. Box 2492, Marlow, SL7 2WW, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1628 898366 Fax: +44 (0) 1628 898367

Email: information@vitalia-health.co.uk Web: www.vitalia-health.co.uk
Vitamed Ltd P.O. Box 114, Binyamina 30550, Israel.

Tel: +972 (0) 4 6189000 Fax: +972 (0) 4 6189029

Email: ricki@vitamed.co.il

Vitaplex Products P.O. Box 270, Gymea, NSW 2227, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 95452633 Fax: +61 (0) 2 95452642

Viternat Laboratérios Ltda Av Dr Luis Arrobas Martins 759, 04781-001 Sdo
Paulo, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 11 56862661

VSM Belgium Prins Boudewijniaan 17 unit 7, 2550 Kontich, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 3 4508166 Fax: +32 (0) 3 4583624

Email: info@vsm.be Web: www.vsm.nl

VSM Geneesmiddelen BV Postbus 9321, 1800 GH Alkmaar, Netherlands.

Tel: +31 (0) 72 5661122 Fax: +31 (0) 72 5623883
Web: www.vsm.nl

@

W. Spitzner, Arzneimittelfabrik GmbH Bunsenstr. 6-10, 76275 Ettlingen,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7243 10601
Web: wwwspitzner.de

Fax: +49 (0) 7243 106333

Wagner Pharmafax Kft Gyogyszer Business Center, Kassai u 56-58/b, 1041
Budapest, Hungary.

Tel: +36 3804596 Fax: +36 3708633

Wala Schweiz GmbH Waaghausgasse 3, 3011 Berne, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 31 8493901 Fax: +41 (0) 31 8493902

Walgreens Finest Natural 200 Wilmot Road, , Deerfield, IL 60015, USA.

Tel: +1 847 914 2500 Web: www.walgreens.com

Walker Pharmacal 4200 Laclede Ave, St Louis, MO 63108, USA.

Tel: +1 314 533 9600

Wallace Pharmaceuticals Ltd 7101/2 Floral Deck Plaza, Off Central MIDC Rd,
Andheri (East), Mumbai 400 093, India.

Tel: +91 (0) 22 8390681 Fax: +91 (0) 22 8390733

Web: www.wallacepharma.net

Wampole Brands Inc. 5950 Cote-de-Liesse, Montreal, H4T 1E2, Canada.
Tel: +1 866 2219267

Wassen Italia S.r.1. Via Canova 25, 20145 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 3191061 Fax: +39 02 33100935

Email: wassen@wassen.it Web: www.wassen.it

Watson Pharmaceuticals Inc. 371 Bonnie Circle, Corona, CA 91720, USA.
Tel: +1 951 493 5300 Fax: +1 951 493 5842

Web: www.watsonpharm.com

Weber & Weber GmbH & Co. KG Herrschinger Str. 33, 82266 Inning/
Ammersee, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8143 9270

Email: service@weber-weber.de
Weleda AG Stollenrain 11, 4144 Arlesheim, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 61 7052121 Fax: +41 (0) 61 7052310

Email: info@weleda.ch Web: www.weleda.ch

Weleda AG-Heilmittelbetriebe Mohlerstr. 3-5, 73525 Schwabisch Gmund,
Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 7171 9190
Email: med-wiss@weleda.de
Weleda GmbH & Co. KG Hosenedelgasse 27, A-1220 Vienna, Austria.
Tel: +43 (0) 1 2566060 Fax: +43 (0) 1 2594204

Web: www.weleda.at

Weleda (UK) Ltd Heanor Rd, Ilkeston, DE7 8DR, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 115 944 8200 Fax: +44 (0) 115 944 8210

Email: info@weleda.co.uk Web: www.weleda.co.uk

Wellchem Pharmaceuticals Pte Ltd 221 Henderson Rd, 04-15 Henderson
Building, S 159557, Singapore.
Tel: +65 6276 6533

Email: wellchem@singnet.com.sg
Weston Pharmaceutical Ltd Unit 26, 8/F Tower A, Southmark, 11 Yip Hing St,
Wong Chuk Hang, Hong Kong.
Tel: +852 25528122

Email: westonph@netvigator.com
WF Young Inc. 1225 rue Volta, Boucherville, 4B 7M7, Canada.

Tel: +1 450 6416496 Fax: +1 450 6419347

Whitehall P.O. Box 12736, Penrose, Auckland, New Zealand.

Tel: +64 (0) 9 5253807 Fax: +64 (0) 9 5257971

Whitehall Italia S.p.A. Via Puccini 3, 20121 Milan, Italy.

Tel: +39 02 8069181 Fax: +39 02 80691871

Whitehall Laboratories Australia P/L Private Mailbag 1, Punchbowl, NSW
2196, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 95341000 Fax: +61 (0) 2 95333980
Whitehall-Much GmbH Regina-Protmann-Str. 16, 48159 Munster, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 251 92718 Fax: +49 (0) 251 92713099

Email: wh-medwiss@wyeth.com Web: www.whitehall-much.de
Whitehall-Robins AG Grafenauweg 10, 6301 Zug 7, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 41 7290250 Fax: +41 (0) 41 7290255
Whitehall-Robins Inc. 5975 Whittle Rd, Mississauga, L4Z 3M6, Canada.

Tel: +1 905 5077000 Fax: +1 905 SO77111

Wick Pharma Zweigniederlassung der Procter & Gamble GmbH Sulzbacher
Str. 40, 65824 Schwalbach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 6196 8901

Web: www.wickpharma.de

Fax: +49 (0) $143 7084
Web: www.weber-weber.de

Fax: +49 (0) 7171 919362
Web: www.weleda.de

Fax: +65 6276 5672
Web: www.wellchem.com

Fax: +852 25526799

Fax: +49 (0) 6196 894929

----- PAGE 700 -----
Wiedemann Pharma GmbH Pilotyweg 14, 82541 Munsing, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 8177 93140 Fax: +49 (0) 8177 931414

Email: mail@wiedemann-pharma.de Web: www.wiedemann-pharma.de
Wierhom Pharma S.A. Arismendi 2441, 1427 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Tel: +54 (0) 11 45234815

Will-Pharma SA Rue du Manil 80, 1301 Wavre, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 10 243838 Fax: +32 (0) 10 243377

Email: willpharma@willpharma.com Web: wwwawillpharma.com

Wing Wai Trading Co. Unit E, 2/F Freder Ctr, 3 Mok Cheong St, Kowloon, Hong
Kong.

Tel: +852 23346228 Fax: +852 23344665

Woelm Pharma GmbH & Co. Rhondorfer Str. 80, 53604 Bad Honnef, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 2224 7740 Fax: +49 (0) 2224 774170

Email: kontakt@woelm.com Web: www.woelm.com

Wolfs SA Industriepark West 68, 9100 Sint-Niklaas, Belgium.

Tel: +32 (0) 3 7806390 Fax: +32 (0) 3 7806391

Email: info@wolfsnvbe

Worldwide Health Corp. Ltd Freepost, Alderney, Guernsey, Channel Islands,
GY1 555, UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 800 952 9952
Email: info@wwhonline.com
Wérwag Pharma GmbH & Co Pod Zameckem 1372, 500 12 Hradec Krdlové,
Czech Republic.

Tel: +420 (0) 49 5267157
Email: woerwag@traveller.cz
Wé6rwag Pharma GmbH & Co. KG Calwer Str. 7, 71034 Boblingen, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7031 62040 Fax: +49 (0) 7031 620431

Email: info@woerwagpharma.de Web: www.woerwagpharma.de

Wyeth Consumer Healthcare Del Inca 4446, Of. 201, Las Condes, Santiago,
Chile.

Wyeth Consumer Healthcare Inc. 5 Giralda Farms, Madison, NJ 07940, USA.
Tel: +1 973 660 5500 Fax: +1 973 660 7111

Web: www.wyeth.com

Wyeth Laboratories Huntercombe Lane South, Taplow, Maidenhead, SL6 OPH,
UK.

Tel: +44 (0) 1628 604377
Web: www.wyeth.co.uk
Wyeth Pharmaceuticals, Division of Wyeth Australia P/L Locked Bag 5002,
Baulkham Hills BC, NSW 2153, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 88508200 Fax: +61 (0) 2 90230000

Web: www.wyeth.com.au

Wyeth-Lederle Pharma GmbH Storchengasse 1, A-1150 Vienna, Austria.

Tel: +43 (0) 1.891140 Fax: +43 (0) 1 89114399

Web: www.wyeth.at

ty)

Yauyip P/L Suite 503 Cliveden, 4 Bridge Street, NSW 2000, Australia.

Tel: +61 (0) 2 92474160

Y.S.P. Industries (M) Sdn Bhd 78 Jin Wan Kadir, Taman Tun Dr Ismail, 60000
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Tel: +60 (0) 3 77276390
Web: www.ysp.com.my

Fax: +44 (0) 1481 824 878
Web: www.wwhonline.com

Fax: +420 (0)

Fax: +44 (0) 1628 666368

Fax: +60 (0) 3 77276701

Suppliers Directory

Yung Shin Pharmaceutical (S) Pte Ltd 8 Kaki Bukit Rd 2, 02-26 Ruby
Warehouse Complex, S 417841, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6741 2466 Fax: +65 6747 6009

Email: yspsin@singnet.com.sg Web: www.ysp.com.tw

@

Zambon Group SpA Glazovskii per. 7, of. 17, 119002 Moscow, Russia.

Tel: +7 095 9333830 Fax: +7 095 9333831

Email: zambin@zambon.ru Web: www.zambon.ru

Zambon SA Ave Bourgemestre E. Demunter 1 boite 9, 1090 Brussels, Belgium.
Tel: +32 (0) 2 7719936 Fax: +32 (0) 27718570

Web: www.zambongroup.com

Zellaforte Vertriebsanstalt Austrasse 52, FL-9490 Vaduz, Switzerland.

Tel: +41 (0) 75 2322617

Zeppenfeldt Pharma GmbH Weiler Str. 19-21, 79540 Lorrach, Germany.
Tel: +49 (0) 7621 919290 Fax: +49 (0) 7621 9192930

Email: mail@zeppenfeldt.de Web: www.zeppenfeldt.de

Zeta Farmaceutici S.p.A. Via Galvani 10, 36066 Sandrigo (VI), Italy.

Tel: +39 0444 461911 Fax: +39 0444 658351

Email: info@zetafarm.it

Ziethen Tengstr. 26, 80798 Munich, Germany.

Tel: +49 (0) 89 2714759 Fax: +49 (0) 89 339558

Zuellig Pharma 376-318 Richmond Road, Grey Lynn, Auckland, New Zealand.
Tel: +64 (0) 9 3610403 Fax: +64 (0) 9 3610445

Web: www.zuelligpharma.com

Zuellig Pharma Ltd 8-9 Ploenchit Center, 2 Sukhumvit Rd, Kwang Klongtoey,
Khet Klongtoey, Bangkok 10110, Thailand.

Tel: +66 2 656 9800 Fax: +66 2 656 9801

Email: info@zuelligpharma.co.th Web: www.zuelligpharma.com

Zuellig Pharma Pte Ltd 19 Loyang Way, 08-20, S 508724, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6546 8188 Fax: +65 6546 8288

Email: enquiry@zuelligpharma.com Web: www.zuelligpharma.com

Zuellig Pharma Sdn Bhd Level 3A, No 10, JIn Bersatu 13/4, 46200 Petaling
Jaya, Malaysia.

Tel: +60 (0) 3 79856688

Web: www.zuelligpharma.com
Zuoz Pharma S.A. Esquina Puente Restaurador a Rio, Av. Oeste 20, Santa Teresa,
Caracas, Venezuela.

Tel: +58 (0) 212 4818833 Fa:
Email: clientes@zuoz.com

Fax: +60 (0) 3 79551388

+58 (0) 212 4846401
Web: www.zuozpharma.com.ve

Zurita Laboratério Farmacéutico Ltda Rua Domingos Graziano 104, 13600-
000 Araras, Brazil.

Tel: +55 (0) 19 5411611
Email: zurita@zurita.com.br
Zydus Cadila Group Zydus Tower, Satellite Cross Roads, Ahmedabad 380 015,
India.

Tel: +91 (0) 79 6868100
Web: www.cadila-zydus.com
Zyfas Medical Co 102E Pasir Panjang Rd, 02-10/11 Citilink Warehouse Complex,
S 118529, Singapore.

Tel: +65 6275 7757

Email: zyfas@singnet.com.sg

Fax: +55 (0) 19 5412052
Web: www.zurita.com.br

Fax: +91 (0) 79 6862366

Fax: +65 6275 2287

----- PAGE 701 -----
yp 7 Index

Page numbers in bold refer to monographs.

13-hydroxyballonigrinolide, 358

LA)

abdominal cramps, 51, 52
abdominal pains, 51, 271
abietanes, 30, 31
abortifacient activity

aloes, 52

aniseed, 59

chamomile, Roman, 157

cohosh, blue, 181

feverfew, 266

garlic, 286

ginger, 297

horehound, white, 362

hydrocotyle, 373

juniper, 387

liferoot, 408

nettle, 454

pennyroyal, 470

pokeroot, 480

shepherd's purse, 542

squill, 548

vervain, 592

yarrow, 606
abscess treatment, 545
acacetin rhamnoside, 268
Acanthopanax senticosus, 315
acetic acid, 102, 169
acetovanillochromene, 382
7-a-acetoxymarrubiin, 358
acetylcholine, 452, 541

antagonist, 92

inhibited release, 38
acetylenes, 153, 604
acetylenic amide, 218
Achillea collina, 604
Achillea lanulosa, 604
Achillea millefolium, 604
achillicin, 604
acid constituents

apricot, 61

artichoke, 67

blue flag, 87

bogbean, 89

borage, 96

burdock, 102

centaury, 149

clivers, 164

coltsfoot, 185

cranberry, 197

dandelion, 204, 205

eyebright, 256

figwort, 268

fumitory, 276

Jamaica dogwood, 379

juniper, 386

lime flower, 409

nettle, 452

plantain, 474

sage, 512

senega, 533

acidic urine, 199, 577

acne, 274

Aconitum spp., 8

Acoraceae, 118

Acorus calamus, 118

Actaea monogyna, 168

Actaea racemosa, 168

actein, 168, 170

acteoside, 208

adaptogenic properties, 318, 501, 502

adrenal cortical activity, 126

adrenocorticosteroids, 52
senna and, 539

adulteration, 8, 10

adverse effects

examples, see Introduction, Table 1
potential, see Introduction, Table 2

Aeromonas, 283
Aeschrion excelsa, 491
aescin, 363, 365
aesculentic acid, 479
aesculetin, 363, 367
aesculin, 363, 367
Aesculus, 363
Aesculus hippocastanum, 363
African Myrrh, 449
afterbirth elimination, 531
Agathosma betulina, 100
agglutinating activity
mistletoe, 439
Agni Casti, 36
Agnus Castus, 36
agnuside, 36, 37
Agrimonia, 42
Agrimonia eupatoria, 42, 43
agrimoniin, 31, 43
Agrimony, 42
agropyrene, 193
Agropyron, 193
Agropyron repens, 193
Ague Tree, 518
Ajo, 279
ajoene, 279, 280
ajugol, 447
ajugoside, 447
akuammigine, 133
alanine, 268, 371, 409, 474
Alant, 240
alant camphor, 240
alantolactone, 240
albumen, 77
Alchemilla arvensis, 459
alcoholic liver disease, 432
alcoholism, 253
alcohols, 294
absorption inhibition, 534
metabolism, 51
aldehydes, 102, 247, 256, 294, 425
Alder Buckthorn, 270
Alexandrian Senna, 537
Alfalfa, 45
alfalfa top saponins (ATS), 47
alginic acid, 273, 274
aliphatic alcohols, 390

alkaloid-containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 15
alkaloids, 29, 218
kava, 390
alkamides, 218, 219, 220, 221
alkanes, 149, 164, 249, 409
alkenes, 218
allantoin, 188, 191
allergenic herbal ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table
i
allergic reactions
kava, 397
allergic rhinitis, 108, 112, 243
All-Heal, 580
Alliaceae, 279
allicin, 279, 280, 281, 283, 284
alliin, 279, 280, 281
allinase, 279, 280
Allium, 279
Allium sativum, 279
alloxanthoxyletin, 484
allyl isothiocyanate, 542
S-allyl-L-cysteine, 281
allylpropyl disulfide, 279
allyltetramethoxybenzene, 457
Aloe africana, 48
Aloe barbadensis, 48, 50
Aloe ferox, 50
Aloe gel, 48
Aloe Vera, 48
Aloe vera, 48, 50
aloe-emodin, 506, 608
aloenins, 51
Aloes, 50
aloesins, 50, 51
aloinosides, 50, 51
aloins, 50, 51
alopecia
treatment, 526
Aloysia citriodora, 405
Aloysia triphylla, 405
Altamisa, 263
Althaea, 418
Althaea kragujevacensis, 418
Althaea officinalis, 418
Althaea taurinensis, 418
Alzheimer's disease, 253, 303, 513
amarogentin, 290
amenorrhoea, 180, 258, 414
treatment, 407
amentoflavone, 299, 300, 386
American Elder, 237
American Ginseng, 325
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA), 2
American Valerian, 403
amides, 486
kava, 390
amine-containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 15
amino acid constituents
alfalfa, 45
arnica, 64
broom, 98
chamomile, German, 152
chaparral, 159

----- PAGE 702 -----
eyebright, 256
fenugreek, 260
figwort, 268
ginkgo, 299
ground ivy, 342
hydrocotyle, 371
lime flower, 409
plantain, 474
yarrow, 604
amoebicidals, 160, 492
amygdalin, 29, 61, 62
amyrin(s), 30, 31, 237, 249, 411, 482, 489, 572, 596
anacardic acid, 303
anaemia treatment, 238
anaesthetics, 49, 163
anagyrine, 180
analgesic activity, 139, 172, 189, 209, 450, 575, 599
kava, 393
analphylactic reactions, 377
anaphylactic reactions, 147, 154, 157, 444
andrenocorticosteroids
cascara and, 129
Anemone patens, 489
Anemone pratensis, 489
Anemone pulsatilla, 489
anemonin, 472, 473, 489, 490
anethole, 58, 411, 518
angelic acid esters, 156
Angelica, 53
Angelica archangelica, 53
Angelica sinensis, 54, 55
Angelicae Radix, 53
angelicin, 53
angiogenic activity, 122
anisaldehyde, 57
Anise, 57
Aniseed, 57
Anisi Fructus, 57
Anisum, 57
Anisum officinarum, 57
Anisum vulgare, 57
anodyne, 167
anorexia, 119, 149, 156, 162, 183, 261, 291
anorexia nervosa, 54, 103
anthelmintic agents, 92, 162, 240, 572, 573
anthemic acid, 154, 156
Anthemis nobilis, 156
anthocyanins, 31, 32, 79, 80, 197, 495, 543
anthracene glycosides, 128
anthranoid glycoside content, 50
anthranoids, 50
genotoxicity, 539
anthraquinone glycosides, 271
anthraquinones, 128, 164, 270, 506, 537, 550, 608
anti-allergic properties, 110, 153, 157
anti-androgenic activity, 522
anti-arthritics, 49
anti-asthmatic properties, 300
anti-atherogenic effects, 280
anti-atherosclerotic effects, 80, 281, 284, 295
antibacterial ingredients
aloe vera, 49
angelica, 54
bilberry, 81
bogbean, 90
burdock, 103
calendula, 122
chamomile, German, 153
cohosh, black, 173
coltsfoot, 186
cranberry, 197
damiana, 202

echinacea, 219, 222

elecampane, 240

ephedra, 244

eucalyptus, 248

euphorbia, 250

ginseng, eleutherococcus, 318

holy thistle, 352

hops, 355

horehound, black, 359

quassia, 492

sculleap, 531

shepherd's purse, 542

thyme, 575

yarrow, 605

yellow dock, 609
antibiotic activity, 475
anticarcinogenic activity

bilberry, 80

cat's claw, 132

celandine, greater, 139, 142

cranberry, 198

garlic, 282, 285

ginger, 294, 295

ginseng, eleutherococcus, 319

Jamaica dogwood, 380

milk thistle, 432

mistletoe, 438, 440

rhodiola, 503
anticatarrhal effects, 237, 256
anticholinesterase activity, 513
anticoagulant ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 5
anticoagulant therapy

garlic and, 286

ginkgo and, 311

ginseng, eleutherococcus and, 322

ginseng, panax, and, 333
anticonvulsant effect, 58, 119, 338, 463, 464, 594.

kava, 392
antidepressant(s), 183, 303, 555

St John's wort, 551
antidepressants

sexual dysfunction and, 307
antidiarrhoeals, 75, 130, 162, 183, 376, 507
anti-emetic activity, 87, 130, 156, 166, 294
antifertility, 180, 387, 594
antifungal activity

angelica, 54

aniseed, 58

calamus, 119

celandine, greater, 141

cinnamon, 163

cranberry, 198

echinacea, 222

garlic, 283

gentian, 291

kava, 393

quassia, 492

thyme, 575

wild carrot, 594
antihaemorrhagics, 75, 98, 105, 121, 188
antihaemorrhoidal properties, 105, 473
antihepatotoxic effects, 283

rosemary, 510
antihistaminic properties, 167, 338
anti-HIV-1 activity, 426
antihypertensive effects, 280, 282, 285, 383
antihypertensives, interaction with

butterbur, 116

hawthorn, 350
anti-infective agents, 219
anti-inflammatory activity, 110, 140, 153, 172, 209,

222

Index

anti-inflammatory ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 13

antileukaemic activity, 486
antimalarials, 429
antimicrobial activity

agnus castus, 38

aniseed, 58

arnica, 65

bloodroot, 85

burdock, 103

cassia, 130

celandine, greater, 141

chamomile, German, 153

chaparral, 160

cinnamon, 162

drosera, 215

ephedra, 244

feverfew, 265

garlic, 280, 283, 285

ginger, 294, 295

golden seal, 338

guaiacum, 345

holy thistle, 353

Java tea, 383

liquorice, 413

marshmallow, 419

melissa, 426

mistletoe, 440

passionflower, 465

prickly ash, Southern, 486

rosemary, 509

sage, 513

St John's wort, 553

uva-ursi, 578
antimutagenic effects, 132, 133, 150, 503
antinociceptive properties, 264
anti-oedema effects, 363, 524
anti-oestrogenic activity, 172, 412
antioxidant activity

artichoke, 69

cat's claw, 132

celandine, greater, 141

echinacea, 222

garlic, 281, 285

ginger, 294, 295

ginkgo, 301, 302

horehound, black, 359

milk thistle, 430

rosemary, 510
antiplatelet activity, 147, 295, 297, 413
antiplatelet agents

bilberry and, 82

garlic and, 286

ginkgo and, 311
antipsychotic activity, 392
antipsychotics

ginseng, eleutherococcus and, 322
antipyretics, 77, 490, 575, 598, 605
antirheumatic properties, 132, 147, 169, 180, 273
antiseborrhoeic properties, 548
antiseptics

bilberry, 80

bloodroot, 84

boldo, 91

buchu, 100

calendula, 122

capsicum, 126

celery, 147

chamomile, German, 153

cinnamon, 163

cinnamon oil, 162
clove oil, 167

----- PAGE 703 -----
Index

antiseptics (cont.)

eucalyptus, 247

uva-ursi, 578
antiserotonergic activity, 294
antispasmodic activity, 108, 110, 137, 139, 153, 509
antispasmodic ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table

14

antithrombotic activity, 280, 281, 285, 294
antitoxic activity, 318
antitumourigenic activity

agrimony, 43

aloes, 51

aniseed, 58

arnica, 65

burdock, 103

cassia, 131

cat's claw, 132, 133

chamomile, Roman, 157

dandelion, 206

echinacea, 222, 224, 232

euphorbia, 250

garlic, 282

ginseng, panax, 329, 330

mistletoe, 439

motherwort, 448

myrrh, 450

rhodiola, 503

rosemary, 509

yucca, 610
antitussive properties, 169, 185, 215, 300, 465, 575
anti-ulcerogenic activity, 131, 153, 294, 424
antiviral activity

calendula, 122, 123

cat's claw, 132

celandine, greater, 141

chamomile, German, 153

cinnamon, 163

echinacea, 219, 221, 230

elder, 238

eucalyptus, 248

fucus, 274

ginseng, eleutherococcus, 318

ginseng, panax, 329

ground ivy, 343

horse-chestnut, 364

melissa, 426

motherwort, 448

rosemary, 509

sage, 513

St John's wort, 553, 557
anxiety, 184, 195, 245, 355, 403, 422, 551

treatment, 202, 349, 585
anxiolytic effects, 295, 463, 465
anxiolytics, 392, 393
aperient properties, 94
Aphanes, 459
Aphanes arvensis, 459
aphrodisiac activity

passionflower, 465
Apiaceae, 53, 57, 146, 371, 456, 593
apigenin, 31, 32

agrimony, 42

celery, 146

chamomile, German, 152, 153

chamomile, Roman, 156

cowslip, 195

fenugreek, 261

hawthorn, 346

horehound, white, 361

juniper, 386

lemon verbena, 405

melissa, 425

motherwort, 447

passionflower, 461, 464

plantain, 474

rosemary, 508

sculleap, 530

squill, 547

wild carrot, 593

wild lettuce, 596
apigenin glycosides, 447, 456
apigravin, 146
Apii Fructus, 146
apiin, 146, 152, 156
apiole, 12, 456, 457, 458, 518
Apium graveolens, 146
Apium petroselinum, 456
appendicitis, 52, 129, 271, 539

grumbling, 42
appetite

increase, 516, 573

loss, 92, 205, 209, 291, 491

suppressant, 244
Apricot, 61
Apricot Vine, 461
Aquifoliaceae, 421
Arabian Myrrh, 449
arabinans, 419
arabinogalactan, 218, 221
arabinogalactans, 419
arabinose

aloe vera, 48

coltsfoot, 185

comfrey, 188

cowslip, 195

ispaghula, 374

lime flower, 409

myrrh, 449

pilewort, 472

red clover, 498

senega, 533
arabinoxylan, 374
Araceae, 543
arachidonic acid, 48
Aralia quinquifolia, 325
Araliaceae, 315, 325
arbutin, 201, 577
archangelenone, 53
Archangelica officinalis, 53
archangelicin, 53, 54
archengelenone, 53
Arctic root, 500
arctigenin, 102, 352
arctiin, 102
arctiopicrin, 102, 103
Arctium lappa, 102
Arctium majus, 102
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, S77
Arecaceae, 521
arginine, 45, 159, 260
Aristolochia spp., 8
aristolochic acids, 12
Armeniaca vulgaris, 61
Armoracia lapathifolia, 367
Armoracia rusticana, 367
Arnica, 64
Arnica chamissonis ssp. foliosa, 64
Arnica montana, 64
Arnicae Flos, 64
arnicin, 64
arterial pressure, raised, 409
arterial vasomotion enhancement, 80, 81
arteriosclerosis, 347

treatment, 409

arthritis
alfalfa, 46
arnica, 65
capsicum, 126
cat's claw, 132
celery, 147
chaparral, 159
devil's claw, 210
yucca, 610
arthritis treatment, 208, 273, 454
arthrosis, painful, 208
Artichoke, 67
asacoumarins, 72
Asafetida, 72
Asafoetida, 72
Asant, 72
B-asarone, 12
asarone, 518
Asarum europaeum, 119
ascaridole, 91
Asclepiadaceae, 477
Asclepias, 477
Asclepias albicans, 478
Asclepias curassavica, 478
Asclepias engelmanniana, 478
Asclepias eriocarpa, 478
Asclepias glaucescens, 478
Asclepias tuberosa, 477
asclepin, 477, 478
Ascophyllum, 273
Ascophyllum nodosum, 274
ascorbate, 146
ascorbic acid, see vitamin C
ash values, 10
Asian Ginseng, 325
asiatic acid, 373
Asiatic Pennywort, 371
asiaticentoic acid, 371
asiaticoside, 371
Asparagaceae, 547, 610
asparagic acid, 342
asparagine, 45, 419, 474
aspartine, 159
Aspen, 482
Aspergillus parasiticus, 283
Aspergillus spp., 283
asperuloside, 164, 165, 577
aspirin
willow and, 599
aspirin hypersensitivity, 599
Asteraceae
arnica, 64
artichoke, 67
boneset, 94
butterbur, 107
calendula, 121
chamomile, German, 152
chamomile, Roman, 156
coltsfoot, 185
dandelion, 204
echinacea, 217
elecampane, 240
feverfew, 263
gravel root, 340
holy thistle, 352
hypersensitivity to, 154, 157, 266
liferoot, 407
milk thistle, 429
tansy, 572
wild lettuce, 596
yarrow, 604
asthenia, 89

----- PAGE 704 -----
asthma, 84, 154, 185, 249, 252, 307, 599
adult bronchial, 49
psychogenic, 54
spasmodic, 416
treatment, 113, 215, 405, 543

astragalin, 354, 363, 601

astringents
agrimony, 42
avens, 76
bayberry, 77
bilberry, 80
burnet, 105
cassia, 130
cinnamon bark, 162
clivers, 164
comfrey, 188
eyebright, 256
ground ivy, 342
juniper, 387
raspberry, 495
St John's wort, 554
witch hazel, 602

atherosclerosis, 46, 383, 530

atony, 183, 271, 539

atopic eczema, see eczema, atopic

aucubin, 36, 37, 256, 268, 374, 474, 475, 591

aucubinine B, 209

Avens, 75

azulene, 240

CB)

Baccae Juniperi, 386
Bacillus anthracis, 277
Bacillus leprae, 372
Bacillus pumilus, 147
Bacillus spp., 283
Bacillus subtilis

aloes, 51

arnica, 65

burdock, 103

celery, 147

chaparral, 160

cohosh, black, 173

eucalyptus, 248

garlic, 283

holy thistle, 353

milk thistle, 432

plantain, 475

sage, 513

sculleap, 531

uva-ursi, 578

yarrow, 605
back pain, low, treatment, 208, 211
bacterial skin diseases, 153
bactericidal activity, 46, 65, 163, 277
bacteriostatic properties, 147, 424, 544
Bai Guo, 299
baicalein-6,7-dimethylether, 570
baldrinals, 580
ballonigrin, 358
Ballota, 358
Ballota foetida, 358
Ballota nigra, 358
ballotenol, 358
ballotinone, 358
Balm, 425
Balsamodendron Myrrha, 449
Balsamodendron myrrha, 449
baptifoline, 180
Bardanae Radix, 102

Bari, 389
barium antagonist, 92
Barosma betulina, 100
Batavia Cassia, 162
Batavia Cinnamon, 162
Bayberry, 77
Bearberry, 577
Bee plant, 96
Beebread, 96
behavioural activity, 301
Belgian Valerian, 580
Benedict's Herb, 75
benign prostatic hyperplasia, 452, 454
benzaldehyde, 162, 166, 411, 423
benzochromenes, 382
benzoic acid, 474
benzophenanthridines, 12, 137, 276
y-benzopyrones, 462
benzyl alcohol, 423
berberastine, 337
Berberidaceae, 180
berberine, 337, 338
bergapten, 53, 57, 456, 457
betaine, 64, 183, 452, 453
betalains, 479
betanidine, 479
betanine, 479
betonicine, 29, 361, 447, 604
beverages
alcoholic, 50, 64, 68, 149, 240, 605
non-alcoholic, 149
bicuculline methochloride, 392
Bilberry, 79
bile duct occlusion, 206
bile flow disturbance, 205, 277
biliary system dysfunction, 142, 144
bilobalide, 299, 300, 302
bilobetin, 299
biochanin A, 45, 498, 499
Biomphalaria glabrata, 578
birth facilitation, 58
bisabolene, 294
bisflavonols, 243
bitter acids, 354
bitter aromatics, 54, 149
bitter complexes, 205
bitter glucoside, 94
bitter index, 90
Bitter Lettuce, 596
Bitter Myrrh, 449
bitter principles, 42, 64, 98, 118, 354, 596
bitter properties, 89
Bitter Root, 290
bitters, 290
Bitterwood, 491
Bitterwort, 290
Black Cohosh, 168
Black Elder, 237
Black Horehound, 358
Black Sampson, 217
Black Snakeroot, 168
Black Tang, 273
Bladderwrack, 273
Blatterdock, 107
Blazing Star, 258
bleeding
enhanced risk, 310, 311
Blessed Thistle, 352
Blond Psyllium, 374
blood pressure
high, see hypertension
increase, 181, 245

Index

low, see hypotension

reduction, 75, 440, 554
Bloodroot, 84
Blue Cohosh, 180
Blue Flag, 87
blueberry, 79
Bockshornsame, 260
Bog rhubarb, 107
Bogbean, 89
bogberry, 79
Bogshorns, 107
boils, treatment, 219, 545
Boldi Folium, 91
boldine, 29, 91, 92, 518
Boldo, 91
Boldus, 91
Boneset, 94
Borage, 96
Boraginaceae, 96, 188
Borago officinalis, 96
Bordetella pertussis, 186, 553
borneol, 405, 508, 512
bornyl acetate, 581
boschniakine, 374, 474
boschniakinic acid, 374, 474
Botrytis cinerea, 65, 594
bowel cramps, 159
brahminoside, 371, 372
brahmoside, 371, 372
Brassicaceae, 541
Brauneria pallida, 217
breast cancer, 177
breastfeeding, 19
bromazepam, 399
bronchial asthma, see asthma

bronchial catarrh, 58
chronic, 342
bronchiectasis, 535
bronchitis, 575
acute, 94
chronic, 475, 534, 547
secondary, 416
treatment, 215, 243
angelica, 54
aniseed, 58
asafoetida, 72
bloodroot, 84
coltsfoot, 185
horehound, white, 361
thyme, 575
bronchodilation, 474
bronchospasm, prevention, 215
Broom, 98
Brucella abortus, 353
Brucella bronchoseptica, 353
bruises, 64
Buchu, 100
Buckbean, 89
Burdock, 102
burn treatment, 48, 80, 123
Burnet, 105
Burrage, 96
Burseraceae, 449
Butterbur, 107
Butterdock, 107
Butterfly Dock, 107
Butterfly Weed, 477
butyric acid, 169
Buxus sempervirens, 578

----- PAGE 705 -----
Index

@

Cactaceae, 151
cactine, 151
Cactus grandiflorus, 151
$-cadine, 201
cadinene, 386, 530
caffeic acid, 30, 67

celandine, greater, 136, 137, 139

clivers, 164

cohosh, black, 172

coltsfoot, 185

comfrey, 188

dandelion, 204

eucalyptus, 247

eyebright, 256, 257

figwort, 268

fumitory, 276

lime flower, 409

marshmallow, 419

melissa, 425

nettle, 452

plantain, 474

rosemary, 508

sage, 512

St John's wort, 550
caffeic acid derivatives, 218, 219, 367
caffeine, 29, 183, 184, 421, 422
caffeoylmalic acid, 358, 452
caffeoyltartaric acid, 185
calamene, 201
Calamus, 118
calcium, 130, 162, 452
Calendula, 121
Calendula officinalis, 121
calenduladiol, 121
calendulin, 121
calendulosides, 121
calotropin, 477
cAMP, 65
Campanulaceae, 416
campesterol, 30, 31, 45, 121, 166, 249, 429, 449, 572
camphene, 386, 508, 580
camphor, 31, 386, 508, 512, 518, 541, 572, 604
canadine, 337
canavanine, 45, 47
cancer treatment, 62, 159, 526
Candida albicans, 163, 283, 383, 413, 426, 486, 513
Candida krusei, 513
Candida pseudotropicalis, 513
Candida spp., 46, 85, 283
Candleberry Bark, 77
canin, 263
Cannabaceae, 354
Cao Ma Huang, 243
Capdockin, 107
Caprifoliaceae, 237
capsaicin, 125, 126
capsaicinoids, 125
Capsella, 541
Capsella bursa-pastoris, 541
Capsicum, 125
Capsicum spp., 125
Carbenia benedicta, 352
Carbenia Benedicta, 352
carbohydrate constituents

alfalfa, 45

aloe vera, 48

aniseed, 57

arnica, 64

burdock, 102

clove, 166

coltsfoot, 185

comfrey, 188

couchgrass, 193

cowslip, 195

cranberry, 197

damiana, 201

devil's claw, 207

elecampane, 240

fucus, 273

ginger, 293

ginseng, eleutherococcus, 315, 316

hydrangea, 369

lime flower, 409

myrrh, 449

plantain, 474

pulsatilla, 489

red clover, 498

saw palmetto, 521

senega, 533

senna, 537

slippery elm, 545
carbonic acid, 452
carboxystrictosidine, 133
carcinogenesis, protection against, 302
carcinogenic properties

aloes, 51

bayberry, 78

bloodroot, 85

comfrey, 190

euphorbia, 250

gravel root, 341

liferoot, 408

sassafras, 519

senna, 538
cardiac disorders, 151, 447, 548

arrhythmias, 99

therapy, 348
cardiac glycosides, 30, 477, 547
cardioactive ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 2
cardiotonic activity, 46, 99, 297, 338, 347, 547
cardiotoxic ingredients, 181
cardiovascular activity, 108, 301, 319, 328, 348, 503
cardiovascular diseases, 19, 422
cardiovascular-related disorders, 414
Carduus Benedictus, 352
carminatives

angelica, 54

aniseed, 58

asafoetida, 72

calamus, 118

capsicum, 126

cassia, 130

chamomile, German, 153

chamomile, Roman, 156

cinnamon, 162

clove, 166

juniper, 386
carnasol, 512
carnosic acid, 30
carnosolic acid, 509
carotene, 89, 188, 521
carotenoids, 64, 98, 121, 125, 137
Carum petroselinum, 456
carvacrol, 31, 193, 574
carvone, 31, 193, 462
caryophyllene, 67, 166
B-caryophyllene, 358
caryophyllene, 371, 382, 386, 405, 425, 518, 530,

580

B-caryophyllene, 593
Caryophyllus aromaticus, 166
Cascara, 128

Cascara Sagrada, 128
cascarosides, 29, 30, 128
Cassia, 130
Cassia acutifolia, 537
Cassia alexandrina, 537
Cassia angustifolia, 537
Cassia Bark, 130
Cassia Lignea, 130
Cassia senna, 537
casticin, 36, 37
catalpol, 474, 530
catarrh, 58, 249
bronchial, see bronchial catarrh
nasal, 153
nasopharyngeal, see nasopharyngeal catarrh
upper respiratory tract, 419, 575
catarrhal cystitis, acute, 100, 541, 577
catechins, 31, 61, 79, 183, 601
catecholamines, 58
catechols, 423, 608
cathartic activity, 84, 98, 538
Cat's Claw, 132
caulophylline, 180
caulophyllogenin, 570
Caulophyllum, 180
Caulophyllum robustum, 180
Caulophyllum thalictroides, 180
caulosaponin, 180, 181
cauloside D, 180
Cayenne, 125
celandine
common, 136
garden, 136
greater, 136
lesser, 136
celerin, 146
Celery, 146
Celery Fruit, 146
Celery Seed, 146
cell death, 69, 523
cell necrosis, 59
cell proliferation, 59
cell-proliferant, 188
cellulose, 183
centapicrin, 149
Centaurium erythraea, 149
Centaurium minus, 149
Centaurium umbellatum, 149
Centaury, 149
Centella, 371
Centella asiatica, 371
centelloside, 371
central nervous system
activity, 58, 99, 131
hypnotic effects, 594
central nervous system depressants
hawthorn, 348
hydrocotyle, 372
nettle, 453
sassafras, 518
sculleap, 531
senega, 534
valerian, 582
central nervous system stimulants.
cola, 183, 184
ephedra, 244
ginseng, eleutherococcus, 318
lobelia, 417
maté, 421
cerebral embolism, 531
cerebral thrombosis, 531, 605
Cereus, 151

----- PAGE 706 -----
Cereus grandiflorus, 151
Ceylon Cinnamon, 162
chalcone derivatives, 423
chalcones, 31, 32, 354, 390, 411, 412, 436, 437
chamaelirin, 258
Chamaelirium carolianum, 258
Chamaelirium luteum, 258
Chamaemelum nobile, 156
Chamaesyce hirta, 249
chamazulene, 152, 153, 156, 604
Chamomile

German, 152

Roman, 156
Chamomilla recutita, 152
Chaparral, 159
Chaste tree, 36
Chasteberry, 36
cheilitis, 167
chelerythrine, 84, 138, 143, 484, 485, 486, 487
chelidonic acid, 136, 137
Chelidonium majus, 136
chilblains, 126
Chilli Pepper, 125
Chinese Cinnamon, 130
Chinese Ginseng, 325
Chlamydia aureus, 338
Chlamydia trachomatis, 338
chlorogenic acid

angelica, 53

apricot, 61

artichoke, 67, 69

burdock, 102

comfrey, 188

dandelion, 204

fumitory, 276

lime flower, 409

nettle, 452

plantain, 474

rosemary, 508

St John's wort, 550
chlorogenic acids, 219, 237
cholagogic activity, 510
cholecystitis, 205
choleretic activity, 139
choleretics, 92
cholesterol, 46, 48, 61, 70, 121, 429, 449, 572

biosynthesis inhibition, 68, 252

high concentrations, 46

intestinal absorption decreased, 46
cholesterol-lowering effects, 46, 281, 284

see also lipid-lowering effects
choline

arnica, 64

celery, 146

chamomile, German, 152

chamomile, Roman, 156

coltsfoot, 185

comfrey, 188

euphorbia, 249

eyebright, 256

fenugreek, 260

nettle, 452

shepherd's purse, 541
cholinergic activity, 375
chorea, 169
chromones, 50, 51
chromosome damage, 73
chronic fatigue syndrome, 319, 321
chrysaloin, 128
Chrysanthemum audiberti, 572
Chrysanthemum parthenium, 263
Chrysanthemum tanacetum, 572

Chrysanthemum vulgare, 572
chrysin, 464
chrysophanol, 506, 608
chrysophanol glycosides, 270
chrysoplenol, 36, 37
cichoric acid, 218, 219
Cimicifuga, 168
Cimicifuga daburica, 173
Cimicifuga foetida, 173
Cimicifuga heracleifolia, 173
Cimicifuga racemosa, 168
Cimicifuga simplex, 173
cimicifugic acids, 169, 172
ifugoside, 168, 170
cimicifugosides, 173
cimigenol, 170
cimiracemosides, 168, 170
cineole, 31, 91, 156, 201, 405

see eucalyptol
1,8-cineole, 508, 512
cinnamaldehyde, 130, 162, 163, 449

toxicity, 163
cinnamamide, 486
cinnamic acid, 50, 162, 268, 474
Cinnamomum aromaticum, 130
Cinnamomum burmanii, 162
Cinnamomum cassia, 130
Cinnamomum japonicum, 162
Cinnamomum loureirii, 162
Cinnamomum obtusifolium, 162
Cinnamomum pseudomelastoma, 130
Cinnamomum verum, 162
Cinnamomum zeylanicum, 162
Cinnamon, 162
cinnamon oil, 162, 163
Cinnamon Wood, 518
cinnamylideneacetone, 390
cinnzeylanin, 162
cinnzeylanol, 162
circulatory stimulants, 77
cirrhosis, 338, 432
cirsilineol, 574
cirsimaritin, 405
citral, 405
citric acid, 164, 197, 596
Citrobacter, 283
citronellal, 425
citrullol, 180
Cleavers, 164
Clivers, 164
Clove, 166

bud oil, 166

leaf oil, 166

stem oil, 166
Clusiaceae, 550
enicin, 352, 353
Cnicus, 352
Cnicus benedictus, 352
coagulant ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 5
Cochlearia armoracia, 367
cognitive deficiency, 300, 303
cognitive enhancement, 304, 503
cognitive performance

kava, 397
Cohosh

black, 168

blue, 180
Cola, 183
Cola acuminata, 183
Cola nitida, 183
Cola Seed, 183
colchicine, 29

Index

Colewort, 75
colic

flatulent, see flatulent colic

intestinal, see intestinal colic
colitis, 129, 188, 545
Collinsonia canadensis, 570
Collinsonia punctata, 570
Collisonia canadensis, 570
colon inflammatory disease, 51, 271
Coltsfoot, 185, 16
coma, 62
Comfrey, 188, 16
Commiphora, 449
Commiphora coriacea, 449
Commiphora cuspidata, 449
Commiphora habessinica, 449
Commiphora molmol, 449
Commiphora mukul, 449, 450
Commiphora myrrha, 449
Commiphora playfairii, 449
Commiphora rivae, 449
commiphoric acids, 449
Common Boneset, 94
Common Centaury, 149
common cold, 130, 159, 470

treatment, 219, 223, 224, 225, 226, 243, 405
Common Evening Primrose, 251
Common Figwort, 268
Common Fumitory, 276
Common Hoarhound, 361
Common Juniper, 386
Common Plantain, 474
Common Thyme, 574
Common Valerian, 580
Compositae

arnica, 64

artichoke, 67

boneset, 94

butterbur, 107

chamomile, German, 152

chamomile, Roman, 156

coltsfoot, 185

dandelion, 204

echinacea, 217

elecampane, 240

feverfew, 263

gravel root, 340

holy thistle, 352

hypersensitivity to, 154, 157, 266

liferoot, 407

milk thistle, 429

tansy, 572

wild lettuce, 596

yarrow, 604
Coneflower, 217
coniferaldehyde, 518
conjunctivitis, 122

treatment, 256
constipation, 70, 87, 91, 92, 128, 270, 526, 608

chronic, 374, 376, 538

occasional, 537

treatment, 537
contact dermatitis

aniseed, 59

asafoetida, 73

boneset, 95

celandine, greater, 143

chaparral, 160

clove, 167

corn silk, 192

elecampane, 241

hops, 356

----- PAGE 707 -----
Index

contact dermatitis (cont.)
horehound, white, 362
hydrangea, 370
plantain, 475
pleurisy root, 478
contaminants of herbal ingredients, 10
contraceptives, 132
convulsion-inducing ingredients, 62, 202, S11, 514
a-copaene, 201
copaene, 518
coptisine, 84
Corn Silk, 191
coronary dilation, 184
coronary heart disease, 253
coronary thrombosis, 245, 605
corticosteroid-like activity, 327
corynebacteria, 509
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 147, 338, 553
Corynebacterium insidosum, 65
corynoxeine, 133
cosmetics, 61
cosmoriin, 342
costonulide, 263
Couchgrass, 193
coughs, 96
dry, 419
treatment, 243
coumaric acid, 30, 409, 419, 474, 498, 550
coumarin containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 16
coumarins, 29
coumestrol, 45
counter-irritants, 64
Cow Clover, 498
Cowslip, 195
COX-1 and COX-2 inhibition, 222
cramp, 480
Cranberry, 197
Crassulaceae, 500
Crataegus laevigata, 346
Crataegus monogyna, 346
Crataegus oxyacantha, 346
Crataegus oxyacanthoides, 346
Crataegus pinnatifidia, 348
Creosote bush, 159
Crohn's disease, 52, 129, 271, 539
croton oil dermatitis, 432
Cruciferae, 541
Cryptococcus neoformans, 283, 513
cryptoxanthin, 191, 192
cuminaldehyde, 162
Cupressaceae, 386
Curled Dock, 608
curzerenone, 449
cutaneous affection, 371
cutaneous eruptions, 87, 103, 518
cutaneous porphyria, 43
cyanide, 61
cyanide glycosides, 29
cyanide poisoning, 62
acute, 62
antidotes, 62
chronic, 62
cyanidin, 79
cyanogenetic glycosides, 13, 61, 193, 201
cyanogenic glycosides, 461, 462
cyanosis, 43
cyclic mastalgia, 251, 253
p-cymene, 91, 193, 201, 386, 574
Cynara scolymus, 67
cynarin, 68, 218, 219
cynaropicrin, 67

cynaroside, 342
cypripedin, 403
Cypripedium, 403
Cypripedium calceolus, 403
Cypripedium parviflorum, 403
Cypripedium pubescens, 403
cysteines, 281
cystine, 45, 159, 409
cystitis, 42, 91, 100, 103, 193, 369
cytisine, 168, 169
Cytisus scoparius, 98
cytochrome P450 inhibition, 233, 399
cytokine production, 221
cytoprotective activity, 450
cytostatic effects, 383
cytotoxic constituents, 216

agnus castus, 38

agrimony, 43

aniseed, 59

arnica, 65

boneset, 95

calendula, 123

cat's claw, 133

cinnamon, 163

drosera, 216

ephedra, 244

ginkgo, 302

ginseng, eleutherococcus, 319

ginseng, panax, 329

hydroquinone, 578

mistletoe, 438, 440

motherwort, 448

quassia, 492

saw palmetto, 523

St John's wort, 553

valerian, 583

[D)

daidzein, 45, 498
Dalmation Sage, 512
damaradienol, 240, 241
Damiana, 201
damianin, 201
Dandelion, 204
daphnanes, 30, 31
daucol, 593
Daucus, 593
Daucus carota, 593, 594
Daucus carota subsp. sativus, 593
Daucus communis, 593
dehydration, 271, 539
dehydrogingerdione, 294
dehydroguaiaretic acid, 344
dehydrokaempferol, 429
dementia, 253, 303
demulcents, 185, 188
dental hygiene, 85
depression, 96, 183, 303, 551, 555, 585, 591

kava contra-indication, 398
dermatitis

angelica, 55

aniseed, 59

arnica, 65

celandine, greater, 143

croton oil, 432

feverfew, 265

garlic, 286

hydrocotyle, 372

wild carrot, 594

wild lettuce, 597

yarrow, 606

dermatitis (conditions)
contact, see contact dermatitis
phototoxic, see phototoxic dermatitis
dermatology, 602
dermatomyositis, 397
dermatophytes, 85
desmethoxyyangonin, 391
Devil's Claw, 207
Devil's Dung, 72
Devil's Shrub, 315
Devil's-bit, 258
diabetes mellitus
alfalfa, 46
bilberry, 80
cranberry, 199
ephedra, 245
Java tea, 382
liquorice, 413
protection against, 432
willow, 599
yucca, 610
diabetic neuropathy, 253
diallyl disulfide, 279
diallyl trisulfide, 279
dianthrones, 506
diaphoretics, 54, 77, 94, 96, 118, 126, 237
diarrhoea, 51, 405, S41
acute, 338
herbal remedies causing/treating
agrimony, 42
aloes, 50, 51
bilberry, 80
bogbean, 90
broom, 99
cassia, 130
elder, 238
in children, 424
ispaghula, 374, 375
saw palmetto, 526
slippery elm, 545
nervous, 153
Diddin, 449
Didin, 449
didrovaltrate, 580, 581, 583
digestive disorders, 291
Digitalis lanata, 8
digoxin
squill and, 548
dihydroalantolactone, 240
dihydroanthracenes, 270
dihydrocorynantheine, 132, 133
dihydrofoliamenthin, 89
dihydrokavain, 391
dihydromethysticin, 392
dimeric flavones, 299
diosgenin, 261
diosmetin, 100, 268, 405, 508, 541
diosmetin-7-rutinoside, see diosmin
diosmin, 100, 268, 508
diosphenol, 100
Diplococcus pneumoniae, 338
disulfides, 72
diterpene acids, 386
diterpene lactone, 447
diterpenes, 30, 31, 36, 64, 94, 208, 299, 361, 382,
512,
Ditrysinia sylvatica, 493
diuresis, 184, 542
stimulation, 205
diuretic effects, 137, 238, 382, 454
diuretic ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 3
dizziness, 62

----- PAGE 708 -----
docetaxel Eleutherococcus senticosus, 315
cohosh, black, and, 177 eleutherosides, 315, 316
Dogs Grass, 193 ellagitannins, 31
dopamine receptor Elymus repens, 193
antagonists, 116 Elytrigia repens, 193
dopamine receptors, 38 emetics, 46, 77, 84, 98, 157
antagonists, 40, 58 emmenagogues, 46, 169, 180, 408
dopamine release, enhancement, 80 emodin, 506, 608
doxorubicin emodin glycosides, 270
cohosh, black, and, 177 endometriosis, 253
Dracontium foetidium, 543 Entamoeba histolytica, 160, 283, 372, 492
Drimia maritima, 547 Enterobacter spp., 578
Dropwort, 423 Enterococcus, 383
Drosera, 215 Enterococcus faecalis, 199
Drosera rotundifolia, 215 enteropathy, 352
Droseraceae, 215 enzymes, 279
drowsiness, 62 Ephedra, 243
drug metabolism, inhibition, 55 Ephedra equisetina, 243
drug—herb interactions, 21 Ephedra gerardiana, 243
see also Appendix 1 Ephedra intermedia, 243
duodenal motility, activation, 126 Ephedra mahuang, 243
duodenal ulcers, 188, 212, 213, 291, 545 Ephedra major, 243
dysentry, 132, 183 Ephedra nebrodensis, 243
dyskinesia, 397 Ephedra scoparia, 243
dysmenorrhoea, 156, 169, 180 Ephedra shennungiana, 243
chronic primary, 81 Ephedra sinica, 243
dyspepsia Ephedraceae, 243
atonic, 337, 352, 491 , ephedradines, 243
flatulent, see flatulent dyspepsia ephedrannin A, 244

non-ulcer, 68 ephedrans, 243

dyspepsia, and herbal remedies ephedrine, 29, 243, 244, 245

aniseed, 58
artichoke, 69, 70
calamus, 118
centaury, 149
chamomile, Roman, 156
cinnamon, 162
dandelion, 205
devil's claw, 209
fenugreek, 261
gentian, 290, 291
juniper, 386
dyspeptic complaints, 54, 58, 509
dysuria, 164, 577

toxicity, 245
ephedroxane, 243

Epidermaphyton, 283

epigallocatechin, 195
epilepsy, 97, 343, 530

temporal lobe, 254
epinine, 98

eriodictyol, 574
e erythbigenin, 379

erythema nodosum, 231
Erythina piscipula, 379

echimidine, 188

Echinacea, 217 Erythraea centaurium, 149
Echinacea angustifolia, 217, 220 erythrolysis, 181
Echinacea intermedia, 217 Escherichia coli
Echinacea pallida, 217, 220 bilberry, 81
Echinacea purpurea, 217, 220 burdock, 103
echinacin, 218 cinnamon, 163
echinacoside, 218, 219, 222, 233 cohosh, black, 173
echinatine, 340 cranberry, 198, 199
eczema, 48, 103, 122, 498, 535 damiana, 202
atopic, 251, 253 garlic, 283
chronic, 277 golden seal, 338
nervous, 452 holy thistle, 353
treatment, 137, 268 java tea, 383
efficacy of herbal medicines, 23 meadowsweet, 424
elastase inhibition, 80 melissa, 426
Elder, 237 milk thistle, 432
Elecampane, 240 rosemary, 509
electrolyte depletion, 539 sage, 513
elemene, 382 scullcap, 531
elemicin, 518 uva-ursi, 578
elemol, 449 yarrow, 605
eleutherans, 315 yellow dock, 609
Eleuthero, 315 aescin, 363

Eleutherococcus Ginseng, 315 B-escin, 363

pharmacological properties, 245

epicatechin, 33, 79, 195

Epidermaphyton floccosum, 198
Epidermaphyton spp., 65

Epstein-Barr virus, inhibition, 413, 448
Ericaceae, 79, 197, 577

Index

essential oils, 382
see also Appendix 2, Table 21
esters
kava, 390
estragole, 12, 57
eucalyptol, 247, 604
eucalyptrin, 247
Eucalyptus, 247, 248
Eucalyptus globulus, 247
Eucalyptus maidenii, 247
eucalyptus oil, 248
eudesmane, 30, 31
eudesmanolides, 263
eudesmolides, 30, 31
eufoliatin, 94
eufoliatorin, 94
Eugenia aromatica, 166
Eugenia caryophyllata, 166
Eugenia caryophyllus, 166
eugenol, 75, 162, 166, 167, 405, 409, 411, 449, 462,
580, 580
eugenol acetate, 167
eukovoside, 256
euparin, 340
eupatorin, 94, 382, 405
eupatoriopicrin, 95
Eupatorium cannabinum, 95
Eupatorium chapmanii, 94
Eupatorium perfoliatum, 94
Eupatorium purpureum, 340
Eupatorium trifoliatum, 340
euperfolide, 94
euperfolin, 94
euperfolitin, 94
Euphorbia, 249
Euphorbia capitata, 249
Euphorbia hirta, 249
Euphorbiaceae, 493
euphrasia, 256
Eupbrasia officinalis, 256
Euphrasia rostkoviana, 256
euphroside, 256
European Cranberry, 197
European Elder, 237
European Medicines Agency, 4
European Medicines Evaluation Agency (EMEA),
5,5
European Pharmacopoeia (Ph Eur), 10
European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy
(ESCOP), 5
Evening Primrose, 251
excessive perspiration, 512
Excoecaria sylvatica, 493
exhaustion, 183
expectorant effect
angelica, 54
aniseed, 58
asafoetida, 72
bloodroot, 84
borage, 96
coltsfoot, 185
eucalyptus, 247
ginkgo, 300
horehound, white, 362
lobeline, 417
squill, 547
thyme, 575
extrapyramidal symptoms, 399
exudative skin eruptions, 493
eye abnormalities, 127
eye inflammation, 87
Eyebright, 256

----- PAGE 709 -----
Index

@

Fabaceae, 45
False Cinnamon, 130
False Unicorn, 258
Farfara, 185
farnesene, 371
farnesiferols, 72
fatigue, 557
chronic, 319, 321
postviral syndrome, 252, 253
fatty acids
mistletoe, 436
fatty acids, in
agnus castus, 36
arnica, 64
borage, 96
celery, 146
centaury, 149
chamomile, German, 152
chamomile, Roman, 156
elder, 237
ginger, 293
yarrow, 604
Faucibarba officinalis, 425
febrifuge, 247
Fenugreek, 260
fenugreekine, 261
ferujol, 73
Ferula assafoetida, 72
Ferula communis, 72, 73
Ferula foetida, 72
Ferula jaeschkeana, 73
ferulenol, 72
ferulic acid, 30, 72, 185, 247, 256, 268, 419, 474,
512
feruloylhistamine, 244
fetal tachycardia, 458
fever, 108, 591, 598
treatment, 96, 405
Feverfew, 263
hypersensitive reaction, 16
Fevertree, 247
Feverwort, 94
fibrinolytic activity, 280, 281, 285, 296
Ficaria, 472
Ficaria degenii, 472
Ficaria nudicaulis, 472
Ficaria ranunculoides, 472
Ficaria verna, 472
Ficaria vulgaris, 472
Figwort, 268
Filipendula, 423
Filipendula ulmaria, 423
Fish Poison Bark, 379
fixed oils, 191, 193, 251, 521
Flapperdock, 107
flatulence, 54, 70, 92, 377, 386
treatment, 405
flatulent colic, 58, 72, 130, 166, 352
intestinal, 294
flatulent dyspepsia, 54, 130, 153, 156, 456, 470, 512
flavanones, 31, 32, 423, 436, 437
flavolignans, 429, 430
flavone derivatives, 346
flavone glycosides, 57, 261, 342, 604
flavones, 31, 32, 105, 159, 405, 423, 436, 437, 550,
596, 596
flavonoflavonol, 243
flavonoid containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 17
flavonoid glycosides, 301, 409

flavonoids, 29, 31, 32, 218
kava, 390
flavonol derivatives, 577
flavonol glycosides, 103, 159, 185, 299, 300, 342,
452, 452, 601
flavonols, in, 31, 32
aniseed, 57
arnica, 64
boldo, 91
boneset, 94
coltsfoot, 185
elder, 237
ginkgo, 299
hawthorn, 346
liquorice, 411
meadowsweet, 423
St John's wort, 550
uva-ursi, 577
wild carrot, 593
wild lettuce, 596
witch hazel, 601
floridanine, 407
florosenine, 407
foenugraecin, 261
Folia Bucco, 100
folic acid, 89
food flavouring categories, definition, see Appendix
3
food use, see individual herbal ingredients
foreign organic matter, 11, 270
formic acid, 169, 452
formononetin, 45, 168, 169, 171, 411, 498, 499
Fossil Tree, 299
Fragrant Valerian, 580
Frangula, 270
Frangula alnus, 270
Frangula nigra, 270
Frangula purshiana, 128
frangulins A and B, 270
frangulosides, 270
fraxetin glucoside, 363
fraxin, 363
French Thyme, 574
fructose, 185, 188, 193, 197, 207, 474, 533
Fucaceae, 273
fucoidan, 273
Fucus, 273
Fucus spp., 273
Fucus vesiculosus, 273
fukiic acid, 169, 379
fukinolic acid, 169, 171, 172, 173
Fumaria officinalis, 276
Fumariaceae, 276
fumaric acid, 276, 452, 474, 541
Fumitory, 276
fungicidal activity, 387
fungitoxic activity, 46
furaneudesma-1,3-diene, 449
furanocoumarins, 13, 53, 57, 456, 457, 593
furanosesquiterpenes, 108, 109, 449
furfural, 87
furoguaiacin, 344
furoguaiaoxidin, 344
furunculosis, 219
Fusarium oxysporum, 383

CG)

GABA activity, 392

galactose, 48, 185, 207, 315, 316, 409, 449
galacturonic acid, 195, 545
galacturono-rhamnans, 419

Galium, 164
Galium aparine, 164
gallic acid, 30, 94, 164, 185, 247, 256, 403, 506, 512,
S77
gallocatechin, 31, 354, 386
gallotannins, 31
gallstones, 91, 213
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 58, 479, 480,
582,
concentration, 58
gamolenic acid, 48, 96, 251, 252
Gan Cao, 411
Gan Jiang, 293
Garden Angelica, 53
Garden Burnet, 105
Garden Sage, 512
Garden Thyme, 574
Garden Valerian, 580
Garlic, 279
gastralgia, 526
gastric mucosa, inflammation, 419
gastric ulcers, 188, 212, 213, 291, 413
protection against, 432
gastric upset, 338, 454, 492, 599
gastritis, 261
severe, 573
treatment, 215
gastroduodenitis, chronic, 43, 475
gastroenteritis, 65
gastrointestinal irritation
agnus castus, 40.
aloes, 51
frangula, 271
garlic, 286
ground ivy, 343
horse-chestnut, 365
kava, 395
rhubarb, 507
senega, 535
senna, 538
St John's wort, 559
yellow dock, 609
gastrointestinal tract, 81, 90, 101, 181, 244
antiseptic properties, 387
disorders, 137, 142, 253, 425, 433
function, 610
hypermotility, 189
inflammation, 535
motility, 294, 296, 377
protection from damage, 111
geijerone, 386
gein, 75
General Plantain, 474
genistein, 45, 498, 499
genisteine, 98
Geniévre, 386
genkwanin, 447, 508
genotoxic effects, 341, 408, 519
gentialutine, 290
gentiamarin, 290
Gentian, 290
Gentiana, 290
Gentiana lutea, 290
Gentiana pannonica, 291
Gentiana punctata, 291
Gentiana purpurea, 291
Gentianaceae, 149
gentianidine, 89
gentianin, 89, 291
gentianine, 29, 260, 290, 291
gentianose, 290
gentiopicrin, 149, 290

----- PAGE 710 -----
gentiopicroside, 149, 290
gentisein, 291
gentisic acid, 247
gentisin, 290, 291
Geotrichum canadidum, 46
geraniol, 405, 500, 501
germacranolide, 31
germacranolides, 30, 263
germacrene, 30, 31, 358, 371
German Chamomile, 152
Geum, 75
Geum urbanum, 75
Giardia intestinalis, 283
Giardia lamblia, 338
Ginger, 293
gingerol, 294
gingivitis, 64, 449, 512
ginkgetin, 299
Ginkgo, 299
Ginkgo biloba, 299
Ginkgoaceae, 299
ginkgolides, 30, 299, 300, 302
Ginseng
Eleutherococcus, 315
excessive ingestion, 16
Panax, 325
ginsenosides, 325, 326, 327
glabridin, 413
glabrol, 412, 413
glaucoma, 245
Glechoma hederacea, 342
glechomin, 342
Globe artichoke, 67
glucans, 419
glucomannan, 48
gluconasturtin, 367
glucose
coltsfoot, 185
comfrey, 188
couchgrass, 193
cowslip, 195
devil's claw, 207
ginseng, eleutherococcus, 315
plantain, 474
red clover, 498
senega, 533
glucosides, 183
glucosinolates, 29, 367

glucuronic acid, 188, 195, 386, 411, 498

glutamic acid, 159, 342
glycans, 328
glyceryl-t-palmitate, 169
glycine, 159, 256
glycosides, 29, 30
agrimony, 42
aloes, 50
apricot, 61
eyebright, 256
Jamaica dogwood, 379
lady's slipper, 403
passionflower, 461, 462
pilewort, 472
poplar, 482
thodiola, 500, 501
senna, 537
St John's wort, 550
vervain, 591
glycyrin, 411
glycyrol, 411
glycyrrhetic acid, 411

glycyrrhetinic acid, 411, 412, 413

Glycyrrhiza glabra, 411

Glycyrrhiza uralensis, 413
glycyrrhizic acid, 411
glycyrrhizin, 411, 412, 413
glycyrrhizin glycoside, 411
glycyrrhizinic acid, 411, 412
gnidilatin, 493
Gold-bloom, 121
Golden ragwort, 407
Golden root, 500
Golden Seal, 337
Golden Senecio, 407
gonorrhoea, 132
gonzalitosin, 201
Goosegrass, 164
gossypetin, 195, 500, SOL
Gotu Kola, 371

gout, 518

graft rejection, 535
Gramineae, 191, 193
Grapple Plant, 207
Gravel Root, 340

Great Lettuce, 596
Greater Burdock, 102
Greater Burnet, 105
Greater Celandine, 136
Greater Plantain, 474
Grenadille, 461
grosheimin, 67

Ground Ivy, 342

growth depression, 119
grumbling appendicitis, 42
Guaiac, 344

guaiacin, 344

guaiacol, 344

Guaiacum, 344
Guaiacum officinale, 344
Guaiacum sanctum, 344
guaiane, 30, 31
guaianolides, 30, 31, 263
guaiaretic acid, 344
guaiazulene, 344

guaiol, 344

Guajacum, 344
Guayacar, 344
guggulipid, 450

Gum Asafetida, 72

gum fraction, 72

Gum Tree, 247

Guru Nut, 183
Guttiferae, 550
gynocardin, 461, 462

CH)

haematemesis, 188, 541
haematological aberrations, 480
haemolytic properties, 46
haemorheological activity, 301
haemorrhage, 310, 311
haemorrhagic gastritis, 51

haemorrhoids, 80, 374, 376, 474, 601, 602

see also piles
Hafnia, 283
hallucinations, 404
Hamamelidaceae, 601
Hamamelis, 601
Hamamelis virginiana, 601
hamamelitannin, 601
hamamelose, 601
harmaline, 461, 462
harmalol, 461, 462
harman, 29, 461, 462

Index

harmine, 461, 462
harmol, 461
harpagide, 208, 209, 268, 269
harpagogenin, 209
Harpagophytum, 207
Harpagophytum burchelii, 207
Harpagophytum procumbens, 207
harpagoside, 208, 209, 268
Hartogia betulina, 100
hastatoside, 591
Hawthorn, 346
hayfever, treatment, 243
headaches, 62, 598
fatigue associated, 421
nervous tension, 355
Heal-All, 570
hearing loss, 306
heart disease, 245
Heart-leaved Groundsel, 407
heavy metals, 9
Hedeoma pulegioides, 470
Hedera senticosa, 315
hederagenin, 45, 180, 472, 489
heerabomyrrhols, 449
helenalin, 64, 65
helenin, 240
Helenium microcephalum, 240
Helicobacter pylori, 283, 285
Helmet Flower, 530
Helonias, 258
Helonias dioica, 258
Helonias lutea, 258
helonin, 258
heniarin, 152, 411
hepatic cirrhosis, 55
hepatic disease, see liver disease
hepatic tumours, 186
hepatitis, 457
acute, 160, 432
chronic, 55, 432, 443
hepatoprotective activity, 67, 68, 69, 92, 328, 429,
516, 516
hepatoregeneration, 67, 69
see also liver, regeneration
hepatotoxic constituents, in
boneset, 95
borage, 97
buchu, 101
butterbur, 114, 116
celandine, greater, 142, 143
cohosh, black, 175
coltsfoot, 186
comfrey, 189, 190
gravel root, 341
liferoot, 408
pennyroyal, 470
scullcap, 531
hepatotoxicity
kava, 394, 395
Herb Bennet, 75
herbacetin, 500, 501
herbal ecstasy, 243
Herbal Medicines Advisory Committee (HMAC),
5
herbal teas, 153, 156, 186, 337, 405, 452
in pregnancy, 19
herclavin, 487
Hercules-club, 486
herculin, 486
herpes simplex labialis, 425
herpes simplex virus type 1, 221, 387, 425, 426, 602
growth inhibition, 535

----- PAGE 711 -----
Index

herpes simplex virus type 2, 230
Hippocastanaceae, 363
hirsuteine, 132, 133
hirsutine, 132, 133
histamine, 452, 479, 480, 541
inhibition of release, 51, 157
potentiation of release, 249
histidine, 45, 260, 474
HIV infection, 443
HIV-1 protease activity, 43, 509
Hoarhound, 361
Hogweed, 98
Holy Thistle, 352
homeopathy, 64, 463, 489
Honeyplant, 425
Hong Jing Tian, 500
Hoodwort, 530
hookworm treatment, 240
Hops, 354
hordenine, 151
Horehound, 361
black, 358
white, 361
hormonally active ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 9
Horse-chestnut, 363
Horseheal, 240
Horseradish, 367
Huang Qin, 530
huckleberry, 79
humulene, 354, 382, 530
humulone, 354
Humulus, 354
Humulus lupulus, 354, 427, 585
Hungarian Chamomile, 152
Hydrangea, 369
Hydrangea arborescens, 369
hydrangenol, 369
hydrangin, 369
hydrastine, 337, 338
Hydrastis canadensis, 337
Hydrocotyle, 371
Hydrocotyle asiatica, 371
Hydrocotyle lurida, 371
hydrocotylegenins, 371
hydrocotylin, 371
hydrocyanic acid, 61, 493
hydroplumbagin glucoside, 215
hydroquinone, 578
hydroxyanthracenes, 29, 506, 537, 538
hydroxybenzoic acid, 30, 185, 419
hydroxycinnamic acids, 533
derivatives, 136, 139, 425
esters, 169, 171
hydroxycostunolide, 263
hydroxyisonobilin, 157
hydroxykynurenic acid, 299, 300
hydroxyparthenolide, 263
5-hydroxytryptamine, see serotonin
hydroxyursolic acid, 342
hyoscine, 29
hyoscyamine, 596
hyperactivity, children, 254
hyperaldosteronism, 413, 414
hypercholesterolaemia, 573
hyperforin, 551, 552, 553, 554
hyperglycaemic ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table
8

hypericin, 550, 551, 553, 554
hypericism, 559

Hypericum, 550

Hypericum noeanum, 550

Hypericum perforatum, 550
Hypericum veronense, 550
hyperin, 89, 577
hyperlipidaemia, 530
prevention, 531
see also lipid-lowering effects
hyperlipidaemic ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table
6

hyperoside, 79, 151, 237, 247, 347, 423, 447, 551
hyperprolactinaemia, 36
hypertension, 99, 282, 291, 322, 338, 382
hypertensive ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 4
hypertensives, interaction with

butterbur, 116
hyperthyroidism, 274, 275
hypnotic ingredients, 581
hypocholesterolaemic activity, 46, 68, 261, 376
hypoglycaemic activity, 328, 330, 377, 383, 450, 534
hypoglycaemic ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 8
hypokalaemia, 414, 539
hypokalaemic myopathy, 414
hypolaetin, 419
hypolipidaemic activity, 534
hypolipidaemic ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table

6

hypotension, 440, 456

hypotensive ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 4
hypothyroidism, 368

hypouraemic activity, 153

ichthynone, 379, 380
Ichthyomethia communis, 379
Ichthyomethia piscipula, 379
Tlex, 421
Ilex aquifolium, 421
Ilex paraguariensis, 421
Hex pubescens, 421, 422
ilexosides, 421
imanine, 554
imidazoles, 29
immunomodulation, 140, 219, 220, 223, 252, 282,
439, 439, 442
immunomodulatory ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 10
immunosuppressant effects, 215
immunosuppressant therapy, 232
imperatorin, 55, 456, 457
incontinence, urinary, 42
Indian Pennywort, 371
Indian Plantago, 374
Indian Senna, 537
Indian Tobacco, 416
Indian Water Navelwort, 371
indicaine, 374
in nine, 374
indigestion, 355
treatment, 405
indoles, 29, 461, 463, 491
inflammation, 598
eyes, 87
joints, 367
skin, see skin inflammation
tissues, 367
inflammatory reactions, 43
influenza treatment, 94, 591
inorganics, 452
inositol, 156, 193, 249
insect bites, 64
insecticides, 38, 58
insomnia, 245, 379, 403, 463, 464, 581, 583, 596
see also sleep disorders

insulin secretion, 43, 286

intercostal myalgia, 169

interleukin-1 stimulation, 132

interleukin-6 stimulation, 132

intermedine, 96

intermidine, 188

intermittent claudication, 300, 306

intestinal amoebiasis, 249

intestinal colic, 162, 456, 470
flatulent, 294

intestinal obstruction, 52, 129, 271, 539, 609

intestinal spasms, 181

intoxicants, 391

Intoxicating Pepper, 389

Inula, 240

inula camphor, 240

Inula helenium, 240

Inula racemosa, 240

inulin, 64, 94, 102, 185, 240, 241

iodine, 273

iridin, 87

iridoid containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,

Table 18

iridoids, 36, 149, 164

Iris caroliniana, 87

Iris versicolor, 87

Iris virginica, 87

iriversical, 87

irritability, 195

irritable bladder, 202

irritable bowel syndrome, 70, 73, 374

irritable cough, 596

irritant ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 12

irritants, powerful, allyl isothiocyanate, 542

isoalantolactone, 240

isoboldine, 91, 518

isobutylamides, 217, 218, 220

isocorynoxeine, 133

isoflavones, 411, 412

isoflavonoids, 45, 379, 498

isoginkgetin, 299

isoimperatorin, 53

isoleucine, 45, 159, 268, 409

isoliquiritigenin, 413

isomenthone, 470

isomitraphylline, 132, 133

isoorientin, 461

isopimpinellin, 457

isopteropodine, 132, 133

isoquassin, 491

isoquercitrin, 146, 237, 386, 521, 577

isoquinolines, 29, 84, 91, 180, 276, 337, 484, 486,

S18

isorhamnetin, 300, 452, 498
mistletoe, 437

isorhynchophylline, 132, 133

isoschaftoside, 461

isoscutellarin, 419

isosilichristin, 429

isothiocyanate, 367

isotussilagine, 218, 232

isovaltrates, 580, 581

isovitexin, 461

Ispaghul, 374

Ispaghula, 374

Ispagol, 374

itching, 544

jaligonic acid, 479
Jamaica Dogwood, 379

----- PAGE 712 -----
Jamaican Quassia, 491
jamiacin, 379

Java Tea, 381

Jesuit's Brazil Tea, 421

Ji Xue Cao, 371

Joe-Pye Weed, 340

joint inflammation, 367
Joshua Tree, 610
junionone, 386

Juniper, 386

Juniperus communis, 386

@

kaempferitrin, 151
kaempferol, 31, 32
bogbean, 89
clove, 166
coltsfoot, 185
drosera, 215
elder, 237
ginkgo, 300
hawthorn, 346
hops, 354
hydrangea, 369
kaempferol, 363
lime flower, 409
maté, 421
motherwort, 447
nettle, 452
passionflower, 461
raspberry, 495
red clover, 498
thodiola, 500, 501
saw palmetto, 521
wild carrot, 593
witch hazel, 601
kaurenes, 30, 31
Kava, 389
kava dermopathy, 389
kavain, 391, 392
Kava-kava, 389

kavalactones, 389, 390, 391, 392, 394

kavapyrones, 389
Kawa, 389
Kawa-kawa, 389
kawalactones, 389
Kelp, 273
Kelpware, 273
keratinisation, 372
ketones, 247, 256, 456
Kew Tree, 299
Key, 389
Khartoum Senna, 537
kidney
damage, 55
gravel, 452
irritants, 343, 406
kidney disease, 599
treatment, 192
see also renal disease
King's Cureall, 251
Klebsiella ozanae, 513
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 283, 432
Klebsiella spp., 283, 338, 578
Kluyveromyces bulgaricus, 509
Knob Root, 570
Kola Nut, 183
Koniak, 389
Korean Ginseng, 325
Ku Xing Ren, 61
Kumis Kucing, 381
Kydney Root, 340

@

L-652,469, 186
labdanes, 30, 31
Labiatae, 342, 358, 361, 381, 425, 447, 470, 508,
530, 530, 570, 574

labriformin, 478
lactation, see Introduction, Table 3
lactic acid, 96
Lactobacillus brevis, 509
Lactuca canadensis, 596
Lactuca quescina, 596
Lactuca sativa, 596
Lactuca serriola, 596
Lactuca spp., 596
Lactuca virosa, 596
lactucarium, 596, 597
lactucin, 596
lactupicrin, 596
Lady's Slipper, 403
Lady's Thistle, 429
laetrile, 62
Lamiaceae, 381, 425, 447, 508, 512, 530, 570, 574
Lamiceae, 470
Laminaria, 273
laminarin, 273
Lamium album, 454
Large Cranberry, 197
Large-leaved Lime, 409
Larrea divaricata, 159
Larrea mexicana, 159
Larrea tridentata, 159
larreantin, 159
larvicidals, 163
laryngismus stridulus, 493
laryngitis, 84, 185, 479
Lauraceae, 130, 162, 518
lauric acid, 45, 87, 102, 293
lauriflorine, 484
laxative effect

celandine, greater, 137

elder, 238

ispaghula, 376
laxative ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 1
laxative preparation, 48
learning, 301
lectins, 12, 436, 438, 479
Leguminosae, 45, 260, 379, 411, 498, 537
Leishmania donovani, 338
Lemon Balm, 425
Lemon Verbena, 405
lens opacity, 81
leocardin, 447
Leontice thalictroides, 180
Leontodon taraxacum, 204
leonuride, 447
leonuridin, 447
leonurine, 447, 448
leonurinine, 447
Leonurus, 447
Leonurus cardiaca, 447
Leonurus heterophyllus, 447
Leonurus japonicus, 447
Leonurus sibirious, 447
Leopard's Bane, 64
leprosy, 516
leprous ulcers, 371
Lesser Celandine, 472
Lettuce Opium, 596
Leucanthemum parthenium, 263
leucine, 45, 159, 237, 256, 268, 409, 474
leucocyanidin, 249

Index

leucopenia, drug-induced, 238
leukodin, 604
leukotriene inhibition, 264
libido increase, 58, 307
licoflavonol, 411
licoric acid, 411
Licorice, 411
Life-giving Vine of Peru, 132
Liferoot, 407
lignans, 29, 102, 103, 159, 344, 352, 437, 452, 486
Lignum Vitae, 344
Liliaceae, 279
Lime, 409
Lime Flower, 409
Lime Tree, 409
limonene, 100, 146, 243, 386, 405, 409, 500, 501,
530, 530
linalool, 31, 91, 405, 462, 604
Linden Tree, 409
lindestrine, 449
linoleic acid, 128, 204, 237, 251, 252, 293, 429
linolenic acid, 204, 237, 251
Lion's Tooth, 204
ipid peroxidation inhibition, 80
lipid-lowering effects, 281, 284, 450
see also cholesterol-lowering effects
lipid(s), 48, 57, 128, 166, 293, 429
lipolytic activity, 46
Lippia citriodora, 405
liqcoumarin, 411
liquirigenin, 412
liquiritic acid, 411
liquiritin, 412
Liquorice, 411, 221
excessive ingestion, 16, 52
lisetin, 379
Listeria monocytogenes, 65
lithospermic acid, 188, 352
liver

cirrhosis, 55
dysfunction, 87
regeneration, 58, 157, 456
symptoms involving, 337
tumours, 186
liver damage, 51, 55, 69, 114, 177
treatment, 429
liver disease, 143, 175, 599
alcoholic, 432
treatment, 137, 429
see also hepatic disease
lobelacrin, 416
Lobelia, 416
Lobelia inflata, 416
lobeline, 29, 416, 417
local microcirculation, increased, 49
loganin, 89
loperamide
ispaghula and, 377
Lucerne, 45
lumbago, 126
lupanine, 98
lupulone, 354
Lupulus, 354
luteolin, 31, 32
luteolin glycosides, 425, 456
luteolin-7-lactate, 358
luteolins, constituents in
agnus castus, 36
agrimony, 42
chamomile, German, 152
chamomile, Roman, 156
cowslip, 195

----- PAGE 713 -----
Index

luteolins, constituents in (cont.)
dandelion, 204
fenugreek, 261
ground ivy, 342
hawthorn, 346
horehound, white, 361
lemon verbena, 405
melissa, 425
passionflower, 461, 462
rosemary, 508
shepherd's purse, 541
squill, 547
wild lettuce, 596
lyaloside, 133
lycopsamine, 96, 188
lymph node enlargement, 164
lymphadenitis, 164, 261
lymphocyte resistance to apoptosis, 221
lysine, 45, 260, 268, 474
lysozymes, 43

@

Macrocystis, 273
macrophage function
enhancement, 221
Macropiper latifolium, 389
Macropiper methysticum, 389
Macrotys Actaea, 168
madasiatic acid, 373
madecassic acid, 373
madecassoside, 371, 372
magnoflorine, 180, 484, 486, 487
Maidenhair Tree, 299
Maize, 191
Male Myrrh, 449
malic acid, 45, 96, 185, 197, 379, 452, 596
malignant duodenal tumours, 119
malignant melanoma, 160
Malmal, 449
malonic acid, 45
maltol, 461, 462, 463, 464
Malvaceae, 418
mandelonitrile, 61, 62
mania
St John's wort, side-effect, 560
mannitol, 521
mannose, 188
maodongqing, 422
MAOI therapy, 262
St John's wort and, 562
MAOL-like action, 457
maokonine, 244
Marian Thistle, 429
Mariana lactea, 429
Marigold, 121
marrubenol, 361
marrubiin, 361, 362, 447
marrubin acid, 362
Marrubium, 361
Marrubium vulgare, 361
Marsh Trefoil, 89
Marshmallow, 418
Marybud, 121
mastalgia, 38
noncyclic, see noncyclic mastalgia
mastitis, 153
mastodynia, 37
matricaria, 604
Matricaria Flowers, 152
Matricaria recutita, 152
matricin, 152, 153

matricine, 30

Maté, 421

Maypop, 461

maysin, 191

Meadow Clover, 498
Meadowsweet, 423
Medicago, 45

Medicago afganica, 45
Medicago grandiflora, 45
Medicago ladak, 45
Medicago mesopotanica, 45
Medicago orientalis, 45
Medicago polia, 45
Medicago praesativa, 45
Medicago sativa, 45
Medicago sogdiana, 45
medicagol, 45
medicarpin, 45

Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory

Agency (MHRA), 6
Mediterranean Milk Thistle, 429
melancholy, 183
melanoma, malignant, 160
Melanthiaceae, 258
Melissa, 425
Melissa officinalis, 425, 585
Melissa pulegioides, 470
memory, 301
menopausal neurosis, 551
treatment, 407
menopausal symptoms, 173, 499
menstrual cycle
herbal remedies affecting
calendula, 123
chamomile, German, 155
gentian, 291
horehound, black, 360
horehound, white, 362
hydrocotyle, 373
motherwort, 448
nettle, 454
parsley, 458
pokeroot, 481
irregularities, 37
menstruation
profuse, 98
promotion, 58, 108
suppression, 50
mental depression, 147
Mentha pulegium, 470
menthiafolin, 89
menthol, 31, 193
menthone, 31, 100, 193, 470, 518
Menyanthaceae, 89
Menyanthes, 89
Menyanthes trifoliata, 89
metabolites
primary, 29
secondary, 29
methaemoglobinaemia, 73
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA), 283
methionine, 45
5-methoxyeugenol, 518
methoxyphenylacetone, 57
methoxypsoralen, 456, 593
methyl acetate, 167
methyl chavicol, 57
2-methyl-3-buten-2-ol, 354, 355
methylarbutin, 577
2-methylbuten-3-en—2-ol, 354
N-methylcytisine, 168, 169, 180, 181

methylephedrine, 243

methyleugenol, 12, 130, 162, 166

methylpseudoephedrine, 243

methylpyridoxine, 311

methylripariochromene A, 382, 383

methylsalicylaldehyde, 130

1-methyltetralin, 50

microbial contamination, 11

Micrococcus flavus, 475

Micrococcus glutamious, 248

Micrococcus luteus, 426

Micrococcus roseus, 65

Microsporum, 198, 283

Microsporum infections, 215

migraine, 183, 263, 264, 265
prevention, 108, 113, 263
treatment, 263

Milfoil, 604

Milk Thistle, 429

millefin, 604

Millefolium, 604

Millepertuis, 550

mineralocorticoids, 77

minerals, 46, 204

miscarriage, threatened, 258

Mistletoe, 436, 16

mitogenic substances, 480

mitraphylline, 132, 133

Mohave Yucca, 610

Mohmol, 449

molluscicidal activity, 480

Molmol, 449

Monimiaceae, 91

Monk's Pepper, 36

monoamine oxidase inhibition, 119, 392, 551

monosaccharides, 48

monoterpene glycosides, 512

monoterpene hydrocarbons, 294

monoterpenes, 30, 31, 36, 72, 193, 241, 247, 354,

386, 386, 425, 437, 456, 500, SOL
monoterpenoids, 149
monotropein, 164, 165, 577
Moraceae, 354
Mossberry, 197
Motherwort, 447
motion sickness, see travel sickness
motor impairment, 58, 423
Mountain Hydrangea, 369
Mountain Tobacco, 64
mouth ulcers, 449
movement disorders, 397
mucilage polysaccharides, 409, 419
mucilages, in

borage, 96

buchu, 100

burdock, 102

calamus, 118

cassia, 130

cinnamon, 162

coltsfoot, 185

comfrey, 188

elecampane, 240

ispaghula, 374, 375

marshmallow, 419

milk thistle, 429

plantain, 474

sassafras, 518

slippery elm, 545
mucopolysaccharides, 374
mucosal secretion, 534
mucous colitis, 42
multi-infarct dementia, 303

----- PAGE 714 -----
multiple sclerosis, 252, 253, 535

mumps, 479

Murr, 449

muscle ache, 65

muscle relaxants, 393

muscular rheumatism, 89, 169

muscular weakness, 183

mustard oedema, 49

mutagenic activity, 134, 190, 291, 539

Mutelia officinalis, 425

Mycobacterium avium, 54

Mycobacterium phlei, 65

Mycobacterium smegmatis, 103, 173, 413, 426, 578,
609, 609

Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 51, 283, 372

myoglobinuria, 397, 398

myopathy, 397, 398

myrcene, 31, 386

Myrica, 77

Myrica cerifera, 77

Myricaceae, 77

myricadiol, 77

myricetin, 31, 32, 215, 409, 577

myricitrin, 77, 577, 601

myristic acid, 45, 293

myristicin, 456, 457, 458, 518

myristoleic acid, 521

Myrrh, 449

Myrtaceae, 166, 247

Myrtilus niger, 79

Myrtocyan, 80

myxoedema, 273

LN]

naphthodianthrones, 550
naphthoquinones, 215
nasal congestion, treatment, 243
nasopharyngeal catarrh, 94

chronic, 42
Nasturtium armoracia, 367
nausea, 40

aloes, 52

aniseed, 59

apricot, 62

blue flag, 87

bogbean, 90

broom, 99

chamomile, Roman, 156

cinnamon, 162

elder, 238

eucalyptus, 248

false unicorn, 259

ginger, 296

lobelia, 417

pokeroot, 480

saw palmetto, 526
nausea, prevention, 294, 296
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 338
Neisseria meningitidis, 338
neochlorogenic acid, 61
neoherculin, 486, 487
neopancreatinum, 46
neoquassin, 491
neosilihermins, 429
Nepeta glechoma, 342
Nepeta hederacea, 342
nephritis, 51
nephroprotective properties, 431
nephrotoxic ingredients, 365, 470
Nerve Root, 403

nervous conditions
treatment, 391, 392
nervous eczema, 452
nervous excitability, 581
nervous system, 81
nervous tension, 379
treatment, 409
Nettle, 452
neuralgia, 126, 379, 551
neurological adverse effects, 397
neurological effects, 59
neurosedative activity
horehound, black, 359
neurosis, 447
neurotransmitters, 328
nicotinamide complex, 42
nicotinic acid, 261, 352
nicotinic-like action, 181
Night Blooming Cereus, 151
night vision improvement, 81
nitidine, 484, 486, 487
nobilin, 156, 157
noncyclic mastalgia, 251, 253
noradrenaline decrease, 119
nordihydroguaiaretic acid (NDGA), 159
toxicity, 160
norephedrine, 243
norisoguaiacin, 159
norpseudoephedrine, 243
Northern Prickly Ash, 484
Northern Senega, 533
nortracheloside, 352
norwogenin-7,8-dimethylether, 570
NSAIDs
passionflower and, 466
numbness, 380

©

obesity, treatment, 273
Oenothera biennis, 251
oesophageal
ulcers, 413
a-oestradiol, 61
oestrogenic activity
alfalfa, 46
aniseed, 58, 59
cohosh, black, 171, 177
ginkgo, 303
hops, 355
pleurisy root, 477
red clover, 499
saw palmetto, 524
wild carrot, 594
oestrone, 61
oils, 96
oleanoic acid, 30, 31
oleanolic acid, 166, 237, 326, 342, 345, 352, 472,
512
oleic acid, 251, 429
oleo-gum resin, 72, 449
oleo-resin, 294, 354
Onagra biennis, 251
Onagraceae, 251
ophthalmic activity, 80
oral hygiene, 85
oral mucosa
inflammation, 449, 513
irritants, 419
oral rinses, 85
oral toxicity, 134
Orchidaceae, 403

Index

orexigenic properties, 103, 162
organic acids, 84

Oriental Ginseng, 325
orientin, 261, 461, 547
Ormenis nobilis, 156
orthochromene A, 382
Orthosiphon aristatus, 381
Orthosiphon spicatus, 381
Orthosiphon stamineus, 381
osteoarthritis, 211, 294, 296, 599
osthenol, 146

osthol, 53

otosenine, 407

oxalic acid, 45, 452, 596
oxindole alkaloids, 132
Oxycoccus macrocarpus, 197
Oxycoccus palustris, 197
oxypeucedanin, 456
oxysparteine, 98

oxytocic properties, 181, 262
Oyo, 389

cP)

Padang-Cassia, 162
paedatric uses, 19
PAF, 302, 307
pagoside, 208
Paigle, 195
Pale Psyllium, 374
Palmae, 521
palmidin, 506
palmidin C, 270
palmitic acid, 382
agrimony, 42
alfalfa, 45
angelica, 53
blue flag, 87
bogbean, 89
burdock, 102
calamus, 118
cohosh, black, 169
dandelion, 204
elder, 237
evening primrose, 251
ginger, 293
milk thistle, 429
palmitic acid ester, 121
Palo Santo, 344
palpitations, 62, 184
Panang Cinnamon, 162
Panax americanus, 325
Panax cuneatus, 325
Panax Ginseng, 325
Panax ginseng, 325
Panax notoginseng, 325
Panax pseudoginseng, 325
Panax quinquefolius, 325
Panax schin-seng, 325
Panax spp., 325
Panax versus, 325
panaxosides, 325, 327
panaxynol, 328
panaxytriol, 329
pancytopenia, 47
Papaveraceae, 84, 136
Papoose root, 180
Paprika, 125
paraffin, 185
Paraguay Tea, 421
paralysis, 62
stroke induced, 531

----- PAGE 715 -----
Index

parasiticides, 58
parillin, 516
Parsley, 456
excessive ingestion, 16
phototoxic reaction, 16
Parsley Piert, 459
parthenolide, 263, 264
parturition, 496
raspberry leaf and, 496
Pasque Flower, 489
Passiflora, 461
Passiflora edulis, 462
Passiflora incarnata, 461
Passifloraceae, 461, 462
Passion Vine, 461
Passionflower, 461
patuletin-3-rutinoside, 218
Peagle, 195
pectins, 79, 102, 193
Pedaliaceae, 207
pediculosis, 58
pelvic congestion, 51
Penicillium digitatum, 383
Penicillium notatum, 387
Penicillium spp., 160
Pennyroyal, 470
pentacyclic triterpenes, 159
peptic discomfort, 291
peptic ulcers, 46, 48, 189, 599
prophylaxis, 423

see also duodenal ulcers; gastric ulcers

treatment, 215, 423

hawthorn, 348

hydrocotyle, 372

kava, 391, 394

liquorice, 413

milk thistle, 433

passionflower, 465

saw palmetto, 524

St John's wort, 558

valerian, 583
pharyngitis, 449
phellandrene, 53, 518
phenelzine

ginseng, panax, and, 333
phenethyl glycosides, 256
phenolic acids, 30

apricot, 61

artichoke, 67

bilberry, 79

centaury, 149

chamomile, Roman, 156

euphorbia, 249

marshmallow, 419

sage, 512

wild lettuce, 596
phenolic alcohols, 409
phenolic esters, 409
phenolic glycosides, 201, 598
phenolics, 30, 159, 197, 423

phenols, 130, 162, 195, 367, 508, 574

phenyl pyrones, 50

phenylalanine, 45, 159, 268, 409

phenylethylamine, 346

Pilewort, 472
Pillbearing Spurge, 249
pilocarpine, 29
Pimpinella anisum, 57

pinene(s), 31, 36, 201, 386, 405, 409, 500, 501, 508,

518, 518, 580
Piper methysticum, 389
Piper sanctum, 391
Piper wichmanni, 391
Piper wichmannii, 389
Piperaceae, 389
piperidines, 29, 416
piperitenone, 470
piperitone, 31
pipermethystine, 390
piperonylacrolein, 518
piscerythrone, 379
Piscidia erythina, 379
Piscidia inebrians, 379
Piscidia piscipula, 379
Piscidia toxicaria, 379
piscidic acid, 169, 379
piscidin, 379
piscidone, 379
Plantaginaceae, 374, 474
Plantago asiatica, 474
Plantago lanceolata, 474
Plantago major, 474
Plantago ovata, 374
plantagonine, 374
Plantain, 474
Plasmodium falciparum, 173

perfumery products, 61 phenylethylisothiocyanate, 367 platelet aggregation, 81, 133, 296
perimenopausal symptoms, 169, 173 phenylpropanes, 29 inhibition, 252, 264, 281, 294, 393
peri-operative use, 20 phenylpropanoids, 72, 75, 118, 130, 168, 169, 208, platelet-activating factor (PAF), 186
peripheral blood 219, 219, 315, 316, 358, 437 antagonism, 302, 307
mononuclear cells, 221 phosphoric acid, 180, 452 platyphylline, 189
peripheral blood flow photodermatitis, 55, 560 pleurisy, 54, 477
insufficiency, 484, 486 photosensitisation, 373 Pleurisy Root, 477
peripheral occlusive disease, 306 St John's wort, 553, 559, 562 plumbagin, 215
peripheral vascular disease, 54 photosensitive allergic reaction, 55, 59, 147 Pocan, 479
peroxidases, 43, 67, 279 phototoxic dermatitis, 448, 458 Podophyllum hexandrum, 8
pertussis, 58, 72, 185, 575 phototoxic effects, 55, 186, 372, 594 poisoning
pesticides, 11 phthalides, 53, 54, 146 animal, 606
Petasites hybridus, 107 physcion, 506, 608 human
Petasites officinalis, 107 phytohaemagglutinin, 237 apricot, 62
Petasites ovatus, 107 Phytolacca acinosa, 480 arnica, 65
Petasites sabaudus, 107 Phytolacca americana, 479 broom, 99
Petasites vulgaris, 107 Phytolacca dodecandra, 479 chaparral, 160
Petroselinum crispun, 456 Phytolaccaceae, 479 cohosh, blue, 181
Petroselinum hortense, 456 phytolaccagenic acid, 479 comfrey, 189
Petroselinum peregrinum, 456 phytolaccagenin, 479, 480 elder, 238
Petroselinum sativum, 456 phytosterols, 188, 409 eucalyptus, 248
Petroselinum vulgare, 456 agrimony, 42 golden seal, 338
Peumus boldus, 91 arnica, 64 pokeroot, 480, 481
phagocytosis, 43, 49 artichoke, 67 pulsatilla, 490
stimulation, 450 burdock, 103 sage, 514
pharmacodynamics chamomile, Roman, 156 sassafras, 519
devil's claw, 210 cohosh, blue, 180 tansy, 573
garlic, 284 coltsfoot, 185 Pokeberry, 479
saw palmetto, 524 comfrey, 188 Pokeroot, 479, 13, 16
St John's wort, 554 holy thistle, 352 Pokeweed, 479
pharmacokinetics phytotherapy, 4 pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP), 479

butterbur, 110, 112 picein, 500, S01
celandine, greater, 138 piceoside, 577

pokeweed mitogen (PWM), 479
polyacetylenes, 102, 217, 218, 222, 241, 352, 353

cohosh, black, 173
devil's claw, 210
echinacea, 223
ephedra, 244
garlic, 281, 284
ginkgo, 303
ginseng, panax, 327

Picrasma, 491
Picrasma excelsa, 491
picrasmin, 491
piles
internal, 137, 472
prolapsed, 472
see also haemorrhoids

polyenes, 102, 218, 220, 352
Polygala, 533

Polygala alpestris, 534
Polygala chamaebuxus, 534
Polygala comosa, 534
Polygala erioptera, 535
Polygala microphylla, 534

----- PAGE 716 -----
Polygala paniculata, 535
Polygala polygama, 534
Polygala senega, 533
Polygala spp., 533
Polygala tenuifolia, 533
Polygala triphylla, 534
Polygala vayredae, 534
Polygalaceae, 533
polygalic acid, 534
Polygonaceae, 506, 608
polyhydroxylated triterpenes, 132
polymorphonuclear leukocyte infiltration, 49
polyphenols, 36, 79, 132, 134, 425
polysaccharides, 437
aloe vera, 48
arnica, 64
boneset, 94
burdock, 102
calendula, 121
chamomile, German, 152
echinacea, 217, 218, 221
fucus, 273
ginseng, eleutherococcus, 315
marshmallow, 419
senna, 537
pomolic acid, 105
pontica, 604
Poplar, 482
populin, 482
Populus Alba, 482
Populus nigra, 482
Populus spp., 599
Populus tremula, 482
Populus tremuloides, 482
Porphyromonas gingivitis, 513
positive inotropic activity, 151
postmastectomy lymphoedema, 123
postmenopausal symptoms, 169, 173
postviral fatigue, 252, 253
Pot Marigold, 121
potassium, 204, 452
potassium ion inhibition, 80
Poterium officinale, 105
pratensin, 498
pregnancy
see Introduction, Table 3
preleosibirin, 358
premarrubiin, 361
premenstrual syndrome, 38, 252, 253, 557
prenylated terpenoids, 550, S51
Prickly Ash
northern, 484
southern, 486
Prickly Comfrey, 188
primin, 195
Primula, 195
primula acid, 195
Primula officinalis, 195
Primula veris, 195
primulaveroside, 195
primulic acid, 195
primveroside, 195
proanthocyanidins, 31, 61, 195, 197, 198, 299, 386,
550
procumbid, 268
procumbide, 208
procyanidins, 134, 347
prolactin secretion
inhibition of, by agnus castus, 38
proline, 342, 541
prophylactic activity, 348
proscillaridin A, 547

prostaglandin thromboxane, inhibition, 264
prostatic hyperplasia, 522, 525
benign, see benign prostatic hyperplasia
prostatitis, 100
proteins, 125, 183, 260
Proteus, 283
Proteus hauseri, 186
Proteus mirabilis, 202, 283, 383, 432
Proteus spp., 353
Proteus vulgaris, 65, 186, 419, 424, 426
protoanemonin, 472, 473, 489, 490
protoberberines, 137, 276
protocatechuic acid, 30, 247
protopanaxadiol, 325, 326
protopanaxatriol, 325, 326
protopines, 137, 276, 277
Providencia, 283
Prunus armeniaca, 61
Prunus tiliifolia, 61
pruritus
treatment, 268
pseudoephedrine, 243, 244, 245
pseudoguaianolides, 30, 31
pseudohypericin, 551
pseudomelanosis coli, 539
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 160, 186, 202, 283, 338,
383, 383, 419, 424, 432
Pseudomonas fluorescens, 509
Pseudomonas putida, 426
Pseudomonas solancearum, 147
pseudotannins, 195, 447
psoralen, 456, 457, 593
psoriasis, 48, 103, 164, 252, 372, 498, 516, 535
treatment, 268, 608
psychogenic asthma, 54
psychological symptoms, 173, 559
pteropodine, 132, 133
Pulegium parviflorum, 470
Pulegium vulgare, 470
pulegone, 100, 470
pulmonary infection, 367
pulmonary oedema, 59
Pulsatilla, 489
Pulsatilla nigricans, 489
Pulsatilla patens, 489
Pulsatilla pratensis, 489
Pulsatilla ucrainica, 489
Pulsatilla vulgaris, 489
purgative ingredients, 538, 608
Purple Boneset, 340
Purple Clover, 498
Purple Medick, 45
Pyrethrum parthenium, 263
Pyrethrum vulgare, 572
pyridines, 29, 45, 149, 260, 290, 580, 604
pyrocatechols, 188
2-pyrones, 389
pyrophosphates, 30
pyrrolic esters, 189
pyrrolidines, 29, 45, 361, 604
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, 12, 108, 109, 186, 189, 190,
407, 407
pyrrolizidines, 29, 185, 188, 218, 232
toxicity, 189

@

Quackgrass, 193
Quaker Bonnet, 530
Quaker Comfrey, 188
Quaking Aspen, 482
quality assurance, 11

Index

Quassia, 491
Quassia amara, 491
Quassia excelsa, 491
quassin, 491
Queen Anne's Lace, 593
Queen of the Meadow, 423
Queen's Delight, 493
Queen's Root, 493
quercetagetin, 37
quercetin, 31, 32
bilberry, 79
bogbean, 89
buchu, 100
chamomile, Roman, 156
coltsfoot, 185
drosera, 215
elder, 237
euphorbia, 249
eyebright, 256
fenugreek, 261
ginkgo, 300
hawthorn, 346
hops, 354
horse-chestnut, 363
hydrangea, 369
juniper, 386
lime flower, 409
maté, 421
milk thistle, 429
motherwort, 447
nettle, 452
red clover, 498
shepherd's purse, 541
squill, 547
uva-ursi, 577
wild carrot, 593
wild lettuce, 596
witch hazel, 601
quercetin glycosides, 31, 32, 237, 276
quercetin-3,7-diglucoside, 100
quercitin
mistletoe, 437
passionflower, 461
raspberry, 495
quercitrin, 31, 32, 42, 79, 247, 249, 256, 354, 447,
601, 601
quinic acid, 45, 197, 452
quinidine
cascara and, 129
quinine, 29
quinolines, 29
quinolizidines, 29, 168, 169, 180
quinones, 195, 215, 403, 577
quinovic acid glycosides, 132, 134

@

radiation burns, 48

Ragwort, Golden, 407
ramentaceone, 215

ramentone, 215

Ranunculaceae, 168, 337, 472, 489
ranunculin, 472, 489
Ranunculus, 472

Ranunculus ficaria, 136, 472
rapid eye movement (REM), 557
Raspberry, 495

raspberry ketone, 495
Rattlesnake Root, 533

Red Clover, 498

Red Ginseng, 325, 326

----- PAGE 717 -----
Index

Red Indian Paint, 84
red pigment, 183
Red Plant, 479
Red Root, 84
refrigerants, 162
regulatory controls on herbal medicines, 4
United Kingdom, 5, 6
World-wide, 7, 10
Ren Shen, 325
renal calculi, 340
renal disease, 253, 343, 388
renal failure, acute, 134
renal irritation, 101, 599
renal tubular acidosis, 231
reporting of adverse reactions, 22
reproductive capacity, 319
reproductive system pain, male/female, 489
resins
asafoetida, 72
avens, 75
bayberry, 77
bloodroot, 84
boldo, 91
boneset, 94
broom, 98
buchu, 100
burdock, 103
calamus, 118
capsicum, 128
cassia, 130
cereus, 151
chaparral, 159
cinnamon, 162
cohosh, blue, 180
dandelion, 205
elecampane, 240
eucalyptus, 247
euphorbia, 249
guaiacum, 344
motherwort, 447
myrrh, 449
respiratory allergy, 356
respiratory catarrh, 54, 479
respiratory depression, 417
respiratory stimulation, 184
respiratory tract
fluid increase, 58

rheumatism, treatment, 454
bilberry, 80
bogbean, 89
boldo, 91
burdock, 103
capsicum, 126
cat's claw, 132
celery, 147
chaparral, 159
pokeroot, 479
rheumatoid arthritis
aloe vera, 49
bogbean, 89
celery, 147
cohosh, black, 169
devil's claw, 210
evening primrose, 253
feverfew, 265
ginger, 294
guaiacum, 345
poplar, 482
willow, 598
rhinitis, allergic, 454
Rhizopus nigricans, 383
thodalidin, 500, 501
thodalin, 500, S01
Rhodiola, 500
Rhodiola rosea, 500
rhodiolgidin, 500
thodiolgin, 500
rhodionidin, 500, S01
rhodionin, 500, 501
rhodiosin, 500, 501
Rhodotorula, 283
Rhodotorula glutinis, 46, 509
Rhubarb, 506
thynchophylline, 132, 133
Robinia alata, 379
Rockweed, 273
Rodiola, 500
Roman Chamomile, 156
Rosaceae, 42, 75, 105, 346, 423, 459, 495
rosarin, 500, 501
rosavin, 500, S01
Rose root, 500
Rosemary, 508
rosin, 500, SOL

Rutaceae, 100, 484, 486

rutin, 29, 30, 31, 32
buchu, 100
cereus, 151
chamomile, Roman, 156
elder, 237
eucalyptus, 247
fumitory, 276
ground ivy, 342
hawthorn, 346
hops, 354
horse-chestnut, 363
maté, 421
motherwort, 447
saw palmetto, 521

CS)

Sabal, 521

Sabal serrulata, 521

sabinene, 386

Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 426
Saccharomyces pastorianus, 383
sachaliside, 500, 501

safety of herbal ingredients, 11
safrole, 12, 162, 518

Sage, 512

Saigon Cassia, 162

Saigon Cinnamon, 162

salads, 96, 188, 205
Salicaceae, 482, 598

salicin, 423, 482, 599
salicortin, 482

salicylaldehyde, 130, 423
salicylates, 423, 598

salicylic acid, 42, 87, 89, 164, 169, 423, 533

salidroside, 500, S01
saligenin, 483, 599
Salishuria adiantifolia, 299
Salisburia biloba, 299
Salix, 598

Salix alba, 598

Salix fragilis, 598

Salix pentandra, 598

Salix purpurea, 598
Salmonella, 160, 283, 513, 583
Salmonella paratyphi, 338

infections, 219, 220, 223, 224, 225, 443, 482
restlessness, 195, 245, 355

rosiridin, 500, S01

Salmonella typhi, 147, 283, 322, 338
rosiridol, 500, 501

Salmonella typhimurium, 51, 65, 66, 103, 123, 432,

nervous, 463
reticuline, 91
Rhamnaceae, 128, 270
rhamnazin

mistletoe, 437
rhamnetin, 166
Rhamni Purshianae Cortex, 128
rhamnose, 188, 195, 409, 498
Rhamnus, 128
Rhamnus frangula, 270
Rhamnus purshiana, 128
rheidin, 506
thein, 506
Rheum officinale, 506
Rheum palmatum, 506
Rheum potaninii, 506
Rheum qinlingense, 506
Rheum tanguticum, 506
rheumatic ailments, 598
rheumatic diseases, 54, 371, 484, 486

treatment, 208, 482
rheumatic pains, 180, 518
rheumatic therapy, 452

rosmaricine, 509

rosmarinic acid, 188, 189, 425, 508, 510, 512

Rosmarinus laxiflorus, 508
Rosmarinus officinalis, 508
rossoliside, 215

rotenoids, 379

rotenone, 379, 380
rotundifarine, 30
rotundifuran, 36, 37
Round-leaved Sundew, 215
roundworm treatment, 240, 572
Rubbed Thyme, 574
Rubiaceae, 132, 164
rubichloric acid, 164
Rubus, 495

Rubus idaeus, 495
Rudbeckia hispida, 217
Rudbeckia pallida, 217
Rudbeckia purpurea, 217
Rudbeckia serotina, 217
Rumex crispus, 608
Rumex odontocarpus, 608
Russian Comfrey, 188

597, 597
Saloop, 518
Salvia lavandulifolia, 512
Salvia officinalis, 512
Sambucus, 237
Sambucus canadensis, 237
Sambucus formosana, 238
Sambucus nigra, 237
sambunigrin, 237
San Qi, 325
Sanchi Ginseng, 325
Sanguinaria, 84
Sanguinaria australis, 84
Sanguinaria canadensis, 84
Sanguinaria dilleniana, 84
sanguinarine, 84, 85, 138, 143
Sanguisorba, 105
Sanguisorba officinalis, 105
Sanguisorba polygama, 105
Sanguisorbin, 105
Sapium sylvaticum, 493
sapogenins, 325
Saponaria officinalis, 238

----- PAGE 718 -----
saponin glycosides, 371

saponin-containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 19

saponins, 13, 30, 121, 137

Sarcina lutea, 531

Sarcinia lutea, 65

sarothamine, 98

Sarothaninus scoparius, 98

sarracine, 189

Sarsaparilla, 515

sarsaparilloside, 516

sarsasapogenin, 516

sarsasaponin, 516

sarsaspogenin, 610

Sassafras, 518, 16

Sassafras albidum, 518

Sassafras sassfras, 518

Saveéntaro, 132

Saw Palmetto, 521

Saxifragaceae, 369

Saxifrax, 518

scabies, 58

Scabwort, 240

scalds, treatment, 123

Scented Mayweed, 152

schaftoside, 461

schizophrenia, 253

sciatica, 169, 551

Scilla, 547

scillaren A and B, 547

scillicyanoside, 547

scilliglaucoside, 547

scoparin, 98

Scoparius, 98

scopoletin, 57, 64, 89, 156, 164, 367, 419, 452, 462,
491

scopoletin glucoside, 363

scopoletin-7-glucoside, see scopolin

scopolin, 29, 30, 363

Scrophularia, 268

Scrophularia nodosa, 268

Scrophulariaceae, 256, 268

Scullcap, 530, 16

scutellarein, 530

Scutellaria, 530

Scutellaria baicalensis, 530

Scutellaria lanceolaria, 530

Scutellaria lateriflora, 530

Scutellaria macrantha, 530

scutellarin, 530

Sea Onion, 547

seasonal affective disorder, 557

Seawrack, 273

secretolytic affect, 58

sedative activity, 153, 427

sedative ingredients, see Appendix 2, Table 7

Sedum rosea, 500

Sedum roseum, 500

seizures, 59

Selenicereus grandiflorus, 151

Senecio aureus, 407

senecionine, 185, 186, 407

Senega, 533

Senega Root, 533

Senega Snakeroot, 533

senegin, 533

senegrin, 533

senkirkine, 185, 186

Senna, 537

Senna acutifolia, 537

Senna alexandrina, 537

Senna angustifolia, 537

sennidin, 506, 537
sennosides, 537, 538
septicaemia, 219
Serenoa, 521
Serenoa repens, 521
Serenoa serrulata, 521
serine, 371, 409, 474
serotonin, 452, 453, 543, 552
decrease, 119
sesquiterpene bisabolol compounds, 152, 153
sesquiterpene lactones, 30, 31, 64, 94, 108, 109, 205,
241, 241, 263, 265, 572, 596
sesquiterpene(s), 30, 31
artichoke, 67
asafoetida, 72
boneset, 94
burdock, 102
butterbur, 107, 109
calamus, 118
celery, 146
chamomile, German, 152, 153
dandelion, 205
eucalyptus, 247
ginger, 294
ginkgo, 299
holy thistle, 352
hops, 354
juniper, 386
melissa, 425
parsley, 456
valerian, 581
Seven Barks, 369
sexual dysfunction
antidepressant-related, 307, S61
sexual function
increased, 465
sexual inadequacy related depression, 327
Shan Ling Ma Huang, 243
shengmanol, 168, 170
Shepherd's Purse, 541
Shigella dysenteriae, 147, 338
Shigella flexneri, 103, 173, 578, 605, 609
Shigella sonnei, 103, 173, 426, 513, 578, 605,
609
shikimic acid, 29
shogaol, 294
Short Buchu, 100
Siberian Ginseng, 315
silandrin, 429, 430
silhermin, 429
silibinin, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433
silichristin, 430
silicic acid, 42, 188, 195, 452
silicon, 452
silidianin, 429, 430
silimonin, 429
silybin, 429, 430, 431
Silybum marianum, 429, 432
silychristin, 430
silymarin, 429, 430, 431, 432, 433
Simarouba excelsa, 491
Simaroubaceae, 491
similikilactone, 491
sinensetin, 382, 383
sinigrin, 29, 367, 541, 542
sinusitis, treatment, 243
sitosterols, 30, 31, 166, 240, 249, 521, 572
Sjégren's syndrome, 253
skin inflammation, 544, 601
skin reactions
butterbur, 113
chamomile, German, 154

Index

kava, 396
Skullcap, 530
Skunk Cabbage, 543
sleep disorders, 355, 425, 464, 581, 583

see also insomnia
sleep disturbance, 427
sleep induction, 391, 392
sleeplessness, 184, 422
Slippery Elm, 545
Small Pasque Flower, 489
Smallage, 146
Small-leaved Lime, 409
Smilacaceae, 515
smilacin, 516
smilagenin, 516
Smilax febrifuga, 515
Smilax ornata, 515
Smilax purhampuy, 515
Smilax regelii, 515
smoking cessation

St John's wort, 556
Smooth Hydrangea, 369
smooth muscle

contraction, 250, 283

relaxation, 184, 240, 244, 283

stimulation, 181, 542
Snake Root, 533
Snakeroot, 94
Snakeweed, 249
sodium retention, 78
Solanaceae, 125
Somali Myrrh, 449
somatic symptoms, 173
sore throat, acute, 42
soups, 96, 188, 205, 452
Southern Bayberry, 77
Southern Prickly Ash, 486
Southern Wax Myrtle, 77
soyasapogenin, 45
sparteine, 29, 98, 99
Spartium scoparium, 98
spasmolytic activity, 84, 118, 119, 522, 523
speciophylline, 132, 133
sperm, and echinacea, 232
spices, 57, 125, 162, 294
a-spinasterol, 89
spirobenzoquinolines, 276
Spogel, 374
sprains, 64
sputum

scanty, 547

viscosity, 535
Squaw Mint, 470
Squaw root, 180
Squaw Weed, 407
Squill, 547
St Bartholomew's Tea, 421
St John's Wort, 549

drug interactions, 21

valerian, combination, 586
St Mary's Thistle, 429
stachydrine, 447, 604
stachyose, 207, 474
Staphylococcus albus, 147, 509
Staphylococcus aureus

agrimony, 43

arnica, 65

bilberry, 81

burdock, 103

celery, 147

chaparral, 160

cohosh, black, 173

----- PAGE 719 -----
Index

Staphylococcus aureus (cont.)
coltsfoot, 186
damiana, 202
garlic, 283
holy thistle, 353
java tea, 383
liquorice, 413
marshmallow, 419
meadowsweet, 424
melissa, 426
methicillin-resistant (MRSA), 283
milk thistle, 432
plantain, 475
rosemary, 509
sculleap, 531
St John's wort, 553
uva-ursi, 578
yarrow, 605
yellow dock, 609
Staphylococcus epidermidis, 424
Staphylococcus spp., 283, 338
starch, 77, 84, 118, 180, 201, 293
Starflower oil, 96, 97
Starwort, 258
stearic acid, 42, 87, 102, 251, 293
stenosis, 271, 539
Sterculia acuminata, 183
Sterculiaceae, 183
steroidal activity, 319, 411
steroidal sapogenins, 261
steroids, 45, 132, 342, 344, 352, 449, 521, 572
kava, 390
sterols, 94, 240, 249, 429
Stigma Maydis, 191
stigmasterols, 30, 31, 166, 188, 240, 249, 429,
572
Stillingia, 493
stillingia factors, 493
Stillingia sylvatica, 493
stimulants, 126, 180
Stinging Nettle, 452
stomach cramps, 54
stomach pains, severe, 181
stomatitis, 167, 512
Stone Root, 570
Streptococcus faecalis, 147, 283, 353
Streptococcus haemolyticus, 432
Streptococcus mutans, 383, 594
Streptococcus pyogenes, 147, 553
Streptococcus spp., 160, 338, 578
stress resistance, 317, 327
stroke
acute ischaemic, 307
substitution/adulteration, 8
sugars, 94, 98, 102, 118, 130, 162, 183, 249
Sundew, 215
Surinam Quassia, 491
swallow wort, 136
Sweet Balm, 425
Sweet False Chamomile, 152
Sweet Flag, 118
sweroside, 89, 149
swertiamarin, 149
swertiamarine, 290
swertisin, 461
symlandine, 188
sympathomimetic ingredients, see Appendix 2,
Table 15
symphytine, 29, 188
Symphytum asperum, 188
Symphytum officinale, 188
Symphytum Radix, 188

Symphytum uplandicum, 188

Symplocarpus foetidus, 543

systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 47, 134
SLE-like syndrome, 46

Syzygium aromaticum, 166

Syzygium cuminii, 167

oO

T. x europaea, 409
Tabasco Pepper, 125
tachycardia, 245
tamoxifen

cohosh, black, and, 177
Tanacetum, 572
Tanacetum audibertii, 572
Tanacetum parthenium, 263
Tanacetum vulgare, 572
tannic acid, 94, 185, 403
tannin-containing ingredients, see Appendix 2,

Table 20

tannins, 29, 30, 31, 33, 36
Tansy, 572
taraxacoside, 204
Taraxacum, 204
Taraxacum officinale, 204
Taraxacum palustre, 204
taraxerol, 77, 249
taraxerone, 77
tartaric acid, 185, 379
Tasmanian Bluegum, 247
taxanes, 30, 31
taxifolin, 429, 430, 547
tendonitis, 208
terpene aldehydes, 456
terpene lactones, 301
terpenes, 30, 159, 279, 405, 409, 512
terpenoids, constituents of

arnica, 64

bayberry, 77

boneset, 94

calendula, 121

cohosh, black, 168, 170

dandelion, 205

elecampane, 240

ephedra, 243

euphorbia, 249

feverfew, 263

ginkgo, 299

ginseng, panax, 325

ground ivy, 342

guaiacum, 345

hops, 354

horehound, white, 361

hydrocotyle, 371

liquorice, 411

motherwort, 447

myrrh, 449

quassia, 491

queen's delight, 493

rosemary, 508

senega, 533

tansy, 572

uva-ursi, 577

wild lettuce, 596

yucca, 610
terpinen-4-ol, 243, 386, 387, 593, 594, 604
terpinene, 386, 574
terpineol, 31, 243, 405, 409, 530
tetrahydroalstonine, 133
tetramethoxyflavones, 382, 383
tetramethylscutellarein, 382, 383

tetraphyllin B, 201
tetrochrysin, 570
Tetterwort, 84
Teucrium spp., 16, 531
theobromine, 183, 184, 421
theophylline, 421
thiamine, 42
thiazide diuretics, 52
cascara and, 129
senna and, 539
thioacrolein, 280
thiophenes, 102
Thoroughwort, 94
threadworm treatment, 240, 572
threonine, 45, 268
throat irritation, 88
thrombotic conditions, 605
thujone(s), 31, 512, 518, 572, 604
Thyme, 574
thymol, 201, 574
thymoleptic properties, 183
thymonin, 574
Thymus aestivus, 574
Thymus ilerdensis, 574
Thymus melissa, 425
Thymus sabulicola, 574
Thymus sylvestris, 574
Thymus valentinus, 574
Thymus vulgaris, 574
Thymus webbianus, 574
Thymus welwitschii, 574
Thymus zygis, 574
thyroid disease, 245
Tienchi Ginseng, 325
tiglianes, 30, 31
tiglic acid esters, 156
tigogenin, 610
Tilia x vulgaris, 409
Tilia cordata, 409
Tilia officinarum, 409
Tilia parvifolia, 409
Tilia platyphyllos, 409
Tilia ulmifolia, 409
Tiliaceae, 409
tiliroside, 409
Tinnevelly Senna, 537
tinnitus, 169, 306, 578
vascular origin, 300
tissue inflammation, 367
tonsilitis, 479
toothache, 166
Toothache Bark, 484, 486
Toothache-tree, 484
toothpastes, 85
Torulopsis glabrata, 513
Torulopsis spp., 46, 283
Touch-Me-Not, 315
toxic constituents, 12
toxic elements, 9
toxic metals, 11
tracheitis, 58
trachelogenin, 352
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), 54
trans-anethole, 57, 59, 193, 462
travel sickness, 153, 294
Trefoil, 498
tremors, 184, 422
tremulacin, 599
Treponema pallidum, 338
Trichomonas, 85
Trichomonas vaginalis, 338
Trichophyton, 283

----- PAGE 720 -----
Trichophyton mentagrophytes, 65, 383
Trichosporon, 283
tricin, 193
trifolioside, 89
Trifolium borysthenicum, 498
Trifolium bracteatum, 498
Trifolium lenkoranicum, 498
Trifolium pratense, 498
Trifolium repens, 498
Trifolium ukrainicum, 498
trifoside, 498
trigalloyl glucose, 33
Trigonella foenum-graecum, 260
Trigonella upendrae, 45
trigonelline, 260, 261, 604
trimethylamine, 64
triterpene glycosides, 180
triterpene hydrocarbons, 152
triterpenes, 31
triterpenes, in, 30

agrimony, 42

boneset, 94

cat's claw, 134

coltsfoot, 185

comfrey, 188

dandelion, 205

elder, 237

elecampane, 241

euphorbia, 249

ginkgo, 299

hydrocotyle, 371

pokeroot, 479

pulsatilla, 489

sage, 512

stone root, 570
triterpenoids, 123, 149, 315, 317, 352, 472
Triticum, 193
Triticum repens, 193
tropanes, 29
True Cinnamon, 162
True Sage, 512
tryptophan, 45, 159, 260, 299, 474
Tu Mu Xiang, 240
tuberculosis, 159
tumour necrosis factor (TNF), 221, 232, 393
tumour-promoting activity, 163
turicin, 447
Turnera apbrodisiaca, 201
Turnera diffusa, 201
Turneraceae, 201
tussilagine, 185, 186
Tussilago farfara, 185
tussilagone, 185, 186
Twitch, 193
Twitchgrass, 193
tyramine, 151
tyrosine, 159, 268, 342
tyrosol, 500, 501

CU)

ulcerative colitis, 52, 105, 271, 539
Ulmaceae, 545

Ulmus fulva, 545

Ulmus rubra, 545

Umbelliferae, 53, 57, 146, 371, 456, 593
umbelliferone, 57, 64, 152, 153, 164, 369, 411, 462
umbelliprenine, 57

Umbrella Plant, 107

Uncaria guianensis, 132

Uncaria tomentosa, 132

uncarine F, 132, 133

United Kingdom regulatory controls, 5, 6
licensed products, 6
licensing-exempt remedies, 6

Urginea, 547

Urginea indica, 547, 548

Urginea maritima, 547

Urginea scilla, 547, 548

urinary antiseptic, 541, 577, 605

urinary calculi, 369, 593

urinary gravel, 593

urinary incontinence, 42

urinary porphyrins, 43

urinary system inflammation
acute, 191
chronic, 191

urinary tract infection, 193, 197, 452
prevention, 198
treatment, 199

urinary tract pain, 108

uronic acid, 185

ursolic acid, 30, 31, 237, 342, 421, 447, 474

Urtica, 452

Urtica dioica, 452

Urticaceae, 452

urticin, 453

uterine atony, 180

uterine colic, 169

uterine contraction, 54, 99

uterine depressants, 490

uterine relaxation, 54

uterine stimulants, 103, 126, 490

uterotonic activity
herbal remedies affecting

angelica, 54
calendula, 122
cohosh, blue, 180
comfrey, 189
liferoot, 407
motherwort, 448
in pregnancy, 19
Uva-Ursi, 577
Unia de gato, 132

@

Vaccinium macrocarpon, 197
Vaccinium myrtillus, 79
Vaccinium oxycoccus, 197
valepotriates, 580, 581, 582
valerenic acid, 582

Valerian, 580

Valeriana officinalis, 427, 578, 580
Valeriana wallichi, 583
Valerianaceae, 580

valerianine, 580

valerine, 371, 580

valine, 45, 159, 237, 256, 268, 342
valtrates, 580, 581

vanillic acid, 30

varicose veins, 122, 601

vascular disorders, 81
vasodilatory properties, 252, 362
venereal disease, 159

venous insufficiency, chronic, 306, 363, 364
venous tone, 363

venous ulcers, 306

ventricular tachycardia, 269
Veratrum luteum, 258
verbascoside, 219, 591

Verbena, 591

Verbena citriodora, 405

Verbena officinalis, 591

Index

Verbena triphylla, 405
Verbenaceae, 405, 591
verbenalin, 591
verbenin, 591
vertigo, 99, 300, 526
Vervain, 591
vesicular calculi, 340
Vibrio, 283
Vibrio cholerae, 147, 283, 338, 509
vimalin, 500
vinyldithiines, 279, 280
viral infections, 253
Virginian Witch Hazel, 601
viscotoxins, 12, 437, 438
Viscum, 436
Viscum album, 436
visual disorders, 307
visual disturbances, 398
vitality, 317
vitamin A, 125, 205
vitamin C, 42, 79, 105, 125, 215, 386, 423, 474, 495,
604, 604
vitamin K, 42, 541
vitamin(s), 42, 45, 46, 166
Vitex agnus-castus, 36
vitexilactone, 36, 37
vitexin, 98, 261, 461, 547
glycosides, 346, 347
vitexlactam, 36, 37
volatile oils
in pregnancy, 19
vomiting
aloes contra-indication, 52
herbal remedies causing/side-effect
aniseed, 59
apricot, 62
blue flag, 87
bogbean, 90
elder, 238
false unicorn, 258
lobelia, 417
pokeroot, 480
squill, 548
herbal remedies preventing, 296
ginger, 294, 296
herbal remedies treating,
chamomile, Roman, 156
horehound, black, 358
pregnancy, 156, 258
vulgarol, 361
vulnerary properties, 188

W)

Wacholderbeeren, 386
Waghi, 389

water retention, 78

Wati, 389

Wax Myrtle Bark, 77
waxes, 94, 98, 149, 247, 447
West Indian Dogwood, 379
whipworm treatment, 240
White Ginseng, 325, 326
White Horehound, 361
White Poplar, 482

White Squill, 547
whooping cough, 169, 361, 575
whortleberry, 79

Wild Carrot, 593

Wild Celery, 146

Wild Chamomile, 152

Wild Hydrangea, 369

----- PAGE 721 -----
Index

Wild Lettuce, 596
Wild Pepper, 315
Willow, 598
Witch Hazel, 601
Wolf's Bane, 64
Wood Avens, 75
Wood Spider, 207

Working Group on Herbal Medicinal Products

(HMPWG), 4

World Health Organization (WHO), 7

World-wide regulatory controls
authenticity of ingredients, 10, 7
efficacy, 7
quality control, 8
regulated products, 10

reproducibility of ingredients, 10

safety, 7
unregulated products, 8

World Health Organization (WHO), 7
wound healing, 48, 80, 154, 189, 222

@

xanthines, 29, 183, 184, 421, 422
xanthohumol, 354
xanthones, 149, 290, 291, 533

xanthorhamnin, 249

Xanthorhiza simplicissima, 337
Xanthorrhoaceae, 48
Xanthorrhoeaceae, 50
xanthotoxin, 53

xanthoxyletin, 484

Xanthoxylum, 484, 486
xanthyletin, 484

xyloglucan, 218

xylose, 48, 188, 195, 374, 449, 498

LY)

yamogenin, 261
yangonin, 391, 392

Yao Yong Da Huang, 506
Yarrow, 604

Yaw Root, 493

Yellow Dock, 608

Yellow Gentian, 290
Yellow Root, 337

Yellow Starwort, 240
Yemen Myrrh, 449

Yerba Maté, 421

Yin Xing, 299

Yin Xing Ye, 299

Yucca, 610
Yucca arborescens, 610
Yucca brevifolia, 610
Yucca glauca, 610
Yucca mohavensis, 610
Yucca schidigera, 610

@

Zanthoxylum, 484, 486
Zanthoxylum americana, 484
Zanthoxylum clava-herculis, 486
Zea, 191

Zea mays, 191

Zhang Ye Da Huang, 506
Zhong Ma Huang, 243
Zimbro, 386

zingerone, 294

Zingiber, 293

Zingiber officinale, 293
Zingiberaceae, 293
zingiberene, 294

ziyu glycosides, 105
Zygophyllaceae, 159, 344
