
----- PAGE 1 -----
COMMON MEDICINAL PLANTS

AND THEIR USE

AYUSHMAN BHARAT
AYUSH Health & Wellness Centres

aeria Faa

MINISTRY OF AYUSH

Government of India

----- PAGE 2 -----


----- PAGE 3 -----
COMMON MEDICINAL PLANTS

AND THEIR USE

AYUSH Health & Wellness Centres

wera ad

MINISTRY OF AYUSH

Government of India

----- PAGE 4 -----
© Ministry of AYUSH,
Government of India,
New Delhi, 2020

Disclaimer: All possible efforts have been made to ensure the correctness
of the contents. However, the Ministry of AYUSH shall not be accountable
for any inadvertent error in the contents. Corrective measures shall be
taken up once such errors are brought to notice.

Publisher : Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India, New Delhi
http://ayush.gov.in/

Printed at: Chauhan Art Press
Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005

----- PAGE 5 -----
1. Background 01
2. General Instructions 02
3. Amalaki Phyllanthus emblica L. 05
4. Ashvagandha Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal | 07
5. Bala Sida cordifolia L. 09
6. Brahmi Bacopa monnieri (L.) Pennel 11
7. Guduchi Tinospora cordifolia

(Thunb.) Miers 13
8. Haridra Curcuma longa L. 15
9. Kumari Aloe barbadensis Mill 17
10. | Mandukparni Centella asiatica (L.) Urb. 19
11. | Nimba Azadiracta india A. Juss. 21
12. | Nirgundi Vitex negundo L. 23
13. | Punarnava Boerhavia diffusa L. 25
14. | Shatavari Asparagus racemosus Willd. 27
15. | Shigru Moringa oleifera Lam. 29
16. | Shunthi Zinziber officinale Roscoe. 32
17. | Tulasi Ocimum tenuiflorum L. 34
18. | Vasa Justicia adhatoda L. 36

L 19. | Acknowledgement 39 J

----- PAGE 6 -----


----- PAGE 7 -----
Background

Growing plants around the house has multi- dimensional
benefits as they have enormous potential in the prevention and
treatment of various ailments. Apart from this, plants provide
basic nutritional requirement in the form of food ingredients.
Plants also keep the environment clean by improving the air
quality. Growing plants helps in preserving indigenous
knowledge, culture and if taken up on a large scale, can also
empower women, take care of livestock and poultry activities.

Indiscriminate collection from natural habitat has adversely
affected availability of plants. Adulteration is common in the
herbal material procured from market and their identification
needs expertise and scientific tools. Therefore, cultivation of
some essential and easy to grow plants in the house hold is
always beneficial for the conservation of plants and appropriate
use.

So as to empower the community with the basic knowledge
of medicinal plants, this booklet has been prepared focusing on
16 useful plants which can be easily grown in the gardens, parks
orevenin the pots. The booklet covers the general description of
the plants, their medicinal uses and method of cultivation.

Home Remedies

Home remedy is a simple medication prepared at home by
using herbs available in the region or other ingredients available
in the house like spices. Use of home remedies is prevalent in
every parts of the country as they are also cost effective.

----- PAGE 8 -----
General Instruction

The home remedies are generally safe but may give rise to side
effects if not used properly. Therefore the following instructions
should be read carefully, under stood and followed by the user.

* Home remedies are meant for prevention of diseases and
management of simple and minor illnesses like common cold,
cough, loss of appetite, indigestion and to aid recovery from
illnesses etc.

¢ Sometimes, the home remedies are also useful in chronic
problems suchas osteoarthritis.

* Home remedies cannot replace a standard treatment and can be
used as add on only. The attending physician should be always
informed about the home remedy used by the patient.

* Home remedies should not be used in major diseases such as
cancer, serious or life threatening conditions as a main course of
treatment.

* Avoid any internal medication when a person is unconscious,
not even through the nose. It may enter airway and can cause
sudden death.

* These home remedies should not be given to the child below 1
year of age, unless advised by a qualified AYUSH physician.

* The medicines mentioned in this booklet are generally
considered safe; however, in case of any discomfort it should be
stopped immediately and reported to a qualified physician.

* Use of right ingredient will give the desired result and therefore

ensure proper identification of herb.

¢ The plants from footpath, burial grounds, dump-yards, drain-
sides, industrial belt & other polluted area should be avoided.

* The plant should be properly washed and dried in shade if
required.

----- PAGE 9 -----
It should be stored in airtight container and freshness shold be
ensured before use.

Utmost care should be given to old, sick persons, children,
pregnant women while administrating these simple home
remedies.

Do not cause damage to the whole plant and encourage
replacement while plucking it.

Collection of plant materials should be done in proper season to
ensure maturity and minimal damage to plant.

Encourage the use of weeds (like touch me not) and plant wastes
(pomegranate fruit coat, rose petals).

The dose mentioned in the booklet is for adult, while advising
for children it must be 2 or %4 of this adult dose.

The dosage may be adjusted with little alterations according
need.

General Measurements
5gm = 1Teaspoon full
5ml = 1Teaspoon full

General Dosage
Fresh juice- ¥2 to 2 tea spoons
Decoction- ¥2to 1 cup
Hotand cold infusion- ¥2to 1 cup
Powder-1to3 gm
Paste-1-3 gm

Oils are generally recommended for external use as home
remedy.

----- PAGE 10 -----
Frequency of these simple medications is generally 2 to 3 times a
day, may be more frequently in cough, vomiting, dyspnoea,
diarrhea etc.

The duration may be as required or advised by the physician or
till the symptoms subside.

In case of combined use/ add on, a minimum gap of 30 minutes
should be kept to avoid drug interaction.

The home remedies may be taken along with water, milk, butter
milk, honey, ghee, rock salt as desired or as advised.

Juice should be prepared by crushing with stones/pestle or
grinding in mixture with little water if required and the juice
should be strained through a clean cloth/ strainer.

Decoction should be prepared by boiling crushed/coarsely
powdered drug in water.

Paste should be prepared by crushing/ grinding the drug very
finely with desired liquid if required.

It is advisable to take only one or two home remedies mentioned
in the booklet at a time.

The person should be immediately referred to a medical facility
if the condition is serious like acute pain, high fever, respiratory
distress, unconscious, uncontrolled bleeding, tumors, ulcers,
chronic cough, unexplained weight loss etc. and in case of
suspected major ailment.

----- PAGE 11 -----
1. Amalaki (Phyllanthus emblica L.)

> Local name : Amla (Hindi)
Indian Gooseberry (English)

> Habitat: All over India
> Part used: Fruit

> General description

Amla is a medium sized deciduous ~
plant. It grows to a height of 8 -18 meters. It has a crooked trunk and
spreading branches. Its flower is yellow-greenish in color. The fruit
is spherical pale yellow with six vertical furrows. It has gray bark
and reddish wood. Its leaves are feathery, linear-oblong in shape
and have peculiar smell. Its wood is hard in texture. It wraps and
splits when exposed to the sun or in excessive heat.

> Uses

1. Enhancing immunity: The fruit is useful in the form of juice,
powder, food recipe or as part of formulation in enhancing
immunity against diseases.

2. Urinary problems: 10 to 20 ml of fresh juice of Amalaki with
jaggery is beneficial in burning micturition.
3. Reproductive problems: Fresh juice of Amalaki or powder is

useful in menorrhagia and leucorrhoea.

4. Diabetes / Prediabetes: Powder of Amalaki and turmeric (2-
4gm each in equal quantity) with water will be an effective
rernedy.

5. Anemia: Juice of Amalaki is beneficial.

6. Acid peptic disorder: Amalaki powder (2gm-3gm) with warm
water will help in hyperacidity.

----- PAGE 12 -----
Constipations: 5 to 10 gm of Amalaki powder taken with warm
water during bedtime is useful in relieving constipation.

Cosmetics: Amla boiled with any oil is used traditionally for the
treatment of dandruff and hair loss.

Food recipes

Amla murabba: Boiled Amla pieces are soaked in sugar or
jaggery syrup and flavored with cardamom. This easy recipe is
suitable for everyday use to boost immunity and to manage
health issues mentioned above. This preparation is not
recommended for diabetics due to presence of sugar jaggery.

Amla chutney: Amla along with fennel seeds, chillies salt and
other spices as per the choice are grounded in coconut.

Amla pickle: Boil the Amla with salt and water till it becomes
tender, drain the water. Heat some oil and add mustard seeds,
asafoetida and chilli powder. Mix well and add Ami. Stir till
mixed well and excess water gets fully evaporated.

Precautions

Intake in excessive quantity may result in loose motion.
Mode of propagation

Itis propagated by seeds as well as by stem cuttings.

When the stem divisions are used as the planting material, the
selected division should have 3-4 nodes. 100% sprouting will be
seen in7-10 days. Planting may be done in the month of June.

Or

Collect the fresh seeds during February-March. Sow them on
nursery beds or directly in the fields. 60% of germination would
be obtained within 10 days.

Ayurvedic formulations

Chyawanprash, Triphala Churna, Amalaki Churna.

----- PAGE 13 -----
2. Ashwagandha
(Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal)

Local name: Asgandh (Hindi)
Indian Ginseng, Winter Cherry
(English)

Habitat: All over India

Part used : Whole plant,
mainly root

General description

Ashwagandha is native to drier parts of India. It is a perennial
herb that is short, tender, growing 35-75 cm tall. Velvet-hairy
branches extend radially from a central stem. Leaves are dull
green, elliptic, usually up to 10-12 cm long. The flowers are
small, green and bell-shaped. Orange fruits in persistent papery
sepals follow the small greenish flowers.

Uses
Fatigue: Ashwagandha powder (2gm-6gm) with milk or ghee is
useful in general weakness.

Insomnia: Ashwagandha powder (2gm-3gm) with sugar/
milk/ cow's ghee is useful in sleeplessness anxiety & depression.

Neurological/ degenerative problems: Ashwagandha powder
(2gm-6gm) boiled with milk is useful in neurological problems
and degenerative arthritis.

Food recipes

Ashwagandha tea: Mix 12 cup milk, % cup water and 1 teaspoon
Ashwagandha powder together and boil. Add the cardamom
and honey and drink it twice ina day. Milk can be added in place

of water.

----- PAGE 14 -----
> Precautions
Over dose can cause diarrhoea, stomach upset and vomiting.
> Mode of propagation

Ashwagandha is propagated by division, cuttings or seed. It
prefers dry stony soil with sun to partial shade. Seed is the best
way to propagate Ashwagandha. It can be grown from seeds in
the early spring or from greenwood cuttings in the later spring.

> Ayurvedic formulations

Ashwagandha Powder, Ashwagandharistha.

----- PAGE 15 -----
3. Bala (Sida cordifolia L.)

Local name: Khareeti (Hindi)

Habitat : Throughout the tropical
and sub-tropical plains of India

Part used: Whole plant,
especially root

General description Le

-e
Bala is an erect perennial plant that reaches 50 to 200 cm tall. The
stems are yellow-green, hairy, long, and slender. The yellow-
green leaves are oblong-ovate, covered with hairs, and 3.5 to 7.5
cm (1.4 to 3.0 in) long and 2.5 to 6 cm (0.98 to 2.36 in) wide. The
flowers are dark yellow, sometimes with a darker orange center,
witha hairy 5-lobed calyx and 5-lobed corolla.

Uses

Neurological / degenerative problems: Decoction of Bala (whole
plant) for internal use and oil for local application are
recommended. Oil can be prepared by boiling the Bala paste in
sesame oil. Use of this oil is indicated for massage, internal use
and for therapeutic enema also.

Leucorrhea: Root powder (2gm-3gm) with milk is useful.
Precautions

Dizziness, restlessness, irritability, insomnia, headache, lack of
appetite, nausea, vomiting, flushing, tingling, difficulty in
urinating and pounding heartbeat may happen if taken in access
quantity.

Use of Bala with other stimulants such as caffeine is
contraindicated. This might increase the chance of having side

effects.

----- PAGE 16 -----
Mode of propagation

The plant is propagated through seeds and root suckers. It
prefers clay damp soils under shade conditions.

Collect the mature seeds from well-grown plants. Dry them and
soak in water for 24 hours. Sow the seeds in raised beds during
rainy season since water logging would be injurious to the
seedling. In other seasons you could sow the seeds in sunken
beds. In 6-7 days, 80-90% germination is obtained.

For vegetative propagation, plant the root suckers in small pits,
cover with loose soil and allow for sprouting. Transplant the
seedlings when they have at least 4 leaves.

Ayurvedic formulations

Balarishtha, Dashamularistha, Bala Taila.

----- PAGE 17 -----
4. Brahmi
(Bacopa monnieri (L.) Pennel)

Local name : Brahmi (Hindi)

Habitat: All over India,
particularly in marshy land

Part used: Whole plant

General description

Brahmiisa perennial, creeping herb
widely grown in wetlands and
muddy shores. The leaves of this plant are succulent and
relatively thick and are arranged oppositely on the stem. Small
flowers are borne in leaf axils. Flowers are blue, purple, or white,
8-10 mm, obscurely 2-lipped. Seeds are yellow-brown, ellipsoid,
truncate at one end, longitudinally channeled. Flowering occurs
during May-October.

Uses

Memory enhancer - 8 to 10 crushed fresh leaves or 3 gm powder
of Brahmi in water taken with sugar and milk improves learning
skills and memory.

Mental fatigue - Juice of Brahmi leaves 1-2 spoons with ghee and
honey taken twice daily controls mental stress and anxiety.

High blood pressure - One spoon of Brahmi juice taken twice
daily helps in lowering high blood pressure.

Epilepsy - 20 ml Brahmi juice with milk or boiled with cow's
ghee, taken twice daily is beneficial in epilepsy (as add on to
regular medication).

----- PAGE 18 -----
Food recipes

Brahmi chutney: Heat the oil, add black gram, bengal gram, red
chillies, curry leaves and asafetida. Fry them till the grams turn
golden brown in color. Transfer roasted and cooled masala to a
blender/ mixer. Add salt, tamarind, grated coconut and Brahmi
leaves, grind to a smooth consistency by adding water.

Precautions: Consult the physician for long term use or in case of
specific health problems.

Mode of propagation

It is propagated mainly by stem cuttings but sometimes it can
also be propagated by seeds.

For vegetative propagation, cut the whole plant into small units
with 4-6 nodes each.

Dip the cuttings in cow dung slurry to ensure better rooting.

Plant these stem cuttings directly in the field. Use marshy open
fields for the cultivation of the plant.

It grows faster in the high temperature (33- 42 Degree Celsius)
and humidity (65 -80%). It prefers wet spots. It is grown in the
pots in the house garden. It requires water from time to time as
its roots are shallow.

Ayurvedic formulations

Brahmi Rasayana, Brahmyadi Ghrita.

----- PAGE 19 -----
5. Guduchi
(Tinospora cordifolia (Thunb.) Miers)

> Local name: Giloy (Hindi)
> Habitat: All over India
> Partused:Stemand leaves

> General description

It is a large, deciduous, extensively-
spreading, climbing shrub with
several elongated twining branches. Leaves are simple, heart

shaped with long petioles. Fruits aggregate in clusters of one to
three and are orange in color.

> Uses

1. Fever -Decoction (30ml) of Guduchi stem is useful in all types of
fever including prevention and treatment of dengue, malaria,
chikungunya flue like symptoms.

2. Enhances immunity - Decoction of stem (40ml) taken every day
alongwith the standard treatment is good in immune deficiency
conditions like AIDS, tuberculosis and even cancer. The
decoction is used for prevention of seasonal infections.

3. Diabetes- The stem of Tinospora cordifolia is widely used in the
therapy of diabetes for regulating blood glucose.

4. Joint pain- Single or synergistic formulations of Tinospora
cordifolia with ginger has been used in treatment of all types of
arthritis including the sequel of viral fever.

> Precautions

Over dose may cause palpitation and discomfort in the chest.

----- PAGE 20 -----
Intake should be immediately stopped and should consult a
physician immediately.

Mode of propagation

The plant is propagated either through seeds or through cuttings
but the best way is through cuttings. Plant is raised through stem
cuttings having nodes/seeds sown directly in ground or ina pot
of adequate size. Plant requires support to grow, which can be
provided by raising rope, stick etc. The Climber needs watering
once in 2-3 days. Thereafter, occasional watering as per the
requirement will help the plant to survive in adverse conditions.

Ayurvedic formulations

Amritarista, Guduchyadi Kwatha.

----- PAGE 21 -----
6. Haridra (Curcuma longa L.)

Local name : Haldi (Hindi),
Turmeric (English)

Habitat : Cultivated all over India

Parts used: Rhizome
(underground stem)

General description : Haridra is a |

herb, it reaches up to 1 m tall.
Highly branched, yellow to orange,
cylindrical, aromatic rhizomes are found. The leaves are
alternate and arranged in two rows. They are divided into leaf
sheath, petiole, and leaf blade. The petiole is 50 to 115 cm long.
The simple leaf blades are usually 76 to 115 cm long and rarely
up to 230 cm. They have a width of 38 to 45cm and are oblong to
elliptical, narrowing at the tip.

Uses

Multiple benefits: hepato-protective, blood-purifier,
antioxidant, antiallergic, and reduces high cholesterol.

Diabetes /Prediabetes : Powder of Amalaki and Haridra (2-4gm
each in equal quantity) with water.

Seasonal allergy / Influenza : 2 to 3 gm of powder with warm
milk twiceaday.

Skin diseases and wounds : Powder mixed with water or oil for
external application on affected area alongwith 2 to 3 gm of
powder for internal use.

Food recipe

Turmeric is used daily in cooking asa spice.

----- PAGE 22 -----
Pieces of fresh rhizome may be added in the vegetables and
pickle.

Pieces of fresh rhizome ground with coconut, chillies, tamarind,
salt and jaggery makes a healthy and tasty recipe. The same may
be boiled alongwith water to eat with rice or millet. Jaggery and
lemon may be added according to the need.

Precaution

Turmeric is hot in nature and excessive use may be avoided
during summer. If burning of feet, palm and urine is noticed, the
intake should be restricted.

If taken together with other medicines in diabetes, the blood
sugar may drop drastically.

Mode of propagation
The plant is propagated through seeds and cuttings.

Collect fresh seeds, sow them directly in raised beds, pots or
polybags. May-June is the favorable season for sowing. In 7-8
days the seeds germinate. They show 70-90% germination.

Vegetatively the plant can be propagated through cuttings.
Separate the tillers arising from the base of a matured plant and
plant them individually as mentioned above.

Ayurvedic formulation

Haridra Khanda.

----- PAGE 23 -----
7. Kumari (Aloe barbadensis Mill.)

> Local name : Aloe Vera (English),
Ghritkumari (Hindi)

Habitat: All over India \
Part used : Gel inside the leaves

General description: Aloe Veraisa
stem less or very short-stemmed
plant growing to 60-100 cm tall,
spreading by offsets. The leaves are
thick and fleshy, green to grey-green, with some varieties

showing white flecks on their upper and lower stem surfaces.
The margin of the leaf is serrated and has small white teeth. The
flowers are produced in summer ona spike up to 90 cm tall, each
flower being pendulous, with a yellow tubular corolla 2-3 cm
long.

> Uses

1 Burns and wounds: Due to its soothing, moisturizing, and
cooling properties, Aloe vera gel is used externally to treat
burns. Gel, mixed with turmeric powder and coconut oil aids
early healing of wounds and ulcers including anal fissure and
skin problems.

2 Digestive problem: 2 to 3 spoons of Aloe gel mixed with a glass
of water should be taken in all types of digestive and liver
problems.

3 Adjuvant therapy: Aloe vera gel may be taken with antibiotics,
NSAIDs (Non-steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs) and
chemotherapy to eliminate drug induced gastritis and other
adverse effects.

4 Multiple uses: Useful in various diseases such as diabetes,

----- PAGE 24 -----
arthritis, eye disease, spleen and liver complaints.
Precautions

Contraindicated in cases of known allergy to plant. It may cause
redness, burning, stinging sensation and rarely generalized
dermatitis in sensitive individuals.

Oral intake of Aloe vera is not be recommended during
pregnancy as it may cause stimulation of uterine contractions.

It may sometime causes gastrointestinal distress in the infant if
given to breastfeeding mothers.

Mode of propagation

Methods of propagation are sexual (with seeds), vegetative (by
pups obtained from the plants themselves or by the micro-
propagation method).

Itis grown successfully in marginal to sub marginal soils having
low fertility. It is observed that its growth was faster under
medium fertile heavier soil such as black cotton soils of central
India.

It is cultivated in pots out door or indoor, kept on sunny
window.

Ayurvedic formulations

Kumari Asava, Rajahaparvartani Vati, Aloe Vera Juice, Pulp,
Cream.

----- PAGE 25 -----
8. Mandukparni
(Centella asiatica (L.) Urb.)

Local name : Mandukaparni, }
Brahmi, Manduki

Habitat : Native to India, found in
tropical America, Africa, West :
Pakistan, China, Japan and the
Pacific

Part used : Whole plant

General description : Perennial herb, with long slender
horizontal stolons, characterised by long internodes. Leaves are
green, fan-shaped or round-reniform, 1-4 cm by 1-7 cm with a
crenate or dentate margin. Flowers are umbels with white or
light purple-to-pink petals and bear small oval fruit.

Uses

Mandukaparni is considered as brain tonic used for improving
memory and overcoming mental stress, fatigue. 5 to 10 ml fresh
juice or powder is given with milk in sleeplessness, anxiety,
cognitive problems, headache or neurological problems.

It is useful in neurological problems such as convulsions along
with standard therapy.

Food recipes

Mandukaparni chutney when ground with coconut, green
chilly, tamarind and coconut.

Juice of leaves or whole plant can be used in lemon sharbat,
herbal tea.

----- PAGE 26 -----
> Precautions
Excessive use every day may lead to giddiness or headache.
> Mode of propagation

Stolon cuttings with minimum of one node are planted
horizontally at a distance of 30 cm x 30 cm. Watering should be
done just after transplantation and subsequently at an interval of
2 to 3 days. To begin with weeding is done at an interval of 15-20
days thereafter, it is done as and when required. Similarly it can
be grown in the pots.

> Ayurvedic formulations

Saraswataristha, Brahma Rasayana.

----- PAGE 27 -----
9. Nimba (Azadiracta india A. Juss.)

Local name : Neem (Hindi)

Habitat : Nimba is found in
abundance in tropical and
semitropical regions like India,
Bangladesh, Pakistan and Nepal

Part used: Leaf, fruit, bark, seed oil

General description:

Neem is an attractive broad-leaved, evergreen tree which can
grow up to 30m tall and 2.5m in girth. Its trunk is usually straight
and 30-80 cm in diameter. Its spreading branches form a
rounded crown of deep-green leaves and honey-scented flowers
as muchas 20m across.

> Uses:

1. Dental plaque/ gingivitis: Gargling with warm decoction of
Neem leaves twice daily and brushing with twigs of Neem.

2. Skin diseases: Intake of powder of Neem leaves and
application of Neem oil.

3. Upset stomach: Decoction of Neem leaves helps in abdominal
pain and worm infestation.

4. Insect repellent: Applying Neem oil to the skin to protec against
mosquitoes.

5. Other important uses: Used to as antifungal agent, anti-
parasitic, anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, neuro-protective,
and liver protective, used in jaundice.

> Foodrecipe

Neem flower chutney along with raw mango and green chilly

----- PAGE 28 -----
or

tender leaves fried in oil alongwith red chilly, asafoetida and
ajwain seeds and ground with tamarind, salt and jaggery makes
very healthy and savoury chutney.

Precautions

It can cause nausea, vomiting in some persons due to its bitter
taste.

Some studies also indicated adverse effects of excess doses on
sperm count, so may not be used in males planning for family.

Should not be used in access during pregnancy and lactation and
inchildren.

Mode of propagation

Neem is frequently self-sown in gardens and the areas under
mature trees which are quickly colonized by a carpet of
seedlings. It has the ability to establish itself under the protection
of thorny bushes and to survive in dry poor soils, provided it is
not subjected to frost. Although the main reproduction is by
seed, root suckering does occur, for example when the roots are
damaged.

The simplest way to propagate Neem trees is by seed, but root
shoot and root cuttings may also be used.

Ayurvedic formulations

Mahanarayan Oil, Nimba Churna, Neem Oil, Tiktaka Ghrita.

----- PAGE 29 -----
VV V WV

10. Nirgundi (Vitex negundo L.)

Local name : Samhalu (Hindi)
Habitat: All over India

Part used: Leaves, bark
General description

It is a shrub up to 5 meters tall or
sometimes a small, slender tree
with thin, gray bark. The bark is
reddish brown and has compound leaves in the form of a spread

hand with five leaflets, or sometimes three. Flowers are bluish-
purple, small and are in bunches In central India, flowering
occurs between June and December and fruiting from
September to February. The fruit is a succulent drupe, black
when ripe, 5-6 mm in diameter. Seeds are 5-6 mm in diameter.

Uses

Backache : 20 to 30 ml of decoction of Nirgundi leaves twice a
day is beneficial for lower back ache. 5 to 10 ml of Erandtaila
(castor oil) may be added to decoction, especially when there is
constipation and bloating of abdomen. The oil made up of
Nirgundi leaves should be applied externally.

Joint pain: 20 to 30 ml decoction of Nirgundi roots (3 to 5 gm) or
Nirgundi leaf powder in a dose of one 3-5 gm twice a day are
beneficial in osteoarthritis. Oil prepared from leaves is applied
or heated leaves are pressed and tied for joint pains and sprains.

Headache: Grind Nirgundi leaves with water and apply warm
paste on the forehead.

Wound: Washing with decoction or juice of leaves and
application of oil made from Nirgundi leaves aids healing of

----- PAGE 30 -----
woundsand chronic ulcers.
Precautions

Internal use may be best avoided in pregnant women and
alongwith hormonal pills. Nirgundi should be taken under
medical supervision in case of heart problems.

Mode of propagation

The mature seeds sown in nursery beds normally germinate
within 2-3 weeks. Four- to six-month-old seedlings are used for
transplanting in the field. It can be reproduced readily from
shoot cuttings. Nirgundi roots are strong, deep and produce root
suckers which can also be utilized as planting material.

Ayurvedic formulations

Dashamularishta, Sarasvatarishta, Mahayogaraja Guggulu,
Anu Taila.

----- PAGE 31 -----
11. Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa L.)

Local name : Gadarpunna (Hindi)
Habitat: All over India

Part used : Whole plant, roots

VV V WV

General description : It is a herb
grown as weed in waste lands
throughout the year but dries
during the summer. Leaves are

small with whitish colour on the
lower surface and green on upper
surface. Stems are purplish or pale green depending on the
variety. It bears small reddish pink flowers and fruits in winter.

> Uses

This plant is useful in all types of swellings, urinary problems,
anemia, liver disorders, heart diseases and piles. It can be used in
the form of fresh juice, decoction, powder or added in the food
preparations.

1. Dysuria: 50 to 100 ml of decoction made from 5 to 10 gm of arial
portion of the plant administered twice daily is useful in urinary
tract infection and burning or discomfort during urination.
Intake of plenty of fluids also advisable in this case.

2. Anaemia: 50to 100 ml decoction of whole plant is given thrice
daily in anaemia.

3. Jaundice: 50to 100 ml decoction of whole plant is given thrice
daily in liver problems.

4. Swelling: The warm paste of punarnava plant mixed with oil
applied externally twice daily on affected areas will be useful in
reducing swellings. Intake of the decoction of whole plant (50 to

100 ml) is also useful.

----- PAGE 32 -----
Joint pain: Intake of 2 to 5 gm of dry ginger with 50to 100 ml
decoction of Punarnava reduces swelling and pain in the joints.

Food recipes

Saute the tender leaves in little quantity of oil or ghee or butter
along with green chilies and grind with coconut to make chatni.
Cumin seeds, ginger, onion, garlic or asafetida can be used as per
the taste of the individual. Lemon juice, tamarind or curd may be
added.

Leaves can be used as a vegetable in dal or sambar.
Itcan be used in paratha as any other leafy vegetable.

Chopped leaves can be added in the dosa along with tomato and
onion.

Leaves and stem may be sauted and seasoned with chopped
onion, garlic, chilli and salt as a food item. It can also be mixed
with sprouts.

Precautions
Intake in excessive quantity may have mild purgative effect.
Mode of propagation

It grows widely in waste lands and does not require any special
care. The plant is propagated through seeds and cuttings.

Collect fresh seeds, sow them directly in raised beds, pots or
polybags. May-June is the favorable season for sowing. In 7-8
days the seeds germinate. They show 70-90% germination.

Vegetatively the plant can be propagated through cuttings.
Separate the tillers arising from the base of a matured plant and
plant them individually as mentioned above.

Ayurvedic formulations

Punarnavadi Mandura, Punarnavasava, Punarnavasthaka
Kwatha.

----- PAGE 33 -----
VV Vv WV

12. Shatavari
(Asparagus racemosus Willd.)

Local name: Shatavar (Hindi)
Habitat: All over India

Part used : Tuberous root

General description , K

The plant is a perennial, prickly es A %,
climber of 1-2 meters, found wildly

throughout India and also
cultivated for medicinal & ornamental purpose. Shatavari has
with shiny green leaves like pine needles, branches that are
thorny and pale. In July, it produces minute, white flowers on
short, spiky stems, and in September it fruits, producing
blackish-purple, globular berries. It has multiple tuberous roots
that measure up to one metre in length, tapering at both ends.

Uses

Shatavari is a good immunity booster. It is used to promote
fertility and have a range of health benefits, particularly for the
female reproductive system.

To increase breast milk: 3-5 gm of root powder or 2 spoons of
Shatavari root juice taken with 1 glass of milk twice daily
enhances milk in lactating mothers.

As a tonic: Shatavari root powder 1 to 3 gm is taken with milk
twice daily to overcome fatigue. It is useful in age related
problems suchas bone and neuro degeneration.

Hyper acidity and peptic ulcer: Intake of 2-4 spoon of juice of
Shatavari root or 1 to 3 gm of powder daily will be helpful to
reduce hyperacidity and peptic ulcers.

----- PAGE 34 -----
Reproductive health: 1 to 3 gm of Shatavari powder one to two
times a day is useful to prevent menopausal symptoms and
osteoporosis. The powder is recommended in non-specific
infertility.

Precautions

Shatavari is safe to be used within recommended quantity in a
normal person.

Sensitivity may cause allergic reactions in some people such as
skin rashes or breathing difficulty on intake of large dose. In case
of any medical problem or other medications, please follow the
advice of a qualified doctor.

Mode of propagation:

The seeds are used for propagation in the nurseries however
vegetative method is more suitable to grow in house hold. The
vegetative propagation is by division of rhizomatous disc
present at the base of the aerial stem. The rhizomatous disc
develops several vegetative buds around the aerial shoots. The
disc is divided in sucha way that each piece possess at least two
buds along with 2-3 tuberous roots. These pieces are planted
conversing the buds with 1 cm of soil followed by watering. The
sprouting commences in 8-10 days after plantation.

Ayurvedic formulations

Shatavari Ghrita, Shatavari Kalpa, Shatavari Churna.

----- PAGE 35 -----
13. Shigru (Moringa oleifera Lam.)

Local name: Sahijan (Hindi)
Habitat: All over India

Part used : Leaves, bark, fruit,
flower, seed

General description : Shigru, also
known as moringa, drumstick tree, |
grows to a height between 20-40

feet. Its stem is brittle having fragile branches of whitish-grey
bark. It has solitary compound leaf with a row of leaflets
arranged along each side of a common rachis. Leaflets are egg
shaped with the broader end at the base (ovate). Flowers are
yellowish-white in color and have a fragrant odour. The fruits
are long and size can vary between 8-18 inches. They bear dark
brown or white globular seeds. The seeds have three whitish
papery wings.

Uses

Anemia: 10 to 20 ml juice or use of leaves or pods Moringa in the
form of vegetable.

Asthma: Consumption of about 100 ml of decoction of a fistful of
drum stick leaves is beneficial in bronchitis and asthma.

Swellings & wound: application of warm paste made up of bark
and leaves of moringa is useful in relieving pain and swelling in
joints and abscesses. Its paste is also helpful in wound healing.

Heart disease: This has cholesterol lowering action and
stabilizes blood pressure. Therefore, use of leaves, flowers and
pods in any form is good for heart.

----- PAGE 36 -----
Other uses: Moringa is helpful in various eye problems and
improving vision. It is used in amenorrhea and dysmenorrhea
and asa tonic to improve the immunity against diseases.

Food recipes

Drum sticks pods & leaves are popularly added in sambar, daal
and vegetables.

It can be used in paratha as any other leafy vegetable. Chopped
leaves can be added in the dosa along with tomato and onion.

Tender drum stick pods or leaves may be sauted and seasoned
with chopped onion, garlic, chilli and salt.

The leaves can be used in zunka, a recipe popular in Maharashtra
and it's neighbouring parts of Karnataka. Heat oil/ ghee in a
utensil and add mustard seeds, asafetida, onions, curry leaves,
drum stick leaves and other spices of your choice. Add gram
flour, salt, turmeric powder and red chilli powder and mix well.
Add water, little by little as per desired consistency and mix
well. Cook on medium heat for four to five minutes while
continuously stirring. This can be used with rice, roti, dosa etc.

Precautions

There are no contra- indications for the use of any part of
moringa, however excessive intake may lead to increase in body
heat and Pitta in some people. Intake may be avoided during
heavy menstrual bleeding.

Mode of propagation

It grows best in direct sunlight. Moringa can be propagated from
seed or cuttings. Direct seeding is possible because the
germination rate is high. Soak the seeds in water overnight and
crack the shells before planting. Remove shells and plant kernels
only. Moringa seeds can be germinated year-round in well-
draining soil.

----- PAGE 37 -----
e

For vegetative propagation, use hard wood and not green wood.
Cuttings should be 45cm to 1.5m long and 10cm thick. Cuttings
can be planted directly or in sacks. Plant one-third of the length
in the ground and do not over water if the soil is too heavy or
wet, the roots may rot.

Ayurvedic formulations

Shigru Guggulu.

----- PAGE 38 -----
14. Shunthi
(Zinziber officinale Roscoe.)

Local name : Adrak (fresh ginger)
sonth (dry ginger) - Hindi

Habitat: All over India \
Part used : Root (nn
General description ——

Ginger is a flowering plant whose
rhizome is widely used as a spice and a
folk medicine. It is a herbaceous
perennial plant which grows pseudo
stems (false stems made of the rolled
bases of leaves) about one meter tall bearing narrow leaf blades.
The inflorescences bear pale yellow with purple flowers and
arise directly from the rhizome on separate shoots.

Uses

Rheumatoid arthritis: Decoction of Shunthi is useful in
rheumatoid arthritis when taken alongwith 10 to 20 ml of castor
oil.

Indigestion: Paste of Adarak with jaggery in equal quantity
helps in indigestion in warm water.

Cough: Shunthi (dry ginger) powder with honey is beneficial in
cough.

Joint pain : Shunthi churna 2 gm with ghee two times ina day.
Food recipes

Fresh turmeric-ginger pickle: Combine sliced ginger and
turmeric 4 cup each, 2 tsp lemon juice, chilli powder and 1 tsp
salt in in a deep bowl. Mix well and serve immediately or store
refrigerated for 1 week.

----- PAGE 39 -----
Ginger tea: Boil the water along with grated ginger. Add tea
leaves and sugar to the boiling water and then let the tea leaves
steep in the water for about 3-5 minutes. Add hot milk, mix well,
strain and serve immediately.

Ginger and lemon drink: Add 2 tsp ginger juice, 1 tsp lemon
juice and % tsp sugar syrup to a glass of water, stir and serve
immediately.

Ginger chutney: Fresh ginger ground with coconut, chillies and
tamarind make a healthy and tasty recipe.

Precautions

Intake in excessive quantity may result in heartburn and
stomach upset.

Mode of propagation

Ginger is always propagated by portions of the rhizomes,
known as seed rhizomes. Carefully preserved seed rhizomes are
cut into small pieces of 2.5 - 5 cm length weighing 20-25 gm, each
having one or two good buds.

The seed rhizomes are treated planted at a spacing of 20-25 cm
along the rows and 20-25 cm between the rows.

Ayurvedic formulations

Ardrak Paka, Nagaradi Kwatha, Trikatu Churna.

----- PAGE 40 -----
15. Tulasi (Ocimum tenuiflorum L.)

> Local Name : Holy basil (English),
Tulsi (Hindi)

Habitat: All over India
Part used: Leaves
General description

Tulasi is a heavy branched sub-
shrub having hair all over the parts.
It attains the height of about 75 - 90 cm. It has round oval shaped
leaves which are up to 5 cm long. The leaves are 2-4 cm in length.

Its flowers are purple - creamish in colour. Tulasi with the green
leaves is called the Shri Tulasi and one with the reddish leaves is
called the Krishna Tulasi. Seeds are yellow to reddish in colour.
Leaves of Tulasi contains essential oils and therefore have
peculiar fragrance.

> Uses

. Worms: Juice of Tulasi leaves (10-20ml) is beneficial for
deworming.

Wound or any skin disease: Local application of juice or paste of
Tulasi leaves is good.

Cough: Juice of Tulasi leaves (5-10ml) mixed with honey is good
for cough.

Urticaria: Intake and local application of Tulasi juice is useful in
urticaria.

> Foodrecipes

Tulasi tea: Boil Tulasi leaves in water, strain, add lemon juice
and Tulasi tea is ready to sip.

----- PAGE 41 -----
Tulasi juice: The fresh leaves of Tulasi can be consumed as a
juice. This tasty and refreshing method of using Tulasi is
profoundly rejuvenating for the immune system. Traditionally,
the juice is mixed with honey to resolve cold, fever, and
respiratory issues.

Precautions

Eating fresh leaves is not advisable as it causes damage to tooth
enamel. Excessive intake of Tulsi might cause nausea, heartburn
and diarrhoea.

Mode of propagation

This is propagated through seeds. For propagating through
seeds, they are to be sown in the nursery beds. The nursery
should be located preferably in partial shade with adequate
irrigation facilities.

As the seeds are minute, the required quantity of seeds are mixed
with sand in the ratio of 1:4 and sown innursery bed, 2 months in
advance of the onset of monsoon. They germinate in 8-12 days
and seedlings are ready for transplanting in about 6 weeks' time
at 4-5 leaf stage.

Ayurvedic formulations

Tulsi Arka.

----- PAGE 42 -----
VV V WV

16. Vasa (Justicia adhatoda L.)

Local name: Adusa (Hindi)
Habitat: All over India
Part used: Leaves

General description

Vasa is a shrub with lance-shaped
leaves 10 to 15 centimeters in
length. They are oppositely
arranged, smooth-edged, and
borne on short petioles. The trunk
has many long opposite ascending
branches, where the bark is yellowish in color. Flowers are
usually white and the inflorescence shows large, dense, axillary

spikes. Fruits are pubescent, and are with club-shaped capsules.
Uses
Cough: Decoction of 5-10 Vasa leaves is beneficial in cough.

Hemorrhagic disorders: Juice of Vasa leaves (5-15 ml) with
honey is useful in hemorrhagic epistaxis and hemoptysis.

Scanty menstruation: Decoction or juice of Vasa leaves is
beneficial.

Precautions: Intake in excessive quantity may result in
diarrhoea, vomiting and excessive menstrual bleeding.

Mode of propagation

Stem cuttings of 15-20 cm long with 3-4 nodes are ideal for
planting done in March-April.

----- PAGE 43 -----
* Tender stem cuttings are planted in poly bags /pots filled with
farm yard manure, top soil and sand in the ratio 1:1:1.

* Cuttings will root readily and will be ready to transplant to main
field after two months.

> Ayurvedic formulations

Vasavleha, Vasarishta.

----- PAGE 44 -----


----- PAGE 45 -----
Acknowledgement

Guidance

.

.

Vaidya Rajesh Kotecha, Secretary , Ministry of AYUSH
Shri Roshan Jaggi, Joint Secretary , Ministry of AYUSH

Prof. Tanuja Nesari, Director, All India Institute of Ayurveda, New
Delhi

Prof. Mita Kotecha, HoD, Department of Dravyaguna, National
Institute of Ayurveda, Jaipur

Editing

.

Dr A. Raghu, Joint Adviser, (Ayurveda), Ministry of AYUSH

Dr Sulochana Bhat, Nodal Officer (Ayushman Bharat), Ministry of
AYUSH

Dr Rajeshwari Singh, OSD (Tech.), Ministry of AYUSH

Contributors

Dr Amit Bhatt, Research Officer, (Ayurveda), Ministry of AYUSH
Dr Dushyant Kishore, National Medicinal Plants Board

Dr Kandarp Desai, Senior Consultant, Ministry of AYUSH

Dr Balu Mote, Domain Expert, Ministry of AYUSH

Dr Sameer Deshmukh, Domain Expert, Ministry of AYUSH

Dr Kavita Tyagi, National Medicinal Plants Board

Photo Courtesy

DrS. K. Lale, Research Officer, (Ayurveda), CCRAS

----- PAGE 46 -----


----- PAGE 47 -----


----- PAGE 48 -----

