
----- PAGE 1 -----
NCISM |
2023 ) 2nd
Edition

e
dé. )
J

A Text Book of :

| Dravyaguna
'Vijnana

National Commission for Indian System of
Medicine (NCISM)

Dr. Prakash L. Hegde, MD (Ayu.), Ph.D. (Ayu.) j
Dr. Harini A., M.D. (Ayu. 7’

----- PAGE 2 -----
A Text Book of
Dravyaguna Vijnana

(According to the New Syllabus of National Commission for Indian
System of Medicine (NCISM)

nial ieeeettee ee eat anes einen aaa idememeamemmanat tamed eee cc aaadamandiins inte teaenaah taeda iene tesonae

. By
Dr. Prakash L. Hegde, MD (Ayu.), Ph.D. (Ayu.)
Dr. Harini A., M.D. (Ayu.)

Chaukhambha Publications
New Delhi

----- PAGE 3 -----
oN aun fF WN

WN NY NY NY NY NN NN NY |S BS So So oa ao ao ao ao an cg
CoO MON DUN KR WY S| CO DOD WAN AWN BR WH HH OO?

HES.
ara ia.
TAT.

aX.
TALIA.
afa.
af.

. aa.
. OT.
aa,

. WAY,
. a.

. offi.
. aR.
a5

. 0T.
ie

. WS.

. aaa,
. waa.
a

. USAW.
Ltt

. ta.
ta.
RCAC A
Laz.

. Ws.

bbl b bd dbl ddb dd bblidlliddlliividdd

Abbreviation

Oy FeA SAMA
OF Tet PRIA

WR HT FA

----- PAGE 4 -----
31.
32.
33.
34,
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.

Jlblllddidd

Dravyaguna Vijnana

MAM FA TT
WHA TIT UVS

WMH Bea WAT Ws
TUR sO Fea YA
waly Gar sey Tea YA
Bat SM TA

ae Patera
Gad UE IMA

Gat art
Yadavaji Trikamaji Acarya

----- PAGE 5 -----
Content

Particulars

1.

21
2:2
2.3

v2.4
2.5
2.6
2.8
2.9
2.10
2.11
2.12
2.13

Bheshajavacharaniya

(Criteria have to be considered for selection of drugs in vyadhis).

Dravya (Drug) N ama-Guna-Karma Jnana
1. Useful parts withRasapanchaka,

2. Karma, Agryakarma, Dosha karma, Rogaghnata,

3. Amayikaprayoga: Therapeutic utility in Vyadhi (Disease)
pertaining to various Srotas, Vyadhiavastha (Stage),
Kalpana (dosage form), Matra (Dose), Anupana (Vehicle),

Marga (Route of administration),

Sevanakala (Time of administration), Kalavadhi
(Duration) and Pathya-apathya (Do’s and Don’ ts)
4. Active phyto-constituents, Research updates and Vishishta Yoga

(Important formulation).

5. Botanical name, Family, Main synonyms and Vernacular names.

Page No.
01

6. Identification- External morphological features such as habit, root, stem,

leaf, inflorescence, flower, fruit and seed.
7. Varieties , Grahyagrhyatwa , Adulterants, Substitutes &

toxic effects (wherever applicable) of
Agnimantha (Clerodendrum phlomidis)
Ahiphena (Papaver somniferum)
Ajamoda (Apium graveolens)
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis)
Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera)
Aragwadha (Cassia fistula)
Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna)
Ashoka (Saraca asoca)
Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera)
Asthishrunkhala (Cissus quadrangularis)
Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum)
Bakuchi (Psoralea corylifolia)
Bala (Sida cordifolia)

13
21
29
33
42
50
58
65
72
80
84
91
98

----- PAGE 6 -----
2.14
2.15
2.16
2.17
2.18
2.19
2.20
2.21
2.22
v2.23
— 2.24
2.25
2.26
2.27
2.28
2.29
2.30
- 2.31
2.32
2.33
= 2.34
"2.35
2.36
2.37
2.38
2.39
2.40
2.41
2.42
2.43
2.44
2.45
2.46

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Beejaka (Pferocarpus marsupium)
Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium)
Bharangi (Clerodendrum serratum)
Bhrungaraja (Eclipta alba)
Bhumyamalaki (Phyllanthus amarus)
Bilva (Aegle marmelos)

Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri)

Bruhati (Solanum indicum)
Chakramarda (Cassia tora)
Chandana (Santalum album)
Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica)
Dadima (Punica granatum)
Dhanyaka (Coriandrum sativum)
Dhataki (Woodfordia fruticosa)
Dhanvayasa (Fagonia critica)

Ela (Elettaria cardamomum)

Eranda (Ricinus communis)
Gambhari (Gmelina arborea)
Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris)
Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia)
Guggulu (Commiphora mukul)
Haridra (Curcuma longa)

Haritaki (Terminalia chebula)

Hingu (Ferula narthex)

Jambu (Syzygium cumini)

Japa (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis)
Jatamansi (Nardostachys grandiflora)
Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans)
Jeeraka (Cuminum cyminum)
Jyotishmati (Celastrus paniculatus)
Kalamegha (Andrographis paniculata)
Kampillaka (Mallotus philippensis)
Kanchanara (Bauhinia variegata)

105
112
121
127
134
139
147
154
161
166
181
188
195
203
210
215
222
232
239
247
256
268
277
291
298
306
310
317
324
337
344
349
355

----- PAGE 7 -----
2.47
2.48
2.49
2.50
2.51
2.52
2:53
2.54
2.55
2.56
2.57
2.58
2.59
2.60
2.61
2.62
2.63
2.64
2.65
2.66
2.67
2.68
2.69
2.70
2.71
2.72
2.73
2.74
2.15
2.76
2.17
2.78
2.79
2.80

Content

Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum)
Kapikachhu (Mucuna pruriens)
Karkatshrungi (Pistacia integerrima)
Katuki (Picrorhiza kurroa)

Khadira (Acacia catechu)

Kulatha (Dolichos biflorus)

Kumari (Aloe vera)

Kumkuma (Crocus sativus)

Kutaja (Holarrhena pubescens)
Lajjalu (Mimosa pudica)
Latakaranja (Caesalpinia crista)
Lavanga (Syzygium aromaticum)
Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa)
Madanphala (Catunaregum spinosa)
Mandukaparni (Centella asiatica)
Manjishta (Rubia cordifolia)
Maricha (Piper nigrum)
Meshashrungi (Gymnema sylvestre)
Methika (Trigonella fonum-graecum)
Musta (Cyperus rotundus)
Nagkeshara (Mesua ferrea)

Nimba (Azadirachta indica)
Nirgundi (Vitex negundo)

Palasha (Butea monosperma)
Pashanabheda (Bergenia ciliata)
Patha (Cissampelos pareira)

Pippali (Piper longum)

Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa)
Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata)

Rasona (Allium sativum)

Sairayaka (Barleria prionitis)
Sarapagandha (Rawvolfia serpentina)
Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus)
Shallaki (Boswellia serrata)

XV

362
369
376
382
389
397
402
409
417
427
432
437
443
449
457
464
471
479
484
489
497
503
S11
518
526
$32
538
547
555
563
572
578
584
592

----- PAGE 8 -----
Xvi Dravyaguna Vijnana

2.81 Shalmali(Mocharasa) (Bombax ceiba) 598
2.82 Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis) 607
2.83 Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) 614
2.84 Shigru (Moringa oleifera) 622
2.85 Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) 631
2.86 Talisapatra (Abies webbiana) 641
2.87 Trivrut (Operculina turpethum) 647
2.88 Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) 655
2.89 Twak (Cinnamomum aromaticum) 662
2.90 Usheera (Vetiveria zizanioides) 669
2.91 Vacha (Acorus calamus) 675
2.92 Varuna (Crataeva magna) 682
2.93 Vasa (Justicia adhatoda) 688
2.94 Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox) 695
2.95 Vibhitaki (Terminalia bellirica) 702
2.96 Vidanga (Embelia ribes) 709
2.97 Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra) 716

Appendix I 723

Appendx II 731

Question Papers 737

Index (Botanical Names) 763

----- PAGE 9 -----
Bheshajavacharaneeyam (Pre-requisites of
Treatment)
—_e eee snsesntsssesesessnnasenetensnesunsanoenmmnesennenen,

Points

* Rogi Pariksha (Examination of the patient)

¢ Dosha Pariksha (Determination of Doshas)

¢ Deha Desha Pariksha (Determination of seats of diseases)

+ Aushadha Pariksha (Determination of the drug)

e Kala Aushadha Sambandha (Relationship of time and treatments)

e Bhaishajya Sevana Kala (Time of administration)

e Dosha Nirharana Kala (Time for elimination of doshas)
Introduction:

Treating a disease involves several key points and when applied properly will bring
the best result. All these key areas are very well explained in the chapter
Bheshajavacharaneeya Adhyaya of Ashtanga Sangraha Sutra Sthana, Chapter 23. For a
successful physician the knowledge regarding the different useful points which are ex-
Plained in this chapter is becomes must. The Chapter includes several important pre req-
uisites to carry out treatment like Rogi Pariksha (Examination of Patient), Dosha Pariksha
(Assessment of Dosha), Deha Pariksha (Determination of disease), Aushadha Pariksha
(Evaluation of drug / medicine), Bhaishyajya Sevana Kala (time of administration of

medicine) etc. which are very much required. Before selecting particular drug / medicinal
plant knowledge regarding Bheshajavacharana is essential.

Rogi Pariksha (Examination of the patient)~ _|1al/ 4 Creat fhtory-)

AUTH, Ula aaeaargt Ueteta | waferaet Set wrt: dat wale ar

Reiger St , Pr? f . sifted creer re ere
arahe creat eatientatratite | ueretta & a at Partastonserettat ae: |
aes daensh aga: vat tra: | cea: anther agar fea, crate
eRe at wes vies Af | cave aafevenieet yaSest Wor at
AT SSIMT TA: elem Fae: | cere | Baers
FIR AAAs Stare rTP eM AT ATTA: | ATA STOTT AT

----- PAGE 10 -----
- Dravyaguna Vijnana

aiitrataray a testy Tadtareatayishrrtter ark aM ITT |
Acted WIT 1 (37.4.Y, 23/2)

Rogil Par pecs oe is very amnpOREE to plan the treatment so, Berane starting of the treat-

e In which region is he born? Where as he been brought up? Where has he
developed the disease? Which are the type of food, activities, strength, mental]
attitude, accustomed things, the likes, prevalent diseases, the suitable and
unsuitable things of the people living in that region? Knowing this beforehand
will facilitate determination of the specific causes for the increase of the
Doshas. Though the dosha may be one, there are many causes for its increase.
Carefully noting the qualities and functions of each, the physician has to
determine the dosha involved. For example, has Vata undergone inctease by
indulgence in bad food or bad activities? Whether it is due to indulgence i in
foods which are dry, light, or cold or by overexertion, suppression of the urges
of the body, fear or grief? _

Prescribing the opposite kind of treatment after determining all these facts, will
certainly leads to quick success. Sweet, Sour and salt tastes have their opposites
in pungent, bitter and astringent tastes tespectively.

Dosha Pariksha (Determination of Doshas)

It is to be ascertained that in what manner the person has indulged in the causes of
the diseases, whether by mild, moderate or profound measure (quantity, degree). Even
though the cause may be one only, by its different variations (quality, quantity) it pro-
duces changes in the different facets (parts) of the doshas which in turn make the disease
to become either mild or severe.

In diseases which have many doshas and in drugs which have many tastes, the
physician should carefully consider the special effects of the each of the doshas and of
each of the tastes and plan out the appropriate mode of treatment of the disease.

ayaa WAaaMaTavaraT aT
anftranattad sti Prec | wierd fe ete: cate carreras teste at
SR Hater | caver Caraga Net Perera: TeHfeeter: ul (31.F.F, 23/3)

But this need not apply in all cases.

In conditions caused by the combination of things of dissimilar qualities, that is caused

----- PAGE 11 -----
_Bheshajavacharaneeyam (Pre-requisites of Treatment)

pc rmeparie of different things each one supporting or antagonizing the other and
a ei which are being influenced by other factors, it is possible to relay on the
Special effect of the whole (Dosha, Diséase or Drug) than of each part of it. Thus, in such

eo the treatment should be planned, taking in to consideration the effect of the

Deha Desha Pariksha (Determination of seats of diseases):

Further it is to be decided, in which place (part) of the body the disease is localized.
The doshas which have increased may not produce the diseases in their own seats but
may do so in other places such as the head etc. and so may become difficult to treat.
Hence the treatment has to be planned as is found appropriate to the seat of the disease.

Aushadha Pariksha (Determination of the drug)

Waves | acarsadteeres sarge at ates: Rerercit ar 1 ara fe
deerdemnfracdt enirentrraentet safer u (ara. % 23/4)

Teta dieses at 1 aarsttaen-
WRAAMUT TATE aeaay: | deh gy enkracreranh aye
art enftraftaes siteraraeta 1 wtkaentrarh wtaestrenieacear |
aftaacrattert terrae (a8. F 23/5)

Selecting suitable and genuine drug is very much necessary to have best therapeutic
effects, hence Aushadha Pariksha (Assessment or determination of drug/medicine) be-
comes inevitable. :

To which drug and to what dose of it, are the disease and the patient suitable? Deter-
mination of the drug, its potency, dose etc., should be appropriate to the dosha, the strength
of the disease and the diseased (person). Whether the urgent use of powerful purificatory
drugs (or treatments) having the properties of Agni (Teja Bhuta) and Vayu bhuta is needed
or use of the drugs possessing mild properties in greater doses will be necessary, treatment
such as branding with the fire, use of alkalies and surgical instruments, are more harmful,
to patients who have poor mental stamina and physical strength. Palliative drugs (or treat-
ment) also if stronger than the strength of the disease will produce opposite diseases quickly,
after mitigating the earlier ones, in the body which has become weak by the effect of
disease. Those (drugs and treatment) which are stronger than the body will cause exhaus-
tion, fainting, toxicity, delusion and decrease of strength; those which are more powerful
than the digestive capacity will produce exhaustion and poor digestion. ;

af a | afrgetstraet gdet gdagutagttirneetraadtscartarcad-
gnisareamentatadt: uneedt at anfiaeta aacantaey 1 fe greater

----- PAGE 12 -----
4 Dravyaguna Vijnana

dean nang annealed atnarieanet 1

aemakaaygaeren: Wet: FPA: UTA | aets fefegraur forge: | Tar

aoate areangisrraemed at tasmfatacant ya wa sage carey, 1
(Ha. Y 23/6)

Persons who are stout, very emaciated, weak, which have their body part not having
well knit muscles, blood and bones; of poor digestive ability, take very little food, who are
habituated to unhealthy unaccustomed foods; whose body is impoverished of essences of
the tissues, will be incapable of withstanding the disease itself. Then how can they with-
stand the effect of such strong drugs (or treatment) Hence, such weak patient are to be
treated specially with drugs which do not cause discomfort, which are mild, pleasant,
successively hard (increasingly strong) and which do not cause debility.

This should be so, especially for women because they are unsteady, tender and of
weak heart (mind), tender in body and dependent on others (men);it should be still more
so especially for children. _

Likewise, drugs (or ee which are very mild and of very little quantity (dosha)
will do not any good for severe diseases and for strong persons; on the other hand, they
will aggravate the disease by exciting the doshas.

eA ce a
santcaeret ova «offer: 1 at wa wa aete eos

Perea eS (3a. FY 23/7)

Though a drug is found suitable, still it should be examined to determine its taste,
potency, taste after digestion, qualities nature of the substance (mass), actions, special
effects, place of growth, season of collection, method of preservation, correct mode of
using, prohibited mode of use, methods of processing, combinations (or admixtures),
procedure of use, dosage, the type of patient for whom it is meant, the time (season) of
use, the dosha which it expels out or mitigates inside etc. if there happens to be another
drug of similar properties, then both are to be compared and the best of them should be
used.

Very subtle are the variations in different stages of the doshas, drugs, dushya (tissues

----- PAGE 13 -----
Bheshajavacharaneeyam (Pre-requisites of Treatment) 5

and wastes) regions, time, strength, digestive activity, food, tastes, accustoms, mental
makeup, constitution, age etc., which if not considered deeply will lead to death of the
patient. If taken up for careful consideration, these will create confusion even in the mind
of a very intelligent physician. What to say then one of poor intellect?

Hence the physician should study the scriptures, engage himself in practical work
constantly and transform his intellect for gaining mastery.

There are some diseases which stand out as exceptions to the general line of treat-
ment prescribed in the texts. In such cases, the intelligent physician should himself be the
judge to determine the strength or weakness of the doshas without seeking help from
elsewhere.

Kala Aushadha Sambandha (Relationship of time and treatments)

aves NSH AAAS 1A aToTagentfedeargquanan wo fear: were
a | vittteratoentafie: are: 1 aa vidteueddftesitaatrarsa aremuit
weoacraal | tiaatareateg, ureitge: prefer fracad | ay Aremraraey
amd vfafatafatarmstramrar 1 meron & wepidrradctargecand,
qaratrncrar: wreireerany | ferattarhearay ul (31.4. J 23/8)

Kala (time) also confers suitability of the drugs. It was described that time is of two
kinds viz., First — such as Kshana, Lava, Muhurta etc. Second — stages of the patient (or
disease). Time (seasons) is of three characters — cold, hot and rainy. Between cold (Shishira)
and hot (Grishma) seasons and in between rainy (Varsha) and Cold (Hemanta) seasons,
there are two ordinary seasons (temperate) Viz., Vasanta and Sharat respectively. The
ordinary (temperate) season found in between Grishma and Varsha which is the first
commencement of rain is known as Pravrat.

The ideal time for administration of therapies like emesis and purgation is the day
time of the ordinary (temperate) seasons; whereas the daytime of other seasons are unsuit-
able because of the risk of inadequate or excessive bouts. Similarly, the ordinary seasons
are ideal even for the administration of other drugs (or treatments) to the body, because of
mild degrees of cold, heat and rain during these seasons and so are easy and harmless.
Opposite will be the condition in other seasons.

wad | ortker armrattagara | dguteatt waaetreasat seed Uradataada Ta
Teg: wRefarmgerieenrateraaaa  yHaaalufeaaaa-
AATagae WAT water (AF. FT 23/9)

----- PAGE 14 -----
6 Dravyaguna Vijnana

During cold season, the body being a victim of severe cold and cold breeze the
doshas become stable (immobile, stagnated) and heavy (greatly increased). Purificatory
drugs (or therapies) administered during this period, though generally of hot potency, get
vanquished by the profound cold, becomes inefficient in action, give only inadequate
bouts and make the body susceptible to many diseases of Vata origin.

Similarly, during rainy season also, similar is the result (the drugs become weak and
produce only inadequate bouts) because in this season the sky is full of thick clouds
which obstruct the hot rays of the sun reaching the earth, the earth becomes full of slush
by lashing rain and flowing water, the bodies of men get water logged, lose the efficiency
of digestive activity and become weak by the effect of season.

Waa | AVaATATATA TA aT wort Hata eiwet Hererary TT —
Aredtaee Saree tl (37.4. J 23/10)

The condition of the entire vegetation will be poor in potency because of the net-
work of roots of trees will have been submerged in water due to rain falling in torrents
from the clouds, the stem and branches will become full with tender leaves and buds,
making the trees appear to have become young. Because of this tenderness and the effect
of slush of the soil they will undergo sourness during digestion; the water will have be-
come contaminated with the cadavers, tissues, urine and excreta of birds, animals, reptiles
etc., the wind will be very cold due to presence of water vapour, snow and mist; the heat
of the earth becomes reduce, the vegetation not attaining maturity with potency, they will
only cause burning sensation during digestion in the human body. Because of these rea-
sons, the drugs which are collected even at the commencement (of the rainy season) will
be unsuitable for health (and produce inadequate bouts only) due to preponderance of
water and wind full of water vapour.

aa | fast yarerate qasrenhraragen temrargararaer arrearreers | welt

FOOT ST AAT | RATATAT LT STATO TAT Aare TTT START:

laratre ¢ abrruiceradad quieaidrdarecenrran franc yaraure aera
afeatsrearerd tt (31.4. J 23/11)

During Grishma (Summer) due to the effect of withdrawal (of moisture by the sun)

----- PAGE 15 -----
_Bheshajavacharaneeyam (Pre-requisites of Treatment) 7

the body under the influence of hot and dry wind will have severe perspiration and the
doshas will be very loose (fluid moving freely) and in very little quantity. Purificatory
drugs though not hot in potency will acquire the properties of heat and penctrating deep
inside, Cause excessive bouts (of emesis and purgation); the body will suffer from compli-
cations like thirst, giddiness and exhaustion,

So, itis ideal to administer emesis and other purificatory therapies during appropriate
seasons only, if there is no emergency discase. In case of an emergency conditions
purificatory treatment should be done by creating conditions opposite of the seasons arti-
ficially and administering drugs which have been made suitable with appropriate process-
ing, combination, dosage, mode of use and other procedures.

Bhaishajya Sevana Kala (Time of administration)

MKAAY GT Het: Ale Wat: | Taser arse AM
AeaTeAetet careteet attra: waft | PA HTSMNST AO, TTT | ST WATE
FETS UAHA TH ATS EHS: MM MATT PGT (a. 23/12)

In the context of the conditions or the stages of the patient (or the disease), time
means the different parts, viz., a certain time whether appropriate for administration of
medicine, or not, whether a particular time either suitable or unsuitable for a particular
drug etc. drugs administered either at premature time or elapsed time not yield the desired
results.

The times of administration of medicines are eleven in number such as without food,
before meals, after meals, mixed with food during its preparation itself, in between meals
(of afternoon and night), at the commencement and end of the meals, often (frequently)
irrespective of meals, mixed or along with morsel, in between such morsels and at night.

1. Abhakta
Tanith Amdetdee feterefedtei 1 ctxenfeepryreratar:
Wedoaqagata | gateq watfearareenter fect arferetrent safe 1
(A.4. Y 23/13)

Abhakta (without food) is administration of the drug separately without giving any
food to the patient. The action of the drug in that case will be very powerful. So, persons
who are strong, drugs should be given in the morning after the increased Kapha has
moved out of the stomach; in case of others it should be before food (of the morning or
breakfast) as the person will not suffer from fatigue by the consumption of food.

2. Pragbhakta
Rath AM Fea, | eM oe aay: HAT THATS AAT A earhtry,

----- PAGE 16 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

gerrare asftencorref er aren i (31.4. F 23/14)

Pragbhakia is administration of the drug just prior to the meal, It useful in the treat-
ment of diseases caused by Apana Varta, in diseases of lower extremities for strengthening
the body and for making the body thin.

3. Madhyabhakta
Teh Tet THT ae BAe frat | pteery a eareery thrhg a
(AA. FJ 23/15)
Madhyabhakta is administration of drug in the middle ofthe. meal_and useful in

diseases caused by Samana Vata, in diseases of alimentary tract and in diseases of Pittaja
origin.

4. Adhobhakta
SUNT WAHT | TT aaa UIA UA: Maa ys
mrret a aed aady etry a years wychenronedast Ni (3.8. | 23/16)

Adhobhakta is administration of drug after the meal, diseases due to Vyanavata and
should be after the morning meal and in diseases due to Udana vata it should be after the
evening meal. This method is useful for strengthening the upper part of the body and to
cure the diseases of Kapha and cause stoutness of the body.

5. Sabhakta
Rag ST ATG Ut (AA-Z,23/17)

Sabhakta is taking the food prepared by mixing the drug or mixing the drug to
prepared food and eating immediately. It is indicated for children, persons of tender con-
stitution, those who hate medicines, in loss of appetite and in diseases affecting the whole
body.

6. Antarabhakta

aT Ue Yate uh sitet were Aoaqagerd 1 afeever sfot qa
ae war Ubreateare | area areararay i (31.8. J 23/18)

Antarabhakta is administration of medicines first at midday after the digestion of the

forenoon meal (breakfast) and once again in the afternoon after the digestion of the mid-
day meal. Likewise in case of the night also. This method is indicated for those who have
strong digestion and in disorders caused by Vyanavata.

LY

----- PAGE 17 -----
Bheshajavacharanceyam (Pre-requisites of Treatment) 9

7, Samudga

HUTA MEAT TY ST VT 1 (31.4. FY 23/19)

Samudga is the use of the medicine twice- once just before meals and immediately
after meals. Food should be easily digestible and little in quantity, drugs should be having
digestive property and be in the form of confection, powder etc. this method is indicated
in hiccough, tremors, convulsions and when the doshas are localized at both upper and
lower parts of the body.

& Muhurmuhu

Weed Fr: Grath aaah at | remarernraheenqawtay faatatiry a fercnreg 11

(AA. F 23/20)

Muhurmuhu is the use of medicine, frequently with or without food. This method is
useful in diseases like dyspnoea, cough, hiccough, thirst, vomiting and diseases caused
by poisons.

9, Sagrasa, 10. Grasantara and 11, Nishi:

POS Ae DTH | OTA ae rea a eat were MrT resterseeay | TAT
ward quideacanfematadedt arstteronts aogier | ore EArt sat ArT
weary Pree Ul (31... F 23/21)

e Sagrasa is taking medicine only once with first morsel of food.

* Grasantara is taking medicine after every meal. Both these are indicated in
disorders of Pranavata. Medicines which are in the form of powder, confection
pill etc., and having the property of kindling digestion and those which are
aphrodisiacs are to be used along with one morsel. Drugs which are used in
diseases of heart, drugs to produce vomiting and those useful for inhalation of
smoke, they can be administered after every morsel.

e Nisha administration of drugs at night (bed time, before sleep) is ideal for the
treatment of diseases of parts of the body above the shoulders.

ware are afta: dtasftargrsief afr: arava fest ast 1 weg
asgemereemfedtantreananret sftararratte | sreatfer art votes: i (34.4. F 23/22)

The use of medicine during the first of this time (empty stomach) should be avoided
for those who are thirsty, who have just drunk cold water, which have indigestion, who
are hungry and who is very emaciated, very strong and hot potency medicine, having
strong smell and large quantity should be avoided.

----- PAGE 18 -----
10 Dravyaguna Vijnana

trarel wliste ceaareeeny at: Het Prey Uae aye PATENT MN
(4.4. FY 23/23)
The disease is to be examined first and next the drug; and then after, the physician
should treat the disease with full knowledge.

Paristt qaeatixetarnte tga (ee arffae ae: ve: gett gare: 0
Tearagqastianrd, warren | tegrratt aria yet eredtaraey
(AM. FY 23/24-25)
Though the diseases gets cured they may reappear again due to residue of the doshas
remaining inside the body and getting excited even by trivial causes, just like the fire
which flares up from a small spark. Hence doshas should be cleared out with harmless
methods and effective recipes.
AAT TAT Tes SOTTATTAY | aera eT: react HATA:
(AM. FT 23/26)
A drug which is good for health may become disagreeable due to continuous use or
lack of pleasantness; hence such things should be made acceptable by subjecting in to
various processes.
Waaatqaqrgittent whaler | parasite at Rae eave: were:
(31-4. Y 23/27)
Nourishment, valour, desire, strength and enjoyment of happiness all are dependent
upon the feeling of comfort in the mind; then the relief of the diseases follows.
Beara aT SPA: ATG Teal AeA ferret, |
(A.4. | 23/28)
Desire towards a thing develops during the course of the disease due to fondness,
decrease of the doshas or peculiar effect of the disease; physician who is well versed in
the knowledge of the good, should make appropriate alterations and make it suitable for
consumption.

Dosha Nirharana Kala (Time for elimination of doshas)

vittrorautfifrdt sarsracrentte 1 ATL MM yom wag ll
Ween wmeeaag a aq | aemity fate Parra |
virtroratat ydtert were | wate feat ured fore 3 wai
TSA TOTES Hearst wast | atest wre a Rrarerated: UyTrseahe g
artafersratcendere 1 (31.8. FY 23/29-32)

----- PAGE 19 -----
Bheshajavacharanecyam (Pre-requisites of Treatment) 1]

The doshas — Kapha Vata and Pitta - which have undergone increase in cold, hot
and rainy seasons respectively should be expelled out of the body either during the three
ordinary months — the Chaitra, Shravana, and Kartika or during the three ordinary Months
of Pravrat, Sharat and Vasanta Rutu respectively with the prescribed procedure. Having
created conditions opposite of the cold, hot and rainy seasons artificially treatments should
be done in appropriate time, without skipping the sequences of time.

If no relief is found within seven days another alternate treatment should be started
and that only after the effect of the earlier treatment has disappeared. Mixing of two kinds
of treatment is not good. Even it slight improvement has been obtained by any one treat-
ment, the same should be continued with suitable modifications to obtain better improve-
ment.

Quast yudeaewncaesst Yt: | Wert agyyt agaes: wether

satarisafed: aan aaa: | seated uftet: waraqwasra, i

(AA. FY 23/33-34)

The drug to be administered to the king, should be pleasant, small in quantity, with
no deleterious effects, pure, scientifically prepared, possessing many good qualities and
found efficacious many times. The physician should not engage himself in any other
work, should obtain the consent of his friends for his treatment; the drug having been
tasted by the royal routine earlier and also by himself and then administered to the king.

shat we at terest ete faery | aviszonit cadena |
driagiad ware, cater | teens wert are sitet aera |
VATA SISTA AT Ul (3.8. F 23/35-36)

That drug which is grown in the same land in which a person lives will be ideal for

that person. Those drugs which possess properties similar to the properties of the land in
which a person is born should be used for those living in a different land.

The drug, which by nature, is potent, fortified further by soaking it in the fresh juices
of others, made easily digestible, endowed with pleasant taste, smell etc. administered at
proper time, in the mild dose and with steady mind is sure to become nectar.

Exercise: Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs)
1. Chapter Bheshajavacharaneeyamadhyayam is included in - Sthana of Ashtanga
Sangraha
a. Chiktsa Sthana b. Sutrasthana c. Sharirasthana d. Nidanasthana
Ans: b. Sutrasthana

----- PAGE 20 -----
12 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Chapter number of Bheshajavacharaneeya Adhyaya included in Sutrasthana of
Ashtanga Sangraha
a. 25" Chapter b. 27° Chapter c. 23 Chapter _—d.: 15"" Chapter
Ans: c. 234 Chapter

3. Kasmin Deshe jata refers to
a. Aushadha Pariksha b. Deha Desha Pariksha
c. Bhaishajya Kala d. Rogi Pariksha
Ans: d. Rogi Pariksha

4, Number of Bhaishajya Sevana Kala acc to Ashtanga Sangraha
a. 10 b. 11 c. 5 d. 8
Ans: b. L1

5. Abhakta refers to
a. With food b. After food
c. Without food d. In between food
Ans: c. Without food

6. Suitable Bhaishajya Sevana Kala for Pittaja Vyadhi
a. Madhya Bhakta b. Pragbhakta = c. Muhurmuhu d. Nishi
Ans; a. Madhyabhakta

7. Antarabhakta is suitable for Vyadhis related to
a. Prana Vata b. Apana Vata c. Udana Vata d.Vyana Vata
Ans: d. Vyana Vata

8. Aushadha Sevana Kala indicated in Jatrurdhva Vikara

a. Nishi b. Grasantara _—c. Sagrasa d. Pragbhakta
Ans: a. Nishi

RR AE

— |

----- PAGE 21 -----
Chapter

Agnimantha

Useful Part : Mula (Root)
Rasadi Panchaka : Rasa Pancaka

Katu, Tikta, Kashaya, Madhura

Karma (Actions)
Shothaghna, Agnivardhaka, Vibandhahara & Jwarahara

Pharmacological Actions

Hypoglycaemic, Anthelmintic & Anti inflammatory (Aqueous extract of leaves)
Dosha Karma (Actions on Dosha)

Kapha Vata Shamaka, Kaphahara because of Katu, Tikta, Kashaya rasa, Ushna
virya and Katu vipaka, Vata Shamaka because of its Ushna virya.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Shwayathu, Pandu, Agnimandya, Vibandha, Jwara, Arshas and Adhmana.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administraion)

1. Vasameha (Lipuria]

aerate Riera at (a Fa. 11/9)

Agnimantha (Premna integrifolia) kashaya is very effective in Vasameha.

2. Arshas (Haemorrhoids)

aftaaag Brats Waa ST | era Vo Ma TSA

(af. 14/45)

The decoction prepared from the leaves of Agnimantha (Premna integrifolia), Shigru
(Moringa oleifera) and Ashmantaka (Ficus rumphii) is used for Avagaha (Tub bath) in
Hemorrhoids.

3. Granthi visarpa (Erysipelas pustulosum)
agraaatied pate afer were tafe. 21/125)

----- PAGE 22 -----
14 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Paste prepared from the leaves of Agnimantha (Premna integrifolia) and Vamsha is
applied in Granthi visarpa (Glandular erysipelas).

4, Urusthambha (Disease related to thigh)
attra a weirs Sara | Worst aftdatazeetent Pract i
(afa. 27/57)

Kwatha prepared from Agnimantha (Premna integrifolia) and Karanja (Pongamia
pinnata) is sprinkled and paste of these two drugs is applied externally.

5, Shitapitta (Urticaria)
aftr yi fie after after | sfafiritedator, woreda Aree
(4.4. 51/7)

The Chuurna of Agnimantha (Premna integrifolia) is taken with ghee cures Shitapitta,
Udarda and Kotha within seven days.

Matra (Dose)
Kwatha - 50to 100 ml
Swarasa - 10to20ml
Churna - lto3gm

Important phytoconstituents

Root - Premnine (Alkaloid), Ganiarine, Ganikarine, B-sitosteroal, Ceryl alcohol,
Triterpenes, Clerodin, Polyphenols, Clerodendrin A, Essential oil.

Stem bark - Betulin, ?-sitosteroal, Aphelandrine, D-mannitol.
Leaves - Essential oil, Palmitic acid, g-sitosterol.
Research Corner

1. The plant has been found to possess hypoglycemic activity. (Pande M.C.,
Journal of natural integrated Med Ass, 1978, 20 (8), 295. The methanolic
extract of C. phlomidis Linn. (MECP) leaves shows most of the
pharmacological activities characteristic of minor tranquilizers. (Murugesan T.,
Saravanana K.S., Lakshmi S., Ramaya G. and Thenmozhi K., Evaluation of
psychopharmacological effects of Clerodendrum phlomidis Linn. Extract (J)
Phtomedicine, 2001, 8 (6), 472).

2. Methanolic extract of leaves of C. Phlomidis Linn (MECP) showed significant
inhibitory activity against castor oil induced diarrhoea and PGE2 induced
enteropooling in rats. The extract also showed a significant reduction in
gastrointestinal motility in charcoal meal test in rats. (Rani S., Ahamed N.,

----- PAGE 23 -----
3. The tre

a _ Agnimantha 15

Rajaram S, and Saluj

aR., Thenmozhi S., Murugesan T., J. Ethano-pharmacol.,
1999, 68, 315),

‘tment with petroleum ether, chloroforms and methanolic fractions of
alcoholic extract of Clerodendrum phlomidis at a dose of 500-mg/kg b.w,p.o.
significantly prevented CCl4 induced elevation of liver enzymes. The results
indicated that the methanolic fraction was most active among the three fractions
(Amita verma et al/Int.J.Pharm Tech Res. 2009, | (4) pp 1028-1031).

. Petroleum ether, Ethyl acetate and Methanolic extracts of Clerodendrum

phlomidis aerial parts at the doses of 100 and 200 mg/kg was evaluated for the

Analgesic activity using the hot plate and acetic acid induced abdominal

constrictions in mice. The study showed that the Methanolic and Ethyl acetate

extracts of Clerodendrum phlomidis at dose 200 mg/kg exhibited significant
analgesic activity. (R. Vijayamritharaj, S. Vincent and N. Senthilkumar.,

Analgesic activity of clerodendrum Phlomidis linn. (Aerial parts), International

Journal of Research in Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences, Vol. 2 (1),

2011 pp 120-123),

. The methanolic extract of the roots of Clerodendrum phlomidis (Verbenaceae)
showed significant in-vitro anti-oxidation activity in the anti radical, superoxide
scavenging, anti lipid peroxidation, hydroxyl radical scavenging and nitric
Oxide scavenging, assays, (Gokani, R.H., et al, Evaluation of antioxidants
activity (in vitro) of Clerodendrum phlomidis, linn. f. suppl. Root, Journal of
Herbal Medicine and Toxicology 5 (1), 2011 pp 47-53).

- The anti inflammatory activity of the crude ethanolic extract of Clerodendrum
phlomidis was studied using the carrageenan and cotton pellet induced
inflammatory models. The antiarthritic activity was studied using Freund's’s
complete adjuvant induced rat model. Clerodendrum phlomidis displays
considerable potency in anti inflammatory action and has prominent antiarthritic
effect on adjuvant induced arthritis. (Babu NP, Pandukumar P, lgnacimuthu S.,
Lysosomal membrane stabilization and anti-inflammatory activity of
Clerodendrum phlomidis L.f., a traditional medicinal plant. J.
Ethnopharmacol. 2011. Jun 1;135(3):779-85. Equb 2011 Apr 16).

. The leaf extract of C. Phlomidis, when subjected to TLC, showed the presence

of adrenaline. Mohan Maruga Raja MK, Patel RS, Mishra SH, identification

and quantification of adrenaline from the leaves of Clerodendrum phlomidis
using thin-layer chromatography, Journal of Chinese Integrative Medicine,

9(1), 2011.

----- PAGE 24 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

important formulations

Name Indications

iE Dashamularishta Aruchi, Shula, Shwasa

Ze Dashamula kwatha Jwara, Kasa, Shwasa
Kushtha, Prameha, Shotha

4. Narayana taila Vatavyadhi, Prakupitavata
Indukanta ghrata Vatavyadhi, Kshaya
[6 Pratiama Brahmarasayana | Ayurvardhak
ee

(A Agurvadya Taila hitajwara
fF 8k Baladi lepa isarpa

Botanical name

1. Clerodendron phlomides, Linn of Suppl.

2. Clerodendron multiflorum O. Kitze.
Kleros=Chance, Dendron = tree (Gk)
Pholomides = Resembling phlomis (Jerusalem sage)

3. Premna integrifolia Linn.
Premna = Premnon (Greek) = a stump, low stature of the species
Integri = entire or whole
Folia = leaves

Family - Lamiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)

Basonym of Drug

okt wetter dtaacarey_ |

When two dried sticks of Agnimantha plant rubbed each other will produce fire and
when administered internally stimulates digestive fire.

Main synonyms

Based on Habitat
1. freer —> wot aae vat wars ar

Agnimantha grows gregariously.

2. areet => wal vat!
Agnimantha grows gregariously on river banks.

----- PAGE 25 -----
Agnimantha 17

Morphology

3. hy: > Weteha yore |
Inflorescence of Agnimantha resembles the kite.

4. asafirat > warha |

Inflorescence resembles the kite.

Properties and actions
5. War > wartm
Agnimantha cures many diseases.

6 Tet => Wr Tara
Agnimantha overcomes diseases.
Other
7. aime > afinteadsyarftretor |
The Agnimantha stick catches fire similar to dry cowdung.
8. anitte > afer wasrar: |

Agnimantha can be used as a source of fuel like dried
cowdung.

9. wenlft — Acolloquial name

Regional names
Hin
Kannada i

Malayalam

Shothahara varga, Shitaprashamana varga, Anuvasanopaga varga

Viratarvadi Gana, Varunadi Gana, Brahat Panchamula

Guduchyadi varga 23-24

Habitat

The piant is found all over India. Grows abundantly in Karnataka, Maharashtra and
through out drier parts.

----- PAGE 26 -----
18 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Morphology

Premna integrifolia Linn.

External Morphology : Premna integrefolia Linn.

A large shrub or a small tree reaching 9 mtrs in height.

Bark - Yellowish, lenticellate, Trunk and large branches
sometimes spinous.

Leaves - 5-9 cm long and 3-6 cm wide, broadly elliptic,
obtuse, very shortly acuminate, glabrous, entire or upper part
dentate, base rounded or sub acute, with 4-5 pairs of main
nerves, petioles 1 cm long.

Inflorescence - Terminal, Pubescent, Paniculate corym-
bose cyme.

Flower - Small greenish yellow, with disagreeable
odour.

Fruits - Pear shaped, small 4 mm long.

Clerodendron phlomides Linn

A large bush or small tree, reaching 9 mtrs high with
more or less pubescent branches.

Leaves - Ovate or subrhomboid, coarsely crenate, den-
tate or sub entire, glabrous above more or less puberulous
beneath. Base truncate, or subcordate, simple or opposite.

Inflorescence - Dichotomous axillary cyme, arranged to form a rounded terminal
panicle.
Flower - White or pinkish.
Fruit - Drupe, obovoid, black when ripe.
Varieties
Dhanvantari Nighantu. — 1. Agnimantha (Tarkari)
2. Nadeyi
. 3. Kshudragnimantha (Aranika)
Kaiyyadeva Nighantu’ -— > 1. Agnimantha
2. Tarkari
Raja Nighantu . — = 1. Agnimantha-Premna integrifolia Linn.

2. Kshudragnimantha-Clerodendron phlomides.
Linn.

Clerodendron. phlomides
Linn.

----- PAGE 27 -----
Agnimantha 19

Grahya Laxana (Features of useful Part: Mula (Root)
Diagnostic characters

Premna latifolia Clerodendron multiflorum

Shape: Cylindrical, knarled roots or it’s | Shape: Pieces of cylindrical, some what
longitudinally split pieces. twisted, gradually tapering roots, upto 3 cm
in diameter.
Surface: Surface rough, longitudinally | Surface: Surface is longitudinally fissured,
wrinkled, yellowish brown in clour with | yellowish brown in colour; transversely cut
small round root scars. Debarked portion shows a creamish yellow. Surface
surface is silky yellow and longitudinally | enclosed by an easily separating thin bark,
striated. Surface of transversely cut root | well- defined annual rings and a central pith
shows a closely adhering thin bark, of dark brown colour. Size: The bark occur
followed by a narrow cortical region, a | small flat or slightly curved and friable pieces
large woody portion with prominent of 1.5 to2 mm thickness. These have a brown
concentric rings and small central pith. _| exfoliating inner surface.

Odour: Mild and pleasant Odour: Slightly pungent

Taste: Astringent Taste: Bitter

Substitutes
Premna mucronata is substitute for Agnimantha (API-I-Vol. 3).
Classical references
Synonyms
air wer: wearedtauff aftertaste seat enh areet arora
(A. TAS a-23)
Properties, Actions & Indications
aftara: gargqghiten: amaded | Wag qengatermegant wetshre:
(aa. Wseafe at 24)
ceaaltt meet ferent cates Premrngheret | vite verofrreraferarartsr feared
(a.fA. gee aT 110)
aeahet agent fever qau wepeftrer | cfteifoor axe are Mey UTTgAT: |
sTfererat TUTeTaTSRTaTaT TTT Ul (GFF. sitahey PF 25-28)

----- PAGE 28 -----
20 Dravyaguna Vijnana

aired wa fren: Hare: Neg | Shafer: were stadt seca:
(BLP. etree aT 29)

waht agson a fereasreracaaer | vayctentraransistreareeArt ATT 1
aires da gen atetrenfeg | certain ater erate
(aia. samixrt 23-25)
STATE Ba Hee: Vil WAN | ata eT Woah Se: TAT: AIST:
(B.A. etttenfe af 30)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Agnimanthaa is
a. Patra b. Kanda c. Mulatwak = d. Phala
Ans: c. Mula twak
2. Pradhana Rasa of Agnimantha

a. Madhura b. Katu c. Kashaya d. Amla
Ans: b. Katu
3. Pradhana Karma of Agnimantha
a. Brahmana __b. Bhedana c. Balya d. Shothaghna

Ans: d. Shothaghna

4. Agnimantha Kashaya is effective in
a. Vasameha _b. Haridrameha c. Shukrameha_ d. Sikatameha
Ans: a. Vasameha

5. Premnine an alkaloid is present in
a. Ahiphena _b.. Arka c. Agnimantha d. Bhallataka
Ans: c. Agnimantha

6. Vaijayantika is a synonym of
a. Amalaki b. Agnimantha c. Arka d. Ashwagandha
Ans: b. Agnimantha

7. Premna integrifolia is the botanical name of
a. Haridra b. Panasa c. Ashoka d. Brahat Agnimantha
Ans: d. Brahat Agnimantha

8. Substitute for Agnimantha
a, Premna mucronata b. Plumbago zeylanica
c. Withania somnifera d. Aegle marmelos
Ans: a. Premna mucronata

----- PAGE 29 -----
*~ “Chapter

Ahiphena

Parts used — Kshira (Latex) & Beeja (Seed)

Rasadi Panchaka

ee ee | | |

Karma (Actions)

Niryasa (Latex) : Grahi, Madaka, Ruchikara, Agnivardhaka, Stambhaka,
Vedanasthapaka, Nidrajanaka.

Phalatwak (Fruit bark) : Grahi, Mohakara, Ruchya, Agnivardhaka
Bija (Seed) : Balya, Vrashya

Pharmacological Actions

Analgesic, Hypnotic, Sedative, Narcotic, Respiratory depressant, and Depresses
cough reflex, Emetic (but in large doses suppresses vomiting centre).

Dosha karma (Action on Dosha) : Niryasa is Kaphahara because of its Ushna
virya. Bija is Pittahara because of its Shita virya.

Rogaghnata (Indications)
Niryasa (Latex): Shula (Pain), Atisara (Diarrhoea) and Agnimandya (Loss of appe-
tite)
Bija (Seed): Daurbalya (General debility), Klaibya (Impotency)
Amayika payoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Daruna (Dandruff)
Sar Grae Sst werarg qreut HAT (MA. 3/11/19)

Paste prepared from Ahiphena (Papaver somniferum) seeds and milk if applied over
scalp will destroy dandruff.

----- PAGE 30 -----
22 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Atisara (Diarrhoea)

walter wee wae: fenced: aa stat Mak YR THER TTT

(4.4. 6/3)

Ahiphena (Papaver somniferum) mixed with bark of Kupilu (Strychnos nuxvomica)
and honey if given checks all kinds of Atisara (Diarrhoea).

Matra (Dose)
Aphim (Latex) - 30to 125 mg
Churna (Powder) - 1to2gm
Bija (Seed) - 2to5fgm
Phytoconstituents

Alkaloids of Opium are divided into two groups Viz., Phenantherene group and
Benzyl isoquindine group.

Phenanthrene séries - Benzyl isoquinoline group

Morphine 521%
Codeine 03.4%
Thebaine 03%

Opium also contains Meconin or pianin, organic acids like Neopine, Porphyroxine
and Meconidine.

Research Corner

1. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separations using a
monolithic column with acidic potassium permanganate and tris (2,2'-
bipyridyl)ruthenium (II) chemiluminescence detection in a rapid and highly
sensitive method to monitor the process of extracting opiate alkaloids from
Papaver somniferum. Due to the high flow rates allowed with the monolithic
column and the inherent selectivity of the chemiluminescence reactions, the
four predominant alkaloids-morphine, codeine, oripavine and thebaine-were
determined in less than 2 min. (Costin JW, Lewis SW, Purcell SD, Waddell
LR, Francis PS, Barnett NW. Rapid determination of Papaver somniferum
alkaloids in process streams using monolithic column high Acta. 2007 Jul
30;597(1):19-23. Epub 2007 Jun 27).

2. Solid-phase microextraction (SPME) with DVB/Carboxen/PDMS Stable-Flex
fiber was applied to the study of volatile compounds of several seed oil samples
from Papaver somniferum L. (Papaveraceae). 1-Pentanol (3.3-4-9%), 1-

----- PAGE 31 -----
Ahiphena 23

hexanal (10.9-30.9%), 1-hexanol (5.3-337%), 2-pentylfuran (7.2-10.0%), and
caproic acid (2.9-11.5%) could be identified as the main volatile compounds in
all examined poppy seed oil samples. (Krist S, Stuebiger G, Unterweger H,
Bandion F, Buchbauer G. Analysis of volatile compounds and triglycerides of
seed oils extracted from different poppy varieties (Papaver somniferum L.). J
Agric Food Chem. 2005 Oct 19;53(21):83 10-6).

3. Papaver somniferum allergy is mediated by an IgE mediated mechanism and
not by a pharmacological or toxic effect of the alkaloids or polyphenols.
(Moneo I, Alday E, Ramos C, Curiel G. Occupational asthma caused by
Papaver somniferum. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 1993 Jul-Aug; 21
(4):145-8).

4. Oripavine was isolated from the dried capsules of a variety of Papaver
somniferum cultivated in Tasmania. (Nielsen B, Roe J, Brochmann-Hanseen E.
Oripavine-a new opium alkaloid. Planta Med. 1983. Aug; 48(8):205-6).

5. The stenciling of alkaloid biosynthetic genes using VIGS confirms the
physiological function of enzymes previously characterized in vitro, provides
insight into the biochemical regulation of morphine biosynthesis, and
demonstrates the immense potential for metabolic engineering in opium poppy.
(Wijekoon CP, Facchini Pj. Systematic knockdown of morphine pathway
enzymes in opium poppy using virus-induced gene silencing. Plant J. 2012.
Mar; 69(6):1052-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-313X.2011.04855.x.Epub 2011 Dec

28.)
Important formulations
SI-No. Formulations Indications

Agnikumara Rasa

a

Botanical Name
Papaver somniferum Linn.
Papaver - Member of Papaveraceae family.
Somniferum - Produce sleep.

----- PAGE 32 -----
24 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Family
Papaveraceae
Classification
Bhavaprakasha Nighantu - Haritakyadi Varga 236-238
are ther Mette Aewrporcang, | arereTeT ate AT Cat Meta TAMA
(FA.)

Ahiphena (Papaver somniferum) latex is very strong like venom of Cobra.

Synonyms
Kshira (Latex)

o hth > wHftrat ha a SITUA

Latex is as strong as venom of Snake.

e Atha — Kshira (Latex) is as strong as Snake venom.

e 3th — A source for opium.

« TGamcieftt > Injury done to fruit yeilds latex.
Bija (seed)

¢ Ger att > Seeds are very small

e Wan age — Small seeds
Regie Name:
leas
Habitat

In India it is cultivated in Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Bihar.

Morphology
Habit. - An annual herb with latex.
Reet - Tap root, branched.
Stem- Erect, herbaceous, green, cylindrical, hairy with latex

----- PAGE 33 -----
Ahiphena 25

Leaf - Simple, alternate, sessile, sheathing base,
exstipulate, lobed, unicostate, reticulately, veined.

Inflorescence - Solitary, terminal Cymose

Flower - Pedicellate, actinomorphic, bisexual,
complete, hypogynous, large, showy, red or white
coloured.

Fruit - Small, white or black
Varieties

I. According to the Colour of flowers [Ra.Ni.

& Ni. Ratnakara)

1. Shweta — White flower
2. Pita — Yellow flower Papaver somniferum Linn.
3. Krishna — Black flower
4. Chitra — Multi coloured
IL Acc to Action
1. Jarana — Digests food
2. Marana — Fatal
3. Dharana — Maitains health
4. Sarana — Evacuates wastes

Ii. Different Species
1. Papaver glabrum Bios — Cultivated in Turkey, Egypt and Iran.

2 Papaver album DC — Cultivated in India & Yugoslavia
3. Papaver nigrum DC — Cultivated in Southern Europe
4. Papaver setigerum DC — Wild in Southern Europe
Different preparations
1. Raw opium (the inspissated juice): It is the dried latex obtained by the

incision from the unripe fruit capsules of Papaver somniferum, dried or partly
dried or partly dried by heat or spontaneous evaporation and worked into some
what irregularly shaped masses or moulded into masses of more uniform size
and shape.

2. Poppy seeds: Seeds are collected from the poppy capsules. The seeds are very
small, about 1 to 1.5 mm in diameter.

----- PAGE 34 -----
26 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Poppy straw: Dricd opium poppies are referred as ‘‘Poppy straw’’
Adverse effects and remedial measures
Signs and symptoms of acute poisoning
There are three stages:
1. Stage of Excitement: Sense of well being
(i) Freedom from anxiety
(ii) Restlessness
(iii) Hallucination
(iv) Flushing of face
(v) Increased action of heart
(vi) In children it may present with convulsions
2. Stage of Stupor: Depressive action starts
(i) Headache
(ii) Heaviness of the body
(iii) Fatigue
(iv) Giddiness
(v) Drowsiness and intense desire to sleep
(vi) Pupils contracted and pinpointed.
(vii) Face and lips slightly cyanosed
(viii) Pulse and respiration is normal
3. Stage of Coma:
(i) No response to talking and shaking.
(ii) Later, no response to deep pain.
(iii) Relaxed muscles, reflexes are lost.
(iv) All secretions except that of skin are depressed.
(v) Pupils contracted and insensitive to light.
(vi) Feeble pulse, slow.
(vii) Low blood pressure
Treatment
1. Gastric lavage with Potassium Permanganate (KMn04)
2. Endotracheal clearance

----- PAGE 35 -----
Ahiphena 27

3. Hot bags and blankets should be used to maintain the body heat.

4, Administering the antidote - Nalorphene hydro bromide in the dose of 5 mg IV
should be given.

Fatal dose
Crude opium - lto2g
Tinctureopium - 3to4ml
Morphine - 60 tol80 mg (Injectable)
Codiene200 - 400mg
Heroin - 20to30mg
Fatal period
45 minutes to 12 hrs.
Ahiphena is contraindicated in
Bala (Young)
Vraddha (Aged)

Madhumeha (Diabetic)
Visuchika (Patients suffering from Visuchika with cold limbs)
Shlaishmika kasa (Cough because of Kapha dosha).
Vrakka shotha (Inflammation of Kidney).
Purification: [Rasa Tarangini-24/242]
Ahiphena (Papaver somniferum) is subjected to trituration with Ardraka swarasa
for 21 times.
Classical References
Synonyms
Valkala - frate: Gateret: Grate TTA: |
Ksira - Searnciaht arpeanateray |
Bija - Fae Gein a Greate arte 1 ay, etree at-236
Gunakarma
mie fark Has adhd HHA, | MGA wile BaaHaststtay, |
alee vireo wes severed araftrrery | AAT Gace acne Ura AT It
aastienttt acaritr genftr qyettr a seat aa ater srratet VAIN UI
(Aa. Sitaaieart 236-240)
gent aeasy attra: VAM aA: | arma Hat att ret Agra:

----- PAGE 36 -----
to

Dravyaguna Vijnana

SRS ihe oy yeeros aah (PLT aH 106-108)
Pvt anit ent apeereor | Pret g ORE ATTY IT ce

Cia sPraret eet gre: wes ui (BLA. magene a 198-199)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Ahiphena

a. Root b. Latex & Seed cc. Stem d. Leaf
Ans: b. Latex & Seed
2. Madaka Karma is attributed to of Ahiphena

a. Rasa b. Guna c. Vipaka d. Prabhava
Ans: d. Prabhaya

3. Ahiphena Bija is
a. Balya b. Shulahara c. Agnidipaka d. Pranahara
Ans: a. Balya

4. Morphine an alkaloid derived from
a. Vatsanabha b. Ahiphena c. Jayapala d. Arka
Ans: b. Ahiphena

5. Morphine is best
a. Antihypertensive b. Antidiabetic c. Analgesic d. Antiepileptic
Ans: c. Analgesic

6. Botanical name of Ahiphena
a. Argemona Mexicana b. Withania somnifera
c. Uraria picta d. Papaver somnifera
Ans: d. Papaver somnifera

7. English name for Ahiphena
a. Cannabis b. Castor c. Opium d. Henbane
Ans: c. Opium

8. Which variety of Ahiphena maintains health
a. Jarana b. Marana c. Dharana d. Sarana
Ans: c. Dharana

9. Ardraka swarasa is used to purify
a. Shala b. Ahiphena c. Lashuna d. Bhallataka
Ans: b. Ahiphena

26 2K ek

----- PAGE 37 -----
Ajamoda = | 0K)
pearre wha \ervoud

Useful part - Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Dipana, Ruchikara, Shulahara, Hridya, Vrishya, Balya, Krimighna, Chardighna,
Hikkanigrahana, Bastirujahara.
Pharmacological (Actions)

Carminative, Stimulant, Expectorant, Emmenagogue, Cardiotonic.
Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha Vata hara Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Kapha hara due to its Ushna
virya, Katu vipaka & Katu Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Indications)

Agnimandya, Aruchi, Shula, Chardi, Hridroga, Krimi, Hikka and Bastiruja.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Sashula Atisara (Diarrhoea with pain)

wat gas ay a fraeoenfge: 1 franmeneaguyercaitiag

(]3. 40/79)

In Sashula Atisara (Diarrhoea with pain) the milk mixed with ghee, honey, sugar,
powder of Ajamoda (Carum roxburghianum), Katvanga (Ailanthes excelsa) and Madhuka
(Glycyrrhiza glabra) is administered.

2. Vataja vikara (Disorders of Vata) and Swarabheda (Hoarseness of voice)

aareRrenreat ar Rragarst warfeteany (YS. 53/11)
Combination of Devadaru (Cedrus deodara), Agnika (Carum roxburghianum) and

honey is very useful in Vata vyadhi (Disorders of Vata) and Swarabheda (Hoarseness of
voice).

----- PAGE 38 -----
30 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) — 1 to 3 g

Chemical constituents
Fruits contain Anthoxanthins, Graveobioside A and B, Lutrolin, Myristic acid, d-
linconene and Bergapten. ‘

Research corner

Study done to evaluate the chemical composition and antimicrobial activity of
Trachyspermum roxburghianum. Study shown presence of thymol, r-terpinene and O-
cymene were the major components of Trachyspermum roxburghianum. Thymol is an
antimicrobial agent. Mahaboubi M & Kazempour N. Chemical composition and antimi-
crobial activity of Trachyspermum roxburghianum. Iran J. Microbiol 2011 Dec; 3(4):194-
200.
Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name Indications

Ajamodadi kwatha Chaturthika jwara

Ajamodadi churna Atisara, Shula
Hingwashtaka churna Agnimandya, Vatavyadhi

Latin Name
Carum roxburghianum Benth. or Apium graveolens Linn.

Carum - roots and seeds are edible, roxburghianum in memory of Dr. William
roxburgh a botanist.

Family — Apiaceae
Kula — Shatapushpa kula

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Dipaniya varga, Shulaprashamana varga
Pippalyadi Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. Haritakyidi varga 77-79

Basonym of Drug

aret Aeahet, AA MVTMATOTaeL; BTSTET Aled TASTE Stet AT

Fruit of Ajamoda (Carum roxburghianum Benth) has got strong odour which may
cause intoxication to goat if consumed. Fruit has got similar aroma like that of goat.

----- PAGE 39 -----
Ajamoda 31

Synonyms
Properties and Actions
1. Gvar-wivad sft i aerPerrarcrarment |
Fruit of Ajamoda has got similar odour to donkey.
2. cere: -arftretot |
Ajamoda increases appetite.
3, SoPeret-sa: West Stet |
Ajamoda has got very strong Aroma.
Vernacular Names

Malayalam Aayamodakam
2
Habitat

Ajamoda grows all over India but commonly cultivated in Maharashtra state.

Morphology

Habit - An annual herb. Grows up to 1 mtr in
height

Leaves - Lower leaves are broad; where as upper
leaves are linear-lanceolate.

Inflorescence - Umbel inflorescence.

Flowers - White or greenish white and very small.

Fruit - Very small, Cremocarp 2 mm long.
Grahya- agrahya (Genuine characteristics):

Fruits of Ajamoda are ovoid or globular shaped,
yellow or grayish yellow in colour and up to 2 mm long.
The surface is studded with blunt simple hair. Fruit con-
sists of two mericarps, each having five ridges and fif-
teen vittae. Has got characteristic odour.

w
F/EIE
5 if]
=} +) oe
= 2.
o. ~
boo]

z
S
i

Carum roxburghianum Benth

----- PAGE 40 -----
32 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references

Synonyms

SHAT VATA ST TAY hee | TAT HATH re HCA TATA
(ata. eterna aT-7 7 )
Properties and Actions
aatet eee dost aaa | sot rarest eer Gear aetentt wT:
Fare Hlteoftttaan aftrast eeu (ar. eirenfe at-7 8-79)
sTatler a yerett fara acne | eaeereareherdha He are i
(a.Fr. mrargeaie 7-9 6 )
aTaalar efter Hearent ferarfedt | dtast avert war arate aTaretee |
aftr sagfteat wer gear Rare | saRrTekrateererakteaHay
(fr. ates af-1 201-1203)
AAAS ESM SAT HHA SharHd, | AAMT HARTATATTA IT UI
(aA. freeanfe aT-1 10)
ANT Aa Aa: Tartare Wh: | TAaTafereareg ae: WATS AT
(BA. eergeate af-1 3 )
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Ajamoda
a. Mula b. Phala c. Bija d. Patra
Ans: b. Phala
. Pradhana Karma of Ajamoda
a. Bhedana b. Rchana c. Dipana d. Vrashya
Ans: c. Dipana
. Apium graveolens is the botanical name of
a. Jiraka b. Krishna Jiraka c. Dhanyaka d. Ajamoda
Ans: d. Ajamoda
4. Kharashwa is the synonym of
a. Ashwagandhab. Sarpagandha c. Ajamoda d. Jiraka
Ans: c. Ajamoda
. Ajamoda is
a. Tree b. Creeper c. Shrub d. Herb
Ans: d. Herb

ay

NO

Ww

Nn

dR RR

----- PAGE 41 -----
Chapter *

Amalaki

Parts used ~ Phala (Fruit)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Rasayana, Pramehaghna, Jwaraghna, Vrashya, Dahahara, Chardighna,
Shophaghna, Ruchya, Medohara, Bhagna Sandhanakara, Keshya, Chakshushya,
Kushthaghna.

Agrya Karma antegng
AMAT SALAAM | (F.-Y. 25/40)

Aamalaki (Emblica officinalis Gaerten.) is best Vayasthaapana (Rejuvenative).

Pharmacological actions

Immunomodulator, Antioxidant, Antiulcerogenic, Anticarcinogenic,
Antihypercholesterolaemic, Pancreatoprotective, Antimicrobial.

Doshakarma : Tridoshahara
— Vataharahecause of Amla Rasa
— Pittaharabecause of Shita virya and Madhura vipaka
— _Kaphara-because of Ruksha guna and Kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

As a Rasayana, Prameha, Jwara, Raktapitta, Panduroga, Kamala, Shukra
dourbalya, Daha, Chardi, Bhagna, Shopha, Kesha vikara.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Prameha (Diabetes)

él ehtat fraxearmrcratHerany | (=F. 6/26)

----- PAGE 42 -----
34 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fresh Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) juice mixed with Haridra (Curcuma longa)
taken every day will cheek the Prameha (Diabetes).

2. Jwara (Fever)

TOAST at Ft WE TTT | (a. 3/230)

Juice extracted from Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) fruit fried with ghee is very use-
ful in Jwara.

3. Pandu (Anaemia)

eTeitaet at AEATSateraMe, | (GS. 44/27)

Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) churna (powder) mixed with honey is effective in
Pandu roga (Anaemia).

4, Kamala (Jaundice)

ITSM AT Baleaetent Ta: 1 (aA. 16/114)

Juice of Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) and grapes may be used in Kamala (Jaun-
dice).

5, Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder)

en aaa aT |

fated waaite weperaeyerehery | Ta: Werte ot Terie festa:

(a.fa. 4/57-58)

Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) churna mixed with more quantity of Madhu (Honey)
and Sharkara (Sugar) given as a Virechaka (Purgative) is very useful in Raktapitta.

6, Hikka (Hiccough)

frroreftreyereat at tat exeftenftreeratt: 0 (a.F. 17/135)

Juice of Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) and Kapitha (Feronia elphantum) mixed with
Pippali (Piper longum) churna and Madhu (Honey) controls Hikka (Hiccough).

7, Kasa (Cough)

got firaamcrnen arte efitor vat wat feast | (3.2.fa. 3/78)

Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) churna boiled with milk and taken with ghee is very
useful in Kasa (Cough).

8, Vatarakta (Gouti Arthritis)

aimee ERAT HATS AY AAT aaa | (GAB. 5/10)

Kashaya (Decoction) of Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) and Haridra (Curcuma longa)
are very useful in Vatarakta.

----- PAGE 43 -----
Amalaki 35

Matra (Dose)
Phalachurna — 3tol0g
Kashaya — 30to 100 ml
Swarasa — 10to20ml

Important phytoconstituents

Fruit -Ellagic acid, Amlaic acid, Phyllantine, Phyllantidine, Zeatin, Zeatin nucle-
otide, Zeatin riboside, Benzenoid, Chebulic acid, Chebulinic acid, Chebulagic acid, Gal-
lic acid, Ethyl galate, {-glucogatin, Digallic acid, Emblicol, Phyllemblic acid, Ascorbic
acid, Triterpene, Lupiol, Phyllemblin, Flavonoid, Kaempheral, Rutin, g-Sitosterol, Tan-
nin (28%), Carbohydrates, Protein, Fat, Calcium.

Bark — Tannin (10-20%)
Leaves — Tannin — 22%
Rich source of Vit. C-— 600 mg/100 g.

Research Corner

1. Adil MD, Kaiser P, Satti NK, Zargar AM, Vishwakarma RA, Tasdug SA,
Effect of Emblica officinalis (fruit) against UVB-induced photo-aging in
human skin fibroblasts. J Ethnopharmacol. 2010 Oct 28; 132 (1) : 109--14.
Equp 2010 Aug 3. Fruit of Emblica officinalis effectively inhibits UVB-
induced photo-aging in human skin fibroblast via its strong ROS scavenging
ability.

2. Gopa B, Bhatt J, Hemavathi KG, A comparative clinical study of
hypolipidemic efficacy of Amla (Emblica officinalis) with 3-hydroxy-
3methylgutaryl-coenzyme-A reductase inhibitor simvastatin. Indian J
Pharmacol. 2012 Mar; 44(2):238-42. Amla produced significant hypolipidemic
effect along with a reduction in blood pressure. Addition of Amla to the
currently available hypolipidemic therapy would offer significant protection
against atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease, with reduction in the dose
and adverse effects of the hypolipidemic agents.

3. Shivananjappa MM, Joshi MK, influence of Emblica officinalis aqueous
extract on growth and antioxidant defence system of human hepatoma cell line
(Hep G2]. Pharm Biol. 2012 Apr; 50(4):497-505. Epub 2011 Dec 1.

4. Dhingra D, Joshi P, Gupta A, Chhillar R, Possible Involvement of
Monoaminergic Neurotransmission in Antidepressant-like activity of Emblica
officinalis Fruits in Mice. CNS Neurosci Their. 2012 May; 18(5):419-25.

----- PAGE 44 -----
36 Dravyaguna Vijnana

doi:10.1111/).1755-5949.2011.00256.x. Epub 2011 Jun7. Thus, aqueous
extract of E. officinalis showed antidepressant-like activity probably by
inhibiting MAO-A and GABA; and also due to its antioxidant activity.

5. Patel SS, Goyal RK, Prevention of diabetes-induced myocardial dysfunction in
rats using the juice of the Emblica officinalis fruit. Exp Clin Cardiol. 2011 Fall;
16 (3):87-91.

6. Kumar A, Tantry BA, Rahiman S, Gupta U, Comparative study of
antimicrobial activity and phytochemical analysis of methanolic and aqueous
extracts of the fruit of Emblica officinalis against pathogenic bacteria J Tradit
Chin Med. 2011. Sep;31(3):246-50. Aqueous infusion extract of amla
exhibited potent antimicrobial activity against E. cloacae followed by E. coli.
Preliminary phytochemical analysis of E. officinalis aqueous extracts (infusions
and decoctions) only showed presence of tannins, saponins, flavonoids,
terpenoids and phenols. MIC of aqueous extract of E. officinalis was most
active against K. pneumoniae. Whereas minimum inhibitory concentration
(MIC) of methanol extract of E. officinalis shows maximum activity against E.
coli. Emblica officinalis definitely possesses potent antimicrobial.

Important formulations
SENo.
i

Formulations. Indications

Bhrangamalakadi taila Keshavikara, Netra roga
Triphala kwatha
Triphala ghrata

Jwara, Kasa

Timira, Netraroga
Pandu, Kamala, Hradroga

oo) Sui

Dhatryarishta

Botanical Names
Emblica officinalis Gareth
Phyllanthus emblica, Linn
Emblica — from Sanskrit — Amlika (Sour)
officinalis — available in the market.

Family : Phyllanthaceae (See appendix-I for key features).

----- PAGE 45 -----
Amalaki 37

Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka

Kushthaghna varga, Kasahara varga,
Virechanopaga varga, Jwarahara varga,
Vayasthapana varga.

Parushakadi gana, Amalakyadi gana, Triphala
Bhavaprakasha Nighantu | Haritakyadi varga 38-41
Basonym of Drug
STATS emTearfer TAT HET EMT area ST Wa STA ST VAI, SAAT
MAAAN EM Aah earaval- aah Ie Pea SA AMMA TA ATTA TAT TTEAT

Amalaka (Emblica officinalis), which protects the body by subsiding the aggravated
doshas or the fruit is mainly sour to taste.

Synonyms
Habitat
1. ga Vet Var |

Amalaka (Emblica officinalis) commonly cultivated in Tamilnadu and Andhra
Pradesh.

Morphology
2. TAHT — Ft HTM: |
Amalaka (Emblica officinalis) fruit is globose.
3. le — HicraRart weet |
Amalaka (Emblica officinalis) fruit weighs 6 g.
4. freer — frst dread wet area sem:, fret aged emmen str Was
Fruiting season in Pushya masa (Nov-Dec.) or the fruits are auspicious.
5. ae — a Ae free |
Amalaka (Emblica officinalis) purifies the body.
6. TIAHT BAA TA HTT:
Fruit is rejuvenating as Amrita (Elixir).

7. sya — ayeag Yornkuft, areca, FT thera WaT stenret eT: Baas |

----- PAGE 46 -----
“uUINTOO [BNW J1OYs B UO ¢ SOT}
-uY “9sINgo ‘“Su0]g0 ‘9g sjedas ‘sjaotpad sapua|s WOYs UO ‘sNOJOWINN —SAIMO]y BJeYA]
“sjoTouRIg SULWaq Jeo] ay) UO so[tosey Are][IXe Ur ‘MOT[OA YSTUISID — amo],
‘gnoe Ayoury ‘ayeAo sopndys
‘sonra ajeuutd Jo souvseodde oy Suravy ‘osnygo ‘reour] A[Mouzeu ‘snoiqes ‘users 14ST]
‘sjaTqouRIG ot] BuoTe 39s ATASOjO ‘oprm WU €-¢'Z ‘SUT WO €T-| ‘o[Issasqng —Seava']
“snonploep UajJo ‘BUOT Wd QZ-OT ‘uoosaqnd AjouTy JO snoigeys sjoTyouelg
“sooueig Surpeaids pue YUNT psyoord YIM 9aI) pozis SPP Jo [Tus snonprsap VY
ASojoqdr0y] [EUIIIXA
“ATPIEM 2] Qe [LEAR JO payBATI[NO STII BIPUT INO YSNoIy |, 2 Feyquyy

TpurH
Atioq aS003 ueIpuy ysysuq

SOME TeMICUII A
“pad DILYS sossassod yn (sypuroyfo vIIquiq) DyDJDULy
| ith Pippa — htnpya*€ 1
‘Telorjouag skemye (s1puioyfo vo1.quiq) byDjDUy
| yiteiniiedts — hela} *Z 1
“nyoyq vaynys saoidun (syoursiffo voyquiq) byvjDUY
| bbusit — Ira * 1 1
‘AWAIBUOT So}OWOId (syoUIIIffo DIN Quiq) DYDjDIUy
| ‘pikabire 1b2) phite Rhb - lbihb *O |
‘Qa
yseoig) p{unjg se sontadosd reyruns sey pur (ansst) ney soyoword saint yin]
| ‘Webspinth [B2bh biajbeb? ‘pupinnibinilts nARe bills — Yells 6
‘[NJosn Ar9A AT[VULOIPOUl st Muy Jo son oy,
| bdo|bdoth ‘Dah {plln — hwdothipin *g

(UXT) Olay se Suneuoanfos (sypujayfo vay qui) DyV]OULY

vueuli, vundeAavig 8¢

----- PAGE 47 -----
Amalaki 39

Female flowers — Few, subsessile, ovary 3-celled.

Fruit — 1-1.5 cm diameter, fleshy, globose, with 6 ob-
scure vertical furrows, pale yellow of three 2-seeded crusta-
ceous cocci.

Seed — 6, 3-gonous.
Varieties
Raja Nighantu - Amalaka
Kshudamalaka
1. Vanya — Small & hard |
2. Gramya — Big, Soft & Fleshy Emblica afficinalis
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Charavteristics) Gach

Dried fruit is globular, subhexagonal, upto 1.5 cm in diameter, with a wrinkled sur-
face of yellowish brown or greyish black colour. The fruit breaks easily, exposing a
section of dried pulp and nut which contains triangular seeds of yellowish brown colour.

Fresh fruit is globular, fleshy, obscurely six lobed and measures 2 to 3 cm in diam-
eter. The surface is smooth and pale or yellowish green in colour. The fruits contain a
juicy pulp enclosing an obtusely obovate, Triangular, 3 celled nut, containing two seeds
ineach cell.

Classical references
Synonyms
SITET weed Prey | aeitact shasta aargdHet FIAT |
Brarmernareandt echt freer menswean ul (as. eiteRMe a3 8)
Properties
Bicat wt eitect faq faster: 1 weftramdeet We get TARA tl
Bhat are Tanerearheaed Aree Seat: HH SAH Aa MATAR TST, |
ae ter eee ote wate are et wee Safer aeararatt Fafesre,
(aa.etiaeate FI-3 9-41)
ware Hefernnet tag Ue ea | at Praleeg Get watet ST TATA Il
Sheard dercreanfead aeyesicat: | atheerenarearatcnet emeakararatste,
(afr. qgeate wt)
amet warns nat Prt wy lt ceftaaite vitwet a TARA

----- PAGE 48 -----
40 Dravyaguna Vijnana
sranfiaan-emreeyrayangat «=| ae: «et THN
(af. smear 158-159)
age at watdlemen yet ar | ween vet frorarnwftre |
TASH YAR: TaTgeraeel terete | Bet aed TATA Het waAs HANTS AT
aE wdaleet Termite | (a. sitefrerf. 238-240)
Biaat wi attect fg favtea: 1 ctf vftaater firretewet we |

areata tenftrs: was aT araarad | viteht uftager wet aa: werent uu
(fi. ff. ateenfeert 9-10)

Variety
Kshudramalaka or Kashtha Dhatri
Waele With wseltact aa | aa Wath ates A
(aft. street 60-161)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Pradhana Rasa of Amalaki
a. Madhura b. Amla c. Katu d. Tikta
Ans: b. Amla
Number of Rasa in Amalaki
a.3 b. 1 c. 5 d. 2
Ans: ¢. 5
. Nishamalaki is best in
a. Prameha b. Agnimandya c. Parinama shula d. Jwara
Ans: a. Prameha
4. Amalaki is rich with
a. VitB b. Vit D c. Vit K d. Vit C
Ans: d. Vit C
5. Agrya Karma of Amalaki
a. Sanjnasthapana b. Prajasthapana c. Vedanasthapana d. Vayasthapana

Ans: d. Vayasthapana

—y

ad

Ww

----- PAGE 49 -----
Amalaki 41

6. Indian Goose berry is the common name for

a. Haritaki b. Amalaki c. Vibhitaki d. Brahati
Ans: b. Amalaki
7. Botanical name of Amalaki
a. Emblica officinalis b. Zingiber officinalis
c. Phyllanthus urinaria d. Terminalia chebula

Ans: a. Emblica officinalis

ah ok a a

----- PAGE 50 -----
Apamarga

ii

Useful Part — Panchanga (Whole plant)
Rasadi Panchaka

[Vivaka
Vina |

Karma ( Actions)
Agnidipaka, Saraka, Pachaka, Vamaka, Chedana.
Agrya Karma

WeTRTET PATA | (FY, 25/40)

Pratyakpushpa (Achyranthes aspera Linn.) is best for Shirovirechana Karma.

Phala
Madhura
Ruksha

Madhura

[Usina Sit

Panchanga

Pharmacological actions
Anti-hypertensive, Antidiabetic, Abortifaecient, Diuretic, Antileprotic, Purgative,
Spasmolytic, Hypoglycaemic and Antifungal.
Action on Dosha
Panchanga (Whole plant) — Kaphavatahara - because of its Ushna virya.
Phala (Fruit) — Vatakara— because of the Shita Virya.
Rogaghnata [Therapeutic indications]

Agnimandya Adhmana Chardi Hradruja Arsha — Kanduu
Udarashula Udara Apachi Dadru

Apamarga bija is indicated in Bhasmaka roga.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Arshas (Piles)

sroTaTeH aT Ug eee MAE: (A 6/13)

Repeated administration of Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) mula (root) grinded
with Kshaudra (Honey) and given with Tandulodaka (Tice-water) is very useful in Arshas.

----- PAGE 51 -----
Apamarga 43

2. Raktarshas (Bleeding piles)
staant atarat aenerrgeranttor | chat center aret apee ArT Aya:
(WA. 2/5/19)
In bleeding piles, seeds of Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) are taken with rice-
water.
3. Visuchika (Diarrhoea)

wertraaranhyet ware fergferaany | (41... 6/110)

Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) mula (root) Kalka taken with water is efficacious
in Visuchika.
4. Nadivrana (Sinus)

meant way Va Hate way frarearcery | (ZA. 17/25)

Oil prepared out of Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) phala is applied along with
Cow’s urine in Nadivrana.

5. Atyagni (Bhasmaka)

get arearart ates: aT | (FZ. 2/33)

In excessive hunger, gruel prepared out of Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) bija
(seeds), milk and Godha rasa (Inguana meat Juice) is effective.

6. Shastrakshata (Wound)

aan dita wateas THA aT | Melaaty Tee g Wart URafaste

(A.%. 44/52)

Paste of Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) leaves is applied over accidental wound
to check bleeding.

Matra (Dose)
Kshara -— 0.5 to2g
Swarasa - 10to20ml
Mulachurna — 3to6g
Bijachurna —- 3g
Important phytoconstituents

Whole plant— Achyranthine (Alkaloid)
Root—Ecdysone, Ecdysterone, Oleanolic acid
Seeds— Saponin A, B, C, D, Hentriacontane

----- PAGE 52 -----
44

- Aqueous extract of Achyranthes aspera

= Dravyaguna Vijnana

Research Corner
J.

5 aspera showed excellent wound.
Begum SA, Pathak DC, Sarma
ling efficacy and antioxidant
s. Pharm Biol. 2012. Apr

The methanol leaf extract of Achyanthe
healing activities. (Barua CC., Talukdar A,
DK, Borah RS, Gupta A. In vivo wound-hea
activity of Achyranthes aspera in experimental burn

6. [Epub ahead of rint]).
Ark (500 and 1000 mg/kg body wt.) had

nd reduced renal injury. (Aggarwal A,
e and curative effects of
lly induced nephrolithiasis,

an ability to maintain renal functioning a! :
Singla Sk, Gandhi M, Tandon C. Preventiv
Achyranthes aspera Linn. extract in experimenta
Indian J. Exp. Biol. 2012 Mar; 50 (3):201-8).

- Anxiolytic activity of methanol extract of Achyaranthes aspera Linn

(Amaranthaceae) is confirmed & attributed to its phyto-constituents viz.
Alkaloid, steroid and triterpenses. (Barua CC, Talukdar A, Begum SA, Borah
P, Lahkar M. Anxiolytic activity of methanol leaf extract of Achyranthes
aspera Linn in mice using experimental models of anxiety. Indian J.
Pharmacol. 2012 Jan; 44(1):63-7).

. 58-kDa protein isolated from Achyranthes aspera root possesses spermatotoxic

effects comparable to gossypol. (Anuja MN, Nithya RN, Rajamanickam C,
Madambath I. Spermatotoxicity of a protein isolated from the root of
Achyranthes aspera : a comparative study with gossypol. Contraception. 2010
Oct; 82(4):385-90. Epub 2010 Jun 17).

. The acetone, chloroform, ethyl acetate, hexane and methanol leaf extracts of

Achyranthes aspera studied for larval mortality and the highest larval mortality
was found in the ethyl acetate extract of A. aspera. (Bagavan A, Rahuman AA,
Kamaraj C, Geetha K. Larvicidal activity of saponin from Achyranthes aspera
against Aedes aegypti and Culex quinquefasciatus (Diptera : Culicidae).
Parasitol Res. 2008 Jun; 103(1):223-9).

. The phytochemical tests revealed the presence of sterols, flavanoids, tannins

and carbohydrates. (Krishnaveni A, Thaakur SR. Pharmacognostical and
preliminary phytochemical studies of Achyranthes aspera linn. Anc Sci Life.
2006 Jul; 26(1-2):1-5).

. The ethanol extract of the root of Achyranthes aspera was screened for

antifertility activity in proven fertile female albino rats at 200 mg/kg body
weight and given orally on days 1-7 of pregnancy. The ethanol extract
exhibited 83.3% antiimplantation activity when given orally at 200 mg/kg body

----- PAGE 53 -----
Apamarga 45

weight. (Vasudeva N, Sharma SK. Post-coital antifertility activity of
Achyranthes aspera Linn. Root. J Ethnopharmacol, 2006 Sep. 19;107(2):179-
81. Epub 2006 Mar 22).

Important formulations

SIL.No. Formulation Indications

Apamarga kshra Arshas
Apamarga taila Krimija Shirashula

Apamargadi varti Yonigata Raktasrava, Yonivyapat

Mahapanchagavya Ghrata Apasmara, Unmada, Shotha
Apamarga kalka Asragdhara

Botanical Name

1.
sl

Achyranthes aspera Linn.

Achyranthes — Akanthes — Thorn.

aspera — Refering to the spinuouns bracts of inflorescence.
Family— Amarantheaceae (See Appendix-II for key features).
Kula — Apamarga Kula

Classification of Dravya
Krimighna Varga, Vamanopaga Varga, Shirovirechanopaga Varga

Sushruta

Bh.Pr.Ni. | Guduchyadi Varga 219-223

Basonym of Drug
TaUSTS Set |
The plant which removes all vitiated doshas from the body and purifies the body.
Main synonyms
Morphology
1. Gat — aueferar ureast gost |

Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) inflorescence has spinous bracteols and pointed
perianth, hence prickly to touch.

----- PAGE 54 -----
2. SMEG ~ yrefeayeTUNTE TAT |
Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) has spinuous bracteo
3. gslet — arvefrceret ate Er | |
Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) is difficult to hold as the inflorescence is
spinuous,

4. Rraft - Pret gorse |
Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) plant bears terminal spike inflorescence.
S. WereRyE -yrahes areitqearft eaves |
Plant has deflexed flowers.
Actions and properties
6. Ant: anstafe ary eta |
Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) cleanses all the channels.
7. ARAET:- AR TA MASE, Bite: ATC WIAA |
Whole plant is predominantly alkaline.
8. Wath: ag ga ferrer:, aterar Hitarfer feahet THT |
Apamarga (Achyranthes aspera) is antipoisonous or cures many diseases.
9. MaH:-aagent: sarant aogerat Prafaterenare |

Causes sneezing, the seeds possess Sirovirecaka property.

Js and pointed perianth.

Regional Names

Prickly chaff flower

Habitat
The plant grows abundantly in waste places of tropical and temperate regions.

External Morphology
Habit- Wild perennial herb grows 30-90 cm in height.

Root-— Branched tap root.

----- PAGE 55 -----
Apamarga 47

Stem-— Acrial erect, angular, branched, hairy, green,
herbaceous but woody below, nodes and internodes are
prominent on stem and is violet or pink at nodes.

Leaf- Petiolate, opposite, simple, obovate or
semiorbicular with a suddenly pointed apex; hairy, reticu-
late venation.

Inflorescence— A spike with reflexed flowers ar-
ranged on long peduncle.

Flower-— Bracteate, bracteolate, bracteoles have
spinous tips, complete, actinomorphic, bisexual, hypogy-
nous, pentamerous, tertracyclic, small, green and spinescent.

Achyranthes aspera Linn.

Perianth- Tepals 5, polyphyllous, valvate, persistent,
ovate to oblong, green, membranous and chaffy. Androecium-Stamens 10, 5 fertile sta-
mens alternating with 5 sterile.

Gynoecium- Bicapellary syncarpous and ovary is superior.
Fruit— An indehiscent achene enclosed within persistent perianth and bracteole.t
Seed— Endospermic.

Varieties
Bha. Ni 1. Shweta — Achyranthes aspera
Dha. Ni } 2. Rakta — Achyranthes rubrofusco
Ra. Ni
Kai.Ni-— 1. Apamarga
2. Vashira

3. Ramatha (Toyapamarga)

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Dry herb, consisting of pieces of quadrangular, striated stems, 4 to 7 mm in diameter,
orbicular, obovate, hairy leaves, having an attenuated base and short petiole and pieces of
long slender spikes bearing prickly flowers or fruits which are sharply deflexed against
the rachis. The colour of fleshy dried material is greyish which changes to pale brown
during storage and will have faintly aromatic odour and bitter taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
staranteg Pratt eergreat were: | achet gale: anit fenftredt Gat
(Ma EMeaA-2 19)

----- PAGE 56 -----
48 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Raktapamarga

THEA a sae aantatste a 1 werepualf cyraulf aaferar aAfahtroretT

(Maeas-2 27 )

Properties and actions
Apamarga

srarant: weeftent daa: Rerereh: the: | Ure tergotdanntetsPreance: 1

Prefer ggarenist: avg yettauaett: 0 (aa ygefert-220)

aTaranteg ferenten: Heat HATTA: | ave: HUGSUTEA TrheaMeaied Hel

(aA SAeat-2 54)

atarant: wearnedtemtent ctor: Ae: | Urea aTawet areata shreaTs: |

Pref yetereitenrgagrret: ut (a.F.sirsftrert-1 033-1034)
Raktapamarga

sTaTanifseut arafaerht arneaten: | eat: geersta: caret ureters: 1

( iiaaTgeafeart- 222 )

Apamarga phala (Fruit)

STOTT thet Fag TH Urs TT ae | feet atact Gat Teel Ware Il

(aageeat-2 23)

Apamarga bija (Seed)

ararart ators asert wer arlfor reaver feet Perera Te ETAT

(BLP rrgsaieat-1 7 9 )

Ramatha [Jalapamarga]
WHS: HEH: VHA: 1 (35.F.straheaT-1 038)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Ueseful Part of Apamarga
a. Patra b. Panchanga c. Pushpa d. Kanda
Ans: Panchanga

2. Apamarga Phala has which Vipaka
a. Katu b. Amla c. Madhura d. Kashaya
Ans: c. Madhura

----- PAGE 57 -----
Apamarga

. Agrya Karma of Apamarga

a. Vamana b. Virechana c. Pramehahara_ d. Shirovirechana
Ans: Shiro Virechana

. Apamarga Bija is indicated in

a. Atyagni b. Kushtha c. Madhumeha_— d. Shiroroga
Ans: a. Atyagni

. Achyranthine an alkaloid found in

a. Chitraka b. Apamarga c. Shunthi d. Aragwadha
Ans: b. Apamarga

. Apamarga Kshara is indicated in

a. Visha Roga_ b. Arshas c. Yakratvikara d. Pandu
Ans: b. Arshas

. Botanical name of Apamarga is

a. Cinnamomum zeylanica b. Plumbago rosea
c. Achyranthes aspera d. Piper longum
Ans: c. Achyranthes aspera

. Kharamanjari is a synonym of

a. Chitraka b. Swarnakshiri c. Ativisha d. Apamarga
Ans: d. Apamarga

seo KR Re

49

----- PAGE 58 -----
Chapter

Aragwadha

Useful part — Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi panchaka

Karnikara (Variety)

Aragwadha phala Aragwadha puspa
majja (Pulp) (Flower)

Rasa Madhura- Tikta (Ra. Ni) |Madhura, Kashaya, | Madhura Tikta (Ra.
Tikta Ni)

Guru, Snigdha fa ako 2 Laghu Sara

Vipaka Madhura Madhura MadhuraKatu (Ra.
Ni)
Shita, - Ushna (Dha.Ni) Shita,-Ushna(Ra. Ni)

Karma (Actions)

Phala (Fruit) - Sramsana, Shulahara, Ruchya, Koshtha Shuddhikara, 17rKrimighna,
Pramehaghna, Jwaraghna, Kushtaghna

Patra (Leaf) - Meda vishoshaka, Virechaka.

Pushpa (Flower) - Grahi

Aragwadha phala majja is best Sramsaka.

Particulars

Agrya Karma
agent We fertaarry | (FF, 25/40)
Chaturangula (Cassia fistula Linn.) induce mild purgation.
Pharmacological actions
e Purgative
« Febrifuge
Dosha karma
Vatapitta Shamaka and Pitta kapha samshodhaka.
e Vata Shamaka because of Madhura rasa, Snigdha guna and Madhura vipaka.
e Pitta Shamaka because of Madhura rasa and Shita virya.
+ Pitta kapha, Samshodhaka because of its Sramsana property.

----- PAGE 59 -----
Aragwadha 5]

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Phala (Fruit) - Jwara, Hradroga, Raktapitta, Udavarta, Kushtha Krimi Prameha,
Mutrakrachra, Gulma, Udara, Vrana.

Patra (Leaf) - Medoroga
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Prameha (Diabetes insipidus)

eka Afet wergaerHarey | (ahs. 1179)

Aragwadha (Cassia fistula) kashaya is best for Haridra meha.

2. Kushtha (Skin diseases)

unit fireat arg a UU cre: | Te ATT
PSrAeaae IEG Ul (TY, 3/17)

Triturate leaves of Aragwadha (Cassia fistula) and Kakamachi (Solanum nigrum)
with buttermilk. The paste thus obtained is applied over skin lesions (the part should be
anointed prior to this application).

3. Amavata (Rhumatoid arthritis)
TTT Uae syeathrencdad: | AMAT AL: Hale, Beat AeHTS AT TU
(a1.5.F8. 26/52)

Leaves of Aragwadha (Cassia fistula) are fried with mustard oil. These leaves are
chewed after evening meal.

4. Visarpa (Erysipelas)
ATA VAN Set STOTT SH eT Hale aM: Aagitsér ae
Weal: Wa Wad Sar: TaeaTarya: Ut (aA. 21/89-92)

Paste of Aragwadha (Cassia fistula) leaves and Shleshmataka bark is mixed with
ghee and applied in all types of Visarpa (Erysipelas).

Matra (Dose)

Bija churna (Powder) -— 3to6og.
Mula twak kwatha - 10tolS5ml
Pushpa swarasa —- 5tol0ml

Phala majja (Fruit pulp)

10 to 20 g

Important phytoconstituents
Pod pulp - Anthraquinone, sucrose, lignoceric acid, amino acids.

----- PAGE 60 -----
$2 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Root bark - Anthraquinone derivates, sennoside A&B, Fistucacidin, g-sitosterol,
Volatile oil.

Stem bark and Leaves - Rhein glycoside.

Research Corner

1. Cassia fistula stem bark was used for the preparation of aqueous extract and
synthesis of god nanoparticles to evaluate the hypoglycemic effects and found
that gold nanoparticles have promising antidiabetic properties. (Daisy P,
Saipriya K. Biochemical analysis of Cassia fistula aqueous extract and
phytochemically sythesized gold nanoparticles as hypoglycemic treatment for
diabetes mellitus. Int. J. Nanomedicine. 2012;7:1189-202. Epub 2012 Mar 7).

2. Antibacterial and antifungal potentials of hydroalcohol extracts of leaves of
Cassia fistula Linn found very effective. (Bhalodia NR, Shukla VJ.
Antibacterial and antifungal activities from leaf extracts of Cassia fistula L. :
An ethnomedicinal plant. J Adv Pharm Technol Res. 2011 Apr; 2 (2):104-9).

3. Bioactivity-guided fractionation of n-hexane phase from MeoH extract of the
seeds of Cassia fistula L. (Leguminosae) yielded two bioactive substances
against Cladosporium cladosporioides and C. sphaerospermum. (Sartorelli P,
Lago JH, Cunha RL, Kitamura RO, Young MC. A new minor dimmeric ester
from seeds of Cassia fistula L. (Leguminosae). Nat Prod Res. 2012;26(1):36-
41. doi:10.1080/1478619.2010.5321128. Epub 2011 Jul 15).

4. Methanolic extract of seeds of Cassia fistula did not produce any significant
toxic effect in mice. (Jothy SL, Zakaria Z, Chen Y, Lau YL, Latha LY,
Sasidharan S. Acute oral toxicity of methanolic seed extract of Cassia fistula
in mice. Molecules. 2011. Jun 23;16(6):5268-82).

5. Cassia fistula fruit pulp and seed extract possessed anticandidal activity.
(Irshad, Shreaz S$, Manzoor N, Khan LA, Rizvi MM. Anticandidal activity of
Cassia fistula and its effect on ergosterol biosynthesis. Pharm Biol. 2011 Jul;
49(7):727-33. Epub 2011 May 18).

6. Crude hydro-alcoholic extract of Cassia fistula (golden shower tree) fruit to
protect the kidney against bromobenzene-induced toxicity was confirmed by
the histological examination of the kidneys. (Kalantari H, Jalali M, Jalali A,
Salimi A, Alhalvachi, F, Varga B, Juhasz B, Jakab A, Kemeny-Beke A,
Gesztelyi R, Tosaki A, Zsuga J. Protective effect of Cassia fistula fruit extract
on bromobenzene-induced nephrotoxicity in mice. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2011
Oct; 30(10:1710-5. Epub 2011 Jan 19).

7. Hepatoprotective an antioxidant activities of ethanolic leaf extract (ELE) of

----- PAGE 61 -----
Aragwadha 53

Cassia fistula Linn. against diethylynitrosamine induced liver injury in ethanol
pretreated rats was found very effective. (Pradeep K, Raj Mohan CV,
Gobianand K, Karthikeyan S. Protective effect of Cassia fistula Linn. on
dicthylinitrosamine induced hepatocellular damage and oxidative stress in
ethanol pretreated rats. Biol Res. 2010;43(1):113-25. Epub 2010 May 7).

Formulations

SLNo Formulation Indications

Aragwadha Ghrata
Shula, Kamala, Raktapitta
Kushtha, Sarvanga Shotha

Botanical Name
Cassia fistula Linn.

Cassia — Kasia (Greek), derived from a Hebrew word, which os a name of plant.
fistula — Tube (Refering to the cylindrical pod)
Family— Fabaceae (See appendix-II for family features).
Classification of the Dravya

Charaka Kushthaghna, Kandughna Varga
Aragwadhadi gana, Shyamadi gana

B.P.Ni. Haritakyadi varga 148-150

Basonym of Drug

A MAAS Gat AST |

Aragwadha completely cures ailments.
Main synonyms
Morphology

1. PAATAT-Hat MAT ATT FOTIA |

When flowering, the tree looks adorned with garlands.

----- PAGE 62 -----
54 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. WYRM aaelsyea: yAroeT wer: ETP wets seca:
Aragwadha fruit has depression at every 4 inch distance.
3. detwe:-ded wet afbacet |
Aragwadha fruits are long.
4, UAGR:-TAUT WaT, YHA: VATA |
Aragwadha tree is regarded as king of tree oving to its beauty.
5. FaUig-tauiqurbaretty GouVET |
Aragwadha flowers are golden yellow coloured.
6. Wae:- Wave Were HH: |
Aragwadha tree is liked by people as it is beautiful.
Properties and actions
7. STASI-3Ht SheT
Aragwadha relieves Ama
8. Wad-saahe Pacatet ACH |
Expels mala (faeces) from the body.
9. antafita-smbeaye: ra: Hees |
Pods are therapeutically very useful.
10. HPSIer-HS Faucher |
Aragwadha cures skin diseases.
11, SATHTh:-SaTATTh: |
Aragwadha relieves from fever.
12. earrara:-sarelis aha |
Aragwadha is useful in many diseases.
13. WPOTE:-¥t EATON UTS |
Aragwadha corrects the digestive process.
14, BHUTTO: aUpA TATU BUTT VITTS |

Aragwadha flowers were used as ear ornaments.

----- PAGE 63 -----
Aragwadha 55

Regional Names

Hindi Amaltas
Kannada Kakke kayi

Malyalam
Mini

Habitat
Grows all over India and as it is a beautiful plant, it is cultivated in gardens.

External Morphology

Habit — A medium sized perennial tree.

Stem — Erect, branched, cylindrical, woody, solid,
bark greenish grey in colour.

Leaf — Alternate, petiolate, compound, paripinnate,
with pulvinus base, leaf lets 4-8 pairs, stalked, ovate,
wavy, acute, glabrous, entire, venation of the leaflets | “
unicostate, reticulate.

Inflorescence — Long axillary pendulous racemes.

Flower — Pedicellate, with long pedicels, bracte-
ate, bisexual, complete, zygomorphic, yellow, hypogy-
nous and pentamerous.

Calyx-5 speals, slightly petaloid, polysepalous, odd ed
sepal anterior, imbricate aestivation. Cassia fistula Linn.

Corolla-5 petals, polypetalous, yellow, posterior a
petal is the small and innermost in the bud; petals unequally inserted on the thalamus.

Androecium-10 stamens, polyandrous and all with anthers, but very unequal in length.

Gynoecium-Monocarpellary, ovary superior, unilocular, with marginal placentation,
ovules many, short style, stigma is terminal and hairy.t

Fruit - A legume which is very long (1-2 feet) and cylindrical (nearly one inch in
diameter).

Seeds — Flat, albuminous, embedded in soft pulp.

Varieites ;
Dhanvantari Nighantu & Raja Nighantu : 1. Aragwadha 2. Karnikara

----- PAGE 64 -----
56 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

The fruit is a straight or slightly curved, cylindrical pod of chocolate brown colour,
with a short woody stalk and a blunt end which is suddenly contracted into a point. It
measures 40 to 70 cm in length and upto 2.5 cm in diameter. Internally the pod is divided into
anumber of cellular compartments by then woody transverse dissepiments. These compart-
ments contain flat, oval seeds of reddish brown colour and a soft black greasy pulp.

Commercially available material consists of seeds and walls of cells, having deposits
of black pulp. Pieces of the rind are also commonly mixed with the mixture.
Classical references
Synonyms
ATA MAG: MTA YCA: | Aa carrera: Herat: Faster: |
waftteart detect: carurig: eauteeOT: 1 (aT. etretet-1 48 )
Action and properties
area ye: wag: vitae: Washes: | vearestrftrrearctaradyyerse |
Aen Gat wet Holtiranmey | wt Gg Aad Tet aleyigat wy
(a. eRaemfert-1 49-150)
area wa ferent your: pltepergd | anlar Weert: eayeahreratsry tt
(a. fgenfeat-21 6)
amet aftr weet yeter: 1 gedit saryedtarae: 1
Veteradgstian HeMAITG Ul (HP.stsat 944-945)
aera
Waa aaa faye | feta wad wet wear what uu
(S.P.ststtert 945-946)
TAY HYA-
wes Rit wag Hort is ferneny | (3. P.sierert 945-946)
BTA THT
ene Sat wet He frame | wat T Wad wet aleyeant Ws
(d.P.atsftret 947)
ATA et HaN- AAT Targurentshred Rares Prete |
(d.P.siehtert 948)
sreaeishange: eta: Yee: | vag Bele ae ATTA: I
(ar.FF.)

----- PAGE 65 -----
Aragwadha Si

wyraet agittewntan (4.9. 25/40)
waaay | Tass ust gga:
art ae at aft gat aaa 1 det ygrafrenferasgege:

(AH. 8/4-5)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful Part of Aragwadha
a. Mula b. Kanda c. Bija d. Phalamajja
Ans: d. Phalamajja
2. Vipaka of Aragwadha Phala Majja
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: b. Madhura
3. Pradhana Karma of Aragwadha
a. Bhedana b. Anulomana c. Sramsana d. Rechana
Ans: c. Sramsana
4. Agrya Karma of Aragwadha as per Charaka
a. Mradu Virechana b. Tikshna Virechana
c. Sukha Virechana d. Stambhana
Ans: a. Mradu Virechana
5. Rajavraksha Kashaya is indicated in
a. Udaka Meha b. Haridra Meha_ ic. Vasa Meha dd. Sikata Meha
Ans: b. Haridra Meha
6. Botanical Name of Aragwadha
a. Cassia tora b. Withania somnifera
c. Cassia fistula d. Eclipta alba
Ans: c. Cassia fistula
7. Kratamala is a synonym of
a. Ashwagandhab. Ashoka c. Ashoka d. Aragwadha
Ans: d. Aragwadha
8. Raja Vriksha is a synonym of
a. Arjuna b. Aragwadha c. Japa d. Amalaki
Ans: b. Aragwadha
9. Habit of Aragwadha is
a. Herb b. Shrub c. Tree d. Creeper
Ans: c. Tree
2K KKK

----- PAGE 66 -----
Arjuna

Useful part- Twak (Bark)

Rasadi pancaka

Karma (Actions)
Hradya (Prabhavajanya karma), Vranahara, Artighna, Bhagna sandhanakara,

Raktapittahara.

Pharmacological actions

Cardiotonic, Antidysenteric, Diuretic, Antihypertensive.
Action on Dosha

Kapha Pitta Shamaka : Kaphahara because of Kashaya rasa and Katu vipaka,
Pittahara because of Kashaya rasa and Shita virya.

Actions on Dhatu — Medohara, Asthisandhanaka

Rogaghnata [Therapeutic indications]
Hrdroga, Medoroga, Pameha, Trsna, Arti, Bhagna, Uraksata, Ksaya, Raktapiita.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Hradroga (Cardiac diseases)
dersnysterrest ut meas ashe
frafe waits @ wate france: Gor: Perens FT 26)
Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna) and Godhuma (Triticum sativum) are mixed together
and cooked with oil, ghee, jaggery and milk. This is beneficial in Cardiac disorders.
2. Shukrameha (Spermaturia)

Wapatest apy wear Hort a (aaa. 11/44)

The decoction of Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna) is very useful in Shukrameha.

----- PAGE 67 -----
Arjuna 59
ee i‘

3. Twak roga (Skin diseases)
SS APT, ar HET ar aig era: aaerftat an serarecan Tet

- HBS. 32/16)

Application of Kalka

and honey is useful in Vang eines eae nia ee ie Re

4. Bhagna (Fracture)
yet gt dese ytartrerent: 1 Oa: Ceara ete eter

(a.5.Fa. 48/29)
Powder of Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna), Laksha (Coccus lacca) and Guggulu
(Commiphora mukul) mixed with ghe

: : € and taken internally, which promotes union in
fracture. During this treatment patient should be on milk diet.
Matra [Dose]

Kwatha [Decoction]

— 60to100 ml
Churna [Powder] — 3to6g.
Kshirapaka [Decoction with milk] — 20to30ml

Important phytoconstituents

Hydrolysable tannis (15%), Triterpenoid saponin, Arjunolic acid, g-sitosterol, El-
lagic acid, Arjunic acid, Arjunine, Arjunetinc, Calcium, Aluminium and Magnesium.
Research Corner

1. Methanol, ethanol, acetone, aqueous (hot and cold) extracts from the leaves and
bark of Terminalia arjuna were tested for their antimicrobial activity and found
to be useful to treat the bacterial ear pathogens especially S. aureus. (Aneja KR,
Sharma C, Joshi R. Antimicrobial activity of Terminalia arjuna Wight & Arm.
: an ethnomedicinal plant against pathogens causing ear infection. Braz J.
Otorhinolaryngol. 2012 Feb; 78(1):68-74).

2. Methanol extract of Terminalia arjuna leaf (META) exhibited remarkable
antitumour activity against Ehrlich ascites carcionoma (EAC) in Swiss albino
mice (Biswas M, Bhattacharya S, Ghos AK, Kumar RB, Bera S, Gupta M,
Haldar PK, Antitumour activity of Terminalia arjuna leaf against Ehrlich
ascites carcinoma in mice. Nat Prod’Res. 2011 Oct 24. [Equb ahead of print).

3. Diethyl ether, ethyl acetate and ethanol fractions of Terminalia arjuna bark
exerted hypolipidemic and antioxidative effects at two different doses leves of
175 and 350 mg/kg body weight in. Poloxamer (PX)-407 induced

----- PAGE 68 -----
60

Dravyaguna Vijnana

hyperlipidemic albino Wistar rats. (Subramaniam S, Ramachandran S,
Uthrapathi S, Gnamanickam VR, Dubey GP, Antihyperlipidemic and
antioxidant potential of different fractions of Terminalia arjuna Roxb. bark
against PX-407 induced hfyperlipidemia, Indian J Exp Biol. 2011 Apr; 49
(4):282-8).f

. Aqueous extract of Terminalia arjuna [TA (AqE)]-induced cardiotonic action

via enhancing SR function, a unique action minimizing the occurrence of
arrhythmias, makes TA (AqE) a promising and relatively safe cardiotonic
beneficial to the healthy heart and the treatment for chronic heart disease.
(Oberoi L, Akiyama T, Lee KH, Liu SJ. The aqueous extract, not organic
extracts, of Terminalia arjuna bark exerts cardiotonic effect on adult ventricular
myocytes. Phytomedicine. 2011. Feb 15; 18(4):259-65).

. Methanolic Extract of Terminalia arjuna leaf demonstrated remarkable

antihyperglycemic activity in STZ (streptozotocin)-induced diabetic: rats.
(Biswas M, Kar B, Bhattacharya S, Kumar RB, Ghosh AK, Haldar PK.
Antithyperglycemic activity and antioxidant role of Terminalia arjuna leaf in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Pharm Biol. 2011. Apr;49(4):335-40.
Equb 2011 Feb 1).

. Terminalia arjuna bark powder (400 mg/kg, po) significantly reduced

formalin-indued paw oedema, showed anti-inflammatory potential against some
phlogistic agents along with some immunomodulatory activity and
antinococeptive action. (Halder S, Bharal N, Mediratta PK, fKaur I, Sharma
KK. Anti-inflammatory, immuno-modulatory and antinociceptive activity of
Terminalia arjuna Roxb bark powder in mice and rats.Indian J Exp Biol. 2009
Jul; 47(7):577-83).

. Arjunic acid, a strong antioxidant and a free radical scavenger, more potent

than ascorbic acid, in microsomes lipid peroxidation, DPPH, hydrogen
peroxide induced RBCs hemolysis, and (DCFH (2)-DA) assay (p<0.05). (Sun
FY, Chen XP, Wang JH, Qin HL, Yang SR, DU GH. Arjunic acid, a strong
free radical scavenger from Terminalia arjrruna. Am J Chin Med. 2008;
36(1):197-207).

Formulations

SI.No.
Arjuna Ghrata Sarva Hradroga
Zr Arjuna twak churna Hradroga

Formulation Indications

----- PAGE 69 -----
Arjuna 6]

Arjunadi siddha kshira

Parthadyarishta Hradroga, Puppusa roga

Arjunadi taila Prameha

Kakubhadi vati Yakshma, Kasa
Sarivadi vati Karna roga, Hradroga
Kakubhadi churna Hradroga, Raktapitta

Botanaical Name
Terminalia arjuna Wight and Avn.
Terminalia — Disposition of leaves of some species towards the end of branchlets.
arjuna — Derived from Sanskrit word ‘Arujna’.
Family — Combretaceae
Kula — Haritaki kula

Classification of Dravya

Caraka Udardaprashamana varga
Nyagrodhadi gana, Salasaradi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni | Vatadi varga 26-27
Basonym of Drug

srtater yreertet Ferry, |

Arjuna gives strength to heart, hence useful in cardiac disorders.

Synonyms
Habitat
Commonly grows on river banks.
Morphology
2. Ydet:- DAA |
Arjuna bark is white in colour.
3. Paae:- Aa aT |
Bark is white in colour.

4. edur:- warorstter: |

----- PAGE 70 -----
62 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Arjuna is a large tree with spreading branches.
S. Tepper: TET |
Arjuna flowers are sweet scented.
A large tree covers large area.
Actions and properties
7. FRB WAT HATA gar: |
Tree which is a very potent medicine.
8. SaRTA:- CAM HATA Ta: Heit aT |
Tree with strong action.
9. drae:- vader |
A potent tree.
10. Barrah-aart faforscrstene: |
Arjuna is very useful for Cardiac problems.
11, VARA ATTA: |
Arjuna relieves Shwasa

Regional Names

—

Habitat

Arjuna is found as naturally growing plant in the dense forests through out India.
Arjuna can be successfully raised by sowing seeds.

External Morphology
A large tree with a huge buttressed trunk and horizontally spreading branches.

Bark — Smooth, Gray, flaking off in large flat pieces. Sap wood is reddish white and.
heart wood is brown.

Leaves — Sub-opposite, 10-15 cm long, 4-7 cm wide, oblong or elliptic oblong,

----- PAGE 71 -----
Arjuna 63

obtuse or subacute, pale dull green above, pale brown
beneath. Shallowly crenate, serrate in the upper part.
Base rounded or cordate, often unequal sided, main
nerves arcuate, 10-15 Pairs, reticulate venation. Peti-
ole is 0.5 to 1 cm long, with | or usually 2 prominent
glands at the top immediately below the leaves.f

Inflorescence - Short axillary spikes or termi-
nal panicles.

Flowers — Sessile, bracteoles linear, shorter than
flowers.

Fruit — Drupe, 2.5-5 cm in diameter, ovoid or %
obovoid-oblong, fibrous, woody, glabrous, dark Terminalia arjuna Wight
brown with 5 hard projecting wings. and Avn

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Flat or slightly curved, stratified pieces of stem bark or varying sizes.and 5 to 10 mm
thickness. External surface pink or flesh coloured with a mealy coating.

Inner surface is reddish brown finely striated, peeling out in thin flakes.

Fracture -— Fibrous
Odour — None
Taste — Astringent
Adulteration
e Terminalia alata e Terminalia tomentosa

Classical references

Synonyms
apse adtesiar aitie: | sagdiaes die sat: wa: Il
(Aa. aereart-2 6)
Properties
wpU: vitro zea: aeaaraaarated, | AaeaOMy et Gee: SeealtrST
(aa. aerfert-27)
PUY HATA: HHA AVA: \ ftrasargurftedt areamrereanras:
(a.Aarenfeert-1 05)

anprger: vidt wad frranauid, | Aettereesorag wertarar Il
(d.A.siteftert-s 20)

----- PAGE 72 -----
64 Dravyaguna Vijnana

ape aerator: amet aurea: | ftrersmrgeritfedt areerraentas:
(a.Praatea-1 1 8)
arta: safer) Aelteroreafie | stant art aha cenftet waar, 1
(fa. etirrnfert-1 26 )
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Hradya Karma of Arjuna is attributed to
a. Rasa b. Vipaka c. Prabhava d. Virya
Ans: ¢, Prabhava
. Useful part of Arjuna is
a. Mula b. Twak c. Phala d. Patra
Ans: b. Twak
3. Rasa of Arjuna Twak
a, Amla b. Katu c. Madhura d. Kashaya
Ans: d. Kashaya
4. Arjuna and Chandana Kashaya is indicated in
a. Shukra Meha b. KshaudraMeha c.Udakameha  d. Vasa Meha
Ans: a. Shukrameha
5. Matra of Arjuna Kshirapaka
a.10to20ml__b. 20 to 30 ml c5to10ml d. 80 to 100 ml
Ans: b. 20 to 30 ml
6. Arjuna Kshirapaka is best indicated in
a. Agnimandya_b. Raktapitta c. Jwara d. Hradroga
Ans: d. Hradroga

nN

7. Botanical name of Arjuna
a. Terminalia chebula b. Terminalia bellirica
c. Terminalia arjuna d. Terminalia alata
Ans: c. Terminalia arjuna
8. Dhavala a Synonym of Arjuna is given to its
a. Kanda Twak b. Mula c. Pushpa d, Phala
Ans: a. Kanda Twak

----- PAGE 73 -----
Chapter

Ashoka

Useful parts — T\wak (Bark), Beeja (Seed) & Pushpa (Flowers)

Rasadi Pancaka

Kashaya, Tikta

Karma (Actions)
Grahi, Varnya, Trishnahara, Daha Shamaka, Krimighna, Vranaropaka, Hradya,
Sandhaniya, Vishaghna, Stambhaka.

Phamacological Actions
Astringent, Uterine sedative
Dosha karma [Actions on Dosha]
Kaphapitta Shmaka
Kapha Shamaka because of Kashaya, Tikta Rasa and Katu vipaka.
Pitta Shamaka because of Shita virya and Kashaya Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Pradara, Yonivyapat, Trishna, Daha, Krimi, Vrana, Visharoga, Shosha, Apachi,
Arshas, Vaivarnya, Gulma, Udarashula, Adhmana.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatavyadhi (Diseases of Vata)
favaanfakrartaramadeen: (yf. 4/27
Ashoka ghrata is indicated in Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata) by Acharya
Sushruta.
2. Pradara (Metrorrhagia)
AeHacHe Fas Geet Yoon | erat fray Mae A PATA, Ut

(3.71. 63/5)

----- PAGE 74 -----
66 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Ashoka twak kwatha (Decoction of bark) cold milk in morning will check severe
bleeding per Vagina.

3. Ashmari (Urinary calculus)
wert Gafadt athst yarereryetteny ui (a3. 33/12)

Ashoka bija churna (Seed powder) with water relieves Mutraghata (Retention of
urine) and Ashmari (Urinary calculus).

Matra (Dose)
1. Kwatha (Decoction) - 40to80ml
2. Bija churna (Seed powder) -— lto3g

3. Pushpa churna (Flower powder) — 1to3g

Phytoconstituents

Bark - Contains -Tannin (6%), Catechol, Epicatechin, Catechin, Hematoxylin,
Ketosterol and Saponin.

Pods—Contain-Catechol, Epicatechol, Leucocyanidin

Seeds — Have oleic, Linoleic, Palmitic and Stearic acids.

Flowers — Contain-g-sitosterol, Quercetins, Gallic acids, Palmitic, Stearic, Oleic
and Linoleic acids.

Wood contains Quercetin.

Research corner

1. Saraca asoca methanol extract was capable of ameliorating the conditions of
arthritis in adjuvant induced arthritic rats. Saravanan S, Babu NP, Pandikumar
P, lgnacimuthu S. Therapeutic effect of Saraca asoca (Roxb.) Wilde on
lysosomal enzymes and collagen metabolism in adjuvant induced arthritis.
Inflammophar-macology. 2011 Dec; 19(6):317-25. Epub 2011 Sep 23.

2. Flavonoids of Saraca asoca shown chemopopreventive activity on 2-stage skin
carcinogenesis. Cibin TR, Devi DG, Abraham A. Chemoprevention of Two
stages Skin Cancer in Vivo by Saraca asoca. Inter Cancer Ther. 2011 Jul 19.

Ww

. The phytochemical analysis of the promising methanolic extract of the seed
extract was postive for carbohydrates, saponins, terpenoids, tannins, and
proteins. Bioassay-guided fractionation of effective extracts may result in
identification ofa useful molecule for the control of mosquito vectors. Mathew
N, Anitha MG, Bala TS, Sivakumar SM, Narmadha R, Kalyanasundaram M.
Larvicidal activity of Saraca indica, Nyctanthes arbor-tristis, and Clitoria

----- PAGE 75 -----
Ashoka 67

ternatea extracts against three mosquiot vector species. Parasitol Res. 2009 Apr;
104(5):1017-25. Epub 2008 Nov 28.

4, Extracts of Saraca asoca contain antibacterial agents. Shahid M, Shahzad A,
Malik A, Anis M. Antibacterial activity of aerial parts as well as in vitro raised
calli of the medicianal plant Saraca asoca (Roxb.) de Wilde. Can J Microbiol.
2007 Jan; 53 (1):75-81.

5. The antimicrobial potential of seventy-seven extracts from twenty-four plants
was screened aganist eight bacteria and four pathogenic fungi, using
microbroth dilution assay. Water extracts of Acacia nilotica, Justicia zelanica,
Lantana camara and Saraca asoca exhibited good activity against ‘all the
bacteria tested. Dabur R, Gupta A, Mandal TK, Singh DD, Bajpal V, Gurav
AM, Lavekar GS. Antimicrobial activity of some Indian medicinal plants. Afr
J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 2007 Feb 16;4(3):313-8.

6. The commonly used adulterant is the bark of Polyalthia longifolia which shows
some similarity with that of Asoka. Studies were conducted at Aromatic and
Medicinal Plants Research station, Odakkali (Kerala Agricultural University)
during 2001-2002 to evolve methods for differentiating the original drug from
the adulterant species by anatomical biochemical and chromatographic
techniques. Mathew S, Mathew G, Joy PP, Skari BP, Joseph TS.
Differentiation of Saraca asoca crude drug from its adulterant, Anc Sci Life.
2005 Apr; 24(4):174-8.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulations Indications
1
2D.

Botanical Name

Ashokarishta Asragdhara, Raktapitta
Ashoka ghrata Pradara, Yonishula, Katishula
Ashoka kashaya Swarasada

Madhukadyavaleha _, | Pradara, Raktatisara, Raktarsha
Mahamarichadya Taila

Saraca indica Linn.

Saraca asoca Roxb, De Wilde

Saraca -Named after Dr. Sarasin who was French physician.
indica -Native of India.

----- PAGE 76 -----
68 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Family
Fabaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)

Classification of Dravya

Vedanasthapana varga
Rodhradi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni_ | Pushpavarga 47-48

Basonym of Drug
AMAIA, VieHATETAT sere:

Ashoka relives pain and patients get relief from many health problems.

Synonyms
Morphology
1, TRIG Y TATA |
Flowers of Ashoka are aromatic.
2. ATAUSATA- ATA: UECTAT TT |
Tender leaves of Ashoka are coppery red coloured.
3. frosyey- festa: AIA: FATS ST |
Inflorescence (Corymb) is globose.
4, AT: Aat Teed Yea |
Plant flowers in Vasanta Ritu (Spring).
5. BAST: TaOPT ETT ITT
Ashoka flowers are golden coloured.
Properties and Actions
6. etfra:- shut fra: etry feacart |
Women like this plant or Ashoka is useful in striroga.
7. lah GS Heals saat, serene: |
Ashoka generates happiness.

Regional Names

English

----- PAGE 77 -----
Ashoka 69

Malayalam

Habitat - Commonly grows in forest region of Western Peninsula, Central and
Eastern Himalaya and West Bengal. Plant grows very well near the streams or river banks.
It is cultivated in gardens throughout India for its handsome flowers.

Morphology — A tree grows 6-9 mtrs high,
branches are glabrous.

Leaves — 15-20 cm long, compound, rachis gla-
brous, corky at the base, petioles very short, stipules
are intrapetiolar, completely united.

Leaflets — 4-6 pairs, 10-20 cm long and 4-7 cm
wide, oblong-lanceolate, obtuse or acute, glabrous,
base rounded or cuneate, slightly oblique, petiolules
4-6 mm long, stout, wrinkled.

Inflorescence — Axillary corymb.

Flowers— Numerous, fragrant, 7.5-10 cm across, u
peduncles stout, pedicels 8-13 mm long, red, glabrous, Saraca indica Linn.
bracts ovate, subacute, bracteoles 2, appearing like a
calyx, 4 mm long, calyx passing from yellow to orange and finally red; tube 1.3-2 cm
long, cylindrical, solid at the base; segments 4, oblong or obovate-oblong, 1 cm long.
Stamens 7 or 8 ovary is pubescent.

Fruit — Pod, black, 10-25 cm long, 4.5-5 cm wide, linear oblong, tapering to both
ends, compressed, and glabrous.

Seeds — 4-8, ellipsoid-oblong, 3-8 cm long, slightly compressed.
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Bark: Curved, channelled or sometimes quilled pieces, 5 to 12 mm in thickness.
Outer surface is rough, greyish brown in colour, covered with warty protuberances and
enclosing circular to transversely elongated lenticels. The inner surface of the bark is
smooth reddish brown in colour and finely mottled with black dots. Transversely cut
surface shows long, radially elongated but irregularly running medullary rays. It is tough
to break and becomes fibrous. Bark doesn't possess any characteristic odour.

----- PAGE 78 -----
70

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Adulterant & Substitutes
Polyalthia longifolia is very commonly used as Ashoka, but it is an adulterant. Shala

(Shorea roubusta) is common substitute,
Classical references

Synonyms

awirat ays ayerennaeda: | age: fresqersr weet zeeTaT 11

Actions and properties

aie: EUS IE AS ATR aoreeitqerarcaftrene frat

(AIT. WIErt 47)

(A17. Tart 48)

args vtamaret: goitetea vehi | art arate ada: |
arent wet er: Varta: green: (a. sreenfert 147-148)
aTetet Baer: Ravet quel ot Harr: | etoroeitqerereanhtatts ferarefer 1

(df. sitet 1503)

aria: Rrrt ca: fracresarge: | Yeayetareaa-ae: fafa:

(aA. archatat 57)

agit Rernegqar: viet avaf frame: vette vert a atPrearaeg sree

—

NS

a. Mula Twak _ b. Kanda Twak c. Patra
Ans: b. Kanda Twak

. Pradhana Rasa of Ashoka

a. Madhura b. Katu c. Kashaya
Ans: c. Kashaya

. Main indication of Ashoka is

a. Striroga b. Ajirna c. visha Vikara
Ans: a. Striroga

(B.A. eteeeneteart 174)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Important useful part of Ashoka

d. Phala

d. Amla

d. Sthaulya

----- PAGE 79 -----
Ashoka i
- Main indication of Ashokarishta
a. Agnimandya_p, Pradara
Ans: b. Pradara

- Botanical Name of Ashoka

a. Aconitum ferox

c. Boerhavia diffusa

Ans: d. Saraca asoca

c. Sthaulya d. Vibandha

b. Achyranthes aspera
d. Saraca asoca

. Tamrapallava is a synonym of

a. Maricha b. Manjishta
Ans: c. Ashoka

. Substitute of Ashoka

a. Kashtadaru _b. Shala
Ans: b. Shala

. Adulteration of Ashoka

a. Shorea robusta

c. Polyalthia longifolia

Ans: c. Polyalthia longifolia

c. Ashoka d. Haridra

c. Vidarikanda d. Yashtimadhu

b. Aconitum heterophyllum
d. Withania somnifera

----- PAGE 80 -----
Ashwagandha

Useful part — Mula (Root)
Rasadi panchaka

Action of Dosha: Kaphavatahara

Kaphahara - Because of Ushna virya & Tikta, Kashaya rasa.
Vatahara - Because of Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka.

Karma (Action)

Balya Rasayana Shukrala
Kantivardhaka Kasahara Nadibalya
Shwitraghni Kandughna Krimighna
Shwasahara Vishaghna Vraanahara
Shophahara

Pharmacological actions
e Sedative e Hypnotic e Antiseptic
e Antimitotic e Antitumour

Rogaghnata: (Therapeutic Indications)
Kshaya Vatavyadhi Klaivya Shwitra Shotha Visha
Vranaa_ Kasa Shopha Kandu Krimi Shwasa

Amyika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. As a Rasayana (Rejuvenator)
Cats aren TeaeIseart Bast TAT TSEPSAT aT |
wares ofS agat faert atereT PAT TMT Ta: | a.Z.S. 39/158

Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) taken with milk or ghee or oil or warm water
for fifteen days will act as Rasayana and increases the weight.

----- PAGE 81 -----
Ashwagandha 13

2. Shosha (Emaciation)
ager aftege frerest ura: free aise wets (8.3. 41/42)

Ghrata prepared from Ashwagandha to be taken every day morning or the milk

processed with Ashwagandha taken with sugar helps to relieve Shosha.
3. Shwasa (Dyspnoea)

anrarearsnreran ferret atts aftfar (af. 17/117)
The Kshara (Alkali) of Ashwagandha taken with honey and ghee is beneficial in
Shwasa.
4. Nidranasha (Insomnia)
aut weer: Ferrer wefgerss ater efter | farcenter tehR Pare fafa ar
(4.4. Seratarfe 13)
Ashwagandha churna mixed with sugar and ghee is very useful in Nidranasha (In-
somnia).
5. Garbhadharanartha (For conception)
SATIVA: Urea AT Wa: | a ETATSAeT Ucar wat eect TAT
(a1.9.Fa. 70/26)
Ghrata prepared from Ashwagandha kwatha (decoction) and milk should be con-
sumed by the woman at the right time (Ritusnata) to help in conception.
Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) - 3 to 5 g

Phytoconstituents

Root — Somniferine, Somniferinine, Withanine, Nicotine, Withaniol [Steroidal lac-
tone], Withasomnine [Pyrazole alkaloid], Tropine, Withanolide [Steroidal lactones],
Analygrine, Anaferine (Alkalirid), Starch, g-sitosterol.

Seed — Withanolide, Withaferin A

Research corner
1. Neha Sehgal, Alok Gupta, et.al., Withania somnifera reverses Alzheimer’s
disease pathology by enhancing low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein
in liver, proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of United States of
America, (Published on-line before print January 30, 2012, http://dx.doi.org/
10.1073/pnas. 1112209109)

A 30-d course or oral administration of a semipurified extract of the root of

----- PAGE 82 -----
74

bo

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Withania somnifera consisting predominantly of withanolides and withanosides
reversed behavioral deficits, plaque pathology, accumulation of g-amyloid
peptides (Ab) and oligomers in the brains of middle-aged and old APP/PS1
Alzheimer's disease transgenic mice. It was similarly effective in reversing
behavioral deficits and plaque load in APPSwlnd mice (line j20). The
remarkable therapeutic cffect of W. Somnifera mediated through up-regulation
of liver LRP indicates that targeting the periphery offers a unique mechanism
of Ab clearance and reverse the behavioral deficits and pathology seen in
Alzheimer's disease models.

. Kaurav BP, Wanjari MM, Chandekar A, Chauhan NS, Upmanyu N, Influence

of Withania somnifera on obsessive compulsive disorder in mice, Asian Pac J
Trop Med. 2012 May; 5(5):380-4.

W. Somnifera extract was found effective in treating obsessive compulsive
disorder. Administration of aqueous extracts W. Somnifera (AEWS) and
methanolic extracts MEWS (50 mg/kg) successively decreassed the marble
burying behaviour activity without affecting motor activity.

. Hosny Mansour H, Farouk Hafez H. Protective effect of Withania somnifera

against radiation-induced hepatotoxicty in rats. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2012
Jun; 80:14-9. Epub 2012 Feb 28.

WS could be developed as a potential preventive drug for ionizing irradiation
induced hepatotoxicity disorder via enhancing the antioxidant activity and
induction of HO-1.

Konar A, Shah N, Singh R, Saxena N, Kaul SC, Wadhwa R, Thakur MK.
Protective role of Ashwagandha leaf extract and its component withanone on
scopolamine-induced changes in the brain and brain-derived cells. Plos One.
2011;6(11):e27265. Epub 2011 Nov11.

Our study suggested that besides cholinergic blockade, scopolamine-induced
memory loss may be associated with oxidative stress and alcoholic extract of
Ashwagandha leaf, and withanone may serve as potential preventive and
therapeutic agents for ne-urodegenerative disorders.

Shah J, Goyal R., Investigation of neuropsychopharma-cological effects of a
polyherbal formulation on the learning and memory process in rats. J Young
Pharm. 2011 Apr;3(2):119-24.

The poly herbal formulation containing Ashwagandha produced significant
improvement in passive avoidance acquisition and memory retrieval in rats.

----- PAGE 83 -----
Ashwagandha 715

Formulations

SI.No Name Indications

Ashwagandhadya Ghrata
Ashwagandhadi Kwatha
Ashwagandhadyarishta Murcha, Apasmara

4. Ashwagandha Rasayana
Vatavyadhi, Karshya, Raktapitta
Ashwagandhadi Lepa Vrana Shotha
Pandu, Kshaya, Arshas

Karshya, Durbala

Vataroga, Angadaha

| 6
yt
P
| 0.

Ashwagandhadi Churna
Ashwagandhadi Lehya

Balashwagandhadi Taila
Vajikarana Ghrata
Botanical Name

Withania somnifera (L) Dunal.
Withania - Withan [Scientist name]

10. As a Vrishya

somnifera - produces sleep
Family — Solanaceae (See Appendix-II for Key features)
Kula — Kantaakari
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Balya, Brahmaniya
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bha.Pra.Ni Guduchyadi Varga 189-190
Basonym of Drug
AMAA WANS: ATMS TAT WHT SATE: ( ATAENT: ) AAT: HAA AT |

Ashwagandha root has the smell of horse and also improves sexual potency of the
person who consumes it.

Synonyms
Morphology
1, Wert garorearaerca4ry |

Leaves too have the smell of horse.

----- PAGE 84 -----
76 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. aTeHull. areata waTOTEM: |
Ashwagandha leaves resemble pig’s ears.

3. AMHA- AMAT WAH: Tea BMA: Ha: TTA: |
The root smells like horse or on consuming it imparts sexual power like a
horse.

Actions and properties

4, Aearenten:- samarigater ater: aritfer Geaereat geet |
Ashwagandha promotes sexual power better than horse.

5. HRRI-HAd TEMA Yow alerawes |
Ashwagandha increases and retains Shukra

6, carroftuft-arreates WA TATA: |
Ashwagandha gives good look to the person who consumes it.

7. GAaI-UAt calle Ymaelnrare |
Which increases the potency and quality of Shukra (Sperm) there by increasing
the chances of progeny.

8. Aeal-aet carer aeraeitieae: |
It imparts strength.
9, Avatett-Arect aretferaare ele |
Ashwagandha useful in Vata disorders.
10. Ga-gquad-Yaelstt asia F
Ashwagandha increases sexual potency.
Others
11. Faleel-AY ATAT WTA |
Synonyms of horse may be attributed to Ashwagandha.

‘Regional Names

----- PAGE 85 -----
Ashwagandha 77

Habitat — Found throughout the dry parts of In-
dia, in waste places, on bunds in areas of upper ge-
netic plain, West Bengal, Bihar, Orissa, Gujarat,
Konkan, Deccan and Karnataka. It grows in semitropi-
cal areas receiving 500-750 mm rain fall. Crop requires
relatively dry season during its growing period.
External Morphology

Habit — A much branched wild peremial herb.

Root -— Tap-root branched.

Stem — Acrial, erect, cylindrical, branched, her-
baceous above, woody below, densely covered with
fine stellate hairs.

Leaf -—Cauline and ramal, alternate or in unequal
pairs, ovate, ovate-oblong, or ovate lanceolate, entire,
acute or obtuse, tapering to the base; petiolate, petiole | Withania somnifera(L) Dunal

thick and long; reticulate unicostate ventation, covered
with glandular branched hair.

Inflorescence — Sub-sessile, axillary umbellate, 5- flowered cyme.

Flower — Greenish yellow, subsessile, pedicellates, complete, bisexual, pentamer-
ous, actinomorphic and hypogynous.

Calyx —5 Sepals, gamosepalous, campanulate (bell shaped), tomentose.

Corolla —5-Petals, short, campanulate, greenish yellow in colour.

Androecium — Stamens 5, free

Gynoecium — Bicarpellary, syncarpous, superior, bilocular and axile placentation.

Fruit — Small berry, globose, yellow or red when ripe.

Seed — Endospermic.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Root—Cylindrical, straight or slightly tortuous, mostly unbranched roots, 5 to 8 mm
in diameter, occurring whole or in pieces of varying length; upper portion of the roots are
more often topped with stem bases. Outer surface fawn coloured or light brown, finely
wrinkled longitudinally : a transversely cut portion of the root shows a creamish starchy
surface with a thin, closely adhering bark, followed by a narrow cortex and a large woody
portion cortex and a large woody portion surrounded by a prominent cambium ring of
brownish colour.

----- PAGE 86 -----
78 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fracture — Short and powdery
Odour -— Slightly pungent
Taste — Bitter and acrid

Difference between root of Cultivated and Wild Variety

Cultivated Ashwagandha Wild Ashwagandha

e Diameter of root is 0.5-0.8 mm Diameter of root is 1 cm or more (thicker)
e Cylindrical and straight Curved or vary in sahpe

e Ext. surface-light brown finely Ext. surface-reddish brown, easily
wrinkled longitudinally seperable bark (3 mm thick)

Substitution
Ashwagandha is a substitute for
e Kakoli (Lillium polyphyllum)
e Kshirakakoli (Fritillaria roylei)

Classical references

Synonyms
Tarn afrarnearen gare | amenuff ar acer penert u
(AT.AMeaT-6 7 )
Actions and properties
RITA SHASATTA AMAA TST Ta fereaT HATA SHAH
(aTTSaMe GT 190)
atenren carne fereat atdtareraer | fersaar atery ett carfeet atet aeTTAT
(afi. yeeatert 263)
Tarren wera fercat ET Tare | eerae aT ele HATA TAIT,
virmavsherataa aitraraercaaary ul (Fy. sisfrat 1045-1046)
AAT HET CATT HT A AST | ACA ATTRA Sheet TAA,
(aA. wraveefe at 112)

AAS ATM TAY HATO Tara aretakt aera tt (B.A rages et 110)

----- PAGE 87 -----
-_

to

ON

~

Ashwagandha

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Prayojya Anga of Ashwagandha

a, Phala b. Patra c. Mula d. Pushpa
Ans: c. Mula

. Vipaka of Ashwagandha

a. Katu b. Madhura c. Kashaya d. Amla
Ans: b. Madhura

. Pradhana Karma of Ashwagandha

a. Stambhaka __ b. dipana c. Shodhana d. Vrashya
Ans: d. Wrashya

. Analkaloid Somniferine is present in

a. Ashwagandha _b. Chitraka c. Punarnava d. Vatsanabha

Ans: a. Ashwagandha

. Ashwagandhadi Lehya is indicated in

a. Sthaulya b. Medoroga c. Karshya d. Kushta
Ans: c. Karshya

. Botanical Name of Ashwagandha

a. Rauwolfia serpentina b. Cassia fistula
c. Withania somnifera d. Papaver somnifera

Ans: c. Withania somnifera

. Balya and Brahmana Karma is attributed to

a. Kapikacchu b. Ashwagandha — c. Amalaki d. Haritaki
Ans: b. Ashwagandha

. Varaha Karni is a synonym of

a. Patha b. Ashoka c. Ashwagandha d. Arjuna
Ans: c. Ashwagandha

. Ashwagandha is a

a. Tree b. Creeper c. Shrub d. Herb
Ans: d. Herb

79

----- PAGE 88 -----
2.10

Asthishrunkhala
a
Useful part - Kanda (Stem)
Rasadi pancaka

Karma (Action) .

Bhagna Sandhanakara, Arshoghna, Krimighna, Netrarogahara, Pachana, Vrishyg
Balya.

Pharmacological Actions

Union promoting, Laxative Anthelmintic, Carminative, Digestive, Stomachic,
Haemostatic, Aphrodisiac and Opthalmic.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Vata kapha hara, Vatahara because of Ushna virya, Madhura vipaka and Madhura
rasa. Kaphahara because of Ushna virya.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Asthibhagana, Vatavyadhi, Krimi, Arshas, Agnimandya, Netraroga, Klaibya and
Dourbalya.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Bhagna (Fracture)

wedaReadan cent ep | ashe a rag efter Ara: 1

(J.T. 46/8)

In case of Bhagna (Fracture) one should take milk processed with Asthisamhara
(Cissus quadrangularis), ghee, lac, wheat and Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna).

2. Putra labhartha (To achieve conception)
SSAC Gea det Aeneen FePITL | aegeTaT ae: firs aerate yareniferet 1
(a9. 13/10)

----- PAGE 89 -----
Asthishrunkhala 81

To achieve conception, lady after having seasonal bath should consume juice and
paste of Vajra vallari (Cissus quadrangularis) mixed with Oil. ‘
Matra (Dose)

Swarasa (Juice) - 10 to 20 ml

Chemical constituents
Stem contains two tetracyclic triterpenoids, g-sitosterol, f-amyrin and g-amyrone.

Research corner .
A study is conducted to evaluate the beneficial effects of Cissus quadrangularis
stem extract on antoxidant or oxidant status in Diabetes mellitus. The ethyl acetate frac-
tion of Cissus quadrangularis is rich in quercitin and this indicates that it is good supple-
ment for the attenuation of diabetic complications. Lakshmi R.K. Divya BT & Mini S.
‘*Cissus quadrangularis extract attenuates hyperglycaemia mediated oxidative stress in
streptozotocin induced diabetic rats.’” Redox Rep. 2014 Sep : 19 (5) : 214-20.

Yoga (Formulations)

Name Indications

Asthisamharadi Churna Asthibhagna, Sandhimukta
Asthisamhara Taila Bhagna, Vatavyadhi
Lakshadi Guggulu Asthibhagna 5 ee

Botanical Name

SI.No.

Cissus quadrangularis Linn.
Cissus — A name for Ivy (a creeper)
quadrangularis — Stem is four angled
Family — Vitaceae
Kula - Draksha kula
Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not included in Varga
Sushruta Not included in Gana
Bh. Pr. Ni Guduchyadi Varga
Basonym of Drug
Tea See SATS WTAE

Stem of Asthishrunkhala (Cissus quardrangularis Linn.) appears like chain of bones.

----- PAGE 90 -----
82 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Synonyms
Morphology
1, DAT -HTUS TT: |
Stem of Asthishrunkhala is having nodular stem.
2. ag:fae:-aere: feet: BUSSE |
Asthishrunkhala has got quadrangular stem.
Properties and Actions
3. site dertt-stiter wet Percale ater
Asthishrunkhala is one of the best drugs for the fracture of bones and it promotes
union of bones.
Regional Names
Habitat
Asthishrunkhala commonly grows in South India.

Morphology

A tendril climber with stout fleshy jointed quadrangu-
Jar stems. Tendrils are simple, long, slender and leaf opposed.
In addition to the normal roots, some aerial roots arising from
the jointed nodes grow downwards and strike the soil.

Leaves - Simple, broadly reniform, entire or toothed,
rounded, truncate or cuneate at the base.

Cissus quadrangularis
Linn.

Flower - Small, greenish in shortly peduncled cymes.
Petals are 4, hooded at the apex.

Fruits - Ovoid or globose, red berries with ellipsoid seeds.
Classical references

Synonyms

aPanratudent asrgtarskearreen | (as. Wee TH 226)

----- PAGE 91 -----
Asthishrunkhala 83

Properties and Actions
atiterderan: went arascrershtermg | sor: ae: Biltretargatret starter esr,
wer: Fargetyser: ureta: ferret: BTA: uu (aT. BBeaMRe a-2 26-227)
asacet wr tan Higher 1 dhoeqen fra a tarst Gear Teryay
afte wararrt arerserorett Te: (HF. sitet af-1594-1595)
aifterssgterer cto aretseroret ae | areata wreat caterer a
(fi. FA. froremf& at-5 8)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful Part of Asthishrinkhala
a. Mula b. Kanda c. Partra d. Pushpa
Ans: b. Kanda

2. Pradhana Karma of Asthishrinkhala is
a. Kushthaghna b. Pramehahara c. Bhagna Sandhanakara_ _—_ d. Dipana
Ans: c. Bhagna Sandhanakara

3. Asthisamhara Taila is indicated in
a. Bhagna b. Agnimandya c. Kushtha d. Prameha
Ans: a. Bhagna

4. Botanical Name of Asthishrinkhala
a. Vitis vinifera b. Saraca asoca
c. Cissus quadrangularis d. Bauhinia variegata
Ans: c. Cissus quadrangularis

5. Chatusira is a synonym of
a. Madanaphala b. Nagakesara c. Asthishrinkhala d. Ashoka
Ans: c. Asthishrinkhala

6. Habit of Asthishrinkhala is
a. Tree b. Herb c. Shrub d. Climber
Ans: d. Climber

----- PAGE 92 -----
Useful part — Kanda (Tuberous roots)
Rasadi Pancaka

Laghu, Ruksha

rc

i
[Vishahara |

Karma (Actions)
Dipana, Pachana, Kasahara, Jwarahara, Krimighna,
Agrya Karma

arferrat dtasfterarerteraimnearrd arrears | (AY, 25/40)

Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum Wall.) is Appetizer, Digesta
pacify all three doshas.
Pharmacological Actions

Antibacterial, Aphrodisiac & Tonic
Desha karma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha pitta Shamaka
Kapha Shamaka because of Ushna virya and Katu vipaka.

Vishaghna, Chardighna.

nt, Astringent and

PittaShamaka because of Tikta rasa
Rogaghmuata (Therapeutic Indications)

Atisara, Agnimandya, Ajirna, Jwara, Kasa, Chardi, Krimi, Balaroga, Visaroga.
Aumayiha Paayoge (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kasa (Cough)

qreera SPARTA HATTA ASOT ETL \(S.@.3. 2/58)

Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum) kanda churna (Powder of tuberous roots) ad-
ministered with Madhu (Honey) is very beneficial in Kasa (Cough).

----- PAGE 93 -----
Ativisha 85

2. Amatisara (Diarrhoea with undigested food)
SEL UTfererat Vat Ay are MATT | (AY, 2/22)

The peya (Liquid gruel) processed with Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum), Nagara
(Zingiber officinale) and sours is very beneficial in Amatisara.

3. Grahani (Spruce)
aMTfreranetaarea: Parerraraa: | (AAT. 15/98)

Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum), Shunthi
(Zingiber officinale) and Musta (Cyperus routndus) is very useful in digesting Ama (Un-
digested food) in Grahani roga.

Matra (Dose)
Mula churna (Root powder) — 1-3 gm
Phytoconstituents

Root tuber and root contains-Atisine, Atidine, Atodine, Benzylheteratisine,
Doterpene, Heteratisine, Hestisine, Heterophylline, Heterophyllcene, Aconitic. acid, Tan-
nic acid, g-sitosterol, g-carotene, Isoatisine etc.Ativisa

Research corner

1. Two new diterpenoid alkaloids, heterophyllinine-A (1) and heterophyllinine-B
(2), along with two known alkaloids dihydroatisine (3):and ‘lycoctonine (4)
were isolated from the roots of Aconitum heterophyllum Wall. Nisar M,
Ahmad M, Wadood N, Lodhi MA, Saheen F, Choudhary M1. New diterpenoid
alkaloids from Aconitum heterophyllum Wall : Selective butyrylcholinestrase
inhibitors. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2009 Feb; 24(1):47-51.

2. Two new aconitine-type norditerpenoid alkaloids 6-dehydroacetylsepaconitine
(1) and 13- hydroxyl-appaconitine. (2) along with three known norditerpenoid
alkaloids lycoctonine, delphatine and lappaconitine were isolated from the roots
ofthe Aconitum heterophyllum Wall. These compounds have exhbited
significant antibacterial activity. Anmad M, Ahmad W, Ahmad M, Zeeshan M,
Obaidullah, Shaheen F. Norditerpenoid alkaloids from the roots of Aconitum
heterophyluum Wall with antibacterial activity. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem.
2008 Denc; 23(6):1018-22.

3. The immunobiological activity was investigated of certain medicinal plants
widely used in the Ayurvedic and Unani systems of medicine for treatment of
chronic infections and immunological disorders. The effect of an ethanolic
extract of each drug was studied on delayed type hypersensitivity, humoral

----- PAGE 94 -----
86 Dravyaguna Vijnana

sabi tmeenefninnemneernaciadenspemmaongmaesnceponns inna ioe eceoneeemacilinaitesgeesiniainn eraiasimmandpoatinademencas
responses to sheep red blood cells, skin allograft rejection, and phagocytic
activity of the reticuloendothelial system in mice. Aconitum heterophyllum
appeared to stimulate phagocytic function while inhibiting the humoral
component of the immune system. Atal CK, Sharma ML, Kaul A, Khajuria A.
Immunomodulating agents of plant origin. I: Preliminary screening. J.
Ethnopharmacol. 1986 Nov; 18(2):133-41.

4. In the absence of a desired first choice medicinal herb, classical Ayurveda
recommends use of a functionally similar substitute. Post 16th century
Ayurvedic texts and lexicons give specific examples of possible substitutes.
Here we report a preliminary study of one such Ayurvedic substitution pair:
Musta (Cyperus rotunds L., Cyperaceae), a common weed, for the rare
Himalayan species, Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum Wall. ex Royle;
Ranunculaceae). Observations indicate that Ayurveda may attach more
importance to pharmacological properties of raw drugs than to their botanical
classification. Venkatasubramanian P, Kumar SK, Nair VS. Cyperus rotundus,
a substitute for Aconitum heterophyllum: Studies on the Ayurvedic concept of
Abhava Pratinidhi Dravya (Drug substitution). J Ayurveda integr Med. 2010
Jan; 1(1):33-9.

Yoga (Formulations)
SILNo.

Indications

Formulations

Ativishadi Churna
Mahatiktaka Ghrata Pittaja kushtha
Pushyanuga churna Arsha, Atisara
Prameha
6 5

Madhukadi Ghrat
Botanical Name

Aconitum heterophyllum wall.
Aconitum - Aconite
heterophyllum - with dissimilar leaves
Family
Rananculaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)

Kula

Vatsanabha

----- PAGE 95 -----
Ativisha

Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Lekhaniya, Arshoghna Varga
Sushruta Pippalyadi gana, Vachadi gana, Mustadi gana
Bh.Pr. Haritakyadi varga 213-214
Basonym of Drug
ferrafecnrt |
Ativisha overpowers Visha.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. cargeihet :- aye war
The plant grows in Kashmir.
2. Wat :- ARa TAT |

Plant grows in Madra Desha.

Morphology
3. YRAaa- YA: HalSSM: |
Root tubers are white in colour.
4. STgt- TET sea, |
Root tubers are horn shaped.
Properties and actions
5. Rraacca-firearwey |
Ativisa is efficacious in Pittaja roga
6. PUACAN- BMY TN: GIR |
Root tubers are quickly infested.
7. siferarcedt-arfereant areratet
Ativisa is very useful in Atisara.

8. Preatasaq-arentty ATTET |

Ativisa is very beneficial in pediatric disorders.
9. ferat-aerhe caratter erat steven fart eft |
Ativisa spreads through out the body or is useful as an antidote.

10. QNATaST-SHATTAT I

Ativisa cures Shopha.

87

----- PAGE 96 -----
88 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Regional Names

Indian Atees
Habitat

Ativisha is a drug of Himalayan origin. It is commonly found in the sub alpine and
alpine zones of the Himalaya from Indus to Kumaon at a height ranging about 6000-
15000 ft.

Morphology

Habit — Herbaceous perennial plant grows 1 to 1.5
mrs.

Root — Both taproot and adventitious roots are
present. Adventitious roots are swollen to form tubers.

Stem — Aerial as well as underground, aerial stem is
erect, hairy & branched.

Leaves — Cauline and ramal, simple, petiolate, leaf
base sheathing.

Inflorescence — Raceme with an end flower.

Flowers — Bisexual, polyse-palous, polypetalous,
with numerous stamens, bi to pentacarpellary syncarpous,
superior ovary.

Fruit —Etaerio of follicles

Varieties :
Based on colour of root tubers: esdanidae oa yom
Madanapala Nighantu
1. Rakta — Red tubers
2.Shweta — White tubers
3. Krishna -— Black tubers
4. Pita — Yellow tubers

----- PAGE 97 -----
Ativisha 89

Botanically three varieties of Afivisha are observed:

1, Aconitum heterophyllum

2. Aconitum palmatum

3. Aconitum kashmiricum
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Tuberous roots are obconical or ovoid, sometimes occurring as a pair of mother and
daughter tubers. The daughter tuber is bigger in size being 2 to 6 cm Jong and upto 1 cm
broad in the middle. It ends in a thin tap like extremity which is sometimes divided. The
surface is smooth, slightly curved and has a yellowish grey colour. The mother tuber is
small, shriveled up to 3 cm long and 0.5 cm thick and has a dark grey colour. The roots
are often crowned with scaly leaf buds.

Adverse effects

Ativisha belongs to the genus of poisonous species, shows the effect of poisoning
when used without proper care. At extreme over doses shows mild to moderate poisoning
like constipation, dry mouth, brady cardia but not fatal. 5-6 gm in a single dose without
purification may produce these toxicological effects.

Antidote — Goghrata (Cow’s ghee) or Godugdha (Cow’s milk) orally.
Shodhana (Purification)
Ativisha tuberous roots are cut into small pieces and kept in Gomaya kwatha (Liquid
cow dung) for 3 hours and then dried in Sunlight.
Classical references
Synonyms
ferarcaferferar ferar sret wfaferarseun | yertenear SAT ASAT FUTACAAT UI
(aa. Slaerafert 213)

Properties & Actions
faa arom weft uret dettett | arafirnirantarrarcatrpay
(aa. etreenfert 214)
aoomstataer feat aratrisatcel | arardtararedt ferrsatdternert
(aft. Teaert 11)
faarator crafter dt oret seat, | eaftiraricranraferrenreratrpatry Ut
(Fr. sieftat 1120-1121)

----- PAGE 98 -----
90 Dravyaguna Vijnana
memmstatren free patra | aranitararreth frreataterrert i
(wr. frorenfe af 135)

atfaferet mettre atom dtorarett | ara PTY STATA ASNT I
(B.A. mage ef 176)

Varieties
Pafrersferferar Har Yar HOT Taser | Taehtes ferareay Prfeigra yor aT ArT
(air. rocane af 136)

Purification
aerat teas Taefakerat aa: Etat wetewea asa at Areva:
(afr. froavafe et 137)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful Part of Ativisha
a. Tuberous roots b. Fruit c. Seed d. Flower

re

Ans: a. Tuberous roots
2. Atisine is present in

a. Gunja b. chitraka c. Ativisha d. Sarpagandha
Ans: c. Ativisha
3. Botanical name of Ativisha
a. Aconitum ferox b. Aconitum chasmanthum
c. Aconitum heterophyllum d. Glycyrrhiza glabra

Ans: c. Aconitum heterophyllum
4. Madri is a synonym of

a. Kumkuma b. Ativisha c.Apamarga d. Katuki
Ans: b. Ativisha

5. Shishubhaishajya is a synonym of
a. Lodhra b. Shunthi c. Vatsanabha_ d. Ativisha
Ans: d. Ativisha

6. Types of Ativisha as per Madanapala Nighantu
a.5 b. 4 c.6 d3

Ans: b. 4

----- PAGE 99 -----
Bakuchi

Useful part — Beeja (Seed)

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Bija — Shwitraghna, Rasayana, Ruchya, Hradya, Shwasahara, Kushthaghna,
Mehahara, Krimighna, Medhya, Dipana, Kandughna.

Phala — Kushthaghna, Keshya, Twachya, Krimighna, Shwasahara, Kasahara,
Shothahara.

Dosha karma : Kaphapittahara
Kaphahara because of Katuvipaka and Tikta Rasa.
Pittahara because of Tikta Madhura Rasa and Shita virya.
Phala — Kaphavatahara
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Bija -— Shwitra, Kushtha, Meha, Jwara, Krimi, Shwasa, Kasa, Visha, Kandu.
Phala — Kushtha, Kesha vikara, Twak roga, Krimi, Shwasa, Kasa, Shotha, Pandu.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Shwitra (Leucoderma)
qaAMsaMpreat aetkaeranar: (aL yeterat fers Past weary Toy
(RA. 2.2/137)

Kwatha (Decoction) preparerd from Avalguja (Psoralea corylifolia), Dhatri
(Phyllanthus emblica) and Khadira sara (Heart wood of Acacia catechu) will cure Shwitra
(Vitiligo). Patient should be on condusive diet.

2. Kushtha (Skin diseases)
arnt got yar waranty | sashes et Hes Hareresy
(ar.a.Fa. 54/53)

----- PAGE 100 -----
92 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Udwartana (Rubbing dried powder) of powder prepared from Somaraji (Psoralea
corylifolia) and Shringavera (Zingiber officinale) will cure any severe skin disorders.

3. Warkeent (Enteritis)
qadererssiat yretrareyas ar | aftr afer ages ATT IN

(a.fa. 19/33)

Shaka (Leaves) of Avalguja (Psoralea corylifolia) is processed with Dadhi (Curd)
and Dadima (Punica granatum) consumed with Shalyadi laghu Anna (Rice) by adding
ample Sneha (Ghee), will check Pravahika (Enteritis).

Matra (Dose)

Churna (Powder) — | to 3 gm (Internally)
Sufficient quantity (externally)

Phytoconstituents .

Fruits and seeds have essential oil (0.05%), resin (8.9%), brown fixed oil (10%),
raffenose compounds, coumarin compounds, psoralen, isopsoralidin, psoralidin, corylifolin,
bavachromanol, psoralenol.

Research corner

1. Antifungal activity of petroleum ether extract of Psoralea corylifolia L. seed,
tested against Fusarium sp. namely, Fusarium oxysporum, Fusarium
moniliforme, and Fusarium graminearum, was evaluated by agar well diffusion
assay and showed potent antifungal activity with a minimum inhibitory
concentration of 1 mg/mL against Fusarium sp. Srinivasan S, Sarada DV.
Antifungal activity of Phenyl Derivative of Pyranocoumarin from Psoralea
corylifolia L. Seeds by inhibition of Acetylation Activity of Trichothecene 3-
O-Acetyltransferase (Tri 101). J. Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:310850.
Equb 2012 Jun 21.

2. The seeds of Psoralea corylifolia L., an important medicinal herb in Indian
Pharmacopeia has shown anti-oxidant modulation in response to gamma
radiation induced oxidative stress. Jan. S, Parween T, Siddiqi TO,
Mahmooduzzafar. Antioxidant modulation in response to gamma radiation
induced oxidative stress in developing seedlings of Psoralea corylifolia L. J.
Environ Radioact. 2012. Jun 20:113C:142-149.

3. Psoralen and isopsoralen constituents of Psoralea corylifolia L. contribute to its
anticancer effect. Wang Y, Hong C, Zhou C, Xu D, Qu HB. Screening
Antitumour Compounds Psoralen and Isopsoralen from Psoralea corylifolia L.

----- PAGE 101 -----
Bakuchi 93

Seeds. Evid Based Complement Alternate Med. 2011;2011:363052. Equb
2011 Mar 10.

4. The antidepressant-like effects of psoralidin isolated from the seeds of Psoralea
corylifolia were investigated in the forced swimming test (FST) in ICR strain
of male mice. Results suggested that psoralidin possessed potent antidepressant-
like properties that were mediated via the monoamine ‘.curotransmitter and the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis systems. Yi LT, Li YC, Pan Y, Li
JM, Xu Q, Mo SF, Qiao CF, Jiang FX, Xu, HX, LU, XB, Kong LD, Kung
HF. Antidepressant-like effects of psoralidin isolated from the seeds of
Psoralea Corylifolia in the forced swimming test in mice. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Feb 15;32(2):510-9. Epub 2007
Oct 16.

5. A new biologically active flavonol glycoside (1) mp 264-265 degrees C,
C32H38020, (M)+742 (EIMS) has been isolated from the methanol-soluble
fraction of the defatted seeds of Psoralea corylifolia (Linn). which showed
antimicrobial activity against various bacteria and fungi. Yadava RN, Verma
V. A new biologically active flavonol glycoside from Psoralea corylifolia
(Linn.). J Asian Nat Prod Res. 2005 Aug; 7(4):671-S.

6. Psoralidin, Bakuchicin, Psoralin and Angelicin, isolated from the seeds of
Psoralea corylifolia, showed significant antibacterial activities against a number
of Gram (+) and Gram (-) bacteria. Khatune NA, Islam ME, Haque ME,
Khondkar P, Rahman MM. Antibacterial compounds from the seeds of
Psoralea corylifolia. Fitoterapia. 2004 Mar; 75(2):228-30.

Yoga (Formulations)
SI.No.

Indications
Shwitra, Kandu
Kushtha, Twakroga
Kushtha
Shwitra

Kushtha
Shwetakushtha

Psoralea — plants with rough surface due to glandular dots or warts.

Name
Somaraji Taila
Nila Ghrata

Vidangadi Churna

Somaraji Ghrata
Shashilekha Vati

| ae Panchanana Taila
Botanical Name
Psoralea corylifolia Linn.

----- PAGE 102 -----
94 Dravyaguna Vijnana

corylifolia — From Greek word korus which means helmet, calcine covering of the
nut.

Family : Fabaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni_ — Haritakyadi varga 206-209
Basonym of Drug
ATR: PEAS Mot KAT WHET UTATT, |
Bakuchi is a reputed drug for its use in Shwitra.
Synonyms
Morphology
‘lis gatttea - water woe: |
Bakuchi possess beautiful leaves.
2. wIeeet caret Frater eaele, Horeca: |
Bakuchi fruits are black.
3, POTAAT- HH HAAEM: |
Bakuchi fruits are black in colour.

4. Ufernent-alet giifer meTTeT: |
Fruits have characteristic offensive odour.
5. ifieral-aaa TEIseary |
Bakuchi seeds have white streaks.
Properties and Actions
6. -HS Erith
Bakuci is efficacious in Kustha
8. Paaedt-Past efter
Bakuchi cures Switra
9. Tery:-Aet Past Arter gery carte
Bakuchi destroys Switra (Vitiligo).
10, HARYM- sae aryl TRY wT TTTTAT |

Bakuchi imparts colour and lustre to a person suffering from Switra.

----- PAGE 103 -----
Bakuchi 95

Regional Names

Big [Poa sn Pap eaan]
(a cr
Bavachya, Babchi
Habitat

Grows in Uttar Pradesh and Assam, fairly common in Bihar, Punjab, Rajasthan,
Deccan, Konkan, and Karnataka, Commonly grows in plain areas and it is cultivated
also.

Morphology

Habit — An erect annual herb grows 60-180 cm
in height. Trunk is straight and gland dolted. Branches
are strong and elastic.

Leaves — Alternate, simple, covered with numer-
ous black dots. 3 to 8 cm long and 2.5 to 5 cm broad.
Round or heart shaped, scallop toothed with mucr-
onate apex. 5 main nerves springing from the base
and 4-6 pairs of lateral nerves springing higher up of
the leaf. Petiole is 1-2.5 cm long.

Inflorescence — Axillary 10-30 flowered race-
mose.

Flowers — Bluish purple in colour, long peduncle
and short pedicels. Calyx 3-4 mm long, gamosepalos.
Corolla twice as long as calyx, standard petal is or-
bicular 6 mm long, clawed, wing petal is oblong and
keel petal is obtuse.

Psoralea corylifolia Linn.

Androecium contains 10 stamens.

Gynocecium has monocarpellary ovary with long style and a minute terminal stigma.

Fruit — A small blackish, glabrous, ovoid or kidney shaped, compresed, closely
pitted one seeded indehiscent legume. Pods are 5 mm long.

Seeds — Smooth, small, adhering to pericap, some what ovate with an agreeable
aroma.

----- PAGE 104 -----
96 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Fruit is one seeded, indehiscent pod, measuring up to 5 mm in length and 3.5 mm in
breadth. These are ovoid, oblong, somewhat compressed or flattened. The surface of the
pericarp which closely adheres to the seed is glabrous, closely pitted, having a dark chocolate
to almost black pitted, having a dark chocolate to almost black colour. The entire pod, in
most cases, is found to be enclosed within a membranous persistent calyx which is adher-
ent to the fruit. The seed is also black and contains two starchless cotyledons. Odfrour is
faint, which turns pungent on chewing, having acrid, bitter taste and is nauseating.
Adverse effects

Oral administration has resulted in nausea, vomiting, malaise, loose motion and head
ache. Oil has a specific irritant action on the skin and mucous membrane.

On applying on leucoderma, the skin become reddish and occasionally blisters may
occur.
Classical references
Synonyms
TAM StH eres gutter | wihrerarHeTHe atar yfercacttier aT
aracett arent geet a wanttar u (ars. etrafest 206-207)

Properties and actions

atepelt weitere Hearet Tart | recreear wear MT vera UI

wal SM ses Aesarphy u acne frat HeHurtetet we |

aye eras TT (ALT. elMest 207-209)

araett vitcen ferret yer perigee, | tareategeer a ofatenteaedstt 1
(afi. Texafert 164)

arpelt gan fercar eure fear ory: | cto eye GAT Sea GET Tara

fase a tea cafe | att geahtrarremtesateet:

tect cay wae itraragiarrare ged | (s.FA. sitet 706-708)

ageh agra pipeaame | erdtaferangtreg weet a AT
(aft. wareete at 65)

ape dhrst eifesaret utah: 1 frre st fect fast cae satoTTafe

(RAR. Magee TT 166)

----- PAGE 105 -----
ro"

Bakuchi

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Pradhana Karma of Bakuchi

a. Mehahara b. Shwitraghna c. Vrishya
Ans: b. Shwitraghna

. Indications of Somaraji Taila

a. Shwitra b. Prameha c. Agnimandya
Ans: a. Shwitra

. Botanical name of Bakuchi

a. Boerhavia diffusa b. Vitex negundo
c. Piper longum d. Psoralea corylifolia
Ans: d. Psoralea corylifolia

. Shashilekha is a synonym of

a. Ativisha b. Ashwagandha __c. Bakuchi
Ans: c. Bakuchi

. Malayu is a synonym of

a. Kapikacchu b. Bakuchi c. Agnimantha
Nagakeshara
Ans: b. Bakuchi
. Bakuchi is
a. Herb b. Tree c. Creeper

Ans: a. Herb

d. Anulomana

d. Raktapitta

d. Shirisha

d. Shrub

----- PAGE 106 -----
Bala

Useful part: Mula (Root)
Rasadi Panchaka

Ra.
Snigdha, Guru
Karma (Actions)

Balya, Kantikara, Grahi, Vrashya, Ojo vardhaka, Ayu vardhaka, Stambhana (Bala
phala), Brahmana, Shothahara, Rasayana, Hradya.

Agrya Karma

AT MMM SHACTATAS TUM | (F.Y. 25/40)

Balaa (Sida cordifolia Linn.) is Astringent, energy promoter and pacify Vata.
Pharmacological activities

Aphrodisiac, Diuretic, Deflatulant, Analgesic, Antiinflammatory, Tonic, Emollient,
Cardio tonic.
Dosha karma (Action on Doshas)

Vatapitta Shamaka-Vatahara because of Madhura rasa, Snigdha guna and Madhura
vipaka.

Pittahara because of Shita Virya, Madhura Rasa and Madhura vipaka.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Vatavyadhi, Karshya, Dourbalya, Kshaya, Raktapitta, Vatarakta, Mutratisara,
Mutrakrachra.

Balaphala — Adhmana, Jwara
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic Administration)
1. Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata)

Bala taila 4.fa.— 28/148-56, Ufa. 5/19

Bala taild is commonly used in all kinds of Vatavyadhi.

----- PAGE 107 -----
Bala 99

Bahu Shosha (Atrophy of Arms) = Decoction of Bala mula (Root) with Saindhava
favana (Rock salt) is very useful in Bahu Shosha (Atrophy of arms).

2. Vatarakta (Gout)
BRAT VATS TST | (aA. 29/119-120, Ha Fe. 22/45-46)
aeraet at ufttenrame aftr wT 1 (yA. 5/12)
Bala taila (Oil) is used for bath, enema and for diet in case of Vatarakta.
3. Madatyayaja Trashna (Thirst caused by alcoholism)
gad ale aret seret Sar are ear vRACwat at Hocarats eran ge
(a.fa. 24/165)
In Madatyayaja trashna (Thirst caused by alcoholism) water processed with Bala
should be given to drink.
4, Shlipada (Filariasis)
afftor prerecare fate ag ATE | Halt seftrarsrgquares watt yeas
CAR ILCEDD)
One, who takes milk processed with two types of Bala (Bala and Atibala) in the
morning, will be relieved from Asadhya Shlipada (Chronic and severe filariasis).
Matra (Dose)
1. Kwatha (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
2. Chuurna (Powder) - 3to6g
3. Swarasa (Liquid extract) - 10to20ml

Phytoconstituents

Seed contains: Ephedrine, Fatty oil, Steroids, Phytosterol, Resin, Resin acids, Mu-
cin, Potassium nitrate.

Root contains: Ephedrine, Hypaphorine, Vasiscinone, Vasicine, Vasiscinol, Cho-
line, Betaine.

Research corner
1. Ethanol extract (EE), Chloroform (CF) and methanol (MF) fractions obtained
from Sida cordifolia are subjected to antinociceptive activity and these
demonstrate a pronounced antinociceptive activity on orofacial nociception.
Bonjardim LR, Silva AM, Oliveira MG, Guimaraes AG, Antoniolli AR,
Santana MF, Serafini MR, Santos RC, Araujo AA, Estevam CS, Santos MR,

----- PAGE 108 -----
Yoga (Formulations)
SILNo Name Indications

Bala Taila Vata Vikara, Bhagna
:

tN

a

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Lyra A, Carvalho R, Quintans-Junior LJ, Azevedo EG, Botelho MA. Sida
cordifolia leaf extract reduces the orofacial nociceptive response in mice.
Phytother Res. 2011 Aug; 25(8):1236-41. doi:10.1002/ptr.3550. Epub 2011
Jun 14.

. This study aimed at assessing the effects of ethanolic extract of Sida cordifolia

root on quinolinic acid (QUIN) induced neurotoxicity and to compare its effect
with the standard drug deprenyl in rat brain. Swathy SS, Panicker S, Nithya
RS, Anuja MM, Rejitha S, Indira M. Antiperoxidative and antiinflammatory
effect of Sida cordifolia Linn. on quinolinic acid induced neurotoxicity.
Neurochem Res. 2010 Sep; 35(9):1361-7. Epub 2010 May 25.

. Ethanol extracts of roots of Sida cordifolia was evaluated for antistress,

adaptogenic activity using cold restraint stress and swim endurance in mice.
Mice pretreated with extract of Sida cordifolia showed significant improvement
in the swim duration and reduced the elevated WBC, blood glucose and plasma
cortisone. Sumanth M, Mustafa SS. Antistress, Adoptogenic Activity of Sida
cordifolia Roots in Mice. Indian J Pharm Sci. 2009. May; 71 (3):323-4.

. The anti-pyretic and anti-ulcerogenic properties of methanolic extract of Sida

cordifolia aerial parts (MESC) were investigated in rats.

The analgesic and anti-inflammatory activities of a new alkaloid, 1,2,3,9-
tetrahydropyrrolo (2,1-b) quinazolin-3-ylamine (compound 1) isolated from
Sida cordifolia Linn. were investigated in animal models. The alkaloid also
produced significant increase in the tail flick latency in radiant heat tail-flick
method. In Carrageenan induced rat paw edema the compound 1 produced
16.93 and 24.43% inhibition of paw edema at the doses of 25 and 50 mg/kg
body weight respectively at the third hour of study. Sutradha RK, Rahman
AM, Ahmad M, Bachar SC, Saha A, Roy TG. Anti-inflammatory and
analgesic alkaloid from Sida cordifolia linn. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2007 Jul;
20(3):185-8.

Sida cordifolia extracts of the aerial and root parts showed good analgesic,
antiinflammatory and hypoglycaemic activities. Kanth VR, Diwan PV.
Analgesic, antiflammatory and hypoglycaemic activities of Sida cordifolia.
Phytother Res. 1999 Feb; 13(1):75-7.

Kshirabala Taila

----- PAGE 109 -----
Bala 10]

Vatarakta, pte

Baladi Kashaya

Baladya Ghrata
Balashwagandhalakshadi Taila

Botanical Name: Sida Cordifolia Linn.

Pittaja taja kasa
Rajayakshma, Kasa

Jwara, Unmada, Vatavikara

Sida — (Greek) old name for water lily used by Theophratus.
cordifolia — Heart shaped leaves.

Family — Malvaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features).
Kula — Karpasa

Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Brahmaniya Varga, Balya Varga, Prajasthapana Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Varga
Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduchyadi Varga 142-146
Basonym of Drug
aela aerate at, Wushth set aeladiered: , carat gerarexr |
Bala improves strength.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. ATeaTeeHT-aret aorerether TATA ET
Herb grows in fields and waste places.
Morphology
2. Gratar-war vem aaa, |
Stem of Bala is rough like Yastika
Tet Fore: |
Flowers are yellow.
4. Aeat-areae award BART
Bala stem is having strong fibres.
5. yitrarent-yftcrentet Teac ster

Fruits of Bala ripen in winter season.

----- PAGE 110 -----
102 Dravyaguna Vijnana

6. wgtadt-wantedt dtarreat: |
Bala seeds resemble cereals.
7. HeArea-vaaaharmararavarelest Ga |

Seeds of Bala resemble like that of Cereals.

Properties and Actions
8. TATSU-WYTATITAT |
Bala itself is strong and imparts strength.
9. faer-fasreor serfer aerate
Bala is promoting strength.

Regional Names

Mac

Habitat —Bala is distributed throughout the hotter parts of India and fairly common
in various provinces in states like Uttarpradesh, West
Bengal, Karnataka, Andhrapradesh, Tamilnadu and
Kerala. It is acommon weed grows in waste places.

Morphology
Habit — Wild undershrub

Stem — Herbaceous, aerial, erect, cylindrical,
branched, solid and green.

Leaf - Cauline and ramal, alternate, stipulate,
cordate, serrate, acute, pubescent, unciostate reticu-
late reined.

Inflorescence — Solitary, axillary or terminal and
few flowered cymes.
Flower —- Bracteate, pedicellate, complete,

actionomorphic, bisexual, pentamerous, hypogynous,
yellow coloured, 5 sepals, gamosepalous, petals are Sida cordifolia Linn

----- PAGE 111 -----
Bala 103

5, polypetalous, twisted, yellow. Stamens are indefinite, monadelphous; gynoecium is
multicarpellary, syncarpous, multi locular due to false septa.

Fruit —Schizocarp., 6-8 mm in diameter.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Identification: Pieces of cylindrical, gradually tapering roots upto 2 cm in diameter.
branching at lower parts only. The outer surface is rough, longitudinally wrinkled or
shrivelled and earthy brown in colour. The thicker root pieces bear transversely elongated
lenticels. Thinner pieces representing lower part of root bear lot of root-scars and rem-
nants of rootlets. A transversely cut portion of the root whose closely adhering bark which
is up to 1 mm thick; a well marked cambium ring, a woody region characterised by
radiating medullary rays in between concentric ring and a central pith. On breaking be-
comes short woody fieces, has characteristic pungent odour, mucilaginous on chewing.

Adverse effects

Bala is known as Indian-ephedra because it contains 0.8-1.2% of Ephedrine. The
continuous use of products with Ephedrine which is an alkaloid can bear a series of risk to
health. Intake of Bala, by not being aware of presence of ephedrine, or by ignoring its
contra-indications, or a prolonged use, specially combined with other stimulants, can be
harmful. For the reasons many states of United States have prohibited the use of the
ephedrine in the dietary compliments and not to advise in home made preparations. If
used it may cause Hypertension, Headache, Tremors, Insomnia, and Tacchycardia etc.

Remedial Measures: Avoid a prolonged usage of products containing ‘Ephedrine’
Synonyms
went areaiferent aaa Aa areaterentshe St 1 (aT. Yeeeah 142)
Properties and actions
aereged vit wet aerenritHe | feared maf weftreattrares ATTA MN
(ae. Weert 144)
(a5. TSeaeat 145)
aot fearert ear rarectver aeat Bratage | traf at eta acts aefaeatt
(af. yseaeert 271)
aereged Reret wet Taare: | vitet ote erecitsitteng: aaferotelay tt
aha arameanttrarercresreararcderary | (HAY. sitet tf 1056-1057)

----- PAGE 112 -----
104

Dravyaguna Vijnana

aeraet Targa Hard wet Ta fet Ate ET ees chat ENT
frarrenrrraaerfirerencrrentere 1 (3.F. ater af 1058-1059)
aersfafirra wet ftrartaraert | werdiver gi-aaiesntedt
(aA. Weeriert 95)
aeawAgRe wag vires rere | aed get gens arafrreraey
(RP. erqenfe TT 106)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Rasa of Bala Mula
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Tikta
Ans: b. Madhura
2. Sangrahika Balya Vata hara is the Agrya Karma is attributed to
a. Ashwagandha b. Brahmi c. Bala d. Amalaki
Ans: c. Bala
3. Pradhana Karma of Bala is
a. Balya b. Grahi c. Dipana d. Sangrahi
Ans: a. Balya

—

4. Ephedrine is present in

a. Ashoka b. Nirgundi c. Ativisha d. Bala
Ans: d. Bala

5. Balaguduchyadi Taila is indicated in
a. Amavata b. Vatarakta c. Jwara d. Shwitra

Ans: b. Vatarakta
6. Bhadraudani is a synonym of

a. Arjuna b. Ardraka c. Bala d
Ashwagandha
Ans: c. Bala
7. Botanical Name of Bala is
a. Sida veronaecifolia b. Sida cordifolia
c. Soda rhombifolia d. Abutilon indicum

Ans: b. Sida cordifolia

----- PAGE 113 -----
Chapter

Bijaka /Asana

Useful part - Sara (Heart wood).
Rasadi Panchaka

Rasa [Rashad
Ruksha, Laghu

Karma (Action)

Sara (Heart wood) — Pramehahara, Twachya, Keshya, Krimighna, Visarpahara,
Kushthaghna, Medohara, Rasayana, Galadoshahara, Stambhana, Rakta Shodhaka.

Pushpa (Flower) — Keshya, Pachana
Pharmacological Actions

Astringent, Anthelmintic, Blood purifier
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka - Kaphahara because of Ushna virya, Katu Vipaka and
Kashaya rasa.

Pitta Shamaka because of Kashaya rasa. Vatahara (Ra.Ni).- because of Ushna
virya.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Prameha, Kushtha, Visarpa, Shwitra, Krimi, Keshavikara, Raktapitta, Medoroga,
Galaroga.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Prameha (Diabetes)

ATA WT: HSA: | ATV SATA: HHA: I

(S.4, 38/9)
Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from Salasaradya gana including Bijaka is very use-

ful in Meha (Diabetes). It is also useful in Kushtha (Skin disease) & Pandu
(Anemia).

----- PAGE 114 -----
106 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Kushtha (Skin diseases)

aT Matfer ark Ba: Tfereitsrenr | (yfa. 6/19)

Sushruta advocates usage of Bijaka (Pterocarpus marsupium) and Khadira (Acacia
chateau) in different forms.
3. Raktapitta (Bleeding disorders)

AAT AH TATA IT: Were fakerra at | (aFa. 4/14)

Kshira (Alkali) prepared from Asana (Pterrocarpus marsupium) and Madhuka
(Madhuca indica) is very useful in Ratkapitta (Bleeding disorders).
4. Shwitra (Vititigo)

Wha Glogs ders cease | erasers get aay Praga

(a¢.fa. 20/8)

Intake of Markava (Eclipta alba) fried in oil kept in iron vessel followed by milk

processed with Bijaka (Pterocarpus marsupium) will cure Shwitra (Vitiligo).

5. Drishtibalartha (To improve eyesight)

fretemardet Teraatseated Pee: | sreraars frat antler Baler TAT

(3.8.3. 13/46)

The oil prepared from Tila (Sesamum indicum), Aksha taila (Terminalia belerica),
Bhrangaraja swarasa (Juice of Eclipta alba) and Asana kwatha (Decoction of Pterocarpus
marsupium) in an iron vessel used as Nasya (Snuff) will improve vision.

Matra (Dose)

Kwatha (Decoction) — 40-80 ml

Churna (Powder) — 3-5 g

Phytoconstituents — Kino heart wood contains 70-80% of Kinotannic acid, Kino-
red, K-pyrocatechin (Catechol), resin and gallic acid.

Research corner

1. To fractionate the antidiabetic constituents (s) of the aqueous extract of
Pterocarpus marsupium, heartwood: (PME), the antidiabetic constituents of
Pterocarpus marsupium demonstrate that a high molecular weight constituents
(s) of Pterocarpus marsupium has patent insulinotrophic and insulin-like
properties. Mohankumar SK, O'Shea T, McFarlane JR. Insulinotrophic and
Insulin-like effects of a high molecular weight aqueous extract of Pterocarpus
marsupium Roxb. heartwood. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2012 May 7;141 (1): 72-9.
Epub 2012 Feb 10.

----- PAGE 115 -----
Bijaka /Asana 107

he

. Study is designed to investigate the effect of of aqueous extract of Prerocarpus
marsupium Roxb, on elevated inflammatory cytokine, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-i by in type 2 diabetic rats. Modulation of cytokine TNF-f by the
Rasayana drug Prerocarpus marsupium is telated with its potential anti-diabetic
activity. Halagappa K, Girish HN, Srinivasan BP. The study of aqueous extract
of Pterocarpus marsupium Roxb. on cytokine TNF-{ in type 2 diabetic rats.
Indian J. Pharmacol. 2010 Dec; 42(6):392-6.

3. Methanolic extract. of Plerocarpus marsupium Roxb (P. marsupium)
administered to both non-diabetic and alloxan induced diabetic adult female
Wistar rats a dosage of 500mg/kg body weight, and its effect was checked on
serum and tissue lipids together with corticosterone, estrogen and progesterone
profile. Singh PK, Baxi D, Banerjee, $, Ramachandran AV. Therapy with
methanolic extract of Pferocarpus marsupium Roxb and Ocimum sanctum
Linn reverses dyslipidemia and oxidative stress in alloxan induced type I
diabetic rat model. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2012 Jul; 64(5):441-8. Epub 2010 Nov
23.

4, The present study was aimed at extensively evaluating the antioxidant
properties of an anti-diabetic plant extract of stem bark of Pterocarpus
marsupium using various in vitro radical scavenging assays as well as by using
liver slice cultures as a model system. Results demonstrate that the whole
aqueous extract showed high antioxidant activity in all different assays used
and also protected mitochondria against oxidative damage. Mohammadi M,
Khole S, Devasagayam TP, Ghaskadbi SS. Pterocarpus marsupium extract
reveals strong in vitro antioxidant activity. Drug Discover Ther. 2009 Aug;
3(4):151-61.

5. The present study was undertaken to evaluate cardiotonic activity of aqueous
extract of heartwood of Pterocarpus marsupium. Compared to digoxin, a drug
with narrow therapeutic window, Pterocarpus marsupium showed wide
therapeutic window. Mohire NC, Salunkhe VR, Bhise SB, Yadav AV.
Cardiotonic activity of aqueous extract of heartwood of Pterocarpus
marsupium. Indian J Exp Biol. 2007 Jun; 45(6):532-7.

Yoga (Formulation)

SI.No. Name

Asana kashaya
Asana Bilvadi Taila

Bijaka Sararishta

Indications

Sthoulya
Shiroroga, Karnaroga

----- PAGE 116 -----
108 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Asanadi Yoga Dushtha vrana
Pandu, Prameha

Botanical Name — Pierocarpus marsupium Linn.

pterocarpus - Ptero-with wings, carpus-fruit
marsupium - bears pouch in flowers (Purse like).
Family — Fabaceae
Kula - Aparajita kula

Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Udardaprashamana Varga
Sushruta Salasaradi Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni.  Vatadi varga 28-29

Basonym of Drug
ates areater ferafer were TAI, sted Reratela wrens a AAA, |

Bijaka is very much beneficial in Prameha roga and fruits are spread over large area
as itis a large tree.

disens tet disreta Wrerar |
Seed appears prominent in a fruit.
Synonyms
Habitat
Bijaka commonly grows in Shura sena pradesha (Western Uttar Pradesh).
Morphology
2. tat: Wet HSA |
Trunk of Bijaka is very large.
3. Wereast:—Wer gat: Tale: |
Bijaka is big tree like that of Sarja (Vateria indica).
Bijaka blossoms in Pushya masa (Late winter).
5. Btieer- goat Bread |

Flowers are aromatic.

----- PAGE 117 -----
Bijaka /Asana 109

6, Crrare thereat: aise
Heart wood of Bijaka is yellow in colour,

7, regres: —threrare: virereryy: |
Heart wood is yellow in colour and resembles heart wood of Sala (Shorea ro-
busta),

Properties and Actions

8. yd: Hye: |

Bijaka is Karshyakara (emaciating)

Regional Names

Indian Kino tree
Vijayasar
Honnemara
Habitat

Plant is distributed throughout India. It is commonly seen in Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Orissa, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh.

B

Morphology

Habit — Moderate to tall sized deciduous tree
grows 30 mtrs in height and 2.5 mtrs in girth with
straight clear hole.

Heart wood — Golden brown or reddish brown
coloured with darker streaks, strong, tough and mod-
erately heavy.

Leaves — Compound, imparipinnate, leaflets 5-
7, coriaceous, oblong to obtuse glabrous on both
surfaces.

Inflorescence — Terminal panicle.

Flower- Pale yellow, petals are 1-1.5 cm long.

Pterocarpus marsupium Linn.

Fruit — Pod, 2.5-5cm in diameter, nearly cir-
cular, glabrous, with wings, seed is small.

----- PAGE 118 -----
110 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Heart wood pieces will be rectangular or square shaped, 2 to 3 cm thick. Surface is
yellowish red with golden hue, marked with dark streaks and parallely running striation
which represent annual rings. The drug also occurs as curved shavings of brownish red
colour. Very difficult to break and it is brittle. Has phenolic characteristic odour. Taste is

astringent followed by bitter after taste.
Classical references

Synonyms

asta: dhrans Hager gent | aepenger: free: Ustensret: TAA:
(ary. aereat 28)

Properties and Actions
disre: gedhatias teqe arity aha sctoretircts crea: caval Tare: 1
(Ae. aetert 29)

aiste: CHa arate: (a. sranfeert 115)

ofits: Hee: Alo: HAs: Sahel laa: heaters: Hhrataday:

aha pegehiatatar wares: | rater a orttn ferares weer et

(Syarhh ateratatfir pores weprftr a ) farce arerttarhs arent startet FE
(fa. atefterf 811-815)

STA: HSS ferent aaa | AHL MATA THATS: UI
(ay. sasteat 133)

TEA FAT: ited Gar: foraHTTE: | eet AeHErahraned TAR: |
(BAY. etree aT 128)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Bijaka is
a. Mula b. Sara c. Pushpa d. Fruit
Ans: b. Sara

2. Pradhana Rasa of Bijaka
a. Katu b. Amla c. Tikta d. Kashaya

Ans: d. Kashaya
3. Pradhana Karma of Bijaka

----- PAGE 119 -----
Bijaka /Asana 111

sec a ab a a ce

a. Jwaraghna b. Pramehahara c. Dipana d. Shwasahara
Ans: b. Pramehahara

4. Ayaskriti is indicated in
a. Prameha b. Agnimanadya c. Shwasa d. Atisara
Ans: a. Prameha

5. Botanical name of Bijaka or Asana
a. Pterocarpus santalinus b. Aconitum ferox
c. Pterocarpus marsupium d. Elettaria cardamomum
Ans: c. Pterocarpus marsupium

6. Mahasarja is a synonym of
a. Arjuna b. Sarja c. Tuvaraka d. Bijaka
Ans: d. Sarja

7. Habit of Bijaka
a. Shrub b. Tree c. Creeper d. Herb
Ans: b. Tree

----- PAGE 120 -----
Chapter

Bhallataka

Useful parts — Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi pancaka

Vipaka

Karma (Action)
Bhallataka phala— Pachana, Chedana, Bhedana, Medhya, Dipana, Vranahara,
Kushthahara, Arsoghna, Jwarahara, Krimighna, Sukrala, Grahi and Balya.

Bhallataka majja — Vrishya, Bramhana, Dahashamaka, Tarpaka, Dipana.
Bhallatakasthi— Pachaka, Medhya, Dipaka, Krimighna.

Agrya Karma
MecaaHtsee:y | (31.2.3. 40)

Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium) is best in Arshas (Piles).

~

Pharmacological Action

Anti cancerous Antiallergic Anti inflammatory
Antibacterial Analgesic Anti arthritic
Cardiac depressant Hypotensive

Dosha Karma
Kapha Vata Shamaka - Kapha hara beacause of Ushna virya and Katu rasa.
- Vatahara because of Ushna virya, Madhura Vipaka and Snigdha guna
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Bhallataka phala — Arshas, Kushtha, Grahani, Gulma, Shopha, Anaha, Jwara,
Krimi, Agnimandya, Shwitra, Krimi, Vrana.

Bhallataka majja — Karshya, Klaivya, Daha, Aruchi.
Bhallatakasthi — Kushtha, Arshas, Grahani, Gulma, Shopha, Anaha, Jwara, Krimi.

----- PAGE 121 -----
Bhallataka 113

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Arshas (Piles)

Woody AY Wawro | (af. 14/70)
Butter milk processed with Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium) is very useful in
Arshas (Piles).
2. Apaci (Scrofula)
atartecarfit gear weer: we | orp dfieacetet were
(WH. 3.11/98)

The paste prepared by burning the combination of Sarsapa, Arishtha patra (Leaves
of Azadirachta indica) and Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium) mixed with goat’s urine
and applied over Apaci.

3. Romashtanartha (To remove unwanted hair)
det wera watat ada wo wees afta, dame
(a.fa. 1/107)
The combination of Taila (Oil) of Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium) and Snuhi
Kshira (Latex of Euphorbia nerifolia) is a very good remedy for removing unwanted
hair.
4. Krimi (Worm infestation)
ferarecat det Uy edt et asta | (37.2.F8. 20/32)
In case of Krimi (Worms) one has to take Bhallataka taila internally or as a Basti
(Enema).
5. Kushtha (Skin diseases)
Tee: AaHct: Ural: Breit amber Teh a (aA. 7/82)

Person has to take the ghee processed with Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium),
Amalaki (Emblica officinalis), Haritaki (Terminalia chebula), Vibhitaki (Terminalia
belerica) and Nimba (Azadirachta indica). This is very beneficial in curing all the skin
diseases.

Matra (Dose)
Taila : 10-20 drops
Kshirapaka _: 30m.
Phytoconstituents

Nuts contain — Bhilawanol, Bioflavanoids A, B and C., Anacardiac acid.

----- PAGE 122 -----
114

Seeds contai i ‘
1in— Bhilawanol :
j 4 Bt ne, Bioflavonoids, Bp;
Anacardol, Semecarpol. Nut shell contains! Bioflavaone, » Bhil
Tetrahydroa-mentoflavone, and Tetrahydrorobust
Research corner

Li;

i)

Dravyaguna Vijnana _

and Anacordoside, Anacardic acid, cardoy,

tho
aw: ’
aflavone. Ang),

wo 1 a a .
The objective of the study was [0 determine the antic NCEFOUS effica,
jective oO ‘ . us anacardium (SA) ny ot
Ayurvedic preparation made of Semecarp™ Uts, f;
yurvedic preparation mé he stud demonstrated the eff; Ve
groups of rats were used for the study. The stucy ICac
act for the treatment of hepatocey

Semecarpus anacardium nut milk extr Lule,
carcinoma cither alone or along with chemotherapy. Joseph JP1, Raval S

Sadariya KA, Jhala M, Kumar P. Anti cancerous efficacy of Ayurvedic milk
extract of Semecarpus anacardium nuts on hepatocellular carcinoma in Wists
rats. Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 2013 Aug 12; 10(5):299-304
To evaluate the hypolipidemic effect of Semecarpus anacardium Linn nut milk
extract (SA) in high cholesterol fed hyperlipidemic rat model. SA demonstrate
remarkable hypolipidemic activity in high cholesterol fed hypercholesterolemic
rats. The potential anthihyperlipidemic action 1s plausibly due to its underlyin
antioxidant role. vinayagam KS1, Khan HB, Keerthiga G, Palanivelu §,
Panchanatham S. Hypolipidemic effect of Semecarpus anacardium in hj
cholesterol fed hypercholesterolemic rats. Chin J Integr Med. 2012 Dec 3,
Semecarpus anacardium Linn. nut milk extract (SA) was evaluated for jts
antidiabetic role in type 2 diabetic rats. Type 2 diabetes was induced in rats by
feeding high-fat diet for 2 weeks followed by single intraperitoneal injection of
streptozotocin 35 mg/kg body weight. Diabetic rats were treated with SA orally
at a dosage of 200 mg/kg body weight daily for 30 days. The potential
antihyperglycemic action of SA is plausibly due to tis underlying antioxidant
role. Khan HB1, Vinayagam KS, Renny CM, Palanivelu S, Panchanadham S.
Potential antidiabetic effect of the Semecarpus anacardium in a type 2 diabetic
rat model. Inflammopharmacology. 2013 Feb; 21 (1):47-53. doi: 10.1007/
s10787-012-0136-6. Epub 2012 May 4.

- The wound healing promoting property of stem bark methanol extract of

Semecarpus anacardium was evaluated at three different dosages by excision,
incision and dead space wound models using Wistar albino rats. Methanol
extract at 100 mg kg (-1) exhibited significant wound healing activity but was
lesser than standard; whereas, in animals treated with 50 and 75 mg kg(-!)
showed moderate activity. Lingaraju GM1, Krishna V, Joy Hoskeri 1
Pradeepa K, Venkatesh, Babu PS. Wound healing promoting activity of stem

----- PAGE 123 -----
Bhallataka 115

bark extract of Semecarpus anacardium using rats, Nat. Prod Res. 2012;
26(24):2344-7. doi: 10,1080/14786419.2012,656108. Epub 2012 Feb 10.

toga (Formulations)
SI.No

Indications
Graathi

Name
Bhallataka Churna
Bhallatakadya Taila
Bhallataka Ghrata

Nadivrana, Apachi
Grahani, Gulma, Pandu

Kankayana Vati
Bhallatakavaleha

I

z

3

4.

Bhallatakadi Kwatha Urustambha

Botanical Name

Semecarpus anacardium Linn.

Semecarpus - Simeion-marking, carpus-carpos (Greek) which means nut [Black
juice of the nut is used for marking or tracing designs upon cloth].

Anacardium - Heart like.
Family — Anacardiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features).
Kula — Amra kula
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Dipaniya Varga, Kushthaghna Varga, Mutra Sangrahaniya Varga
Sushruta Nyagrodhadi Gana, Mustadi Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni.  Haritakyadi Varga 228-232

Basonym of Drug

Tet Fara, TATA |

Bhallataka is very sharp like that of spear.
Synonyms
Morphology

1. aPagdt- ataxic pa vittaritset |

Bhallataka fruits are attached to the orange coloured fleshy cup.

----- PAGE 124 -----
116 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. enqeffer:-erqftarettarrer |

Bhallataka fruits are obliquely ovoid.
3. Were: -det Ase |

Bhallataka fruit has oily contents.

Properties and actions
4. Aratk-areatyrr: |
Bhallataka passifies Vata.
5, aiftren:-atrar aera |
Bhallataka causes burns and increase temperature.
6, SRA: aTEdTt HAT
Bhallataka fruit causes blisters.
7. Weett-aeet ga cent tase |
The Rasa (Juice) of Bhallataka is very corrosive.
8. Ver:-Rrreagarcthre
Bhallataka alleviates Arbuda (Cancerous growth).
9. Wren: Taree caret rter
Bhallataka juice cause redness to the skin.
10. yitmpd-Vitth caeter eae het
Bhallataka juice induce swelling if comes in contact with skin.
11. araer:-atetary gat: |
Bhallataka is very sharp and potent plant.
= Names

es aa |
Habitat— Bhallataka is found in abundant in Bihar, Westbengal, Orissa, Assam,
Karnataka and fairly common in hotter parts of India.

----- PAGE 125 -----
Bhallataka 117

Morphology

Bhallataka is a medium sized tree grows up to
30-50 ft. in height.

Bark — Gray in colour and exudes an irritant se-
cretions on incising.

Leaves-— Simple, 30-60 cm long, 12-30 cm broad,
obovate to oblong, glabrous above, ashy gray or buff
and pubescent beneath and developed on the tip of the |£7,”
branch and deciduous. ;

Inflorescence — Compound panicle.

Flowers-— Small, greenish yellow, dioecious, with
long flower stalk, petals are 5-6, stamens 5-6, ovary is
rudimentary in male flowers and superior in case of | Semecarpus anacardium Linn.
female flowers.

Fruit— Drupaceous nut, 2-3 cm long, heart shaped, green when raw and turn to
black on ripening. Fruits are attached to fleshy orange coloured receptacle, which is ed-
ible.

Seeds - Pendulous.

Fruit contains black, oily and highly vesicant juice which is used traditionally for
marking the cloths.

Varieties — Sushruta and Nighantu Ratnakara:

1.Bhallataka 2. Nadi Bhallataka

Botanically other species are:

1. Semecarpus albecens 2. Semecarpus travancoria
3. Semecarpus anrienlata 4. Semecarpus heterophylla
5. Semecarpus kurzi 6. Semecarpus pubescens
7. Semecarpus obscura 8. Semecarpus parviflora

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Fruit is heart shaped, obliquely ovoid, drupaceous nut, with a fleshy pear-shaped
receptacle. It is up to 2.5 cm long and 2 cm broad. Surface is black or brownish black,
glossy, sometimes shrivelled. Internally the nut contains a viscous oily liquid of black
colour.

Adverse effects
In higher doses Bhallataka will cause

----- PAGE 126 -----
118 Dravyaguna Vijnana

e Blisters on tongue and throat e Increased thirst and sweat

e Heart burn e Gastro-intestinal tract irritation
e Oliguria ¢ Skin eruptions and burning

e Swelling e Renal failure

Remedial measures
1. If consumed then gastric lavage should be done.
. In case of dehydration-I V fluid administration.
. Antacid therapy
. Jiraka (Cumin seed) and Saindhava lavana (Rock salt) to be given.

nn & WwW bh

. Coriander leaves paste is applied.
6. Butter with Tila kalka (Paste of Sesamum) or Haridra (Turmeric) application.

Antidote
1. Coconut oil will be good antidote.

2. Application of Meghanada Rasa (Juice of Amaranthus tricolour) with-
Navanita (Butter).

Fatal Dose — More than 10 gm.
Fatal Period — 12-24 hrs.

Shodhana (Purification)

1. Fruit of Bhallataka (Semecarpus anacardium) is cut into pieces by crushing
and kept it in Ishtika churna (Brick powder) or rubbed with brick powder.
Then it is washed clearly with hot water. This purifies Bhallataka.

2. Swedana is done with Narikela ambu (Coconut water) is Dolayantra.
Classical references
Synonyms
aves Bry vinecrisenisttre: alain sect cages sims,
(a3. etrrnfert 228)

Properties and Actions
Tet arent aha amarante | Hewiinecthyeaiermesatpety Ul
aaa aT ger seu avafirrat | GaTeERt tag fret year,
(aa. ethene at 229-231)

----- PAGE 127 -----
Bhallataka 119

TATA ATATT TUT:
oa gersenfasatenra sitar ui (as. ehercrnfeert 232)
TEMA: BHT AIT: HHA: | Tearefaeeltart set aH A, I
(aft, aaeat 129)
Sete TAA: HATA AYUASA | Met Utes che: firmwares trey: I
yet sat set wefirr fererny i areata et far Heures wy
mare ured fearet cfteniteat Sfe Nea | Hext atrgent eft aaa AVTTaTy, |!
SS Teut YouylEMepi | AST AE Get seelt araftrcta
(fA. sitsftreart 496-500)
Teeth: eae: Bea: Hea, | UHATATTATS- ASAT:
STERN Wat ATTA EE at arc ATH AAT ATE TATE TAT TAT TSA |
wart ot fexteatesrt frarcen adutt arabernentctrarrtt PrateT TASTAT I
(aft. sTeTfeat 69)
gestg aamay fata wert ghsy, amet viftraghetstiragy ait
faatreatt 1 (R.A. iaeenest 53)
Grahya Bhallataka (Genuine Bhallataka)
aectaafr waar franca ahr g | Paste fe arta ores fags
(L.4. 24/473)

Bhallataka matra (Dose)
Teent: WAT Terres day | Meta Waele: serenreretera
(Ld. 24/473)
Bhallataka Shodhana Prayojana (Dose)
Wea TT: wacasth ufsate i tht aeot ATt Aarfaereory
wit weeny dia ce earany | ge frat at dread yaa su
SHURA Uaet UIA RaT | Meat at: MaMa Ae
(U1. 24/474-476)
Bhallataka Shodhana

sBergut wath wet weoraanteey | Wgcteated etenft ara: 0

----- PAGE 128 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

Aa: Wat Was atterdafractd: | seat tera TT Aeon Bhar u

(U9. 24/477-478)

eA: Theis AtRenemaare: | heer sherent Ger YA ATA TTA,

_

(Ud. 24/475)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Bhallataka

a. Bija b. Phala c. Twak d. Mula
Ans: b. Phala

. Vipaka of Bhallataka

a. Katu b. Amla c. Madhura d. Lavana
Ans: c. Madhura

. Agrya Karma of Bhallataka

a. Arshas __ b. Kushta c.Jwara d. Raktapitta
Ans: a. Arshas

. Anacardic acid is present in

a. Arka b. Karanja _—_c. Kanchanarad. Bhallataka
Ans: d. Bhallataka

. Kankayana Vati is indicated in

a. Kushta b. Arshas c. Atisara d. Grahani
Ans: b. Arshas

. Botanical name of Bhallataka

a. Pongamia pinnata b. Piper nigrum
c. Semecarpus anacardium d. Zingiber officinalis
Ans: c. Semecarpus anacardium

. Dhanurbija is the synonym of

a. Bhallataka b. Maricha c.Dadima _d. Guggulu
Ans: a. Bhallataka

. Bhallataka shodhana is done with

a. Shunthi Rasa b. Ishtika Churna c. Taila d. Ghrata
Ans: b. Ishtika Churna

----- PAGE 129 -----
Bharangi

Useful part — Mula (Root).
Rasadi panchaka

Katu, Tikta, Kashaya
Ruksha, Laghu

Karma (Action)
Shwasahara, Kasahara, Pachana, Dipana, Shothahara, Jwaraghna, Krimighna,
Dahahara, Vranahara, Ruchikara, Arshoghna.
Action on Dosha
Kapha vata Shamaka, Kaphara because of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu,
Tikta, Kashaya rasa. Vatahara because of its Ushna virya.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Shwasa, Kasa, Pinasa, Aruchi, Agnimandya, Gulma, Shotha, Jwara, Rajayakshma,
Vrana, Krimi, Jwara, Raktagulma, Arshas.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Shwasa (Bronchial asthma)
ugar: meh aRaaetar | dghrrarentangatont agar Frey
(a.fa. 17/110)
Paste prepared from Bharangi (Rotheca serrata) and Nagara (Zingiber officinale)
or Marica (Piper nigrum) and Yavakshara is taken with Kwatha of Pitadru (Berberis

aristata), Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica), Asphota (Hemidesmus indicus) and Murva
(Marsedinia tenacissima) is much beneficial in Shwasa (Bronchial asthma).

feranq-aret ar aftteprargary | (33. 51/39)

Paste of Bharangi (Rotheca serrata) prepared with ghee and honey should be given
for licking in case of Shwasa (Asthma).

2. Arshas (Piles)

Te Wa Tgulentaaaramctey Say Aas HET: 1 (GFT. 6/13)

----- PAGE 130 -----
122 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Butter milk processed with Bharangi (Rotheca serrata), Asphota, Yava (Hordeum
vulgare), Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) and Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia) is to be given
for drinking in case of Arshas (Piles).

3. Madatyaya (Alcoholism)
agi a wert feetsaaen: | (%.3. 47/36)

Decoction prepared from Bharangi (Rotheca serrata) is used to take bath. This will
cure Madatyaya (Alcoholism).

Matra (Dose)
Mula Churna (Root powder) : 3 to 6 gm

Phytoconstituents
Root bark — Contains-D-mannitol, B-Sitosterol, Glucose, Stigmasterol, Traces of
saponins, serratagenic acid, oleanolic acid, queretaroic acid.

Leaves — a-spinasterol, Catechin, Luteolin, Apigenin, Baicalein, Scutellarein, Caf-
feic acid, Ferulic acid, Arabinose & glucuronic acid, Plantarenaloside and euphroside.

Research corner

1. A new compound, serratin, was isolated from the essential oil of Clerodendron

serratum alongwith lupeol. The structure of the compound has been elucidated
on the basis of chemical analysis and spectroscopic methods including IR, MS,
and NMR techniques. Ravikumar R, Lakshmanan AJ, Ravi S. Chemical
constituents from Clerodendron serratum. J Asian Nat Prod Res. 2008 Jul-
Aug; 10(7-8):659-62.

2. The ethanol extract of Clerodendron serratum roots and ursolic acid isolated
from it were evaluated for hepatoprotective activity against carbon tetrachloride
induced toxicity in male Wistar strain rats. The results when compared with the
standard drug silymarin, revealed that the hepatoprotective activity of the
constituents ursolic acid is significant as similar to the standard drug. Vidya
SM, Krishna V, Manunatha BK, Mankani KL, Ahmed M, Singh SD.
Evaluation of hepatoprotective activity of Clerodendrum serratum L. Indian J
Exp Biol. 2007 Jun; 45(6):538-42.

. The alcoholic extract (50, 100 and 200 mg/kg, p.o.) of Clerodendron serratum
roots produced a significant antinociceptive, anti-inflammatory and antipyretic
activities in animal models. Narayanan N, Thirugnana-sambantham P,
Viswanathan S, Vijayasekaran, V, Sukumar E, Antinociceptive, anti-
inflammatory and antipyretic effects of ethanol extract of Clerodendron

wW

----- PAGE 131 -----
Bharangi 123

serratum roots in experimental animals. J Ethnopharmacol. 1999 Jun; 65 (3):
237-41.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name Indications

Bharangyadi churna Shula, Angamarda

Bharangyadi kwatha Kapha jwara

Bharangyadi lehya Shwasa

Bharangyadi sura Unmada
Vidangadi churna Mandagni
Botanical Name

Rotheca serrata (Linn.), Steane & Mabb.
Rotheca — Small teak from Malayalam origin

serratum — Based on saw toothed margins of the leaves.
Family— Lamiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Classical categorization (Gana)
Charaka — Purisha Sangarahaniya Varga
Sushruta Pippalyadi Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Haritakyadi Varga 182-183

Basonym of Drug

oat sft argt | yeritere 1 ( Prat.) vate er oetfseerenre, gfe aT 1 aT
ames 1 (31.4)

Bharangi destroys all the diseases. It possesses the potency of Sun.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. GRTH-Gh: TTT: |
Leaves of Bharangi are rough.
2. Wl-WaMnet GST: |

Flowers are red like that of lotus.

3. AFNaeh-sg_rieraectt sez sit sigTracet |

----- PAGE 132 -----
124 Dravyaguna Vijnana

When blossoms appears like Angara (Red hot coal).
Properties and Actions
4, Wreratt-aferrcart Treat ste
Bharangi is very auspicious plant.
5. Wreratdent-areroren aE she | ATEVITHATIS ATL |
Bharangi is an auspicious plant having the stem like that of Yasft.

Regional Names

Habitat— Bharangi grows in many parts of India like Karnataka, Kerala, Tamilnadu,
West Bengal, Bihar and Himalayan region.

Morphology

Habit — Shrub grows upto 7 ft. in height.

Stem — Bluntly quadrangular, young parts gla-
brous.

Leaves— Opposite, big, upto 28 cm long but usu-
ally 12-15 cm in length, 5.5-6 cm wide, oblong or
elliptic, acute, coarsely and sharply serrate, glabrous,
petioles are very stout, 6 mm long.

Inflorescence— Panicle, 15-20 cm long.

Flowers— Numerous, showy has a pair of acute
bracts at each branching, pedicels twisted, flowers
are bluish to dark purple in colour.

; Clerodendron serratum (Linn).
Fruit — Drupe, 6 mm long, somewhat succulent, ile Cinp)

broadly obovoid, normally four lobed.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Roots are hard, cylindrical, gradually tapering, 2 to 5 cm in diameter, split longitudi-
nally into half. External surface is rough, dark brown in colour, with scattered patches of
small beady warts and circular scars. The centrally split pieces show a creamish yellow,

----- PAGE 133 -----
Bharangi 125

longitudinally striated woody surface with a well marked pith. The bark is upto 2 mm
thick and is always accompanied with substantial portion of woody part of the root. Root
is difficult to break and becomes fibrous. Root does not have any particular odour.

Adulterants
1. Stem part of Clerodendron serratuin
2. Root of Clerodendrum indicum
3. Bark of Picrasma quasiodes
Classical references

Synonyms
agt eat War Gosh arelvratwet | aelvagacch a UIT sera I
(41.5. Te=aeart 143)

Properties and Actions

anff var peter Sector ore ory: | eto get YorerHqayeae Fay I

Vila H SMT a SATA HAL UI (ALT. Site HT 182-183)

TST AL ae ferear SOT APH HUTT EAST ae seat Stat STM

(afi. qeeufe aT 68)

aster Haravent dost ure og: | cea BAT TATA HATTA, I

iirarahaeura senrut ferret i (o.F.sitetirert 1135-1136)

ag g wefan meat | warped a cesar Prarktatt
(ain. frereanfert 151)

UST vaHeMTeTaT adler ort, araver Hatt aN ATA HES |

ard direnarite warete: Y tei at set aha a eeerARaet WET araatt
(B.A. marge at 126)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Bharangi
a. Twak b. Mula c. Phala d. Patra

Ans: b. Mula

2. Pradhana Karma of Bharangi is

a. Dipana b. Stambhana c. Shwasahara__ d. Vrashya

Ans: c. Shwasahara

----- PAGE 134 -----
126 Dravyaguna Vijnana

eee

3. Bharangyadi Lehya is indicated in
a. Agnimandya _ b. Ajirna c. Anidra d. Shwasa
Ans: d. Shwasa

4, Botanical name of Bharangi is
a. Rotheca serrata b. Symplocos serrata
c. Cyperus rotundus d. Andrographis paniculata
Ans: a. Rotheca serrata

5. Brahmana Yashtika is the synonym of
a. Manjishta b. Bharangi c. Parpata d. Gambhari
Ans: b. Bharangi

6. Habit of Bharangi is
a. Tree b. Creeper c. Herb d. Shrub
Ans: d. Shrub

----- PAGE 135 -----
Chapter
Bhringaraja

Useful parts — Panchanga (Leaves, stem, fio

Wer, roots & fruits)
Rasadi Panchaka

li
thi

Karma (Actions) — Keshya, Twachya,
Shothahara, Pandunut, Dantya, Rasayana,

Pharmacological activities: Hepatoprotective, Antiviral, Antibacterial, Purgative
Hypotensive, Analgesic, Antileprotic, wound healing.

Action on Dosha — Kapha Vata hara,
Katu vipaka and Katu, Tikta Rasas, Vataha
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications]

Kesha vikara like Palitya & Khali
Shotha, Amadosha, Pandu, Dantarog

Krimighna, Shwasahara, Kasahara,
Balya, Netrya.

Kapha Shamaka because of Ushna virya,
ra because of Ushna virya.

tya, Kushtha, Krimi, Shwasa, Kasa, Shotha, Kasa,
a, Netravikara, Shirorti, Hradroga, Visha.

Amayika— Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1 Palitya (Hair fall)

archer Taree, etre faneet ee WENT 1 a: wed Hed dortaes ufeaTae II
(af. 26/267)

The oil prepared from Markava (Eclipta alba), Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra) and
milk is used as Nasya (Inhalation). This reduces Palita (Premature graying of hair).

2 Shwitra (Vitiligo)

Who Bled Te te cheesy | Sistas es Gre wag frases uN

(3.a.Fa. 20/08)

Bhringaraja (Eclipta alba) is fried in iron pan with oil given to eat then milk pro-

cessed with Bijaka (Pterocarpus marsupium) given to drink. This therapy is very much
beneficial in Shwitra (vitiligo).

----- PAGE 136 -----
128 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Drashti prasadanartha (To improve vision)
fretemardet yeeaistarea Pree: | srereraratercet anttfer eater eT, 11
(3.2.5 13/46)

Taila (Oil) of Tila (Sesamum indicum), Aksha (Terminalia belerica) is processed
with Bhringa Swarasa (Juice of Eclipta alba) and Asana Kwatha (Decoction of
Pterocarpus Marsupium) in iron vessel. This oil is used for Nasya (Snuff).

4. Suryavarta (Head ache)
TRTsenttatgent scherftea: gated Peay tere ware
(M.5.F4. 62/50)

Bhringaraja Rasa (Juice of Eclipta alba) mixed with equal quantity of Chaga kshira
(Goat’s milk) kept in sunlight should be used as Nasya (Instillation), will be a very good
remedy for Suryavarta.

Matra (Dose)

Swarasa (Juice) : 5tol0ml
Churna (Powder) : 3 to 6g
Phytoconstituents

Leaves — B-terthienyl-methanol, stigmasterol, B-amyrin, Desmethyl wedelolactone
glucoside Amino acids—cystine, glutamic acid, phenylalanine, tyrosine and methionine.

Whole plant — Phytosterol-A, «-amyrin, Wedelolactone, Triterpenic acid, desmethyl
wedelolactone, fatty acids like-palmetic, stearic, oleic and linoleic acids, nicotine.

Root — Hentriacontanol, 14-heptaosanol, stigmasterol.

Research corner

1 The anti-diabetic effect of the ethanolic extract of Eclipta alba (EEA) on
hyperglycaemia and diabetic nephropathy was investigated in streptozotocin-
induced diabetic rats. The results suggest that EEA possesses antidiabetic effect
associated with alpha-glucosidase and aldose reductase inhibition. Jaiswal N,
Bhatia V, Srivastava SP, Srivastava AK, Tamrakar AK, Antidiabetic effect of
Eclipta alba associated with the inhibition of alpha-glucoside and
aldosereductase. Nat Prod Res. 2012 Feb 21.

2 Study was designed to explore antiproliferative activity of Eclipta alba on liver
and other related cancer. The data establish the existence of anti-proliferative,
DNA damaging and anti-metastasis properties in EAE which is yet unexplored
and hold high therapeutic impact. Chaudhary H, Dhuna V, Singh J, Kamboj

----- PAGE 137 -----
Bhringaraja 129

SS, Seshadri S. Evaluation of hydro-alcoholic extract of Eclipta alba for its
anticancer potential: an in vitro study. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Jun
22;136(2):363-7-6. Epub 2011 May 6.

3. The present study investigated the ability of 100 and 200mg/kg of aqueous
extract of Eclipia alba to circumvent aggression. Eclipta alba significantly
minimized dominance (p<0.05) which is correlated to the level of aggression
particularly with 200 mg/kg in the water competition test. A tangible behavioral
submission was observed with 100 and 200mg/kg and of Eclipta alba in the
foot shock induced test. Lobo OJ, Banji D, Annamalai AR, Manavalan R.
Evaluation of anti aggressive activity of Eclipta alba in experimental animals.
Pak J. Pharm Sci. 2008 Apr; 21(2):195-9.

4. The combined effect of dried Eclipta alba leaf powder (3 g/day) in
encapsulated form on blood pressure, diuresis, and lipid profile of 60 mildly
hypertension male subjects in the age group of 40-55 years was studied. In
conclusion, it would appear that E. alba is diuretic, hypotensive, and
hypocholesteroliemic and helps in the alleviating oxidative stress-induced
complications in hypertensions. Rangineni V, Sharada D, Saxena D. Diuretic,
hypotensive and hypocholesterolemic effects of Eclipta alba in mild
hypertensions subjects: a pilot study. J Med Food. 2007 Mar; 10(1):143-8.

5. The anti-inflammatory effect of the plant of Eclipa alba (Family-Asteraceae)
was evaluated using carrageenin, mediators such as histamine and serotonin
induced paw oedema, and cotton pellet induced granuloma tests for their effect
on acute and chronic phase inflammation models in rats. The results indicate
the potent anti-inflammatory effect and therapeutic efficacy of Eclipta alba
extract on animal models, which is compared with Indomethacin. Kumar SS,
Sivakumar T, Chandrasekar MJ, Suresh B. Evaluation of Anti-inflammatory
Activity of Eclipta alba in rats. Anc Sci Life. 2005 Jan;24(3):112-8.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Indiéations

Khalitya, Palitya

Name
;

Brahanmanjishthadi Kwatha Sarvakushtha
Panchanimba Churna Kushtha

HAL Nn

----- PAGE 138 -----
130 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name- Eclipta alba, Hask.
Eclipta — Derived from ekleipo which means to be deficient.
alba — White
Family— Asteraceae (See Appendix-II for Key features)
Kula- Bhringaraja
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduchyadi Varga 239-241

Basonym of Drug
WF sa UAT |
The flowers of Bhringaraja shine like honey bees.
Synonyms
Habitat
1 FART RL Tatahet See
Plant attracts honey bees.
2 SIRT TPH CTT |
Bhringaraja plant attracts honey bees.
3 AYRATA-HYT: Wated BIT Shyacared Bea |
Bhingaraja has very good effect on hair. If used, hair will become very beautiful.
4 CYRS- hy Wa: vaca she |
Bhringaraja nourishes hair and gives natural black colour.
5 Wrcha:—arcate cayrpttercet ferret |

Bhringaraja prevents premature graying of hair.

Regina] Names

Kannada
Malayalam

Bhangra
Garuga
Kayyunni
Maka

----- PAGE 139 -----
Bhringaraja 131

Habitat

Bhringaraja is found throughout India ascending
to 6000 ft altitude from sea level especially nearby
Marshy places as a weed. Commonly seen in South
Indian states like Karnataka, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh,
Tamilnadu and grows abundantly in Uttar Pradesh,
Gujarat, Maharashtra, West Bengal ete.f

Morphology
Habit — Annual herb.
Root- Branched, tap root

Stem- Herbaceous, aerial, erect, cylindrical,
branched, solid, glabrous, hairy.

Leaf —Ramal and cauline, simple, opposite, decussate, sub-sessile, exstipulate, el-
liptical, acute, reticulate venation.

Inflorenscence — Capitulum: ray florests (periph-
eral flowers) are ligulate, and disc florets (Central flow-
ers) are tubular; involucre of bracts present.ftt

Ray floret — Bracteate, sessile, incomplete, zy-
gomorphic, unisexual, pistillate, tetramerous, epigy-
nous, cyclic, and peripheral in position. Sepals are 4,
white, petals are 4. Androecium is absent or highly
reduced. Ovary is inferior. Gynoecium is bicarpellary
syncarpous, Disc florets are sessile, complete, actino-
morphic, bisexual, tetramerous, white, central in po-
sition, sepals are 4, reduced to pappus Petals are 4,
gamopetalous, tubular stamens are 4, Gynoecium is
bicarpellary syncarpous, inferior ovary and unilocu-
lar.

wet

pS he

b 2
Wedelia calendulacea Less

Fruit—Cypsela

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Dried whole herb with flowers and fruits; stems, cylindrical up to 4 mm thick, red-
dish brown in colour; leaves, long lanceolate, narrowed at both ends, having a rough
surface of dark green colour which is covered with white apressed hair; flower heads are
in pairs, axillary or terminal, with white ray florets and yellow or black disc (when ripe).
It has mild odour and bitter taste.

----- PAGE 140 -----
132 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references
Synonyms
HTMUTAY WRT rebel age Tren eT | OTT: Shorea AT: AAA:
(an.5. Tee PF. 239)
Properties and Actions
YR: HeHetemt Ballon: seaeaye, | Hy: Barna WATS TA
aah THA aA: He Aafrisheigea (a9. WE ah. 240-241)
TRA MATAR Bear Ter I | HAVA EAU TATA: 1
(af, artrofeat)
arch: aaganfterent gaitenitsfeatrats felt, | arcmerrett eae: Aye TATA: |
ha arrairare He warrarogen: ui (4.4. staftrat 1575-1576)
ARUN VYSTAR: Ses: | ATCA Aatett Tara:
(aa. wareefert 147)
argue: weft Staten awmerccgd, | ava: Mage eat TATA:
(B.A. magenta TF 145)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Pradhana Karma of Bhringaraja
a. Kanthya b. Swarya c. Keshya d. Jwaraghna
Ans: c. Keshya
2. The drug used for Khalitya and palitya

a. Ativisha b. Bhringaraja _—_c. Bhallataka d. Ahiphena
Ans: b. Bhringaraja

3. Bhringaraja swarasa Nasya is indicated in
a. Atisara b. Jwara c. Kasa d. Palitya

Ans: d. Palitya
4, Bhringaraja Taila is indicated in
a. Shwasa b. Shula c. Khalitya d. Shotha

Ans: c. Khalitya

----- PAGE 141 -----
Bhringaraja 133
Se ree

5. Botanical Name of Bhringaraja
a. Eclipta alba b. Boerhavia diffusa

c. Glycyrrhiza glabra d. Vitex negundo
Ans; a. Eclipta alba
6. Markava is a synonym of

a. Mandukaparni_ b. Ashwattha c. Lodhra d. Bhringaraja
Ans: d. Bhringaraja
7. Habit of Bhringaraja
a. Tree b. Herb c. Climber d. shrub
Ans: b. Herb

----- PAGE 142 -----
Bhumyamalaki

Useful part - Panchanga (Whole plant)
Rasadi panchaka

Shita

Karma (Action)

Kasahara, Kandughna, Dahahara, Rochaka, Kushthaghna, Shwasahara,
Trishnahara, Shothahara, Mehahara and Mutrarogahara.

Pharmacological Actions

Antibacterial, Demulcent, Hepatoprotective, Antifungal, Anticancer, Antiviral and
Hypoglycaemic.
Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)

Pittakapha Shamaka. Pittahara due to Shita virya, Madhura vipaka and Tikta
Kashaya Madhura Rasa. Kaphara because of Tikta kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Shwasa, Kasa, Kamala, Pandu, Shotha, Prameha, Mutra vikara, Kushtha, Kandu,
Trishna and Daha.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Prameha (Diabetes insipidus)
gerard frrenut aftarrs fete: | sreaeary MLA, AEP AUT ATT:
(ALY. 287)

In case of Prameha (Diabetes insipidus) one should take combination of 20 g of
Bhumyamataki (Phyllanthus urinaria) and 20 Maricha (Piper nigrum).

2. Pradara (Metrorrhagia)
qearmernget fe dit aogerarhtor | erat sae art Vth Tere Te, UN
(aid. 74/9)

----- PAGE 143 -----
Bhumyamalaki 135

Powder of root of Bhumyamalaki (Phyllanthus urinaria) is taken with rice water
cures Pradara (Metrorrhagia) very quickly.
Matra (Dose)

Swarasa (Juice)—10 to 20 ml

Churna (Powder)-3 to 5g

Chemical constituents

Bitter substance and Alkaloids total plant contains phylJanthin, hypophyllanthin,
niphyllin, phyllnirium, phyllantheol and phylleteralin.

Research corner

A study done to assess hepatoprotective and antioxidant activities of 11 phyllanthus
species like P. amarus, P. urinaria, P. debilis, P. tenellus, P. virgatus, P. maderaspatensis,
P. reticulates, P. polyphyllus, P. emblica, P. indofischer and P. acidus. The methanol
extracts of P. polyphyllus, P. emblica and P. indofischeri showed high levels of
hepactoprective activity. Srirama R et all. “Hepatoprotective activity of Indian Phyllanthus.
Pharm Biol. 2012. Aug 50 (8):948-53.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Name Indications

Chyavanaprasha Medhyartha, Karshya ~

Botanical Name
Phyllanthes urinaria Linn.
Phyllanthes — Phyllus-leaved anthus

Urinaria —Diuretic
Family—Phyllanthaceae

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Kasahara varga Shwasahara varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh. Pr. Ni Guduchyadi varga

Basonym of Drug

apfer atrovent Str |

----- PAGE 144 -----
136 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fruits of Bhumyamalaki (Phyllanthus urinaria Linn.) resemble the fruit of Amalaki
(Phyllanthes emblica) but the plant is very small,
Synonyms
Morphology

1. aaa & aga srrerctat TT

Bhumyamalaki is a very small tender herb.

2. TEIA-Aga: Wale AAT |

Bhumyamalaki has many small leaves.
3, AYHAU-Aga: Heh AAT |
Bhumyamalaki yields many fruits.
Properties and Actions
4, HAST SA Ae AEM: |
Bhumyamalaki purifies the body.

5. Brave Prana

Bhumyamalaki is a very potent medicine and regarded as one of the best.

Vernacular Names.

Habitat
Bhumyamalaki grows in waste place through-

out India.

Morphology
An annual herb grows 30 to 60 cm in height.

Stem - Erect and branched.
Leaf - Simple, Closely placed, distichously im-

Phyllanthes urinaria Linn.
bricate, sessile or nearly so, 6 to 13 mm long and 2 to “i aie eu

----- PAGE 145 -----
Bhumyamalaki 137

omm wide, oblong or linear-oblong, stipules are peltate,
Mower - Solitary, axillary, subsessile, minute and yellowish in colour.
ruit - Capsule, 3 mm in diameter, globose. Seeds are trigonus, transversely fur-
rowed and 1.5 mm long.
Classical references
Synonyms
aparrerenant wheat frat araeratfe ae agua agen agatatsaterst = 1
(a3. Tee Th 277)

Properties and Actions
yerat antahirat waren wep fear Provan Arak ahs aTATTRT I
(AI. Tee wT 278)
aera wepe freer ate: ror erat | feet elt ret eeareferasyt 1
(af. deat FT 86)

arrerent fear fereat ara HERE ay: | eet oneginaanpS frac |

TATA TTTSTERREATAAT TATA, |

qerat g aeararen ftrate feast | ror Peete SEAT
(a.fa. siete FF 93)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful Part of Bhumyamalaki
a. Only Root b. Only fruit c. Only Flower d. Whole Plant
Ans: d. Whole Plant
. Pradhana Rasa of Bhumyamalaki
a, Madhura b. Tikta c. Kashaya d. Katu
Ans: b. Tikta
3. Vipaka of Bhumyamalaki
a. Madhura b. Katu c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: a. Madhura
4, Bhumyamalaki Kashaya is mainly indicated in
a. Atisara b. Vibandha c. Kasa d. Ajirna

Ans: c. Kasa

—

i)

----- PAGE 146 -----
138

a. Cedrus deodara

Dravyaguna Vijnana

. Botanical name of Bhumyamalaki

b. Phyllanthes urinaria

c. Phyllanthes emblica d. salmalia malabarica

Ans; b. Phyllanthes urinaria

a. Talisapatra

. Tamalaki is the synonym of

b. Amalaki c. Bhumyamalaki d. Nagakeshara

Ans: c. Bhumyamalaki

b. Compound
Ans: b Simple

. Bhumyamalaki is a
a. Shrub b. tree c. Creeper d. herb
Ans: d. herb

. Botanically Leaf of Bhumyamalaki is

b. Simple c. Pinnately compound d. Palmate

----- PAGE 147 -----
Bilva

Useful parts— Mula (Root), Phala (Apakwa)-Unripened fruit & Patra (leaves)

Rasadi Pancaka

Apakwa phala Pakwa phala Mula

(Unripened fruit) (Ripened fruit) (Root)

Karma (Actions)
Mula (Root) — Shothahara, Chardighna, Shuulahara
Patra (Leaf) — Sangrahi, Pramehaghna, Shothahara
Kasisa (Stem) — Kasahara, Hradya, Ruchya, Agnivardhaka
Apakwa phala (Unripen fruit) — Dipana, Pachana, Grahi, Hradya.
Pakwaphala (Ripen fruit) - Vidahi Vishtambhi, Durjara, Agnisadaka.
Pushpa (Flowers) —Atisarahara, Trishnahara, Chardighna.

Agrya Karma
fared aineendtefterare mya | (AY, 25/40)
Bilva (Aegle marmrlos Corr.) is Astringent, Appetizer and Pacify Vaata Kapha
Dosha.
Pharmacological Activities
Unripen fruit — Astringent, Digestive, Stomachic, Constipative.
Pulp — Stimulant, Antipyretic
Ripen fruit — Cooling, alterative, laxative
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka, Kaphahara because of Kashaya, Tikta rasa, Ushna virya and
Katu vipaka.

Vatahara because of Ushna Virya

----- PAGE 148 -----
140 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Rogaghnata — Therapeutic indications
Mula (Root) — Shotha, Shula, Chardi
Patra (Leaf) — Prameha, Shotha
Kanda (Stem) — Kasa, Aruchi, Agnimandya
Apakwaphala (Unripen fruit) — Atisara, Agnimandya
Pushpa (Flowers) — Atisara, Trishna, Chardi
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration):
1. Atisara (Diarrhoea)
eau aegat Ucar ash tear afer | Sree aT aretercanht Peat AAMT
(afa. 19/113)
If one takes Bala bilva (Unripen fruit of Aegle marmelos), he will be relieved
from Atisara (Diarrhoea).
2. Raktatisara (Diarrhoea mixed with blood)
Fa Wad Bale settee Metra | aaltactet wera ferenrany Ra aa
(G3. 40/119)
Combination of Bala bilva phala (Unripen fruit of Aegle marmelos), Jaggery,
honey and oil if administered, it checks diarrhoea with blood.
3. Chardi (Vomitting)
fara arn Pzaret eareate fara rerenny | fated AUR cheat sare wraferent Wet:
(ara.Ft 6/112)

Kwatha (Decoction) of Bilva (Aegle marmelos) and Nagara (Zingiber
officinale) is very useful in Chardi (Vomiting). If added with Kaitarya it
becomes more potent.

4. Arshas (Piles)
fara araisae ash eervenet aise A aT GaN tf THATS I

(a.fa. 14/47)

Patient suffering from Arshas (Piles) should sit in a tub containing warm
decoction of Bilva (Aegle marmelos).

5. Balaroga (Diseases of children)

rot averted: | (BE. 1/40)

Unripen fruit of Bilva (Aegle marmelos), Ela (Elattaria cardamom), Sugar and
Laja (Parched paddy) are mixed together and advised in Bala (Children) to
improve Agni (Appetite).

----- PAGE 149 -----
Bilva 14]

6, Medoroga (Obesity)

fares: velare: argent reer ae | ere Tre Bree Trae atxor eA: 1
(WH, 2/2/117)

Kwatha (Decoction) of Brahat pancamiila like Bilva (Aegle marmelos),
Agnimantha (Clerodendron phlomides), Shyonaka (Oroxylum indicum),
Kashmari (Gmelina arboroea) and Patala (Stereospermum suaveolens) is
taken with honey reduces weight.

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) -lto2g
Patra swarasa (Leaf juice) - 10 to 20 ml

Phytoconstituents

Root and Root bark contains — Marmelosin, marmelide, tannic acid, marmin,
skimmianine (alkaloid), Haplopine (alkaloid), Marmelin, Skimmin, Marmesin, Fatty ac-
ids, essential oil.

Leaves contain — o and B- phellandrene, Rutin, marmesinin.

Unripen fruit — Has-Marmeline (Alkaloid), Aegeline (Alkaloid).

Ripen fruit — Contains-Xanthotoxol, B-Sitosterol.

Heart wood — Contains Dictamine.

Research corner

1 To evaluate ethanolic extract of leaves of Aegle marmelos in an experimental
animal model of chronic fatigue syndrome for potential therapeutic benefit. The
results are suggestive of potential protective effect of A. marmelos against
experimentally induced CFS. Lalremruta V, Prasanna GS. Evaluation of
protective effect of Aegle marmelous Corr. In an animal model of chronic
fatigue syndrome. Indian J. Pharmacol. 2012 May; 44(3):351-6.

2 Antioxidative role of Aegle marmelos in aspirin-induced gastroduodenal
ulceration in albino rat was evaluated using essential biochemical parameters.
Pretreatment with Aegle marmelous fruit pulp extract for 14 consecutive days
showed the reverse effects of aspirin suggesting gastro-duodenal protective and
anti-ulcerogenic properties of Aegle marmelos through its antioxidants
mechanism. Das SK, Roy C. The protective role of Aegle marmelos on aspirin-
induced gastro-duodenal ulceration in albino rat model: a possible involvement
of antioxidants. Saudi J. Gastroenterol. 2012 May-Jun; 18(3):188-94.

3 To evaluate antiproliferative and anxtioxidant activity of Aegle marmelos
leaves in Dalton’s Lymphoma Ascites (DLA)-bearing mice. The

----- PAGE 150 -----
142 Dravyaguna Vijnana
hydroalcoholic extract of Aegle marmelos exhibits strong antitumour and
antioxidant activities in DLA-bearing mice. Chockalingam V, Kadali SS,
Gnanasambantham P. Antiproliferative and antioxidant activity of Aegle
marmelos (Linn.) leaves in Dalton’s Lymphoma Ascities transplanted activity
of Aegle marmelos (Linn.) leaves in Dalton’s Lymphoma Ascites transplanted
mice. Indian J Pharmacol. 2012. Mar; 44(2):225-9.

4 Study done to examine the antidiabetic potential of Aegle marmelos (L.) Corr.
(Rutaceae) bark in a diabetic rat model. These findings suggest that Aegle
marmelos bark extract has the therapeutic potential in STZ-induced
hyperglycemia; hence it can be used in the treatment of diabetes mellitus.
Gandhi GR, Ignacimuthu S, Paulraj MG. Hypoglycemic and ?-cells
regenerative effects of Aegle marmelos (L.) Corr. bark extract in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Food Chem Toxicol. 2012 May;
50(5):1667-74. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

5 Study done to evaluate the immunomodulatory potential of methanol extract of
Aegle marmelos in an experimental animal model of cellular and humoral
immunity. Low dose of methanol extract of Aegle marmelos was more
effective for augmenting cellular immunity, whereas, high dose was more
inclined towards humoral immunity. Govinda HV, Asdaq SM.
Immunomodulatroy Potential of Methanol Extract of Aegle marmelos in
Animals. Indian J Pharm Sci. 2011 Mar; 73(2):235-40.

6 To evaluate and compare the anti-inflammatory activity of the aqueous root
bark extract of Aegle marmelous (Bilwa) in experimental acute and chronic
inflammatory animal models. Bilwa showed significant anti-inflammatory
agent. Benni JM, Jayanthi MK. Suresha RN. Evaluation of the anti-
inflammatory activity of Aegle marmelos (Bilwa) root. Indian J Pharmacol.
2011 Jul;43(4):393-7.

Yoga (Formulations)
SI.No:

Name of formulations Indications |

Bilvadi kwatha Jwaratisara, Shotha
Bilvadi ghrata Grahani roga, Agnimandya

----- PAGE 151 -----
Bilva

Botanical Name = Acgle marmelos Corr.
Aegle —goat-One of the hesperides daughters of the evening golden apple.
marmelos — Portuguese word meaning acid pear shaped fruit.
Family — Rutaceac (See Appendix-II for key features]
Kula - Jambira
Gana Vargikarana (Classification)

Charaka — Shothahara varga, Arshoghana varga, Asthapanopaga varga,
Anuvasanopaga varga

Sushruta — Varunadi gana, Ambashthadi gana, Brahatpancamula

Bh.Pr.Ni = Guduchyadi varga 13

Basonym of Drug
Bilva is very useful drug in dysentery.
Synonyms
Habitat
1 Srepe:—vrotshtr rarer |
Bilva tree grows in hilly region also.
Morphology
2 Oaet:—o aa are |
Stem of Bilva is nodular.
3 qleHl-Huee: wae |
Bilva is a thorny tree.
4 Pras:-sitftt wearers |
Leaves of Bilva are trifoliate.
5 WRU: —Teya tt WATT |
Leaves of Bilva are aromatic.
6 Ternftca:-ged witer Fey: |
Fruit resembles large Kapittha fruit.
7 Hehe: Te HTT |

Fruit is large in size.

143

----- PAGE 152 -----
144 Dravyaguna Vijnana

8 sftret:—sfterrmergeh werret, see, thr Gat HAT |
Fruit of Bilva is having aroma.
9 Parnet:-TarHetet fees rare, |

Bilva bears fruits always.

Properties and actions
10 Wettat-Wai aya attrat ars eteecatt |
Bilva purifies Koshtha like that of Haritaki, especially in animals.
11 ATA ret, Tater, atreToT sere:
Bilva alleviates all types of Mala dosa.
12 Alara: arrears aac |
Bilva is very good carminative.
13. wnfteca:—gregs Tet Ta
Bilva cures money diseases.
14 CEPR: set WAST TST |

Aroma of Bilva is pleasant.

Habitat
Commonly found throughout India especially in temple yard.

Morphology

Habit— A deciduous, armed tree of 8-15 mtr
high.

Root — Tap root, branched,.

Stem — Erect, branched, woody, cylindrical,
solid, with axillary straight single or paired spines.

Leaf —Palmately compound, trifoliate, petiolate,
alternate, gland-dotted, leaflets are elliptic, lanceolate
or oblong, acute, entire, glabrous, net-veined, laterals
sessile, terminal one stalked.

Inflorescence —Cymose, axillary panicle.

Flowers- Pedicellate, bisexual, actinomorphic, Ve. we
complete, hypogynous, pentamerous, sweet scented, Aegle marmelos Corr.
5 petals white in colour.

----- PAGE 153 -----
Bilva 145

Fruit - Berry with wooden rind, ovoid, sweet pulp having many orange seeds,

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Root Curved or channeled pieces of root bark of varying sizes, 3-5 mm in thick-
ness. Outer surface is grayish white or carthy brown in colour, prominently warty in the
case of older roots. The younger root shows few warts but a large number of lenticels
which appear as short vertical slits, Surface skin is fairly tough and layered, but feels off in
small irregular pieces on rupturing. Inner surface is fibrous, having greenish brown colour.

Classical references
Synonyms
fava: enfteca vieatareae sftmerratir 1 (1. yeeafe at. 13)

Properties and Actions
oftrcreqahircat dt waitsfaftrerant | arascrrett aoa TROT Ue:
(a3. Teeae TH. 13)
wefan fet aaamey | frerdea Weed wet We ll
faranfe Pawererant SoeeafrTsTA Ul (LP Teeate TT. 106-107)
sfacteqaritant oat warship | orayctoreretet Ut Gas araksrg,
Wer aeeaiqeayered wT HY: | wAcAaTgeTed arfeutt farcarafyrear
wus raat eet Searkrerety | fret Heart fer aay,
Rarei dtent ory ole wet atrtaraer | vad fears fester wepTaTs TE
Bet wferent Uiee AMTaTafeareray | (af. staff. 19-24)
facaeq TER ga: Hara: fray Te: | Harfsaned wheres: WE
wea vad fast neat weet Ue | wefrmnaratent dae a fretefa
(a. stemfe FT. 190-192)
faraeryat are ryt wasTd | decor whet eel vlwet oN
aed mars tarhach nfs a Aer | aaa Vat wat ye faster ashy
(B.A. eiteenfe af. 19-20)

----- PAGE 154 -----
146

Ww

Nn

~“

ge

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

a. Pakwa Phala
Ans: b. Apakwa

a. Kashaya
Ans: a. Kashaya

a. Shita
Ans: c. Ushna

. Bilva Mula is

a. Jwarahara

b. Apakwa

b. Madhura

. Bilva Mula has which Virya

b. Snigdha

b. Kushthahara

Ans: d. Shothahara

a. Agnimandya
Ans: b. Atisara

a. Arshas
Ans: c. Ajirna

. Apakwa Bilva Phala is
a. Grahi b. Rechana
Ans: a. Grahi

. Apakwa Bilva Phala is best in

b. Atisara

. Bilvadi Gutika is indicated in

b. Jwara

. When fruit of Bilva to be used it should be

c. Atipakwa

c. Amla

c. Ushna

c. Vishahara

c. Amavardhaka

c. Shotha

c. Ajima

Aegle marmelos is the botanical name of

a. Chandana
Ans: d. Bilva

b. Maricha

Mahakapittha is a synonym of

a. Tuvaraka
Ans: b. Bilva

b. Bilva

c. Kalamegha

c. Kapittha

d. Pakwa majja

. Apakwa Phala of Bilva has which Rasa as its Pradhana Rasa

d. Lavana

d. guru

d. Shothahara

d. Kushthaghna

d. Raktapitta

d. Kasa

d. Bilva

d. Vidarikanda

----- PAGE 155 -----
Brahmi

Useful parts — Panchanga (Whole plant),
Rasadi Panchaka
Pig [Shit
Prabhove | Medlya

Karma (Actions)
Medhya, Ayushyakara, Rasayana, Swarya, Smrati Vardhaka, Kushthaghna,

Pandujit, Mehahara, Vishaghna, Shothahara, Jwarahara, Hradya, Kandughna,
Shwasahara, Kasahara.

Tikta, Kashaya,

Madhura

Agrya Karma

eet atet | (3.2.3. 40)

Brahmi (Bacopa monneri) is best in loss of memory.
Pharmacological Actions

Nervine tonic, Diuretic, Anti-infammatory, Anticonvulsent, Immenagogue, Blood
purifier, Rejuvinative, Cardiotonic and Memory enhancer.

Dosha Karma (Actions on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka - Vata hara because of Madhura vipaka, Pittahara hebnins of
Tikta, Kashaya, Madhura Rasa, Madhura vipaka and Shita virya. Kaphahara because of
Tikta kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Unmada, Apasmara, Kushtha, Kandu, Pandu, Shotha, Prameha, Shwasa, Kasa,
Jwara, Swarbheda, Aruchi.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Apasmara (Epilepsy)
aeite carps egyehtta a | WOT A MATT Ul (FFT 10/25)

----- PAGE 156 -----
148 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Purana ghrata (Old ghee) processed with Brahmi rasa (Juice of Bacopa
monneri),Vacha (Acorus calamus), Kushtha (Saussurea lappa) and Shankha pushpi
(Convolulus pluricaulis) will cure Unmada (Insanity), Alakshmi (Inauspiciousness),
Apasmara (Epilepsy) and Papa (Sinful conditions).

2. Unmada (Insanity)
velporesmeareeNn Waa: | TATA SET: Vat HS Aya: 1
(W.a. 2/1-18)

Juice prepared seperately from Brahmi (Bacopa monnieri), Kushmandi phala,
Shadgrantha (Acorus calamus), Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaculis) mixed with
Kushtha churna (Powder of Saussurea lappa) and honey relieves insanity.

3. Medhadi Janana (To promote intellect)
raat: 5 T aetaisitaenieet: | gesat saan yeat fasten Ae TAL
arr terregfercarecetan et TATSPUTRTUANT It (37.8.3. 1/27)

Drugs like Brahmi (Centella asiatica), Aindri (Bacopa monnieri) and Jivaka are
tied around Hasta (Palm), Griva (Neck) and Murdhna (Head) helps in over all develop-
ment of child including intellect. For this purpose Vacha (Acorus calamus) is best.
Matra (Dose)

e Swarasa (Juice) —10-20 ml

e Churna (Powder) -5-10 gm

e Kwatha (Decoction) —50-100 ml
Phytoconstituents

Whole plant contains — D-Mannitol, Saponin, Betulic acid, B- Sitosteroal, Stig-
masterol, Stigmastanol, Bacoside A, Bacoside B (Saponins), Monnierin, Hersaponin,
Nicotine, Bacogenin-A Betulinic acid, Mannitol.

Leaves — Brahmine and herpestine (Alkaloids)

Research corner

1 The study is conducted to evaluate the neuroprotective potential of Bacopa
monnieri (BM), and Indian traditional medicinal plant effective against
cognitive impairment, in colchicine-induced Dementia. The results suggest
therapeutic potential of Bacopa monnieri in the treatment of AD associated
cognitive decline. Saini N, Singh D, Sandhir R. Neuroprotective Effects of
Bacopa monnieri in Experimental Model of Dementia. Neurochem Res. 2012
Sep; 37(9):1928-37. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

----- PAGE 157 -----
Brahmi 149

2 Study done to test the hypothesis that BM Extract (BME) could offset
neurotoxicity induced oxidative dysfunctions in developing brain in a rotenone
(ROT) mouse model. It is suggested that Bacopa monnieri may be effectively
exploited as a prophylactic/therapeutic adjuvant for neurodegenerative
disorders involving oxidative stress. Shinomol GK, Mythri RB, Srinivas
Bharath MM, Muralidhara. Bacopa monnieri extract offsets rotenone-induced
cytotoxicity in dopaminergic cells and oxidative impairments in mic brain, Cell
Mol Nurobiol/ 2012 Apr; 32(3):455-65. doi:10.1007/s10571-011-9776-0.
Epub 2011 Dec 10.

3 An n-butanol extract of the plant (nBt-ext BM) was analysed and found to
contain Bacoside A (Bacoside A3, Bacopaside II and Bacopasaponin C), The
effects of the BM extract were then studied on morphine-induced hyperactivity
as well as dopamine and serotonin turnover in the stratum since these
parameters have a role in opioid sensitivity and dependence. These findings
suggest that nBT-ext BM has an antidopaminergic/serotonergic effect and may
have potential beneficial effects in the treatment of morphine dependence. Rauf
K, Subhan F, Sewell RD. A Bacoside containing Bacopa monnieri extract
reduces both morphine hyperactivity plus the elevated striatal dopamine and
serotonin turnover. Phytother Res. 2012 May; 26(5):758-63. doi:10.1002/
ptr.3631. Epub 2011 Nov 22.

4 Study is done on Anthihyperglycemic activity, in vivo antioxidant potential,
effect on hemoglobin glyco-sylation, estimation of liver glycogen content, and
in vitro peripheral glucose utilization of bacosine, a triterpene isolated from
ethyl acetate fraction (EAF) of the ethylenic extract of Bacopa monnieri. Study
suggested that bacosine might have insulin-like activity and_ its
antihyperglycemic effect might be due to an increase in peripheral glucose
consumption as well as protection against oxidative damage in alloxanized
diabetes. Ghosh T, Maity TK, Singh J. Antihyperglycemic activity of bacosine,
a triterpene from Bacopa monnieri, in alloxan-induced diabetic rats. Planta
Med. 2011 May; 77(8):804-8. Epub 2010.Dec 10.

5 In this study, the neuroprotective properties of Bacopa monnieri against
rotenone induced oxidative damage and neurotoxicity is studied. Flies (Oregon
K strain, adult males) exposed to a standardized Bacopa monnieri powder for
7 days in the diet exhibited significant diminution in the levels of endogenous
oxidative markers viz., malondialdehyde, hydroperoxide and protein carbonyl
content. Hosamani R, Muralidhara. Neuroprotective efficacy of Bacopa
monnieri against rotenone induced oxidative stress and neurotoxicity in

----- PAGE 158 -----
Drosophila melanogaster. Neurotoxicology. 2009 Nov; 30(6):977-85, Epub

2009 Sep 8.
Yoga (Formulations)
SINo. Name

Brahmi Ghrata
Kumara Kalyanaka Ghrata

Saraswatarishta
Brahmi Vati

Smrati Sagara Rasa

| 6 | Brahmi Arka
Manasa Mitra Vataka Unmada, Apasmara
ages | Brahmi Draksadi Kwatha Unmada, Apasmara

Botanical Name— Bacopa monneri, Herpestis moniera H.B.K.

Indications

Apasmara
Pandu, Shosha

Horpesties - Creeping, moniera - Moni-Necklace
Family— Plantaginaceae

Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Caraka Balya Varga, Prajasthapana Varga, Sanjnasthapana Varga

Sushruta Not mentioned in Varga

Bh.Pr.Ni Guducyadi Varga 279-281
Basonym of Drug

gam: st ate |

Brahmi plant is related to intellectuality and it is memory enhancer.

Habitat
Ts Freracht-aet AAMT Aeeht aT AT SEAT: |

Brahmi grows abundantly near water resources.

Morphology
>. Heearaft-reratta ORT: |

Flowers of Brahmi resemble eyes of fish.

Properties and Actions

3. Rreneitftrent-fercer afer caterer |

----- PAGE 159 -----
Brahmi 151

Brahmi is bitter type of Lonika.
4, aaeat-aate freer |

Brahmi is very good rejuvinator.
5, Wraceh-arera acta |

Brahmi filled with good qualities.
Regional Names

Habitat

Brahmi is found through out India growing naturally in the planes as well as in hills
up to 1200 mtr attitude particularly in the areas having more moisture. It is very common
in Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, Uttarpradesh, Bihar etc.

Morphology

Habit — Succulent, spreading, prostrate or
creeping glabrous annual herb. Branches are nu-
merous, upright and having adventitious roots at
almost every node. Stem is green with internodes
of varying length.

Leaves — Simple, opposite, decussate, almost
sessile, spathulate or obovate-oblong shape, entire
and fleshy. Leaves are obscurely veined and dot-
ted with minute spots 0.5-2 cm long and 0.5 cm
wide.

Flowers— Axillary, solitary on long slender
pedicels of varying lengths usually longer than the
leaves. Flowers are whitish or pale bluish in colour.
Petals are twice as long as the sepals. Stamens are 4. Ovary is bicarpellary syncarpous,
two chambered with many ovules in each cell on swollen placenta.

wy
Bacopa monnieri

Fruits — Capsule, ovoid, small, 2-celled, 2-valved and glabrous.
Seeds— Oblong, minute and many.

----- PAGE 160 -----
152 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Fresh herbs consists of quadangular, succlent, creeping stems, upto 8 mm thick,
bearing fleshy leaves occuring in whorls at nodes; the leaves are decussate, spathulate,
oblong, obovate and upto 2.5 cm in length; the stems bear clusters of white thin wiry roots
on the underside; flowers are solitary, axillary and have a pink perianth.

The dried material is yellowish in colour with majority of leaves detached. It has
mild odour and bitter in taste.

Controversy

Number of plants has been described in Ayurveda as Medhya (Brain tonic). Brahmi
and Mandukaparni are two popular names in this category. The controversy on Brahmi
and Manukaparni is never ending.

In Ayurvedic classical texts like Charaka samhita, Sushruta Samhita and Ashtanga
Hradaya, Brahmi and Mandukaparni have been described as two different plants. For
examples Caraka enumerated Aindri and Mandukaparni together in the Prajasthapana
varga which may be considered as Bacopa Monnieri and Centella asiatica respectively.
The controversy may be because of synonyms and similar properties.

But these two plants may be distinguished easily.

Distinguishing features

SLNo..” Criteria Brahimi Mandukaparni

—_ Botanical Name Cae asiatica

Family Scrophulariaceae
Type of Plant | Prostrate succulent herb

Prostrate herb and rooting at

the meas
Simple, Opposite decus-

ees ee fleshy and entire brous and crenats ipo
Flower White or Pinkish i ee
He — Capsule and Many seded

Classical references

ie. a

Synonyms
arett mattag w Macc ara | aUgeTUll aregart canst fecat etaet 1
(A. Teeate GT. 279)

Properties and Actions

aratt ferret ferenr reeeat St PTET | HUTA HET TATG UTS STEM TATA Ul

----- PAGE 161 -----
Brahmi 153

ep ree

erat tafemeT HEUTE Areva | Revie agagaateett

arelt gitar (ara. Teas aH. 280-281)
RATAN TRT eHaTET RET aT: | ear gare ATTA EMEA TATA I
mferefteret et HeavEsat we | vilereler fermarrraateraaTUsAT:
(SF. atteftrert, 722-723)
oral fet saver a fereet stare, | ahs wat a ert a Freatarges att
=_ Tata weitqsran | areft ferencetemt eM ET ara Ut

(afr. viet +f. 66-67)
oralt er ae frat cater a yitten 1 caret

(B.A. serene at. 19)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful Part of Brahmi

a. Panchanga b. Patra c. Mula d. Pushpa
Ans: a. Panchanga
. Medhya Karma of Brahmi is attributed to
a. Shita Virya b. Madhura Vipaka c. Laghu guna d. Prabhava
Ans: d. Prabhava
3. Pradhana Rasa of Brahmi
a. Kashaya b. Katu c. Tikta d. Madhura
Ans: b.Tikta
4, Puranaghrita with Brahmi is useful in
a. Apasmara b. Kampavata c. Ardita d. Pakshaghata
Ans: a. Apasmara
5. Brahmi Vati is indicated in
a. Kushta b. Atisara cc. Manasika Roga — d. Arshas
Ans: c. Manasika roga
6. Botanical Name of Brahmi
a. Centella asiatica b. Herpestis moneira
c. Citrullus colocynthis d. Papaver somnifera
Ans: b. Herpestis moneira
7. Matsyakshi is a synonym of
a. Ashwagandha b. Kalamegha  c. Brahmi d. Ashoka
Ans: c. Brahmi

—

nN

----- PAGE 162 -----
Brahati

Useful parts — Mula (Root), Phala (Fruit) & Patra (leaves).
Rasadi Panchaka

Karina (Actions)

Kasahara, Hradya, Pachana, Ruchikara, Kushthaghna, Shwasahara, Kanthya,
Shulahara, Agnivardhaka, Chardighna.

Sarpatanu (Variety) — Kasahara, Shwasahara

Shweta Brahati — Ruchya, Netrya

Pharmacological Actions — Carminative, Aphrodisiac, Cardiac tonic, Antipyretic,
Analgesic, Expectorant.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosa)

Kaphavata Shamaka - Kapha hara because of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu
Tikta rasa.

Vatahara because of Ushna virya.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications) - Shwasa, Kasa, Swarabheda, Hradroga,
Agnimandya, Asya vairasya, Arochaka, Kushtha, Jwara, Shula, Chardi.

Sarpatanu (Variety) — Shwasa, Kasa & Jwara.
Shwetabrahati — Aruchi and Netraroga.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1 Grahani (Sprue)
wa Maen sae aah Gaditera: | (MM. 2/5/28)

Butter milk processed with Brahati (Solanum indicum) Mula (Root) will be benefi-
cial in Grahani (Sprue).

2. Indralupta (Alopecia areata)

saa oar wear geeites: | (MMA. 3/11/2718)

----- PAGE 163 -----
si zat 155

Fruit juice of Brahati (Solany

scalp in case of Indralupta (Aopen, ieee scam
3. Balaroga (Diseases of Children)

ct crate: err i ory thar fraratateercet wareers rea I
(3.23. 2/58)

m) & Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum)

anchakola (Pippali, Pippalimula, Chavya, Chitraka &
who vomit the breast milk.

4, Krimi karna (Maggots in ear)
aratgefres fem: wniaee war a (Ys. 21/52)

. Dhuma (Fumigation) of Vartaki (Solanum indicum) is very beneficial in case of
Krimi karna (Maggots in ear) as like that of Sarshapa sneha (Oil of mustard).

Matra (Dose)
Kwatha (Decoction) — 40 to 80 ml

teen

Fruit juice of Brahati (Solanum indicu
mixed with honey, ghee and P,
Shunthi) and given to the child

Churna (Powder) - lto2g
Phytoconstituents

Roots & Stem — Contains Solasonine (Glycoalkaloid), Solanine, solasodine,
diesgenin, f - sitosterol, lanosterol & solamargine.

Fruits — Solasonine, solanine, diosgenin, maltase, fatty acids like lauric, palmitic,
stearic, arachidic, oleic and linoleic acids, carpesterol.

_ Leaves — Solasoniné, solanine, diosgenin, B-sistosterol, lanosterol, solamargine &
solasodine.

Research corner

1 A new characteristic steroidal glycoside of the 23S, 26R-hydroxylated
spirostanol-type named indioside F was isolated from the fruit of Solanum
indicum, along with indioside A and protodioscin. El-Aasr M, Miyashita H,
Ikeda T, Lee JH, Yoshimitsu H, Nohara T, Murakami K. A new spirostanol
glycoside from fruits of Solanum indicum L. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2009
Jul; 57 (7):747-8.

2 Solavetivone (1), Cytotoxic to OVCAR-3 cells with an IC (50) value of 0.1
mM, has been isolated from Solanum indicum. Syu WJ, Don MJ, Lee GH, Sun
CM. Cytotoxic and novel compounds from Solanum indicum. J Nat Prod.
2001 Sep; 64(9):1232-3.

----- PAGE 164 -----
156 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Beta-Sitosterol (S]-0), beta-sitosterol glucoside (S]-1), dioscin (SI-2), methyl
protoprosapogenin A of dioscin (SI-3), methyl protyodioscin (SI-4) and
protodioscin (SI-5) were isolated and characterized from the whole plant of
Solanum indicum L. (Solanaceae) showed cytotoxicity on seven cancer cel]
lines. Chiang HC, Tseng TH, Wang CJ, Chen CF, Kan WS. Experimental
antitumor agents from Solanum indicum L. Anticancer Res. 1991 Sep-Oct;
11(5):1911-7.

4. The ethanol extract of roots, fruits and roots of Solanum indicum and
Saccharum munja respectively and water soluble resin of commiphora myrrha
were studied for anti-inflationary activity were found in former two plants will
slight anti inflammatory activity was observed in latter plant. Singh RK, Joshi
VK, Gambhir SS. Anti-inflammatory activity of some traditional medicinal
plants. Anc Sci Life. 1998 Oct; 18(2):160-4.

5. A standardized extract of the fruits of Solanum distichum has previously been
shown to possess anti-hypertension activity in rats (ED50 about 1 mg/kg).
Earlier acute toxicity studies had shown that single doses up to 2g/kg orally or
intraperitoneally failed to show any signs of morbidity. To study its potential
long-term toxicity, rats of either sex were fed rurally 1g/kg of the extract daily
over a period of 4 weeks to 6 months the present findings point to the wide
safety margin of the extract, Abdel Aziz UW, Fawzy N, Ismail Al, El-Askary H.
Toxicological studies on a standardized extract of Solanum indicum ssp.
distichum. Food Chem Toxicol. 2011 Apr; 49(4):903-9. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Yoga (Formulations)

Name Indications

Brahatyadi kwatha Sannipata Jwara, Shwasa

Laghupancamula kwatha Vatapittaja jwara
Dashamularishta Shwasa, Kasa, Vatavyadhi
4 Dashamuladya ghrata Vatavyadhi

Botanical Name
Solanum indicum Linn.

Solanum — Name of a German Botanist

indicum — Native of India

Family— Solanaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Kantakari

----- PAGE 165 -----
Brahati

Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka — Kanthya Varga, Shothahara Varga, Hikkanigrahana Varga,
Angamardaprashamana Varga

Sushruta Brahatyadi Gana, Laghupanchamula
Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduchyadi varga 36-37

Basonym of Drug

gett | ae Tat | vested, Tea FT
In comparison to Kantakari, Brahati plant is big.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, atatat-adasaat gfe
Brihati is a common plant available in all regions.

Morphology
2. Uhraet-dtranntft mehr srt |
Fruits of Brihati are yellow.
3, MUeal-HUSH: AASET |
Plant bears thorns.
Properties and Actions
4. fdt-fee sa renter eh |
Brihati is very efficacious in Kasa (Cough).
5. Wedt-weret gsaesat ster aed |
Brhati is very useful in many diseases hence respected by all.
Botanical Name
Solanum indicum Linn.
Solanum - Name of a German Botani~*
indicum - Native of India
Family- Solanaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula- Kantakari

Yemacular Names

157

----- PAGE 166 -----
138 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Malayalam Cheruchunda

Habitat

Brahati is found throughout tropical India,
grows in waste places, along roadsides and in the
places where it gets good sunshine.

Morphology

Habit — Armed shrub

Stem — Herbaceous, branched, green, prickly;
prickles scattered.

Leaves — Simple, appear opposite (from adna-
tion); those of the same node unequal, sinuate,
sparsely stellate-pubescent above; densely so below;
prickles absent on leaves; exstipulate.

Solanum indicum Linn.

Inflorescence —Extra-axillary corymbose cyme.
Flower — Ebracteates, bisexual, ebracteolate, obliquely, zygomorphic, hypogynous.
Calyx — Cupular, lobes pubescent, lobes enlarged in fruit.
Corolla: Petals Stellate— pubescent, acute, white, sub-rotate, plicate.
Androecium — Stamens 5.
Gynoecium — Superior ovary, bilocular.
Fruit- Berry, green, globose, pulpy.
Seeds — Circular, smooth.
Varieties
Ra.Ni- 1. Brahati 2. Sarpatanu
3. Shwetabrahati
Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics)

Pieces of stout, tortuous roots upto 4 cm in diameter, sometimes divaricately branched,
with long cylindrical rootlets. External surface is rough, earthy brown in colour, with
small round warty protuberances. Root bark separates easily from the root, exposing a
longitudinally striated surface of yellowish white colour. A transversely cut portion shows
a thin bark, followed by a cortical layer enclosing a broad mealy woody portion and a

----- PAGE 167 -----
Brahati 159

a a nent ret tin ne a —

central pith surrounded by a prominent ring. The dried root is difficult to break and be-
comes short pieces. It has slightly pungent odour and bitter to taste.

Different species
1, Solanum indicum 2. Solanum torvum
Substitutes
1. Solanum torvum Swartz
2. Solanum incanum Linn.
Classical references
Synonyms
aratent qarverat rect sect ett | eget utter feet weTst Goettott u
(41.5. Teenie FH. 36)
Properties and Actions
sect met ger urett Hared | HeferrassereaTeMe aa
TOT PSA ATH AAA | (AT. WSEAS TH. 36-37)
fifter erat srayersenme 1 oftestrrairemeia arr
(afi. Weeafe aT. 94)
gect Harta Ato aaa | dott orett ger mnfeult sarHsye |
TATRA ARTA eTRy TS, (s.AR. stsfRrerf. 50-51)
gedt wefan aahisaetat | athrearmarcedt smestrrert i

(afr. wareerfe FT 25)
wag (Variety)
erfercat gedit freer BEAN ST AAT | rT KeaaeTeay amet Were sega U
(afr. wereere aT 27)

aged
fasar acaedt art scrafeeret | wear aeahlt ARMATAaTTaT UI
(afi. wareetia TT 29)
gedt wefan marceatt wat 1 fect areit wear ger afendtost
TAT HT TAT BA Yet ATT ST MATT (BLA. Sites af 37-38)

----- PAGE 168 -----
160 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Brahati in combination of Laghu Panchamula
a. Patra b. Mula c. Pushpa d. Kanda
Ans: b. Mula
2. Solanum indicum is the botanical name of
a. Kantakari b. Katuki c. Brahati d. Kakamachi
Ans: c. Brahati
3. Vartaki is a synonym of

a. Brahati b. Vatada c. Devadaru d. Bala
Ans: a. Brahati

4, Brahati is
a. Herb b. Shrub c. Tree d. Creeper

Ans: b. Shrub
. As per Raja Nighantu Sarpatanu is a variety of
a. Sarpagandha __b. Swarna kshiri_c. Brahati d. Agnimantha

Ans: ¢c. Brahati

Nn

6. Brahati is one among
a. Brahat Panchamula b. Trana Panchamula
c. Kantaka Panchamula d. Laghu Panchamula

Ans: d. Laghu Panchamula

7. Dhuma of Vartaki (Brahati) is indicated in
a. Kasa b. Krimi Karna ___c. Shwasa d. Jwara
Ans: b. Krimi Karna

----- PAGE 169 -----
Chapter

Chakramarda

Parts used - Bija (Seeds)
Rasadi panchaka

D.N., B.P.Ni.

al 0
Laghu Ruksha
Katu

Laghu Ruksha s

Madhura
Shita

Vipaka
Vina | Using
Karma (Actions)

Kushthaghna, Kandughna, Dadrughna, Krimighna, Shwasahara, Hridya, Jwaraghna,
Medohara, Vranaropaka.

Pharmacological Actions

Laxative, Antibacterial, Antimicrobial Hepatoprotective, Antiinflammatory, Antitu-
mor, Antioxidant, Antihelminthic.

Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha Vata Shamaka,, Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka because
of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Rasa. ,
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Dadru, Kushtha, Kandu, Twak vikara, Krimi, Shwasa, Jwara, Medoroga and Vrana.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kushtha (Skin disease)

TST: Vase Fa fast ws YS Sages eee SP u

(afa. 7/161)

Combination of Edagaja (Cassia tora), Vidanga (Embelia ribes), Haridra (Cur-
cuma longa), Daruharidra (Berberis aristata), root of Raja vraksha (Cassia fistula),
Pippali (Piper longum), Pakala (Saussurea lappa) is used for bath and drink in Kushtha.

2. Shiroroga (Head disease)
Me Y Woatelsterenieend: | (3.2.5. 24/10)

----- PAGE 170 -----
162 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Prapunnata (Cassia tora) seeds are pounded with sour substances and then applied
over scalp will relieve many head related diseases.

Matra (Dose)

Bija Churna (Seed powder) - 1 to3g
Patra Swarasa (Leaf juice) - 5to10ml

Chemical constituents

Seeds yield fatty oil consisting of Oleic, Lenolic, Palmitic and Lignoceric acids and
Sitosterol. ;

Research corner

A study done to investigate the effects of soluble fibres of Cassia tora seeds on lipid
metabolism. Male sprague dawly rats were fed one of three experimental diets, a normal
diet a high cholesterol diet or a high cholesterol diet with 5% soluble fibres of Cassia tora
seeds for 5 weeks. Serum concentration of total cholesterol in rats fed soluble fibres of
Cassia tora was 27% lower compared to that of the control group. The results indicate
that it enchances fecal lipid excretion and may cause a reduction in serum and hepatic
lipid concentration in rats. Cho IJ, Lee C & Ha T%. “Hypolipidemic effect of soluble
fiber isolated from seeds of Cassia tora Linn. in rats fed a high cholesterol diet.” J. Agric
food Chem 2007 Feb 21:55(4):1592-6.

Yoga (Formulations)

Name Indications

Edagajadi lepa Sidhmakushtha

Botanical Name

Cassia tora Linn.

Casia - Cognate of Kasian in Bible
tora — Srilankan name of the plant
Family — Fabaceae

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization) .

Shaka varga
Urdhwabhagahara

----- PAGE 171 -----
Chakramarda 163

Basonym of Drug
aah as Teeth; ae TAMAS Weare aT |
Chakramarda (Cassia tora Linn.) is a very eficacious drug in ring worm infestation
and skin diseases.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, Unt aes WAS ATTA: |
Chakramarda grows gregariously.
Morphology
2. Resitar-Aeer Aafia TAA |
The leaves of Chakramarda resemble with eyes of sheep.
3. qatar Stes |
Seeds of Chakramarda are hard.
Properties and Actions
4, Cga-ag extifer |
Chakramarda cures Dadru.
5. Urarenta-ureat waiter
Chakramarda is useful in Pama Kushtha.

Vernacular Names

English

Habitat

Chakramarda grows through out India. Grows wild
on roadsides and field margins in the midlands and moun-
tains.
Morphology
Annual shrubby weed, 30 to 90 cm in height. Leaves Cassia tora Linn.

----- PAGE 172 -----
164 Dravyaguna Vijnana

are alternate, pinnate, with 3 pairs of obovate leaflets.

Inflorescence - Axillary raceme and shorter than leaf.

Flower - Yellow, | to 3 in number.

Fruit - Pods, slender, very long, curved seeds, many, dark-brown and shining.
Classical references
Synonyms

aennd: Wgarel eget Racer: | wae: Elles Wat Yate Feary 1

(aot. Sirens FF 210)

Properties and Actions
UenAel Ty: tale Ga: frre: | get fea: SHE Hs agartetc
egal dene we Hg ag frente, | Torres wg FIAT I
(A15. SttteMe a-21 1-212)
EAS: HEMT: TAL WIHT ATATUTATE: | AAHVSR: Hiecatpartent Act:
(afr. axdrife af-s )
Water fant wait ear: kag: Veety: u
fasst ge faoqa: gate french at | wposrararetererarpay Ul
WATS Wiles Ff HHS | fravenrqut set SgUATet TS
aanet Hees At BAe He Hater | Saravgyenaguanaay TAT Ul
(& fr. attefet af-7 00-703)
aad: meet AetarcaHeae: | AUHVSfrarlaguraaataye tl
(aA. aereenfe ai-2 00)
sander sist oy Hugeg rarer u (B.A. mages TH-167)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Chakramarda

a. Mula b. Pushpa c. Patra d. Bija
Ans: d. Bija

2. Pradhana Karma of Chakramarda
a. Kasahara b. Kushtaghna cc. Shwasahara_— d. Dipana

Ans: b. Kushtaghna

----- PAGE 173 -----
Chakramarda 165
a eee

3, Chakramarda is indicated in
a. Dadru b. Agnimandya —c. Jwara d. Shwasa
Ans: a. Dadru

4. Main ingredient of Edagajadi Lepa is
a. Kantakari b. Bijaka c. Chakramarda_ d. Manjishta
Ans: c. Chakramarda

5. Botanical name of Chakramarda
a. Cassia fistula b. Cassia tora
c. Cassia occidentalis d. Cassi alata

Ans: b. Cassia tora

6. Pamaghati is a synonym of
a. Aragwadha ob. Kalamegha ce. Chakramarda_d. Pushkaramula
Ans: c. Chakramarda

7. Chakramarda is a
a. Shrubby weed b. Tree c. Creeper d. Climber
Ans: a. Shrubby weed

RRR KK

----- PAGE 174 -----
Shweta Chandana

Useful part - Saara (Heart wood).
Rasadi Panchaka

Ruksha, Laghu
Karma (Action) — Ahladakara, Shramahara, Trashnahara, Raktaprasadaka,

Vrishya, Dahahara, Krimighna, Twakdosha hara, Saumanasya janana, Hradya,
Kushthaghna, Jwaraghna, Angamarda prashamana.

Shrikhanda Chandana Karma — Trishnahara, Jwarahara, Krimighna, Vrashya,
Kantivardhaka.

Vetta Chandana Karma - Dahahara, Jwarahara, Chardighna, Trashnahara,
Kushthaghna, Kasahara. ,

Sukadi Chandana Karma — Dahahara, Sugandhaprada.
Shabara Chandana Karma — Shramahara, Visphotahara, Trashnahara.

Pita Chandana Karma — Kushthahara, Kanduhara, Dadrughna, Krmighna,
Kantivardhaka.

Barbara Chandana ~ Kushthaghna, Kandughna, Rakta-doshahara.
Hari Candana — Shramahara, Tapahara
Agrya Karma

weed Gierraetrataoraaaray | (FG, 25/40)

Chandana (Samtalum album) application will remove bad odour, relieve burning
sensation and acts as coolant.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Pittakapha Shamaka - PittaShamaka because of Shita virya and Tikta, Madhura
rasa.

Kapha Shamaka because of Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.

----- PAGE 175 -----
Shweta Chandana 167
ee ae

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Chandana — Daha, Trashna, R i ; imi
: ’ , Raktapitta, i , Krimi,
Varna vikara, Jwara and Vidaroga. SEN EEEE scot Manatee REED

Shrikhanda Chandana ~ Raktapitta, Trashna, Krimi and Varna Vikara.

Vetta chandana — Daha, Jwara, Chardi, Trashna, Kushtha, Kasa.
Sukadi Chandana - Daha, Dourgandhya

Shabara Chandana - Shrama, Trashna, Visphota

Pita Chandana - Kushtha, Kandu, Dadru, Krimi

Barbara Chandana ~ Kushtha, Kandu, Vrana and Raktadosha.

Hari Chandana — Shrama & Jwara.
Pharmacological Actions

Antibacterial, Antiviral, Antigonorrhoeal, Antifungal, Antioxidant, Blood purifier,
Intellect promoting, cooling, Diuretic, Analegesic, Antipyretic and Haemostatic.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Raktatisara (Diarrhoea with blood)

Via MUTANS VI AUSATAT | STRTUNT WAAAY CERT Ea Ul
(afa. 19/86)

In Raktatisara (Blood mixed diarrhoea), Candana curna (Powder of Santalum al-
bum), Sugar and honey are mixed to Tandulodaka (Rice water) and taken internally.

2. Raktarshas (Haemorrhoids)
Heaatrse: TAM: area: TSS ET Aa PATTI
(afa. 14/185)

Candana (Santalum album) Kashaya or Rasa (Extract) is mixed with Shunthi is
very useful remedy for Raktarshas (Bleeding piles).

3. Pittajwara (Fever)

frasarat at reaarftenaret sree | (GPa. 5/8)

Candanadi kwatha mixed with sugar and honey should be administered. ,
4. Shukra meha (Diabetes)

Uae wprerarHares at | (Ge. 11/9)

Kwatha (Decoction) of Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna) and Candana (Santalum al-
bum) is very much beneficial.

----- PAGE 176 -----
168 Dravyaguna Vijnana

5. Chardi (Vomiting)

erat waaran aeast at 1 (af. 20/32)

In case of Chardi (Vomiting) Candana curna (Powder of Santalum album) taken
with Dhatri rasa (Juice of Emblica officinalis) is useful.

Matra (Dose)
1. Kwatha (Decoction) — 50 to100 ml
2. Churna (Powder) —- 3to6g
3. Taila (Oil) — 5to 10 drops

Phytoconstituents— Sandal wood oil contains about 95% of two isomeric sesquiter-
pene alcohols, o-santalol, B-santalol, santene, santenone, teresantol, santalone and

santalene.

Research corner

1 The chemical composition of volatile compounds from pericarp oils of Indian
sandalwood, Santalum album L., isolated by Hydrodistillation and solvent
extraction, were analyzed by GC and GC-MS. A total of 66 volatile
components were detected. The most prominent compounds were palmitic and
oleic acids, representing about 40-70% of the total oil. Zhang XH, da Silva JA,
Jia YX, Zhao JT, Ma GH. Chemical composition of volatile oils from the
pericarps of Indian Sandalwood (Santalum album ) by different extraction
methods. Nat Prod Commun. 2012 Jan; 7(1):93-6.

2 This study investigated the antihyperglycemic and antihyperlipidemic effect of
long-term oral administration of the Santalum album pet ether fraction in
streptozotoccin induced diabetic rats. Santalum album pet ether fraction has
potential antihyperlipidemic activity that can help in overcoming insulin
resistance. Kulkarni CR, Joglekar MM, Patil SB, Arvidekar AU.
Antihyperglycemic and antihyperlipidemic effect of Santalum album in
streptozotocin induced diabetic rats. Pharm Biol. 2012 Mar; 50(3):360-5. Epub
2011 Dec 1.

3 The antimicrobial activity of aqueous extract leaf and stem of Santalum album
was performed against Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus and
Pseudomonas. Leaf extract showed significantly higher inhibition when
compared to stem extract. Kumar MG, Jeyraaj IA, Jeyaraaj R, Loganathan P.
Antimicrobial activity of aqueous extract of leaf and stem extract of Santalum
album. Anc Sci Life. 2006 Jan; 25(3-4):6-9.

4 Six new sesquiterpenes, (Z)-2beta-hydroxy-14-hydro-beta-santalol (1), (Z)-

----- PAGE 177 -----
Shweta Chandana 169

2alphahydroxy-albumol (2), 2R-(Z)-campherene-2, 13-diol (3), (Z)-campheren-
2beta, 13-diol (4), (Z)-7-hydroxynuciferol (5), and (Z)-1beta-hydroxy-2-
hydrolanceol (6), together with five known compounds, (Z)-alpha-santalol (7),
(Z)-beta-santalol (8), (Z)-lanceol (9), alpha-santaldiol (10) and beta-santaldiol
(11) were isolated from Santalum album, by using bioassay-guided
fractionation for Helicobacter pylori and compounds 7 and 8 have strong anti-
H. pylori activities. Ochi T, Shibata H, Higuti T, Kodama KH, Kusumi T,
Takaishi Y. Anti-Helicobacter pylori compounds from Santalum album. J Nat
Prod. 2005 Jun; 68 (6):819-24.

Sandalwood oil, the essential oil of Snatalum album L., was tested for in vitro
antiviral activity against Herpes simplex viruses-1 and -2. It was found that the
replication of these viruses was inhibited in the presence of the oil. Benenicia,
F, Courreges MC. Antiviral activity of Sandalwood oil against herpes simplex
viruses-1 and -2. Phytomedicine. 1999 May; 6 (2):119-23.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo.

Nn

Name

Chandanadi Taila

Indications

Daha, Jwara

Chandanasava Mutrakricchra, Shukrameha

2
5

Chandanabalalakshadi taila Jwara, Kasa, Kshaya
Chandnadi Churna Prameha, Jirna jwara

Botanical Name

Santalum album Linn.
Santalum — Derived from Greek word Santalon, which signifies its aroma.
album — White
Family —Santalaceae
Kula — Chandana
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Dahaprashamana Varga, Angamarda prashamana Varga, Trashna
nigrahana Varga, Varnya Varga, Kandughna Varga & Vishaghna
Varga

----- PAGE 178 -----
170 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Sushruta Salasaradi gana, Patoladi gana, Sarivadi gana, Priyangwadi gana,
Guduchyadi gana

Bh.Pr.Ni_ Karpuradi Varga 11-13

Basonym of Drug
araht arereater sft |
areata sere SAL PP Aa Vihrercarest |
Chandana gives pleasure because of its aroma and cooling effect.
Prat aay gfe |
Shweta Chandana is white coloured.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. AATA-ATTTAT BAT: |
Chandana plant grows in Malaya (Region covers Western Ghats spreading in
Karnataka and Kerala states).
Morphology
2. freautery-freraa coir |
Leaves of Shweta Chandana resemble leaves of Tila (Sesamum plant).
3. WRT: UNS |
Heartwood of Shweta Chandana has good aroma.
Properties and Actions
4. Perereq-sitt cast def a |
Shweta Chandana has Shita Virya and it is cold to touch.
5, CRO lt:-AARNATATSIAHTL |
Shweta chandana has cooling effect like that of moon rays, so it is pleasing.
6. Uget:-vaT oft: yiraTSeT |
Imparts beauty to the person who uses Shweta chandana.
7, TRATA-TFATOT WaT ASA |
Shweta chandana is regarded as best among aromatic substances.

Others
8. fraven-firar gata WvSsr7e |

Pieces of heart wood of Shweta chandana are valuable.

----- PAGE 179 -----
Shweta Chandana 171

Habitat— Chandana is commonly found in for-
ests of Karnataka & Tamil nadu. Weather of South-
ern Karnataka is very much conducive to cultivate
Sandal wood.

Morphology
Habit — Small ever green glabrous tree.

Branches — Slender and drooping.

Sapwood — White and odourless.

Heartwood — Yellowish brown in colour and
strongly scented.

Leaves-— 4-6 cm long and 2-3 cm wide, elliptic-
lanceolate, subacute, glabrous, entire, thin, base acute,
petioles are 1-1.3 cm long and slender.

Santalum album Linn.

Inflorescence — Terminal and axillary paniculate cyme.

Flowers — Brownish purple in colour, inodourous. Perianth is companulate, sta-
mens are 4.

Fruit — Drupe
Varieties

Bh.Pr.Ni. 1 Shweta Chandana — Santalum album linn

2 Rakta Chandana — Pterocarpus santalinns Linn.
3 Pita Chandana (Kaleyaka) — Jateorhiza palmata or Coscinium

fenestratum Colebr.
Kuchandana (Patranga)— Caesalpinia sappan.
Chandana — Santalum album Linn.
Raktacandana — Pterocarpus santalinus Linn.
Kucandana —Caesalpinia sappan
Kaliyaka — Coscinium fenestratum Colebr. °
Barbarika
Chandana — Santalum album Linn.
Rakta Candana — Pterocarpus santalinus Linn.
Pita Candana — Coscinium fenestratum Colebr.
Kairata Candana
Barbara Candana
Hari Candana

Dh.Ni.

Ka.Ni.

NUORWNRKNARWNK LH

----- PAGE 180 -----
172 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Based on Colour - 1. Rakta 2. Pita 3. Pandura

Based on Habitat - 1. Malayaja — Uttama
2. Yavana — Madhyama
3. Barbara/Pancala-Adhama
Ra.Ni- 1 Shrikhanda-Santalum album
2 Shabara
3 Pita chandana — Santalum fonum
4 Patranga-— Caesalpinia sappan
5 Rakta chandana — Pterocarpus santalinus

6 Barbara
7 Harigandha
Shreshtha Chandana Lakshana (Qualities of best variety Chandana):
e Swade Tikta — Taste is Bitter
e Kashe Pitam — Yellow on rubbing
e Chede Raktam — Red on cutting
e Tanau Sitam — Body is white
e Granthi Kotara Samyukta — with knots and hollow space

Market sample consist cylindrical or longitudinally split pieces of heartwood, stripped
of much of the sapwood; pieces will be 20 cm long and 4 to 8 cm in diameter. The
heartwood is homogenous, rather hard and ponderous, pale reddish with darker reddish
brown and bright yellow concentric zones. Heart wood is having characteristic odour.

Classical references

Synonyms
sravg wet 3 att asattetcraftte: 1 wera werersaetea TREAT A: |
(ara. afore et. 11)
Properties and Actions
wert vtact wat frrmaretet wy | saetrafeaycter qonftraraaeye Ul
(ars. afafe af. 13)
stravé vftrct wag fark frafrarerr | tapered aereterenay |
frarafragecentret ye wenn | we wferaeyt weet Prise ae
(aft. aamfert 2-3)
agate vith aad forfire fa (dF. sitter 1256)

----- PAGE 181 -----
Shweta Chandana 173

aradodtenfe eon cenit wieterer aida first oo sramt:-yfr
wet we vit a att Hata a sad cals Ae wer qea |
orate wire free vier Utne | atalfesst firret yates a ary |
HR Yea T Uso Tea yet WAT

Shit Oat Wa Get wag fet ye | qomaerettrredt aenvirafragy. |
watt fed fark weet oy 1 avd aerated areqemfeanye

(4.FA. araferrt 1262-1267)
sfrarsersnyor
shavs Hefernvtitenyat tare ners ag ferwaaatt saat ger ara |
Get AEARATTS MAG Sher Tay Shoat frat Geran I
(A. aeart 8)
aga YT

aerated sftact ceftragrmd serve |
oidaeatt pedtinicnrencnyat

to ferment
(aA. aeate FT 12)

gals Uat WT
gases fark geste cegd, | Viet Hrd ures yeh AI cea UI
(af. aafert 13)
VARGA TT (AUT UT )
cua wevhacrs verorbreret sraftrcrentt |
frentcamniftaearas gaa aateateanhst
(a. aaa aT 15)
Utter TUT
Utes vitact fark qeycrentroney, | nughraiaregattecatdée UU
(wR. wea a7)
wet tact firm aftrret wy THM Blanka |
(BA. Sone wi 63)
we

wrest frfeet franre teh Ohta UST | seHTAA Vet Tey Ut TAT |

Wg want vieh weraftnfaeme: ui (a.f. sitet ef 1278-1269)

sravd grat dit wag THe | aet efter Get Wa BENT UN
(a. aera at 1)

----- PAGE 182 -----
174

Dravyaguna Vijnana

SAA See TUT ,
are free He cet BS teh eh fee | oPoRe dah at HeTeAt I

—

(ara. Before af. 12)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Shweta chanadana

a. Root Bark b. Fruit c. Leaf d. Heartwood
Ans: d. Heartwood

. Primary Taste of Shweta Chandana

a. Katu b. Tikta c. Kashaya d. Madhura
Ans: b. Tikta

. Agryakarma of Shweta Chandana

a. Dipana b. Stambhana c. Durgandhahara d. Mutrala
Ans: c. Durgandhara

. Combination of shweta chandana and Kakubha is indicated in

a. Madhumeha b. Shukrameha_ cc. Vasa Meha_— d. Sikata Meha
Ans: b. Shukrameha

. 6- Santalol is present in

a. Chandana b. Shunthi c. Arjuna d, Madanaphala
Ans: a. Chandana

. Botanical Name of Shweta chandana
a. Pterocarpus santalinus b. Mesua ferrea
c. Asteracantha longifolia d. Santalum album

Ans: d. Santalum album

. Malayaja is a synonym of
a. Bala b. Shweta chandana
c. Bilva d. Bharangi

Ans: b. Shweta Chandana

. Shweta Chandana is a
a. Creeper b. Tree c. Herb d. Shrub
Ans: b. Tree

eK a

----- PAGE 183 -----
Rakta Chandana

Useful parts - Saara (Heart wood)
Rasadi panchaka

na

Tikta Madhura

Ra
Vipaka [Kaw
[Vina | Shita |

Kar iia (Actions) — Tr ishnahara, Varnya, Netrya, Vrashya, Jwarahara, Vrana
Ropaka, Vishahara, Ahladakara, Dahahara, Chardihara.

Pharmacological Activities — Cooling, Tonic, Mild astringent, Antiinflammatory.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha) - Kaphapitta Shamaka, Kapha Shamaka owing
to Katu vipaka and Tikta Rasa.

Pittahara because of Shita virya and Tikta Madhura Rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications) - Trishna, Raktapitta, Jwara, Vrana,
Visharoga, Daha, Kasa, Krimi, Chardi.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Bhagna (Fracture)
areata aRrst wech Tee | waelttaedtast enfeits a det
(aa. 3/7)
Combination of Manjishtha curna (Powder of Rubia cordifolia), Madhuka

(Glycyrrhiza glabra), Rakta candana (Pterocarpus santalinus) and Shali (Rice flour)
mixed with Shatadhouta ghrita (Ghee washed hundred times) and applied.

2. Hikka (Hiccough)
ative: fener at qatet a weet Tar |
suited Seraccsrars rar Pret feat a fect a eM: Ul (GS. 50/17)

Rakta candana (Ptrocarpus santalinus) triturated with breast milk and used for Nashya
(Instillation).

----- PAGE 184 -----
176 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Vyanga (Depigmentation)
Tae ARet aetataga: | ae: WEST cage: YaatiAay:
(4.8.3 32/17)
External application of paste prepared by Rakta chandana (Pterocarpus santalinus),
Manjishta (Rubia cordifolia), Kushtha (Saussurea lappa), Priyangu (Calicarpa
macrophylla), buds of Vata (Ficus benghalensis) & Masura (Ervum lens) will cure Vyanga
(Depigmentation) and gives good lustre to the face.
Matra (Dose)
Kanda sara churna (Powder of heart wood) - 2 to 5 g.

Taila (Oil) —5 to 25 drops
Kashaya (Decoction) —50 to 100 ml
Phytoconstituents

Heart wood — Contains santalin, Santalic acid, Santalic pterocarpin, detoxy santalin
& Kino tannic acid.
Leaves — Contain -amyria, stigmasterol, erythrodial and betulin.

Research corner

1 One new phenanthrenedione, pterolinus K (1), and one chalcone, pterolinus L
(2) were isolated from the heartwood extract of Pterocarpus santalinus. Wu
SF, Hwang TL, Chen SL, Wu CC, Ohkoshi:'E, Lee KH, Chang FR, Wu YC.
Bioactive components from the heartwood of Pterocarpus santalinus. Bioorg
Med Chem Lett. 2011 Sep 15;21(18):5630-2. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

2 Five new benzofurans, pterolinuses A-E (1-5), six new neoflavonoids,
pterolinuses F-J (8-13), and five known compounds (6,7,14-16) were isolated
from an extract of Pterocarpus santalinus heartwood. Six compounds (1, 2, 4,
6, 7 and 15) showed significant inhibition in at least one anti-inflammatory
assay. Wu SF, Chang FR, Wang SY, Hwang TL, Lee CL, Chen SL, Wu CC,
Wu YC. Anti-inflammatory and cytotoxic neoflavonoids and benzofurans from
Pterocarpus santalinus. J Nat Prod. 2011 May 27:74 (5):989-96. Epub 2011
Apr 13.

3 The larvicidal potentials of the seed oils of Pterocarpus santalinus was
investigated in the laboratory against larvae of Aedes aegypti. The results
therefore suggest that the seed oil of Pterocarpus santalinus could be
incorporated as botanical insecticides against mosquito vectors with high safety
to non-target organisms. Adeleke MA, Popoola SA, Agbaje WB, Adewale B,

----- PAGE 185 -----
Rakta Chandana 177

Adeoye MD, Jimoh WA. Larvicidal efficacy of seeds oils of Pterocarpus
santalinus and tropical Manihot species against Aedes aegypti and effects on
aquatic fauna. Tanzan J Health Res. 2009 Oct; 11(4):250-2.

4 Study was designed to investigate the effect of bark of Pterocarpus santalinus,
an ethnomedicinal plant, on blood glucose, Plasma insulin, Serum lipids and
the activities of hepatic glucose metabolizing enzymes in streptozotocin-
induced diabetic rats. Biological testing of the active fraction demonstrated a
significant antidiabetic activity by reducing the elevated blood glucose levels
and glycosylated hemoglobin, improving hyperlipidemia and restoring the
insulin levels in treated experimental induced diabetic rats, Further elucidation
of mechanism of action showed improvement in the hepatic carbohydrate
metabolizing enzymes after the treatment. Kondeti VK, Badri KR, Maddirala
DR, Thur SK, Fatima SS, Kasetti RB, Rao CA. Effect of Pterocarpus
santalinus bark, on blood glucose, serum lipids, plasma insulin and hepatic
carbohydrate metabolic enzymes in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Food
Chem Toxicol. 2010 May; 48(5):1281-7. Epub 2010 Feb 21.

5 A new isoflavone together with liquiritigenin and isoliquiritigenin has been
isolated from the heartwood of Pterocarpus santalinus. Krishnaveni KS, Rao
JV. An isoflavone from Pterocarpus santalinus. Phytochemistry. 2000 Mar;
53(5):605-6.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo. Name

Indications

Chandanadi Churna Raktapitta, Atisara
Chandana kwatha Raktarshas, Raktapitta :

1
Chandanadya varti Timira

Chandanasava Mutra dosha, Shukradosha

Chandanadi ep

Pterocarpus santalinus Linn. Pterocarpus -Ptero-winged carpus-fruit. santalinus -
Sandal wood.

Family — Fabaceae (See Appendix-II for key features).

Botanical Name

Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Patoladi Gana, Sarivadi Gana, Priyangvadi Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Karpuradi Varga 16-17

----- PAGE 186 -----
178 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug
Teal wat Be BAT
Rakta Chandana is considered as red vareity of Sandal wood.

Morphology
1. THATNA-TrHatal A SEAT: |

Heart wood of Raktachandana is of red colour.
2. TRRTS=TeHAUTT HT TST TT |
The heart wood is red in colour.
3, WaTeT HA- WATT VSN Celtel AAT: |
Fruits of Rakta Chandana resemble like that of Pravala.

Properties and Actions
4, %JRaAeeAA-Properties are little inferior when compared to Shweta candana.

Regional Names

indi Rakta chandan

Rakta chandana

Chan chandanam

Rakta chandana

Kannada
Malayalam
Marathi

Zi
5
iS

Habitat

Red sandal grows naturally in South Indian
states like, Karnataka, Tamilnadu and
Andhrapradesh upto an elevation of 3000 ft. atti-
tude. Owing to its high commercial value it is culti-
vated in these states.

Morphology

Habit — Small tree grows upto 25 ft. in height.
Heart wood is dark purple in colour and is very
hard.

Leaves —- Compound with 3-5 leaflets, broadly
elliptic, obtuse, 4-7.5 cm long, Pale beneath and
clothed with fine adpressed hairs.

----- PAGE 187 -----
Rakta Chandana 179

Inflorescence — Few flowered axillary or terminal raceme.
Fruit — Pod, 4 cm in diameter, oblique, gradually narrowed into a short stalk.
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Sample have tough, rectangular pieces of heartwood, upto 18 cm long and 3 to 5 cm
in diameter, surface is dark reddish brown in colour, polished with longitudinal striations.

The transversely cut portion shows prominent black veins. The wood is quite heavy,
sinking in water. It doesn’t have any particular odour, having astringent and bitter odour.

Classical references
Synonyms
THe Tals Axa | faeraut Tat Aaletact HAT
(ans. ayute at. 16)
Properties and actions
th vit qerrerofigomsaticed, | fre tated get seraufearey,
(aia. afate at. 17)
THISARENE ated faengftcery 1 Tealkeet eft fread gare,
(af. aaa. 5)
urivftact wat firmed glad wy | amptafragerer gon frarearegd,
aR. atsftert. 1257
THeracdta viteret frre Alert ERs SATA, |
Taha HaAes wbasrqarirgerey (aA. seers. 22)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Rakta Chandana
a. Bark b. Heartwood c. Fruit d. Leaf
Ans: b. Heartwood
2. Chandanadi Lepa is indicated in
a. Jwara b. Atisara c. Vyanga d. Ajirna
Ans: c. Vyanga
3. Botanical Name of Rakta chandana
a. Pterocarpus santalinus b. Mesua ferrea
c. Asteracantha longifolia d. Santalum album

Ans: a. Pterocarpus santalinus

_

----- PAGE 188 -----
180

Dravyaguna Vijnana

4, Pravalaphala is a synonym of

ws

a. Dhataki bh. Haridra ¢. Jambu
Ans: d. Rakta Chandana

. Red Sandal wood is

a. Creeper b. Tree c. Herb
Ans: b. Tree

. Raktasara is a synonym of
a. Jyotishmati b. Kumari c, Bijaka

Ans: d, Rakta Chandana

. Pradhana Karma of Rakta Chandana

a, Swarya b. Mutrala c, Varnya
Ans: c. Varnya

d, Rakta Chandana

d. Shrub

d. Rakta Chandana

d. Kanthya

----- PAGE 189 -----
Chitraka

Useful parts — Mula (Root) and Mula twak (root bark).
Rasadi Panchaka

Katu (Tikta acc to Kai. Ni

Karma (Action)

Chitraka — Dipana, Pachana, Kushthaghna, Arshoghna, Shothahara, Krimighna,
Kasahara, Grahi, Rochaka, Kandughna.

Rakta Chitraka — Ruchya, Kushthaghna & Rasayana.
Agrya Karma

Farner deta urertenqanttaret erererromy | (A.A, 25/40)

Root of Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica Linn.) is Appetizer, Digestant and relieves
inflammation, Piles and colicky pain.
Pharmocological Actions

Appetiser, Digestant, Irritant

Action on Dosha -— Vatakapha Shamaka, Vatahara because of Ushna virya,
Kaphahara because of Ushna virya, Katu rasa and Katu vipaka.

Ka.di.Ni —Tridosha Shamaka

Kaphara because of Katu rasa & Katu vipaka, Pittahara because of Tikta rasa,
Vatahara because of Ushna virya.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Chitraka: Agnimandya, Ajirna, Grahani, Kushtha, Shotha, Krimi, Kasa, Arshas,
Pandu, Udara, Kandu. ,

Rakta Chitraka: Aruchi and Kushtha
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Arshas (Piles)
raet forenqeres firsar qest ware ais aT afer cet STTATfRt Fra

(a.Fa. 14/76)

----- PAGE 190 -----
182 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Paste prepared from Citrakamula twak (Root bark) of Plumbago zeylanica) is ap-
plied to the vessels (Mudjar) then curd or butermilk is prepared in the jar usage of this curd
or butter milk relieves piles.

Panne fare ar eee wera, | (a. 14/78)

Application of paste of Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica) and Nagara (Zingiber
officinale) mixed with sour gruel on haemorrhoids will relieve the problem.
2 Shwitra (Vitiligo)

(a.fa. 9/39)

In a jar, Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica), Vyosha (Piper longum, Piper nigrum and
Zingiber officinale), Cow’s urine, honey & ghee is mixed and kept for 15 days. The
patient suffering from Shwitra (Vitiligo) has to take internally.
3. Kushtha (Skin diseases)

Titra ait ar cenet stat PaO UTS Te | Ue Verse: serquritre: Freres
aT Yaar Tt Beat: VAP. 9/45

Finely powdered Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica) is taken with urine in case of
Kushtha (Skin diseases).

4, Atisara (Diarrhoea)

Ut AeYAat cigar ash Uicat aber | (af. 19/113)

Regular usage of Citraka (Plumbago zeylanica) with butter milke prevents diar-
rhoea and it is a good remedy as well.

Matra (Dose):
Mula twak churna (Root bark powder) - 0.5 to 1 g

Phytoconstituents — Yielded plumbagin (A naphthoquinone derivative)
isozeylinone, chitranone, zeylinone, elliptinone, droserone, T-sitosterol, vanillic acid,
plumbagic acid, steroidal glycoside, catechol, tannin, plumbazeylanone and naphthalenone.

Research corner
1. To assess the effect of plumbagin-free alcohol extract (PFAE) or Plumbago
zeylanica Linn. (Plumbaginaceae) P. zeylanica) root, on female reproductive
system and fertility of adult female wistar rats. All findings suggest that the
antifertility activity of extract could possibly be through the changes in the
implantation site, altered hormonal levels, prolonged estrous cycle and

----- PAGE 191 -----
two

iss)

Chitraka 183
antiestrogenic activity. Hence, the extract possesses reversible antifertility
activity without adverse toxicity in female rats. Sandeep G, Dheeraj A, Sharma
NK, Jhade D, Bharti A. Effect of plumagin free alcohol extract of Plumbago

zeylanica Linn. root on reproductive system of female Wistar rats. Asian Pac
J Trop Med. 2011 Dec; 4 (12):978-84,

. The study was aimed at isolating, separating and evaluating the antimicrobial

properties of compounds such as neioisoshinanolone and 1-epineo-
isoshinaolone from the roots of Plumbago zeylanica. The root extract of
Plumbago zeylanica possesses good antimicrobial activity, which suggests its
therapeutics use in the Ayurvedic system of medicine to cure skin diseases.
Jetty A, Subhakar C, Rajagopal D, Jetty M, Subra-manyam M, Marthanda
Murthy M. Antimicrobial activities of neo- and 1-epineo-isoshinaolones from
Plumbago zeylinica roots, Pharm Biol. 2010 Sep; 48(9):1007-11.

. Three Plumbago spp have been tested for mosquito larvicidal activity. The

crude extracts exhibiting the highest larvicidal activity against Anopheles
gambiae were hexane (LC 50=6.4 microg/mL) and chloroform (LC50=6.7
microg/mL) extracts from Plubago zeylanica Linn, chloroform (LC50=6.7 ug/
mL) extract from Plumbago stenophylla Bull and ethyl acetate (LC50=4.1
microg/mL) extract from Plumbago dawei Rolfe. Maniafu BM, Wilber L,
Ndiege IO, Wanjala CC, Akenga TA. Larvicidal activity of extracts from three
Plumbago spp against Anopheles gambiae. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2009.
Sep; 104(6):813-7.

. Plumbago zeylanica was tested for its possible in vivo protective effect against

cyclophosphamide-induced genotoxicity and oxidative stress in Swiss albino
mice. Study shown Plumbago zeylanica were effective in exerting a protective
effect against cyclophosphamide-induced gentoxicity and oxidative stress.
Sivakumar V, Niranjali Devaraj S. Protective effect of Plumbago zeylancia
against cyclophosphamide-induced genotoxicity and oxidative stress in Swiss
albino mice. Drug Chem Toxicol. 2006; 29(3):279-88.

. Plumbagin (5-hydroxy-2-methyl-1,4naphogquinone) isolated from Plumbago

zeylanica Linn, when administered orally, at a dosage of 4 mg/kg body weight
induces tumour recession in 3-methyl-4-dimethyl aminoaxzobemzene
(3MeDAB) induced hepatoma in Wistar male rats. Plumbagin administration
increased the gluconeogenic enzyme levels in the treated animals. Parimala R,
Sachadanadam P. Effect of Plumbagin on some glucose metabolising enzymes
studied in rats in experimental hepatoma. Mol Cell Biochem. 1993 Aug
11;125(1):59-63.

----- PAGE 192 -----
184 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Yoga (Formulations)

Name of formulation Indications

oe aS Chitrakadi Gutika Grahani, Agnimandya
2 Chitrakadya Ghrata Arsha, Shotha

SI.No.

4 Chitrakadi Kwatha Vatakaphaja Atisara

Botanical Name
Plumbago zeylanica Linn. Plumbum - lead, Plumbago-which cures lead palsy.

zeylanica — of Ceylon

Family—Plumbaginaceae

Kula — Chitraka
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Dipaniya varga, Trptighna varga, Shulaprashamana varga,
Bhedaniya varga, Arshoghna varga, Lekhaniya varga

Sushruta Pippalyadi gana, Mustadi gana, Amalakyadi gana, Mushkakadi
gana, Varunadi gana, Aragwadhadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. — Haritakyadi varga 70-71

Basonym of Drug
fore: farreaa:, dag See: fat carahrat Brahe agent yeuratarren: fe |
Citraka is very potent that it tears of unwanted growth. It is sharp like a spotted
Leopard.
Synonyms
Properties and Actions
1. aiftren:-athrgea: som: wast ate a ate BASH |
Citraka has Ushna virya and it is hot to touch. If comes in contact cause
burning sensation and induce swelling.
2. HUN:-e: TH Uh a |
Citraka has Katu rasa (Pungent taste) and undergoes Katu vipaka.
3, Weay-arater aterttet |
Citraka digests Anna (Food).

----- PAGE 193 -----
Chitraka 185

4. Gtram:-arhrdtas: |
Citraka increases Appetite.
5, SAeaTaT-athrearen:, THEM steractewrsy |
Citraka has burning qualities like that of Agni (Fire) hence; different synonyms
of Agni are also synonyms with Citraka.
6, aaret:- feng: dae Vee: |
Citraka can tear apart unwanted tissue growths.

Regional Names

Habitat— Chitraka grows very commonly in South
Indian states like Karnataka, Kerala, Tamilnadu &
Andhrapradesh and also in West Bengal, Uttarpradesh.
Attractive plant hence commonly cultivated in gardens.

Morphology
Habit — Perennial herb

Stem — 1.5-4 ft. long, somewhat woody, spread-
ing, terete, striate and glabrous.

Leaves— Thin, 4-7 cm long, 2-4 cm wide, ovate,
subacute, entire, glabrous, glaucous beneath, reticulately
veined, shortly and abruptly attenuated into a short peti- | Plumbago zeylanica Linn
ole, petiole is very narrow, amplexicaul at the base and
there often dilated into stipule like auricles.

Inflorescence — Elongated spikes.

Flowers ~ Arranged in glandular rachis, white in colour, corollatube is 2-2.5 cm
long.

Fruit — Capsule, oblong, pointed, pericarp is thin below and hardened above.
Varieties— 1.Shweta -  Plumbago zeylanica

----- PAGE 194 -----
186 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Rakta -- Plumbago rosea
3. Nila -

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Charecteristics):

Root material consists of cylindrical pieces of various lengths 2-12 mm in diameter.
The external surface is longitudinally striated or shrivelled, reddish brown in colour, hay-
ing warty projections at some places. The bark gets easily separated, exposing an inner
woody portion of pinkish white colour. A transversely cut portion of the root shows a
smooth surface of pinkish white colour with upto 2 mm thick bark, followed by a narrow
cortex and a radiating woody centre. The bark occurs as small curved or quilled, easily
friable pieces of various length, upto 2 mm in thickness. Internal surface of the bark is
rough or slightly fibrous and rusty brown in colour. On breaking it becomes short pieces.
If comes in contact with tongue it causes burning sensation.

Adverse effects — Chitraka is having strong properties; it has to be used cautiously.
It may cause burning sensation.

Purification — Chitraka mula (Root) which is the useful part has to be purified with
lime water.

Classical references
Synonyms

PaaS ST Urest earerea TTT: | (ALT. Aaeenfeart 70)

Properties and Actions
fae: mage: Ue abana oy: lato Teuht Sssitenst: Hitrearage |
AAPA Mietatrer: serorherra | (AH. eaeenert 70-71)
faretshiret: Uren wee: agar | aritensitecttercarg fear:
(a.Pr. mages et)
fast doar: we: Ure TA org: | attra ore watt ctafert treat wae
Teuftenarrayipseraity | waeercae sath eter ferme fre: |
atrorant art wera Breteaistirdtes: | tear ory as araftrafearerr tl
($.P.aieftet 1179-1181)
faaaishrean: ure we: wRHaE: | arteusiineuitaitrrgiearer: 1
(aA. frrenieert 45)
Tataaa-
Waa wear: HEA Taf: | wa Freameat wie Aes Tare: 1
(a.FF. frorente aT-47)

----- PAGE 195 -----
Chitraka ° 187

eewonn trek ferafer eget eure:
Savage wearer Sark ae aheen: | fers ehrafer werreraret ae MeVs ae,
fim fest ate aPeerteperent Sek: wet Tyee (A.A. Preenfe art 12)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Chitraka
a. Phala b. Bija c. Mula d. Kanda
Ans: c. Mula
. Pradhana Karma of chitraka
a, Jwaraghna b. Dipana Pachana_ c. Mutrala d. Kanthya
Ans: b. Dipana Pachana
3. Agrya Karma of Chitraka
a. Arshoghna b. Jwaraghna c. Balya d. Varnya
Ans: a. Arshoghna
4. Chitraka Samskarita Takra is advised in
a. Ajima b. Raktapitta c. Kasa d. Arshas
Ans: d. Arshas
5. A chemical constituent Pumbagin is present in
a. Kutaja b. Chitraka c. Bakuchi d. Dhanyaka
Ans: b. Chitraka
6. Chitrakadi Gutika specifically indicated in
a. Grahani b. Atisara c. Kasa d. Shwasa
Ans: a. Grahani
7. Botanical name of Chitraka
a. Myristica fragrans b. Mallotus philippinensis
c. Plumbago zeylanica d. Cyperus rotundus
Ans: c. Plumbago zeylanica
8. Habit of Chitraka is
a. Tree b. Herb c. Shrub d. Creeper
Ans: b. Herb
9. Types of Chitraka
a. 2 b. 5 c. 4 d. 3
Ans: d. 3 e

—

No

----- PAGE 196 -----
Chapter

Dadima

Useful parts — Phala twak (Rind), Kanda twak, Mula twak (Stem & Root bark) &
Pushpa (Flowers).
Rasadi Panchaka
Madhura Dadima (Sweet variety)

Madhura, Kashaya, Amla

Amla Dadima (Sour variety)

Karma — Madhura Ddima ~ Dahahara, Jwarahara, Tarpana Shukrala, Medhya,
Balya, Hradya

Madhuramla Dadima phala — Dipana, Ruchya

Amla Dadima phala — Ruchya, Dipana

Dadima phala twak ~ Grahi

Pharmacological Actions ~ Astringent, Anthelmintic, stomachic & cooling.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Madhura Dadima — Tridosha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka because of Madhura vipaka
and Madhura rasa. Pitta Shamaka due to Madhura Vipaka & Madhura Kashaya Rasa,
Kapha Shamaka due to Laghu Guna.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Madhura Dadima phala —Trishna, Daha, Jwara, Mukha dourgandhya.

Madhuramla Dadima phala — Agnimandya, Aruchi

Amla Dadima phala — Hradroga

----- PAGE 197 -----
Dadima 189

Dadima phala twak — Atisara
Dadima mula twak = Krimi
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Atisara (Diarrhoea)
yeahs foe, quad afedtmem | amet aeyeigen: wattage:
(IA, 2/1/31)
Ripen fruit of Dadima (Punica granatum) should be cooked in closed heating. The
juice extracted from fruit cures all types of Atisara (Diarrhoea).
2. Raktapitta (Intrinsic haemorrhage)
Ta asageroranier: weet at | aedients weerrerneg
(3.4.F4. 2/47)
Juice extracted from Dadima (Punica granatum) is mixed with juice of Amra
(Mangifera indica) leaves or Waa (Cynodon dactylon) or any drug having Shita virya
(Cold potency) should be used internally and as an external application.
3. Raktarshas (Bleeding piles)
TU Saet Ta CAPR | (aA. 14/185)
Decoction prepared from Dadima phala twak (Fruit rind) is very useful in Raktarsas
(Bleeding piles).
4. Trishna (Thirst)
wetasanars werefsrareta | Heh remade vite AAA I
(a1.5.F. 1/321)

The paste prepared from sugar and Dadima (Punica granatum) or Draksha (Vitis
vinifera) and Dadima (Punica granatum) is kept in mouth will reduce dryness and taste-
lessness associated with Trishna (Thirst).

5. Vyanga (Pigmentetion)

aromafitur arsarfsarae | (31.4.3. 37/24)

Fresh rind of Dadima (Punica granatum) has to be triturated with Aja kshira (Goat
milk) then applied gives good complexion.
Matra (Dose)

1. Phala rasa (Juice) —20 to 50 ml

2. Phala twak kwatha (Decoction) — 40 to 80 ml

----- PAGE 198 -----
190 Dravyaguna Vijnana

meneame eens eens ssceeneensatniaiatitesaa,

Phytoconstituents

Fruit contains - Glucose, fructose, maltose, starch, oxalic acid, carotene, thiamine,
riboflavin, nicotinic acid, Vitamin C, pectin, amino acids, citric acid, tannin, punicic acid.

Research index

1. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of pomegranate (Punica
granatum) in inhibiting and rerversing the nephrotoxicity of carbon
tetrachloride, a potent oxidative stress inducer which induces cellular kidney
damage. Study suggested that pomegranate juice was able to elevate the
antioxidant defense system, clean up free radicals, lessen oxidative damages
and protect the kidney against carbon tetrachloride-induced toxicity, thus
having a potential potective effect. Abdel Moneim AE, El-Khadagy MF. The
potential effects of pomegranate (Punica granatum) juice on carbon
tetrachloride-induced nephrotoxicity in rats. J physiol Biochem. 2012 Nov 7.

2. The purpose of the present study was to investigate the protective effect of
pomegranate peel extract (PPE) on azoxymethane (AOM)-induced colon
tumors in rats as an in vivo expertimental model. The resuits suggest thaat PPE
can partially inhibit the development of colonic premalignant lesions in an
AOM-induced colorectal carcinogenesis model, by abrogating oxidative stress
and improving the redox status of colonic cells. Waly ML, Ali A, Guizani N,
Al Rawahi AS, Farooq SA, Rahman MS. Pomegranate (Punica granatum)
peel Extract Efficacy as a Dietary Antioxidant against Azoxymethane-Induced
Colon Cancer in Rat. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(8):4051-5.

3. Two new ellagitannins containing a rare 3-oxo-1,3,3a, 8b-tetrahydrofuor[3,4-
b]benzofuran moiety, namely punicatannins A (1) and B (2), were isolated
from pomegranate (Punica granatum) flowers. Punicatannin A showed potent
inhibition of ?-glucosidase and lipogenic gene expression. Org Lett. 2012 Oct
19;14(20):5358-61. doi:10.1021/01302548c.

4. Present study was aimed to isolate and evaluate the antidiabetic activity of
phytoconstituents from fruit rinds of Punica granatum. These findings suggest
that MEPG and VAD possess significant antidiabetic activity in both in vitro
and in vivo models. Jain V, Viswanatha GL, Manohar, D, Shivaprasad HN.
Isolation of Antidiabetic Principle from Fruit Rinds of Punica granatum. Evid
Based complement alternat Med. 2012;2012:147202. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

5. This study aimed at evaluating the anti-inflammatory properties of a
pomegranate fruit husk (PomH) polyphenolic extract, rich in punicalagin, using
Caco-2 cells, an in vitro mode] of human intestinal epithelium. Data suggest

----- PAGE 199 -----
Dadima 191

that pomegranate husk could be an intersting natural source contributing to
prevent intestinal chronic inflammation. Hollebeeck S, Winand J, Herent MF,
During A, Leclercq J, Larondelle Y, Schneider YJ. Anti-inflammatory effects
of pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) husk ellagitannins in Caco-2 cells, an in
vitro model of human intestine. Food Funct. 2012 Aug; 3(8):875-85. Epub
2012 Jun 26.

Yoga (Formulations)

SILNo. Name Indications

Dadimashtaka churna Grahani, Atisara

Dadimadya ghrata Prameha, Ashmari
Dadimadya taila Grahani, Prameha
Dadimadi churna Aruchi, Agnimandya

Botanical Name - Punica granatum Linn.
Punica - Pertaining to Carthage-Cartheginian apple

granatum - Filled with seeds.
Family - Lythraceae
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Hradya varga, Chardinigrahana Varga, Shramahara Varga
Sushruta Parushakadi gana
B.Pr.N. Amradi phalavarga 101-104
Basonym of Drug
area fereretet Tarareereh ate
When Dadima fruit is cut open juice spills over.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. Gateltet:- ote eettt ST
Dadima seeds resemble teeth.
2. aftteita:-attit: waa: tified at, tae street l
The seeds are like quartz or ruby.

3. Cereitst:-taui disreree |

----- PAGE 200 -----
192 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Dadima seeds are red in colour.
4, witerqeran:- cif Teneref gore |
Dadima flowers are red in colour.
5. GAA: - Tet Heme |
Fruits are round shaped.
6. APH: -ArHelsd HTT |
Dadima fruit is coverd by leathery rind.
7. TATeTH:-THGTH: |
Fruit is juicy.
Properties and Actions
8. TASRTA-AEATS TE |
Fruit of Dadima has sweet and sour taste.
9. Wetct-fectee: |
Dadima is conducive to health.

10. arten:-unter eater Wea

Dadima is very useful in so many diseases.

Regional Names

Enlih

Habitat

Pomegranate plant is cultivated all over India.
Morphology

Habit — A large deciduous shrub or small tree.

Bark - Smooth, grey and thin, often armed with
small axillary or terminal thorns.

Leaves - Opposite, 2.5-6 cm long, oblong-lan-
ceolate, oblong-elliptic or oblong-oblanceolate, gla-
brous, entire, shining above, bright green beneath. Base Pinica granatum Linn.
narrowed into a very short petiole.

----- PAGE 201 -----
ate iniibaias

Dadima 193

aan | pontary, sometimes 2 to 4 together, 4-5 cm long, petals are 5 to 7 in
number, : co oured, with Numerous stamens, inferior ovary, many celled and cells ar-
ranged in 2 concentric circles,

Fr ee 4to7 comin diameter tipped with the calyx-limb, rind is coriaceous,
wood ays the interior septate with the membranous walls of the carpels, each carpel con-
taining numerous seeds, angular from mutual pressure,

Seeds — With a watery outer coat containing pink juice and a horny inner coat.
Varieties

Bha Ni — 3 Varieties : 1, Swadu, 2. Swadvamla, 3. Amla

Dha.Ni-—1. Madhura, 2. Amla
Commercial Varieties

1. Poona 2. Dholka

3. Muscat
4. Kabul 5. Alandi 6. Bedana
7. Kandahari 8.Papershell 9, Spanish Ruby 10. Vellodu

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteirtics)

Fruit rind — Irregularly broken, more or less curved pieces of dry rind of the fruit,
upto 3 mm in thickness. The outer surface is some what leathery and polished, brick red
or tan brown in colour. Some of the pieces carry a crown of toothed, tubular calyx. Inner
surface is more or less yellowish or light brown in colour, showing a honey-comb struc-

ture with depressions left by the seed. It is brittle and breaking with a short corky fracture,
without particular odour and having strong astringent taste.

Classical references

Synonyms
SSa: catenl Sarat SSAA: | (A. T.sTae Herat. 101)

Varieties
Aeaet Pifeaet tag Cae Hare | (ALT. STEMS Herat. 101)
fefeet reer fae wet acta eT 1 (oP rageae aT. 62)

Properties and Actions ;
mura oe fart tereeraey | tareteidtast wet feoRaterrat oe
Beery rasa STRATA, UI (ATT. HEAT. 102-104)
feretront arfert wet ancattrer ferrari (e.Fa. ereargeieat. 62)

Tet g Pretest coreet arafirad | rgeafirent unet tie wagers ti

----- PAGE 202 -----
194

Dravyaguna Vijnana

attest treat wet chat arferftrereny, | Ret aoorer Tevet ator aamarafer,
aelfftraert fiat aurarget ory 1 fxfeet ag fared meyer fate = i
artet @ faferet art waret ferergaran | kag PratrrecresaTER TTT TA I
ware afer ay aan | ftreeraregon arene HAAS, |

(fa. ateftrert. 307-311)

SUES ETAT HUA CHRTTATINT |

mie dose creer vittet set ofan u (aA. sinfeat 75)

afer wei vad aE qaubaay | dale ator aed GomatesaaeNy, |!
wHeTeTR-Gorenferes Urevat gat Ter | ye Bg Praag WAST Il

(fr.. eaeafert 236-237)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Vipaka of Amla Dadima
a. Madhura b. Amla c. Katu d. Kashaya
Ans; b. Amla
2. Dadimashtaka Churna is indicated in
a. Atisara b. Ajirna c. Shotha d. Kasa

Ans: a. Atisara
3. Botanical name of Dadima
a. Curcuma longa b. Cynodon dactylon
c. Punica granatum d. Centella asiatica
Ans: c. Punica granatum
4. Dantabija is a synonym of
a. Bhringaraja b. Bhallataka c. Gambhari d. Dadima
Ans: d. Dadima
5. Valkaphala is a synonym of

a. Nimba b. Dadima c. Kapikacchu dd. Haritaki
Ans: b. Dadima

6. Habit of Dadima plant
a. Creeper b. Climber c. Large shrub d. Herb

Ans: c. Large shrub
7. Types of Dadima as per Bhavaprakasha
a. 4 b. 5 c. 6 d. 3

Ans: d.3

----- PAGE 203 -----
Dhanyaka

Useful Parts - Phalg (Fruit),

Rasadipanchaka

Particulars Ardra Dhanyaka Shushka Dhanyaka Dhanyaka Shaka

Rasa sng katu, Tikta Madhura, Kashya &
‘ashaya Madhura
a

Karma (Actions)

Shushka Dhanyaka - Dipana, Pachana, Mutrala, Jwaraghna, Rochaka, Grahi,
Trahara, Dahahara, Chardighna, Shwasahara, Krimighna, Hradya.

Ardra Dhanyaka - Dourgandhyahara, Hradya, Dipana, Pachana, Mutrala,
Rochaka, Trashnahara & Dahahara.

Dhanyaka Shaka - Ruchya, Dipana, Mutrala & Jwaraghna.

Pharmacological Actions
Fruits - Aromatic, Stimulant, Carminative, Stomachic, Refrigerant, Tonic & Diruretic.
Leaves - Pungent & Aromatic.

Dosha-karma (Action on Dosha)

Sushka Dhanyaka - Tridoshahara, Vatahara due to Ushna virya & Madhura
vipaka, Pittahara because of Madhura vipaka, Kaphahara due to Ushna virya.

Ardra Dhanyaka - Mainly Pittashamaka because of Madhura vipaka and Madhura,
Tikta, Kashaya Rasa.

Dhanyaka Shaka - Kaphavatahara, Kaphahara due to Ushna virya, Vatahara
because of Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Shushka Dhanyaka - Agnimandya, Mutrakrachra, Jwara, Aruchi, Trishna, Daha,
Atisara, Chardi, Shwasa and Krimi.

----- PAGE 204 -----
196 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Ardra Dhanyaka » Mukha dourgandhya, Agnimandya, Aruci, Mutrakracchra,
Trashna and Daha.

Dhanyaka Shaka - Aruchi, Agnimandya & Jwara
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Trashna (Thirst)
(a.5.Fa. 18/23)

Drinking decoction of Dhanyaka (Coriandrum sativum) mixed with Sugar in the
morning will alleviate Trashna (Thirst), Daha (Burning sensation) and acts as Sroto
Shodhaka (Clears the channels).

2. Daha (Burning sensation)
Udit ante Wrath werkt Gary | stale ervey Weare AAT I
(ALS.FA. 1/356)

Dhanyaka hima (Cold infusion) taken with sugar in the early morning will alleviate
even severe burning sensation immediately.
3. Atisara (Diarrhoea)

arent yet art Torrareret racy | (a7.5.Fa. 2/14)

Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from Dhanyaka (Coriandrum sativum) is very useful
in Atisara (Diarrhoea), Trashna (Thirst) and Daha (Burning sensation).

4. Amavata (Rhumatoid Arthritis)
STAT: FATT: UTA AAAS | WU STH WTA TAT
(3.4. 2/2/65)
Decoction of Dhanyaka (Coriandrum sativum) and Nagara (Zingiber officinale) is

prepared and mixed with Erandamula kwatha (Decoction of root of Ricinus communis)
will overcome all kinds of Vataja disorders and Amavata (Rhumatiod arthiritis).

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) - 3to5¢g
Hima (Cold infusion) - 40 to 80 ml
Swarasa (Juice) - 10 to 20 ml
Phanta (Hot infusion) - 30 to 50 ml

Kwatha (Decoction) - 50-100 ml
Phytoconstituents - Coriander yields volatile oil (0.3 to 1%), fixed oil (13%) &
Proteins (20%).

----- PAGE 205 -----
Volatile oil contains Coriandrol, Co
Geraniol and Pinene. Also yield Tannin

Vit-A.

; Dhanyaka 197

randryl acetate and small quantities of L-borneol,
& Malic acid Coriander leaves are rich source of

Research Corner

1.

tw

Ww

The present study investigated the antioxidant

activity of Coriandrum sativum
on TAA-induced hepatotoxicity in the ma

—_ ie le rats. Phenolic content and
antioxidant activity were evaluated in the coriander leaves and seeds, Treatment
with coriander leaves and seeds helps in improving the adverse effect of TAA-
induced hepatotoxicity; also the histological study confirms this finding.
Moustafa AH, Ali EM, Moselhy SS, Tousson E, El-Said KS. Effect of

coriander on thioacetamide-induced hepatotoxicity in rats. Toxicol Ind Health.
2012 Oct 5.

. The aims of this study were to test the antifungal activity, toxicity and chemical

composition of essential oil from C. sativum L. fruits. C. sativum essential oil
is active in vitro against M. canis and Candida spp. demonstrating good
antifungal activity. Soares BV, Morasis SM, dos Santos Fontenelle RO,
Queiroz VA, Vila-Nova NS, Pereira CM, Brito ES, Neto MA, Brito EH,
Cavalcante CS, Castelo-Branco DS, Rocha MF. Antifungal activity, toxicity
and chemical composition of the essential oil of Coriandrum sativum L fruits.
Molecules. 2012 Jul 11, 17(7) 843948. doi: 10. 3390/molecules 47078439.

. To establish its utility in Diabetes mellitus, the present study evaluated the

antidiabetic and antioxidant effects of CS in alloxan-induced diabetic rats.
These results indicate that the extracts could protect liver function and exhibited
hypoglycemic, hypolipidemic, and antioxidant efficacies in the diabetic rats.
These results support the use of this plant extract to manage Diabetes mellitus.
Sreelatha S, JInbavalli R. Antioxidant, antihyperglycemic, and
antihyperlipidemic effects of Coriandrum sativum leaf and stem in alloxan-
induced diabetic rats, J Food Sci. 2012 Jul; 77(7):T119-23. doi: 10. 1111/
j.1750-3841.2012.02755.x. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

. The study aim was to investigate potential hypoglycemic (and hypolipidemic)

activity of CS-extract after a single oral dose and after daily dosing for 30 days
(sub-chronic study) in normal and obese-hyperglycemic-hyperlipidemic (OHH)
Meriones shawi rats, The present study validates the traditional use of coriander
in diabetes. Aissaoui A, Zizi S, Israili ZH, Lyoussi B. Hypoglycemic and
hypohodemic effect of Coriandrum sativurn L. in Meriones shawi rats. J
Ethno-pharmacol, 2011 Sep 1;137(1):652-61. Epub 2011 Jun 28.

----- PAGE 206 -----
198 Dravyaguna Vijnana

5. The antioxidant and free-radical-scavenging property of seeds in Vitro was
studied and also investigated whether the administration of seeds curtails
oxidative stress in the kidney of streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. These
results show that C. sativum seeds not only possess antihyperglycemic
properties but antioxidative properties also. Increased dietary intake of
coriander seeds decrease the oxidative bur-den in Diabetes mellitus. Deepa B,
Anuradha CY, Antioxidant potential of Coriandrum sativum L seed extract,
Indian J Exp Biol. 2011 Jan;49(1)30-8.

Yoga (Formulations)
SILNo. Name Indications

Dhanyakadi Hima Raktapitta, Jwara, Daha
Dhanyakadi Kwatha

Agnimandya, Amadosha
Dhanya Nagaradi Kwaha Agnimandya, Shula
Dhanya Shunthi Shula, Atisara

Dhanya Panchaka Vibandha, Shula

Botanical Name
Coriandrum sativum Linn.
Coriandrum—Corys=Helmet, andrum-anthers
sativum - Cultivated
Family — Apiaceae
Kula — Shatapushpa Kula
Classification of Dravya
Charaka — Trishna nigrahana Varga, Shitaprashamana Varga
Sushruta Guduchyadi Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni.  Haritakyadi Varga
Basonym of Drug
UAT Cacia |
Dhanyaka is a plant having seeds like cereals.
Synonyms
Morphology
1 Ganaa:- wears WATT |

Leaves of Dhanyaka are small.

----- PAGE 207 -----
Dhanyaka 199

Dhanyaka is a very small green plant looks like dancing when wind blows.
3, DAMUAM-SAANYMAL AH MT |

Dhanyaka has umbel inflorescence.
4, BA-DATANGMYT AT |

Dhanyaka is having umbel inflorescence.

Fruits of Dhanyaka resemble Tumburu.
6. Traatst:- eta STAT |

Dhanyaka seeds resemble cereals.

Properties and Actions
7. faqaan-ferd Garren Sareea
Dhanyaka is used to treat many diseases.
8. ARUTAT-AgUY WSTATHNARAY NST |
Dhanyaka is one of the best spices kept in the kitchen.
9. WTHaANa:-Vleh WH: |
Stem and leaves are used for food preparations
10. aqent-eftard gfe
Fruit powder is added to the drinks.
11, GERTAM-Fel WANSET: |
Dhanyaka has agreeable odour.

Regional Names

Kothimbir

Habitat
Coriander is cultivated throughout India and it is sold in the market. India is the
largest producer of coriander.

----- PAGE 208 -----
200 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Morphology

Habit - annual herb.

Root - Tap root, branched.

Stem - Herbaceous, erect, cylindrical, fistular, ribbed,
branched, glaucous with swollen nodes and aromatic.

Leaves - Cauline, alternate, exstipulate, petiolate,
sheathing leafy base, glaucous, decompound, very much
dissected when matured, leaflets are 2-3 lobed, linear lan-
ceolate, entire, acute apex, unicostate reticulate venation.

Coriandrum sativum Linn.

Inflorescence - Compound umbel, primary umbel
with an involucre of bracts at the base, the secondary umbels also with a similar involved

of bracteoles.

Flowers - The outer flowers of the umbel are with large and unequal petals. The
central ones are smaller with equal petiols. Flowers are bracteate, pedicillate, complete,
bisexual, pentamerous, epigynous. Outer flowers zygomorphic, central ones are actino-
morphic, purplish white in colour. Sepals are 5, gamosepalous and calyx tube adnate to
the ovary wall. Petals are 5, polypetalous with imbricate aestivation. Androecium con-
tains 5 stamens, polyandrous, alternating with the petals with long filaments. Gynoecium
is bicarpellary syncarpous, with inferior ovary axile plancentation without style.

Fruit - Cremocarp, oblong, ridged. Fruit breaks up into 2 Mericarps, one seed in
each mericarp, Vittae is present in the pericarp.

Seed - Endospermic
Varieties

Source — 1. Gramya (Cultivated) 2. Vanya (Wild)

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Fruits are oval or sub-globular fruit of greenish yellow or straw colour, up to 5 mm in
diameter. It consists of two semi-circular mericarps united by their margins. The apex of
the fruit has a stylopod. External surface is covered with longitudinally running primary
and secondary ridges. The former are wavy and inconspicuous while the latter are straight
and prominent on the whole, the fruit gives a ribbed appearance. Fruits have spicy odour
and pungent taste.

----- PAGE 209 -----
Dhanyaka 201

Classical references
Synonyms
Oras IA IAT Maas Ae | Hat dyer war Hepa fers
(ara. whtrrafe aT 86)
Properties and Actions
wared treaeh fe eargurent Pretega | Trereatharranvtphrayd |
HR T Agu targ fergrarfeaagTTy Ul (A7.T. Sirens TF 87-88)
At PEP AS: Haley SATA AT YER VET Urs aren Taare
ah HGS wlewarcetgyy fea | carats wet deqareay
(aft. mageneat: 64-65)
TR MTS: Aa HEent pay wget: |
Yew MT: Year Pe Lag Uren HATA HEAT TY: II
STEM FAT ferret TET Seat Hraraer |
surdtat aefercent stot ore aearq, I
PUNa ea AAA asa |
vented oy Se wet arare Warent Tea II
(&..ateftrt 1195-1197)
arate Tet vit pared fear | See Tereoldarment a ata I
(afr. free FT 37)
ore dad me watet crevotdge | Pretagradt weet wet Poteet tt
(R.A. ergenie at 21)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Dhanyaka

a. Mula b. Kanda c. Phala d. Pushpa
Ans: c. Phala

2. Vipaka of Dhanyaka
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Kashaya d. Amla

Ans: b. Madhura

----- PAGE 210 -----
202

Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Dhanyaka kwatha with Sharkara is indicated in

a. Atisara b. Ajirna c. Vibandha
Ans: d. Trishna

. Dhanya Panchaka is indicated

a. Vibandha b. Atisara c. Kushtha
Ans: a. Vibandha

. Coriandrum sativum is the botanical name of

a. Karkata shringi b. Dhanyaka c. Prishniparni
Ans: b. Dhanyaka

. Kunati is the synonym of

a. Rohitaka b. Pippali * _c. Dhanyaka
Ans: c. Dhanyaka

. Shakayogya is a synonym of

a. Dhanyaka b. Vidarai c. Eranda
Ans: a. dhanyaka

. Habit of Dhanyaka plant

a. Tree b. Creeper c. Shrub
Ans: d. Herb

ae ok oR RK

d. Trishna

d, Vaivarnya

d. Ushira

d. Kiratatikta

d. Punarnava

d. Herb

----- PAGE 211 -----
Dhataki

Useful part — Pushpa (Flowers)

Rasadi panchaka

Vipaka [Ram
Shita, (Ushna acc to. Dh.Ni)

Karma (action) — Trashnahara, Stambhaka, Vishaghna, Krimighna, Visarpahara,
Garbha sthapaka, Madakara, Vranahara, Sandhaniya, Mutravirajaniya.

Pharmacological actions— Astringent, Tonic, Stimulant, Haemostatic and wound
healer.

Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Pitta kapha Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to Shita virya and Kashaya Rasa, Kapha
hara because of Kashaya Rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications) - Atisara, Trashna, Krimi, Visarpa,
Raktatisara, Raktarshas, Raktapitta, Vishavikara, Pravahika and Vrana.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
j. Balatisara (Diarrhoea in children)

Paral arent TATA: | (SLES. 1/40)

Combination of Dhataki pushpa (Flowers of Woodfordia fruticosa), Sugar and Laja
(Parched paddy) are mixed and administered to child, will check Atisara (Diarrhoea).

2. Pravahika (Dysentery)
aaat aatt ust aftercare | Wettetart aeat frst warfeariea: 1
(aa.Fe. 1/120)

Juice of Dhataki pushpa (Flower of Woodfoordia fruticosa), Badari patra (Leaves
of Zizyphus jujuba), Kapittha (Feronia elephentanum) mixed with Lodhra curna
(Powder of Symplocos racemosa), honey and butter milk will cure Pravahika (Dysen-

tery),

----- PAGE 212 -----
204 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Kushtha (Skin diseases)

wert artaitat aera stared AHA | eH Herat POGAeATC A
(af. 7/95)

The paste prepared from Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa) Dhataki (Woodfordia
fruticosa), Vatsaka bija (Seeds of Holarrhena antidysenterica), Karanja bija (Seeds of
Pongamia pinnata) and Malati is efficacious as an ointment in Kustha (Skin disease).

4, Pittabhisyanda (Conjunctivitis due to Pitta)
sot Hatagref Tat at HATA eMttent MSTA, Ul (G3. 10/9)

Ciirna (Powder) of Dhataki (Woodfordia fruticosa) and Candana (Santalum album)
mixed with Stanya (breast milk) is applied as Afijana (Collyrium) in case of Pittabhisyanda
(Conjunctivitis due to pitta).

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) — 1 to 3 g

Phytoconstituents

Flowers are containing becogenin, gallic acid and ellagic acid, B-sitoserol, tannins,
sugar (glucose), ursolic acid, kaempferol, lawsone, octacosanaol & mesoinositol.

Leaves have ellagic acid, myricetin, quercetin, lupeaol, B-sitoserol, betulin, ursolic
acid, betulinic acid, oleanolic acid, tannins.

Stem afford octacosanol, B-sitoserol, tannins, and flavonoids.
Gum has D-galactose, L-arabinose and L-rhamnose

Research index

1 The ethanolic extract of W. fruticosa flowers (250 and 500 mg/kg) significantly
reduced fasting blood glucose level and increased insulin level after 21 days
treatment in streptozotocin diabetic rats. The results suggest that W. fruticosa
possess potential anthiyperglycemic effect by regulating glucose homeostasis
and antioxidant efficacy in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Verma N,
Amresh G, Sahu PK, Rao ChV, Singh AP, Antihyperglycemic activity of
Woodfordia fruticosa (Kurz) flowers extracts in glucose metabolism and lipid
preroxidation in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Indian J. Exp. Biol. 2012
May; 50(5):351-8.

2 To evaluate the protective effect of Woodfordia fruticosa Kurz flowers against
experimentally induced liver toxicity in rats. This study demonstrated the
hepatoprotective activity of WFM and thus scientifically support the use of this

----- PAGE 213 -----
Dhataki 205

plant in traditional medicine for the treatment of liver disorders. Baravalia Y,
Vaghasiya, Y, Chanda, S. Hepatoprotective effect of Woodfordia fruticosa
Kurz flowers on diclofenac sodium induced liver toxicity in rats. Asian Pac J
Trop Med. 2011 May; 4(5):342-6. Epub 2011 Jun 22.

3 To investigate the effect of ethanol extract of W. fruticosa flowers on non-
specific immune responses in mice. The result described here indicates the
immunostimulatory activity of ethanol extract of W. fruticosa flowers by
stimulating non-specific immune responses, macrophages and bone marrow
cells. Shah AS, Juvekar AR In vitro and in vivo immunostimulatory activity of
Woodfordia fruticosa flowers on non-specific immunity. Pharm Biol. 2010
Sep; 48(9):1066-72.

4 The aim of present study was to validate hepatoprotective activity of flowers
of Woodfordia fruticosa Kurz. Present study showed that the aqueous extract
of Woodfordia fruticosa significantly restores physiological integrity of
hepatocytes. WF4 did not show any sign of toxicity up to oral dose of 2g/kg
in mice. Chandan BK, Saxena AK, Shukla S, Sharma N, Gupta DK, Singh,
K, Suri, J, Bhadauria M, Qazi GN. Hepatoprotective activity of Woodfordia
fruticosa Kurz flowers against carbon tetrachloride induced hepatotoxicity. J.
Ethnopharmacol. 2008 Sep. 26;119(2):218-24. Epub 2008 Jun 28.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name Indications
1

9 Dhatakyadi Churna Jwaratisara (Bala)
Dhatakyadi Taila Sutika Vikara

Botanical name
Woodfordia floribunda Salisb., Woodfordia fruticosa kurz.
Woodfordia - After the name of J. Woodford a botanist.
floribunda — Flowers appear in clusters.
Family —Lythraceae (See Appendix II for key features)
Kula — Madayantika

Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Sandhaniya varga, Mutravirajaniya varga, Purishasangrahaniya
varga

----- PAGE 214 -----
206 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Sushruta — Ambashtadi gana, Priyangvadi gana
B.P.Ni Haritakyadi varga 186-187
Basonym of Drug
aemnfer aiferernt efrarrier ceearfir yeuruttter ater center exter oretearcy RECT
Flowers of Dhataki are very attractive and it is also used as medicines.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. Urdefter-ardeamegt TTT |
Dhataki commonly grows in hilly region.
2. Gfran-ageeatreTeaaeT |
Dhataki grows abundantly and one plant yield good quantity of flowers:

Morphology
3. aTgyett-eng: Tas, ago yorreerea: |
Flowers of Dhataki are red in colour like that of Red ochre.
4. abeqen-abesareta THAT fT FoaTTTT: |
The flowers are red in colour like that of flame.
5. TOT TOTTI: |
Dhataki flowers occur in bunches.
6. Agyteran-aght Gear: |
Dhataki plant will have many flowers.
Properties and Actions :
Dhataki flowers are used to prepare Alcoholic preparetions.
8. Meranfeet-wet aratag etter: |
Dhataki flowers are having property of generating alcohol.
9. ~ helt wet epee FEAT: |

Dhataki flowers are used in Alcoholic formulations.

----- PAGE 215 -----
Dhataki 207

Regional Names

indi [Dwi

Habitat
Dhataki plant is common in hilly regions of India.

Morphology

Habit —A straggling leafy shrub grows upto 10 ft.
in height.

Branches — Long, spreading.

Bark— Smooth, ashy brown, peeling off in fibres.

Young shoots — Are terete, often clothed with fine
white pubescence. =

Leaves — 5 to 9 cm long and 1 to 3 cm wide, op- Woodfordia flocbunda
posite or subopposite, sometimes in whorls of 3, sessile, Salisb.

ovate lanceolate, acute, softly velvety above, base is
rounded or cordate. Main nerves are 6 to 12 pairs, arcuate, prominent beneath.

Inflorescence — 2 to 15 flowered cymes.

Flowers — Having short glandular and pubescent pedicel, sepals are striate covered
with glandular dots. Petals are slightly longer than sepals and bright red in colour. Petals
are tubular and narrowly linear.

Fruit — Capsule, 1 cm long, irregularly dehiscent.
Seeds — Seeds are cuneate-obovoid, brown and smooth.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Market sample of Dhataki contains dried flowers of scarlet or bright red colour,
measuring 12 mm to 15 mm in length and occurring in fascicled bunches. The flower is
trimorphic, short pedicellate with a long tubular calyx, which is upto 2 mm broad the
calyx is slightly contracted above the middle and has an oblique mouth having six small
trinagular teeth. The stamens are much exerted beyond the mouth of the tube. It has
characteristic odour and has slightly bitter and astringent taste.

----- PAGE 216 -----
208 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references
Synonyms

erent egqyedt a aragaht at pant | after aggedt a atesaren a UT AAT
(any. eterna TT. 185)

Properties and Actions
tet eat vila AeA ey: | Toorsetharettreerrenferrephertererc ere, 1
(an. afew. 186)
Uden meal a Rafat | strane mere Hires
(afi. Tene TH. 90)
eran vitten ect sare HeeeTy: | Tofrrerctterdferarctare ages, 1
wat wag faust a crear dhgiceny | React det weaken
Rat BUS AT AY MATT: HHT ANT USA. sieht ah. 1072-1074)
aeat wage a Napier i warttenstracet fretrorrert u
(wR. frorene af. 125)
viet ware ETT Raat waft | faa
eal we: Tamaeiwanren amaat eed: ll
(BAY. rage Pt. 77)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Dhataki
a. Bija b. Patra c. Pushpa d. Mula —
Ans: c. Pushpa
2. Pradhana Rasa of Dhataki Pushpa
a. Katu b. Kashaya c.Tikta d. Amla
Ans: b. Kashaya
3. Plant having property to generate natural alcohol
a. Ajamoda b. Ashwagandha c. Patala d. Dhataki
Ans: d. Dhataki

4. Botanical name of Dhataki
a. Terminalia chebula b. Emblica officinalis
c. Woodfordia floribunda d. Tinospora cordifolia
Ans: c. Woodfordia floribunda

----- PAGE 217 -----
Dhataki

5. Madahetu is a synonym of

a. Jambu b. Dhataki c. Bakuchi
Ans: b. Dhataki

. Sidhu Pushpi is a synonym of

a. Dhataki b. Shigru c. Parpataka
Ans: a. Dhataki

. Fire flame bush is a common name of

a. Palasha b. Daruharidra _—_c. Dhataki
Ans: c. Dhataki

. Dhatakyadi Churna is indicated in

a. Kushtha b. Prameha c. Jwaratisara
Ans: c. Jwaratisara

209

d. Shyonaka

d. Aragwadha

d. Sariva

d. Vaivarnya

----- PAGE 218 -----
Dhanvayasa

Part used - Panchanga (Whole plant).
Rasadipanchaka

Rasa [Reshaya Tk, Mahara, Rat

Karma (Actions)

Trishnahara, Kushthaghna, Visarpanashaka, Jwaraghna, Dahanashaka,
Chardighna, Madajit, Bhramajit, Vataraktanashaka.

Pharmacological Actions
Antipyretic, Anti-inflammatory, Analgesic, Antimicrobial, Antiviral, CNS stimu-
lant and Anticancerous.
Agrya Karma:
BeeTaT PTT | (FY, 25/40)
Duralabha (Fagonia cretica Linn.) pacifies Pitta and Shleshma.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Vata Pitta Shamaka. Vatahara due to Madhura vipaka. Pitta Shamaka because of
Shita virya, Madhura vipaka and Kasshaya, Tikta, Madhura Rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Kushtha, Visarpa, Jwara, Trishna, Daha, Chardi, Raktapitta, Vatarakta, Mada and
Bhrama.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Raktapitta (Intrinsic haemorrhage)
mara gaat a Tierepae | etter welts Wet ange MG Ut (aa. 4/68)
In case of Raktapitta (Intrinsic haemorrhage) roots of Yavasa.

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) - 3to6g

----- PAGE 219 -----
Dhanvayasa 211

Kwatha(Decoction) = 50 to 100 ml
Chemical Constituents

Acrial part of the plant have Chinovic acid, Harmine, Alanine, Arginine, Glycine,
Lysine, Genin A & B, Fagonin, Oleanolic acid and Campesterol.
Research corner

To evaluate antioxidant and radical scavenging activities of organic extracts from
fruit, roots and aerial parts of Fagonia critica a research work was carried out. The study
revealed the potent antioxidant potential of Fagonia cretica and its prospective efficacy
against various reactive oxygen species mediated diseases. Iqbal P, Anmed D & Asghar
MN. A comparative invitro antioxidant potential profile of extracts from different parts of
Fagonia cretica. Asian Pac. J. Trop Med. 2014 Sep.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name Indications

Duralabha Kwatha

Sudarshana Churna Jvara, Yakrutvriddhi
3 Haritakyadi Kwatha Mutrakrichra, Vibandha

Botanical Name
Fagonia cretica Linn.

Fagonia — for Monisignor Fagon (1638-1718), Physician to Louis XIV of France.
cretica — Inhabiting Chalky soils
Family —Zygophyllaceae
Kula — Gokshura
Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Trisha Nigrahana, Arshoghna varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduuchyadi varga
Basonym of Drug
SA: ART: WHAM ATAATACAT |

Dhanvayasa (Fagonia cretica Linn) grows commonly in dry lands.

----- PAGE 220 -----
212 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Synonyms
Habitat
1. WAR: WRCH Ta: |
Dhavanyasa grows in dry regions.

2. WM TeMTaN ABTA TEET |

Dhanvayasa is very common in Gandhara Desha (Afghanistan).

Morphology
3, START Ste: freA |
Dhanvayasa spreads extensively on the ground.
4. aayeht-atraat Foe |
Root of Dhanvayasa is coppery in colour.
5. GUAMT-S2r TA Grattan ave tenrarea |
Dhanvayasa has thorns, so difficult to hold.
6. AUel-Welqusran, Hvetercar |
Dhanvayasa is a difficult plant to hold because of thorns.
Properties and Actions
7 BUAT-KAS HAATATT |
Dhanvayasa has astringent taste.

Vernacular Names

Marathi Dhamasa

Habitat
Dhanvayasa mainly grows in dry regions of North-Western India, Rajasthan and

Andhra Pradesh.

Morphology
Habit - Small erect under shrub, spinuous. Branches are slender and glabrous.

----- PAGE 221 -----
Dhanvayasa 243

Leaves - Opposite, | to 3 foliate. Petioles are variable in
length up to 3. cm long, 2 pairs of thorny stipules sometimes |
cm long. Leaflets are linear, acute, and sessile or with very short
petiolules.

Flowers - Small, light pink in colour.

Fruit - Glandular, pubescent, rounded at the base and py-
ramidal towards the apex. Seeds are ovoid, acute and smooth
with flattened surface.

Varieties
Raja Nighantu — Two varieties: 1. Duralabha,

2. Kshudraduralabha
. Fagonia cretica Linn.
Classical references
Synonyms
UA AAA SAAT AAA: PATS: | FUAA SUT AAAAM A Wee 11
THI HEHUSTAT HATA Se eTNT | (AL. TSA TT 211-212)

Properties and Actions
Oa: Fale: Urea: Vile AA: aHAAS at frargaHs ATARTT |
sonfrrdararesasaat: Aa: i AarererTelegear GAA SMTA Ul
(a9. TSM at 212-214)
gues eargetter ferent creer | frrasarqeahtenteteet

(afi. THM FT 20)
eraarat fear: Herat WERT TE: I

at Ref fraraeeateeyar | frais arareargerenrcaticary, ul
(SR. aiteft af 985-986)

Sree Helter BOT ameter TAT | TERT aaa Sa ET WAS TT

(aft, aera TT S55)
Kshudraduralabha
Sree fetter a ear TaTHS Faq! MTA a one yyfegentitar
(aA. wraveerfe aT ss)

arege afar Mare wet vitae oy | TeTosareotedtatsres Tq
(R.A. margenfe + 182)

----- PAGE 222 -----
214

—

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Dhanvayasa

a, Mula b. Panchanga c. Pushpa d. Bija
Ans: b. Panchanga

. Vipaka of Dhanvayasa

a. Madhura b. Katu c. Amla d. Tikta
Ans: a. Madhura

. Specific indication of Dhanvayasa

a. Kushtha b. Prameha c. Bhrama d. arshas
Ans: c. Bhrama

. Botanical name of Dhanvayasa

a. Acorus calamus b. Andrographis paniculata
c. Crocus sativus d. Fagonia cretica
Ans: d. Fagonia cretica

. Duralabha is a synonym of

a. Saireyaka b. Gokshura c. Dhanvayasa d. Hingu
Ans: c. Dhanvayasa oS

. Tamramuli is a synonym of

a. Yashtimadhu b. Dhanvayasa_ c. Varuna d. Ashoka
Ans: b. Dhanvayasa

. Habit of Dhanvayasa plant

a. Under shrub __ b. Small tree c. Large tree d. Creeper
Ans: a. Under shrub

. Types of Dhanvayasa as per Raja Nighantu

a. 3 b. 5 c. 4 d. 2
Ans: d. 2

----- PAGE 223 -----
Eladwaya

SS erersnenstnesssnnssasenanennneeennsan.
Useful parts — Phala (Fruits) and Beeja (Seeds).

Rasadi Panchaka

Sukshmaila Sthulaila

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)
Sukshmaila — Pitta Vatahara, Pittahara due to Shita virya & Vatahara due to
Madhura vipaka. ,
Sthulaila — Vata Kaphahara, Vatahara due to Ushna virya & Kaphahara because
of Ushna virya and Katu vipaka.

Karma (Actions)

Sukshmaila - Shwasahara, Kasahara, Arshoghna, Mutrakrechraghna, Rochana,
Dipana, Hradya, Mukhashodhaka.

Sthulaila — Shwasahara, Kandughna, Trishnahara, Hrallasanashaka, Kasahara,
Vishaghna, Rochaka, Chardighna.
Pharmacological Actions

Aromatic, Stimulant, Carminative, Stomachic and Diuretic.

Rogaghnala (Therapeutic indications)
Sukshmaila — Shwasa, Kasa, Mutrakracchra, Aruchi, Mukhadourgandhya, Daha,

Trishna.
Sthulaila — Shwasa, Kasa, Kandu, Hrallasa, Chardi, Aruchi.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Mutraghata (Retention of urine) and Mutrakracchra (Dysuria)

unfmerata gaitet ot fratat: (3. 58/41)

Amalaki Rasa (Juice of Emblica officinalis) and Ela churna (powder of Elettaria

----- PAGE 224 -----
216 Dravyaguna Vijnana

cardamomum) will relieve Mutraghata (Retention of Urine) and Mutrakracchra (Dys-
uria),

2. Timira (Progressive Cataract)

ae ee Baretereal gure | yorigrras aftrae wftrecremeIeTy, II

The powder of Ela (Elettaria cardamomum) is immersed in Basta mutra (Goat's
urine) for 3 days and used as Anjana (Collyrium) is efficacious in Timira (Progressive
cataract), Krinu (Helminthiasis) and Pilla.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) — 0.5 to 1g

Phytoconstituents

Cardamom seeds contain volatile oil (2 to 8%). Volatite oil contains cineole, Terpiny]
acetate, Terpineol, Borneol, Terpinene, camphene, P-cymene, Geraneol. Seeds also con-
tain fixed oil (10%), starch and proteins.

Research index

1. The chemopreventive potential of cardamom was evaluated on
7,12dimethylbenz [ajanthracene-initiated and croton oil-promoted mouse skin
papillomagenesis. These findings indicate the potential of cardamom as a
chemopreventive agent against two-stage skin cancer. Qiblawi S, Al-Hazimi A,
Al-Mogbel M, Hossain A, Bagchi D. Chemopreventive effects of cardamom
(Elettaria cardamomum L) on chemically induced skin carcinogenesis in Swiss
albino mice. J Med Food. 2012 Jun: 15(6):576-80. Epub 2C 12 Mar 9.

2. Elettaria cardamomum (L.) Maton. (Small cardamom) fruit powder was
evaluated for its antihypertensive potential and its effect on some of the
cardiovascular risk factors in individuals with stage 1 hypertension. The present
study demonstrates that small cardamom effectively reduces blood pressure,
enhances fibrinolysis and improves antioxidant status, without significantly
altering blood lipids and fibrinogen levels in stage 1 hypertensive individuals.
Verma SK, Jain V Katewa SS. Blood pressure lowering, fibrinolysis
enhancing and antioxidant activities of cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum).
Indian J Biochern Biophys. 2009 Dec,46(6.):503-6

3. Petroleum ether soluble (PS) of Elettaria cardamomum was tried for its
efficacy in gastro protective activity. The PS extract at doses > or=12.5mg/kg
proved to be more active than ranitidine at 50mg/kg. Jamal A, Javed K, Aslam
M, Jafri MA. Gastroprotective effect of cardamom, Elettaria cardamomum

----- PAGE 225 -----
Eladwaya 217

2005 Nov 17.

4. The inhibitory activity of cardamom extract was studied on human platelets.
The aqueous extracted of cardamom may have component (s), which protect
platelets from aggregation and lipid peroxidation, Suneetha VVJ,
Krishnakantha TP. Cardamom extract as inhibitor of human platelet
aggregation. Phytother Res. 2005 May 19(5):437-40.

5. A comparative study of the anti-inflammatory activity of the oil e’dracted from
commercial Elettaria cardamomum seeds, in doses of 175 and 280 microliters/
kg and indomethacin in a dose of 30 mg/kg against acute carrageenan-induced
planter oedema in male albino rats was performed. In addition the
antispasmodic activity was determined on a rabbit intestine preparation using
acetylcholine as agonist, the results proving that cardamom oil exerts its
antispasmodic action through muscarinic receptor blockage. alZuhair H, el-
Sayeh B, Ameen HA, al-Shoora H, Pharmacological studies of cardamom oil
in animals. Pharmacol Res, 1996 Jul-Aug;34(1-2):79-82.

Yoga (Formulation)

SI.No.
1

Indications
Eladi gutika Shwasa, Kasa, Hikka

Ashmari, Mutrakracchra

Eladi Churna Mutrakracchra

=z

Name

Eladyarishta Visarpa, Masurika
Eladya ghrata Rajayakshma, Bhagandara
Eladya modaka Madatyaya, Madyavikara

Botanical Name — Elettaria cardamomum. Maton Elettaria = Elacetar-derived from
Malayalam cardamomum - Kardamon-amomon cress = Pungent.

Family — Zingiberaceae (See Appendix II for key features).
Kula — Haridra.
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Shwasahara varga, Angamarda prashamana varga, Vishaghna Varga
Sushruta Eladi gana, Pippalyadi gana
B.P.Ni. — Karpuradi varga 60-63

----- PAGE 226 -----
218 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug
Ela is a stimulant.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, TAB aaleRee STAT |
Ela grows in South India.

2. xifeSt-xfersest ST |
Ela is cultivated in South Indian states.
Morphology
3, Prget-We: Yet Stet: |
Ela fruit is triangular shaped and has three surfaces.
4, Prepfe:-Prearat ge: ater start Hlergacare, |
Seeds are enclosed by leathery layer appears like a pouch.
5. aget-aete ata |
Ela fruit has many seeds.
6. wfe:-qeae sf, qetteret: |
Ela seeds are very small.
7. suphyert-sopste |
Fruits are contracted.
Properties and actions
8. AQTRN-Aget TANS |
Ela has strong and pleasant odour.
9. Gear-are earrate erate |
Ela alleviated pricking pain.
Regional names

Eli
Hindi Chhoti Elachi

----- PAGE 227 -----
Eladwaya 219

Malayalam Ellakaya

Habitat

Ela is cultivated in many parts of South Indian states like Karnataka, Kerala and
Tamilnadu.

Morphology

Elettaria cardamomum — Plant with woody root
stock, branching.

Stem — 5 to 8 ft high. Clothed below with spongy
sheaths.

Leaves — Leaves are subsessile, 30 to 60 cm long
and 7.5 cm wide, oblong-lanceolate.

Inflorescence — Panicles, 30-60 cm long. Bracts are
linear-oblong, Persistent, 3.8-5 cm long. Calyx is 1.3 cm
long. Lip of corolla is white, streaked with violet.

Fruit — Capsule, subglobose or oblong, about 1.3
cm in diameter, marked with many fine vertical ribs.

Seeds — Small and black.

Amomum subulatum Roxb.- Leafy stem, 3-4 ft.
long.

Leaves — Leaves are 30 to 60 cm long, 7.5 to 10cm
wide, oblong, lanceolate, green, glabrous on both surfaces.

Elettaria cardamomum Maton

Inflorescence — Spike, shortly peduncled, 5-7.5 cm
long, globose, very dense. Bracts are red-brown, obtuse,
outer 2.5 cm, ovate, with a horny cusp, inner shorter. Calyx
and corolla tube 2.5 cm long, segments subobtuse, shorter
than the tube, upper cuspidate. Lip obovate-cuneate, emar-
ginate, yellowish white, rather longer than the corolla- Ammomum subulatum
segments. Filament is very short. Roxb.

----- PAGE 228 -----
220 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fruit — Capsule, 2.5 cm in diameter, globose, red-brown, densely echinate.

Varieties
B.P.Ni., Dh.Ni. & Ka.Ni. -Two varieties- 1. Sukshmaila 2. Sthulaila

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Fruits are three sided trilocular capsule, ovoid or oblong in shape with rounded base
and slightly pointed beak, upto 1.5 cm long and 6 mm broad. Surface is finely striated
longitudinally, pale buff to light green in colour. Seeds are many, irregularly angular,
transversely rugose, reddish brown in colour, closely packed in each of the three cells.
Fruits have camphoraceous and pungent odour, has acrid and sweet taste leaving a cold
sensation on chewing.

Amomum subulatuin— Fruits are large, coarsely striated, dark brown in colour, mea-
suring about 2 to 3 cm in length and upto 1.5 cm in width. Fruit is trilocular capsule,
anterio-posteriorly flattened, having a number of irregular, dentate-undulate wings which
extend from the apex downwards, for two third of its length. Internally the capsule con-
tains several seeds held together by a viscious pulp of dark brown colour. Odour is very
strong and camphoraceous. Has pungent and slightly sweet taste.

Classical references

Synonyms
Sukshmaila

Genres gen ant sfast ae: 1 (ars. afureart. 63)
Sthulaita

Te Wet a agen yedter Bryetsft a 1 axe Geter GT axa a Frese:
(ana. ayueeat. 60-61)

Properties and Actions
Sukshmaila
Ue FeAl HHMAHAM GAPS | TF Hee shar creat ataett Far
(aa. atuert. 63)
getter qarpeget areeraae feat | gator vittem wargeen treat
(af. mage at. 45)
gate Gaps: arrHeHHE | Teg wget ta creat attatt aT
(afr. attsft af. 1341)
wen g acer vier gare: Fastest | eatery at ges a WAT UI
(BF. eiaenfert. 93)

Brahadela-
TSM HHT Wes TH UTHeTy: | waloor vero ys aTATaTSTRT |

----- PAGE 229 -----
Eladwaya 221

wrorafrraanes Prigrattrarage 1 (aT. Te ah. 61-62)
Tetfercat a reat CareHHATAeaATOTL | aT H A ehet TTT TITETAY
(afr. wearqente af. 47)
axe Hea TA fra Heerg: | waite wert srrcHHarra aE |
aha gerade mug Priawarererat: 1 (a.fA. sitafirert. 1343-1344)
werent Bayt Raaq cafe arena 1 (A.A. etraene at. 94)
Ela Samanya Guna

(aA. froreanfe at. 87)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Ela
a. Pushpa b. Mula c. Phala & Bija_ d. Patra
Ans: c. Phala & Bija

2. Vipaka of Sukshma Ela
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: b. Madhura

3. Eladi gutika is indicated in
a. Raktapitta b. Shotha c. Shwasa d. Arshas
Ans: c. Shwasa

4. Eladi Churna specifically indicated in
a. Mutrakricchra _b. Shiroroga c. Netra Roga _ d. Hradroga
Ans: a. Mutrakrichra

5. Botanical name of Sukshma Ela
a. Eclipta alba b. Elettaria cardamomum
c. Cyperus rotundus d. Ammomum subulatum
Ans: b. Elettaria cardamomum

6. Botanical name of Brahat ela
a. Ammomum subulatum b. Elettaria cardamomum
c. Boswelia serrta d. Cuminum cyminum
Ans; a. Ammomum subulatum

7. Dravidi is a synonym of

—

a. Guggulu b. Shalmali c. Agaru d. Ela
Ans: d. Ela

8. Triputa is a synonym of
a. Dadima b. Ela c. Nirgundi d. Kataka

Ans: b. Ela r)

----- PAGE 230 -----
Chapter

Eranda

Useful parts — Mula (Root), Beeja (Seed) & Patra (Leaf).
Rasadi Panchaka

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shmaka - Vatahara due to its Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka, Pittahara
because of Madhura vipaka, Kaphahara due to its Ushna virya.

Karma (Actions)

Eranda mula - Vrashya, Shulahara, Shothahara, Shirapida hara, Jwarahara,
Anahahara, Kasanashaka, Kushthaghna.

Eranda Beeja—Bhedana, Shulahara, Dipana, Arshoghna, Udarapaha, Krimighna,
Mutrakracchrahara. ,

Eranda patra — Krimighna, Mutradoshahara, Bastishulahara.

Pharmacological Actions—Purgative, Stimulant.

Agrya Karma
WS Het FI AAT | (.Y, 25/40)

Root of Eranda (Ricinus communis Linn.) best Aphrodisiac and pacifies Vata.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Erandamutla — Shula, Katishula, Basti Shula, Amavata, Gradhrasi, Pakshaghata,
Shotha, Shirashula, Jwara, Gulma, Anaha and Kushtha.

Eranda beeja —- Malabaddhata, Agnimandya, Arshas, Udara, Mutrakracchra.
Erandapatra — Krimi, Mutradosha, Bastishula.
Erandapushpa — Mutradosha
Indications of different varieties of Eranda
Rakta Eranda — Shwasa, Kasa, Kampa, Arshas, Pandu.

----- PAGE 231 -----
Eranda 223

Shweta Eranda — Arti, Jwara, Kasa.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Amavata (Rhumatoid Arthritis)

amare wither: | wa wae Peay mecha ii

(5a. 26/50)
Eranda taila (Oil of Ricinus communis) alone will cure dreadful disease Amavata
(Rheumatoid arthritis) like how lion kills big animal like elephant.
2. Parshwashula (Pain in flanks)
Were fret Wetseyfired wed | Aeeaalt Aras: UEKI UI
(3H. 2/2/101)
Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from 80 g of Eranda mula (Root of Ricinus commu-
nis) and 8 times of water. Then it is administered with Yavakshara will alleviates
Parshwashula (Pain in flanks).
3. Vibandha (Constiption)
oars g fateart | (aF, 13/12)
Wusde Benes fe a ate uit wetirat az fet fafteat u
(1.4.3/4/20)
In the context of Udara Roga (Ascites), Acharya Caraka has considered Eranda
taila (Oil of Ricinus communis) is best.
Eranda taila (Ricinus communis) oil mixed with double the quantity of Triphala
kwatha or milk will induce purgation immediately.
4. Shula (Abdominal pain)
famrssine earaticn wet frag | egalaeteiaet wal: Beary
(ALS.FA. 30/57)
Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from Shunthi (Zingiber officinale), Eranda mula (Root
of Ricinus communis) mixed with Hingu (Ferula narthex) and Sauvarcala lavana will
relieve Shula (Colic) immediately.
5. Arshas (Piles)

aruierafirarat witerants Brie 14/44)

Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from leaves of Vrisha (Adhatoda vasica), Arka

----- PAGE 232 -----
224

Dravyaguna Vijnana

(Calotropis procera), Eranda (Ricinus communis) and Bilva (Aegle marmelos) is benefi-
cial in Arshas (Piles).

Matra (Dosage)
1. Mula kwatha (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
2. Mula kalka (Paste) -3to6g
3. Patra kalka (Paste) - 10 to 20 ml
4. Taila (Oil)
5. Bija churna (Powder) -3to6g
Phytoconstituents

Seeds contain fixed oil (45 to 52%), proteids 20%, Starch, Mucilage, Albumin, Ri-

cin, Uric acid, hydrocyanic acid. Seed hull contains a bitter substance, some resin, pig-
ments, Recinine (alkaloid). ‘Ricin’ is a toxic substance.

Root and Root bark contains inorganic materials like potassium, sodium, magne-

sium, chloride, nitrate, iron, aluminium, manganese and calcium.

Leaves contain lysine, leucine, isoleucine, valine, threonine tyrosine, histidine, cys-

tine, tartaric acid, B - sitosterol, ricinine, gallic acid, and rutin.

Research Corner

1 Ricin toxin A chain (RTA) is the cytotoxic component of the dimeric protein,

ricin, one of the most potent and deadly plant toxins extracted from the seeds
of Ricinus communis. RTA has been investigated as a potential candidate for
cancer chemotherapy, in the form of immunotoxins, and as a method for
depleting macrophages in vivo. These data suggest that i.v. administration of
RTA resulted in organ injuries that were associated with inflammation and OS.
Alipour M, Pucaj K, Smith MG, Suntres ZE, Toxicity of ricin toxin A chain
in rats Drug Chem Toxicol. 2012 Sep 5.

2 The present study evaluated the in vitro antioxidant and antibacterial activities

of various extracts of aerial parts of Periploca aphylla and Ricinus communis.
The present study provides evidence that Periploca aphylla and Ricinus
communis prove to be potent natural antioxidants and could replace synthetic
antioxidants. Iqbal J, Zaib S, Farooq U, Khan A, Bibi 1, Suleman S.
Antioxidant, Antimicrobial, and Free Radical Scavenging Potential of Aerial
Parts of Periploca apkiyNa and Ricinus communis. ISRN Pharmacol.
2012Z,2012:563267. Epub 2012 Jul 11.

3 The aim of the present study was to appraise the antimicrobial activity of

Ricinus communis L. essential oil against different pathogenic microorganisms

----- PAGE 233 -----
Eranda 225

and the cytotoxic activity against HeLa cell lines. The present study showed the
potential antimicrobial and anticarcinogenic properties of the essential oil of
Ricinus communis L., indicating the possibilities of its potential use in the
formula of natural remedies for the topical treatment of infections. Zarai Z,
Chobba 113, Mansour RB, Bakir A, Gharsallah N, Kadri A. Essential oil of
the leaves of Ricinus communis L.“Jn vitro cytotoxicity and antimicrobial
properties. Upids Health Dis, 2012 Aug 13:11:102. doi: 10.1186/1476-51 1X-
1 1-102.

4. The study was carried out to ascertain the antibacterial properties inherent in
fermented seed extracts of Ricinus communis. The active antimicrobial
ingredients in fermented R. communis seeds should be identified while its
medicinal value to humans properly investigated. Jombo GT, Enenebeaku MN.
Antibacterial profile of fermented seed extracts of Ricinus communis: findings
from a preliminary analysis. Niger J Physiol Sci, 2008 Jun-Dec;23(12)55-9.

5. The antidiabetic activity of 50% ethanolic extract of roots of Ricinus communis
(RCRE) along with its bioassay-guided purification was evaluated. Thus R.
communis seems to have a promising value for the development of a potent
phytomedicine for diabetes. Shokeen P, Anand P, Murali YK, Tandon V.
Antidiabetic activity of 50% ethanolic extract of Ricinus communis and its
purified fractions. Food Chem Toxicol, 2008 Nov;46(1 1)3458-66. Epub 2008
Aug 28.

Yoga (Formulation)

Name Indication

Botanical Name~ Ricinus communis Linn. Ricinus-little tick (Seeds resemble little
ticks) communis -common.

Family — Euphorbiaceae (See Appendix II for key features).
Kula — Eranda kula.
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Bhedaniya varga, Swedopaga varga, Angamarda-prashamana varga

----- PAGE 234 -----
226 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Sushruta Vidarigandhadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 60-66
Basonym of Drug
ar warardtcerter farafer srererceater arg htrter Tey TTS STAT
Eranda is very efficacious drug in Vata vyadhi.
Synonyms
Morphology
1, aetarr-argy ale |
Eranda plant grows very fast.
2. FAAIA:- Tae WATE |
Leaves of Eranda are facing upwards.
3, Tada: reads Tet Fa WATT |

Eranda leaves are palmately lobed and resembling the palm
Gandharva.

4. Targe:-wergterag ferrch Ue |
Leaves of Eranda are palmately lobed.
5, Bhaute:- Fe TARE |
Leaves of Eranda are large.
Leaves of Eranda have got long petiole.
7. AAVS:- IT Hass a TOA |
The flowers when blossomed plant appears very attractive.
8. wsan:-Rreaate tang aSatgats sare: |
When wind blows the inflorescence of Eranda appears like dancing.
9, CUAGS:- ATA Fo Fa YTS |
Inflorescence of Eranda is raceme and that resemble tiger’s tail.
10. faadta:-Fatrd ater |
Eranda has mottled seeds.

Properties and Actions

11. arenht:- arafreanroratt: waatyren seat:

of

----- PAGE 235 -----
Eranda 227

Eranda is regarded as the best drug in Vata vyadhi.

12. YR: YSTATE: |

Eranda relieves pain.

Regional Names

Habitat

Eranda plant is cultivated through out India and
also grows wild.

Morphology
Habit — A tall glabrous annual shrub.

Stem — Erect, herbaceous above and woody be-
low, cylindrical branched, solid.

Leaf — Alternate, broad, palmately lobed and
veined, lobes usually 7-8, simple, serrate, acute, gland-

dotted, green or reddish, petiolate with multicostate
reticulate venation.

Ricinus communis. Linn.

Inflorescence — A terminal raceme.

Flower — Monoecious, aptetalous, female flowers hypogynous, bracteate, pedicel-
late and incomplete, male towards the lower portion of the inflorescence and female to-
wards the upper portion. Male flowers have 5 stamens and female flowers have tricarpellary
syncarpous gynoecium with superior ovary.

Fruit — Globose oblong explosively dehiscent, 3-seeded capsule, 1-2 cm long,
septicidally dehiscent or splitting into 3 two valved cocci. The fruit when young will be
green, turns to ash colour on drying. The fruit usually covered with short or long fleshy
prickles.

Seed — Carunculate, oblong, 1 to 1.5 cm long with smooth mottled surface and hard
crustaceous testa. Endosperm is oily.

----- PAGE 236 -----
228 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Varieties
Bh.Pr.Ni —1. Shukla Eranda — 2, Rakta Eranda
Ra.Ni - 1. Shweta Eranda 2. Rakta Eranda 3. Sthula Eranda

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Root of Eranda will be tough and cylindrical 1.5 to 3.5 cm in diameter. Outer sur-
face consists of closely adhering bark which is slightly wrinkled longitudinally and grey-
ish brown in colour. Transversely cut surface shows a creamish yellow surface with radi-
ating medullary rays, enclosed within a concentric ring of cambium. On breaking thin
root become short pieces while thick roots become fibrous. Roots are having resionous
odour and slightly acid taste.

Seed — Seeds are oval shaped, some what laterally compressed, upto 1.5 cm in
length and 4 to 7 mm in thickness. Surface of the testa is smooth and glossy, brownish
grey in colour, more often mottled with dark brown or black. There is a prominent caruncle
at one extremity of the seed from which the raphe runs along the ventral surface to the
other extremity. The caruncle terminates in a raised Chalaza. The testa is hard and en-
closed a white oily endosperm. Seeds have disagreeable odour.

Toxicology

Entire plant is strong and containing toxalbumin ricin (a water soluble glycoprotein)
and a powerful allergin. Seeds also have yellow coloured purgative oil. Toxalbumin is a
toxic protein, which resembles a bacterial toxin in action and causes agglutination of red
cells with some hemolysis. Ricin blocks the protein synthesis through the inhibition of
RNA polymerase. Ricin has a special binding protein that allows it to gain access to the
endoplasmic reticulum in gastrointestinal mucosal cells causing severe diarrhoea.

Note — Unbroken seeds are non-poisonous when swallowed or cooked.
Fatal dose — 5 to 10 crushed seeds.
Fatal period — 2 to several days.

Treatment
¢ Gastric lavage with plain water.
e Demulcents to prevent intestinal mucosal irritation.
e Turpentine hot water fomentation.
In case of severe haemolysis and severe anemia
¢ Blood transfusion
e Haemotenics orally

----- PAGE 237 -----
Eranda 229

e Oral steroid administration
e Symptomatic treatment
Classical references
Synonyms
Shukla eranda -
Yaa WS aravahyat werdgera: | verge alert cheiguet ase: |
arattererrsntt waaay Pree i (as. Tene TF. 60-61)
Rakta eranda -
THIS BIH: MASSA VARIA | AAS aR yoaATag: 1
(19. Teele FT. 61-62)
Properties and Actions
Wsyt RM WS faa | Ueteadtatte foredteter SAT
RAMTHSMEHASSASA | St aed Hpi
Tape uit fram weatoory | ararinect yeu ahageret we
cna aibeta afte wert faerafr | mosmeaet youn,
aarcigetet mech dot we | deere a fereddt arayetateae:
(A. TERA aI. 62-66)
Ws fie: reser: | seradeite yoraterenstgkssd,
Teatemerat franteviftrearset | Het tag a Bat eT Ale ara Se, UI
Ws Ge tag first seers (a. Yseale a. 287-289)
WUSt wet Get Toot arteters: | Halter: I
Traidanendakares | Aesmadayeithy yet i
Erandapatra -

Wet aed anata | tafe qaett weet
Tet a afttget a ahs wafiet var | anarceiientt gareTSTeTay II
Erandapuspa -

wey act wafer 1 qaeteet get wraftrarratoory
Erandaphala -

sna Toren, | apaegeugtet mea dhetaey Ul
agaist a fread araverottarae: ut (af. atefirerf. 115-121)

----- PAGE 238 -----
230 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Raktaeranda -
THUR: HUTT: HHT TA | ATA TTT EAT:
(aM. araferrt, 123)

Shwetaecranda -

dws: wage sor: sft | ee eel Tae HCHTAENT Tare: I

Raktaeranda -

Thus: wage: aarnftug-wbaaacars aH TPT
(af. meneneart. 58)

Sthulaeranda -

Bens quer: weet iearay | (w.A. merenert. 59)
musa ated dist Serta | Test Meet wees Yost AAT UN
Qt NAN ANT AAS, AA TACHA SASET II
(B.A. marqenieat. 71-72)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Vipaka of Eranda
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: b. Madhura
2. Vrashya and Vata hara is the Agrya Karma of
a. Eranda Mula _ b. Guduchi c. Kantakari d. Pippali
Ans: a. Eranda mula
3. Eranda Bija is
a. Stambhana b. Kushthaghna c. Varnya d. Bhedana
Ans: d. Bhedana
4, As per Bhava Mishra Eranda taila alone can cure
a. Jwara b. Amavata c. Kushtha d. Sandhi shotha
Ans; b. Amavata
5. Eranda Phala payasa is specifically indicated in
a, Gridhrasi b. Atisara c. Nidrahani d. Ajirna
Ans: a. Gridhrasi

----- PAGE 239 -----
Branda 23)

nnn UE UU UaIINE NSIS SII EIEENNERIERERERERESRREERERRERneneneEEnend

6. Gandharva hasta is a synonym of
a. Kutaja b. Sarpagandha —_c. Eranda d. Arjuna
Ans: c. Eranda

7. Chitra bija is a synonym of
a. Vidanga b. Eranda c. Manjishta d. Brahati
Ans: b. Eranda

8. Panchangula is a synonym of
a. Tila b. Shveta Chandana_ c. Eranda_ dd. Aragwadha
Ans: c. Eranda

----- PAGE 240 -----
Chapter

Gambhari

Useful parts = Mula twak (Root bark).
Rasadi paneaka

Mula (Root) Phala (Kruit)

| Rasa Tikta Kashaya Madhura Madhura, Amla
Laghu, Ruksha Guru, Snigdha

Karma (Actions)
Mula - Shothahara, Dipana, Pachana, Bhedana, Shoshahara, Trashnahara,
Amahara, Shulahara, Arshoghna, Vishaghna, Dahashamaka, Jwarahara, Shramahara,

Raktapittahara.
Phala - Brahmana, Vrashya, Keshya, Rasayana, Trashnahara, Dahashamaka,
Hradya, Medhya.
Pushpa = Sangrahi, Raktapittahara.
Pharmacological Actions
Stomachic, Refrigerant, Demulcent, Laxative
Dosha karma (Actions of Desha)

Tridosha Shamaka - Vata Shamaka because of Madhura Rasa & Ushna virya,
Pittahara due to Tikta kashaya Madhura Rasa and Madhura vipaka. Kaphashamaka

due to its Ushna virya.
Phala (Fruit) is Vatapitta Shamaka because of Madhura Rasa & Madhura Vipaka.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Mula = Shotha, Agnimandya, Vibandha, Arshas, Trishna, Daha, Shula, Jwara,

Shrama, Raktapitta, Vishavikara.
Phala = Karshya, Dourbalya, Klaivya, Trishna, Daha.

Pushpa Raktapitta

----- PAGE 241 -----
Gambhari 233

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1, Atisara (Diarrhoea)
mrereteaeramt at fenhereret: Ayre: (aA. 19/74)
The Yusha (Soup) prepared from Kashmarya phala (Fruits of Ginelina arborea),
mixed with sugar and little sour substance will check Atisara (Diarrhoea).
2. Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder)
wlfeenra yori arrears wreae: | ata feelers aearare Tenfrrye
(a.f¥. 4/39)

Flowers of Kovidara (Bauhinia purpurea) Kashmarya (Gmelina arborea) and
Shalmali (Bombax malabaricum) if used as vegetable will check Raktapitta (Bleeding
disorders).

3. Vatarakta (Gout)

SIVA ARAMT sheet aT 1 (GA. 5/12)
Paste prepared from Kashmarya (Gmelina arboroea), Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
and wheat flour is applied.
4, Anguliveshta (Whit low)
wea: AeA: UA: ArT: URAREA: | argferedea: Tat YAY WeTaee
(ALS. 61/77)
In case of Anguli Veshta (Whit low), one should wrap seven tender leaves of
Kashmarya (Gmelina arboroea).
5. Panduroga (Anaemia)
arene ator areratgferregay | xrearetet ar wtect cet fret aT gS
(af. 5/12)

160 gm. fruits of Kashmarya (Gmelina arboroea) or Draksha (Vitis vinifera) are
dipped in 40 ml warm decoction of Danti (Baliospermum montanum), when fruits be-
come soft, they are removed and squeezed to get juice. This juice is useful in Panu roga
(Anemia).

Matra (Dosage)

1. Mula Kwatha (Decoction) -—50 to 100 ml

2. Mula Churna (Powder) -—3to6g

3. Phala Rasa (Juice) —10 to 20 ml

----- PAGE 242 -----
234 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Phytoconstituents

Root yielded Gmelinol, B-sitosterol, Sesquiterpene, cerylalcohol, yellow viscid oil,
resin, trace of benzoic acid and ash free from manganese.

Leaves have luteolin, apigenin, quercetin, hentria contonal and f-sitosterol.

Heartwood afforded n-octacosanol, gmelinol, arboreal, isoarboreol, gmelanone, p-
sitosterol, gmelinol, paulownin, gummadiol, palmitic, oleic and linoleic acids, Glucose,
Xylose, Mannose, Arabinose, Galactose & rhamnose.

Research index

1. The present study investigated the effects of Gmelina arborea hexane leaves
extract on markers of oxidative stress and its vaso relaxant effects on isolated
rat aorta, in order to postulate possible mechanisms involved in the
antihypertensive properties of the plant. The results indicate that Gemelina
arborea hexane extract possesses bioactive compounds with antioxidant and
vasorelaxant properties. Wansi SL, Nyadjeu, P, Nguelefack TB, Fodouop SF,
Donatien AA, Kamanyi A. In vivo Antioxidant and Vasodilating Activities Of
Gmelina arborea (Verbenaceae) Leaves Hexane Extract. J. Complement
Integer Med. 2012 Oct 5:9(1). pii:/j/jcim.2012.9.issue1/1553-3840. 1623/1553-
3840.1623. xml. doi: 10.1515/1553-3840.1623.

2. The present study was designed to evaluate acute and repeated dose toxicity of
the methanol extract (ME) of the Gmelina arborea stem bark. ME of G.
arborea was found safe in acute and repeated dose toxicity studies when tested
in mice and rats. Kulkarni YA, Veeranjaneyulu A. Toxicological Evaluation of
the Methanol Extract of Gmelina arborea Roxb. Bark in Mice and Rats.
Toxicol Int. 2012 May; 19(2):125-31.

3. Phytochemical screening of stem bark and leaves of Gemelina arborea; sand
effect of aqueous and ethanolic extracts of Gemelina arborea stembark on
hepatic and renal insufficiency in rats was assessed in this study. Thus Gmelina
arborea extracts may have ameliorating effect on hepatic and renal
insufficiency caused by paracetamol and cipsplatin respectively, and any
inherent toxicity may be reduced or eliminated through adequate heat treatment.
Anthony OE, Mbuh AF, Emmanuel MP. Phytochemical screening, and
assessment of ameliorating effect of aqueous and ethanolic extracts of Gmelina
arborea on drug induced hepatic. and renal insufficiency in rats. Pak J. Pharm
SCi. 2012 Apr; 25(2):457-61.

4. The immunomodulatory effects of roots of Gmelina arborea Linn. were
investigated. The drug is found to be a potential immunostimulant. Shukla SH,

----- PAGE 243 -----
Gambhari 235

Saluja AK, Pandya SS. Modulating effect of Gmelina arborea Linn. On
immunosuppressed albino rats. Pharmacognosy Res. 2010 Nov; 2(6):359-63.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. ‘Name Indications

Botanical Name — Gmelina arborea Linn. Gmelina - Name of a scientist, arborea—
Tree like.

Family — Lamiaceae (See Appendix II for key features).
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Shothahara varga, Virechanopaga varga, Dahaprashamana varga
Sushruta Sarivadi gana, Bruhat panchamula
Bh.Pr.Ni. | Guduchyadi varga 14-18

Basonym of Drug
at weft fersretier
Gambhari is one of the fast growing trees.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. save -eareeeweety STATA
Gambhari commonly grows in Kashmir region.
Morphology
2. SIVA -cHTeTe WenTaTet Ste
Gambhari is very beautiful tree.
3. aguUff -srarfor wort: |
Leaves of Gambhari are beautiful.
4. sftauff-sftaPa wntsret: |

Gambhari has beautiful leaves.

----- PAGE 244 -----
236 Dravyaguna Vijnana

5. TYME ~RTATHT |
Bark of Gambhari is very thick.
6. HOTA - THOU PTT: |
Leaf has got blackish petiole.
7. Wtatfguft cere: dhacare, |
Bark is yellowish in colour.
8. AHA -Helat HYATAM: |
Gambhari has very long inflorescence.
9. Qe - Mt Hee: |
Gambhari fruit is beautiful and wholesome.
10, Haw -HewHeTAg Here: |
The fruit of Gambhari resembles fruit of Katphala.
Properties and Actions
11, alae -araart 1
Gambhari alleviates Vata.
12. éhr-featfa aed aetafer a ek Taare

Gambhari has got rejuvenating qualities.
Regional Names

Habitat
Gambhari plant grows in hilly regions of South India and Himalayan regions.

Morphology ;
Habit — Moderate sized unarmed deciduous tree grows up to 50 ft. in height.

Bark — Grayish yellow, corky. Branch lets and young parts clothed with fine white
mealy pubescence.

Leaves — 10 to 20 cm long, 7.5 to 15 cm wide, broadly ovate, acuminate, entire,

----- PAGE 245 -----
Gambhari 237

glabrous above when mature, stellately fulvous tomen-
tose beneath, base is cordate, or sometimes truncate
and shortly cuneate. Petioles 5-7.5 cm long, cylindric,
puberulous glandular at the top.

Inflorescence — Densely fulyous-hairy panicle
reaching 30 cm long.

Flowers — Calyx is 5 mm long, broadly campaiiu-
Jate, densely fulvous-hairy, Petals are brownish yel- | #
low, densely hairy outside, up to 4 cm long, 5 lobed, 2 | #iGeeht
lipped upper lip rather more than 1 cm long, deeply | Wags
divided into 2 oblong, obtuse lobes, lower lip nearly
2.5 cm long, 3-lobed, middle lobe projecting forward,
ovate, subobtuse, wit irregularly crenulate margin.

Gmelina arborea, Roxb.

Fruit — Drupe, 2 to 2.5 cm long, ovoid or pyriform, smooth, orange-yellow when ripe.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characeteristics)

Market sample of root bark contains pieces of dry, corky root of various sizes, 2 mm
to 4 mm thickness. Outer surface is brownish yellow in colour, lenticillate, somewhat
warty with shallow longitudinal fissures. The bark more often exfoliates into scurfy flakes.
Inner surface is leathery, whitish in colour. On crushing, root bark becomes short pieces.
Root bark has faintly aromatic odour and sweet mucilaginous with bitter after taste.
Substitute

e For root Gmelina asatica linn.

e Fruit is a substitute for Draksha (Vitis vinifera)

Classical references

Synonyms
Tet agault a sttoulf, wezatoten | creat carga er carer: ctreteaatt
POG AYTA Aerpyrenrsee TU (AT. WeeMe TT. 14-15)

Properties and actions
careentt gat ferear erator wee We: Uetost ureht Rear fet wera It
SATS SHIM MTATATE STAT
acne Geut gel We chy ware | aaiirage wataqafaaseqd |
warguras Rt fart gamit ayaa, | eereeTearaceaftrrerterary I

(1.5. WSeane TT. 15-18)

----- PAGE 246 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

att edt rest ew centri hesreneffemrgemPrarat,

(afr, qeenfe af. 15)

attaoff aepaferent etafer qert ye: | chet arett tea Het wrergtrafere, 11
aeronrayenetfrraesarae | Tee Ayt vit free done aracry, I
ware wet Ure firarergraagy, | arcarfireret vem: whet feret fet Ze
Agua Fa Harare TAIT | Set YoRet chyet ext qaferrerze 1
SeMarrarTaeferrecmaterary | (a.F1. sitafererf 30-34)

aiyatt aeatfecer yoo aay” | fretaferrcrentsargemearatsrd.

(af. saat at 38)

aaa CHa eas Trea, | (AY, 25/35)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Parts used from the plant Gambhari
a. Kanda b. Pushpa c. Mulatwak and Phala d. Patra
Ans: c. Mula Twak and Phala
2. Pradhana Karma of Gambhari Mula
a. Shwasahara __b. Shothahara c. Dipana d. Jwarahara
Ans: b. Shothahara

_

3. Paste prepared from Kashmarya (Gmelina arboroea), Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza

glabra) and wheat flour is applied in
a. Vatarakta b. Kushtha c. Atisara d. Arshas
Ans: a. Vatarakta
4. Kashmaryadi shita Kashaya is specifically indicated in
a. Jwara b. Pittaja trishna cc. Kasa d. Swarabheda
Ans: b. Pittaja trishna
5. Botanical source of Gambhari
a. Tecoma undulata b. Picrorrhiza kurroa
c. Inula racemosa d. Gmelina arboroea
Ans: d. Gmelina arboroea
6. Shriparni is a synonym of
a. Ela b. Rasna c. Gambhari d. Kamala
Ans: c. Gambhari
7. Habit of Gambhari plant

a. Herb b. Tree c. Shrub d. Creeper
Ans: b. Tree

----- PAGE 247 -----
Gokshura

Useful parts— Mula (Root) and Phala (Fruits)
Rasadi panchaka

Phala Mula

Karma (Actions)

Shothahara, Mutrala, Bastishodhaka, Balya, Dipana, Vrashya, Ashmarihara,
Pramehahara, Shwasahara, Kasahara, Arshoghna, Hradya.

Note — Even though both types of Gokshura are having similar properties Brahat
Gokshura (bigger variety-pedalium murex) is said to be more potent (Raja nighantu).
Agrya karma

Metal PAH eH TTI | (FY, 25/40)

Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris Linn.) useful in Dysuria and pacify Vata.

Pharmacological Actions — Diuretic, Tonic, Aphrodisiac, Demulcent.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications) — Mutrakracchra, Ashmari, Shotha,
Prameha, Shwasa, Kasa, Hradroga, Arshas, Shukra dourbalya.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

TridoshaShamaka (Mula) - Vatahara due to Madhura vipaka and Ushna virya,
Pitta shamaka because of Madhura rasa and Madhura vipaka, Kapha Shamaka because
of Ushna virya.

Phala is Vatapitta Shmaka

Vatahara due to Madhura Rasa and Madhura vipaka. Pittahara due to Madhura
vipaka and Shita virya.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Mutrakriechra (Dysuria)
ween avccertteat ey MoMA | (FA, 2/22)

----- PAGE 248 -----
240 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Gruel prepared from Shwadamshtra (Tribulus terrestris) and Kantakari (Solanum
xanthocarpum) is taken with jaggery relieves Mutrakricchra (Dysuria).

ayertarraarer: ferarerftrenetege: | argreet orepeaprttr ter tram erritcore 1
(WA. 2/2/109)
Kwatha (Decoction) of total plant of Goksura (Tribulus terrestris) is mixed with
sugar and honcy is given to drink. It alleviates Mutrakricchra (Dysuria).

2. Ashmari (Calculus)
Raveara dha aot wrayer | arferefttor aerermyatitet wor
(q.Fa. 7/19)
Curna (Powder) of Gokshura (Tribulus terrestris) mixed with honey and Aviksira
(Goat's milk) is given to drink for 7 days will break Ashmari (Calculus).
3. Keshavardhanartha (To promote hair growth)
maktergenit get a agafft 1 Brewed aa aya co
(W.F. 3/11/22)
Flowers of Goksura (Tribulus terrestris) and Tila (Sesamum indicum) are mixed

with equal quanity of honey and ghee, and then applied on scalp. This therapy promotes
hair-growth.

4. Amavata (Rhumatoid arthritis) & Katishula (Lumbago)
guetta sare: wre: wrahtafra: | aaa afeeet ore wa UI
(4.4. 25/9)
Kwatha (Decoction) of Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) and Gokshura (Tribulus
terrestris) if taken in morning times regularly acts as digestant there by relieves Amavata
(Rhumatoid arthritis), Katishula (Lumbago) and Ruk (Pain).
Matra (Dosage)
Phala churna (Powder) —3 to6g
Kwatha (Decoction) —50 to 100 ml

Phytoconstitutents

Total plant contains Diosgenin, Gitogenin, Chlorogenic, Harmane, Harmine,
Kaemperal, Quercitin, Rutin, Steroidal glycosides (Trillin, diosgenin-D, gracillin, dioscin,
protodioscin), Saponin C & G, astragaline.

Fruits yielded flavonoid components like Kaempferol, Steroid sapogenins,
neotigogenin and hecogenin.

----- PAGE 249 -----
Gokshura 241

Roots afforded campesterol, (}-sitosterol and stigmasterol.

Research index

ls

ty

The present study is aimed at examining the antilithiatic potency of the protein
biomolecules of Tribulus terrestris, a plant which is a common constituent of
herbal marketed preparations to treat urolithiasis. Findings suggest that this
purified protein biomolecule from Tribulus terrestris could open new vista in
medical management of urolithiasis. Aggarwal A, Tandon S, Singla SK,
Tandon C. A novel antilithiatic protein from Tribulus terrestris having
cytoprotective potency. Protein Pept Lett. 2012 Aug; 19 (8) : 812-9.

. To Study the effect of acute and repeated dose administration of lyophilized

aqueous extract of the dried fruits of Tribulus terrestrisSLAET) on sexual
function in sexually sluggish male albino rats. Findings of the present study
validate the traditional use of 7. terrestris as a sexual enhancer in the
management of sexual dysfunction in males. Singh S, Nair V, Gupta YK.
Evaluation of the aphrodisiac activity of Tribulus terrestris Linn in sexually
sluggish male albino rats. J Pharmacol Pharmacother. 2012 Jan;3(1):43-7,

. The effect of oral exposure of Acetaminophen (500 mg/kg) in Oreochromis

mossambicus at 24-h duration was evaluated. The Tribulus terrestris fruit
extract (250 mg/kg) showed a remarkable hepatoprotective activity against
acetaminophen induced hepatotoxicity. Kavitha P, Ramesh R, Bupesh G,
Stalin A, Subramanian P. Hepato protective activity of Tribulus terrestris
extract against acetaminophen-induced toxicity in a freshwater fish
(Oreochromis mossambicus). In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2011. Dec;
47(10):698-706.

. Investigate the possible effects of Tribulus terrestris (TT) on endocrine

sensitive organs in intact and castrated male rats as well as in a postmenopausal
rat model using ovariectomized females. Tribulus terrestris was not able to
stimulate endocrine sensitive tissue such as the prostate, seminal vesicle, uterus
and vagina in Wistar rats, indicating lack of androgenic and estrogenic activity
in vivo. Martino-Andrade AJ, Morais RN, Spercoski KM, Rossi SC, Vechi
MF, Golin M, Lombardi NF, Greca CS, Dalsenter PR. Effects of Tribulus
terrestris on endocrine sensitive organs in male and female Wistar rats, J
Ethnopharmacol. 2010 Jan 8; 1 27(1)165-70. Epub 2009 Sep 23.

. Acetone extracts of leaves and seeds from the Tribulus terrestris

(Zygophyllaceae) were tested against mature and immature different mosquito
vectors under laboratory condition. It is confirmed from the LC5O values that

----- PAGE 250 -----
242 Dravyaguna Vijnana

the seed acetone extract of 7. terrestris is more effective compared to leaf
extracts. Singh SP, Raghavendra K, Singh RK, Mohanty SS, Dash AP,
Evaluation of Tribulus terrestris Linn (Zygophyllaceae) acetone extract for
larvicidal and repellence activity against mosquito vectors. J Commun Dis.
2008 Dec:40(4):255-61.

Yoga (Formulations)

Naine Indications
Gokshuradyavaleha Ashmari, Mutrakracchra
Gokshurabija churna Ashmari

Gokshura kwatha Mutraghata
Gokshuradi modaka Vajikaranartha
Shwadmshtradya ghrata Hradroga, Shula
Shwadamshtradi lepa Mutrakracchra

Botanical Name -— Tribulus terrestris Linn. Tribulus - having three sides, terrestris-
of the ground.

Family — Zygophyllaceae

Kula — Gokshura
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Mutra virechaniya varga, Shothahara varga, Krimighna varga,
Anuvasanopaga varga

Sushruta _ Vidarigandhadi gana, Viratarvadi gana, Laghu panchamula,
Kantakapanchamula

Bh.Pr.Ni. | Guduchyadi varga 44-46

Basonym of Drug
Gokshura fruits injure the grazing cattle.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, SAYRE: At Aa: YETTA |
Goksura grows wild.
Morphology
2. ATZA:-ATA: Ya: |

----- PAGE 251 -----
sokshura 243

i nen illinois id clean tiglacee

Herbaceous plant with leaves resembling leaves of Canaka (Bengal gram).
3. Wepven:-Tat Hee: |
Fruits of Goksura have spines which pricks grazing cattle.
4. QteH:- Ar ga dtevrnveacang |
Goksura fruit bears sharp spines.
5, PAM - YA eda chan Hewat |
Fruit of Goksura has sharp spines resembling canines of dog.
6. PHS :- TA: HVSHT: HIST |
Goksura fruit bears three spines.
7. HUetHe:- Huctad HAA |
Goksura fruits have spines.
Properties and Actions
8. sarierc:- gata wetset |
Goksura has the similar odour to /ksu (Sugarcane).
9. Usama - Uct aie Hate eater Hucteacanrd |
The fruit of Goksura injures flesh because of its sharp spines.
10. TIGHUSH:- TeTHVeHATT |
Goksura has sweet taste.
11. eenve:-Huefeerastt wea: |

Even though fruit has spines the fruit is commonly used as medicines.

Regional Names

Tribulus terrestris Pedalium murex

Habitat
Gokshura grows commonly in sandy soil throughout India. Brahat gokshura is com-
mon in South India.

----- PAGE 252 -----
244 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Pedalium murex (Pedaliaceae)

Habit — Glabrous annual herb.

Leaves — Opposite, petioled, irregularly toothed
or almost lobed.

Inforescence — Solitary axillary with two glands
at the base.

Flowers — Yellow coloured with small calyx, four
stamens are present.

Fruit —Indchiscent, hard, capsule, ovoid or pyra-
midal with four patent spines arising from the base.

Tribulus terrestris Linn. (Zygophyllaceae)

Habit — Prostrate herb. Stem — Slender, branched,
weak and creeping. ;

Leaf — Compound, sub-opposite, even-pinnate,
stipulate, leaflets in 4 or 5 pairs, pairs unequal, leaflets
oblong.

Flower — Actinomorphic, bisexual, pentamerous,
hypogynous and bright yellow, sepals are 5 and free.
Petals are 5, free and obovate. Androecium contains
two whorls of stamens 5 in each which are inserted at
the base of a disc. Stamens subtended by glandular
scales. Gynoecium is 2-5 carpellary, axile placentation
lobed ovary with simple style. Tribulus terrestris Linn.

Fruit — Schizocarp with 5 spinous cocci, each contain one seed, Schizocarp is 5
angled, cocci is woody, each with a pair of unequal spines.

Seed — Obliquely pendulous. One or more seed in each coccus.
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Market sample of Goksura root contains slender, tortuous, gradually tapering roots,
12 to 20cm long and upto 1 cm in diameter at the thickest part, external surface is yellow-
ish brown in colour, slightly wrinkled longitudinally with prominent root scars, the crown
of the root, more often, and bears a number of horizontally spreading proteins of stem.

----- PAGE 253 -----
Gokshura 45

Transverscly cut portion of the root shows a yellowish surface, surrounded by a loosely
adhering bark, followed by a cortical zone of light colour and a central woody portion
showing distinct concentric rings. On breaking root becomes short pieces and powdery.
Has faint agreeable odour and swectish astringent taste.

Fruit — Fruits are five ribbed or lobed, more or less spherical with flattened apex and
dome-shaped base, upto 1 cm in diameter. Each of the lobes of the fruit is studded with
four sharp and rigid spines. Surface of the fruit is hard, villous and greenish yellow in
colour. The fruit contains several small seeds in a number of transversely separated com-
partments. Fruit has faint agreeable odour.

Classical references

Synonyms
Tigre: arent earbreanve: Calgaes: | Wenveat Mayet GST Feaee
USM VERT ST TMT CMaaeraar i (AMA TCAMe Th 44-45)
Properties and actions
Tat: vite: wrgdepattrster: 1 weet deat qea: yfecereatter: |
wearer Pesearrarage Ul (ASEM Th 45-46)
(aft. yeeate at 103)
Tat wet get deat aegBed | vttet aftrarcet ctesatraar |
CATA H ASLAM: (HAM. stale af 69-70)
erage weateat Bsitacit aermeh cit wept at seit |
ereanrattetreawet aad at Feqyvirat: i
(aft. wareefe TT 43)
MAA F Yet gM araaraey, | aenet vilaet Mg Aes FS PACH II
(BAr. eeireenfe TT 45)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Parts used from the plant Gokshura
. Patra b. Mula & Phala c. Sara d. Kanda
Ans: b. Mula & Phala

2. Pradhana Karma of Gokshura
a. Varnya b. Nidrakara c. Mutrala d. Medhya

Ans: c. Mutrala

po

----- PAGE 254 -----
. Mutrakrichra Anila haranam is the Agrya Karma refers to

Dravyaguna Vijnana

a, Gmbhari b. Chitraka c. Dhanvayasa d. Gokshura
Ans: d. Gokshura

. Gruel prepared from Shwadamshtra (Tribulus terrestris) and Kantakari

(Solanum xanthocarpum) is taken with jaggery
a, Atisara b. Mutrakracchra_c. Arshas d. Shotha

Ans: b. Mutrakracchra

. Gokshuradi Modaka is best

a, Rasayana b. Vajikara Shothahara d. Kasahara
Ans: b. Vajikara

. Botanical source of Laghu Gokshura

a. Acorus calamus b. Cyperus rotundus
c. Tribulus terrestris d. Commiphora mukul
Ans: c. Tribulus terrestris

. Botanical source of Brahat Gokshura

a. Bergenia ligulata b. Dioscorea bulbifera
c. Tribulus terrestris d. Pedalium murex

Ans: d. Pedalium murex

. Shwadamshtra and Trikantaka are synonyms of

a. Gokshura b. Agaru c. Kantakari d. Khadira
Ans: a. Gokshura

----- PAGE 255 -----
Chapter

Guduchi

Useful part - Kaanda (Stem).

Rasadi panchaka

Tikta kashaya
Guru, Snigdha

Karma (Actions)

Jwarahara, Rasayana, Sangrahi, Dipana, Amahara, Trashnahara, Dahahara,
Pramehaghna, Kasahara, Kusnthaghna, Balya, Krmighna, Chardighna, Arshoghna,
Medhya, Hradya, Chakshushya, Vayasthapana.

Kanda Guduchi — Jwarahara, Vishaghni, Bhutagni, Valipalitanashini
Agrya Karma
STAT Aion arrearage oN TM AT AIM | (F.-Y, 25/40)

Amruta (Tinospora cordifolia Miers.) is Astringent, Pacify Vata, Appetizer, Pacify
Kapha, Pacify Rakta and useful in Vibandha.

Pharmaclogical (Actions)
Antipyretic, Alterative, Diuretic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka because of Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka.
Pittahara due to Madhura vipaka and Tikta kashaya rasa. Kapha Shamaka because of
Ushna virya and Tikta Kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Indications)

Jwara, Vatarakta, Prameha, Kushtha, Agnimandya, Trishna, Daha, Kasa, Krimi,
Chardi, Arshas, Netravikara, Hradroga.

Note — Guduchi is one of the best Medhya dravya mentioned by Charaka.
Amayika-Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Jwara (Fever)

TH vittenarst at Tee: ata Ft (YS. 39/170)

----- PAGE 256 -----
248 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Decoction prepared from Guduci (Tinospora cordifolia) when it is cooled to be
administered.

2. Vataja Jwara (Fever because of Vata)

ararat HaeaTY Maret arswATA: | (31.4.F4. 1/70)

In case of fever originated from Véita, Juice of Guduci (Tinospora cordifolia) is very
useful.

3. Vatarakta (Gout)

qekagemat vet marta at 1 fet ayeerttat amg,

(a. fa. 29/121)

The Taila (oil) processed with Guduci kwatha (Decoction) and milk will alleviate
Vata rakta (Gout).

4, Amlapitta (Hyper acidity)

froitpertraceterast aitsitad tirararacy |

arent abet carerttrt aererfereteTayS WITT (ATH. FA. 10/16)

Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from leaves of Guduci (Tinospora cordifolia) Nimba
(Azadirachta indica) and Patola (Tricosanthes dioica) is taken with honey cures severe
Amlapitta (Hyper acidity).

5. Prameha (Diabetes)

TET Th SCAM A TATA TR AT | (3.3. FA. 12/6)

Juice of Guduci (Tinospora cordifolia) taken with honey cures all types of Prameha.
6. Trsna (Thirst)

MTA ASMA Aa TM Sled | (AP. 22/45)

Syurp prepared from Guduci (Tinospora cordifolia) is beneficial in all kinds of Trsna
(Thirst).

Matra (Dosage)
Kwatha(Decoction)  -—50to 100 ml

Churna (Powder) -lto3g
Satva -0.5 to2g
Phytoconstituents

Total plant contains tinosporide, cordifolide, unosporin, tinosporon, tinosporic acid,
cordifol, heptacosanol B-sitosterol and tinosporidine.

----- PAGE 257 -----
Guduchi JA9

Leaves yielded octacosanol, J-sitosterol, heptacosanol and cardifolone, magnoflorine
& tembetarine.

Research index

1. To evaluate the effect of aqueous extract of stem of Tinospora cordifolia (TC)
on hyperalgesia in streptozotocin induced diabetic rats and invitro aldose
reductase inhibition. Tinospora cordifolia prevents the hyperalgesia in
experimental diabetic neuropathy. It has an aldose reductase inhibitory activity
in-vitro which may contribute to the beneficial effects. Nadig PD, Revankar
RR, Dethe SM, Narayanswamy SB, Aliyar MA. Effect of Tinospora cordifolia
on experimental diabetic neuropathy. Indian J Pharmacol. 2012 Sep; 44(Q580-
3. dok 10.4103/0253-7613.10038CO

2. The aim of the study was to isolate and characterise the immunomodulatory
active compounds of Tinospora cordifolia. Chromatographic purification of
these fraction led to the isolation of a mixture of two compounds 2, 3 isolated
for the first time from natural source and five known compounds 1, 4-7 which
were characterized as 11-hydroxyrmus takone (2 N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (3),
N-formylannonain (1), cordifolioside A (4), magnoflorine (5), tinocordiside (6),
syringin (7) by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and mass spectrometry
(MS) and comparing the spectral data with reported one. Cordifolioside A and
syringin have been reported to possess immunomodulatory activity. Other five
compounds showed significant enhancement in phagocytic activity and
increase in nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species generation at concentration
0.1-2.5 ?g/ml, Sharma U, Bala M, Kumar N, Singh B, Munshi RK, Bhalerao
S. Immunomodulatory active compounds from Tinospora cordifolia. J
Ethnopharmacol. 2012 Jun 14;141 (3) 918-26. Epub 2012 Mar 26.

3. Immunomodulatory activity of Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia) was tried. The
confirmation of an immunomodulatory protein in guduchi stem showing
lymphoproliferative and macro phage-activating properties reinforces the
rationale of the use of guduchi preparations in several Ayurvedic medicines for
immunomodulation. Aranha 1, Clement F, Venkatesh YP. Immunostimulatory
properties of the major protein from the stem of the Ayurvedic medicinal herb,
Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia). J Ethnopharmacol. 2012 Jan 31;139(2) 366-
72. Epub 2011 Nov 20.

4. This study assess the antioxidant capacity of Tinospora cordifolia stem
methanol extract in daily oral administration of 500 mg/kg of body weight for
40 days in alloxan induced diabetic rats. After treatment of methanol Tinospora

----- PAGE 258 -----
250 Dravyaguna Vijnana

cordifolia stem extract brings back to normal (P<0.01) in the erythrocytes
membrane and liver cell enzymes activities. Sivakumar V, Rajan MS,
Antioxidant Effect of Tinospora cordifolia Extract in Alloxaninduced Diabetic
Rats. Indian J Pharm Sci. 2010 Nov;72(6):795-8.

Yoga (Formulations)

SILNo.

Name Indications

Guduchyadi kwatha
Guduchi ghrata Vatarakta, Kushtha

a

Guduchyadi Modaka Prameha, Raktapitta

0. Kaishora Guggulu Vatarakta, Kushtha

Botanical name — Tinospora cordifolia, Miers.

Tinospora - Plant stitches like a bow with the curved seeds.
cordifolia — Heart shaped leaves and cordate base.
Family — Menispermaceae.
Kula -— Guduchi
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Traptighna varga, Stanyashodhana varga, Dahaprashamana varga,
snehopaga varga, Trashnanigrahana varga, Sandhaniya varga,
Vayasthapana varga

Sushruta Guduchyadi gana, Patoladi gana, Aragwadhadi gana, Kakolyadi gana,
Vallipancha mula

Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 6-10

Basonym of Drug

Tyefer verter Teer ste |

Guduchi protect from diseases.

----- PAGE 259 -----
Guduchi 251

Synonyms
Habitat
1, HUSA - HVSTERANSM: |
Guduci can be propagated with stem.
2. ayaarert - a fae aatset: |
If planted, Guduci never dic.
3. fosmet ~ fora wet ga: trae
When cut Guduci grows again.
Morphology
4. Husett - Huseranr at |
Guduci ascends a supporting plant in a circular way.
5, WuSet -quserartr aelarT |
Guduci climbs up the supporting plant in a circular manner.
6. TeAcHT -WsaTAHNT, FART A |
The stem of Guduci resembles a rope.
7. waft - HTSesS TAT eT She |
When cut transversely the stem shows circular structure.
8. Ayu - weyaRMa Hs ToT: |
When crushed, leaves give viscid juice like that of honey.
9. WRT - AAT Basta AM: |
The seed is semi lunar shaped.
Properties and Actions

10. Sat - saydag Worearftatt = |
Guduci is very useful drug and possess the qualities like that of nectar.
11. Taree - tartare |
Guduci has rejuvenating quality.
12. Gard - sfteradife varercare |
Guduci protects the life because of its Rasayana (Rejuvenating) property.
13. Gee - aera age fear, areata: |

Guduci promotes longivity.

----- PAGE 260 -----
252 Dravyaguna Vijnana

14, Tact - sat fares, |

Guduci is very efficacious drug in fever,
15. fagrear - fered were: |

Guduci protects by removing toxins.
16. Qt - SATaMT |

Guduci_ gives strength like that of Soma.
17. arate - acta |

Leaves of Guduci is liked by Calves.

Regional Names

Habit

Guduchi grows throughout India and commonly
cultivated owing to excessive demand.

Morphology

A large glabrous climber with succulent, corky
and grooved stems. Branches sending down slender
pendulous fleshy roots, terete, striate, with tubercled,
pale, sometimes shining or glaucous bark.

Leaves - Membranous, 5-10 cm long, roundish
or sub deltoid, cordate with a broad sinus and large
basal lobes, obtuse or more or less cuspidate, 7-9
nerved, reticulately veined with microscopic glisten-
ing glands beneath; petiole is 2.5 cm to 7 cm long.

Tinospora cordifolia Meirs

Inflorescence - Laxed Raceme, 5 cm long, elongating and often longer than the
leaves, axillary, terminal or from the old wood.

Flowers
Male flowers — Clustered in the axils of small subulate bracts. Sepals are 6 in num-

----- PAGE 261 -----
Guduchi 253

ber. Outer three are small, ovate-oblong, acute and inner three are larger, membranous,
broadly elliptical, concave, 3-4 mm, yellow in colour. Petals are 6 in number, equal about
2 mm long, broadly spathulate, cach loosely embracing a stamen when young. Female
flowers usually solitary, similar to male, but sepals are green, margins not reflexed
staminodes short and linear. Carpels | to 3 widely seperated on the short fleshy gyno-
phore, dorsally convex, ventrally flat or nearly so,

Fruit — Red on ripening, size of a large pea.

Seeds — Broadly ellipsoid with a slender dorsal ridge and a ventral depression, slightly
muricate.

Varieties (D.N.)
1. Padmaguduchi

2. Kanda guduchi (Tinospora sinensis)

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characetristics):

Market sample consists transversely cut pieces of dry, cylindrical, soft wooded stem,
5 mm to 2.5 cm in diameter. Outer surface is grayish brown to almost black in colour,
longitudinally wrinkled and warty and covered with raised lenticels the bark peels of in
then papery flakes. Transversely cut surface of the stem shows a soft pale yellow or dirty
white surface with marked wedge shaped structure brought about by radiating medullary
rays. On breaking stem is fibrous stem is not having any particular odour but has very
bitter taste.

Species

1. Tinospora crispa 2. Tinospora sinensis

3. Tinospora malabarica 4. Tinospora tomentosa
Classical references
Synonyms

Tget ayouff enaqasyracet | frat foavet foataat aeerett w u
fart afar att araect a Hose | cencterftren efter fagrean Tt TAT

asErM aaa a Aust Sakray. PATH 6-9)

Properties and Actions
Tse ween ferent Margurenr Tare | dase aerate creat Aras
AAMC SH UGA | ATCT B ATTA aT UI
Wagar: Pepearaa gy | (AL. TeAMerT 8-10)

----- PAGE 262 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

nn

TSVATAwAvEr dear ferent Hot wer i eegeMIgarrapoeretaaratsrd_ 1
Tee amare feria 1 creer auger

(afr. Temafert 5-7)
wraygett-
are Use a mewn afore | freed sere acetates
(aft. Weemert g)

get wer wre Hare eet TY: | ferret Hote ger accion ares
augepieotagareanvga: | SRMaMeMegeMea Tae
fratwet tag vet aa dud wy aaa: wat Beane

(FA. aitafeert 9-17)
FA Yoel qeourdteat frat Hara TATA T
er qoarakteHaMAASaTy AAT = I
ardigat Teet a ager afar | fared sanyredt actor 1
(af. yeeafert 17-18)

geht g we fercer Bot ae Tare | sat AS area araeeh WETAT I
Rrencarstt tareraarsclerasaratstrary | caret We U8 aeatlet Fs aha Mt
(B.A. rocane at 18-19)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Main useful part of Guduchi
a. Root b. Stem c. Fruit d. Flower
Ans: b. Stem
2. Pradhana Rasa of Guduchi
a. Madhura b. Amla c. Tikta d. Katu
Ans; c. Tikta
3. Vipaka of Guduchi
a. Madhura b. Katu c. Amla d. Tikta
Ans: a. Madhura
4, Shrita Shita Kashaya of Guduchi is indiacted in
a. Kasa b. Arshas c. Atisara d. Jwara

Ans: d. Jwara

_

----- PAGE 263 -----
ames

Guduchi 255
nr ndtasiniasi sets sigaansasatmansscsiiosonoene

. The Taila (oil) processed with Guduchi kwatha (Decoction) and milk will

alleviate
a. Granthi b. Vatarakta

c. Netraroga d. Shwasa
Ans: b. Vatarakta

. Tinosporide a chemical constituent is present in

a. Ativisha b.Shatavari
Ans: d. Guduchi

c. Brahmi d, Guduchi

. Amratarishta is indicated in

a. Shwasa b. Sarvajwara c. Vaivarnya d. Kasa
Ans: b. Sarvajwara

. Botanical name of Guduchi

a. Haridra b. Guggulu c. Guduchi d, Varuna
Ans: c. Guduchi

. Chakralakshanika and Chandrahasa are the synonyms of

a. Gokshura b. Katuki c. Karpura d. Guduchi
Ans: d. Guduchi

----- PAGE 264 -----
Chapter

Guggulu

Useful parts — Niryasa (Gum resin)
Rasadi panchaka

Tikta Katu Madhura Kashaya

Tikshna, Sara, Sukshma, Snigdha, Laghu, Vishada

Karma (Actions)

Medohara, Amavatahara, Pramehahara, Bhagna Sandhanakara, Vrashya, Swarya,
Rasayana, Dipana, Balya, Vranahara, Kushthaghna, Shophahara, Arshoghna, Krmihara,
Varnya, Brahmana.

Nava Guggulu Karma (Actions of fresh Guggulu)

Brahmana, Vrashya

Properties and Actions of Nava & Purana Guggulu

Nava Guggulu. (Fresh) Purana Guggulu (Old)

Varna (Colour) Bright yellow (Kanchana)

or Dark brown (Pakwa
jambu phala)

Gandha (odour) | Sugandha (Pleasant) Durgandha (Offensive)
Guna (Qualities) | Snigdha (Unctuous) Picchila Shushka

Karma (Actions) | Brahmana (Vrashya)

Note— Guggulu older than 5 yrs is considered as Purana Guggulu.

Yellowish brown (Tyakta
Prakrati varna)

Properties and actions of different types of Guggulu

1. Gandharaja (Kana) Guggulu — Katu Rasa, Ushna virya, Shulahara, Rasayana,
Vatahara.

2. Bhinya guggulu — Tikta katu Rasa, Ushna virya, Vatahara, Medhya.
Agrya Karma
Harry WATT: (3.ZS. 40)

----- PAGE 265 -----
Guggulu 257

Guggulu (Commiphora mukul) is best in diseases of Vata and Meda dhatu (Obe-
sity).
Doshakarma (Action of Dasha)

TridoshaShamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya. Pittahara due to Tikta
madhurakashaya rasa and Kaphahara because of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tiktakatu

kashaya rasa.
Note — Because of Madhura rasa vatahara, Kasaya rasa pittahara & Tikta rasa
kaphara.
Rogaghnata (Indications)
Medo roga, Amavata, Prameha, Bhagna, Vrana, Kushtha, Shopha, Arsha, Krmi &
Vatavyadhi
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata)
TAM waar wed | vera wgaisered weer Weyer
(AFA. 28/241)
Guggulu (Commiphora mukul) taken with milk is very useful as a Rasayana in all
kinds of Vatavyadhi.
2. Amavata (Rhumatoid Arthritis)
rat vitor weet eet Prteray| (He Fe. 21/47)
Regular usage of Guggulu (Commiphora mukul) with cow’s urine is beneficial in
Amavata (Rhumatoid arthritis).
3. Shotha (Oedema)
Wye ar eT, etterent ar 1 (37.8. Fa. 19/3)

Guggulu (Commiphora mukul) or Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) mixed with urine
to be administered in case of Shotha (Oedema)

4. Vatarakta (Gout)

fremarg water payers 1 (aFa. 29/159)
Regular usage of Guggulu (Commiphora mukul), Shilajatu (Bitumen) and honey
will cure Vatarakta (Gout).

5. Urustambha

Wrat yayet ster ui (ga. 5/35)

Guggulu (Commiphora mukul) with cow’s urine is a best remedy for Usrutambha.

----- PAGE 266 -----
258 Dravyaguna Vijnana

6. Sthoulya (Obesity)

THT UT: TTT NT: 1 rem warrar arfrrerat fer: 1

(H.Z.Y. 14/23)

Rasanjana, Mahat panchamula (Bilva - Aegle marmelos, Agnimantha -
Clerodendron phlomides, Shyonaka - Oroxylum indicum, Patala - Sterospermum
suaveolens & Gambhari - Gmelina arborea), Guggulu (Commiphora mukul), Shilajatu
(Bitumen) & Agnimantha rasa (Juice of Premna intergrifolia) taken regularly is benefi-
cial in Sthoulya (Obesity).
Matra (Dosage)

Niryasa (Gumresin) - 0.5 to 3 g

Phytoconstituents

Gum resin of Guggulu contains steroidal constituents like Z-guggulusterone, E-
Guggulusterone, Guggulusterols I, II, II, IV & V, Diterpene alcohol, Myrecene,
Dimyrcene, Polymyrcene, Myricyl alocohol, B-sitosterol, 15 amino acids like Cystine,
Histidine, Lysine, Arginine, Aspartic acid, Serine, Gultamic acid, Threonine, Alanine,
Proline, Tyrosine, Tryptophan, Valine, Leucine and Isoleucine.

Research index

1. The present study was undertaken to evaluate the effect of ethanol extract of
Commiphora mukul gum resin (CMEE) on blood glucose, plasma insulin, lipid
profiles, reduced glutathione, lipid peroxidation, protein oxidation and
enzymatic antioxidants like superoxide dismutase, catalase, giutathiane
reductase, glutathiane peroxidase, glutathione-S-transferase in fructoseinduced
type-2 diabetic rats. CMEE has the ability to improve insulin sensitivity and
delay the development of insulin resistance, aggravate antioxidant status in
diabetic rats and may be used as an adjuvant therapy for patients with insulin
resistance. Ramesh B, Saralakumari D. Antihypergiycemic, hypolipidemic and
antioxidant activities of ethanafic extract of Commiphora mukul gum resin in
fructose-fed male 1 Nistar rats. J Physiol Biachem. 2012 May 13.

2. Present study was undertaken to evaluate cardio-protective potential: of
COmmiphora mukul against isoprenaline-induced myocardial necrosis in rats. It
is concluded that Commiphora mukul may be a potential preventive and
therapeutic agent against the oxidative stress associated ischemic heart disease
owing to antioxidant and antiperoxidative activity. Ojha S, Bhatia J, Arora S,
Golechha M, Kumari S, Arya DS. Card ioprotective effects of Commiphora
mukul against isaprenaline induced cardiotaxicity: a biochemical and histo-
pathologicaf evaluation. J Environ Biol. 2011 Nov; 32(6):731-8.

----- PAGE 267 -----
Guggulu 259

3. Oleo gum resin extracted by incision of the bark is a very complex mixture of
gum, minerals, essential oils, terpenes, sterols, ferrulates, flavananes and
sterones. Its active constituents, the Z- and E-guggulsterones, have been
demonstrated to exhibit their biological activities by binding to nuclear
receptors and modulating the expression of proteins involved in carcinogenic
activities. Shah R, Gulati V, Palombo EA. Pharmacological properties of
gugguisterones, the major active components of gum guggul. Phytother Res.
2012 Nov;26(11):1594-605. doi: 10.1002Iptr.4647. Epub 2012 Mar 3.

4. High fat diet induced diabetic rodent models resembling type 11 diabetic
conditions in human population were used to assess the anti-diabetic and
hypolipidemic activity of guggulsterone (isolated fram COmmiphora mukul
resin). The results presented here suggest that the gugqulsterone has both
hypoglycemic and hypofipidemic effect which can help to cure type i! diabetes.
Sharma B, Sa4unke R, Srivastava S, Majumder C, Roy P. Effects of
guggulsterone isolated from Commiphora mukul in high fat diet induced
diabetic rats. Food Chem Taxicol. 2009 4ct;47(10):2631-9. Epub 2009 Jul 25.

5. In the present study effects of the combination of XN + C’,S an 3T3-L1
adipacyte apoptasis and adipagenesis were investigated. Combination of XN
and G5 is more patent in exerting anti-obesity effects than additive effects of
the individual compounds. Rayafam S, Yang JY, Deila-Fera MA, Park HJ,
Ambati S, Baibe CA. Anti-obesity effects of xanthohumoi plus guggulsterone
in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. J Med Food. 2009 Aug;12(4):846-53.

Yoga (Formulations)

SINo.: Name Indications

Gokshuradi Guggulu Prameha, Mitrakracchra
Kanchanara Guggulu Gandamala, Arbuda
Kaishora Guggulu Vatarakta, Pramehapidaka

Trayodashanga Guggulu Gradhrasi, Katigraha
Mahayoggaraja Guggulu Vatavyadhi, Kushtha

Shotha, Arsha, Bhagandara

----- PAGE 268 -----
260 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name - Commiphora mukul Hook ex. Stocks. Balsamodendron mukul,
Hook.
Commiphora — phore=bearer, mukul - Arabic name

Family— Burseraceae.
Kula — Guggulu
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Sanjnasthapana varga
Sushruta Eladi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 32-45
Basonym of Drug
TS oaenfster Tarathe
Guggulu protects the body by curing many diseases.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. Gt:- Great aaa |
Guggulu mainly grows in dry mountain regions.
2. WBdvea - HSA WTAAA: |
Guggulu plant grows in dry regions.
Morphology
3. Bae - wpaceratentata: |
Gum-resin exudes from the cavities.
4. GPNLATHY - PATS LATTA BTA: |
Gum-resin of Guggulu exudes from pot shaped cavities.
5. alte: ~ HUST: |
Guggulu exudes gum-resin from its cavities.
6. AAMT A:- ASTAAAL TTA HMTAT: |
Gum-resin of Guggulu has reddish black colour like that of Buffalo’s eye.
7. wurbrate: - Hore Prabaset |
Gum-resin of Guggulu has particles.
8. aerate: pret: HT Praarses |

----- PAGE 269 -----
Guggulu 261

Gum-resin of Guggulu is blackish in colour.
Properties and Actions
9. Wt: - frafey ste:

Guggulu is regarded as best among Nirydsa (Gum-resin).

10. Wage: - vet Att wale feaha, wleagferad: |
Guggulu reduces obesity.

11, Taller - tari gether, reef got wee: |
Guggulu is very good antimicrobial hence used for fumigation.

12, Saye agra aware: |

Guggulu is also used in incense sticks to worship.

Regional Names

English Indian bedellium

Habitat

Guggulu plant commonly grows in dry and arid
regions and it is cultivated extensively because of huge
demand. Found in arid and rocky tracks of Rajasthan,
Deccan, Bellary & Mysore.

Morphology

Shrubby, 4 to 6 ft. high. Young parts glandular-
pubescent; branches knotty and crooked, divaricate, usu-
ally ending in a sharp spine.

Leaves — 1 to 3 foliate, leaflets sub sessile, the ter-
minal leaf let is large, 2 cm long and 1 cm wide, rhom-
boid or ovate shaped, serrate, toothed in upper part,
smooth, shining, the lateral leaflets when present less
than half the size of the terminal ones.

. . . Commiphora mukul
Flowers — Seen in fascicles of 2-3 with very short Hook ex stocks

----- PAGE 270 -----
262 Dravyaguna Vijnana

pedicels. Calyx is companulate, glandular and hairy. Petals are brownish red, broadly
linear, nearly thrice the length of the calyx, reflexed at the apex. Stamens are 8 to 10 in
number, alternately long and short, half the length of the petals. Ovary is oblong-ovoid,

Fruit - Drupe, when ripe becomes red; 6-8 mm in diameter, ovoid, epicarp is 4-
valved.
Seeds — Small, Nuts, Ovoid, Splitting into two.

Varieties
Bh.Pr.Ni — 5 types
1. Mahishaksha - Black in colour
2. Mahanila - Blue in colour
3. Kumuda - White in colour
4, Padma - Brown in colour
5. Hiranyaksha - Yellow in colour
Bh.Pr.Ni — 2 types
1. Nava Guggulu
2. Purana Guggulu
R.Ni. - 1. Gandharaja Guggulu | Kana Guggulu
2. Bhumija Guggulu

Commercial varieties
1. IGrade — Consists of translucent Guggulu free from bark and sand.
2. JiGrade — Dull coloured Guggulu mixed with bark and sand.
3. JGrade - Mostinferior quality, Collected from ground and mixed with

lot of extraneous matters.

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of Market Sample)

Market sample of gum resin is translucent vermicular or stalactitic tears of varying
sizes, reddish yellow or brown in colour, more often occurring in resinous lumps which
turn darker in colour on long storage. On breaking become pieces with a rough waxy
surface having a moist unctuous appearance. Having balsamic aromatic odour with bitter

taste.
Toxicology
LD50 of Essential oil —- 750 mg/kg I.P. Sometimes there might be burning in stom-
ach, itching and urticarial rashes on skin after its use.
Treatment— Stop using for two days.
Saffron is an antidote

----- PAGE 271 -----
263

Guggulu Shodhana

Physical impurities like sand, stone, leaf ctc. are first removed from crude drug,
crushed into small pieces, Then taken in a pottali and boiled in liquids and one among
Gomutra (Cow’s urine), Triphala Kwatha, Vasapatra swarasa, Vasa patra Kashaya,
Nirgundi patra swarasa or Godugdha (Milk). Swedana (Boiling) is carried out till all
pass into the fluid through cloth. The residue left in the Pottali is to be discarded. The fluid
is filtered and boiled till it forms a mass. This mass is dried under sun and pounded with a
pestle in a stone mortar, adding a little quantity of ghee till it becomes waxy.
Prashasta Guggulu (Qualities of Genunine Guggulu)

1. Atapaiste vitiyanti becomes liquified when exposed to Sunlight.

2. Kshiptagnou jwalanti-Burns well when put on fire.

3. Should be Snigdha, Mradu (Soft), Picchila, Sugandha (Good smell), Pitabha

(Yellowish tinged).
4. Mrat Sikata rahita (Devoid of mud and sand).

Atimatra prayoga (Excessive usage) of Guggulu
Without precaution if Guggulu used in excess it may lead to-

e Klaviya (Impotency) e Asya Shosha (Dryness in mouth)
e Timira (Progressive cataract) e Karshya (Lean)
e Moha (Giddiness) e Atisara (Diarrhoea)

Contraindications during Guggulu usage
1 Amla & Tikshna —Sour and strong foods.
2 Ajirna - Food that causes indigestion.
3 Vyavaya, Shrama, Atapa - Avoid excessive sex, Strenous exercise and walking
in hot Sunlight.
4 Madya - Alcoholic preparations
5 Rosha - Psychological upsets like anger.

Adulteration .
Main adultrants of Guggulu available in Market were the gums of olants such as—
e Albizia lebbeck e Acacia senegal
e Acacia arabica e Boswellia serrata
e Morninga oleifera

Note — Guggulu is listed among endangered plants.

----- PAGE 272 -----
264 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Collections

Schizogonous ducts in the bark become enlarged by braking down of the surround-
ings cells to form large lysigenous cavities in which a granular oleo-gum-resin collects,
When the bark is wounded, the secretion exudes and changes in the air from a yellowish-
white fluid to a reddish brown hard mass. The greater part of the gum resin exudes spon-
taneously through natural fissures.

Tapping

The best tapping period for gum resin has been recognised from the middle of De-
cember to the end of February. The plants of 7 yrs age group are suitable for tapping the
gum resin. The contractors are to use solution prepared in sulphuric acid for complete
extraction of gum-resin.

The incision of 0.8 to 1.5 cm deep is made on the main trunk and thick branches after
dipping the knife in the solution of the angle of 600 the yellow fragrant liquid starts
coming out just after incision for hours depending upon the plant. The liquid solidifies in
the due course of time and the same is collected after a day or two. This collected gum
resin is sold in the market as Guggulu. Since the plant is an important source of Guggulu
gum over the past few years this species has been extensively tapped in rajasthan and
Gujarat and the trees were noticed to be progressively drying.

Classical references
Synonyms
Wyqeayas weg: Hire: Ue: | Pritepacts setter ufsarar: aes: |
(1.5. Bee TT 32)
Types, characters & their utility
afearant Werte: gaye: war seafe | feror: warat Fat WAYe: Tar wa:
ygrmaatesy ufearer sft wie: | weriicreg faga: TaATTaAcTAMT: I
HAS: PSA: Aer Mafra haw: STATS SATA: Tar fer
ste ne wh fo | gart ys: Wat aware wt
fasta agent aaa: unentfia: | parferaieeratsr wa: aafargurafr
(aa. Hue GT 34-37)
Properties and Actions
Ie feterattent cftaton: fret: Ae: | HAT: HES: UT He Balt MY: UE: Ul
MTIAHS FA: Yer: Tae Tare: ates: foes sea: HATTA:
Adhiteen amis acteenaredry | freamPasiharsitwsaetrehtear |

----- PAGE 273 -----
- Guggulu 265
myaheeadterd waracaree firerer 1 frencara anf yyy: aelaraer i
(a1.5. Hate at 38-41)

TAP TT TOOTS Toa : 1
Bal Foot ger: Yeates: | eer: HBT: Te: 11
et Ta: wie: BaPekeg fafa: | ypent gierasa eremamspferater: 1
Gere: og faaat yryepeietaSta: (ary. Hae Pf 42-44)
Contraindications during Guggulu usage
aTet dtenrasituigg Sarars srraraay | wet Te astern Tore yeaa: I
(a1.5. ayate Ti 45)
Tay: fase: wien: efter: Heraary laud: eral org: Gent wat artacraphag
(aff. aeate BT 117)
waurafagter: Raven: Faratet: Geet: | wet Garctatet wel TT: AAT: |
aad Perens: HATA: FATS: TAA, | AAS alt Wer Herts es
aihsrat Hye: Vall ANT atch: VA: | Aeareorag att HaTAcared ra I
fragranced yng: wadlaet | Hom: vittrars a veratirs a fist:
arated car Fat TT: VT Tar | PTE HUTA: Heh: He: Il
Ureaeal oy: Wer: Staten: acetates: Hoare GET: AeA TA:
wR eat seu farrrcots | Aehteen aaa VrSsATTTSH:
frsaractartnrnttarsasatrpaiy 1 (A. sitet 1412-1420)
PRs:
(dF. attain 1420-1421)
ING: wefernter: panacea, | Hftardtancteyinyitet Tara: 1
(a. wae af 105)
BITS: Heo: BATA: | YENCAA AUAET TA:
(aA. aaa &T 107)
gira Tyg:
mnTyfratach: HELO: HUA, | SAT TEA He: TAT: eT Ul
(aA, aaafert 109)

----- PAGE 274 -----
206 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Tnpehernancar safer: arcrareepe, | arreates rosaren wonfeg a we
Qualities of Genuine Guggulu
arreattrest Perched farmrarralh serertrenht 1 (25.Fr. sitaftrert 1412)

Adverse effects of excessive usage of Guggulu

arrearage aod fetes rary | Rrearenvivafeficnre aera
(fir.fa. etree TF 80)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Guggulu
a. Kanda b. Niryasa c. Mula d, Phala
Ans: b. Niryasa
2. Pradhana Karma of Guggulu
a. Medohara b. Jwarahara c. Arshoghna d. Medhya
Ans: a. Medohara
3. Pradhana Karma of Purana Guggulu
a. Dipana b. Bhedana c. Lekhana d. Sramsana
Ans: c. Lekhana
4. Medo anila hara is the Agrya Karma attributed to
a. Kalamegha b. Bala c. Jiraka d. Guggulu
Ans: d. Guggulu
5. Gokshuradi Guggulu is specifically indicated
a. Jwara b. Vatarakta c. Mutrakracchra d. Galaganda

—

Ans: c. Mutra kracchra

6. Kanchanara Guggulu specifically indicated in
a. Galaganda b. Vatarakta c. Jwara d. Mutrakracchra
Ans: a. Galaganda

7. Kaishora Guggulu is specifically indicated in
a. Jwara b. Vatarakta c. Mutrakracchra d. Galaganda
Ans: b. Vatarakta

8. Triphala Guggulu is specifically indicated
a. Bhagandara _—b. Mutrakracchra c. Galaganda d. Vatarakta
Ans: a. Bhagandara

----- PAGE 275 -----
Guggulu 267

9. Laksha Guggulu is specifically indicated in

13.

14.

15.

a. Mutrakracchra_ b. Vatarakta
Ans: c. Asthibhagna

a. Vatarakta b. Amavata
Ans: b. Amavata

. Botanical name of Gugulu

a. Cedrus deodara
c. Glycyrrhiza glabra
Ans: d. Commiphora mukul

. Mahishaksha is a synonym of

a. Hingu b. Guggulu
Ans: b. Guggulu

Pura is a synonym of

a. Shankhapushpi b. Kumkuma
Ans: c. Guggulu

Habit of Guggulu is

a. Tree b. Herb
Ans: d. Shrub

c. Asthibhagna d. Bhagandara

. Simhanada Guggulu is specifically indicated

c. Bhagandara — d.. Arshas

b. Embelia ribes
d. Commiphora mukul

c. Vasa d. Shallaki

c. Guggulu d. Kiratatikta

c. Creeper d. Shrub

Types of Guggulu as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu

a. 4 b. 5
Ans: b. 5

c. 6 d. 7

----- PAGE 276 -----
Haridra

Useful part - Kanda (Rhizome)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Action)

Varnya, Twachya, Pramehahara, Shothahara, Vranahara, Kandughna, Vishaghna,
Kushthaghna, Krimighna, Ruchikara, Shitapittahara.

Amragandhi Haridra
Kandughna
Vana Haridra
Kushthaghna & Vataraktanashaka.
Phamacological Actions
Hepatoprotective, Antiallergic, Immunostimulant, Anticancer, Antitumor,
Antihyperlipidimic, Antioxidant and Antimicrobial.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)
Kapha pitta Shamaka, Pittaharais due to Tikta rasa and Kapha nashaka because of
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta katu rasa.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
j. Prameha (Diabetes)
ath gramaar oftat frag weATeTatHeAAMT | (AFH. 6/26)

Powder of Haridra (Curcuma longa) is taken with honey or Haridra (Curcuma
longa) and Amalaki (Phyllanthes emblica) mixed in equal quantity and administered will
be beneficial in Prameha (Diabetes).

2. Dadru Kushtha (Ring worm infestation)
wet ystgret aor fies: | ated scfiug eta aga fasted: u
(ars.fa. 45/14)

----- PAGE 277 -----
Haridra 269

Rajani (Curcuma longa) powder is taken with Cow’s urine and Jaggery cures
Dadrukushtha (Ring worm infestation) and even Shlipada (Filariasis).

3. Vatarakta (Gout)
ehtargass aaret wear wepeipery | fete ar Bremerrereret areca apcaTher II
(.9.f4. 29/79)

Kwatha of Haridra (Curcuma longa) and Amrta (Tinospora cordifolia) is taken
with honey in case of Kapha dominant Vatarakta.

4. Kaphaja Trishna (Thirst due to Kapha dosha)

wet frag ta at fetes attache | (3.8. 14/5)

In case of Kaphaja trishna (Thirst) one has to take water processed with Rajani
(Curcuma longa) mixed with honey and sugar.

5. Panduroga (Anaemia)

fata eftat Breenaat ar i aftteysar | (8.3.44/17)

Haridra (Curcuma longa) Churna (Powder) is mixed with Triphala (Amalaki,
Haritaki & Vibhitaki) added with ghee and honey cures Panduroga (Anaemia).

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) — 2to4g

Swarasa (Juice) — 10to20ml

Kashaya (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
Phytoconstituents

Rhizome of Curcuma longa contains 5% volatile oil, Resin, abundant zingeberaceous
starch grains and yellow colouring substances known as curcuminoids. Chief component
of curcuminoids is known as curcumin (50-60%).

Volatile oil contains mono and sesquiterpenes such as and 1i-pinene, -phellandrene,
camphor, camphene, zingiberene and curcumenes.

Research index
1. This study reports the induction of cellular senescence of human colon cancer
cells HCT1 16 upon curcumin treatment. Study demonstrated a new antitumor
activity of curcumin leading to cancer cell senescence and revealed the
presence of a functional link between senescence and autophagy in curcumin-
treated cells. Mosieniak G, Adamowicz M, Alster 0, Jaskowiak H,
Szczepankiewicz AA, Wilczynski GM, Ciechomska IA, Sikora E. Curcumin

----- PAGE 278 -----
270

Dravyaguna Vijnana

induces permanent growth arrest of human colon cancer cells: link between
senescence and autophagy. Mech Ageing Dev. 2012 Jun; 133(6):444-55, doi:
10,1016/j.mad, 2012.05,004. Epub 2012 May 18,

2 To explore the therapcutic potential of turmeric for epilepsy further, we
analyzed its anticonvulsant activity in a larval zebrafish seizure assay.
Researchers presented the first report of the anticonvulsant properties of
bisabolene sesquiterpenoids and provide evidence which warrants further
investigation toward the mechanistic understanding of their neuromodulatory
activity. Orellana-Paucar AM et all. Anticonvulsant activity of bisabolene
sesquiterpenoids of Curcuma longa in zebrafish and mouse seizure models.
Epilepsy Behav. 2012 May;24(1):14-22. Epub 2012 Apr 5.

3 In the present study, curcumin was observed to contain a high level of
polyphenols and strong antioxidant activity. Then, the antihyperglycemic effect
of curcumin was examined for various signaling pathways using C(2)C(12)
mouse myoblast cells. Results indicate that curcumin can promote AMPK
activation and glucose uptake with increased insulin sensitivity in muscle cells
as a potential anti-diabetic therapeutic agent. Kang C, Kim E. Synergistic effect
of curcumin and insulin on muscle cell glucose metabolism, Food Chem
Toxicol. 2010 Aug-Sep;48(8-9)2366-73. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

4 In the present study, reseacrhers investigated the effects of chronic
unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) and curcumin on behaviours and
serotonergic receptor-cou pled AC-cAMP signal pathway in rats. These results
suggested that the potent antidepressant property of curcumin might be
attributed to its improvement of AC-cAMP pathway as well as CREB via
suppressing central 5-HT(1A/1B/7) receptors in the CUMS rats. Li YC, Wang
FM, Pan Y, Qiang LQ, Cheng G, Zhang WY, Kong LD. Antidepressant-like
effects of curcumin on serotonergic receptor-coupled AC-cAMP pathway in
chronic unpredictable mild stress of rats. Prog Neuropsycho-pharmacol Biol
Psychiatry. 2009 Apr 30;33(3)A35-49. Epub 2009 Jan 22.

5 The purpose of the present study was to investigate the preventive effects of
curcumin against acute pancreatitis (AP) induced by caerulein in Mouse and to
elucidate possible mechanism of curcurmin action. Curcurmin significantly
decreased the pancreas injury and reversed the elevation of serum amylase,
ALT and AST activities. Yu VVG, Xu G, Ren GJ, Xu X, Yuan HQ, Qi XL,
Tian KL. Preventive action of curcumin in experimental acute pancreatitis in
mouse. Indian J Med Res. 2011 Nov; 134(5):717-24.

----- PAGE 279 -----
Haridra 271

Yoga (Formulations)

Name Indications

Haridra khanda Shitapitta, Kandu

Haridradi kwatha Kaphajwara

Haridra churna Shwasa

Haridradi lepa Arshas

Haridradi varti Timira, Naktandya

Haridradya ghrata Kamala, Panduu

Botanial Name — Curcuma longa Linn.
Curcuma - Arabic name-Kurkum, longa - long.
Family— Zingiberaceae (See Appendix II for key features).
Kula - Haridra
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka — Kushthaghna varga, Vishaghna varga, Lekhaniya varga
Sushruta _Haridradi gana, Mustadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni.  Haritakyadi varga 196-197
Basonym of Drug
Haridra is yellow coloured.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. Utar-teauterar, that gear a |
Rhizome of Haridra is yellow and even flowers are also yellow coloured.
2. wat-cautant |
Haridra rhizome is yellow like that of gold.
3. fremen-femerticatearattetaect |
Turmeric is also known by names like Nisa, Rajani etc. owing to its yellow
coloured rhizome.

Properties and Actions

4. spftreat - gfrtart |

Haridra is efficacious anthelmintic drug.

----- PAGE 280 -----
272 Dravyaguna Vijnana

5. Peet - wikeatt fervtitor were |
Haridra is very potent antidiabetic drug.
6. orator - ae: det auitsem: |
Haridra is having attractive bright yellow colour.
7. Tart - taraft cenit centers ward: |
Haridra imparts colour to the cloth hence used for colouring.
8. aut ferenftrtt - aot fererrerate wargarcttfr
Haridra is one of the popular cosmetic.
9. ferorestt - Feoreercftter |
Haridra is effective antidote for poison.
10. 4 faentet - egareut fercrrererter srrererettfer |
aridra gives good look to the shops where it is sold.
11, Stftraftren-athtrairer eftort fire, searchers Wettsercare, |

Haridra is a best cosmetic substance liked by ladies.

Regional Names

Hindi Haldi

Habitat
Turmeric is cultivated extensively all over India
as acommerical crop.

Morphology
A tall herb root stock large, ovoid, with sessile,
cylindric tubers orange-coloured inside.

Leaves — Very large, in tufts up to 1.2 meter or
longer, including the petiole which is about as long
as the blade, oblong lanceolate, tapering to the base.

Inflorescence — Spike, 10-15 cm long, peduncle

Curcuma longa Linn.

----- PAGE 281 -----
Haridra 273

15 em or more, concealed by the sheating pertiole. Flowering bracts pale green, bracts of
coma tinged with pink.

Flowers — Pale yellow as long as bracts, Corolla tube has funnel shaped upper half
which is pinkish white.

Types
Bh.Pr.Ni. ~ 1, Haridra 2. Amraharidra 3, Vanaharidra 4, Daruharidra

Dathana = |. Pinda haridra 2. Daruharidra

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Rhizome of occurs in two forms: long turmeric consisting of lateral branches of the
rhizome and round turmeric which is the primary rhizome. The long turmeric is cylindri-
cal in shape, upto 7 cm long and 1.5 em broad and have a yellowish brown external
surface with small round root scars. The round turmeric is ovate, oblong or conical in
shape, 4 to 8 cm in length and 2 to 3 cm in diameter. Transversely cut portion of both the
forms shows a waxy surface of deep orange colour, having a central cylinder twice as
broad as the cortex. Ithas characteristic aromatic odour and bitter taste.

Curing of Haridra (Turmeric)

Fresh turmeric is cured for obtaining dry turmeric, The fingers are separated from
mother rhizomes. Mother rhizomes are usually kept as seed material. Curing involves
boiling of fresh rhizomes in water and drying in the sun. In traditional method of curing,
the cleaned rhizomes are boiled in water just enough to immerse them. Boiling is stopped
when froth comes out.

Shodhana-Samskara (Purification and Processing)

Ina vessel Bijapiira rasa and Kanji is taken and 10 g of lime is added then rhizomes
of Haridra (Curcuma longa) is immersed. Vessel is kept on fire and heated in a low flame
till the liquid gets dried. Then in a dolayantra Tila taila (Sesam oil) 150 ml and Gandhodaka
is filled and Swedana is done. Everyday oil should be changed. By this Haridra becomes
bright yellow and gets purified.

Drying

The cooked fingers are dried in the Sun by spreading them in 5-7 cm thick layers on
Bamboo mats or drying floor. A thinner layer is not desirable, as the colour of the dried
product may be adversely affected. During night time, the rhizomes should be heaped or
covered with material which provides aeration. It may take 10-15 days for the rhizomes to
become completely dry. Artificial drying, using cross-flow hot air at a maximum tempera-
ture of 600C also gives a satisfactory product. In the case of sliced turmeric, artificial

----- PAGE 282 -----
‘74 Dravyaguna Vijnana

drying has clear advantages in giving brighter colored product than sun drying which
tends to under go surface bleaching. The yield of the dry product varies from 10-30%
depending upon the variety and the location where the crop is grown and white fumes
appear giving out a typical odour. The boiling should last for 40-60 minutes when the
rhizomes turn soft. The stage at which boiling is stopped largely influences the colour and
aroma of the final product. Over cooking spoils the colour of the final product while
under-cooking renders the dried product brittle.

Scientific method

The cleaned fingers (Approximately 50 kg) are taken in a perforated through of 0.9
m x 0.5 m x 0.4 m size made of GI or MS sheet with extended paralled handle. The
perforated trough containing the finger is then immersed in a pan; 100 liters of water is
poured into the trough so as to immerse the turmeric fingers. The whole mass is boiled till
the fingers become soft. The cooked fingers are taken out of the pan by lifting the trough
and draining the water into the pan.

Polishing

Dried turmeric has a poor appearance and a rough dull outer surface with scales and
root bits. The appearance is improved by smoothening and polishing the outer surface by
manual or mechanical rubbing.

Manual polishing consists of rubbing the dried turmeric fingers on a hard surface.
The improved method is by using a hand operated barrel or drum mounted on a central
axis, the sides of which are made of expanded metal mesh. When the drum filled with
turmeric is rotated, polishing is effected by abrasion of the surface against the mesh as
well as by mutual rubbing against each other as they roll inside the drum. Turmeric is also
polished in power operated drums. The yield of polished turmeric from the raw material
varies from 15-25%.

Classical references
Synonyms

afta aaraat tat Proms swe arate | aaftrett geret arfirferar esteem 1
(a5. Rites TT 196)

Properties and Actions

aftar meen ferent waitor Haftrge | aval waraleterst MATT SATTTTNT
(ara. eae eT 197)

----- PAGE 283 -----
Haridra 275

areas after:

arene ear ar ar gitar areren wer 1 fireearepe ferent actanrgferifordt 1
(ony, wtterrate at 199)

anette:

BRUGES: PSATATT ATTA: 1 (AT. wlkraenfe at 200)

ght wad feat Sato faateqd | HusHeaorata eeautfeenfestt 1

fastert after traraterartrt | (ef. Weert 55-56)

fren frat Hear avator arate | cogaroredttecarare ferrets.

(b.F. arafeert 1115)

aft agra awareHsad | teaver eta eeavtferenfet
(aA. frorerafert 199)
aaratordtal etestattrst carat Verarateterrerrary | (A.A. mergeafeat 170)
HIRE
atatehtaracat ear fared Waeet eae, | STAT HEAT UF eR: FeraATAAT AeT
(B.A. margeneat 170)
attr ge
TAA Uergu Waa UBecieh | ya: Eade aeeded waa |
TRIM Yee Ves Tet we fated: (AL. aTTenfPafeaca 447)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Haridra
a. Mula b. Kanda c. Patra d. Phala
Ans: b. Kanda
2. Pradhana Karma of Haridra
a. Jwaraghna b. Kasahara c. Varnya d. Atisaraghna
Ans: c. Varnya
3. Combination of Nisha and Amalaki is indicated in
a. Kasa b. Kushtha c. Shotha d., Prameha
Ans: d. Prameha

—

----- PAGE 284 -----
276

Dravyaguna Vijnana

. Haridra Khanda is specifically indicated in

a. Shitapitta b. Netra roga c. Jwara d. Atisara
Ans: a, shitapitta

. Botanical name of Haridra

a, Curcuma zedoria b. Curcuma longa
c. Andrographis paniculata d. Piper longum
Ans: b. Curcuma longa

. Hattavilasini and Vyoshati priya are the synonyms of

a. Kumkuma b. Manjishta c. Haridra d. Lodhra
Ans: c. Haridra

. Habit of Haridra

a. Shrub b. Creeper c. Tree d. Herb
Ans: d. Herb

. Types of Haridra as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu

a. 3 b. 4 c. 5 d. 7
Ans: b. 4

----- PAGE 285 -----
Haritaki

Useful part — Phaia (Fruits),
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Rasayana, Medhya, Caksushya, Brhmana, Anulomana, Shwasahara, Kasahara,
Pramehahara, Arsoghna, Kushthagna, Shothahara, Krimighna, Vibandhahara,
Trishnanigraha, Chardighna, Kandughna, Hradya, Shulahara, Lekhana, Dipana,
Pachana, Vayasthapaka, Smritiprada, Jwarahara, Vranahara.

Agrya Karma

Bttaent Wea | (FF. 25/40)

Haritaki (Terminalia chebula Linn.) is highly conducive.

Pharmacological Actions

Antimicrobial, Antifungal, Antibacterial, Antistress, Antispasmodic, Hypotensive,
Hypolipidemic, Anthelmintic, Purgative, Cytoprotective, Cardiotonic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka, Pitta
Shamaka because of Madhura vipaka and Kashaya rasa. Kapha Shamaka owing to

Ushna virya and Kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Indications)
Vibandha, Shwasa, Kasa, Prameha, Arshas, Kushttha, Netraroga, Shotha, Krimi,

Chardi, Shula, Agnimandya & as a Rasayana.

1. Parinama sila (Duodenal ulcer)

Myst Padget warade ar etterenty | (H1..FE. 30/51)

Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) taken with jaggery and sugar relieves Parinama shula.

----- PAGE 286 -----
278 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Vatavyadhi (Disorder of Viita)

wvat pfrererer eat yprayet firteterery, | (31.aFa. 21/41)

Regular usage of Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) with cow’s urine cures Vatavyadhi.
(Disorders of Vara).

3. Atisweda (Excessive sweating)
etaat g after meyadier: | war ert wei Betas II
(ar.y.Fa. 39/75)

Paste of Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) is anointed on the body, then taken bath, will
check Atishweda (Excessive perspiration).

4. Vibandha (Constipation)

TSA at TSA aT avatar: | (aA. 12/27)

Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) taken with jaggery relieves Vibaddha varca (Consti-
pation).
5. Chardi (Vomiting)

foray aes ars | (af. 20/21)

Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) powder taken with honey will check Chardi (Vomit-
ing).
6. Arshas (Piles)
Treghrat cere AST at attranhy | elrant agar Braet at watsrag
(a.Fa. 14/67)
Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) is kept in Cow’s urine then mixed with jaggery if
taken cures Arshas (Piles).

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) — 1g (Rasayanartha)

Churna (Powder) — 6g (Shodhanartha)

Kwatha(Decoction) - 30to50ml
Phytoconstituents

Chebulic myrobalan is an important source for Tannin. It contains upto 32% of
Tannin (Hydrolysable) and on hydrolysis yield chebulic acid and d-galloyl glucose. Other
constituents include chebulagic acid, chebulinic acid, gallic acid, sorbitol, ethyl gallate,
punicalagin terflavin A, Terchebin.

----- PAGE 287 -----
Research Index

|

w

3

4

5

a Haritaki 279
mae

a a

Chebulic acid was Selected, as tannj
antidiabetic, renoprotective ‘tte )
inhibitor, Objective: The study c
ischemia reperfusion induced bio

ns from Terminalia chebula are used as
xidant, hypotensive and a-glucosidase
valuated the effect of chebulic acid on

+ rags chemical alteration in diabetic rats. The
statistical dat : ion in diabetic
. data indicated that chebulic acid at both doses (25 and 50 mg/kg)

improves bi ics .

a at N eee, alterations caused by renal ischemia in diabetic rats.

Einelnint ‘ in cave Chebulic acid attenuates ischemia reperfusion induced
cal alteration in diabetic rats, Pharm Biol. 2012 Sep 10.

~ present study has evaluated the healin g effects of extract of dried fruit pulp
e Terminalia chebula (TCE) on acetic acid (AA)-induced colitis in rats. TCE
indicated the Presence of active Principles with proven antioxidants, anti-
inflammatory, immunomodulatory, and free radical scavenging and healing
properties. Thus, TCE seemed to be safe and effective in healing experimental
colitis. Gautam MK, Goel S, Ghatule RR, Singh A, Nath G, Goel RK.
Curative effect of Terminalia chebula extract on acetic acid-induced

experimental colitis: role of antioxidants, free radicals and acute inflammatory
marker. Inflammo-pharmacology. 2012 Sep 7.

In the present study, we firstly compared rat intestinal a-glucosidase inhibitory
activity by different ethanol-aqueous extractions from the dried fruits of
Terminalia chebula Retz. The results presented here suggest that chebulagic
acid from T. chebula can be used to control blood glucose and manage type
2 diabetes, although clinical trials are needed. Huang YN, Zhao DD, Gao B,
Zhong K, Zhu RX, Zhang Y, Xie WJ, Jia LR, Gao H. Anti-Hyperglycemic
Effect of Chebulagic Acid from the Fruits of Terminalia chebula Retz. Int J
Mal Sci. 2012;13(5):6320-33. Epub 2012 May 22.

Terminalia chebula fruit extracts were prepared sequentially with hexane, ethyl
acetate, methanol and methanol-water (70:30) and tested for their ?-glucosidase
inhibitory and antioxidant potential. The results indicated the ‘possibility of
using the extract as a nutraceutical health supplement in the management of
type 2 diabetes. Sasidharan I, Sundaresan A, Nisha VM, Kirishna MS, Raghu
KG, Jayamurthy P. Inhibitory effect of Terminalia chebula Retz. fruit extracts
on digestive enzyme related to diabetes and oxidative stress. J Enzyme inhib
Med Chem. 2012 Aug;27(4):578-86. Epub 2012 Apr. 18.

The objective of this study is to explore the optimal extraction and purification
technology (OEPT) of tannins, while studying the use of this drug in the
treatment of a cutaneous wound of rat as well as its antibacterial effects. The
results suggest that tannin extracts from dried immature fruits of Terminalia

----- PAGE 288 -----
280 Dravyaguna Vijnana

chebula Fructus Retz, can promote cutaneous wound healing in rats, probably
resulting from a powerful anti-bacterial and angiogenic activity of the extracts.
Li K, Diao Y, Zhang H, Wang S, Zhang Z, Yu B, Huang S, Yang H. Tannin
extracts from immature fruits of Terminalia chebula Fructus Retz. promote
cutaneous wound healing in rats. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2011 Oct
7;11:86.

Yoga (Formulations)

Name Indications

Haritakyadi kwatha Vibandha, Mutrakracchra
Haritaki khanda AshtavidhaShula, Amlapitta

SI.No.

;

; ;

[6 Vator Gugguli
;
ra
Ls]

Chitraka Haritaki Gulma, Udavarta
Agastya Harta
Habitat

Haritaki tree is found all over India especially in forests of North India, Central
provinces and South India.
Bhavamishra has given habitat for individual varieties of Haritaki.

Arochaka, Udararoga

Name/Type | Distribution

Vijaya Vindhya mountain
Chetaki Himalayan region
Sindhu region

1 Tv

----- PAGE 289 -----
Haritaki

Morphology

Moderate to large sized deciduous tree, attaining height
upto 90 ft, youngest leaves, branchlets and leaf buds have
soft, shining, generally rust coloured hairs.

Leaves — 7 to 20 cm long and 4 to 8 cm wide, gla-
brous or nearly so when mature, not clustered, distant, al-
ternate or subopposite, elliptic-oblong, acute, rounded or
cordate at base, penninerved, secondary nerves 6-8 pairs,
arching, prominent, petioles are 2 to 5 cm long, pubescent
usually with two glands near the top.

Inflorescence — Spikes sometimes simple, usually in
short panicles, terminal and in the axils of the uppermost
leaves.

Flowers — All hermaphrodite, 4 mm, across, sessile, dull white or yellow with an
offensive smell. Bracts are exceeding the flowers, subulate or lanceolate, hairy, conspicu-
ous, among the buds but soon deciduous. Calyx is campanulate, 3 mm long, flat at the
base expanding a little towards the mouth, glabrous outside, hairy within.

Fruit - Pendulous drupe, 2-4 cm long, ellipsoid or obovoid from a broad base,
glabrous, more or less 5-ribbed, when dry becomes yellowish green.

Seed — Oblong, bony, very thick and obscurely angled.

Bark — Bark is 6 mm thick, dark brown with many generally shallow vertical cracks.

Wood — Wood is very hard, brownish grey, with a greenish or yellowish tinge, with
an irregular small dark purple heartwood, close grained.

Botanical Name — Terminalia chebula Retz.

Terminalia —Proceeding from the extremity at the end.

chebula — Distorted form of the world Kabul.

Family— Combretaceae.

Kula - Haritaki
Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Kasaharavarga, Virechanopaga varga, Arshoghna varga,
Vayasthapana varga, Kushthaghna varga, Jwarahara varga,
Prajasthapana varga, Hikkanigrahana varga

Sushruta Amalakyadi gana, Mushkakadi gana, Vachadi gana, Parushakadi
gana, Mustadi gana, Triphala

Bh.Pr.Ni — Haritakyadi varga 6-35

Terminalia chebula Retz.

----- PAGE 290 -----
282

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug
wafer were, center gate sorely weragren aaatsitarectter
Haritaki evacuates Mala (Impurity) and cures the diseases.
BRET AY HAM, BALeTT Rae: | ee Tel Tis ce: Ger Beret

Haritaki is very auspicious drug which cures all the diseases.

Synonyms
Habitat

‘lly

drach - erate aguerarat ATT |

Haritaki is commonly growing in Himalaya.

Properties and Actions

2

11.

AMAT - TAS cael VaATSM: Tareas SarPeraferreren care |

Consuming Haritaki rejuvenates the body and wards off fear for diseases.

_ SAAT - ata Herero, Tareas refer wheres |

Haritaki has rejuvenation quality and protects from old age disorders.

. sate - aterat

Haritaki is efficacious drug and never fails in showing action for the purpose
it is used.

_ HTM - AAT Yet Wat at: F AAT HAAN: , YET WHATS |

Vyatha means pain, Haritaki relieves pain.

. area - ae: weahtaseran, auifarcratt | art arava tarrercitter,

aeaearetcre: |

Haritaki promotes health and postpones old age.

. Beteat - cererter Fert watererchtter |

Haritaki sharpens the mind.

. Sart - taxt gow arate, careerentcae, | STEER TATERT |

Haritaki brings back normalcy and promotes strength.

, teat - ofa: atten Rar, weatsater at, Aa: aerate:

Haritaki is very much conducive to the channels and never harm mind and
body.

_yRAt ~ yet ged ali

Haritaki is cleansing the body.

Tat - ear Veet; carers aftorey emer Teeter at |

----- PAGE 291 -----
Haritaki 283

13.

16.

Haritaki has healing power and nourishes the tissues because of its
rejuvenating qualitics.

. aan - aaa Rar aaeareticash: |

Haritaki promotes longevity.
fersrar - fargteor yetrederat srefer Tomer

Haritaki over comes the diseases from its root.

. UT - USAT TAT BET: |

Haritaki has five rasa (Tastes).

. Seat - atferrere |

Haritaki is best and auspicious drug.

Brat - Hea |

Haritaki always does well to the person who consumes it.

Regional Names

SI-No.

Harad

Alalekayi

Bheda/Type. --Lakshana (Characters) Prayoga (Utility)

Chebulic myrobalan

Alabu vratta(oval) Sarva roga (all diseases)
Vratta(Round) Vranaropaka (Wound healing

Mamsala (bulky) Shodhanartha (for purification

Pancharekha (Five lines Akshiroga (Eye diseases)
Swarnavarna (Yellow Sarvarogahara (Useful in all dis
coloured) eases)

Trirekha (Three lines over} Churnartha (For preparaing
it) powder)

Asthimati Sukshma (Small__| Pralepanartha (for external ap
but with large seed) plication)

----- PAGE 292 -----
284 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Note :— Chetaki is again of two types Shukla and Krashna, Shukla is six Angula
long and Krashna is of one Angula long.

Kaiyyadeva Nighantu: 3 types
1. Niraja 2. Vanaja 3. Parvatiya

Bh.Pr.Ni-— 1. Vijaya - Victorious
2. Rohini - Regenerating and healing
3. Putana - Scantifying
4, Amruta - Nector like
5. Abhaya - Conferring (Fearlessness from diseases)
6. Jivanti - Life giving
7. Chetaki - Animating, stimuiating

Market varieties—

1. Small — Stone less

2. Yellow — Having stones but immature

3. Big — Fully matured

Various species—

1. Terminalia citrina 2. Terminalia angustifolia

3. Terminalia gangetica 4. Terminalia tomentosa

Pancharasa Sthana (Sites of 5 tastes)

1 Madhura Majja Fruit pulp

2 Amla Snayu Fibrous part

3 Tikta Vranta Base of fruit

4 Katu Twaca Outer skin

5 Kashaya Asthi Seed

Prashasta Haritaki (Qualities of Best Haritaki)

1. Nava (New)

2. Snigdha (Unctuous)

3. Ghana (Hard)

4. Vratta (Round)

5. Gurvi (With weight)

6. Ambasi nimejjasa (Sinks in water)

Ae)

. Dwikarsha (Weighing 22 gm) — Double the weight of Vibhitaki.
Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):
Two types of fruits are available in the trade. Large sized fruit and small sized fruit.

----- PAGE 293 -----
Haritaki 285

Large sized fruits consisting of semi-mature fruits which are upto 8 cm long and 2.5
cm in diameter at the thickest part. These are oblong, ovoid or club shaped, with a longi-
tudinally wrinkled surface of greenish yellow or golden brown colour, having five ribs
running from apex to the base. The fruit contains a single stony seed or light yellow
colour.

The small sized variety of young immature fruits are upto 2.5 cm long and 8 mm
broad at the thickest part, Ovoid or often dorsally compressed with a longitudinally wrinkled
surface and dark brown to black colour. It doesn’t have any odour and has astringent
taste.

Ritu Haritaki

To achieve Rasayana karma one has to consume Haritaki with different Anupana

(Vehicle) in different Ritu (Season). This is a unique concept in Ayurveda.

Ritu (Season) Anupana (Vehicle)
Varsha (Rainy season) Saindhava lavana (Rock salt)
Shunt Ginge

Shisira (Late winter) Kana (Long pepper)
Madhu (Honey)

Dosha Haratwa Anupana
Kaphahara Saindhava lavana (Rock salt)
Vatahara Ghrata (Ghee)

Haritaki Bhakshananarha (Contraindications)

1. Adhwatikhinna — Tired of walking

2. Balavarjita — Weak

3. Ruksha — One, who has dryness in his/her body
4. Krasha — Lean

5.Langhnakarshita - Tired of observing fasting

6. Pittadhikya — Excessive aggravation of Pitta

7. Garbhavati — Pregnant

----- PAGE 294 -----
286 Dravyaguna Vijnana

8. Vimukta raktata ~ One who underwent blood letting.

Haritaki Prayoga Bhedena Phalabheda
1. Charvita — Chewed and swallowed increases Agni.

. Peshita (Powder) — When triturated acts as Malashodhaka (Purifies faeces).

. Swinna — When boiled acts as Sangrahi (Astringent).

. Bhrishta — When fried acts as Tridosha Shamaka (Counters Triodosha).

. Sahabhojana - When taken with food, it Unmilini buddhi, Bala, Indriyanam
(Improves intellect, Strength and functions of sense organs) Nirmulini, Pitta
kaphanilan. (Passifies Tridosha), Visramsini mutra, Shakranmalanam
(Evacuates faeces and acts as diuretic).

6. Pashchat bhojana — Annapanakratandoshan vatapitta, Kaphodbhavan Harati

(Alleviates the diseases occured because of improper food and also alleviates
Triodosha).

ne Ww Ye

Classical references

Synonyms
UAT UAT HALT YAS AT | Saar ale cheat sere fear
aera faster aft sfaeht Ceuta au (ay. erate wt 6-7)

Types, Origin and Characters

fasrar Oat Ser year aes aT | Ser erat Vela Te: ATTA:

feet fase arate KArearat TAT

ferret care Taft Pera stat fears

TOTALS HAT ST TAT BS TTR hterchtfer ater Prafeeer wet WAT FA:

AAUTTA PISA THT AT Aah Sy TASHA HAA AAAS TAT

URE Ghat sash cautahott | rear erent gar ara:
(a3. Siaeae FT 8-10)

Utility of Seven types of Haritaki
fase uditty tut aontot | wet yaar ater wereisget feat U
aifaittsaat gre stat aattrert, | eotsh ehtaat gre Taga Wasa
Sreteat fafa TAT POT eT ATA: STATA YS HOM ARTA STAT
RACKATEHTAM cial Vea | ibaa PASAT Ua Aeakesar
arairerearaquaded af am: 1 fed mearmed ugqufapie: i

----- PAGE 295 -----
He ari aki 287

Sire ye ret arathaths aft: Laetigite teg erento r
TAT THAN GMAT eae | Stat wea great feet qeaherrect i
(ain. aflrarate at 11-18)

Properties and Actions
Siva TSMIseaIT Gat TEL | Realtor dot tear wargurent Tart
aya cesT Gault arqeifiet 1 areemreawtert: qyeviaterse

wet rat | wurarrens frat aera i
aqht: frensteret argef Pratseat | sated mh: areal sears ea: I
ata ate Fares ertterperaetan (ars. Areas FF 19-26)
HUTA T eer ferret Teyana | shet TTAT Tea rears fereahStar
aretararasragaret ft weer | ah BAHASA AAS AAT UI
woe cet weet Heat Vasa Ter | AepEAUTeofeeiaraest ea, |
aragemt get APs were 1 dadorratigrnt aha aticet

(oF. Weeaeat 203-206)

war frau Waray Gakiener | TgUHcagen wate seat wy:
datos uret tear aererzarost UAT

eae eae a eat inet cee eee oe

wmareraecared fret ght Aietent | esa ETAT AMAT: TAA:

USHA: PHAM TAT: | TAS MATRA ATTAIN TS: Ul
(fr. asf at 222-229)

iret waar Bram | eters wet free doar

fire arr eeett ar 1 aghoenet gait

amiteraaadaregat Aa | eft vers uegs dead ara
(B.A. aaeeneat 3-5)

----- PAGE 296 -----
288 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Sites of 5 tastes

Weare ASAT Cag: ATT orate: | PrafereneaeHSLLATAT TH:
(ais. aternfect 27)

Qualities of best Haritaki
warhtaren wat gary freer a arse 1 Pras ware wt afresh WoT
aararaed aders fratar 1 gira: wert get TeeETEAM I
(a3. sterate aT 28-29)
Properties of Haritaki in different forms
after aaah after werent | Rar danfeoht wear yer wire fraterye.
sahtert ghgactrant Pritt fray |
fret qatar etitent SI AEM II
TAMAS AAS, eich ara ArHeaaR arfetar

wate ats ea fet eat Berke | gat ara TreyStPaar
(a3. Rite at 30-33)

Ritu Haritaki
Reparhuguetnmeys: HAT | aatfesrsra wivet TareRTOT TTT
(15. Brae TT 34)
Contraindications

sreatfahtaat aeratsitar Bart: Ht cyt HAMA |
firatttrent stadt at art ferret ease A Gree Ut (ATT. Shirai at 3 5)
Unsuitable Haritaki
WRTET caTereant Weiss feria: | Het a erat Prat askirg etry
(df. siete +234)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Haritaki
a. Patra b. Mula c. Phala d. Pushpa
Ans: c. Phala

2. Rasa which is absent in Haritaki
a. Madhura b. Lavana c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: b. Lavana

----- PAGE 297 -----
10.

11.

12.

Haritaki
. Pradhana rasa of Haritaki
a. Lavana b. Madhura c. Katu
Ans: d. Kashaya
. Haritaki is best
a. Visha vardhaka b. Rasayana c. Vrashya

Ans: b. Rasayana

. Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) taken with jaggery relieves

a. Vibaddha varcha b. Jwara c. Kasa
Ans: a. Vibaddha Varcha

. Agastya Haritaki is indicated

a. Atisara b. Kushtha c. Bhagna
Ans: d. Shwasa

. Vijaya variety of Haritaki is growing in

289

d, Kashaya

d. Vishahara

d. Shotha

d. Shwasa

a. Himalaya region b. Vindhya region c. Champa regiond. Sindhu

region
Ans: b. Vindhya region

. Botanical Name of Haritaki

a. Terminalia belerica b. Terminalia arjuna
c. Terminalia chebula_ d. Curcuma longa
Ans: c. Terminalia chebula

. Pathya is the synonym of

a. Amalaki b. Vibhitaki c. Arjuna
Ans: d. Haritaki

Abhaya is the synonym of

a. Vibhitaki b. Haritaki c. Amalaki
Ans: b. Haritaki

Types of Haritaki as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu

a. 5 b. 6 c.7

Ans: ¢.7

Variety of Haritaki having Mamsala (bulky) lakshana
a. A. Putana b. Amrata c. Abhaya

Ans: b. Amrata

d. Haritaki

d. Arjuna

d. 4

d. Chetaki

----- PAGE 298 -----
290 Dravyaguna Vijnana

13. In Varsha rutu Haritaki to be taken with
a, Sharkara b. Pippali c. Saindhava lavana d. Shunthi
Ans: ¢c. Saindhaya Layana

14. In Sharad Rutu Haritaki to be taken with
a. Pippali b. Saindhavalavana c. Guda d, Sharkara
Ans: d. Sharkara

15. In Hemanta Rutu Haritaki to be taken with
a. Shunthi b. Guda c. Sharkara d. Pippali
Ans: a. Shunthi

16. In Shishira Rutu Haritaki is to be taken with
a. Shunthi b. Pippali c. Saindhava Lavana d. Guda
Ans: b. Pippali

17. In Vasanta Rutu the Haritaki to be taken with
a. Guda b. Shunthi c. Pippali d. Madhu
Ans: d. Madhu

18. In Grishma Rutu the Haritaki is to be taken with
a. Shunthi b. Guda c. Madhu d. Pippali
Ans : b. Guda

19. Swinna Haritaki is
a. Agni Dipaka b. Mala shodhka c. Sangrahi d. Tridosha hara
Ans: c. Sangrahi

20. Charvita Haritaki is

a. Mala shodhaka b. Agni dipaka c. Tridosha hara d. Sangrahi
Ans: b. Agni Dipaka

----- PAGE 299 -----
v

Hingu

Useful part - Niryasa (Exudate)

Rasa panchaka

Laghu, Tikshna

Vipaka Katu

Karma (Actions)
Pachana, Ruchya, Krimighna, Shulahara, Hradya, Dipana, Kasahara, Shwasahara,
Chakshushya.

Agrya Karma

feghratarsettardtttargetraranth errr | (5.9, 25/40)
Hingu (Ferula narthex Boiss.) is Chedana, Dipana (Appetizer), Anulomana (Car-
minative) and pacify Vata and Kapha dosha

Pharmacological actions

Carminative, Nurvine stimulant, Antimicrobial, Antiepileptic, Anthelmintic, Con-
traceptive, Diaphoretic.
Doshakarma (Action on dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka, Vatahara because of its Ushna virya and Kaphahara because
of Katu Tikta Rasa and Ushna virya.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Agnimandya, Shula, Gulma, Udara, Anaha, Krimi, Hidroga, Kasa, Shwasa,
Vibandha, Netra roga, Karna Shula.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Madatyaya (Alcoholism)

aad Haetet card Beh Terenas: | ARUN MATA TH Ara AeTMATETT

(Aq. 24/49)

If patient fell unconscious after the consumption of alcohol then Sauvarcala salt

----- PAGE 300 -----
292 Dravyaguna Vijnana

should be mixed with Hingu (Ferula narthex) & Marica (Piper nigrum) given with wine
and sour gruel till the patient regains consciousness.

2. Unmada (Insanity)

fee egret er enter et ere ras, Pet rere re TT ATA:
(a.Fa. 9/57)

Ghee processed with Hingu niryasa (Latex of Ferula narthex), Leaves of Hingu
(Ferula narthex), Kayastha (Elettaria cardamomum) and Vayastha (Bacopa monneiri)
may be used. Other wise Ghee processed with Vayastha (Bacopa monneiri), Hingu (Ferula
narthex) and Coraka (Angelica glauca) is also very useful.

3. Karna shkula (Bar ache)
fesrarte deny | (af. 26/213)

Hingu is the important ingredient of Hifigvadi taila which is used in Karn shula (Ear
ache).

Matra (Dosage)
Churha_ - 125 to 500 mg
Phytocenstituents:
Asafoetida contains resin (40 to 65%), gum (20 to 25%) and volatile oil (4 to 20%).

Resin mainly contains asaresinotanol. Where as oil contains butyl propanyl disulphide,
disulphides, trisulphides, pinene and terpenes.

Research corner

1. The properties of essential oils obtained from Ferula asafOetida oleo-gumresins
(OGRs) collected in three collections times in 15 june (OGR1), 30 June
(OGR2) and 15 July (OGR3) 2011 was investigated. Essential oil from OGR1
was constituted high levels of (E)-1-properny] sec-butyl disulfide (23.9%) and
10-epi-y-eudesmol (15.1%). Essential oil from OGR2 was constituted high
levels of (Z)-1-propenyl sec-butyl disulfide (27.7%). Kavoosi G, Rowshan V.
Chemical composition, antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of essential oil
obtained from Ferula asafoetida oleo-gum-resin: Effect of collection time-
“ Food Chem. 2013 Jun 15;138(4):2180-7. doi:10.1016/j.food chem. 2012.11.

131. Epub 2012 Dec 29.

2. The study aimed to evaluate the activity of asafoetida against the in vitro

growth of Blastocystis sp. Asafoetida as powder-form (Ap) and oil-form (Ao)
extracts at concentrations of 2, 4, 8, 16, and 20 mg/ml and 5, 10, 25, 40 and

----- PAGE 301 -----
Hingu 293
50 mg/ml, respectively were incubated with isolates of Blastocystis sp, subtype
3 for 24, 72 and 144 h and compared to the reference antiprotozoan drug
metronidazole at concentrations of 10, 100 and 500 ?g/ml, These findings
demonstrate the potential of phytomedicine asafoctida as a potent natural
alternative for treatment of Blastocystis sp. infection. El Deeb HK, Al
Khadrawy FM, Abd El-Hameid AK. Inhibitory effect of Ferula asafoetida L.
(Umbellifers) on Blastocystis sp. subtype 3 growth in vitro. Parasitol Res. 2012
Spe; 111 (3):1213-21. doi: 10.1007/s00436-012-2955-1. Epub 2012 May 15.

. Memory loss is universal and is the first symptom to manifest in majority of the
patients suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. This study is designed to
investigate the effect of Ferula asafoetida linn. (F. foetida) extract on learning
and memory in rats. Memory enhancing potential of F. foetida can be attributed
to acetylcholinesterase inhibiting and antioxidant properties. Hence, dietary
usage of F. foetida is beneficial and can also be employed as an adjuvant to
existing anti-dementia therapies. Vijayalakshmi, Adiga S, Bhat P, Chaturvedi
A, Bairy KL, Kamath S. Evaluation of the effect of Ferula asafoetida Linn.
gum extract on learning and memory in Wistar rats. Indian J. Pharmacol]. 2012
Jan; 44(1):82-7. doi.: 10.4103/0253-7613.91873.

4, The Ferula genus (Umbelliferae) is a rich source of gum-resin and is much
utilized in folklore medicine. This study is designed to examine antioxidant and
antihaemolytic activities of Ferula foetida regel flower, stem and leaf extracts.
This study showed remarkable antioxidant and antiahemolytic activities in
Feruia foetida. Biological effects may be attributed to the presence of phenols
and flavonoids in the extract. It is very promising for further biochemical
experiments. Nabavi SM, Ebrahimzadeh MA, Nabavi SF, Eslami B, Dehpour
AA. Antioxidant and antihaemolytic activities of Ferula foetida regel
(Umbelliferae). Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2011 Feb; 15(2):157-64.

Yoga (Formulations)
SI.No.

1
3
ar

uw

Indications

Agnimandya, Gulma
Udara roga, Gulma

Formulation

Hingvashtaka churna

Hingutriguna taila

Ayaskriti Prameha, Pandu
Chitrakadi vati Agnimandya

Hingvadya taila Yoni Shula, Krachrartava

cr aa 7 a rT!
Hingvadi gutika Vata Shula

----- PAGE 302 -----
294 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name — Ferula foetida Linn.
Ferula — Giant funnel
foetida - With foul smell
Family- Apiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Shatapushpa kula
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka — Shwasahara, Dipaniya, Sanjnasthapana, Krimighna
Sushruta —_ Pippalyadi gana, Ushakadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni — Haritakyadi Varga 100-101

Basonym of Drug
fog Ralfa vftet create ara, aed a ean, feet and at Ug Teale Bier aT
Hingu which will be perceived quickly by nose because of its penetrating quality, it
gets increased by itself and alleviates Kapha dosha and cold.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. TAH - TAH Sgt TTT |
Available in Bahlika desa (Punjab province of Pakistan).
Morphology
2. Wqw - wat wrgvater qaret TRAM eet Ag Agee a |
Hifgu is a resinous exudate from the plant.
Properties
3. STITT - SATA AT AT |
Hifgu has very strong odour.
4, WA - Hingu kills worms.
5. Wyte - Hingu destroys worms.
6. Weaater - Hingu has got very strong odour that it cannot be covered by any

means.

Regional names

English Asafoetida, Devil’s dung

----- PAGE 303 -----
Hingu 295

Marathi |: SE
Habitat

Hingu is cultivated in Afghanistan and Iran. In India it is growing in Punjab and
Kashmir.

Morphology
Habit — Perennial herb
Root — Fusiform
Stem — 5 to 8 ft. tall.

Leaves — Pubescent when young, lower leaves are 30
to 60 cm long, ovate shaped. Cauline sheaths are large, from
which inflorescence comes out. Secondary & tertiary pin-
nate are decurrent, entire or very irregularly crenate-serrate.

Inflorescence — Terminal compound umbel.

Fruit — 8x5 mm, having vittae, reddish-brown in colour.

Varieties
As such there is no variety mentioned for Hingu, but
depending on the material sold in the market it is of two kinds. Berula narthex
1. White 2. Black
Different species used for Hingu along with ferula foetida.
1. Ferula jaeschkeana 2. Ferula thomsoni
3. Ferula galbaniflua 4, Ferula sumul
5. Ferula suaveolens 6. Ferula persica

7. Ferula alliaceae

Grahya Laxana (Charecteristics of market sample):

The mass will be gummy or waxy; will have differnt sizes and shapes. Surface is
smooth, dull opaque or vitreous, ranging from light brown to chocolate in colour, when
we break it becomes pieces exposing a waxy surface with numerous cavities, more often
filled with glossy resinous material, thin pieces are translucent. It has got strong aromatic
odour, tastes pungent and bitter.

----- PAGE 304 -----
296 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Adulterants
Usually pebbels, mud; leaves and gum acacia are the things used as an adulterant.

Collection

The collection is done by laying bare the root stock to a depth of 4 to 5 cm of those
plants which have not reached their flowering stage. Then it is cut off as a slice from the
top of the root stock, from which at once a milky juice starts exuding, which is not col-
lected. The root then is covered over by a domed structue called ‘Khora’ formed of twigs
and covered with clay, leaving an opening towards the north, thus protecting the exposed
root from the rays of the sun. After six weeks, a thick gummy, reddish substance appeares
in more or less irregular lumps upon the exposed surface of the root, which is scaraped off
with a piece of iron hoop or removed along with a slice of root and at once placed in a
leather bed, the tanned skin of goat.

Classical references
Synonyms
TERA AIH sredteh fog MAST | (ALT. eirenfe TT 100)
Properties and actions
fegut wet wed dest arareregd | yerieiteresties fir
(ara. attaeafe + 107)
fegut wes eet wt arraat ety 1 eft Yer TARE UI
(oF. marqente at 37)
gut Rraned oor a chery | ag area
uret Hitastrartaraentese ui (a.F. state ef 1210-1211)
we fg mem a phtrardnnraey | erareeA ered AYR TAT Ut
(afr. frre FT. 74)
arget fig week Pract amartgd | cet Wome Yet MATA I
(B.A. etteenfe eT 151)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful Part of Hingu is
a. Mula b. Niryasa c. Pushpa d. Kanda
Ans: b. Niryasa

----- PAGE 305 -----
bo

1s)

wm

Hingu 297

. Chedana, Dipana (Appetizer), Anulomana (Carminative) and pacify Vata and

Kapha dosha is the Agrya Karma refers to
a. Chitraka b. Bhallataka c. Pippali d. Hingu
Ans: d. Hingu

. Hingwashtaka Churna is indicated in

a, Agnimandya b. Atisara c. Shotha d. Arshas
Ans: a. Agnimandya

Hingwadya Taila is specifically indicated in

a. Shiroroga b. Yoni shula c. Arshas d. Kushtha
Ans: b. Yoni shula

. Botanical Name of Hingu

a. Ficus lacor b. Azadirachta indica

c. Convolvulus pluricaulis d. Ferula narthex

Ans: d. Ferula narthex

Sahasravedhi is a synonym of

a. Nagakeshara b. Hingu c. Jiraka d. Jatiphala
Ans: b. Hingu

. Bahlika is the synonym of

a. Kumkuma b. Ativisha c. Hingu d. Lodhra
Ans: c. Hingu

. Habit of the Hingu is

a. Tree b. Shrub c. Creeper d. Herb
Ans: d. Herb

----- PAGE 306 -----
Chapter |

Jambu

Useful parts - Beeja (Seed), Phala (Fruit), Twak (Bark) and Patra (leaf).

Rasadi panchaka

Shita (Mahajambu is Ushna)

Karma (Action) - Sangrahi, Rochana, Kanthya, Vishtambhi, Lekhana, Daha
Shamaka, Shramahara, Krimighna, Shwasahara, Mehahara.
~ Mahajambu - Swarya, Shramahara, Atisaraghni, Shwasahara, Kasahara.
Kakajambu - Dahahara, Shramahara, Atisaraghni, Balya.
Bhumijambu - Hradya, Sangrahi, Balya.
Twak (Bark) — Sangrahi

Agrya Karma

Waa AAT | (AY. 25/40)

Jambu (Eugenia jambolana) increase Vata Dosha.

Pharmacological actives — Antidiarrhoeal, Antidiabetic, Antiinflammatory, Anti-
viral & Antipyretic.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha) - Kapha pitta Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to
Kashaya Rasa & Shita virya and Kapha Shamaka due to Kashaya Rasa & Katu vipaka.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Prameha, Atisara, Aruchi, Sthoulya, Daha, Shrama, Krimi and Shwasa.
Mahamabu - Swarabheda, Atisara, Shrama, Shwasa and Kasa.
Kakajambu — Daha, Shrama, Atisara & Dourbalya.
Bhumijambu - Atisara, Dourbalya & Hridroga
Jambu twak (Bark) —Atisara.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Raktapitta (Intrinsic haemorrhage)
fracdiaaerd a mraanfadvea, | sgraact fiear fernqrata aru

(Gs. 45/23)

----- PAGE 307 -----
Jambu 299

nen

In case of instrinsic haemorrhage cold infusion prepared from Jambu (Syzygium
cumini), Amra (Mangifera indica) and Arjuna (Terminalia arjuna) is very useful or
Udumbara (Ficus glomerata) Phala rasa (Fruti juice) is administered.

2. Chardi (Vomitting)

Wea: Urctast Hares Prete Belt wepeige ar 1 (af. 20123)

Decoction of tender leaves of Jambu (Syzygium cumini) and Amra (Mangifera in-
dica) is prepared. Once it is cooled add little honey and given for drink.

3. Atisara (Diarrhoea)
weaned facas Walt warm | terauss oreradtanr frand i
(a.fa. 81127)

Decoction prepared from Jambu seed of (Syzygium cumini), Amra bija (Seed Ker-
nel of Mangifera indica), Pulp of Bilva (Aegle marmelos), Kapittha (Feronium elephantum)
and Nagara (Zingiber officinale). This decoction is administered with liquid gruel.

4. Vrina Ropanartha (Wound healing)

BPN AMVAATIAAT HelHet: | ATA ATVAS VEThet rea AT: 1

(afa. 25/113)

Fine powder is prepared from barks of Kakubha (Terminalia arjuna), Udumbara
(Ficus glomerata), Ashwattha (Ficus religiosa), Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa), Jambu
(Eugenia jambolana) and Katphala (Myrica nagi). This powder is used for dusting over
wound. It improves healing of wound.

5. Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus)

Various researches conducted have proved that it is very useful in Mahumeha (Dia-
betes mellitus). Fine powder prepared from seeds of Jambu (Eugenia jambolana) | tsp to
be taken every day morning. Decoction prepared from bark is also very useful in
Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus).

Matra (Dosage)

Swarasa (Juice) — 10to20ml
Churna (Powder) -— 3to6gm
Phytoconstituents

Stem bark yielded friedelin, Kaempferol, Quercitin, -sitosterol, B-D-glucoside,
betullinic acid, gallo tannin, ellagi tannin, eugenin, epifriedelanol, Fruits yielded
delphinidin-3-gentiobioside and malvidin-3-laminaribioside.

----- PAGE 308 -----
300

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Leaves contain glycine, alanine, leucine and tyrosine. Flowers yielded Myricetin.3_

L-arabinoside and dehydromyricetin.

acol,

Seeds contain indoleacetic acid, gallic aci
heptacosane, n-nonacosane, n-triacontane, cra

d, oxalic acid, citric acid, glycollic acid, n.
tegolic acid, ellagic acid, corilagin, guaj.

resorcinol dimethyl ether, caffeic acid and ferulic acid.

Research corner

od

bod

t to evaluate the possible in vitro antibacterja|
bolana seeds against multidrug-resistant
human bacterial pathogens. The result provides justification for the use of £,

jambolana folk lore medicine to treat various infectious diseases and may

contribute to the development of novel antimicrobial agents for the treatment of
t bacterial pathogens. Bag A,

infection caused by these drug resistan
Bhattacharyya SK, Pal NK, Chattopadhyay RR. In vitro antibacterial potential
mbolana seed extracts against multidurg-resistant human bacterial

of Eugenia ja :
pathogens. Microbiol Res. 2012 Jun 20:167(6):352-7, doi; 10.1016/j. micres.

2012.02.005. Epub 2012 Mar 22.

Crude extracts of leaves and bark of E. jambolana were tested for antiviral
activity against highly pathogenic avain influenza virus (H5N1) by CPE
reduction assay in three different layouts to elucidate virucidal, post-exposure
and preexposure antiviral activity of the extracts. The significant virucidal
activity of leaves and bark of E. jambolan merits further investigation as it may
provide alternative antiviral agent for managing avaina influenza infections in
poultry farms and potential avian-human transmission, Sood R, Swarup D,
Bhatia S, Kulkarni DD, Dey S, Saini M, Dubey SC. Antiviral activity of curde
extracts of Eugenia jambolana Lam. against highly pathogenic avian influenza
(H5N1) Virus. Indian J Exp Biol. 2012 Mar; 50(3):179-86.

To evaluate the antihyperlipidaemic effects of Eugenia jambolana fruit pulp in
diet induced hyperlipidemic rats and to compare them with Simvastatin. In male
albino rats ethanolic extract of Eugenia jambolana fruit pulp was as effective
as simvastatin in lowering serum total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein
cholesterol and triglycerides and increasing high density lipoprotein cholesterol.
Bilal R, Zakaria M, Usman A, Aftab S, Zia A. Antihyperli-pidaemic effects of
Eugenia jambolana fruit in diet induced hyperlipidemia rats. J. Pak Med
Assoc. 2011 May; 61(5):433-7.

1. The present study was carried ou
potential of extracts of Eugenia jam

. To estimate the hepatoprotective effects of the methanolic seed extract of

Eugenia jambolana Lam. (Myrtaceae), in Wistar albino rats treated with carbon

----- PAGE 309 -----
Jambu 301

tetrachloride (CCl4), The study suggests preventive action of Eugenia
jambolana Lam. in carbon tetrachloride induced liver toxicity. Hepatic cell
regeneration process was dose dependent. Sisodia SS, Bhatnagar M.
Hepatoprotective activity of Eugenia jambolana Lam. in carbon tetrachloride
treated rats. Iidian J. Pharmacol, 2009. Feb; 41(1):23-7. doi: 10.4103/0253-
7613.48888.

Yoga (Formulations)

Formulation Indications

SILNo.
Madhumeha, Daha
Asragdhara, Shwetapradara
Botanical Name - Eugenia jambolana. Lam
Eugenia — after the name of the prince Eugene of Savoy, Patron of Botany.

jambolana — Derived from Sanskrit word Jambu.
Family — Myrtaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Lavanga kula

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka — Mutrasangrahaniya Varga, Purisha virajaniya varga, Cardinigrahana
varga

Sushruta Nyagrodhadi gana
Bh. Pr. Ni Amradi phala varga 69

WAS HAT: |
Fruit of Jambu (Eugenia jambolana) is edible.
Synonyms
Moershelecy
1. TERT - Wa HRS: |
Jambu (Eugenia jambolana) plant has very big and strong trunk.
2. dtergreedr - Ateraryect: TATTTT: |

----- PAGE 310 -----
302 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Jambu leaves of Jambu are bluish in colour.
3. Ahraar - Brera |
Jambu leaves have aroma.
4. Wentfectt - teafedt ster: aafenret waetrearAare, |
Fruiting season of Jambu (Eugenia jambolana) is Varsa ritu (Rainy season).
5. Tetnen - ether searHriht HeraeM: |
Jambu fruit is relatively big.
6. Atermett - Aerts tetra: |
Fruit of Jambu is bluish purple in colour.
7. HERS - WRATH: |
Jambu fruit is juicy.
Properties
8. ets: HOARE: TAT |
Jambu fruit is regarded as one of the best fruits.
Note - The fruit of Jambu is advised in Prameha.

Regional Names

Hind

Habitat

Jambu grows throughout India. It is also cultivated
in gardens as it yields fruits and gives good shade.

Morphology

Habit — An evergreen tree
Root - Tap root, branched.

Stem — Erect, woody, branched, thick, solid, cylin-
drical with grey bark. j

Leaf — Simple, opposite, stalked, ovate or ovate lan- Eugenia jambolana. Lan

----- PAGE 311 -----
Jambu 303

ceolate, 10-12 cm long and 3-4 cm wide, entire margin, acute tip, long pointed, petiolate,
exstipulate with unicostate reticulate venation, gland dotted.
Inflorescence — Panicle inflorescence

Flower — White, small, crowded on inflorescence, sepals are 4 in number, petals are
4-5, numerous stamens, much longer than sepals, 2 Carpels, syncarpous, inferior ovary,
bilocular axile placentation.

Fruit - Berry, succulent, globose or oblong, dark purple in colour.
Seed — Single, endospersmic.

Varieties
B.P.Ni— 1. Raja Jambu 2. Kshudra jambu
Ra.Ni.— 1. Jambu 2. Mahajambu

3. Kakajambu 4. Bhumijambu

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics market sample):

Dried fruit is ovoid or club shaped 2 to 2.5 cm long and upto 1.3 cm in diameter,
having a black or dark brown shrivelled skin enclosing the seed. The seed is ovoid, upto
2 cm long, with a brownish papery shell which encloses a dark brown kernel. It has not
got any characteristic odour and has astringent taste.

Classical references

Synonyms

TeTa-
wernt aera vet Ustad | det aefraat a verergefy GyAT
(AI. SEMfe Hea 69)
AAMaA- YA: TRA Aleeht Mera (ATT. see Herat 70)
Properties and Actions
Tasregae targ fergftsr ye Tay | (AT sae Herat 69)
weg: Banfeaht war aaftrrrararatste, 1 (A. sEMAe Heat 70)
Was Aas US aS HLA, | A HVS HTT ATA HAT RATTAN
(af. senfeet 78)
faster cred arafterasentne Yar |
meaayt fared qefeefter trey | vitar firracar crest wersrgeT
(af. ateftert 349-350)

----- PAGE 312 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

agrarrarcancnenre ferent a fereftsrtt water trerrorertt =

(afr, arerfeent 25)
Testry-
TENTS AAA set | freed aft asa caters I
feert fent yrafa a vite fearge | sardtantt afta waar wT
(aia. arafeet 27)
rH
BTSMG: HIATT Urs F AT Ye: | Tefen dtetyfeacwar
(w.ft. arafert 29)

afreng-
arse: HUTA et HET yer | EM Sees Veet ety fewer:

(w.F. srafert 31)
WHITH F HATA KATA aTfsaht yey | ARTA ET TEU ot Hey,
(Bait. atrenfert 234)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Vatajanana is the Agrya Karma attributed to
a. Hingu b. Jambu c. Nimba d. Jayapala
Ans: b. Jambu
2. Main indication of Jambu is
a. Jwara b. Atisara c. Prameha d. Kasa
Ans: c. Prameha
3. Jambvasava is indicated in
a. Atisara b. Kasa c. Shotha d. Madhumeha
Ans: d. Madhumeha
4. Jambvadi Taila is indicated in
a. Upadamsha b. Kushtha c. Kasa d. Prameha
Ans: a. Upadamsha
5. Botanical name of Jambu
a. Sida cordifolia b. Tecoma undulata

c.Eugeniajambolana __d. Pluchea lanceolata
Ans: c. Eugenia jambolana

----- PAGE 313 -----
Jambu 305

—_—

6. Nilanjana cchada is a synonym of
a. Dhanyaka b. Nimba c. Bhallataka d. Jambu
Ans: d, Jambu
7. Phalendra and Nilaphala are the synonyms of
a, Draksha b. Puga c. Jambu d. Kushmanda

Ans: c. Jambu
8. Habit of the Jambu Plant

a. Herb b. Tree c. Creeper d. Shrub
Ans: b. Tree

9. Types of Jambu as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu
a.2 b. 3 c.4 d. 5
Ans: a, 2

----- PAGE 314 -----
Japa

Useful parts - Pushpa (Flowers) and Patra (Leaves)
Rasadipanchaka

Ras [Rash Mara
Karma (Actions)

Keshya, Sangrahaka, Hridya, Shonitasthapana, Garbhanirodhaka,
Mutrasangrahaniya.
Pharmacological (Actions)

Antifertility, Antiinflammatory, Analgesic, Spasmolytic, Hypotensive, Antipyretic,
Antispasmodic, Antiviral, Antifungal and Antibacterial.
Dosha karma (Action on Desha)

Pittakapha Shamaka. Pittahara due to Shita virya and Kashaya madhura Rasa.
Kapha Shamaka because of Katu vipaka and Kashaya Rasa

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Khalitya, Palitya, Indralupta, Shiroroga, Hridroga, Raktapitta, Raktapradara,
Prameha.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Palitya (Premature greying of hairs)
Peace: STG: Berea | ulate a ovate agTEAate ATT Ut
(4.41. 57/91)

Paste of Lohamala (Iron slag), fruit of Amalaki (Emblica officinalis) and flowers of
Japa (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis) has to be applied over scalp everyday and then take bath;
this therapy is beneficial in Palitya (Premature greying of hairs).

2. Rajorodha (Amenorrhoea)
Penfees VOTE ze watferorcteery | doers a Ferree aPren raade TAT, Ul
(aa. 62/22)

----- PAGE 315 -----
Japa 307

In case of Rajorodha (Amenorrhoca) one should consume the paste prepared from
flowers of Japa (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis), leaves of Jyotishmati (Celastrus paniculatus)
and Kanji (Sour gruel).

Matra (Dose)

Churna (Powder) - 5 to 10 g

Chemical Constituents - Taraxeryl acetate, Beta-sistosterol, Campestrol, Stigmas-
terol, Flavonoids, Flavonoid glycosides, Hibiscetin, Alkanes, Cyanin and Cyanidine glu-
cosides are present in leaves stems and flowers.

Research Corner

Antioxidant and Antibacterial potential of different solvent extracts of Hibiscus rosa-
sinensis was evaluated. The antioxidant activity was assessed by estimation of total fla-
vonoids contents, total phenolic contents, DPPH free radical scavenging activity and per-
centage inhibition of linoleic acid oxidation capacity. Agar disc diffusion method was
used to assess antibacterial potential of crude extract of H. rosa-sinensis. Antibacterial
study against three human pathogens such as staphalococcus Sp., Bacillus Sp. and Escheria
coli showed growth inhibitory effect in the range of 12.75 + 1.17 to 16.75+ 2.10 mm.
Khan ZA eral. “Antioxidant and Antibacterial activities of Hibiscus rosa-sinensis Linn.
flower extracts. Pak. J. Pharm Sci 2014 May:27(3).

Yoga (Formulations)

Madhukadyavaleha Pradara, Yonishula
Patrangasava Pradara, Jwara, Pandu

Botanical Name

Hibiscus rosa-sinensis Linn.

Hibiscus — Virgil’s name for the Marsh mallow.

rosa-sinensis-rosa - reddish or pink, Sinensis of the native China.
Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. — Pushpa varga

Basonym of Drug

wate sf wor | safe eth Hele Mary, TUT |

----- PAGE 316 -----
308 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Japa (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis L.) is having very attractive flowers.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. aigyst - am gaa saftr isch eaters | ots gore |
Flowers of Japa contain a sticky substance.
2. Target - Usually flowers of Japa are red coloured.
3. frazat - Japa will have flowers always.

Vernacular Names

Dasavala

Malayalam Chembarathi

Habitat

Japa is a native plant of China, but it is grown as an
ornamental plant throughout India.

Morphology

Habit- Perennial shrub, grows upto 8 ft.

Root - Tap root and branched.

Stem - Erect, woody, branched, solid, cylindrical, her-
baceous above and woody below.

Leaves - Simple, alternate, large, broad, palmately

veined, petiolate, stipulate, ovate shaped, serrate margin | Hibiscus rosa-sinensis Linn.
and acute tip.

Inflorescence - Solitary terminal or axillary cyme.

Flower - Showy, scarlet red coloured, complete flower.

Fruit - Capsule, mostly abortive. Seeds are endospermic, glabrous and hairy.
Classical references |
Synonyms =

attgged sor are Brarear arseurt feet | (MET. TT aH: 58)

----- PAGE 317 -----
Japa 309

Properties and Actions
wor Garfeott daar Braear armarethere, | (AF. THT aH: 58)
Brean vitor fercat feraftrrencaraer tt
wa g Hee weaned, | freotdarg wert qahrerst are
(aft. achat at: 122)
waged g daret hee wsiPrarony u (B.A. eiaaenfe ah: 220)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Pradhana Rasa of Japa Pushpa
a. Katu b. Tikta c. Kashaya d. Amla
Ans: c. Kashaya
2. Pradhana Karma of Japa
a. Varnya b. Keshya c. Swarya d. Kanthya
Ans: b. Keshya
3. Botanical name of Japa
a. Myristica fragrans _c. Punica granatum
c. Rosa centifolia d. Hibiscus rosa-sinensis
Ans: d. Hibiscus rosa-sinensis
4. Aundra Pushpa is a synonym of
a. Japa b. Champaka c. Jati d. Kamala
Ans: a. Japa
5. Trisandhya is a synonym of

a. Mallika b. Taruni c. Japa d. Puga
Ans: c. Japa

6. Habit of Japa Plant is
a. Tree b. Shrub c. Creeper d. Herb

Ans: b. Shrub

----- PAGE 318 -----
Jatamamsi

Useful part - Kanda (Rhizome)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)
Medhya, Dahahara, Kushthahara, Visarpanut, Vishaghna, Twachya,
Kantiprasadaka, Balya, Bhutaghni, Nidrajanaka.

Gandhamamsi - Raktapittahara, Varnya, Vishaghni, Bhutaghni, Jwarahara.

Akashamamsi — Shophahara, Vranahara, Varnya
Pharmacological actions

Astringent, Coolant, Antiseptic, Analgesic, Digestive, Carminative, Liver stimulant,
Vermifuge, Nervine tonic, Intellect promoter, Sedative, Antipyretic and Aphrodisiac,
Diruretic and Emmenagogue.

Doshakarma (Actions on Dosha) - Tridosha Shamaka, Vatahara because of its
Snigdha guna. Pitta Shamaka due to its Tikta, Kashaya, Madhura Rasa and Shita virya.

Kapha shamaka due to its Tikta, Kashaya rasa and Katu vipaka.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Manasa vikara, Kushtha, Daha, Twak vikara, Vishavikara, Visarpa and Nidranasha.
Gandhamamsi — Vaivarnya, Raktapitta, Jwara and Vishavikara.
Akashamamsi - Vaivarnya, Shopha and Vrana.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kushtha (Skin diseases)
Tih afte cant tart ere Ger WETayA: | A first ae: UTI: HS AT CTT:
(a.fa. 7/87)

Paste prepared from Mamsi (Nardostachys jatamansi), Maricha (Piper nigrum),

----- PAGE 319 -----
Jatamamsi 3)1

Lavana (Salt), Rajani (Curcuma longa), Tagara (Valeriana wallichi), Sudha (Euphorbia
nerifolia), Soot, Urine, Bile and Alkali of Palasha (Butea monosperma) is efficacious in
Kushtha.

2. Kasa (Cough)
wear forerret wees Are ete: feral | eet aeaTy a aft qetrent ays frets.
(a.fa. 18/69)
One should smoke the wick prepared from realgar, Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra),
Mamsi (Nardostachys jatamansi), Musta (Cyperus rotundus). Ingudi (Balanites
roxburghi) then should drink warm milk added with jaggery.

3. Keshavardhanartha (To promote hair growth)
niet qs’ from: Hom: atta tergerery_ | altar afetert Ser aes we It
(F.2.5. 24/41)
The paste prepared Mamsi (Nardostachys jatamansi), Kushtha (Saussurea lappa)
Krishna tila (Sesamum indicum), Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus), Nilotpala, milk and honey
if applied over scalp will promote hair growth.

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder)  -—3to6g

Taila (Oil) —Required quantity
Phytoconstituents

Rhizome has essential oil which contains Jatamansic acid, aristolene, calarene,
jatamansin, oroselol, orselone, dihydrojatamansin, angelic acid, jatamansinol, seselin,
jatamansinone, «-pinene, B-pinene, B-eudesmol, elmol, B-sitosterol, jatamansinol,
jatamansin and angelicin.

Research corner Co

1. Study investigated the potential of NV. Jatamansi extract (NJE) in protecting

against chronic stress-induced impairments in spatial learning and memory. The

study has shown significant results in improving memory. Karkada G, Shenoy

KB, Halahalli H, Karanth KS. Nardostachys jatamansi extract prevents

chronic restraint stress-induced learning and memory deficits in a radial arm

maze task. J. Nat. Sci Biol Med. 2012 Jul; 3 (2):125-32. doi:10.4103/0976-
9668.1011879.

2. The aim of this study was to examine the inhibitory effects of NJ on ACP, C57

black/6 mice received ethanol injections intraperitoneally for 3 weeks against a

----- PAGE 320 -----
312 Dravyaguna Vijnana

background of cerulein-induced acute pancreatitis. In conclusion, the results
suggest that NJ attenuated ACP through the inhibition of PSC activation. Bae
GS, Park KC, Koo BS, Choi SB, Jo Ij, Choi CM, Song HJ, Park SJ. The
inhibitory effects of Nardostachys jatamansi on alcoholic chronic pancreatitis.
BMB Rep. 2012 Jul; 45(7):402-7.

In the present study, the anti-stress effect of hydroethanolic extract (70%) of N.
jatamansi (NJE) was evaluated in reference to its antioxidant property. The
findings suggest that the NJE possesses significant anti-stress activity, which
may be due to its antioxidant activity. Lyle N, Bhattacharyya D, Sur TK,
Munshi S, Paul S, Chatterjee S, Gomes A. Stress modulating antioxidant effect
of Nardostachys jatamansi. Indian J. Biochem Biophys. 2009 Feb; 46(1):93-
8.

4. The present study was undertaken to assess the potential of N. Jatamansi as a
memory enhancer. The 200 mg/kg dose of N. Jatamansi ethanolic extract
significantly improved learning and memory in young mice and also reversed
the amnesisa induced by diazepam (1 mg/kg, i.p.) and scopolamine (0.4 mg/kg,
i.p.) Joshi H, Parle M. Nardostachys jatamansi improves learning and memory
in mice. J. Med Food. 2006 Spring; 9 (1):113-8.

5. Ethanol extract of the roots of Nardostachys jatamansi DC. (Valerianaceae)
was studied for its anticonvulsant activity and neurotoxicity, alone and in
combination with phenytoin in rats. The results demonstrated a significant
increase in the seizure threshold by Nardostachys jatamansi root extract against
maximal electroshock seizure (MES) model as indicated by a decrease in the
extension/flexion (E/F) ration. Rao VS, Rao A, Karanth KS. Anticonvulsant
and neurotoxicity profile of Nardostachys jatamansi in rats. J Ethnopharmacol.
2005. Dec 1;102(3):351-6. Epub 2005 Aug 10.

w

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo. Formulation Indications

: Mahapaishachika ghrata Unmada, Apasmara

Botanical Name — Nardostachys jatamansi Dc.

Nart — Valerius, Stachys - spiked

----- PAGE 321 -----
Jatamamsi 313

Jatamansi = Derived from sanskrit word Jatamansi
Family - Caprifoliaccae
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Sanjnasthapana varga, Kandughna varga, Shukrajanana varga
Sushruta Eladi gana, Anjanadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 89
Basonym of Drug
Wergre viet |
Jatamamsi has matted hair.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. fenerfertt-fenerctarget wre eamegt TAT |
Jatamamsi (Nardostachys jatamansi) grows in mountains of Himalaya.
2. qaRadt-aercan dearest aararen aaRata sae |
Jatamamsi commonly found in high altitudes of Himéalaya, it is having matted
hair like that of a sage.
Morphology
3. Wheen-serenhutt |
Jatamamsi has matted hairs.
4, Yrster- yet Mery |
Jatamamsi has fibres in rhizome which appears like matted hair.
5. HOA-HMA TETITHT |
Rhizome of Jatamamsi is black in colour.
6. ferit-qeract |
Rhizome of Jatamamsi is black in colour.
7. etteen-viterteifahera |

Fibres on rhizome are neatly arranged like a matted hair.
Properties and Actions
8. aret-are feaediie, aaa |

Reduces fat becaue of Lekhana karma (Emaciating action).

----- PAGE 322 -----
314 Dravyaguna Vijnana
9, Uegar- Tet Ate cater feretter |
Reduces Mamsa (Fat stored in flesh).
10. AeaA- Baer: |
Rhizome of Jatamamsi has agreeable odour.
11. Brat -areda Prarrate t

Induces good sleep.

Regional Names

Habitat
Jatamamsi grows at great elevations upto 17,000 ft.
on the Alpine Himalayas.

Morphology

Habit — An erect perennial herb grows 10 to 60 cm
high with long, stout and woody root stock covered with
fibres from the petioles of withered leaves.

Stem - Radical leaves measuring 15 to 20x2.5 cm, | Nardostachys jatamansi DC

longitudinally nerved, glabrous or slightly pubescent, nar-
rowed into the petiole. Cauline leaves are one or two pairs, 2.5 to 7.5 cm long, sessile,
oblong or subovate.

Inflorescence — Usually 1, 3 and 5 flowered, dense cyme.

Flower — Rosy, pale pink or blue coloured, pubescent. .

Fruit ~ 4 mm long, indehiscent, covered with ascending minute transparent hairs,
crowned by the ovate, acute, after dentate calyx teeth.
Varieties

Ra. Ni- 1. Jatamamsi 2. Gandhamansi 3. Akashamansi

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample)
Rhizome will be stout, woody frequently arched, 2.5 to 8 cm long and upto 1 cm

----- PAGE 323 -----
Jatamamsi 315

thick and having dark grey colour. Rhizome densely covered with silky reddish brown
fibres, which are matted to form a network. A transversely cut portion shows a reddish
brown surface and a prominent cambium ring surrounding a porous wood. On breaking
rhizome becomes short piece and exposes reddish brown uneven surface. Rhizome will
have very strong odour and bitter taste.
Substitutes

1. Root of Cymbopogon schoenanthus spreng

2. Nynphoids macrospermum L.
Aduterants

1 Selinium vaginatum clarke

2. Selinium tenuifolium wall ex.
Classical references
Synonyms

weraiet yaster wieer a attest 1 (ars. ahute at 89)
Properties and Actions
Tish fercar Berar a Bean serfersrervay | eatat fear Preteracrectad pea tl
(a. atate at 89)
Tit tag HoT arenas AT | reared TeTTM THM GHATS
(aft. wee TT 44)

niet arg fear fercer gant aerenrhetat | Grete fare chard atest HET U
(&.P. stat ef 1364-1365)

werarett-

ain weratet aor aeviire | Hes YraTeeH fret Heep
(aft. aaa aT 95)

Treraret-

Teme fren vitat amavorrance | teelieter aval fareyrsanrtet Ul
(aft. safe aT 97)

arenrgraret-

argaret fear yite-aorrdhectaet | oarrésrarenfe erftuft auterttett 1
(aA. ane FT 99)

----- PAGE 324 -----
316

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Tih tear g fara ereqen aufero | thacmet Pome qeertatt u
(BLP. wagers af 37)

—

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Jatamansi is

c. Carum carvi d. Cedrus deodara

Ans: b. Nardostachys jatamansi

a. Haritaki b. Bilva
Ans: c. Jatamansi

a. Root b. Rhizome c. Leaf
Ans: b. Rhizome

. Pradhana Rasa of Jatamansi
a, Madhura b. Kashaya c. Tikta
Ans: c. Tikta

. Pradhana Karma of Jatamansi
a. Jwarahara b. Kasahara c. Shwasahara
Ans: d. Nidrajanaka

. Jatamansi mainly indicated in
a. Netra Roga b. Karna Roga c. Prameha
vikara
Ans: d. Manasika vikara

. Achemical Jatamansic acid is present in
a. Vatsanabha b. Jatamansi c. Chitraka
Ans: b. Jatamansi

. Mamsyadi Lepa specifically indicated in
a. Kushtha b. Jwara c. Arshas
Ans: a. Kushtha

. Mahapaishachika Ghrata is indicated in
a. Grahani b. Gulma c. Kushtha
Ans: d. Unmada

. Botanical name of Jatamansi
a. Centella asiatica b. Nardostachys jatamansi

. Bhutajata and Tapaswini are the synonyms of

c. Jatamansi

d. Fruit

d. Amla

d. Nidrajnaka

d. Manasika

d. Bhallataka

d. Shotha

d. Unmada

d. Katuki

----- PAGE 325 -----
Jatiphala

Useful part - Beeja (Seed) and Jatipatri (Ari).

Rasadi panchaka

Katu Tikta Kashaya

Karma (Action)
Jatiphala (Fruit /Seed) — Grahi, Dipana, Rochana, Swarya, Dourgandhyahara,
Krimighna, Kasahara, Shwasahara, Mehaghna, Vrashya and Hradya.

Jatipatri (Arils) — Ruchikara, Varshya, Kasahara, Chardighna, Shwasahara,
Trrashna nigraha, Krimighna, Vishaghna, Dourgandhyahara & Vrashya.

Pharmacological Actions
Nutmeg —- Aphrodisiac, Stomachic, Stimulant, Analgesic, Appetizer, Digestant,
Carminative, Astringent & Anthelmintic.

Aril (Mace) — Stomachic, Digestive, Carminative and Aphrodisiac.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha vata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to its Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka
because of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Tikta Kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Jatiphala —Atisara, Klaibya, Agnimandya, Aruchi, Vaiswarya, Mukhadourgandhya,
Krimi, Kasa, Chardi, Shwasa, Shosha, Pinasa, Hrdruja, Prameha, Kantharoga.

Jatipatri /Kosha — Aruchi, Vaivarnya, Klaibya, Chardi, Shwasa, Trishna, Krimi,
Visha roga, Mukhadourgandhya, Hradroga.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Atisara (Diarrhoea)

mar wretteaet fear areit cee Wer | alarertrart arercatranhtary
(2. aa 30)

----- PAGE 326 -----
318

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Paste prepared from Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans) is applied over the umbilicus

will definitely check the dangerous diarrhoea.

2. Vyanga (Freckles)

wiewerear caeg eta sags ftferenry | (aT. aFa. 61/42)

The Aril of Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans) is triturated with water then applied over

face. It relieves Vyanga.

3. Vipadika (Cracks in foot)

firser sietact core farreta franz (4.4. FS 118)

Paste prepared from Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans) cures Vipadika (Cracks in foot).

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (powder) — 250mg to lg
Taila (Oil) — 7to 15 drops

Phytoconstituents

Nutmeg has volatile oil which contains myristicin, myristic acid, d-pinene, d-cam-

phene, &-pinene, dipentene, P-cymene, geraniol, safrole, eugenol & iesoeugenol.

Aril contains dehy droisoeugenol, lycopene, safrol, trimyristin and guiacin.

Research corner

1. To investigate the anti-angiogenic activity and antioxidant properties of

Myristica fragrans (M. fragrans) (nutmeg). The antiangiogenic activity of
nutmeg oil showed significant antiangiogenic activity with IC (50) of 77.64 g/
mL comparing to mengkudu oil which exhibits IC (50) of 109.30 g/mL. Piaru
SP, Mahmud R, Abdul Majid AM, Mahmoud Nassar ZD. Antioxidant and
antiangiogenic activities of the essential oil of Myristica fragrans and Morinda
citrifolia. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2012 Apr; 5(4):294-8. doi: 10.1016/S1995-
7645 (12)60042-X.

. This study determined the potential anticancer efficacy of the leaf extract of

Myristica fragrans (Houtt.) Phytochemical compounds, possessing antioxidant
activity, may be responsible for the observed effects, suggesting a necessary
characteristic of a promising anticancer agent. Akinboro A, Mohamed KB,
Asmawi MZ, Othman AS, Ying TH, Maidin SM. Mutagenic and
antimutagenic assessment of methanol leaf extract of Myristica fragrans
(Houtt.) using in vitro and in vivo genetic assays. Drug Chem Toxicol. 2012
Oct; 35(4):412-22. doi. 10.3109/01480545. 2011. 638300. Epub 2011 Dec 12.

----- PAGE 327 -----
Jatiphala 319

3. In this study, freeze-dried water extract from the leaves of Myristica fragrans
(Houtt.) was tested for mutagenic and antimutagenic potential using the allium
cepa assay. The obtained results suggest mitode pressive and antimutagenic
potential of water extract of the leaves of M. fragrans as desirable properties of
a promising anticancer agent. Akinboro A, Mohamed KB, Asmawi MZ,
Sulaiman SF, Sofiman OA. Antioxidants in aqueous extract of Myristic
fragrans (Houtt.) suppress mitosis and cyclophosphamideinduced
chromosomal aberrations in Allium cepa L. cells. J. Zhejiag Univ Sci B. 2011
Noy; 12(11):915-22 doi: 10. 1631/jzus. B 1000315.

4. In this study, the anti-inflammatory effect of myristicin on double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA)-stimulated macrophages was examined. In conclusion,
myristicin has anti-inflammatory properties related with its inhibition of NO,
Cytokines, chemokinesis and growth factors in dsRNA-stimulated
macrophages via the calcium pathway. Lee JY, Park W. Antiinflammatory
effect of myristicin on RAW 264.7 Macrophages stimulated with polyinosinic-
polycytidylic acid. Molecules 2011: 16(8):7132-42.

. The present investigation was undertaken to evaluate the antibacterial activity
of constituents of M. fragrans seeds. All the constituents isolated from nutmeg
exhibited good antibacterial activity. Narasimhan B, Dhake AS. Antibacterial
principles from Myristica fragrans seeds. J.Med. Food. 2006 Fall; 9(3):395-9.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Nn

Formulation Indications

Atisara, Grahani

Jatiphaladi taila Dantashula, Mukhavedana
Botanical Name - Myristica fragrans Houtt

Myristica — Sweet scented drug belongs to Myristicaceae family.
fragrans — Aromatic
Family — Myristicaceae
Kula - Jatiphala kula
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

----- PAGE 328 -----
320 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 54-56
Basonym of Drug
TaTet Chet BATT Tet | F.TT.
Jatiphala has got shell-like fruit.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. Wateftentet:~ seit cateriter wrethiter ara, |
Fruit is shell like and it is covered by arils.
2. Ye-vedifer ye: Ye seaes |
The fruit is in the form of a shell, as it is coverd by hard cover.
Properties and Actions
3. Wretettaet:- ATM: He, Weta, Hera vite emrerett fet ATT
The fruit of Jatiphala has got sweet aroma which resembles Jati (Jasmine).
4, Hevivs:- Hat efawErar |
As like Pippali (Piper longum) Jatiphala is also used after consuming alcohol.
Regional Names

Habitat
Nutmeg tree grows in South Indian states like Karnataka, Kerala and Tamilnadu.
The plant grows upto the height of 500 mtrs from the sea level.

Morphology
Habit — Tree with slender branches.

Leaves — Coriaceous, 8 to 9 cm long & 2 to 3 cm wide, elliptic-oblong or lanceolate,

----- PAGE 329 -----
Jatiphala

acuminate. Nerves are pale yellow brown, paler with red-
brown beneath, 8 pairs of nerves which are slender. Peti-
ole is 0.5 to 1 cm long.

Male - Racemes 2.5 to 5 cm long

Flowers - 6 mm long, ellipsoid. Male flowers are
seen in lax slender supra-axillary racemes, Bracteole
scale under the glabrate perianth. Anthers are 9-12 in
number.

Fruit — Ovoid, Subglobose or Pyriform, 4-5 cm long
in diameter.

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market
sample) Myristica fragrans Houtt

Kernels are ovoid or broadly oval, 2 to 3 cm long

and 1.5 to 2 cm broad. Surface is light brown or greyish brown in colour, showing a
network of shallow, reticulate grooves and marked with numerous small dark brown
lines. The tip of the radicle is indicated by a slight circular elevation which is connected
by a broad shallow groove with chalaza which has the form of a slight shallow depression
at the opposite end. The inside of the kernel consists of fawn coloured endosperm cov-
ered by a thin reddish brown perisperm. The perisperm penetrates the endosperm by
numerous inflodings giving a characteristic ruminate appearance to the broken surface. It
has got strong aromatic characteristic odour and has got pungent and slight bitter taste.

Fleshy, foliaceous mantle or arillus of seed occuring as entire piece or in the form of
coarsely reticulate flattened bands. The entire piece is cup shaped divided into strap shaped,
terminally disected lobes, upto 4 cm in length, 2.5 to 3 cm in breadth and about | mm in
thickness. These are transluscent and brittle have a dully yellowish red in colour. Has got
strong aromatic odour.

Substitutes—1.Myristicabeddomei —_2.. Myristica attenuata

Adulterants — 1. Myristica malabarica 2. Myristica argentea
Classical references
Synonyms

reitaet arttentet arereitorctfrcate (as. ature at 54)
Properties and Actions

Uidthet Ta fore dtenttet treat ry | heck det ole tah seterPremaa

----- PAGE 330 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

Pefa qaaret wedhizaporn: | aftrera aftraragiedtragge:
(ay. ature af 54-55)
~ardtastt-
wardtreres tap witrat wreftusht frerat: | aireftastt org: tare: Heer oferaaipe |
mare aftigara gan perfec uu (asa + 56-57)
widiee-
widtact aureitat we avert  arenfreant teed ory Get at cto
(aff. aaafe at 34)
wardtasit-
widtast aoa ear Beet ee | cecebieaegvat: ferred arent
(af. dane FT 33)
widtea-
widtrct we ferris cteuttort treet ory | mech dost wet wae serene
(HFA. staf af 1327)
wareitastt-
adios wefan oem feracter, | acne afta gem epfeferarag:
(&.fr. staf af 1330)
ardicaet-
wide Horatat ae averted, | arakranatset oy set at doa
(aft. aeafe aT 78)
afestt-
wifes aefkrat eer: aoe | aeererensrst creer
(at. arame GT 76)
waidtast aefern fest arma | afer det one get eatery,
Haantafacts onfosttr meat | wert geet g qedhieeet
- (B.A. traf aT 82-83)

----- PAGE 331 -----
—

WN

wn

Jatiphala 323

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Pradhana Karma of Jatiphala

a. Shothahara —_—b. Kushthaghna c. Grahi d. Shodhana
Ans: c. Grahi

. Jatipatri in Jatiphala refers to

a. Stem b. Aril c. Root d. Seed
Ans: b. Aril

. Main indication of Jatiphala

a. Agnimandya __b. Arshas c. Gulma d. Atisara

Ans: d. Atisara
The Aril of Jatiphala (Myristica fragrans) is triturated with water then applied
over face will be beneficial in

a. Kushtha b. Vyanga c. Shotha d. Yauvana Pidaka
Ans: b. Vyanga

Jatiphaladi Vati is indicated in

a. Atisara b. Ajirna c. Jwara d. Anidra

Ans: a. Atisara

Botanical name of Jatiphala

a. Oroxylum indicum b. Myristica fragrans
c. Vetiveria zizanoides d. Mucuna pruriens

Ans: b. Myristica fragrans

. Malatiphala is the synonym of

a. Madanaphala _b. Jatiphala c. Aragwadha_ d. Shigru
Ans: b. Jatiphala

. Habit of Jatiphala Plant
a. Tree b. Herb c. Shrub d. Climber

Ans: a. Tree

----- PAGE 332 -----
Shweta Jiraka

rrr en
Useful part — Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi panchaka

Rasa Katu (Madhura-Dh.Ni.)

Rusa Laghu
Karma (Action)

Dipana, Sangrahi, Medhya, Garbhashaya shodhaka, Jwaraghna, Pachana
Vrashya, Balya, Ruchya, Chakshushya, Chardini-grahana, Hradya, Krimighna,

Vishaghna, Vranahara.

Pharmacological Actions

Appetizer, Digestant, Carminative, Astringent, Anthelmintic, Analgesic, Blood pu-
rifier, Diuretic, Aphrodisiac, Galactogogue, Antipyretic, Antispasmodic, Antibacterial,
Antifungal, Larvicidal, Antiseptic, Antiinflammatory.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha shmaka, Vata shamaka due to its Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka
owing to its Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Agnimandya, Ajirna, Atisara, Vishamajwara, Chardi, Amlapitta, Aruchi, Krimi,
Netra roga, Adhmana, Gulma, Hradroga, Garbhashaya vikara and Udara Shula.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Jwara (Fever)

AAS: ATS He... 1 (3.8. Fa. 2/93)

Paste prepared from Jiraka (Cuminum cyminum) with jaggery is v
case of Jwara (Fever).
2. Amlapitta (Hyper acidity)

Remensarstt eemrtes amet Peart | areafirere feet Hara SA,

(az. 52/51)

ery effective in

----- PAGE 333 -----
Shweta Jiraka 325

First, the paste is prepared from Ajaji (Cuminum cyminum) & Dhanyaka (Coriandrum
sativum) then it is added to 1 prastha (640 gm) of ghee and cooked. It is administered
internally and it is very useful in Amlapitta (Hyper acidity). It is also effective in diseases
of Kapha & Pitta dosas. Aruci (Anorexia) and Manddnila (Reduced appetite).

3. Chardi (Vomitting)
dada a yreht after a i gets aya oe: severed: 1
(JAI. 15/18)

Sauvarchala salt, Ajaji (Cuminum cyminum), sugar & Maricha (Piper nigrum) are
mixed with honey, if taken stops vomitting.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) 3 to 6 g.

Phytoconstituents

Fruits contain 2.5-4% volatile oil, 10% fixed oil and proteins. Volatile oil mainly
consists of 30-50% cuminaldehyde, small quantities of o-pinene, B-pinene, phellandrene,
cuminic alcohol, hydrated cuminaldehyde and hydrocuminine.

Research corner

1. In the present study, the effect of intra peritoneal (ip) administration of different
doses of cumin fruit essential oil (FEO)’on the acquisition of morphine induced
conditioned place preference (GPP) in L-arginine-treated mice was
investigated. Study suggested that some components of the Cuminum cyminum
L. seed attenuate the excessive effect of L-arginine on morphine-induced CPP
through the NOS inhibitory mechanism. Kermani M, Azizi P, Haghparast A.
The role of nitric oxide in the effects of cumin (Cuminum cyminum L.) fruit
essential oil on the acquisition of morphine-induced conditioned place
preference in adult male mice. Chin J Integr Med. 2012 Jan 12.

2. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the contraceptive efficacy of
Cuminum cyminum (Jeera) seeds in male albino rats. The present study shows
that C. cyminum treatment resulted in the inhibtion of spermatogenesis and
fertility without producing apparent toxic effects. Gupta RS, Saxena P, Gupta
R, Kachhawa JB. Evaluation of reversible contraceptive activities of Cuminum
cyminum in male albino rats. Contraception. 2011 Jul; 84(1):98-107. doi:
10.1016/j. contraception. 2010.10.013. Epub 2011 Feb 16.

3. To investigate effects of various concentrations of the essential oil of Cuminum
cyminum L. seed alone and in combination with nisin on survival of vegetative

----- PAGE 334 -----
326 Dravyaguna Vijnana

forms of Bacillus cereus and Bacillus subtilis in a food model (commercial
barley soup) and their ultra structure. The essential oil of C. cyminum L. seed
showed the most bactericidal effects on B. cereus at 8 OC. Ultrastructure studies
of vegetative cells confirmed the synergistic destructive effects of the essential
oil and nisin on membrane and cell wall of the bacteria. Pajohi MR, Tajik H,
Farshid AA, Hadian M. Synergistic antibacterial activity of the essential oil of
Cuminum cyminum L. seed and nisin in a food model. J Appl Microbial. 2011
Jan 12. doi: 10.1111/j. 1365-2672.2011.04946.x.

4. The essential oil of fruits of Cuminum cyminum L. (Apiaceae), from India, was
analyzed by GC and GC-MS, and its antifungal activity was tested on
dermatophytes and phytopathogens, fungi, yeasts and some new Aspergilli.
Antifungal testing showed that Cuminum cyminum is active in general on all
fungi but in particular on the dermatophytes, where Trichophyton rubrum was
the most inhibited fungus also at the lowest dose of 5 microL. Less senstive to
treatment were the phytopathogens. Pharm Biol. 2010 Jul; 48(7):834-8. doi:
10.3109/13880200903283715. Antifungal activity of essential oil form furits of
Indian Cuminum cyminum. Romagnoli C, Andreotti E, Maietti S, Mahendra R,
Mares D.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo.
1

Formulation Indications

Jiraka ghrata Agnidagdha vrana
Trak modaka

=<
a

Botanical Name — Cuminum cyminum Linn. Cuminum - derived from Greek means
very useful for cooking.

Family — Apiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Shatapushpa kula

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorisation)
Charaka Shulaprashamana varga

Sushruta Pippalyadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Haritakyadi varga 81-85

----- PAGE 335 -----
Shweta Jiraka 327

Basonym of Drug

frre até oRorrafe, sar aatertt |

Jiraka (Cuminum cyminum Linn.) is very good digestive.
Synonyms
Habitat

1, STITT SATTS TT |

Jiraka is cultivated in Northern part of India.
Morphology

2. defeq-dtarenc |
Fruit of Jiraka (Cuminum cyminum) is long.
3. Cars -chet srsarsee
Fruit is yellowish in colour
Properties and Actions
4. de:- coach |
Jiraka stimulates appetite.
5. sateit-aret aginst wreercttier
Jiraka improves appetite.
6. BRUT THAT
Jiraka is very good digestant.
7. wary-oharRy |
Jiraka improves the taste.
8. Aemm-Aered Rar
Jiraka improves memory.

Regional Names

Hind

----- PAGE 336 -----
328 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Habitat

Cultivated throughout India, but cultivated more
in Rajasthan and Punjab states. It is mostly cultivated
as cold season crop.

Morphology

Habit - A slender annual plant.

Leaves — Thrice or thrice 3- partite, ultimate seg-
ments are filiform.

Inflorescence — Compound umbel, rays are few,
has several bracts and bracteoles. Bracts are linear and
rigid. Petals are white in colur, often unequal.

Fruit — Cylindrical with narrow tip. Primary
ridges are filiform, distinct and secondary ridges usu-
ally hispidulous. Vittae is large. Solitary under each secondary ridge. Carpophore is 2-
partite or bifid.

Seed —Convex-concave, dorsally compressed.

Cuminum cyminum

Varieties
B.P.Ni—3 types— 1. Jiraka (Cuminum cyminum)
2. Krishna jiraka (Carum carvi)
3. Kalajaji (Nigella sativa)
Dh.Ni— 4 types— 1. Jiraka
2. Shuklajiraka
3. Krishnajiraka
4. Brihatpali
Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Fruits are elongated, greenish or grayish brown in colour, measuring 4 to 6 mm in
length and up to 2.5 mm in width. The fruit is a cremocarp, consisting of two mericarps
which remains united together when dry. Each mericarp has five primary ridges which
run from base to apex. Alternating with these are secondary ridges which are flat and
conspicuous. It has got characteristic odour and pungent taste.

Classical references

Synonyms
Sitar Sussisft aun wareretshives: | (ars. Kicenfeet 81)

----- PAGE 337 -----
Shweta Jiraka 329

Properties and Actions :
wared Ure Ge aed Bet HUTTE | Mayet TaTEMTT er eeerae Be, II
(ars. etirernfeet 84-85)
aierstt fear wear wettest | aftrett feroeatt a aeers semrrafyertt
(afr. magenta +t 69)
aeearett ( sft farsa: )
aa SR: wg vilett aOTET GATT: 1 (ah. eagenfe at 72)

(&.F. staff 1188)
tikerstt feet wear etyr chet | pret aga a aeperenrs arr
(aA. frente af 59)
BATT Sie TUT
sft: eet: Ure atten ahedtean: | sftutsatet Seat AVTTEATA ASAT:
(aL. frreanfeat 66)
sitter: memetton: fret: BHATT, | tT: UTA Beat Taher fergtters:
(AY. wagenfeart 6)

----- PAGE 338 -----
Krishna Jiraka

Useful parts - Phala (Fruits)

Rasadi panchaka

Ruksha, Laghu
Vipaka
Karma (Action)

Dipana, Pachana, Sangrahi, Medhya, Garbhashaya Shodhaka, Jwaraghna,
Vrashya, Balya, Ruchya, Chakshushya, Chardighna, Hradya.

Pharmacological Actions ;

Appetizer, Digestant, Antiflatulent, Constipative, Antiinflammatory, Cardiotonic,
Antispasmodic, Larvicidal, Antiseptic, Galactogogue, Stomachic, Diuretic, Febrifuge.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakaphahara - Vatahara due to its Ushna virya and Kaphahara because of its
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Agnimandya, Ajirna, Jwara gulma, Adhmana, Atisara, Chardi, Netraroga, Jwara,
Garbhashaya vikruti, Krmi, Vrana.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vishama jwara (Malarial fever)

areraatt ¢ est reset aT (aT. F. 1/753)

Intake of Kalajaji (Carum carvi) with jaggery is very useful in Vishama jwara (Ma-
larial fever).

2. Aruchi (Anorexia)
ardtaftarsnst sera asary alate Ys: ats wake
(afa. 26/212)

Mixture of Karavi (Carum carvi), Maricha (Piper nigrum), Ajaji (Cuminum

----- PAGE 339 -----
ee Krishna Jiraka 331
eyminum), Draksha (Vitis vinifera
granatum) mixed with §
Aruchi (Anorexia),

aie ), Vrakshamla (Garcinia indica) and Dadima (Punica
auvarcala salt, Jaggery and honey is very useful in all kinds of

Maira (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) = 1 to 3 g

Phytoconstituents

Fruit contains 2.5 to 8% volatile oil, 10%

; fixed oil, 15% proteins and resin. Volatile
contains 45 to 65% of carvone limonene, dihy it

drocarone and traces of carvacol.
Research corner

—

. The purpose of the present study was to assess the effect of aqueous extract of
Carum carvi seeds in diet induced hyperlipidemia in rats. Carum carvi aqueous
seeds extract decrease lipid levels in diet induced hyperlipidemic rats. Saghir
MR, Sadiq S, Nayak S, Tahir MU. Hypolipidemic effect of aqueous extract of

Carum carvi (black Zeera) seeds in diet induced hyperlipidemic rats. Pak J
Pharm Sci. 2012 Apr; 25(2):333-7.

i)

. To evaluate the effect of oral administration of caraway (Carum carvi) on the
blood glucose level, lipid profile, and the weight of diabetic rats. Caraway has
both antihyperglycemic and hypolipidemic activity in diabetic rats. Haidari F,
Seyed-Sadjadi N, Taha-jalali M, Mohammed-Shahi M. The effect of oral
administration of Carum carvi on weight, serum glucose and lipid profile in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Saudi Med J. 2011 Jul; 32(7):695-700.

3. The present study investigates the direct effects of Carum carvi L. (Apiaceae)
ethanol extract on dispersed intestinal smooth muscle cells (SMC) of guinea
pigs. The data obtained indicate a dose-dependent inhibition of the contraction
induced by Ach. This response may explain, in part, the beneficiaP effect of
caraway in relieving gastrointestinal symptoms associated with dyspepsia. Al-
Essa MK, Carum carvi on dispersed intestinal smooth muscle cells of the
genua pig. Pharm Biol. 2010 Jan; 48(1):76-80. doi:10.3109/138802009030-
46161.

4. Essential oil of Carum carvi L. fruits analyzed by gas chromatographymass
spectrometry and assayed for its in vitro and in vivo antioxidant activity and
hepatoprotective effect against carbon tetrachloride (CCI (4) damage. Caraway
essential oil strongly inhibited LP in both systems of induction, the essential oil
of caraway appeared promising for safe use in folk medicine and the
pharmaceutical and food industries. Samojlik 1, Lakic N, Mimica-Dukic N,

----- PAGE 340 -----
ww
Ww
tw

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Dakovic-Svajcer K, Bozin B. Antioxidant and hepatoprotective potential of
essential oils of coriander (Coriandrum sativum L.) and caraway (Carum carvi
L.) (Apiaceae). J Agric Food Chem. 2010 Aug 11:58(15):8848-53.doi:10.
1021/jf101645n.

5. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the diuretic potential of aqueous
extracts of Carum carvi fruit (Caraway). From the pattern of exception of
water, sodium and potassium, it may be deduced that there are atleast two types
of active principals present in these extracts, one having a furosemide-like
activity and the other a thiazide-like activity. Lahlou S, Tahraoui A, Israili Z,
Lyoussi B. Diuretic activity of the aqueous extracts of Carum carvi and
Tanacetum vulgare in normal rats. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2007 Apr 4;
110(3):458-63. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

Yoga (Formulations)

Formulations Indications

1. Lavngadi churna Kasa, Agnimandya
2: Lavana bhaskara churna Agnimandya, Shula
33

sig Sal Ajaji Gudayoga Vishamajwara, Agnimandya
Hingwashtaka churna
Yogaraja guggulu

Botanical Name — Carum carvi Linn.

Agnimandya, Shula

Amavata, Udararoga

Carum — Caria— Where it was discovered, roots as well as seeds are edible.
carvi — Caraway (Karawia name in Arab).
Family — Apiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Shatapushpa kula
Gana vargikarana (Classical Categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni  Haritakyadi varga 81-85

Basonym of Drug

poranit sina |

Fruit is like Jiraka but black in colour.

----- PAGE 341 -----
Krishna Jiraka 333

Basonym of Drug
Porat shew, |
Fruit is like Jiraka but black in colour.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, carpdtcatices-angeiizaet star sftrent |
Krishna jiraka (Carum carvi) grows in Kashmir state.
Morphology
2. calfe-Horreat: |
Fruits are black in colour
Properties and Actions
3. TBAT ATA |
Fruit of Krishna jiraka has got very strong odour.
4. GIRL TASS |
Krishna jiraka has got very agreeable odour.
5, SRNRTE-SaNe Vitra Pree
It expels the air and induces clear eructation.
6. wem-wtaaett |
Krishna jiraka increases taste.
7. WTA ATA

Itis very good digestive as like Jiraka.

Regional Names

English

indi
Malayayam Shema jeerakam
Habitat
Krishna jiraka is extensively cultivated in Kashmir and Gadhwal.

Morphology
Habit — Biennial but occasionally forming a perennial stock.

----- PAGE 342 -----
334 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Stem — Erect, branched, 35 to 50 cm tall.

Leaves — Has long sheathing foot stalk, pinnate, with
several pairs of segments which are sessile, but once or
twice pinnate with short linear lobes. In a leaf of 6 or 8 cm
long, the lowest or next to the lowest segments are 0.75
cm (7.5 mm), the others diminishing gradually to the top.
Upper leaves are smaller and less divided.

Inflorescence — Umbel having 8 to 10 rays, either
without involucres or with one or two small linear bracts.
Fruit — Caraway seeds are 5 mm long, linear-ob-
long and usually curved, with prominent ribs.
Varieties Carum carvi Linn.
B.Pr.Ni -1. Jiraka 2. Krishna jiraka
3. Upakunchika
Dh.Ni - 1. Jiraka 2. Shukla jiraka 3. Krishna jiraka 4. Vanya jiraka

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Fruits are oblong, laterally compressed and slightly curved, up to 5 mm long, 1 mm
broad, tapering towards both ends. The mericarp is yellowish brown in colour and shows
five equal sides with five narrow ridges which are very distinct, endosperm is brown and
somewhat oily. It has got characteristic odour and pungent taste.

Substitute : 1. Fruit of Bunium persicum Boiss
Adulterant : 1. Cuminum cyminum Linn
Classical references
Synonyms
POS: GIST Tae: (ALT. Aire 8 2)
Properties and Actions
wate Ure Get ae wet HATE, | ST aE CoA ET,
(a3. ethrrafe at 84-85)
TUT HHO St aay Prat | wearschuisaet a aayea oifsatt TAT Ut
(afr. magenta at 71)

----- PAGE 343 -----
Krishna Jiraka 335

sires ehrentent wat ureter ery | wet Hate meget waterer feretrerry
ftract dod text get arena, | Eafeer ore wfdqearenraferantard, 11
(& fr. sirafirert 1188)

TROT ESOT a aRUAMAhet | wes ots a mae Death wT 1
(afr. frorenfaart 62)

gece
geclert Heo AACA, | SOTA Sttont Sed Stott wT
(uF. frorenfert 64)
secret ( areft aftr )-
saat: He: Vila are TTT: (TA. frreenteert 65 )
Sara Site YUT:-
fice: agen: Ue Bhtren apedtoan: | storiseet Gea ATA:
(aA. freenfert 66)
HOST: BUT: LATTA SAAT: STA: SANT MATT MST: Tat Ff OPS:
(B.Pargenert 7 )
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Jiraka
a. Mula b. Phala c. Kanda d. Pushpa
Ans: b. Phala

2. Pradhana Karma of Jiraka
a. Rasayana b. Vajikara c. Dipana d. Shothahara

_

Ans: c. Dipana
3. Paste prepared from Jiraka (Cuminum cyminum) with jaggery is very effective
in case of
a. Jwara b. Atisara c. Arshas d. Shotha
Ans: a. Jwara
4. Jirakadyarishta is specifically indicated in
a. Amlapitta b. Sutika vikara c. Kushta d. Raktapitta
Ans: b. Sutika Vikara

----- PAGE 344 -----
336 Dravyaguna Vijnana
ae

5. Botanical name of Shweta Jiraka
a. Cuminum cyminum b. Nigella sativa
c. Carum carvi d, Carum roxburghianum
Ans: a. Cuminum cyminum
6. Botanical name of Krishna Jiraka
a. Nigella sativa b. Carum copti
c. Cuminum cyminum d. Carum carvi
Ans: d. Carum carvi
7. Udgara shodhana is a synonym of
a. Chitraka b. Maricha c. Haritaki d. Krishna Jiraka
Ans: d. Krishna Jiraka
8. Types of jiraka acc to Bhava Prakasha Nighantu
a. 2 b. 3 c.4 d.6
Ans: b. 3

----- PAGE 345 -----
Chapter

Jyotishmati

Useful part - Beeja (Seed),

Rasadi panchaka

Katu Tikta
Tikshna, Sara, Snigdha

Karma (Action)
Medhya, Buddhi vardhaka, Smritivardhaka, Vamaka, Varnya, Vranahara, Dipana,
Swedajanana, Uttejaka, Nadi balya.

Pharmacological Actions

Intellect promoter, Appetizer, Stimulant, Rubefacient, Emollient, Emetic & Diges-
tive.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha) - Vatakapha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka because
of its Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka due to Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu vipaka
and Katu tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Manasika vikara, Vrana, Visarpa, Pandu, Vaivarnya, Agnimandya.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Sidhma (White spotted leprosy)
TH atatet Wetea: Uae | fragt weatftrarat Serre, eA
(3.¢.fa. 19/75)

The oil of Jyotishmati (Celastrus paniculatus) is processed with water mixed with
Apamarga kshara (Alkali of Achyranthes aspera) and decanted for 7 times. Massaging
this oil on skin lesions will cure Sidhma (White spotted leprosy).

2. Udara (Ascitis)

weitkereatact det ar afitur cafstentegterst fret (GA. 14/10)

Internal usage of Jyotishmati (Celastrus paniculatus) oil which is mixed to milk and

----- PAGE 346 -----
338 Dravyaguna Vijnana

then Swarjika alkali, and Hingu (Ferula narthex) added will cure Udara (Ascitis).

Matra (Dosage)
Taila (Oil) - 5-15 drops
Churna (Powder) -1-2g
Phytoconstituents

Seeds contain 62% oil which is thick reddish yellow in colour. It also contains bitter
resinous principle, Tannin, Celapangine, Celapanine, Celastin, Celestrol, Paniculatine,
Malakanguniol, Malkangunin, -amyrin and 1-sitosterol.

Research corner

1. The objective of the present study was to evaluate hypolipidemic effect of
methanolic extract of Celastrus paniculatus in experimentally induced
hypercholesterolemic rats. Histological studies showed less cholesterol deposits
in the aorta of animals fed with seed extract of C. Paniculatus, compared to the
induced hypercholesterolemic animals not given C. Paniculatus supplement.
Patil RH, Prakash K, Maheshwari VL. Hypolipidemic. Effect of Celastrus
paniculatus in experimentally induced Hypercholesterolemic Wistar Rats.
Indian J Clin Biochem. 2010 Oct; 25(4):405-10. doi: 10. 1007/s 12291-010-
0050-x. Epub 2010 Sep 14.

2. The effect of Celastrus paniculatus Willd. (Celeastraceae) seed aqueous extract
on learning and memory was studied using elevated plus maze and passive
avoidance test (sodium nitrite induced amnesia rodent model). The study
reveals that the aqueous extract of Celastrus paniculatus seed has dose-
dependent cholinergic activity, thereby improving memory performance.
Bhanumathy M, Harish MS, Shivaprasad HN, Sushma G. Nootropic activity
of Celastrus paniculatus seed. Pharm Biol. 2010 Mar; 48(3):324-7. doi:
10.3109/13880200903 127391.

3. To investigate the mode of the relaxing action of a methanolic extract prepared
from the seeds of Celastrus paniculatus (CPE, 0.001-10 microg/mL) in the rat
ileum and to try to confirm on human tissues the intestinal pharmacological
activity of the extract. It is concluded that (i) CPE exerted a powerful myogenic
and L-type Ca(2+)-dependent relaxing effect in the isolated rat ileum and that
(ii) the human ileum is sensitive to the inhibitory effect of CPE. If confirmed
in vivo, our data could explain the traditional use of this herb in the treatment
of intestinal spasma. Borrelli, F, Borbone N, Capassoa R, Monesanao D, De
Marino S, Aviello G, Aprea G, Masone S, Izzo AA. Potent relaxation effect

----- PAGE 347 -----
Jyotishmati 339

of Celeastrus paniculatus extract’ in the rate and human ileum. J
Ethnopharmacol. 2009 Apr. 21;122(3):434-8. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2009.02.003.
Epub 2009 Feb 11.

4 Biochemical, histochemical and histological studies of the effects on an oily
extractive from the seeds of Celastrus paniculatus were done on the testes and
liver of adult rats. These results indicate that Celastrus paniculatus oil may
have useful antifertility effects and that the degenerative changes seen in the
liver are reversal with time. Bidwai PP, Wangoo D, Bhullar N.
Antispermatogenic action of Celastrus paniculatus seed extract in the rat with
reversible changes in the liver. J Ethnopharmacol. 1990 Mar; 28(3):293-303.

Yoga (Formulations)

SIL.No. Formulation Indications

Jyotishmati taila Manasika vikara, Medhya karmartha

Botanical Name — Celastrus paniculatus. Willd.

Celastrus — Privet, a bushy ever green shrub.

paniculata — Having panicle inflorescence.

Family— Celastraceae

Kula —Jyotishmati kula
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka — Shirovirechanopaga Varga

Sushruta Arkadi Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. Haritakyadi Varga 171-172
Basonym of Drug

where yur ts HSM: , After aererarer, Sarhe: Tact ser at
a aa|

Stem of Jyotishmati is having white shining dots (Lenticels), it improves intellect
and having hot potency.

Synonyms
Morphology
1. Hat-aectheatt |

Jyotishmati is a climber.

----- PAGE 348 -----
340 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. URTaAIa-UNTaT aa Te TTA: |
Root of Jyotishmati (Celastrus paniculatus) resembles legs of pigeon.
3. WHecre- per Aaa TET: |
Stem bark has shining white dots over its surface.
4, qauterferent-eearguatrarcn eat |
Jyotishmati has yellow coloured flowers.
5. QeNHeT-ATHT |
Fruits are small in size.
6. HHS HreHlTSad HT |

Fruits of Jyotishmati resemble eggs of crow.

Properties and'actions
7. Cedten-dteeut ere: |
The oil prepared from Jyotishmati will be having yellow colour.
8. Reat-Aere feat |
Jyotishmati improves intellect.
9. wrauT-eatfer fear Teme
Jyotishmati alleviates many diseases.
10. Gaara STM: Whereas aT |
Miscellaneous
11, WUT -IUATey: WUT, ST Sea STANT |
Seeds and oil of Jyotishmati sold in the market.

Regional Names

Habitat
Jyotishmati grows throughout India, especially in hilly areas.

----- PAGE 349 -----
Jyotishmati 341

Morphology

Habit — A large deciduous climber.

Stem — 18 Mtrs high and maximum 23 cm in diam-
eter. Twigs fairly smooth, reddish brown, densely cov-
ered with small elongate whitish lenticels.

Bark — Pale brown, rough with shallow cracks, ex-
foliating in small soft scales. Blaze is 0.75-1 cm in thick-
ness, not fibrous, pink finely streaked with red or reddish
brown. The juice turning blue on the blade of a knife.

Leaves — 6 to 10 cm long, 4 to 8 cm wide, broadly
elliptic ovate or obovate, abruptly short-acuminate, crenate-
serrate, rather coriaceous, glabrous, lateral nerves are arch-
ing. Petiole is 8-15 mm long.

Inflorescence — Long panicle of 5-20 cm long.

Flowers — 4 cm in diameter and green coloured.

Fruit - Capsule, 1 cm in diameter, depressed globose, 3-lobed, bright yellow on
ripening 3-6 seeds.

Seeds — Completely enclosed in an orange-red aril.

Celastrus paniculetus

Different sources/synonyms

1. Celastrus montana 2. Celastrus multiflora 3. Celastrus nutans
4. Celeastrus senegalensis 5. Celastrus spinoses

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Fruit of Celastrus paniculatus contains 3 to 6 seeds enclosed in a complete arillus of
deep orange. Seeds are triquetrous, reddish brown in colour, slightly arched with acute
ends. The testa is hard; enclosing a white kernel which releases oil when put some pres-
sure. It has got aromatic odour.

Adulterants
1 Seeds of Cardiospermum helicacabum Linn.

2. Fruits of Duranta species
Classical references

Synonyms

weitere earmeet waters ether A Correct MTT aT eT SAT
(ara. eaeenfeert 171)

----- PAGE 350 -----
342 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Properties and Actions
waren we fterea aa eer | seq anette areafererta|y
(a. Srerafeat 172 af. Teresi 259)
wafrorct ¢ @faren ferearen seer AT | Haar ara ear Ateterferaat|4r 1
serarfrerent Sat aureterd uregan: 1 (A. sitet 716-717)
waferort ferravar a war faRscncatrancaaer = |
weve dearer teat wars yori cer feta
(af. Terme GF 45)
wart Heftrce denier amarater | dost art ferment qfegareat
att aay unage werent | aenfsaeiaredss Gerd mega: i
waren wareq aR tetenrear carter Hea a era: WaT |
sar wey ft wit wdamene fa arian
(BLP. freate at 72-74)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Jyothishmati

a. Mula b. Biya c. Kanda d. Patra
Ans: b. Bija
2. Pradhana Karma of Jyothishmati
a. Medhya b. Jwaraghna c. Kandughna _—_d.Shothahara
Ans: a. Medhya
3. Celestrol a chemical constituent present in
a. Devadaru b. Vidarikanda cc. Jyothishmati = d. Manjishtha

Ans: c. Jyothishmati
4. Jyothishmati taila is indicated in
a. Jwara b. Vaivarnya c. Netraroga d. Manasika Vikara
Ans: d. Manasika Vikara
5. Botanical name of Jyothishmati
a. Curcuma longa b. Cedrus deodara
c. Operculina turpethum. d. Celastrus paniculatus
Ans: d. Celastrus paniculatus

----- PAGE 351 -----
i

Jyotishmati

6. Paravata Padi is the synonym of

a. Tulasi b. Aragwadha _ c. Jyothishmati
Ans: c. Jyothishmati

. Sphutatwacha is the synonym of

a. Vidanga b. Jyothishmati c. Yashtimadhu
Ans: b. Jyothishmati

. Habit of Jyothishmati
a. Herb b. Tree c. Shrub

Ans: d. Climber

d. Guduchi

d. Aparajita

d. Climber

343

----- PAGE 352 -----
Po Chanter

Kalamegha
Useful part — Panchanga (Whole plant)
Rasadi panchaka
Laghu, Ruksha, Tikshna

Karma (Action)

Dipana, Swedajanaka, Jwaraghna, Krimighna, Yakrudrogahara, Kushthaghna,
Raktashodhaka, Balavardhaka, Shothahara, Vishaghna.
Pharmacological (Action)

Febrifuge, Anthelmintic, Hepatoprotective, Stomachic.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha pitta Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to Tikta rasa and Kapha Shamaka be-
cause of Ushna Virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta Rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Jwara, Agnimandya, Yakrut vikara, Kamala, Kustha, Krimi, Shotha, Vishavikara.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Vishamajwara (Malaria)~ One part of Kalamegha (Andrographis paniculata)
churna and one part of Maricha and 1 g of this churna is given internally in
case of Vishamajwara (Malaria).

2. Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus) — Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from whole
plant of Kalamegha (Andrographis paniculata) is given internally 60 to 100 ml
for a day in case of Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus).

3. Yakrudvikara (Liver disorders) — Kwatha (Decoction) of Kalamegha
(Andrographis paniculata) is given orally in case of all kinds of Yakrudvikara
(Liver disorders).

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) - lto3g

----- PAGE 353 -----
swarasa (Juice) - S5tol0ml }
Kwatha (Decoction) — 20to40 mI
phytocostituents

Total plant contains bitter substances; the bitter substances in the leaves are identi-

fied as ‘Andrographolid’, and ‘Kalameghin’. The ash obtained from the plant had sodium
chloride and potassium salts.

Research corner

[

ae

w

4,

The current investigation was aimed to determine the hepatocurative role of
silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) synthesized rapidly using Andrographis
paniculata. Low dose (25 mg/kg BW) was effective in revival of all biological
parameters to near normal in all intoxicated groups indicating the curing effects
on CCI (4) induced liver injury. Suriyakalaa U, Antony JJ, Suganya S, Siva D,
Sukirtha R, Kamalakkannan S, Pichiah PB, Achiraman S. Hepatocurative
activity of biosynthesized silver nanopaticles fabricated using Andrographis
paniculata. Colloids Surf B Biointerfaces. 2013 Feb 1:102:189-94, doi
10.1016/j. colsufb. 2012.06.039. Epub 2012 Aug 14.

The aim of the present work was to analyze the anti-diabetic potential of
chloroform fraction of ethanol extract of Andrographis paniculata (AP) and
diabetes laden gene expression alteration. Antidiabetic screening fraction of AP
at molecular level revealed significant antidiabetic activity. Chaurasia A,
Kharya MD, Sharma B, Roy P. Glucose metabolism and diabetogenic gene
expression analysis of chloroform fraction of Andrographis paniculata (Nees)
whole herb in diabetic albino mice. J. Complement Integr Med. 2012 Aug
10:9:Article 21.doi: 10.1515/1553-3840.1632.

. This study was designed to evaluate and compare the inhibitory property of

extracts of Andrographis paniculata leaves [Methanolic (AP1), hydroalcoholic
(AP2), Successive water (AP3)] and non-leaves [Methanolic (AP4),
hydroalcoholic (AP5), successive water (AP6)] towards inflammatory
mediators. Results revealed that AP1 and AP4 exhibited inhibitory effect on all
the inflammatory mediators excluding PGE2 and TNF-alpha. Chandrasekara
CV, Murali B, Deepak M, Agarwal A. In vitro comparative evaluation of non-
leaves and leaves extracts of Andrographis paniculata on modulation of
inflammatory mediators. Antiinflamm Antiallergy Agents Med Chem. 2012
Sep; 11(2):191-7.

Andrographolide, a diterpene lactone of the Andrographis paniculata, displays

----- PAGE 354 -----
346 Dravyaguna Vijnana

anti-HIV activity in vitro, A series of andrographolide derivatives have been
synthesized and evaluated for their anti-HIV activity in a cell-free virus
infectivity assay using TZM-bl cells. The results suggest that androgrpholide
derivatives may be promising candidates for prevention of HIV infection.
Uttekar MM, Das T, Pawar RS, Bhandari B, Menon V, Nutan, Gupta SK,
Bhat SV. Anti-HIV activity of semisynthetic derivatives of andrographolide
and computational study of HIV-1 gp 120 protein binding. Eur J. Med Chem.
2012 Oct; 56:368-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech. 2012.07.030. Epub 2012 Jul 24.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications

Kalamegha churna Jaundice, Liver disorder

Botanical Name — Andrographis paniculata, Nees, Andrographis - denoting male,
paniculata — having an inflorescence known as panicle.

Family — Acanthaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Vasa
Gana vargikarana (Classical Categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Not mentioned in Varga
Basonym of Drug
Opfrreat- fer reat, Fret Ta fereHca Tat AINA |
Kalamegha is considered as smaller variety of Nimba as it has got similar properties.
Synonyms
Properties and Actions
1. Welferrh- Whole plant is very bitter to taste.
2. aafert- The seeds are barley shaped which is also very bitter.

Regional Names

=

----- PAGE 355 -----
Kalamegha 347

Malayalam
Habitat
Kalamegha plant grows throughout India, especially in plains of central India,
Andhrapradesh, Karnataka, Tamilnadu and Kerala.
Morphology
Habit — Erect, wild, annual sub shrub.
Stem — Branched, herbaceous, cylindrical, solid, green, branch lets 4-gonous.

Leaves — Simple, opposite decussate, linear-obvate, exstipulate, their, delicate, sub
sessile, unicostate reticulate venation, leaf apex is acute.

Inflorescence — Panicle inflorescence, Panicle branches are zigzag.

Flowers — Complete, bisexual, zygomorphic, white in colour & lower mid lobes are
crested with purple lines gives pink tinge, petals are 5, stamens are 2 in number and
exerted. Gynoecium is bicarpellary syncarpous, superior ovary and axile placentation.

Fruit — Capsule, basally beaked, oblong, compressed, minutely hairy the funicle of
seeds forms a hook-like projection.
Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Dry, whole plant of grayish green colour consisting of straight quadrangular stems,
which are up to 5 mm thick, lanceolate, leaves, up to 8 cm long and 1 to 2.5 cm broad,
small flowers or linear oblong and flattened capsules, 1.5 to 2.5 cm long, borne on termi-
nal and axillary panicles. The roots are fibrous and divaricately branched. It has got no
characteristic odour and tastes very bitter.

Kalamegha (Andrographis praniculata) is used as substitute for Kiratatikta (Swertia
chirata).

Classical references

Synonyms
area rast aarenncacteTan | (A.A. rargeniert 135)

Properties and Actions
Glereat creator: srafraferrert: | ata: Feat Hat VET: APATITE:
apart Hal HE vat areal voreaa ui (HA. Wagaest 136)

----- PAGE 356 -----
348 Dravyaguna Vijnana
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Kalamegha
a. Mula b. Panchanga _ c. fruit d. Seed
Ans: b. Panchanga

2. Kwatha (Decoction) of Kalamegha (Andrographis paniculata) is given orally
in case of
a. Shwasa b. Jwara c. Yakrudvikara d. Vibandha
Ans: ce. Yakrudvikara

3. Andrographolid is present in
a. Katuki b. Jiraka c. Dhanyaka d. Kalamegha
Ans: d. Kalamegha

4. Botanical name of Kalamegha
a. Andrographis paniculata b. Celastrus paniculata
c. Berberis aristata d. Piper longum
Ans: a. Andrographis paniculata

5. Yava tikta is the synonym
a. Kutaja b. Kalamegha c. Yava d. Aragwadha
Ans: b. Kalamegha

6. Habit of Kalamegha plant
a. Herb b. Sub shrub c. Tree d. Tree
Ans: b. Sub shrub

7. Kalamegha is a substitute for

a. Parpataka b. Nimba c. Kiratatikta d. Akarakarabha
Ans: c. Kratatikta

----- PAGE 357 -----
Kampillaka

Useful part - Phala raja (Dried glands covering mature fruits).

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Action)
Phalaraja - Rechana, Krimighna, Mehahara, Vishaghna, Ashmarighna, Vranahara,
Shaka - Grahi and Dipana

Pharmacological Actions
Cathartic, Anthelmintic, Lithotriptic, Purgative.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha Vata Shamaka & Pitta saraka.

Vatashamaka because of Ushna virya, Kapha Shamaka due to its Ushna virya,
Katu Rasa and Katu vipaka. Pittasaraka as it has got Virecana karma.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Krimi, Ashmari, Prameha, Gulma, Adhmana, Udara, Vibandha and Vrana.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Krimi (Worms)
aftaeet wut catel Ss we afer | ureery arity patra: Ul
(a.5.Fa. 7/22)

6 gm of powders of Kampillaka (Mallotus philippinensis) taken with jaggery will
expell all the Krimi (Worms).

2. Vrana (Wound)
— Set cahtueetaet aT | (AFA. 25/93)

Oil processed with Kampillaka (Mallotus philippinensis) if applied, will improve
healing of Vrana (Wound).

----- PAGE 358 -----
350 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Rakta guima (Haemetometra)

yrarirertrenrezut yreberenfarenntearere, | feraetterrgy afer Here AT

(aa.fa. 25/93)

Kampillaka (Mallotus philippinensis) powder mixed with sugar and honey allevi-
ates Rakta gulma.

Matra (Dosage)
Phala raja churna- 2 to 3 g (for adults)
(Powder of fruit) 1 to 2g (for children)

Phytoconstituents
Heart wood yielded lupeol, lupeol acetate, sitosterol and berginin.

Bark consist acetylaleceritolic acid, o-amyrin, sitosterol and sitosterol glucoside.
Seeds yielded bergenin, corotoxigenin-L-rhamnoside and coroglaucigenin-L-rham-
noside.

Research corner

1 A new lignan dimer, bilariciresional (1), was isolated from the leaves of
Mallotus philippensis, along with platanoside (2), isovitexin (3),
dihydromyricetin (4), bergenin (5), 4-O-galloylbergenin (6), and pachysandiol
A (7). Mai NT, Cuong NX, Thao NP, Nam NH, Khoi NH, Minh CV, Heyden
YV, Thuan NT, Tuyen NV, Quetin-Leclercq J, Kiem PV. A new lignan dimer
from Mallotus philippines. Nat Prod Common. 2010 Mar, 5(3):423-6.

2 Bioassay-directed fractionation of the organic extract against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis was a new compound, 8-cinnamoyl-5,7-dihydroxy-2,2-dimethyl-
6-geranylchromene (1) for which the name malloto-philippen F is suggested.
Hong Q, Minter, DE, Franzblau SG, Arfan M, Amin H, Reinecke MG. Anti-
tuberculosis compounds from Mallotus philippinensis. Nat Prod Common.
2010 Feb; 5(2):211-7.

3 In the quest for potent anti-Helicobacter pylori agents, scholars found 70%
EtOh extract of Mallotus philippinensis (LAM.) MUELL. (MPM) with strong
bactericidal activity at the concentration of 15.6-31.2 mg/L against eight H.
pylori strains. Further fractionation and purification of 70% EtOh extract of
MPM led to the isolation of 5 compounds, namely 5,7-dihydroxy-8-methyl-6-
prenylflavanone (1), 3'-prenylrubranine (2), red compound (3), isorottlerin (4),
and rottlerin (5) which were elucidated on the basis of nuclear magnetic
resonance and mass spectroscopy. Zaidi SF, Yoshida I, Butt F, Yusuf MA,

----- PAGE 359 -----
Kampillaka 351

Usmanghani K, Kadowaki M, Sugiyama T. Potent bactericidal constituents
from Mallotus philippinensis against clarithromycin and metronidazole resistant
strains of Japanese and Pakistani Helicobacter pylori. Biol Pharm Bull. 2009
Apr;32(4):631-6.

4, Four known friedelane-type triterpenoids, friedelin (1), 3-hydroxy-D:A-
friedoolean-3-en-2-one (2), beta-hydroxy-D:A- friedooleanan-3-one (3), and 3
alpha-hydroxy-D:A-friedooleanan-2-one (4), and two known lupane-type
triterpenoids, lupeol (5) and betulin (6), were isolated from the stem bark of
Mallotus phillippensis. Tanaka R, Nakata T, Yamaguchi C, Wada S, Yamada
T, Tokuda H. Potential anti-tumor-promoting activity of 3alpha-hydroxy-D:A-
friedooleanan-2-one from the stem bark of Mallotus philippensis. Planta Med.
2008 Mar; 74(4):413-6. doi:10.1055/s-2008- 1034347.

5. The present study was designed to investigate the adverse effects of indigenous
Kamala seed etheral extract on various reproductive parameters of female rats.
Taken together, these data indicate the Kamala reduced serum FSH and LH
levels probably by affecting hypothalamic /pitutary axis in treated animals.
Thus, reduced levels of FSH and LH and estradiol might have affected the
follicular development, quality and number of ovulated eggs, corpora lutea
formation, oestrous cycle, establishment and maintenance of pregnancy in
treated rats. Thakur SC, Thakur SS, Chaube SK, Singh SP. An etheral extract
of Kamala (Mallotus philippinensis (Moll.Arg) Lam) seed induce adverse
effects on reproductive parameters of female rats. Reprod Toxicol. 2005. May-
Jun; 20(1):149-56.

Yoga (Formulations)
SLNo.

Formulation Indications

Botanical Name — Mallotus philippinensis Muell Arg.
Mallotus — Like the shape of Melon
philippinensis — Native of Philippines
Family — Euphorbiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Eranda

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka  Notmentioned in Varga

----- PAGE 360 -----
352

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Sushruta — Shyamadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni.— Haritakyadi varga 147

Basonym of Drug

maha ABM SIT AAT. |

The plant is abundantly available at Kampilla Desha.

Synonyms

Morphology

is

2

3s

Tea THATS TTT |

Fruits of Kampillaka (Mallotus philippinensis) will be covered by red dust.
Hh :- TRAM: VATA |

Powder is rough to touch as it is covered by hairs.
THeuie:- tant gut weaker

Fruits are covered by red coloured powders.

Properties and Actions

4.

10.

aa Ural atrereata frearedeare |
Kampillaka Raja (Powder) has got attractive red colour and also cures many
diseases.

. Welaa:- Terragen |

Powder of Kampillaka if mixed with water may be used as colouring agents
for clothes.

. Tare:-tarafa ard, aterar tarenfirdt aetater

Kampillaka imparts colour to the clothes and also increases Raftjaka pitta.

. THITAA-TeHfeeant eae

Kampillaka alleviates diseases related to Rakta dhatu.

. tere:-trerata efargeneata, pirrredcard |

Kampillaka improves taste as it kills worms which may be a cause for anorexia.

. tar:- terete act aftrafed Preareater |

Kampillaka is very good purgative and expels the worms.
aUeTET:- wut Merate, Hea |

Kampillaka cleanses the wound by killing microorganism.

----- PAGE 361 -----
Kampillaka 353

Regional Names

Indian Kamala, Rottlera

Habitat

Kampillaka plant grows throughout India and commonly seen in South Indian states
like Karnataka, Kerala and Tamilnadu.

Morphology
Habit — Small much branched tree. Branch lets,
young leaves and inflorescence are rusty pubescent.

Leaves — Alternative, simple, variable, 8 to 15
cm long, 3 to 7.5 cm in width, ovate or ovate-lan-
ceolate, entire or slightly toothed, acuminate tip, gla-
brous above, pubescent and with numerous orbicular
red glands beneath, reticulately veined, base rounded
or acute, strongly 3-nerved at the base and with 4-7
pairs of nerves above the basal ones. Petioles are 2.5
to 5 cm long, cylindrical, fulvous-pubescent, with 2 Mallotus philippinensis
small sessile glands one on each side of the summit. Muell.Arg

Inflorescence — Male inflorescence is long ter-
minal spike where as female inflorescence is short spike.

Flowers — Dioecious, small. Male flowers clustered, sessile or very shortly pedicel-
late, sepals are 4 and have numerous stamens. Female flowers: sepals are 3 or 4 in num-
ber, thicker when compare to male flowers ovary has red glands, 3-celled.

Fruit — Capsule, 8-13 mm in diameter, 3-lobed, Loculicidally 3-valved, covered
with a bright red powder consisting of minute stellate hairs and fine grains of a red resin-
ous substance.

Seeds — 4 mm in diameter, sub globose, black.

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Reddish powder containing numerous brick red, spherical glands and stellate thick
walled hair. The powder is resinous.

----- PAGE 362 -----
354 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references
Synonyms
mittee: aeherarat Teargey Vrertiste at (a1.9. elerrnte af 147)

Properties and Actions

ahaa: aafrareatiegetarar | aa teh corse AerareferaryAsa. |
(a3. etrrafert 147)

aaftareray Patel Care HSMN HUMANA: | etter Blaferargrs:
(aft. aaa at 125 >

aaftaeet deat tet eer: amerahr | wonpeHerreneraerrsarger
aeare vitact fer areret ane chery ui (S.A. staf af 949-950)

aftaedt: TRYST: HEBIN ter: | WySIt wee: PART awry a7

(BLA. etree TI 6s)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Kampillaka is
a. Mula b. Phalaraja c. Bija d. Patra

Ans: b. Phalaraja
2. Pradhana Karma of Kampillaka
a. Rechana b. Stambhana c. Atisaraghna d. Keshya
Ans: a. Rechana
3. 6 gm of powders of Kampillaka (Mallotus philippinensis) taken with jaggery

will expel
a. Mala b. Dosha c. Krimi d. Sweda
Ans: c. Krimi
4. Botanical name of Kampillaka ;
a. Operculina turpethum b. Tinospora cordifolia
c. Withania somnifera d. Mallotus philippinensis

Ans: d. Mallotus philippinensis

5. Patodaka is a synonym of
a. Kampillaka b. Arjuna c. Mandukaparni d. Haridra
Ans: a. Kampillaka

6. Raktachurnaka is a synonym
a. Padmaka b. Kamala c. Kampillaka d. Guggulu
Ans: c. Kampillaka

7. Habit of Kampillaka plant
a. Herb b. Creeper c. Shrub d. Tree

Ans: d. Tree

----- PAGE 363 -----
Chapter

Kanchanara

Useful part — Kaanda Twak (Stem bark)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Action)
Kanchanara twak— Grahi, Krimighna, Kushthaghna, Gandamalahara, Vranahara,

Kasahara.
Kovidara twak —Gandamalahara, Kushthaghna, Krimighna, Dipana.

Kanchanara pushpa — Sangrahi, Rochaka, Pradara nashaka, Kasahara.
Kovidara pushpa —Pradaranashaka, Raktapittahara

Pharmacological Actions
Astringent, Anthelminitc, Haemostatic, Antiinflammatory.

Doshakarma (Action om Dosha)
Kaphapitta Shamaka, Pittahara due to Shita virya and Kashaya Rasa and Kaphahara

because of Katu vipaka and Kashaya Rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Twak — Gandamala, Krimi, Kushtha, Kasa, Vranavikara, Atisara, Apachi.
Pushpa — Pradara, Raktapitta, Kasa, Shwasa

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Gandamala (Goitre))
PISA: FMA: YOST TOT ATA |
MOBO ssscsissieseisssdeudassooncan N(R. 2/2/126)

Kwatha (Decoction) of Kanchanara (Bauhinia variegata) is prepared and Shunthi

----- PAGE 364 -----
356 Dravyaguna Vijnana

(Zingiber officinale) powder is added, and then administered. It is very efficacious in
Gandamala (Goitre).

2. Masurika (Pox) a

SSAA: ATTA SOT HOt (HLTA. 60/49)

Incase of Masurika (Pox) the decoction prepared from bark of Kanchanara (Bauhinia
variegata) added with Swarna makshika (Copper pyrite) powder is beneficial.

Matra (Dosage)

Kwatha(Decoction) - 40 to 80 ml

Churna (Powder) —- 3to6g

Pushpa rasa(Juice) - 10to20 ml
Phytoconstituents

Stem bark yielded hentriacontane, octacosanol, -Sitosterol and stigmasterol. Stem
contains lupeol & aminoacids. Seeds consist myricetol glycosides flowers have
hentriacontane, octacosanol, B-Sitosterol & stigma sterol.

Research corner

1 Study to investigate the role of aqueous (BVA) and ethanol (BVE) extracts of
Bauhinia variegata against milk-induced leukocytosis and eosinophilia in
albino mice. The results of the study revealed that pretreatment with both the
extracts caused significant reduction in the total leukocyte and eosinophil
counts in animals in dose-dependent manner, Mali RG, Dhake AS. Evaluation
of effects of Bahuhina vareigata stem bark extracts against milk-induced
eosinophilia in mice. J Adv Pharm Technol Res. 2011 Apr; 2(2):132-4.
doi:10.4103/2231-4040.82949.

2 The nephroprotective activity of the ethanolic extract of Bauhinia variegata
(Linn.) whole stem against cisplatin-induced nephropathy was investigated by
an in vivo method in rats. The ethanol extract of B. variegata at 400 mg/kg
(b.w.) exhibit significant and comparable nephroprotective potential to that of
the standard polyherbal drug cystone. Pani SR, Mishra S, Sahoo S, Panda PK.
Nephroprotctive effect of Bauhinia vareigata (Linn). whole stem extract
agatinst cisplatin-induced nephropathy in rats. Indian J. Pharmacol. 2011. Apr;
43(2):200-2. doi: 10.4103/0253-7673.77370.

To evaluate the ethanolic and aqueous extracts of Bauhinia variegata Linn. for
in vitro antioxidant and antihyperlipidemic activity. From the results, it is
evident that alcoholic and aqueous extracts of B. variegata Linn. can

Ww

----- PAGE 365 -----
Kanchanara 357

effectively decrease plasma cholesterol, triglyceride, LDL, and VLDL and
increase plasma HDL levels. In addition, the alcoholic and aqueous extracts
have shown significant antioxidant activity. By the virtue of its antioxidant
activity, B. variegata Linn. may show antihyperlipidemic activity. Rajani GP,
Ashok P. In vitro antioxidant and antihyperlipidemic activities of Bauhinia
variegata Linn. Indian J. Pharmacal. 2009. Oct; 41(5):227-32. doi:10.4103/
0253-7613.58513.

4 To evaluate the anticarcinogenicity and antimutagenicity of Kachanar extract a
skin carncinogenesis and melanoma tumour model in Swiss albino mice.
Results suggest that Kachanar extract exerts anticarcinogenic and
antimutagenic activity. Agarawal RC, Pandey S. Evaluation of
anticarcinogenic and antimutagenic potential of Bauhinia variegata extract in
Swiss albino mice. Asian Pac J. Cancer preve 2009;10(5):913-6.

5 The present work was carried out to assess the potential of Bauhinia variegata
bark as hepatoprotective agent. The hepatoprotective activity was investigated
in carbon tetrachloride (CC1(4)) intoxicated Spraguedawely rats. The extract
exhibited significant hepatroptective activity. Bodakhe SH, Ram A.
Hepatoprotective properties of Bauhinia variegata bark extract. Yakugaku
Zashi. 2007 Sep;127(9):1503-7.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications

3

Kanchanara varuna_ kwatha
Kanchanaradi kwatha

Botanical Name — Bauhinia variegata Linn.

Bauhinia — In memory of the two famous French Botanist brothers of the 16th cen-
tury Johna and Casper Bauhin.

Variegata — Variegated with patches of different colours.

Family — Fabaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Vamanopaga Varga

Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi Varga 101-104

----- PAGE 366 -----
358 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug
wret aeaut seater yet: |

The flower of Kanchanara (Bauhinia variegata) is golden yellow in colour.Synonyms

Morphology
1, QUT := AAA PTA: | BT AT UT |
Leaf of Kancanara is emarginated.
2. aaa-aatsearcdifer aaa: |
Kancanara has smooth and beautiful bark.
3. AME aTTaTt Yat Tear ECAH |
The flower of Kancanara is coppery red coloured.
4, Warrenl-waet seer Herel TET: |
Flowers contain very few stamens.
Properties and Actions
5. WuSrh-ws: TerTSArerear Wea athe: seer |
Kancanara is very useful in Galaganda and Gandamala.
Regional Names
Mountain Ebony, Camel’s foot
Habitat

Kanchanara is very common throughout India. As it grows very fast and gives
shade, commonly planted by the road sides. Kanchanara plant bears very beautiful flow-
ers hence cultivated in gardens.

Morphology
Habit — Shrub or small tree
Stem— Woody, aerial, erect, branched, solid, cylindrical & rough.

Leaf — Alternate, simple, stipulate, cordate, entire, emarginate, long, wide, divergent
minutely hairy, unicostate reticulate veined.

----- PAGE 367 -----
Kanchanara 359

Inflorescence — Panicle cyme

Flower - Complete, bisexual, zygomorphic, pink
colourd with prominent red veins, 5 petals and 5 sepals,
stamens are 5 in number, monocarpellary gynoecium.

Ip
\
A\

iy

fl

Fruit - Legume or Pod, 15 to 30 cm long and con-
taining several seeds,

Varieties
Kai. Ni & Pri. Ni—Two types :
1, Kanchanara, 2. Kovidara

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample) | Bauhinia variegata Linn.

Stem bark is moderately hard, curved, 4 to 8 mm in
thickness. External surface is rough, grayish brown in colour, transversely fissured or
cracked with small elliptic warts of darker colour. Inner surface is reddish brown and
lamellated with portion of bark coming out in thin strips. A transversely cut portion of
bark shows a narrow cork followed by conspicuous tangential stands of fibers. On break-
ing outer side breaks but fibrous within and has got characteristic faint odour with astrin-
gent state.

Classical references
Synonyms
ISA: HBAS AWS: vtorgers: | alana Altes: Here FIAT: Ul
Suseht aM: ere | (A. WEEMe TH 101-102)
Properties and Actions
arsant fort ot gar: scrafiege | ahtrepsqesit Weare aUTTE:
mifrentstt Care: Us AY BTL | wel Sale firrreanraaaNAgT I
(LF. Tees FT 103-104)
aeer: weg dart wUNITT: | USAT Yeset MTA: FEAT I
(a.Pageae at 195)
@AnN-
Tat HBA Ha: Tat: USE VT YH t Has wa as WS ale Tey
wal praert araftrarea werraer i (&.F.siete af 936)

----- PAGE 368 -----
360 Dravyaguna Vijnana

aatferan-
aarferaret feet ret arava: arenftrerf sae | TSA TRUM HOT oH A AAT

(4 faire TH 934)
alfa: mara: wary wast wortawr: 1 dhe: aeRererett Popes rags
(uP af 25)
aISAR-
TSA: HATA: TATeStat Tet AoE: t acaftrree wVSarenate rags: |
(BP etaent at 196)
walfarane-

AN HSA VA At PASAT: | Aa: Gat Teas yet a Farasz
(B.A. atteafe aT 200)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Kanchanara
a. Kanda Twak b. Mula c. Phala d. Patra
Ans: a. Kanda Twak
2. Gandamalahara action of Kanchanara is attributed to
a. Rasa b. Vipaka b. Virya d. Prabhava
Ans: d. Prabhava
3. Kanchanara pushpa has important Karma as
a. Rechana b. Bhedana cc. Sangrahi d. Dipana
Ans c. Sangrahi
4. Kwatha (Decoction) of Kanchanara (Bauhinia variegata) is prepared and
Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) powder is added, and then administered is
beneficial in
a. Jwara b. Gandamala_ c. Ajima d. Prameha
Ans: b. Gandamala
5. Kanchanara Guggulu is indicated in
a. Vatarakta b. Amavata c. Bhagandhara d. Gandamala
Ans: d. Gandamala
. Botanical name of Kanchanara is
a. Terminalia belerica b. Bauhinia variegata
c. Boerhavia diffusa d. Rauwolfia serpentina
Ans: b. Bauhinia variegata

—

lon

----- PAGE 369 -----
361
Kanchanara

7, Yugmapatra is a synonym of

a. Irimeda b. Babbula
Ans: c. Kanchanara

g. Gandari is a synonym of
a. Kanchanara b. Bhallataka
Ans: a. Kanchanara

c. Kanchanara_ d. Arishtaka

c. Haridra d. Manjishta

----- PAGE 370 -----
Chapter

Kantakari

Useful Parts — Mula (Root) and Panchanga (whole plant).
Rasadi pancaka

Laghu ruksha
Karma (Action)

Mula (Root) — Kanthya, Kasahara, Shwasahara, Jwaraghna, Dipana, Pachana,
Krimighna, Hridya, Kandughna, Kushthaghna, Rochana, Pramehahara.

Phala (Fruit) - Shukra rechaka, Bhedana, Dipana, Kasahara, Shwasahara,
Cakshushya, Balya.
Agrya Karma

care Prfefterenr 1 (31.2.3. 40)

Nidigdhika (Solanum xanthocarpum) is best for Kasa (Cough).

Pharmacological Actions

Antiinflammatory, Antibacterial, Analgesic, Stimulant, Appetizer, Carminative,
Cardio-stimulant, Expectorant, Demulcent, Aphrodisiac.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to its Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka
because of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta katu Rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Mula (Root) — Shotha, Shwasa, Kasa, Jwara, Kantharoga, Agnimandya, Ajirna,
Krimi, Hridroga, Kushtha, Aruchi, Pinasa, Parshwa Shula.

Phala (Fruit) — Kasa, Krimi, Agnimandya, Jwara.

Matra (Dosage)
Kwatha(Decoction) - 50to 100ml

Churna (Powder) - lto2g

----- PAGE 371 -----
Kantakari 363

Tn
ph ytoconstituents

Whole plant yield an alkaloid call
coumarins, scopolin, scopoletin, esculin an
‘ Jkaloid solanocarpine, solanine-s, solasodi
§-solamargine.

and

ed solasonine. Roots, leaves and fruits yield
d esculetin. Fruits yield carpesteral, gluco-
ne, solamargine, stigma sterol, campesterol

Seeds contain solanocarpine and essential amino acids.

Research corner

1.

Y

Present study reports the phytochemical analysis as well as free radical
scavenging and antioxidant activities of Solanum xanthocarpum root extracts.
The study demonstrated appreciable protective efficacy in S. Xanthocarpum
root extracts against free radical damage. Kumar S, Sharma UK, Sharma AK,
Pandey AK. Protective efficacy of Solanum xanthocarpum root extracts against
free radical damage : phytochemical analysis and antioxidant effect. Cell Mol
Biol (Noisy-legrand). 2012 Dec 22358(1):174-81.

This study was designed to evaluate the effects of Solanum xanthocarpum fruit
extract in ethylene-glycol-induced urolithiasis in the male Wistar rats. The result
indicates the antiurolithiatic activity of S.xanthocarpum mediated possibly by
CaOX crystal inhibition, diuretic, antioxidant and this study rationalized its
medicinal use in urolithiasis. Patel P, Patel M, Saralai M, Gandhi T.
Antiurolothiatic Effects of Solanum xanthocarpum Fruit Extract on Ethylene-
Glycol-induced Nephrolithiasis in Rats. J. Young Pharm. 2012 Jul; 4(3):164-
70. doi:10.4103/0975-1483. 100022.

. To evaluate nephroprotective potential of Solanum xanthocarpum (S.

xanthocarpum) fruit extract (SXE) against gentamicin (GM) induced
nephrotoxicity and renal dysfunction. The findings powerfully supports that S.
xantocarpum fruit extract acts in the kidney as a potent scavenger of free
radicals to prevent the toxic effects of GM both in the biochemical and
histopathological parameters and thus validates its ethnomedicinal use. Hussain
T, Gupta RK, Sweety K, Eswaran, B, Vijayakumar M, Rao CV.
Nephroprotective activity of Solanum xanthocarpum fruit extract against
gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicity and renal dysfunction in experimental
rodents. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2012 Sep; 5(9):686-91. doi: 10.1016/S1995-
7645(12)60107-2.

. The present work objective are to investigate indigenous plants used in wound

healing in India, we hereby reported our findings related to wound healing
activities of plant Solanum xanthocarpum Scharad and Wendl (Solanaceae)

----- PAGE 372 -----
una Vijnana acini
—tnaeanaee el studies. The result revealed that th,

from some in vitro and in vivo Me ling potency and appear to justify ;

ethanol extract has remarkable wou ‘a ound healing in India and in
sadieg .¢ , sarpul Cr

traditional use of Solanum xanthocd') sitional healers. Dewangan H, Bash

ae . f trac ; f
a scientific support to the treatment 0 tow anti ie.
ntific support » perential wound healing activity of the ethanol,

M, Jaiswal V, Verma VK, Potenta

shard £ endl leaves Pak J Pharma g,;
extract of Solanum xanthocarpum schard and w Sci

2012 Jan; 25(1):189-94,

Yoga (Formulations)

Indications

Kantakari kwatha

i ghrata

Kasa, Hikka, Shwasa
Arochaka, Udara

Dashamula kwatha Shwasa, Ivara

Dashamula ghrata

Kantakaryavaleha

Botanical Name — Solanum xanthocarpum Schrad & Wendl.
Solanum — Night shade

xanthocarpum — Xantho-yellow, carpum-fruit.

Family- Solanaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)

Kula — Kantakari kula

Gana vargikarana (Classical Categorization)

Charaka Kasahara varga, Kanthya varga, Hikkanigrahana varga, Shothahara
varga, Shitaprashamana varga, Angamarda prashamana varga

Sushruta —_ Brihatyadi gana, Varunadi gana, Laghupancha mula
Bh.Pr.Ni. | Guduchyadi varga 38-43

Basonym of Drug
mpucenttratel |

Plant is thorny.
Synonyms

Habitat
1. Uien-waarrer arcane |

----- PAGE 373 -----
Kantakari 365

The plant is seen everywhere.
2. Hell-Her VAS Var |
Plant is gregarious in nature.
Morphology
3. fafafterar-fafeere aeie 1
Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum) grows very quickly.
4, oeatt-aract wate ste |
Katakari spreads on the ground very quickly.
5. wvetett-Huccnt: Uae: |
Kantakari plant has thorns all over.
6. FSAI CAST, Hula |
Kantakari is difficult to touch as it is studded with thorns.
7. JAH ASOT HAM: |
Fruits of Kantakari are small.
8. Featmett-fearitt werent: |
Fuits of Kantakari are having variegated appearance.
Properties and Actions
9. Caesarea Settler
Kantakari is very good remedy for cough.
10. xrauft-sersrrant sree |
Kantakari liquifies the Shleshma (Sputum).
11. careht-corfirecttfer, ararfertt were, carted Tarat TT |

Kantakari cures many diseases especially Nasal disorders and it gives strong
voice like that of tiger.
Regional Names

Kateli

----- PAGE 374 -----
366 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Habitat
Commonly grows through out India especially
in west and east coasts.

Morphology

Habit — A prickly, Prostrate, Perennial herb
with compressed yellow straight spines all over the | &
plant surface.

Stem — Erect, solid, branched, dark green and
glabrous.

Leaves —Exstipulate, petiolate, alternate, simple
reticulate unicostate venation. Solanum xanthocarpum Schrad

Inflorescence —Extra-axillary shortly peduncled & Wendl
cyme sometimes flower is solitary.

Flowers —Complete, actinomorphic, bisexual, bluish purple or violet coloured with
5 sepals and 5 petals. Stamens are 5 and free. Gynoecium is bicarpellary. Syncarpous
with bilocular ovary, axile placentation.

Fruit —Berry with endospermic seeds.

Varieties
Bh.Pr.Ni — 1. Shwetapushpa Kantakari
2. Nilapushpa kantakari

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample)

Root will be long, gradually tapering sometimes twisted but sparingly branched, 4 to
12 mm in diameter. External surface creamish brown, long itudinally striated or ribbed
with their wiry rootlests coming out from lower parts. Transversely cut portion shows a
creamish white, mealy surface with a prominent cambium ring. On breaking it becomes
short pieces. Roots have bitter taste and not having any characteristic odour. Pieces of
whole plant, consisting highly spinescent stems, leaves, flowers and berries stems cylin-
drical, hollow, upto 6 mm in diameter, covered with straight compressed spines of shining
yellow colour, not exceeding 1 cm in length, lobes of leaves bearing spines the upper
surface of leaf is glabrous, greyish green, frequently mottled with white spots, flowers
campanulate, pink or violet in colour, upto 20 mm across when fresh, Berries spehrical
upto 1.5 mm in diameter, variegated with green and white when immature and deep
yellow when ripe. Odour is disagreeable and tastes bitter.

----- PAGE 375 -----
Kantakari 367

Classical references
Synonyms
BUSH F Feat AAT caret Pafetterer | vere Huet arat geet ear
(a5. Teefeat 38)
gayest Hcant-
aa Qa ae Ta saghra | wag aa ast eager fier
(a9. Teast 39)
Properties and Actions

wHUcant aT fara Heart cost oe: | atte Urata ATA Tat |
Prete dnd uehticratecrrars ui (a3. Wwerkat 40-41)
wlcat taciga-
Wat: Wet He WS Urs A Heh Aa | YoweT tas et fer frePHeeTy
PaewneenUgarde: Hrsg i (AT. Teast 42)
HAT HUcATt-
aac frat ara festare Hea | (ATT. TEeTeTT 43)
aucant Hehe Aa aaa | steht VATA AST
aucentge fireh ararracncnratind, | afraren: tact aa weft STITT |
BUSHSHMAT HHATTRTA Ut (TA. Tee Ft 96-97)
wUcant Heft Batre Net oa: | chet ret PML SHAT TaRTEreA: Ul
eararaararonda Hera, | Ta: wast fare Te Heh Heh TH |
Set Wer eet fark franftreeety | Se screed SUSAR Ul
(.fr. steht aT 5456)
mucant Tc ,
Prfefterar Hucarat: wet Areat aa | Hal AT USAT TATAT I
PTT MYA TA ATTA: LAAT: FASTA: HET: TESTI:
(fA. steht 60-61)
Fawcett wat-
gaat OSes Re arereerstaftrani |
(& fA. ataftrert 62)

----- PAGE 376 -----
368

Dravyaguna Vijnana

ftigteret:- ffteact airrerararemrararary ate STO, | (45.FA. sitaftrert 63)

aueart eum a chet arnrahir | wfervarattarrett apart serfs
(a.F. wearereat 32)

Vaaveawkt-
PaHvearhtanr Sar HOM Hea Te | raze ot Har Wheat Taran TAA I

(uff. werarfeat 36)

meant Heft dato pment, | Berna SAT AAA, TALE, II
(RPI. eireneat 41 )

—_

Ww

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Kantakari

a. Mula & Panchanga _ b. Pushpa c. Patra
Ans: a. Mula & Panchanga

. Agrya Karma of Kantakari

a. Dipana b. Kushthaghna cc. Krimighna
Ans: d. Kasahara

. Kantakari Ghrata is specifically indicated

a. Prameha b. Medoroga c. Kasa
Ans: c. Kasa

. Kantakaryavaleha is indicated in

a. Kasa, Hikka, Shwasa b. Jwara, Rakta pitta
c. Ajirna, Atisara d. Prameha, Kushtha
Ans: a. Kasa, Hikka, Shwasa

. Botanical name of Kantakari

a. Solanum indicum b. Solanum torvum
b. Solanum xanthocarpum d. Solanum nigrum
Ans: c. Solanum xanthocarpum

. Nidigdhika is a synonym of

a. Bharangi b. Kantakari c. Shyonaka
Ans: b. Kantakari

. Habit of Kantakari

a. Tree b. Shrub c. Creeper
Ans: d. Prickly herb

. Types of Kantakari as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu

a. 3 b. 2 c.4
Ans: b.2

d. Phala

d. Kasahara

d. Jwara

d. Patala

d. Prickly herb

d.7

----- PAGE 377 -----
Chapter

Kapikacchu

Useful part — Beeja (Seed)
Rasadi panchaka
Rasa [Madhura Tika |

Karma (Action)

Vrshya, Brahmana, Balya, Vrananashaka.
Dadhipushpi (Kapikacchu vishesha)

Ranjana
Pharmacologocial Actions

Aphrodisiac, Anthelmintic, Nervine tonic, Astringent, Diuretic.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka because of Ushna virya, Madhura vipaka and
Madhura Rasa. Pittahara due to Madhura vipaka and Madhura rasa and Kaphara be-
cause of Ushna virya.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Klaibya, Dourbalya, Dushtavrana, Krisha.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vajikarana (As an aphrodisiac)
efruaaieg Mea: We | MA AAA Gleeta: Waste Pray Wa:
(afa. 26/33)

Powder of Kapikacchu (Mucuna prurita) is mixed with Godhuma (Wheat), and
then processed with milk. Ghee is added to it and consumed. Then one should take milk,
will act as an aphrodisiac.

Tata: THereut Mere | MTT ae: tear Tera a atet AST
(afa. 26/33)

----- PAGE 378 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

a AIT
A re enn cm

men,

Kapikacchu (Mucuna prurita) & Iksuraka (Ast
and taken with Dharoshna paya (Milch-warm mi

eracantha longifolia) mixed with Su
i sver have deficj Bar
Ik) with never have de iciency of,

2. Vatavyadhi-Apabahuka (Paralysis of brachial plexus)

a TATE RATAT PHATT 1 TAM AAS AMAA BG? (A. 22/26)

In case of Apabahuka (Paralysis of brachial plexus) one of the Vatavyadhi one has

to take juice of seeds of Kapikacchu (Mucuna prurita). It gives more strength.

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) -3to6g

Phytoconstituents

Seeds afforded alkaloids like mucuadine mucuadinine, mucuadininine & prurienidine,

Italso contains L-dopa, glutarthione, lecithin, gallic acid, amino acids like histidine, lysine,
tyrosine and valine.

Serotonin is present in trichomes of pods.

Research corner

1. A comparative study on the production of 3, 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-

DOPA) was carried out in cell cultures of Two Mucuna species by elicitor
treatment and precursor feeding. The efficacy of L-DOPA production was
found to be higher for suspension cultures of M. Pruriens compared to M.
prurita in all treatments. Raghavendra S, Kumar V, Ramesh CK, Khan MH.
Enhanced production of L-DOPA in cell cultures of Mucuna pruriens L. and
Mucuna prurita H. Nat Prod Res. 2012;26(9):792-801. doi:10.1080/14786419.
2011.553721. Epub 2011 Oct 14.

. To explore the antidiabetic properties of Mucuna pruriens (M. purines), The

study clearly supports the traditional use of M. pruriens for the treatment of
antidiabetic drug. Majekodunmi SO, Oyagbemi A A, Umukoro S, Odeku OA.
Evaluation of the antidiabetic properties of Mucuna pruriens seed extract.
Asian Pac J. Trop Med. 2011 Aug; 4(8):632-6. doi: 10.1016/S 1995-7645
(11)601611-2.

- To assess the anticataleptic and antiepileptic activity of leaves of Mucuna

pruriens in albino rats. M. Pruriens extract has the potential to be an
anticataleptic and antiepileptic drug. Dopamine and 5-HT may have a role in
such activity. Champatisingh D, Sahu PK, Pal A, Nanda GS. Anticataleptic
and antiepileptic activity of ethanolic extract of leaves of Mucuna pruriens: A

----- PAGE 379 -----
Kapikacchu 371

study on role of dopaminergic system in epilepsy in albino rats. Indian J.
Pharmacol. 2011 Apr; 43(2):197-9, doi: 10.4103/0253-7613,77368.

4, Objective of the present study was to analyze the efficacy of M. pruriens on
male sexual behaviour and sperm parameters in long-term hyperglycemic male
rats. The present work reveals the potential efficacy of ethanolic seed extract
of M. pruriens to improve male sexual behavior with androgenic and
antidiabetic effects on the STZ-induced diabetic male rats. Suresh S, Prakash
S. Effect of Mucuna pruriens (Linn). on sexual behaviour and sperm
parameters in streptozotocin-induced diabetic male rat. J. Sex Med. 2012 Dec;
9(12):3066-78. doi: 10.1111/j. 1743-6109.2010.01831.x. Epub 2010 Apr 26.

5. The present investigation was undertaken to assess the role of Mucuna pruriens
in infertile men who were under psychological stress. On the basis of results
of the present study, it may be concluded that M. pruriens not only reactivates
the anti-oxidant defense system of infertile men but it also helps in the
management of stress and improves semen quality. Shukla KK, Mahdi, AA,
Ahmad MK, Jaiswar SP, Shankwar SN, Tiwari SC. Mucuna pruriens reduces
stress and improves the quality of Semen in infertile Men. Evid Based
Complement Alterant Med. 2010 Mar; 7(1):134-44. doi:10. 1093/ecam/nem
171. Epub 2007 Dec 18.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications

Gokshuradi modaka Vajikaranartha
Brahat Shatavari modaka Dourbalya, Alparetas
Vrashyartha, Viryastambhanartha

Botanical Name — Mucuna pruriens Bak.
Mucuna — Name in Brazillian language

pruriens — Prurita-producing itching
Family — Fabaceae

Gana vargikarana (Classical catergorization)
Charaka Balya varga, Purisha Virajaniya Varga
Sushruta Vidarigandha gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduchyadi varga 129-131

----- PAGE 380 -----
372 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug
adit Sega |
Hairs on the fruit of Kapikacchu cause itching to the monkey.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, Sayan at Sra RTA WANT TT I
The creeper Kapikacchu grows in forest and fruit has hairs like that of Monkey.
2. Wasranft-mradt aracard |

Kapikacchu plant grows mainly in rainy season.

Morphology

3. wpftrnen-afttarag Watt weeTAM: |
Kapikacchu fruits are having firm hairs on their surface.

4. yyenttreatt-yreneent fort orem: |
Kapikacchu fruits are having stiff hairs.

5. iigef-mdkeengerte: tora a frat
Kapikacchu fruit resemble the shape like that of tail of monkey and also has
compact hairs.

6. Whet-Acheag VAT |
Kapikacchu fruit is studded with stiff hairs like that of monkey.

7. AUT - STATA Ra TS TATA TAA:
Fruits have dense hairs which induce intense itching gives protection to the
plant.

8. geftrer-Teercare Tele S:kTeAT |
Very difficult to pluck the fruit as it is covered by stiff hairs which cause severe
itching.
9. WAVS- HUSA WHE ats |
Seeds of Kapikacchu resemble testicles.
Properties and Actions
10. geraten-gearftr starr: |

Seeds of Kapikacchu are potent aphrodisiac.

----- PAGE 381 -----
Kapikacchu 373

11, HST AreT aetet Preacher |
Kapikacchu seeds are strong aphrodisiacs and also stimulate the mind.

12. HUQT-HIS The athe |

When dried hairs of matured fruits come in contact with skin it causes intense

itching.

Regional Names

Hindi
Kannada
Malayalam
Marathi Kuhili
Habitat

Kapikacchu grows all over India, but very
common in tropical regions.

Morphology
Habit — An annual twiner

Branches — Slender, More or less hairy at
first, at length glabrescent.

Leaves — Trifoliate, compound, petiole is 6-
11 cm long; stipules are lanceolate, 5 mm long.
Leaf lets are membranous, 7.5 to 12.5 cm long
and 5 to 7.5 cm wide, terminal leaflets is slightly
smaller, all leaflets are subacute, mucronate, pu- Mucuna pruriens Bak.
bescent above, densely clothed with silvery gray
hairs beneath.

Inflorescence — 6-30 flowered raceme, 15-30 cm long.

Flowers — Solitary or 2 to 3 together along a slender silky rachis. Pedicels are 3 to 6
mm long hairy, bracts 1.2 cm long and lanceolate, calyx 1 cm long, silky and with a few
irritant bristles outside, tube is campanulate. Petals are 2.5 to 4.cm long and purple coloured.
Keel is slightly incurved, Papillonaceous petals.

Fruit — Pod, 5 to 7.5 cm long and 1 cm wide turgid, with a longitudinal rib running
the length of each valve, falcately curved on both ends, some what like letter “S’, densely

----- PAGE 382 -----
374 Dravyaguna Vijnana

clothed with persistent irritant bristles which are at first pale brown, afterwards steel gray.
Have 5-6 seeds.
Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample)

Seeds are kidney shaped, upto 1.5 cm Jong and 0.5 to 1 cm broad. Seed coat is hard,
glossy with brown colour and mottled with black. Hilum is conspicuous with funicular
growth. The embryo consists of two hard dusky brown cotyledons. It has not got any
odour.

Classical references

Synonyms
BRIA FM Wreat FT Aehet | BAST HURT HAST gee wreath
aigett seafratt a dar wire efter: 1 (91.5. Weert 129-130)

Properties and Actions

ahtracqyyt ger wer dau qe: | ra adet sea aah

Watst aragrast ard araftent oe | (aT. Zea 130-131)

cahtreneg: TH eargharer earshrengea | gen trareeat a Geant

(af. Terafeat 248)
erat (aitracgiasrs )
watrren yet watt oar 1 sortat cergen areaest ara,
(afi. Weert 150)

wafthared: tare fercet araftrrncarettere | vitret Seot Get Ages Tat: HET IN
waftrerenct get vit warerd ye | waftenreret geau feeiery tt
(& fi. sitsftrert 608-609)
wftraeg: TATA FEM araaaaEd | vara a fap wort
(afr. qeeafeat 53)
atrecsist gear ae det we: 1 freer ated sear adist fewgqsad
gulstr ager weedu aaa | ahem yh es wei HTT |
Ot Werate areata Yacht Tore Fe arto (A.A. Premeafert 49-50)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Kapikacchu
a. Mula b. Kanda c. Bija d. Patra
Ans: c. Bija

----- PAGE 383 -----
Kapikacchu 375
a occ cme resem ete innate aii

. Vipaka of Kapikacchu
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Kashaya d. Amla
Ans: b. Madhura
3. Pradhana Karma of Kapikacchu
a. Dipana b. Kasahara c. Vajikara d. Medhya
Ans: c. Vajikara
4. Mucadinine a chemical constituent present in
a. Durva b. Kapikacchu c. Guggulu d. Madanaphala
Ans: b. Kapikacchu
. Vanari Vatika is indicated in
a. Dhwaja Bhanga b. Atisara c. Netraroga d. Krimi
Ans: a. Dhwajabhanga
6. Botanical name of Kapikacchu
a. Clerodendron phlomidis b. Gmelina arboroea
c. Cyperus rotundus d. Mucuna pruriens
Ans: d. Mucuna pruriens
7. Markati and atmagupta are the synonyms of
a. Langali b. Kapikacchu
c. Shalaparni d. Prishniparni
Ans: b. Kapikacchu
8. Habit of Kapikacchu plant
a. Twiner b. Creeper c. Herb d. Tree
Ans: a. Twiner

to

nm

FORE RR

----- PAGE 384 -----
2.49 EE

Karkata Shringi
Pe asia aaa een

Useful part -— Keeta Kosha (Galls)

Rasadi panchaka

Kashaya Tikta

Laghu, Ruksha, Guru (Ra.Ni & Pr.Ni)

Vipaka [Ram
[Ushna

Karma (Action)
Shwasahara, Kasahara, Hikkanigrahana, Rochaka, Chardighna, Atisarajit.

Ajashringi

Shophahara, Trashnanigrahana, Shwasahara, Hradya, Vishaghna, Kasaghna,
Kushthaghna, Artinut, Chakshushya.
Pharmacological Action

Astringent, Tonic, Expectorant, Stimulant.
Doshakarma (Action of Desha)

Kapha Vata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka because of Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka
due to Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Kasshaya tikta Rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Karkatashringi— Shwasa, Kasa, Hikka, Aruchi, Trishna, Chardi. Rajayakshma,
Atisara.

Ajashringi— Shopha, Trishna, Chardi, Chakshu vikara, Shwasa, Hradroga, Visha,
Kushtha.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Shwasa (Asthma) & Hikka (Hiccough)

fig mhergn a aan: aratetecnrany | (a.fa. 17/101)

The gruel prepared with Karkata shringi (Pistacia integerrima) is useful in Shwasa
(Asthma) & Hikka (Hiccough).

----- PAGE 385 -----
Karkata Shringi 377

2. Kasa (Cough)
fran, Haeoretes Bare erst ares 1 (aA. 15/50)

Powder prepared from Karkata Shringi (Pistacia integerrima) licked with Taila
(Commonly with sesam oil).

3. Kapha chardi (Vomiting)
en RATA HASH TST oe MEA MEAT Pera, Telefe ay |
, (a.fa. 20/38)

Karkatashringi (Pistacia integerrima) Churna mixed with Musta (Cyperus rotundus)
Churna then administered with honey checks vomiting caused by the vitiation of
Kaphadosha.

4, Vajikarana (As an aphrodisiac)
epetegen: a: aeanieie weer fret | raracaatsarett w arty gars 1
(AAS. 50/44)
Kalka prepared from milk and Karkata Shringa (Pistacia integerrima) is beneficial
as an aphrodisiac. But the person should be on diet like cereals mixed with sugar, ghee
and milk.
Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) -lto3g

Phytoconstituents

Galls contain tannin, resin, essential oil, pistacienoic acid A & pistacin oil acid B,
tirucallid, B-sitosterol and masticadienoic acid.

Essential oil contains 0-pinene, camphene, o--terpineol, caprylic acid.

Fruit yielded crystalline compounds named pistacin and pistacinin.

Research corner

1. This study was planned to evaluate the possible analgesic and antiinflammatory
effects of Pistacia integerrima extracts. These results demonstrate the Pitacia
integerrima extracts have antinociceptive and analgesic effects and not
apparent acute toxicity on oral administration. Anmad NS, Waheed A, Farman,
M, Qayyum A. Analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects of Pistacia
integerrima extracts in mice. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2010 May 27;129(2):250-3.
doi>10.1016/j.jep.2010.03.017. Epub 2010 Mar 30.

2. Pistacides A and B (1-2), two new flavonoid glycosides, have been isolated

----- PAGE 386 -----
78 Dravyaguna Vijnana
from the methanolic extract of the aerial parts of Pistacia integerrima, along
with 2'-hydroxytisooriention (3), echioidinin 2'-O-beta-D-(6"-O-acety])
glucopyranoside (4), chrysoeriol (5) and diandraflavone A (6), reported for the
first time from this species. Their structures were elucidated by spectroscopic
analysis including 2D NMR, FAB-MS, and acidic hydrolysis. Ullah Z,
Mehmood R, Imran M, Malikb A, Afzal RA. Flavonoid constituents of
Pistacia integerrima, Nat Prod Commun. 2012 Aug;7(8):1011-4.

. Deregulated expression of cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) on’ vascular
endothelium aggravates the inflammatory condition in various chronic diseases.
In this work, it is aimed to identify the active constituent from leaf gall of
Pistacia integerrima Linn. using CAMs expression assay in activity guided
purification, followed by determining the molecular mechanism of action.
Results suggest that EG could be useful as a lead molecules for developing
therapeutic agent for various inflammatory diseases. Mehla K, Balwani S,
Kulshreshtha A, Nandi D,Jaisankar P, Ghosh B. Ethyl gallate isolated from
Pistacia integerrima Linn. inhibits cell adhesion molecules by blocking AP-1
transcription factor. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Oct 11;137(3):1345-52.
doi:10.1016/j.jep. 2011.07.068. Epub 2011 Aug 5.

4. The present study was designed to investigate the whole plant of Pistacia
integerrima stewart in order to examine the pharmacological basis of the use
of the plant in folk medicine for the treatment of infectious disease and disorder.
Pistagremic acid showed significant leishmanicidal activity (IC (50):6.710.09
2M) against Leishmania major (DESTO) promastigotes in comparison to
standard compound amphotericin B (IC(50):0.210.06 ?M). Uddin G. Rauf A,
Arfan M, Waliullah, Khan, I, Ali M, Taimur M, ur-Rehman I, Samiullah.
Pistagremic acid a new leishmanicidal triterpene isolated from Pistacia
integerrima Stewart. J. Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2012 Oct; 27(5):646-8. doi:
10.3109/14756366.201 1.604853. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

Yoga (Formulations)

w

SL No. Name Indications

Shrangyadi Churna Hikka, Shwasa
2. sri? Guta
Botanical Name — Pistacia integerrima stewart. Rhus succedenea Linn.

Balachaturbhadra Churna

Rhus — Name of the plant used by Theopharatus.

----- PAGE 387 -----
Karkata Shringi 379

een UnEEIIEII nN REIERRERERREEEERRERREEREEREEnennneneenemnennennaa

succedenea — Used as a substitute.
Family — Anacardiaccae
Kula - Amra kula
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Hikkanigrahana varga, Kasahara varga
Sushruta Kakolyadi Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Haritakyadi varga 178-179
Basonym of Drug
Hehe FIX TH ARM: AT |
Karkata Shringi gall resemble projections of Karkata (Crab).
Synonyms
Morphology
1. BIPM -saATITKaT TET sear ste
The galls of Karkatashringi (Pistacia integerrima) resembles horn of goat.
2. GAI-Ah TAM sit AMA HAGA |
The galls of Karkatashringi are curved.
3. fesrftret- Galls resemble a horn.
4. qeikfaann-gHeik ga fawrat TEM: AT |
The galls of Karkatashringi resemble the shape of crab horn.
Properties and Actions
5. Tyt- STOTT ASA |

Karkatashringi cures many diseases like Kasa, Shwasa, Balaroga etc.

Kakada singi

Kakada singi

The plant grows in Himalayan slopes, hills of Punjab and Uttarapradesh.

----- PAGE 388 -----
380 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Morphology
Habit — Tree, glabrous in nature

Leaves - Imparipinnate, 15-20 cm long, with
fine pubescence along petioles and nerves when
young. Leaflets are opposite or nearly so; 4-5 pairs of | JW
leaflets are present in one leaf. Petiolulate is short, lan-
ceolate from oblique base, entire margin, with 10-18
arcuate lateral nerves joined by reticulate veins.

Inflorescence — Panicle, Male inflorescence is
short, compact and pubescent. Female inflorescence |’
is long.

Flowers — Male flowers have 5,6 or 7 stamens
with large anthers. Sepals are shorter than stamens.
Female flowers have 4 linear sepals, deciduous.

Fruit — Drupe, Somewhat broader than long 6

: Pistacia integerrima. Stewart
mm broad, rugose, glabrous, grey when ripe.

Varieiteis/species
1. Pistacia lentiscus 2. Pistacia veralin

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample):

Galls are curved or horn shaped, hollow, upto 15 cm long and 3 cm broad. Outer
surface is rough, Pinkish purple or dark brown in colour, having a fimbriated appearance.
The inner surface is reddish brown in colour, bearing deposits of dust-like particles, which
represent dried insects and their excrementitious matter. On breaking become uneven
short pieces, having a characteristic odour and astringent taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
ore acess a carpets Prarie | aye a UT aacherea a aATAT
(ay. Shaenfest 178)

Properties and Actions
STS HUTA PATON HATTA] | ATR SHA aHISHRAAA SLU
(ay. eireest 179)
fret aborts a Tested | areata aageneehtstea
(af. Teeeat 84)

----- PAGE 389 -----
Karkata Shringi

ararret ( sagt fergre )

arareret feet tary: Mego aaftserer, | ragear sare ware ferrenratet pase,
(afr. Teenfert 86)

ore FereRT HUTAOMT HUA TATA, | arAagcarerrecnraheenarateraretstag I
(ef. sirafeert 1133)

fereat HahesTet G Tees Prenaren | fear seafarers
(afr. frorenfeert 157)
sre ararar Fre ACHATTATAT | Sat ATA ret are wal feerargy werd I
(fi.Pr. street 147)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Karkata Shringi
a. Root b. Fruit c. Gall d. Exudates
Ans: c. Gall

tN

. Pradhana Karma of Kapikacchu
a. Madhumehahara b. Shothahara c. Kasahara d. Visarpahara
Ans: c. Kasahara

. The gruel prepared with Karkata shringi (Pistacia integerrima) is useful in
a. Shwasa b. Arshas c. Karnaroga d. Hradroga
Ans: a. Shwasa

4. Shringyadi Churna is indicated in

Lo

a. Kushtha b. Hikka c. Vyanga d. Mutrakricchra
Ans: b. Hikka

5. Balachaturbhadra Churna is indicated in
a. Graharoga b. Twak roga c. Balatisara d. Agnimandya

Ans: c. Balatisara
6. Botanical name of Karkatashringi
a. Semecarpus anacardium b. Swertia chirata
c. Plumbago zeylanica d. Pistacia integerrima
Ans: d. Pistacia integerrima
7. Kuliravishana is the synonym of
a. Rasna b. Meshashringi _c. Karkata shringi d. Jatamansi
Ans: c. Karkata shringi
8. Vakra is the synonym of
a. Agnimanda c. Karkata shringi c.Nirgundi d. Bala

Ans: c. Karkata shringi e

----- PAGE 390 -----
0

Katuki

Useful part -— Kanda (Rhizome)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Action)
Bhedana, Dipana, Hradya, Jwaraghna, Pramehahara, Shwasahara, Kasahara,
Dahahara, Kushthaghna, Krimighna, Vishamajwaraghna, Arshoghna.

Pharmacological Action
Liver stimulant, Cholagogue, Purgative, Anthelmintic, Expectorant.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha) -Kapha pittashamaka

Pitta shamaka due to Shita virya and Tikta rasa and Kapha Shamaka because of
Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.
Rogahnata (Therapeutic indication)

Kamala, Yakrut vikara, Vibandha, Hridroga, Agnimandya, Jwara, Vishamajawara,
Prameha, Shwasa, Kasa, Daha, Kushtha, Krimi, Arshas, Raktavikara.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Pittaja Kushtha (Skin diseases due to Pitta)

aie eager ares a men 1 aise at wader wear et
meat Ul (afa. 7/132)

The Lepa (Application) of Priyangu (Callicarpa macrophylla), Katuki (Picrorhiza
kurroa), Renuka (Vitex negundo seeds), Indrayava (Fruit of Holarrhena antidysenterica),
Ativisha (Aconitum heterophyllum), Sevya (Vetiveria zizanoides) and Candana (Santalum
album) is beneficial in Pittaja kushtha (Skin diseases caused by Pitta dosha).

2. Stanya Shuddhi (To Purify breast milk)
UAT KAA Vigattsreny aA. 30/261

----- PAGE 391 -----
Katuki 383

Decoction prepared from Katuki (Picrorrhiza kurroa) is useful in purifying breast
milk.
3. Hridroga (Heart disease)

wedinganees free aftrersrar | anata. 6/44

In Pittaja Hridroga (Heart disease caused by Pitta dosha) the Kalka prepared from
Katuki (Picrorrhiza kurroa) & Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra) is taken with Sugar-water.

Matra (Dosage)
Virechanartha (to induce purgation) - 3 to 6g

Phytoconstituents

Irridoid bitter substances, picroside I, Picroside II, Kutkoside; Kutkin, Picrorhizin
are present in Rhizome.

Roots contain Kutkin, Kurrin, Vanillic acid, Kutkiol, Kutkisterol, D-Mannitol,
Picroside I, Picroside II and a glucoside called Kutkoside.

Research corner

1. This study attempts to determine the in vivo pharmacokinetic profile of
picrosides I and II in rats after oral administration of three different preparations
namely, kutkin (a mixture of picrosides I and II) P. kurroa extract and
Picrolaxz capsule (marketed formulation). Upadhyay D, Dash RP,
Anandjiwala S, Nivasarkar M. Comparative pharmacokinetic profiles of
picrosides I and II from kutkin, Picrorhiza kurroa extract and its formulation
in rats. Fitoterapia. 2013 Mar; 85:76-83. doi: 10.1016/j. fitote. 2013.01.004.
Epub 2013 Jan 18.

2. The antioxidant and anti-neoplastic activities of methanolic and aqueous
extracts of P. kurroa rhizome were investigated in the present study. The study
concludes that P. kurroa possess diverse therapeutic potentials which might be
useful in development of drugs or their precursors. Rajkumar V, Guha G,
Kumar RA. Antioxidant and anti-neoplastic activities of Picrorhiza kurroa
extracts. Food Chem Toxicol. 2011 Feb;49(2):363-9. doi:10.1016/
j-fet.2010.11.009. Epub 2010 Nov 21.

3. The present study was undertaken to investigate the effect of standardized
aqueous extract of Picrorhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth. on diabetes. The
findings provide in vivo evidence that standardized extrat of Picrorhiza kurroa
possess significant antidiabetic activity in streptozotocinnicotinamide induced
type-2 diabetes mellitus in rats. Husain GM, Singh PN, Kumar V. Antidiabetic

----- PAGE 392 -----
aot Dravyaguna Vijnana
‘act of Picrorhiza kurroa in rat model of NIDDyy

activity of standardized extr
activity of standardi : 3(3):88-92.

Drug Discov Ther. 2009 Jut a .
4. The effect of P. kurroa treatment on the antiproliferative response and, hepatic

antioxidant enzymes of rats administered with 2-acetylaminofluorene (2-4 ap

was studied in Wistar rats. There was an increase in the levels of transaminasg
nt also enhanced ornithine decarboxylase

3 as -AAF treatme . ‘ ‘
enzymes and EE, & dine incorporation into hepatic DNA.

activity and [3H] thymi
(ODC) activity and [3H] kurroa extract (250 and 500 mg/kg body

Pretreatment of rats orally with P. ce a :
weight) resulted in significant decreases in lipid peroxidation, transaminase

enzymes, LDH, hepatic ODC activity, and DNA synthesis (p<0.001). Rahman
S, Sultana S. Protective effects of Picorrhiza kurroa extract against 2.
acetylaminofluorene-induced hepatotoxicity in Wistar rats. J. Environ Patho]

Toxicol Oncol. 2007;26(3):195-205.
Yoga (Formulations)

SL.No.

Indications |

Kushtha, Yakratvikara
Kaphapitta jwara

Formulation

Arogyavardhini gutika

Katukadi kashaya Kaphapittajwara

Katukamaladi kashaya Malashodhanartha

Botanical Name — Picrorrhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth.

Picrorrhiza - Palmented root
Family — Scrophulariaceae (see Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Katuki kula

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka _Bhedaniya varga, Lekhaniya varga, Stanya shodhana varga,
Prajasthapana varga, Balya varga, Sanjnasthapana Varga

Sushruta Patoladi gana, Pippalyadi Gana, Mustadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni — Haritakyadi varga 151-152
Basonym of Drug
wetter atte fired aetercttter |
Katuki helps in releasing bile (Choleretic).

----- PAGE 393 -----
Katuki 385

Synonyms
Habitat
1, BTUSHT-HTTAT VAT |
Katuki (Picrorhiza kurroa) plant may be grown by stem cuttings.
Morphology
2. ARAMA PTAA PTT: |
Rhizome of Katuki resembles fish scales.
3, CISA: HVS: |
When cut the stem appears like wheel.
4. FOMte-HOT: WeIISEM: |

On breaking the rhizome, it becomes black powder.

Properties and Actions

5. farat-faTntet |
Katuki has very bitter taste.

6. wmeal-stealg: \
Katuki has unpalatable taste.

7. Aeaftran-tare Haft a Aeahirag, |
Katuki has bitter taste like that of fish bile and even the action is also similar
to bile of fish.

8. aTAet-art efter |
Katuki mitigates Ama.
9. Meth-teaks Gasiaats wk Aare THM ete; Ve: TA, TATETA
ape fercntott = |
Katuki purifies blood, improves functions of liver, acts as regenerative.
10. weuieht-aesret Uectt &

Katuki has regenerative action.
Regional Names

Engh

----- PAGE 394 -----
386 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Malayalam Kadukrohini

Marathi Kalikutki

Habitat
Katuki grows in Himalayan regions from Kashmir to Sikkim at the height of 7,000
to 14,000 ft.

Morphology

Habit - Creeping herb, this spreads by stolons. A
whorl of radical leaves arises from rhizome tip.

Root — Primary root grow maximum upto 38 cm
in length, but usually 6-10 inches long. Many adventi-
tious roots arise from the rhizome.

Shoot — Stem is represented by stolon and under
ground rhizome which bear leaves and flowering scape.

Leaves — Leaves are 5-10 cm long, oval in shape
with a sharp apex, flat and serrate.

Inflorescence — Indeterminate spike forming more
or less a triangular head.

Flower — Flowers are white or pale purple, bi-
sexual and having convex thalamus.

Picrorrhiza kurroa
Royle ex Benth

Fruit — Capsule, 1-15 cm long and oval shaped.

Seed — Extremely small sized 1 mm long and 1 mm wide. Embryo is enclosed in the
large bladdery loose hyaline reticulate taste.

Grahya Laxana (Characteristics of market sample)

Rhizome is straight or slightly arched cylindrical, upto 12 cm long and 4 to 10 mm in
diameter. Outer surface is grey or creamish brown in colour, bearing impressions of round
root scars and numerous scales. Rhizome terminates in a scaly leaf, bed or stem. A trans-
versely cut portion of the rhizome shows a smooth dark brown surface with large creamish
vascular bundles arranged in a prominent broken ring. On breaking becomes short pieces
and black powders spreads around, having a faint odour which is disagreeable. Taste is
very bitter.

Adulterant — Root of Lagotis glauca Gaertn.

----- PAGE 395 -----
Katuki 387

Classical references

Synonyms

meat g Heer fireat Porter Hee | arvilenl MITE TATAT Wee
Teeattrar arvseer Vigo Heahsatt: 1 (a.. elrernfeert 151)

Properties and Actions

edt g Hee Us feet war fear org: | Ate dot ger aaftrrsaraad |

WiesTaaScasaaye ti (as. Fant 152)

aacat ftrafafren we: vilarerarefert | aorreantarenry eet Pera sa TT 1

(afr. Te=aeat 38)

cecal Uitte farat weureRran wy: | edt ctoth war aeafirrseTTeT I

Waeare arant: ae HeHA HAT (S.A. stehrerf 1123-1124)

macanrsterme tree sitattrira Statirt | TANT ATT TA ET A AT I
(a.P. frerenieat 132)

agar 7 we frat dite tat aT | wafietet ate at fete

wR watery Hs aitre aa | seat aera frat g weer

(B.A. wagenteat 157-158)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Katuki is
a. Root b. Rhizome c. Fruit d. Flower

Ans: b. Rhizome
2. Pradhana Karma of Katuki as per Sharangadhara Samhita
a. Rechana b. Anulomana c. Bhedana d. Sramsana

Ans: c. Bhedana
3. Picroside and Kutkoside are present in
a. Pushkaramula b. Ushira c. Ahiphena d. Katuki
Ans: d. Katuki
4. Main ingredient of Arogyavardhini Vati is
a. Trivrat b. Katuki c. Haritaki d. Amalaki

Ans: b. Katuki

----- PAGE 396 -----
388 Drayyaguna Vijnana

5, Botanical name of Katuki is
a, Trachyspermum ammi b, Syzigium aromaticum
¢, Picrorrhiza kurron d, Piper longum
Ans: e. Picrorrhiza kurroa
6. Matsya Shakala is the synonym of
a. Trivrut b, Avartaki c, Aragwadha — d, Katuki
Ans: d. Katuki
7. Chakrangi and Krishna Bheda are the synonyms of
a. Katuki b. Guduchi c.Saptachakra sd. Chandana
Ans: a. Katuki
Habit of Katuki plant is
a. Tree b. Climber c. Creeping herb d. Shrub
Ans: c. Creeping herb
9, Pradhana Rasa of Katuki
a. Katu b. Tikta c. Kashaya d. Amla
Ans: b. Tikta

2

----- PAGE 397 -----
Khadira
jseful part - Sara (Heartwood)

U
Tikta Kashaya

Laghu, Ruksha

=
vine

Prabhava

Karma (Action)
Khadira — Kushthaghna, Dantya, Kandughna, Kasaghna, Ruchya, Medohara,
Krmighna, Pramehahara, Jwaraghna, Shothahara, Shwitrahara, Pachana.

Shwetakhadira — Varnya, Mukha-rogahara, Vranaropaka
somavalka - Raktadoshahara, Kushthaghna, Kandughna
Raktakhadira — Jwaraghna, Bhutaghna

Agrya Karma:
Get HSA | (AY, 25/40)
Khadira (Acacia catechu Willd.) is best for skin diseases.
Pharmacological Actions
Astringent, Cooling, Digestant, Haemostatic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)
Kaphapitta Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to its Shita virya and Tikta Kashaya Rasa.
Kapha Shamaka because of Katu vipaka and Tikta kashaya Rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Kushtha, Dantaroga, Kandu, Kasa, Aruchi, Medoroga, Prameha, Jwara, Shwitra,
Ajirna and Krimi.
Shwetakhadira — Vaivarnya, Mukharoga, Vrana
Somavalka — Raktadosha, Kushtha and Kandu
Raktakhadira — Jwara

----- PAGE 398 -----
390 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kushtha (Skin diseases)

Uahtiarameney a UferenaTeay | (FFA. 9/5)
The patient suffering from Kushtha (Skin disease) should use Khadira (Acacia cat-
echu) for drinking, bathing etc. It destroys Kushtha.

2. Shwitra (Vitiligo)
Tarn Heer Aorut wate Tee | Ulettan Hath Ulett aT A
(afi. 71/166)

Khadira (Acacia catechu) decoction is very. useful for Shwitra (Vitiligo).

3. Kasa (Cough)

fret, fea at aferaterreg hr: | (afar. 18/64)
The powder of heart wood of Khadira (Acacia catechu) is mixed with wine or curd
water.

Matra (Dosage)
Kwatha (Decoction) — 40 to 60 ml

Phytoconstituents
10% of acacatechin, quercitin, gum quercitrin.

Research corner

1. The chemopreventive potential of (+)-catechin-rich extract of Acacia catechu
(L-f.) Willd. Heart wood (AQCE) was evaluated against human breast
adenocarcinoma cell line (MCF-7) and 7, 12-dimethylbenz [a] anthracene
(DMBA)-induced mammary carcinoma in Balb/c mice. The present data
strongly suggest that anticancer potentiality of (+)-catechin-rich AQCE may be
attributable to its ability to positively modulate tumour markers as well as the
antioxidant system that could decompose the peroxides and thereby, offer a
protection against lipid peroxidation and linked to the expression of
transcription factors during DMBA-induced mammary carcinoma. Monga J,
Chauhan CS, Sharma M. Humab Breast Adenocarcinoma Cytotoxicity and
Modulation of 7,12-dimethylbenz [a] anthracene-Induced Mammary
Carcinoma in Balb/c Mice by Acacia catechu (L.f.) Wild Heartwood. Integer
Cancer Ther. 2012 Nov 9.

2. Anti-inflammatory properties of both baicalin and catechins have been widely
reported. However, the reports of analgesic effects of baicalin and catechins are

----- PAGE 399 -----
Khadira 391

limited. Three commonly used pain-related animal models were employed to
evaluate the analgesic activity of UP 446, a standardized bioflavonoid
composition of baicalin and catechins. The findings suggest that the
standardized anti-inflammatory bioflavonoid composition, UP446, could also
be employed to inhibit nociception. Yimam M, Brownell L, Hodges M, Jia Q.
Analgesic effects of a standardized bioflavonoid composition from Scutellaria
baicalensis and Acacia catechu. J Diet Suppl. 2012 Sep;9(3):155-65.
doi: 10.3109/19390211.-2012.708713. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

3. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the cytotoxicity of A. catechu
heartwood extracts in a human epithelial carcinoma cell line (A431) and
antitumor activity against DMBA/TPA induced squamous cell carcinoma in
Balb/c mice. The results suggest that AQCE may exert its chemopreventive
activity by acting as an antioxidant. Monga J, Chauhan CS, Sharma M. Human
epithelial carcinoma cytotoxicity and inhibition of DMBA/TPA induced
squamous cell carcinoma in Balb/e mice by Acacia catechu heartwood. J.
Pharm Pharmacol. 2011. Nov; 63(11):1470-82. doi:10.1111/j.2042-
7158.2011.-01354.x. Epub 2011 Sep 19.

4. Two new phenolic compounds, 5-hydroxy-2-[2-(4-hydroyphenyl) axety]]-3-
methoxylbenzoic acid (1) and (2S,3S)-3,7,8.3',4'-pentahdroxyflavane (2), were
obtained from the aqueous extract of Acacia catechu, along with four known
compounds identified as rhamnetin (3), 4-hydroxyphenyl ethanol (4),
3,3',5,5',7-pentahydroxy-flavane (5), and fisetinidol (6). Their structures were
determined on the basis of spectroscopic analysis. Free radical-scavenging
activities of the new compounds were evaluated. Li XC, Liu C, Yang LX,
Chen RY. Phenolic compounds from the aqueous extract of Acacia catechu.
J. Asian Nat Prod Res. 2011 Sep; 13(9):826-30. doi: 10.1080/10286020.2011.
597384.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications
ib Khadirarishta
35 Khadirakwatha Bhagandara

Botanical Name — Acacia catechu Willd.

Acacia — Tree yielding gum

----- PAGE 400 -----
392 Dravyaguna Vijnana

catechu — Kachu (Kannada word)
Family — Fabaceac (see Appendix-II for key features)

Gana _ vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka — Kushthaghna varga, Udarda prashamana varga, Mutrasangrahaniya
varga
Sushruta Salasaradi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni_ — Vatadi varga 30-33

Basonym of Drug
wafer feat festa feat a terse
By alleviating diseases it brings stability.
Synonyms
Morphology
1, HUCH-HUCHT: AA |
Khadira (Acacia catechu) has thorns over its trunk and branches.
2. ABMCA:- ACA; VSM: HUSH AT |
Khadira is thorny tree having money thorns.
3, PrargTee:- FAM aeT: VIG: HVSHT BIT |
Spines are curved in Khadira.
4. ANZA: ANAL Tar: |
Khadira has heartwood which is medicinally used.
5. THAR:-ThaTt: ARIST |
The heartwood of Khadira has red colour.
6. ATCA: - aA |
Khadira leaves are small in size.
Properties and Actions .
Khadira is regarded as best Kushtaghna dravya (Useful in skin diseases).
8. SAMA: SAMA WAHT |

Khadira twigs are made brush and used for brushing the. teeth.

----- PAGE 401 -----
Khadira 393

9. TARNTTA- TERETE: |

Khadira is very useful in diseases of throat.

Others
10. Teat-meast areadt, Tat Waar |
Khadira is regarded as sacred and used in sacrifices.
11, Ufqe-agt WASTAT: |

Khadira is used to perform rituals.
Regional Names

Hind
Khaya

Habitat
Khadira tree is growing throughout forests of India, but very common in dry regions
of North Karnataka.

Morphology

Habit — Moderate sized tree grows up to
AO ft. in height.

Bark — Dark coloured, rough, young,
shoots dark brown or purple, glabrous.

Leaves— Compound, Bipinnate, 10-15
cm long, main rachis, pubescent, with glands
between many of the pairs of pinnae and a large
conspicuous gland at or near the middle or the
petiole, stipular spines short, hooked, arises
from a broad triangular base. Pinnae have 10-
30 pairs, 4-5 cm long, nearly sessile, and their
rachises pubescent. Leaflets are 30-50 pairs, 0.5
cm wide, linear, subacute, sessile, often ciliate.

Inflorescence — 5-10 cm long axillary
spikes.

Acacia catechu. Wild

----- PAGE 402 -----
at Dravyaguna Vijnana
Flowers — Pale yellow coloured, sessile with corolla longer than calyx,
Fruit — Pod, 5-7.5 cm long and 1-15 cm wide, flat, thin, brown, shining, with

triangular beak at the apex and narrowed at the base. Seeds are 3 to 10 in number.

Manufacture of Catechu

The red heart wood obtained by felling the tree and separating the bark and sq
wood, is cut into chips mechanically and put into extractors. The steam is passed through
the drug for maximum extraction. The extract is concentrated under vacuum and js Cooled
by refrigeration. It is then centrifuged to isolate the cake of Kattha. The cake is moulded

in desired sizes and dried in proper condition.

Chemical tests
1. Catechu gives pink or red colour with Vanillin and Hydrochloric acid because
of the presence of Catehin.

2. Lime water when added to aqueous extract of black catechu gives brown
colour which tuns to red precipitate on standing for some time.

Classical references

Synonyms

Get were weet ae: | Hust ae age ala: 11
(AF. aeteat 30)

Properties and Actions
atett vitaet ora: augrerefamup | firm: Ha Aater: afte SAT I
Roaytrerattrerg penn ete ul (a9. aeieart 31-32)
Sratere nat fargrat aval qatar |
(a1. dere vt 33 df. aitaftrart 825)

Tater: Tae ferent fem: frremread | HErrenrenvsfrafreraer: yA: I

(afr. yeeafeat 25)
arrears (afer fasts )
ace aferftrrs: vita: free: | tadwata augqsfiargr: |
(af. yeeafeert 27)
ater: vftriirm: ware arate | oat aha at iraseATT Ul
VETACAA SATAN AHA: (A. sitet 823-824)

----- PAGE 403 -----
Khadira

395

vaiceyy ee fre: ofteer fererarenee: | ret: 1 arperererrtenagnetien "
(uPA. mrerente af 23)

aTAT:~
aay wiearktats: Hart: Hee: | wHVele YPeET: MATA: II
(afr. mrerenfert 25)
Th UaTlet:-
HEM Th Glet: HUTA Wola: | saat ae AUST: |
(aft. mrerenfert 27)
wateregarhern fer: firernarag: | WHAT Hee Sra AeAatet: VEU
(B.A. etirernfeert 130)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Khadira
a. Mula b. Kanda c. Saara d. Patra
Ans: c. Saara
2. Kushthaghna Karma of Khadira is attributed to
a, Rasa b. Virya c. Vipaka d. Prabhava
Ans: d. Prabhava
3. Agrya Karma of Khadira
a. Kandughna b. Kushthaghna cc. Jwarghna d. Kasahara

Ans: b. Kushthaghna

. Khadirarishtha is indicated in

a. Kushtha b Prameha c. Arshas
Ans: a. Kushtha

. Khadiradi Gutika is specifically indicated in

a. Atisara b. Mukharoga c. Jwara
Ans: b. Mukharoga

. Botanical name of Khadira

a. Areca catechu b. Cassia fistula
c. Acaia catechu d. Cassia occidentalis
Ans: c. Acacia catechu

d. Nidranasha

d. Sandhivata

----- PAGE 404 -----
LO

Dravyaguna Vijnana

7. Gayathri is a synonym of

a. Devadary b. Shala ¢, Sariva
Ans: d, Khadita

. Balaptara is a synonym of

a. Agastya b. Karamarda c. Khadira
Ans: «. Khadira

. Habit of Khadira

a. Shrub b. Tree c. Herb
Ans: b. Tree

2K RK

d, Khadira

d. Atagwadha

d. Climber

----- PAGE 405 -----
Kulattha

Part used - Bija (Sced)
Rasadi panchaka
Rasa Rashaya ]
Karma (Actions)

Ashmarihara, Shwasahara, Kasahara, Lekhana, Mutrala, Swedajanana, Medohara,
Jwaraghna, Krimighna, Ruchikara, Bhedana, Arshoghna, Shulahara, Vranaropaka and
Chakshusya.

Pharmacological Actions

Diuretic, Hypotensive, Anti-spasmodic, Abortifacient, Haemoglutinating,
Hypolipidaemic, Antistress, Hypoglycaemic and Hypocholesterolemic.

Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya. Kapha Shamaka because
of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Ashmari, Shwasa, Kasa, Medoroga, Jwara, Mutrakricchra krimi, Aruchi, Arshas,
Shuula and Vrana.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Atisweda (Excessive sweating)

aaah yEHera wold vreatits qatar 1 (ga. 1/186)

Powder of parched Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus) is rubbed over the body to reduce
the Atisweda (Excessive sweating).

Powder of parched Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus) is rubbed over the body to reduce
the Atisweda (Excessive sweating).

2. Kasa (Cough) & Shwasa (Asthma)

HAMAArh a UH FL UTA test HI farses a yews
(a.Fa. 18/129)

----- PAGE 406 -----
398 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Ghee cooked with decoction prepared from Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus), Pippali
(Piper longum), and Root of Pippali, Chavya (Piper chaba), Chitraka (Plumbago
zeylanica) and Shringavera (Zingiber officinale) is very useful in case of Kasa (Cough),
Shwasa (Asthma) and Hikka (Hiccough), oe

Matra (Dose)

Kwatha(Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
Churna (Powder) - 3to5 gm

Chemical Constituents - Seeds contain strepogenin, g-sitosterol, Genistein, Ure-
ase, Kievitone, Phaseollidein, Coumesterol, Psoralidin, D-glucose, D-galactose, L-
thamnose, D-arabinose and aspartic acid.

Research corner

To evaluate the preventive effect of hydro-alcoholic extract of Dolichos biflorus
seeds (DBE) in ethylene glycol induced nephrolithiasis. Ethylene glycol caused a signifi-
cant increase in calcium, oxalate, phosphate, and total protein in urine as well as in kidney
whereas decrease in calcium, sodium, and magnesium in serum was observed (p< 0.001).
Ethylene glycol also caused a significant increase in lipid peroxidation and concurrent
decrease in activities of antioxidant enzymes in kidney (p < 0.001). However, the seed
extract of D. biflorus caused significant restoration of all these parameters (p < 0.001).
Histopathological and histochemical studies also showed the reduced calcifications in
kidney of seed extract treated rats. These results indicated that seeds of D. biflorus have
significant prophylactic effect in preventing the nephrolithiasis, which might be due to the
antioxidant activity of the active compounds of the plant. Saha S1, Verma RJ. Anti
nephrolithiatic and antio-xidative efficacy of Dolichos biflorus seeds in a lithiasic rat model.
Pharm Biol. 2015 Jan;53(1):16-30. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2014.909501. Epub 2014
Sep 22.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Name Indications

Kulatthadya Ghrita Ashmari, Mutrakricchra
z Kulattha Gude
3, Kulattha yusha Shula, Vatadosha

Pashanabhedadi ghrita Ashmari, Vatavyadhi

Latin Name
Dolichos biflorus Linn.
Dolichos— Old Greek name for a bear.

----- PAGE 407 -----
Kulattha 399

biflorus— Bi=two, florus-flowers, having two flowers
Family - Fabaceae

Gama Vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Swedopaga varga
Sushruta Vatasamshamana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Dhanya varga

Basonym of Drug

Het Yea Ae festa gfe

Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus Linn) Plant spreads on the ground.
Synonyms

Morphology
1. dadts:- agant dare |

Seeds of Kulattha are having copper colour.
2. qnetiedent- The creeper spreads on the ground.

Properties and actions
3. weu- Kulattha has got Lekhana karma so it reduces the weight.
4. Uet- Kulattha is beneficial for eyes.

Vernacular Names

inc [ea

Habitat
Kulattha is cultivated through out India.

Morphology
Habit - Annual, branches are suberect or twining, stipules oblong.

Leaves - Compound, leaflets are 2.5 to 5 cm long, broadly lanceolate or oblong and
entire.

----- PAGE 408 -----
400 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Flowers - Papilionaccous, | to 3 flowers are seen in the
axis of leaves, yellow in colour, petals are | to 2 cm long, Keel
is narrow and obtuse shorter than the standard,

Fruit - Pod, about 5 cm long, compressed, recurved with
persistant style, seeds are 5 to 6 in number in one fruit, reni-
form shaped, grey or reddish brown in colour.

Varieties
Based on cultivation: two types as per Bhavamishra
1. Gramya (Cultivated)
2. Vanya (Wild)
Ra. Ni- ‘Two types

Dolichos biflorus Linn.

1. Tamrabija
2. Shweta bija

Classical references
Synonyms
Hea HAN HAA AGT BIT | (AH. TTHt: 60)
Properties and Actions
Seed: ee: Wes HATA: freemen | referer Aafen: arerenrercncarhrery,
gha Resvatigncrerter war | aaa Halse feahret: AT
(715. arta: 6)
So: peated: was: wefdure HwATEdeA: |
gaat yer yes dea: deeaeed ll
arrendtsera ater feerrarace: witfttr freee |
ate Fae fagtedt aarpereyr Ad: I
(af. gana a: 94-95)
aera werartten ferarasren ferearfea: | frattor Hey war HUTA THT:
Tea wba vitae Reale Heer RHA Se areal aaa Ul
(SF. aeret: 76-77)
wetteaen Hea Pe: Yo | raat aE ATTA
(a. were at: 72)

SOT: eM Tae: sUTatstet Percent arAaTEdeA: |

----- PAGE 409 -----
_

to

Wn

Kulattha — 401

* apieitgietingear titer: dire | areeat i
(fr. Ft. Preeenfe af: 72)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Kulattha

a, Bija b. Mula c. Pushpa d. Patra
Ans: a. Bija

. Pradhana Rasa of Kulattha

a. Tikta b. Madhura c, Kashaya d. Amla
Ans: c. Kashaya

. Main action of Kulattha

a. Dipana b. Grahi c. Kasahara d. Ashmarihara

Ans: d. Ashmarihara

. Powder of parched Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus) is rubbed over the body to

reduce
a. Kushtha b. Atimutra c. Atisweda d. Atipurisha

Ans: c. Atisweda

. Botanical name of Kulattha

a. Dolichos biflorus ___b. Dendropthe falcate
c. Criticum sativum d. Oryza sativa
Ans: a. Dolichos biflorus

. Tamrabija is a synonym of

a. Masha b. Kulattha c. Mudga d. Atasi
Ans: b. Kulattha

. Kulatthadya Ghrata is indicated in

a. Kasa b. Atisara c. Krimi d. Ashmari
Ans: d. Ashmari

KKK

----- PAGE 410 -----
Chapter

Useful part - Patra (Leaves)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Action)

Bhedana, Rasayana, Netrya, Brahmana, Balya, Vrashya, Vishahara, Jwarahara,

Kushthaghna, Krimighna.
Pharmacological Actions

Anti-inflammatory, Coolant, Laxative, Diuretic & Aphrodisiac.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Snigdha guna, Pitta Shamaka because of
Shita virya and Tikta Madhura rasa and Kapha Shamaka because of Katu vipaka and
Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Yakrutvikara, Kamala, Vibandha, Rajorodha, Krichrartava, Mutrakrichra, Pandu,
Jwara, Netraroga, Arshas, Gulma, Shotha, vishavikara, Agnidagdha visphota, Twakvikara,
Kushtha, Krimi.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kamala (Jaundice)

aretha eared Tea Sen Bet Mer: 1 (TAR. 8/44)

The juice extracted from Kumari (Aloe vera) is used as Nasya (Snuff) for Kamala
(Jaundice).

2. Pleeha vraddhi (Spleenomegaly)

Prmgutga: aaa: wetteroeftar: 0 (et. 2/1/15)

----- PAGE 411 -----
Kumari 403

Juice of Kumari (Aloe vera) mixed with Haridra (Curcuma longa) taken internally
will relieve Plecha vraddhi (Splenomegaly) and this therapy is also useful in Apachi
(Scrofula).

3. Vrana (Wound)
apardtee afte sites Seek flag | a aear Uremer Brera Fear I

(UF. 25/18)

Kalka (Paste) prepared from Kumari rasa (Juice of Aloe vera) and Jiraka (Cuminum
cyminum) if applied will relieve burning sensation and inflammation.

Matra (Dosage)
Swarasa (Leafjuice) -10to20 ml

Phytoconstitutents

Anthraquinone glycosides, aloin-barbaloin, isobarbaloin, i-barbaloin, aloe-emodin,
resin, aloetic acid, homonataloin, aloesone, chrysophanic acid, chrysamminic acid
galactouronic acid choline salicylate, mucopolysaccharides, glucosamine, and hexuronic
acid.

Research corner

1. Aloe vera (A.V.) is a tropical plant with anti-inflammatory and
immunostimulant effects, which could be of benefit in a diversity of wound
healing conditions. The aim of this study is to evaluate topically administered
A.V. gel on oral cavity minor aphthous healing. It seems likely that A.V. 2%
oral gel is not only effective in decreasing the recurrent aphthous stomatitis
patient’s pain score and wound size but also decreases the aphthous wound
healing period. Babaee N, Zabihi E, Mohseni S, Moghadamnia AA.
Evaluation of the therapeutic effects of Aloe vera gel on minor recurrent
aphthous stomatitis. Dent Res J (isfahan). 2012 Jul; 9(4):381-5.

2. The aim of the present study was to investigate the anti-obesity effects of Aloe
vera gel administration in male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats with diet-induced
obesity (DIO). SD rats at 7 wk of age were fed either a standard diet (10 kcal%
fat) (Std D) or high-fat (60 kcal% fat) diet (HFD) during the experimental
period. The results suggest that intake of Aloe vera gel reduced body fat
accumulation, in part, by stimulation of energy expenditure. Aloe vera gel
might be benefical for the prevention and improvement of diet-induced obesity.
Misawa E, Tanaka M, Nabeshima K, Nomaguchi K, Yamada M, Todia T,
Iwatsuki K. Administration of dried Aloe vera gel powder reduced body fat

----- PAGE 412 -----
104 Dravyaguna Vijnana
mass in diet-induced obestity (DIO) rats. J. Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo).
2012;58(3); 195-201.

3. The present study was performed to explore the effect of aqueous extract of
Aloe vera on behavioural parameters of pain, thus, the findings suggest that A,
vera exerts its effect by a peripheral mechanism of action rather than central.
Rathor N, Mehta AK, Sharma AK, Mediratta PK, Sharma KK. Acute effect
of Aloe vera gel extract on experimental models of pain. Inflammation. 2012
Dec; 35(6):1900-3. doi: 10.1007/s 10753-012-95 12-z.

4. To investigate the anti-oxidative and anti-fibrotic effects of Aloe vera in patients
with liver fibrosis. Oral supplementation with AHM could be helpful in
alleviating the fibrosis and inflammation of hepatic fibrosis patietns. Hegazy
SK, El-Bedewy M, Yagi A. Antifibrotic effect of Alove vera in viral infection-
induced hepatic periportal fibrosis. World J. Gastroenterol. 2012 May 7;18
(17): 2026-34. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i17.2026.

5. The anti-inflammatory activity of Aloe vera was investigated through MMP
inhibition studies. The effect of Aloe vera on MMP-9 inhibition was tested on
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). The inhibition of MMP-9
production in the cells was detected by gelatin zymography and was confirmed
by RT-PCR. Vijayalakshmi D, Dhandapani R, Jayaveni S, Jithendra PS, Rose
C, Mandal AB. In vitro anti inflammatory activity of Aloe vera by down
regulation of MMP-9 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J.
Ethnopharmacol. 2012 May 7;141(1):542-6. doi:10.1016/j.jep. 2012.02.040.
Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No: Formulation Indications

Botanical Name — Aloe vera Tourn. ex. Linn.
Aloe — Alloeh—A name from Arabic
vera — Native of India.

Family — Asphodelaceae

----- PAGE 413 -----
Kumari 40S

Gana vargikarana (Classical cagegorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 229-230
Basonym of Drug
Saat mise wae wert vite | arftearsrarg ae |
The plant which can survive with little quantity of water and it has cooling effect.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. PyeeeN-Lyet Tet AEA AT |
Kumari (Aloe vera) has very big and thick leaves.
2. Gaprdl-eergenr Hartt ser get alert Uler PraaeTes SMterahteayrey |
Leaves of Kumari have juice which resembles ghee.
3. fageraar-farget agala Sea: |
On cutting the leaves it secretes more juices.
Properties
4. SeAa- sales Seas AT Tartare: Seer

Kumari possesses rejuvenative qualities and it is also very useful in disorders
of teenage girls.

5. TeHA-Te HM Fa, AAS YA THART Ske |

The plant has got very good medicinal properties and useful in disorders of
teen, so liked by all the people.

Regional Name

Habitat

Kumari plant is cultivated throughout India as a commercial plant.

----- PAGE 414 -----
406 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Morphology

Habit - Perennial dwarf fleshy leaved plant.

Stem — Short and thick, somewhat divided.

Leaves — Sessile, crowded, lanceolate, erect-spreading, concave, spiny toothed at
the margin.

Scape longer than the leaves, scaly, branched,
racemes long & dense.

Flowers — Pendulous, yellow or orange
coloured, Perianth-segments united into a cylindric
or campanulate straight or slightly curved tube. Sta-
mens are as long as perianth.

Fruit —Locculicidal.
Varieties Varieties
Commercially there are four varieties.
1. Curacao aloes
2. Cape aloes
3. Socotrina aloes
4. Zanzibar aloes
Chemical tests

1. Freshly prepared bromine solution is added to a small quantity of the filtrate pre-
pared by 1 g of aloe powder boiled with 10 ml water and filtered with help of Kieselguhr.
The test gives a pale yellow precipitate of tetrabromalin.

Adulterants
Black catechu, Pieces of iron and stones.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine features)

Juice obtained from pulp of leaves when dried becomes solid mass of irregular shape
and different sizes, dark chocolate to black in colour surface is hard, opaque with slightly
vitreous appearance. On breaking become pieces exposing a glossy somewhat sticky
surface. Thin pieces are translucent and brownish in colour. It has got nauseating odour
and bitter taste.

Aloe vera Tourn.ex.Linn

The fresh juice which is obtained by crushing the white pulp of green succulent
leaves. It is a sticky liquid of golden yellow colour having nauseating odour and metallic
taste.

----- PAGE 415 -----
Kumari 407

Classical references
Synonyms :
HPA TERA ST He Taparitane | (HI. eM 229)
Properties and Actions
want Vert often farce Asa Tart i eR seuht sea Gear areferr wpe, 11
Tenepegigaastet ea | meaftreufrantefirrmrermar
(aM. Teaeat 229-230)
apart efter frat wep Vest ea Terete eHashes Hse BU
Tranter] fraracarmrary, | aaeer ferrantett aca gen Ta
aratrrahtet HANt HT Te u (HA. staff 1639-1640)
Jean fear frat weer aearcet | firrenrafewarst Heel ot caret
(afr. werieat 49)
ward wep force eT vite Tar | yerette aaa heg Ties Perea I
sat a eT ava Haratea Haare | (ALA. Mayenfe at 154-155)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Kumari
a. Mula b. Bija c. Patra d. Pushpa
Ans: c. Patra
. Pradhana Rasa of Kumari
a. Kashaya b. Tikta c. Madhura d. Katu

Ans: b. Tikta
3. The juice extracted from Kumari (Aloe vera) is used as Nasya (Snuff) for
a. Kamala b. Shotha c. Kushtha d. Arshas

i)

Ans: a. Kamala
4. Rajapravartini Vati is indicated in
a. Yoniroga b. Rajorodha c. Shiroroga d. Nidranasha
Ans: b. Rajorodha
5. Botanical name of Kumari
a. Mesua ferrea b. Asparagus racemosus

c. Curcuma zedoria d. Aloe vera
Ans: d. Aloe vera

----- PAGE 416 -----
cs Dravyaguna Vijnana

6. Sthula dala is a synonym of
a. Bhaya b. Kutaja
Ans: ec. Kumari

7. Kanya and Graha Kanya are the synonyms of :
a, Haridra b. Lodhra c. Manjishta d. Kumari

Ans: d. Kumari

RK

----- PAGE 417 -----
Kumkuma Keshara

Useful part - Keshara (Dried stigma)

Rasadi panchaka

Snigdha Laghu

Karma (Action)

Varnya, Vranahara, Vamihara, Jantughna, Kantikara, Drishtivardhaka, Vishahara,
Hikka nigrahana, Kasahara, Rujahara, Dourgandhyhara, Kushthaghna.

Trana kumkuma

Shophahara, Kandughna, Kushthaghna, Amadoshaghna.
Pharmacological Actions

Antispasmodic, Emmanagogue, Stimulant.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakaphahara, Vatahara due to its Ushna virya and Snigdha guna. Kaphahara
because of its Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Vyanga, Shiroruja, Krimi, Chardi, Vrana, Drishtidosha, Vishavikara, Hikka, Kasa,
Kushtha and Twak vikara, Mutraghata.
Trana kumkuma

Shopha, Kandu, Pama, Kushtha and Amadosha.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Mutraghata (Retention of Urine)

Prot Heprend aT Aye ATT | Ut WraceTaT YAAATYAMT, |!

(43. 58/31)

10 g of Kumkuma (Crocus sativus) is kept in honey water over night. This if it is
taken then it relieves retention of urine immediately.

----- PAGE 418 -----
410 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Shiroroga (Headache)

wea Ue frmg Tay | (31.2.5 24/7)
Nasya (Snuff) with ghee processed with Kumkuma (Crocus sativus) and Sugar will
relieve headache caused by Pitta dosha and Rakta.

3, Mutrodavarta (Obstruction and retention of urine)

FRAT ances HAT PEAT A | vsvsssvn are fretgiscrauttqary, 1
(9.9.3 55/25)
Decoction prepared from Kumkuma (Crocus sativus) added with little salt relieves
the retention of urine.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) - 125 to 500 mg

Phytoconstituents
Saffron contains red colouring matter known as crocin, crocetin, bitter principle called
picrocrocin, traces of volatile oil, non-reducing substances, hydrocarbon.

Research corner

1. The aim of the present study was to investigate the antithyperglycemic and
protective potential of crocin, a pharmacologically active constituent of Crocus
sativus L., in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. In conclusion, findings
suggest that crocin has the hypoglycemic and antioxidative properties in
streptozotocin-induced diabetes and it may be useful in the management of
diabetic patients. Rajaei Z, Hadjzadeh MA, Nemati H, Hosseini M, Ahmadi M,
Shafiee S. Antihyperglycemic and antioxidant activity of crocin in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. J Med Food. 2013 Mar; 16(3):206-10.
doi:10.1089/jmf. 2012.2407. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

2. In this study, they aimed to investigate the effects of crocinon MMP-1, MMP-
3 and MMP-13 expression in rabbit chondrocytes induced by interleukin-1a
(IL-1o) and in an experimental rabbit model induced by anterior cruciate
ligament transection. Findings suggest that the antiinflammatory activity of
crocin may be of potential value in the prevention and treatment of
osteoarthritis. Ding Q, Zhong H, Qi Y, Cheng Y, Li W, Yan S, Wang X. Anti-
arthritic effects of crocin in interleukin-1?-treated articular chondrocytes and
cartilage in a rabbit osteoarthritic model. Inflamm Res. 2013 Jan; 62(1):17-25.
doi: 10.1007/s 00011-012-0546-3. Epub 2012 Aug 18.

3. In this study, the effects of saffron (Crocus sativus) stigma aqueous extract and

----- PAGE 419 -----
Kumkuma_ Keshara 411
two active constituents, crocin and safranal, were investigated on blood
pressure of normotensive and  desoxycorticosterone — acetate-induced
hypertensive rats, Safranal is more important than crocin for lowering down
blood pressure of rats. Imenshahidi M, Hosseinzadeh H, Javadpour Y.
Hypotensive effect of aqueous saffron extract (Crocus sativus L.) and its
constituents, safranal and crocin, in normotensive and hypertensive rats
Phytother Res. 2010 Jul; 24(7):990-4, doi:10.11002/ptr. 3044.

4. The aim of this study was to investigate the agntidepressant properties of
stigmas and corms of Crocus sativus L. The aqueous ethanol extract of C.
sativus corms was fractionated on the basis of polarity. The results suggest that
the low polarity parts of C. sativus corms should be considered as a new plant
material for curing depression, which merit further studies regarding anti
depressive-like activitics of chemical compounds isolated from the two
fractions and mechanism of action. Wang Y, Han T, Zhu Y, Zheng CJ, Ming
QL, Rahman K, Qin LP. Antidepressant properties of bioactive fractions from
the extract of Crocus sativus L. J Nat Med. 2010 Jan; 64 (1):24-30. doi:
10.1007/s 11418-009-0360-6. Epub 2009 Sep 29.

5. In this study, the anxiolytic and hypnotic effects of saffron aqueous extract and
its constituents crocin and safranal, were studied in mice. The results showed
that saffron aqueous extract and safranal have anxiolytic and hypnotic effects.
Hosseinzadeh H, Noraei NB. Anxiolytic and hypnotic effect of Crocus sativus
aqueous extract and its constituents, crocin and safranal, in mice. Phytother
Res. 2009 Jun; 23(6):768-74. doi:10.1002/ptr. 2597.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications

Kumkumadya taila Vyanga, Nilika
Kumkumadi Ghrata Mukhadushika, Sidhma

Botanical Name — Crocus sativus Linn.
Crocus - Name adopted from Theophrastus, sativus - Cultivated.
Family — Iridaceae
Kula — Keshara kula
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Shonithasthapana varga
Sushruta Eladigana
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpradi varga 74-78

----- PAGE 420 -----
412

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug

Vee: FLAT |

Kumkuma is very sacred and all worship.

Synonyms
Habitat

1.

2.

maIeey-HyAt Tey |

Kumkuma grows in Kashmir region.
ATSHT-TTRTHAN STTAATA |

Kumkuma found in Bahlika desha (Punjab province of Pakistan).

Morphology

Se

4.

sTfrraq- art: raat HIST |

Keshara resembles fire-flame.

PHNGAAT-HYAGAaASAT |

Keshara (Stigma) which is a useful part and obtained from the flowers.

Properties and Actions

5.

11.

TRA-THATT |

Kumkuma is red in colour.

. Uaeng-ditant sate

Kumkuma imparts yellow colour if mixed with water.

. auedy-aurter fear

Kumkuma imparts colour.

. Se Hyaranty |

Kumkuma imparts yellow colour like that of Kusumbha (Carthamus
tinctorius).

. tty cteurh er |

Kumkuma has very potent odour.

. RE-ea TR |

Kumkuma has got strong odour.
arq-rat area ster |

Kumkuma is liked by everybody because of its bright and attractive colour.

----- PAGE 421 -----
Kumkuma Keshara 413

Regional Name

Hindi | Kesar ——d

Habitat
Kumkuma is a native plant of Asia and it is cul-
tivated in Kashmir state of India.

Morphology

Habit - Herb

Stem — Underground corm covered by few scale
leaves buds present in the axils of scale leaves, scape
arises from corm. Aerial stem is erect, simple, bear-
ing one flower at the tip.

Leaves — Dorsiventral, grooved on the back,
radical, basal, linear or sword shaped, flat, equidis-
tant, parallel-multicostate veined.

Inflorescence — Simple, solitary and terminal.

Flower — Actinomorphic, bisexual, lilac or deep Crocus sativus. Linn

purple in colour with 3+3 tepals froms a long tube,
Stamens are 3 in number, free, inserted on the throat of the tube. Gynoecium is tricarpellary

syncarpous, Ovary is inferior with axile placentation.
Fruit — Small locucidal capsule.

Varieties
Bh.Pr.Ni — 3 types
1. Kashmira - Best quality
2. Bahlika - Medium quality
3. Parasika - Inferior quality

Ra.Ni-— 1. Kumkuma, 2.Trana kumkuma
Market samples — 1. Mograa, 2. Laccha

----- PAGE 422 -----
414 Dravyaguna Vinana

Properties
1. Kashmira - Sukshmakesharayukta on stigma) Raktavarna (Red in colour)
) i i Lotus).
Padmagandhi (Aroma like that of . |
2. Bahlika - Shukla (White) or Pita varna (Yellow) Ketaki gandha (Aroma like

Pandanus) Sukshma kesara (Small stigma). -
3. Parasika —- Madhugandha (Honey like odour), Jshatpandura varna (Whitish

in colour) Sthulakeshara (Bigget stigma).

Adulterants

Carthamus tinctorius Florets
Chemical tests

1. Add a drop of Sulphuric acid to dry stigma, it turns blue, gradually changing to
purple and finally purplish red.

2. Saffrons imparts yellowish orange brown colour to water.

Collection

The plants are raised from corms planted during July or August. The flowering takes
about one year. Flowers are collected in early morning in November and December,
Stigma and Upper style portions are detached manually and the drug is dried by artificial
heat and stored in dry place.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine features):

Dried stigma of Mogra variety is of deep red colour with the style cut and removed
beyond the length of 10 mm. The upper extremity of each stigma spreads out to form a flat
lamina having a dentate margin. It has got very strong characteristic odour and having
slightly bitter taste.

Dried stigma of Laccha variety is having long, tubular gradually tapering style of
yellowish colour, up to 2.5 cm in length. It has got strong characteristic odour and has
bitter taste.

Classical references
Synonyms :

(as. afatert 74)
Properties and Actions

(a1.3. afufeat 78)

----- PAGE 423 -----
Kumkuma_ Keshara 415

BRET Hed fremyet yeroretteforet | wurgheforcrerferarge, arvana,
(afr. aeanfaert 12)

HEN Hed ferek ave aurea, 1 afer arse frernrforer aftr
(fa. airaftrert 1302)

MC EC a
(af, aaaeart 41)
TPH OMT HOt Here | HUgherararparrarret aTeht ATA.
(uF. aenfeart 43)

Srarae 1 (ALA. eeargenearf 3 9 )
Varieties and their characterstics
ares at get agai aa | qencenach warner agra,
Bet unde aarerher adie, 1 garage aut aaah wy
(ary. Buieett 75-77)
aidt Woh Trager | areity a werd ware agTay
ara rated mea aaaha fF 1 sagt wi Wa wR a
Seat WT PEAT, Ut (S.A. sitefefeart 1303-1306)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Kumkuma
a. Stem b. Dried stigma ___c. Root d. Rhizome
Ans: b. Dried stigma
2. Pradhana Karma of Kumkuma kesara
a. Balya b. Medhya c. Varnya d. Dipana
Ans: c. Varnya
3. Dose of Kumkuma Churna
a. 500mg to 1 g b. 1 to2g
c.3 to6g d. 125 to 500mg

Ans: d. 125 to 500 mg

----- PAGE 424 -----
416 Dravyaguna Vijnana
ce a

4. Kumkumadya Taila is indicated in
a. Vyanga b. Kushtha c. Visarpa d. Vipadika
Ans: a. Vyanga
5. Botanical name of Kumkuma
a. Centella asiatica b. Crocos sativus
c. Curcuma longa d. Hedychium spicatum
Ans: b. Crocos sativus
6. Kusumodbhava is a synonym of
a. Patala b. Aragwadha c. Kumkuma d. Apamarga
Ans: c. Kumkuma
7. Habit of Kumkuma plant

a. Tree b. Shrub c. Creeper d. Herb
Ans: d. Herb

8. Types of Kumkuma as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu
a. 3 b. 4 c. 5 d. 6
Ans: a. 3

9. Adulterant of Kumkuma
a. Tila b. Kusumbha c. Yashtimadhu d. Vacha

Ans: b. Kusumbha

ERK

----- PAGE 425 -----
Kutaja

Useful part Kanda Twak (Stem bark) & Beeja (Seed)

rasadi pancaka

Pushpa (Flower

Karma (Action)

Twak (Bark) — Stambhaka, Arshoghna, Dipana, ‘TOSS FR Kushtaghna,
Krimighna, Amapachaka.

Bija (Seed) — Vamaka, Jwaraghna, Atisarahara, Kushthaghna, Shulahara, Dipana,
Pachana.

Pushpa (Flowers) — Atisarahara, Dipana, Kushthaghna.
Agrya Karma:

HERAH VOUT THATS | (AF. 25/40)

Bark of Kutaja (Holarrhena antidysenterica Wall.) pacify Kapha, Pitta & Rakta,
astringent and dries up.

Pharmacological Actions
Bark — Stomachic, Astringent, Antidysenteric, Febrifuge, Anthelmintic.
Seed — Astringent, Febrifuge, Anthelmintic, Antidysenteric, Emetic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Twak (Bark) and Pushpa (Flower) — Pittakapha Shamaka. Pitta Shamaka due to
Shitavirya and Tikta Kashaya rasa, Kapha Shamaka because of Katu vipaka and Tikta
Kashaya rasa.

Indrayava (Kutaja bija) — Tridosha Shamaka (Ra.Ni.) Vatahara because of Ushna
Virya, Pitta Shamaka due to Tikta rasa and Kapha Shamaka due to Ushna virya, Katu
vipaka and Katu Tikta rasa.

----- PAGE 426 -----
418 Dravyaguna Vijnana
—____
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Twak (Bark) —Atisara, Pravahika, Arshas,
Krimi, Twak vikara.
Bija (Seed) ~ Atisara, Jwaratisara, Rakt
Raktapitta, Jwara.
Pushpa (Flower) — Atisara, Kushtha, Krimi.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Atisara (Diarrhoea)
(FF 19775)
In case of blood mixed diarrhoea one should consume ghee cooked with Indrayay,
(Seeds of Holarrhena antidysenterica) and barley. Then one should take liquid grue,

2. Raktarshas (Bleeding piles)

pescetde: wan: renee: | (aR. 14/185)

Decoction prepared from Kutaja twak (Bark of Holarrhena antidysenterica) and
Nagara (Zingiber officinale) checks the bleeding piles.
3. Vrana (Wound)

ereittehgpest: Hare AUT: 11 (AY. 25/87)

Decoction prepared from Karavira (Nerium indicum), Arka (Calotropis procera)
and Kutaja (Holarrhena antidysenterica) if used for washin g the wound it promotes heal-
ing.

Raktapitta, Kushtha, Amadoshg, Tri

arshas, Visarpa, Kushtha, Vataraky, Shu
> ONY

Matra (Dosage)
Twak kwatha (Decoction of Bark) -— 30to50ml
Bija churna (Seed powder) - 500 mg to 1.5¢
Phytoconstituents

Akaloids like conessine (Kurchicine), Norconessine, Isoconessine, Dioxyconessine,
Conessimine, Holarrhimine, Holarrhidine.

Research corner

1. The present study shows evaluation of anti-malarial effects of two plants
commonly used against malaria in the Garhwal region of north-west Himalay®,
in order to discover the herbal-based medicine. The present investigation

----- PAGE 427 -----
Kutaja 419
reflects the use of these traditi

taditional medicinal i ari
plants may work as potenti poker einer eee samen

lal source in the development of variety of herbal

canescens, plants tradition
rest Himalaya, Malar J. 2011 Feb 2;10:20. doi:10.1186/1475-2875-10-

2. The alkaloids from the ethanolic extrac

: t of H. antidysenterica seeds were
evaluated for their antibacterial acti

vity against clinical isolates of
C) in vitro, and their antidiarrheal
induced diarrhoea in rats, in vivo. The results suggest
usefulness of alkaloids of H. antidysentrica seeds as antibacterial and
andtidiarrhoeal agents. Kavitha D, Shilpa PN, Devaraj SN. Antibacterial and

antidiarrhoeal effects of alkaloids of Holarrhena antidysenterica WALL.
Indian J Exp Biol. 2004 Jun; 42(6):589-94.

3. The aim of the present work to isolate and identify new AChE inhibitors from
Holarrhena antidysenterica. The results suggest that these alkaloids could be
potential candidates for further development of new drugs against AD. Yang
ZD, Duan DZ, Xue WW, Yao XJ, LI S. Steroidal alkaloids from Holarrehna
antidysentrica as acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and the investigation for
structure-activity relationships. Life Sci. 2012 Jun14;90(23-24):929-33. doi:
10.1016/).lfs.2012.-04.017. Epub 2012 Apr 30.

4. This study was carried out to provide pharmacological basis for medicinal of
Holarrhena antidysenterica in gastrointestinal disorders. These results indicate
that the gut stimulant and relaxant activities of Holarrhena antidysenterica are
mediated possibly through activation of hitamine receptors and Ca(++) channel
blockade, respectively and this study provides sound mechanistic background
for its usefulness in gut motility disorders such as constipation, colic, and
possibly diarrhoea. Gilani AH, Khan A, Khan AU, Bashir S, Rehman NU,
Mandukhail SU. Pharmacological basis for the medicinal use of Holarrhena
antidysenterica in gut motility disorders. Pharm Biol. 2010 Nov; 48(11):1240-
6. doi: 10.3106/13880201003727960. Epub 2010 Sep 7.

5. A new steroidal alkaloid, named antidysentricine, has been isolated from the
seeds of Holarrhena antidysenterica and characterized as 3  beta-
dimethylaminocon-5-enin-18-one (1). Kumar A, Ali M. A new steroidal
alkaloid from the seeds of Holarrhena antidysenterica. Fitoterapia. 2000. Apr;
71(2):101-4.

----- PAGE 428 -----
420 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No Formulation Indications

Kutajadyarishta Atisara, Grahani
Kutajavaleha Atisara, Grahani

Kutaja Rasakriya Raktatisara
Kutajadya ghrata Raktarshas
Kutajashtaka Atisara, Arshas

Kalpa of Vatsaka mentioned in Kalpasthana 5th chapter of Caraka. Totally 18
yogas are explained.

Rutajadi kashaya Atisara, Amaja Shula

SI No Kalpa Number of Yoga

With Jala 3 yogas
With Krashara 1 yoga
Botanical Name — Holarrhena antidysenterica Wall.

Holarrhena - Holos-whole, Arrhen-male-whole male-entire anther.

antidysenterica - Useful in dysentery.

Family — Apocynaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)

Kula — Kutaja

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)

oni

Charaka — Arshoghna varga, Kandughna varga, Stanyashodhana varga,
Asthapanopaga varga

Sushruta Aragwadhadi gana, Pippalyadi gana, Haridradi gana, Brihatyadi
gana, Lakshadi gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. | Guduchyadi varga 116-118, Haritakyaadi Varga 156
Basonym of Drug
He at wae area get, He frtys art ser

Kutaja tree grows in forest and in rainy season.

----- PAGE 429 -----
; Kutaja 421
esther eee -
Synonyms

Habitat
1. aalferg:-cHfereest aa: |
Kutaja grows commonly in Kalinga region.
2, ATH: ASN Te: |
Found in Vatsa desa.
3. Faget artery aeaaay age area |
Commonly found in Mahendraparvata KSetra.
4, Uae aee WAS Sa: wt gar: |
Kutaja (Holarrhena antidysenteria) plant grows gregariously.
Morphology
5. GAh:-Beaga: |
Kutaja is a small tree.
6. WURIEA:-UU sy gat: |
The bark of Kutaja is pale white in colour.
7. Waava:-yrafr geeAT |
Kutaja plant blossoms just prior to rainy season.
8. fiRafecar-fity afecrareaeaagUEe: |

Kutaja is tree grows in mountains and flowers are white like that of Mallika
(Jasmine).

9. WfeereRTgEr:— APTA Fa YATE I
Flowers are bright white like that of Jasuune.
10. AEMTeT:-WTIGeIT: I
Flowers are aromatic.
11. Ganea-aarandterated emer | tanh fe sara’ sf ara ute
Seeds of Kutaja fruit are barley-shaped.

Properties and Actions
12. Pordt-ttea carerarchtter
Kutaja stops diarrhoea.

13. arferen-fereey HB: |

----- PAGE 430 -----
422 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Kutaja is one of the best drug among Tikta dravya (Drugs having bitter taste).

Regional Names
a

Habitat

Kutaja tree grows through out India, more com-
mon in forests.

Morphology
Holarrhena antidysenterica

A shrub or small tree, glabrous or pubescent. The
bark is pale in colour.

Leaves — Leaves are opposite, 10 to 20 cm long
and 5 to 11 cm wide, broadly ovate to elliptic, obtuse
or obtusely acuminate tip, glabrous or more or less pu-
bescent, base usually obtuse. Main nerves are 10-14
pairs, conspicuous, very short petiole, 3 mm long and
sometimes leaves are sessile.

Inflorescence — Corymbose cyme, 7 to 15 cm
in diameter, pedicels are slender.

Flowers — Aromatic, creamish white in colour,
corolla is tubular and 8 to 13 mm long.

Fruit —Follicles, 20 to 40 cm long, 6 to 8 mm in
diameter, cylindric, diverging, often dotted with white
spots.

Seeds—8 mm long, linear-oblong, tipped with a
spreading deciduous coma of brown hairs 2 to 2.5 cm
long.

Wrightia tomentosa R.Br.

----- PAGE 431 -----
Kutaja 423

Wrightia tinctoria
Habit — Deciduous tree grows upto 45 ft. in height.

Bark — 8 to 10 mm ‘thick, grey, smooth, outer layer is thin and inner layer is thick,
brittle, creamy, blaze is greenish-yellow, latex is milky white.

Leaves — Simple, opposite, distichous, exstipulate, petiole is 2 to 5 mm Jong, stout,
glabrous. Lamina is 3.5 to 11 cm long and 2 to 4 cm wide, oblong-lanceolate or elliptic-
ovate, base is acute, apex is acuminate, entire margin, glaucous beneath, lateral nerves 5
to 10 pairs, reticulate venation.

Inflorescence — Terminal cyme

Flower — Bisexual, white, scented, pedicel is 1.5 mm long, stamens are 5, carpels
are 2 and free.

Fruit — 2 follicular mericarps, 15 to 45 cm long, slender, smooth, green, cylindric
and cohering at the tip.

Seed —- 1.5 cm long, black and commate at one end.
Varieites
Charaka -— 1. Pumkutaja— Holarrhena antidysenterica
2. Strikataja - Wrightia tinctoria
Modern classification — White and Black variety.

Particular/ Variety White Black
Dark black
White on drying Black on drying

Flowers White, small, Slightly Strongly scented
fragrant
Pods Arranged in pairs but Grow in pairs joined at origin

partly seperate

Charaka in Kalpasthana 5th chapter mentioned two types of Kutaja viz. Pumkutaja
and Strikutaja.

Pumkutaja Strikutaja
Fruit Big Small

Flower White Blackish or Pinkish
Leaf Glaucous -
Pedicel - Small

----- PAGE 432 -----
A424 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine features)

The bark will be flat, slightly curved or arched and upto 5 mm thick, outer surface is
buff to reddish brown in colour, rough and warty, with patches of beady protruberances.
Inner surface is rough and scaly, reddish brown on sides and whitish in the center. On
breaking becomes short pieces or granules, has got faint agreable odour and bitter taste.

Seeds are long, lanceolate upto 1.25 cm long and 3 to 4 mm wide at its thickest point.
External surface is yellowish brown in colourk, finely striated lingitudinally. Seeds when
ripe, carry a teft of brown hair at the top. Seeds have not got any odour and tastes very
bitter.

Classical references
Synonyms
HET: Hes: Hlet arent Prelaferrenr | aarlers: Mee wa AfSeTHTTST SATE |
Sa Baca: Wheat Gar: UU STEA: (A. Wee TF 116-117)
Properties and Actions
Hes: HH wat cereal fer: | sreifshrearcrTEraaT Ms APSTT I
(TN. Tete TT 118)
wen: waht: Bera warfare: | petdtar frmeqenhr feared, u
(afi. ragomie at 14)
Hew: Vaeit wer: aret das: HY: | Hafiraradepeaarayi stead
(S.A. aie af 894-895)
west: Herr: Hoenn | outset rp:
(afr. saarfe aT 54)
peaegqaktan: waftasten: | dort dea: prea: aftrerecarrarers: 1
srrarteae Ceara: SecA |
peaet ( passin )-
gaat Prateet doe we vitae serdtencnilaitdtadaega 0
atest Teantererarearerserorgeery | (AT. Shree at 158-159)
vena: Hehrmemaawrets deat: i Taenitant a sake yeratterar
(afr. magenfe at 16)
YealerHarerearsreteraery ul (HA. atefrert 896-897)

----- PAGE 433 -----
Kutaja

425

BRAT He fterent vite separrercenftrenew | arerkeraeTT ht AAAI I
(aft. waatfe at s7)

Agu ere aetst aera 1 (BLA. atime at 62)
yeuge
aeget vite fare Hered wey che | ateet aeaftrarrerpardtan sqft

(& fa. siafs af 395-896)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Main useful Part of Kutaja

a. Mula b. Kanda Twak & Bija

c. Patra d. Niryasa

Ans: b. Kanda Twak & Bija

. Rasa of Kutaja Kanda Twak

a. Tikta Kashaya b. Tikta Madhura c. Katu Tikta
Ans: a. Tikta Kashaya

. Pradhana Karma of Kutaja Twak

a. Bhedana b. Rechana c. Anulomana
Ans: d. Stambhana

. Bija of Kutaja is called

a, Yava b. Indrayava c. Godhuma
Ans: b. Indrayava

d. Tikta Amla

d. Stambhana

d. Madhulika

. Decoction prepared from Kutaja twak (Bark of Holarrhena antidysenterica)

and Nagara (Zingiber officinale) checks

a. Raktarshas b. Raktapitta

c. Raktatisara d. Rakta shtivana

Ans: a. Raktarshas

. Kurchisine — an important alkaloid present in

a. Langali b. Kupilu c. Kutaja
Ans: c. Kutaja

. Kutajavaleha is indicated in

a. Kushtha b. Atisara c. Amlapitta
Ans: b. Atisara

d. Bhallataka

d. Arshas

----- PAGE 434 -----
426

Dravyaguna Vijnana

8. Total Vamana Yoga mentioned for Vatsaka

10.

Lt,

13.

14.

15.

a. 60 b. 133 c. 24
Ans: d. 18
. Botanical name of Kutaja

a. Pterocarpus marsupium
c. Oroxylum indicum
Ans: b. Holarrhena antidyenterica

Vatsaka is a synonym of
a. Pippali b. Kumkuma c. Haridra
Ans: d. Kutaja
Girimallika is a synonym of
a. Agastya b. Kutaja c. Jati
Ans: b. Kutaja
. Botanical name of Shweta Kutaja
a. Uraria picta b. Holarrhena antidysenterica
c. Wrigthia tinctoria d. Rubia cordifolia
Ans: c. Wrigthia tinctoria
Varieties of Kutaja as per Charaka
a. 2 b. 3 c.4
Ans: a. 2
Habit of Kutaja Plant
a. Herb b. Shrub c. Small tree

Ans: c. Small tree

Main action of Indrayava is

a. Bhedana b. Rechana c. Anulomana
Ans: d. Vamaka

KK

b. Holarrhena antidyenterica
d. Randia dumetorum

d. Kutaja

d. Champaka

d. 5

d. Climber

d. Vamaka

----- PAGE 435 -----
Chapter

Lajjalu

Part used - Panchanga (Whole plant) and Mula (Root)

Rasadi pancaka

Tikta Kashaya
Laghu, Ruksha
Karma (Actions)

Atisarahara, Raktapittaghna, Yoniroganashaka, Shophahara, Dahanashaka,
Shwasahara, Vranahara, Kushthaghna, Sandhaniya and Raktastambhaka.

Pharmacological Actions

Antiviral, Spasmogenic, Diuretic, Constipating, Febrifuge, Wound healing, Hyper-
glycemic and Antifertility.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Pitta kapha Shamaka, Pitta shamaka because of Shita virya and Tikta kashaya rasa.
Kaphahara due to Katu vipaka and Tikta kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Yoniroga, Atisara, Raktapitta, Shopha, Daha, Kushtha, Vrana, Bhagna and
Bhagandara.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Urustambha

aay mene fared Heat Ge AT fret ut (=F 27/29)

Combination of Samanga (Mimosa pudica), Shalmali (Salmalia malabrica) and
Bilva (Aegle marmelos) if taken with honey is beneficial in Urustambha.

2. Antravruddhi (Scrotal enlargement)
mane were fre wera: vata: | qos atPrers arereeferaaeat: 1
(aa. arafs 46)

Paste prepared from root of Lajjalu (Mimosa pudica) and excreta of eagle is applied
externally in case of Antravruddhi (Scrotal enlargement).

----- PAGE 436 -----
428 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Matra (Dose)
Swarasa (Juice) - 10 to 20 ml
Kashaya (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml

Chemical Constituents - Leaves contain Leucoanthocya-nidin, Stigmasterol, Fla-
vone glycosides and an alkaloid Mimosine. Whole plant contains Turgorins, g-sitosterol
& Tannin.

Research corner

1. Mimosa pudica Linn was tested for diuretic activity using the lipschitz test. The
ethanolic and aqoues extract of Mimosa pudica Linn. was studied at two dose level 100
and 200 mg kg (-1) b.wt. Furosemide (20 mg kg (-1) b.wt.) was used as standard drug in
a 0.9% saline solution. Urine volumes were measured for all the groups up to 5 h. The
ethanolic extract of Mimosa pudica linn was exhibited significant diuretic activity at doses
of 100 and 200 mg kg (-1) b.wt. by increasing total urine volume and ion concentration of
Na+ k+ and ClI-. Baghel Al, Rathore DS2, Gupta V3. Evaluation of diuretic activity of
different extracts of Mimosa pudica Linn. Pak J Biol Sci. 2013 Oct 15; 16(20) : 1223-5.

2. The anti-mumps virus activity of Mimosa pudica was evaluated. Suspected mumps
cases were collected to isolate a standard mumps virus by systematic laboratory testing
which included IgM antibody assays, virus isolation, RT-PCR and phylogenetic analysis.
The virus was quantified by TCIDSO assay and anti-mumps virus property was evaluated
by CPE reduction assay and cytotoxicity of the extract was measured by MTT assay and
phytochemical analysis was done by gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy. The RT-
PCR and phylogenetic tree analysis of the SH gene sequence of the clinical isolate showed
it to be mumps virus genotype C. 150 pg/ml concentration of M. pudica completely inhib-
ited mumps virus and the drug was found to be non-toxic up to 2 mg/ml. M. pudica was
thus found to be a potent inhibitor of MuV. Malayan J1, Selvaraj B1, Warrier Al,
Shanmugam S2, Mathayan M1, Menon T1. Anti-mumps virus activity by extracts of
Mimosa pudica, a unique Indian medicinal plant. Indian J Virol. 2013 Sep; 24(2):166-73.
doi: 10.1007/s13337-013-0143-2. Epub 2013 Aug 10.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI-No. — Name Indications

fl. [Samangadi Kashaya
Kutajavaleha Grahani, Raktatisara
3. [

Samangadirbilvadi kwatha Pravahika, Atisara
4 Pushyanuga churna Yonidosha, Raktapradara

----- PAGE 437 -----
Lajjalu 429

Latin Name
Mimosa pudica Linn.
Mimosa—Mimos = Mimic, sensitivity of the leaves
pudica—hides itself when touched.
Family - Fabaceae
Kula - Babbula kula.
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Sandhaniya varga, Purisha Sangarahaniya varga
Sushruta Priyangvadi gana, Ambashthadi gana
Bh. Pr.Ni. Guduchyadi varga

Basonym of Drug
wasticntfarrarecrssgttett |
Leaves of Lajjalu (Mimosa pudica Linn.) are sensitive so on touching they close.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. Werentftent-stefter West STAT |
Lajjalu grows commonly in moist places.
Morphology
2. TlexHl-GRAET TAT |
Leaves resemble like that of Khadira (Acacia catechu).
3. wettast-yeT Sa UAT: |
Lajjalu leaves resemble to the leaves of Shami (Prosopis spicigera).
4, Waele: Haiteregtten AAT |
Lajjalu leaves will be folded on touch giving an impression that the plant is
saluting.

Regional Names

English Touch me not plant

----- PAGE 438 -----
430 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Lajjalu grows in waste lands of tropical regions in India.
Morphology
Habit - Diffuse under shrub, 45 to 90 cm high.

Stem & Branches - Sparingly prickly and clothes with long weak bristles from
bulbous bases.

Leaves - Compound, Sensitive, Petioles 2.5 to 5 cm long, leaf is 5 to 7.5 cm long,
leaf lets are 12 to 20 pairs, 6 to 8 mm long and 4 mm wide, sessile, linear-oblong.

Flowers - Pink in colour, seen in globose heads, 8 mm in diameter.
Fruits - Pods, 1 to 2 cm long, 3 to 4 mm wide, flat, slightly recurved, consisting 3 to
5 one seeded joints.
Varieties
Two types— 1. Lajjalu (Mimosa pudica)
2. Viparita Lajjalu (Biophytum sensitivum)
Classical references
Synonyms
PRT: Creates VAs Were | THATS AAA ATT aetaacaTeer Ut
(M3. Trae aH: 272)
Properties and Actions
wae: Bitten ferear eearean eacaftra hare | Tenftrrrareae ay Pee
(a9. e=ate at: 273)
Teardt we: viet frantaratrt | vingesraagnganreyd Ul
(aft. arate et 98)
sneer fear feat ware anf | aerate tafe a arerag
(fa. steitt af 1082-1083)

Teardt ee: sitet ftrantar ast i wines sAaTe AHS HHATT, |
(afr. wee aT 106)

----- PAGE 439 -----
Lajjalu 43]

Viparita Lajjalu
ASAT ATT HESOIT HLHTAT AL | TAY Praca Seat AMT:
(afr. tere at 108)
ASAT Feat vita erat anaftrahtad, | cateratant was ferred
(B.Fa. mrergente at 79)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Main indication of Lajjalu
a. Kasa b. Gulma c. Yoniroga d. Anidra
Ans: c. Yoniroga

. Combination of Samanga (Mimosa pudica), Shalmali (Salmalia malabrica)
and Bilva (Aegle marmelos) if taken with honey is beneficial in

a. Urustambha b. Vatarakta c. Amavata d. Galaganda
Ans: a. Urustambha
3. Botanical name of Lajjalu
a. Albizzia lebbec b. Acacia catechu
c. Acacia arabica d. Mimiosa pudica
Ans: d. Mimosa pudica
4. Namaskari is the synonym of
a. Shatavari b. Lajjalu c. Irimeda d. Gokshura
Ans: b. Lajjalu
5. Khadiraka is a synonym of
a. Palasha b. Babbula c. Lajjalu d. Agastya
Ans: c. Lajjalu
6. Samangadi Kashaya is indicated in
a. Atisara b. Arshas c. Vaivarnya d. Prameha

No

Ans: a. Atisara

Fok

----- PAGE 440 -----
Lata Karanja

eect CE
Part used - Bija (Seed), Mula (Root), and Patra (Leaf).

Rasadi pancaka

Rasa
Guna

Karma (Actions)
Vishamajwaraghna, Krimighna, Shothahara, Rakta Shodhaka, Kushthaghna,

Pramehaghna and Shulahara.

Pharmacological Actions
Anthelmintic, Styptic, Antipyretic, Antiviral, Antifungal, Anti-inflammatory, Anti-

malarial and Antimicrobial.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)
Vata kapha Shamaka. Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka due to
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Vishamajwara, Krimi, Shotha, Kushtha, Prameha and Udarashula.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1.Vishamajwara (Malarial fever)

Seeds of Latakaranja (Caesalpinia crista) are powdered and administered with equal
quantity of Maricha (Piper nigrum) Churna (Powder) in case of Vishamajwara (Malarial
fever).

2. Youvanapidaka (Pimples)

Seeds of Latakaranja (Caesalpinia crista) is grounded with Godugdha (Cow milk)

and applied in case of Youvanapidaka (Pimples).

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder) - 1 to 3 gm
Swarasa (Juice) - 10 to 20 ml

----- PAGE 441 -----
Lata Karanja 433

Chemical Constituents - Seeds contain Cacsalpin (Bitter substance), Phytosterinin,
Bonducin, Saponin, Fatty oil, Starch, Amino acids, Sucrose and Glucose, Seed kernel
contains Caesalpin, Homoisoflavone bonducellin and fatty acids.

Research corner

A study was carried out to evaluate the ameliorating effect of Caesalpinia crista
Linn. (CCME) extract on iron-overload-induced liver injury. Iron overload was induced
by intraperitoneal administration of iron dextran into mice. CCME attenuated the percent-
age increase in liver iron and serum ferritin levels when compared to control group. CCME
also showed a dose-dependent inhibition of lipid peroxidation, protein oxidation, and
liver fibrosis. The serum enzyme markers were found to be less, whereas enhanced levels
of liver antioxidant enzymes were detected in CCME-treated group. In presence of CCME,
the reductive release of ferritin iron was increased significantly. Furthermore, CCME
exhibited DPPH radical scavenging and protection against Fe(2+)-mediated oxidative
DNA damage. The current study confirmed the hepatoprotective effect of CCME against
the model hepatotoxicant iron overload and the activity is likely related to its potent anti-
oxidant and iron-chelating property. Sarkar R’, Hazra B, Mandal N. Hepatoprotective
Potential of Caesalpinia crista against Iron-Overload-Induced Liver Toxicity in Mice.
Evid Based Complement Alternat Med.2012; 2012:896341. doi: 10.1155/2012/896341.
Epub 2012 Jul 17.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Name Indications

| Latakaranja Bija Taila Kushtha

Latin Name
Caesalpinia crista Linn.
Caesalpinia — In memory of Andrea Caesalpine, Tuscan botanist.
crista- Cock’s comb.
Family - Fabaceae
Kula - Putikaranja
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not included in Varga
Sushruta Not included in Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduchyadi varga

----- PAGE 442 -----
434 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug

ya Met Heras Hens encafer gfe |

Lata karanja (Caesalpinia crista) is considered as creeper having similar fruits to
Karanja.

Synonyms

Morphology -
1. GAT: HATE HAT Fa ATT AA She
Seeds of Latakaranja resemble the eyes of Kubera.
2. BUCH HUA- HUST: Ue |
Fruits of Latakaranja bear sharp projections.
3. Uferen:-yfet Wet STEM: |
Plant has got foetid smell.
4. Utena: afte Ghar: gear Hee ge |

Latakaranja is a variety of Karanja with bad odour.

Vernacular Names

Habitat:
Latakaranja grows throughout India.

Morphology

Habit - Large straggling thorny shrub.

Branches - Armed with hooks and straight hard yel-
low prickles.

Leaves - Compound, 30 to 60 cm long, petioles are
prickly, at the base of leaf there is a pair of stipule reduced to
pinnae, prinnae are 6 to 8 pairs, 5 to 7.5 cm long. Leaflets | Caesalpinia cirsta Linn.
are 6 to 9 pairs, 2 to 3.8 cm long, | to 2 cm wide, elliptic-

----- PAGE 443 -----
Lata Karanja 435

oblong, glabrous above, more or less puberulous beneath, short petiolutes.

Inflorescence - Long peduncled terminal or supra axillary raceme.
Fruit - Pods, shortly stalked, oblong, 5 to 7 cm long, 45 cm wide, densely armed
with wiry prickles. Seeds are 1 to 2 in one fruit, lead coloured | to 3 cm long.

Varieties

Classical references

Synonyms

Se: Hucat aecttnra sft Here u (fA. ethreenfe at: 209)
Properties and Actions

are: Scaeien dtatet attetred, | aetarahyernefanreahranrag:

(a3. Teeafe TH: 120)

vary Sette ferngat wera: | ferreneg eae aHege aor I

—_

NO

(fr. attereenfe at: 211)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Main action of Latakaranja

a. Kasahara b. Krimighna
c. Vishamajwaraghna d. Varnya
Ans: c. Vishama jwaraghna

. Seeds of Latakaranja (Caesalpinia crista) are powdered and administered with

equal quantity of Maricha (Piper nigrum) Churna (Powder) in case of
a. Shwasa b. Atisara c. Shotha d. Vishamajwara

Ans: d. Vishamajwara

. Latakaranja Bija Taila is indicated in

a. Kushtha b. Ajirna c. Anidra d. Atisara
Ans: a. Kushtha

. Botanical name of Latakaranja

a. Cassia fistula b. Pongamia pinnata
c. Caesalpinia crista  d. Holoptelia integrifolia
Ans: c. Caesalpinia crista

----- PAGE 444 -----
436 Dravyaguna Vijnana

5. Kuberaksha is the synonym of
a. Kokilaksha b. Latakaranja c.Matsyakshi  d. Lodhra
Ans: b. Latakaranja
6. Fever nut is the common English name of
a. Latakaranja b. Vasa c. Bhallataka d. Kalamegha
Ans: a. Latakaranja
7. Habit of the Latakaranja plant
a. Large Tree b. Herb
c. Climbing shrub d. Small tree
Ans: c. Climbing shrub

FRR ERR

----- PAGE 445 -----
Lavanga

Useful part — Pushpa Kalika (Flower bud).
Rasadi pancaka

Katu Tikta

[Guna Laghu Snigdha, Tikshna
ipaka | Ratu
oz | Sie

Karma (Action)
Kasahara, Shwasahara, Dipana, Pachana, Netrya, Ruchya, Trishnahara,
Chardighna, Shulanashaka, Hikkanigrahana, Vishaghna, Vrishya, Swarya, Jwaraghna.

Pharmacological Actions

Dental analgesic, Carminative, Stimulant, Aromatic, Antispetic, Appetizer, Diges-
tive, Aphrodisiac.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphapitta Shaamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to its Shita virya and Kapha Shamaka
because of Katu vipaka and Katu Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Kasa, Shwasa, Hikka, Mukhadourgandhya, Danta Shula, Chardi, Trishna,
Agnimandya, Aruchi, Swarabheda, Jwara.
1. Mukhavaishadyartha (To cleans mouth)
TATU See HRT PRAT 1 TATA cssssssseenee mage wet TU
(A.¥. 5/76)

To cleanse mouth one can keep flower buds of Lavanga (Syzigium aromaticum) in
mouth. It also acts as mouth freshner and improves taste sensation.

2. Vatarti Shamanartha (Pain due to Vata)
oe: wort frat eareertrarat AMT (3H. 12/6)

Paste prepared from Lavanga (Syzygium aromaticum) with water is applied over the
of pain. It relieves pain.

Site

----- PAGE 446 -----
438 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Pipasa (Thirst)
RrorereTTA A Ta RING WTA (ZA. 6/62)

Cloves added to a glass of water if taken will relieve Pipasa (Thirst) and Utklesha
(Nausea).

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) - 250mg tol g
Taila (Oil) — 4to 6 drops

Phytoconstituents

Clove contains 15 to 20% volatile oil, 10 to 13% tannin (Gallotanic acid), resin,
chromone, eugenin.

Volatile oil of clove contains eugenol (70-90%), eugenol acetate, caryophyllenes,
esters, ketones and alcohols.

Research corner

1. Molecular mechanism of eugenol-induced apoptosis in melanoma, skin tumors,
osteosarcoma, leukemia, gastric and mast cells has been well documented. This
review article will highlight the antiproliferative activity and molecular
mechanism of the eugenol induced apoptosis the cancer cells and animal
models. Jaganathan SK, Supriyanto E. Antiproliferative and molecular
mechanism of eugenol-induced apoptosis in cancer cells. Molecules. 2012 May
25;17(6):6290-304. doi: 10.3390/molecules 17066290.

. The plant Syzigium aromaticum (SYZ), commonly known as clove has since
been employed locally to treat constipation. Attempt to complement the effort
of other researches called fort its selection for laboratory investigation, in order
to determine its possible effect on intestinal propulsion in rodents as well as its
suspected gastrointestinal protective properties. The findings explain the
folkloric uses of SYZ as an antiulcer and a purgative agent as well as its
possible mechanism of action. Agbaje EO. Gastrointestinal effects of Syzigium
aromaticum (L) Merr. & Perry (Myrtaceae) in animal models. Nig Q J Hosp
Med, 2008 Jul-Sep; 18(3):137-41.

3. The essential oil extracted from the dried flower buds of clove, Eugenia

caryophyllata L. Merr. & Perry (Myrtaceae), is used as a topical application to

relieve pain and to promote healing and also finds use in the fragrance and
flavoring industries. This short review addresses the chemical composition and
biological effects of clove essential oil, and includes new results from GC/MS

No

----- PAGE 447 -----
Lavanga 439
analysis and a study of its antimicrobial activity against a large number of multi-
resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis isolated from dialysis biomaterial. Chaieb
K, Hajlaoui H, Zmantar T, Kahla-Nakbi AB, Rouabhia M, Mahdouani K,
Bakhrouf A. The chemical compostion and biological activity of clove essential
oil, Eugenia caryophyllata (Syzigium aromaticum L. Myrtaceae): a short
review. Phytother Res. 2007 Jun; 21(6):501-6.

4. The effects of long-term administration of boiled aqueous extract of Syzigium
aromaticum (SYZ), commonly known as clove (which has been locally
employed for treating gastrointestinal tract diseases and also used as food
spices), on some biochemical indices, such as body weight, liver functions and
blood parameters were studied in adult albino rats of both sexes. The present
work has revealed the toxicity of sub chronic administration of SYZ, which
suggests that its prolonged usage must be avoided. Agbaje EO, Adeneye AA,
Daramola AO. Biochemical and toxicological studies of aqueous extract of
Syzigium aromaticum (L.) Merr. & Perry (Myrtaceae) in rodents. Afr J Tradit
Complement Altern Med. 2009 May 7:6(3):241-54.

Yoga (Formulations)
SLNo.

Formulation Indications ‘

Botanical Name — Syzgium aromaticum Merr.Perry
Syzygium — Conjuction-Caryohpyllus

aromaticum - Scented
Family —- Myrtaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Lavanga

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Mahakashaya varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Mahakashaya varga
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 58-59

----- PAGE 448 -----
440 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug
Maer festhet Sats SAAT
Lavanga (Syzygium aromaticunt) will expell the Kapha.
Synonyms
Morphology
1, WATS: VSATAT TM SET |
The flowers of Lavanga resemble the flowers of Candana (Santalum album).
2. TaGyA-Tart PY, aT PING ea ga TASMeay | Fal ea Ares PIAA ster
ARTA |
The flowers are used to worship gods and it is considered to be the best flower
among the flowers.

3. Deuter - Cures grahani roga.

4, sftaat - Lavanga is auspicious

5. sftaat - Flowers are beautiful
Habitat

Lavanga plant requires 150 to 300 cm rainfall,

rich loamy with high humus soil, so it is cultivated
in Kerala, Coastal districts of Karnataka and Coorg.

An ever green small tree reaching a height of

20 to 30 ft. Branches are many and horizontal gives
a pyramid shape.

Cy

yy

pA

INH
ge § fig

iy

a=
Vy

Stem is hard with pale yellowish or grey bark | Syzgium aromaticum Merr.
and has smooth surface. Perry

----- PAGE 449 -----
Lavanga 441

Leaves - Simple, opposite, obovate, petiolate, acute, 7.5 to 12 cm long and 2.5 to
3.5 cm wide, leathery, gland dotted.

Inflorescence — Axillary cymose inflorescence

Flowers — White, complete, bisexual, Corolla with four petals and it is free. Flower
bud is clustered at terminal branches, greenish to pink and highly aromatic, Dried cloves
are nail shaped, reddish brown in colour, | to 2 cm long, rough to touch, cylindrical base,
crowned with plum ball like unopened corolla. Surmounted by four toothed calyx.

Fruit — Fleshy, dark pink, drupes, 2.5 cm long and 1 cm thick.

Seeds — Oblong, soft and grooved on one side.

Adulterants
Mother cloves, Blown cloves, Clove stalks, exhausted cloves.

Chemical test
Transverse section of the clove is treated with strong potassium hydroxide solution,
the needle shaped crystals of potassium eugenate is observed.

Collection

The plant starts bearing after 7 to 8 years and a satisfactory yield per hectare of the
drug is achieved only after 15 to 20 years of growth. Cloves are hand picked or collected
by beating with bamboos. Cloves are to be collected when the cloves start changing their
colour from green to slightly pink. The cloves are dried in the sun and freed from foreign

material and graded.
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Flower bud is reddish brown in colour and upto 1.7 cm long. It has got a slightly
flattened stalk (Hypanthium) and a head composed of four calyx teeth and a globular
portion in the centre, consisting of stiff leathery petals and numerous incurred stamens
surrounding the style. Clove has got strong spicy odour, aromatic and tastes pungent.

Classical references
Synonyms :
wag capa skis sftrgrey (ars. afae at 538)
Properties and Actions
aont wfé cansenrt yerary ferrerete, | sere areata Rercnres art arma Yay
(ay. afae aT 58-59)

----- PAGE 450 -----
442

Dravyaguna Vijnana

(af. same TT 40)

cpenftrres decnrerarerentferadt rary tl (HF. sireferert 1334)

(af. aeamfe at 83)

wR are aa ae aa agwfey t pevaraftars a anf wera ul
(B.fr. ettteate aT 80-87)

me

wo

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Lavanga

a. Fruit b. Flower bud c. Root
Ans: b. Flower bud

. Virya of Lavanga Pushpakalika

a. Ushna b. Ruksha c. Shita
Ans: c. Shita

. Pradhana Karma of Lavanga

a. Kasahara b. Medhya c. Vajikara
Ans: a. Kasahara

Lavangadi Vati is specifically indicated in

a. Jwara b. Anidra c. Arshas
Ans: d. Grahani

. Botanicl name of Lavanga

a. Egenia jambolana __b. Syzigium aromaticum
c. Albizia lebbeck d. Syzigium cumini
Ans: b. Syzigium aromaticum

. Devakusuma is the synonym of

a. Patala b. Jati c. Lavanga
Ans: c. Lavanga

. Grahanimihira & Sreesanjna are the synonyms of

a. Chitraka b. Lavanga c. Dadima
Ans: b. Lavanga

. Habit of Lavanga Plant

a. Tree b. Shrub c. Herb
Ans: a. Tree

d. Exudate

d. Laghu

d. Stambhana

d. Grahani

d. Mallika

d. Pippali

d. Creeper

----- PAGE 451 -----
Lodhra

Useful part — Kaanda Twak (Stem bark)
Rasadi panchaka

Twak (Bark) Pushpa (Flower)
Kashaya
Karma (Action)

Shitagrahi, Chakshushya, Shothahara, Jwarahara, Trashnanigrahana, Vishaghna.

ii

Pharmacological Actions
Haemostatic, Coagulant, Astringent, Antiinflammatory.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)
Pittakapha Shamaka — Pitta Shamaka due to its Kashaya rasa and Shita virya.
Kapha shamaka because of its Kashaya rasa and Katu vipaka.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Raktapradara, Shwetapradara, Raktapitta, Raktatisara, Shotha, Netrabhishyanda,
Jwara, Trishna, Aruchi, Vishavikara.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Mukhadushika (Acne)

qughtni ¢ ctagakervat ar wear | (31.9.5 37/5)

Application of the paste prepared from Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa) and Tuvarika
(Alum) will reduce Mukhadushika (Acne).

2. Pandura pradara (Leurorrhoea)
alereraenaret eters ae fra (AAR. 30/118)

ee Paste of Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa) is taken with decoction of Nyagrodha
5 enghalensis) relieves leucorrhoea.

----- PAGE 452 -----
44

Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. Pravahika (Dysentary)

Bilateral eet fraa-werftenrfser: ui (aT..F. 2/120)

Intake of curd mixed with Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa) will check dysentery.

Matra (Dosage)

Kwatha (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
Churna (Powder) - lto2g
Phytoconstituents

Stem bark has triterpenoid saponin, g-sitosterol, Leaves contain flavonol glycoside

rhamnetin, arabinogalactar and phlorizin.

Research corner

1. The present study aims to evaluate the hepatoprotective activity of ethanol

extract of Symplocos racemosa (EESR) bark on carbon tetrachloride (CC14)-
induced hepatic damage in rats. It was therefore concluded that EESR bark is
an effective hepatoprotective agent in CC14-induced hepatic damage, and has
potential clinical applications for treatment of liver diseases. Wakchaure D, Jain
D, Singhai AK, Somani R. Hepatoprotective activity of Symplocos racemosa
bark on carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatic damage in rats. J Ayurveda
Integer Med. 2011 Jul; 2(3):137-43. doi: 10.4103/0975-9476.85552.

. In this study in vivo effect of aqueous extracts of Symplocos racemosa Roxb.

(Fam. Symplocaceae) on serum FSH and LH levels in immature female
Sprague-Dawley rats under basal conditions are reported. Bhutani KK, Jadhav
AN, Kalia V. Effect of Symplocos racemosa Roxb. on gonadotropin release in
immature female rats and ovarian histology. J Ethnopharmacol. 2004 Sep;
94(1):197-200.

. One new phenolic glycoside named benzoylsalireposide (1) along with one

known phenolic glycoside named salireposide (2) have been isolated from
Symplocos racemosa. Four other known compounds i.e. beta-amyrin (3),
oleonolic acid (4), beta-sitosterol (5) and beta-sitosteroal glycoside (6) were
also isolated from this plant. Anmad VU, Abbasi MA, Hussain H, Akhtar MN,
Farooq U, Fatima N, Choudhary MI. Phenolic glycosides from Symplocos
racemosa: natural inhibitors of phosphodiesterase I. Phytochemistry. 2003
May; 63(2):217-20.

. The phytochemical investigation of the n-butanol soluble fraction of the bark

of stem of Symplocos racemosa Roxb. yielded two new phenolic glycosides of

----- PAGE 453 -----
Lodhra 445

salirepin series, symplocuronic acid (1) and sympocemoside (2), while salirepin
(3) was isolated for the first time from this plant. Ahmad VU, Rashid MA,
Abbasi MA, Rasool N, Zubair M. New salirepin derivatives from Symplocos
racemosa. J Asian Nat Prod Res. 2007 Apr-Aug; 9 (3-5):209-15.

5. Phytochemical investigation of Symplocos racemosa resulted in the isolation of
a new ethyl substituted glycoside, 1-ethyl brachiose-3'-acetate (1) along with
four known compounds ketochaulmoogric acid (2), nonaeicosanol (3),
triaconty] palmitate (4) and methyl triacontanoate (5). Abbasi MA, Ahmad VU,
Zubair M, Nawaz SA, Lodhi MA, Farooq U, Choudhary MI. Lipoxygenase
inhibiting ethyl substituted glycoside from Symplocos racemosa. Nat Prod Res.
2005 Jul; 19(5):509-15.

Yoga (Formulations)

Formulation Indications

Pushyanuga churna Atisara, Yonidosha
Garbhashaya vikara, Grahani

Lodhrotpaladi kashaya
Pravahika, Atisara

Latin Name — Symplocos racemosa Roxb.

SI.No.

Symplocos —Connection-Stamens united at the base, having an inflorescence with a
long undivided axis.

racemosa — In form of a cluster of grapes
Family — Symplocaceae (Styraceae)
Kula - Lodhra kula

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka — Sandhaniya varga, Purishasangrahaniya varga, Shonithasthapana
varga

Sushruta Lodhradi gana, Nyagrodhadi gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. — Haritakyadi varga 215-216
Basonym of Drug

teams | eRe area

Lodhra plant has property of stoping bleeding.

----- PAGE 454 -----
446 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Synonyms
1. fava-feerfa ferate stearate farea: |
Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa) produces smoothness to the organs of the body.
2. RAH-MAls Meals HATTA she |
Lodhra has got strong astringent taste like that of Kramuka (Areca catechu).
Lodhra cures many diseases.
4, Ufgnrer-ugisearedife wsl-aiget F
Bark is beautiful and has got high medicinal values.
5. asada ay Yet |
When used, it cleanses the body.
Regional Names

Habitat

Lodhra tree commonly grows in plains of Eastern and Northern India. Also seen in
parts of Kerala and Karnataka.

Morphology

A small evergreen tree with stems up to 20 ft. in
hight and 15 cm in diameter

Bark — Dark grey, rough blaze 7-13 mm thick
shortly fibrous, pale yellow in colour and finely
mottled with pale orange brown.

Leaves — Leaves are 9 to 18 cm long and 3 to5
cm wide, alternate, elliptic-oblong or elliptic lan-
ceolate, apex acute obtusely acuminate or obtuse,
serrulate obscurely crenate or rarely entire, base acute
cuneate, coriaceous, glabrous above and pubescent

Symplocos racemosa. Roxb

----- PAGE 455 -----
Lodhra 447

beneath when young but ultimately glabrous or with scattered spreading hairs mainly on
the mid rub, glossy on both surfaces, dark green above. When it dries lateral nerves are
indistinct, 5 to 9 pairs. Petiole is | to 2 cm long.

Inflorescence — Axillary pubescent racemes.

Flowers — 1 to 1.5 cm in diameter white fading yellow. Petals seen in 2 series sta-
mens usually numerous and ovary is inferior, 3 celled.

Fruit - Drupe, | to 1.3 cm long, oblong, glabrous, purplish black, crowned with
persistent calyx.

Seeds — Oblong, cotyledons much shorter than the radicle.

Varieties Varieties

Bh.Pr.Ni-—1.Lodhra_ 2. Pattika lodhra

Dha.Ni-1.Lodhra 2. Kramuka
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Stem bark is curved, channelled or arched and upto 1 cm thick. Outer surface is
reddish brown in colour, corky and friable with deep transverse and longitudinal cracks.
The corky covering breaks away frequently, excising a rusty brown granular surface.
Internally, the bark is whitish or light brown in colour and closely wrinkled longitudi-
nally. On breaking outer surface becomes short piece but internally fibrous. Odour is
characteristic and agreeable, having astringent taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
ceaeatertesr erent Tretereta | farther: wfsearetea: HY: CITA: |
Sotasit gees: vet crergaret: i (aT.F. etree TT 215)
Properties and Actions
iret oral erg: vitetsrazeT: Hef OTA, | HATA Te TTA ATE MT ET,
(aa. Strne et 216)
wie vita: aarersy eft gerratrereny | erafeecteas: vicar wert Det HITE:
(ef. arate at 156)
aye ( citer fergre )-
Tiere operat Care Vitek arerentnea aT | rages ferrets arate:
(af. aafe TT 158)

----- PAGE 456 -----
448

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Ver: SUAS: Hatta: at: | fer: warren parraratagestany

fears Hat gat wet fee | afer Hea Ur dare weft
(bP. state af 1126-1127)

eet Hares Bae vit arcatHrarge | aaa fares faster acentterm:
(a. frorenfe +f 212)

itat ante argent teaftrashereay 1 PRA ARCA OUTS FRIST AHMET
(B.A. atrenfe at 143)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Lodhra
a. Kanda twak b. Mula twak c. Patra d. Niryasa
Ans: a. Kanda twak
. Pradhana Rasa of Lodhra twak
a. Tikta b. Kashaya c. Katu d. Madhura
Ans: b. Kashaya
3. Pradhana Karma of Lodhra
a. Dipana b. Rechana c. Stambhana d. Anulomana

a"

i)

Ans: c. Stambhana
4. Lodhrasava is indicated in
a. Garbhashaya Vikara b. Ajirna c. Shotha d. Arshas
Ans: a. Garbhashaya Vikara
5. Botanical name of Lodhra
a. Symplocos racemosa b. Cretaeva nurvala
c. Andrographis paniculata d. Zingiber officinalis
Ans: a. Symplocos racemosa
6. Tilva is the synonym of
a. Puga b. Lodhra c. Khadira d. Kalamegha
Ans: b. Lodhra
7. Habit of Lodhra plant
a. Herb b. Tree c. Creeper d. Shrub
Ans: b. Tree
. Types of Lodhra as per Bhava Prakash Nighantu
a. 3 b. 4 c. 2 d. 6

Ans: c. 2

oo

----- PAGE 457 -----
Madanaphala

Part used — Phala (Fruit) & Beeja (Seed)

Tikta, Madhura, Katu & Kashaya
Laghu, Ruksha

Katu
Usha
Vamaka

Karma (Action)
Madana - Vamaka, Lekhana, Vidradhihara, Vranahara, Kushthaghna, Jwarahara,
Shophahara.

Varaha — Chardana, Pakwashaya Shodhaka, Amashaya shodhaka.

Agrya Karma
Tetaet TARA ATATATaTAL t (F.Z. 25/40)

Madanaphala (Randia dumetorum) suitable for Vamana Karma (Emesis),
Asthaapana (Enema with decoction) & Anuvaasana (Enema with Oil).

Pharmacological Actions

Emetic, Diaphoretic, Antispasmodic, Antiflammatory, Antibacterial, Antifungal,
Antiviral.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka (Ra.Ni.) & Pittanissaraka.

Vata Shamaka due to its Ushna virya & Kapha Shamaka because of its Ushna
"rya, Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.

Pitta saraka ~ Expells Pittadosha also.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

= gig Shwasa, Jwara, Shotha, Anaha, Gulma, Pratishyaya, Vidradhi, Vrana

any diseases where Vamana karma is indicated.
Varaha - Vraha Vamanartha

----- PAGE 458 -----
450 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Note - Madanaphaia is considered as best drug to induce emesis.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration) ,
1. Vamanartha (To induce emesis)
SAAR EAH NSTI, STATITAACATT_|
BMA MAATA STATE Weryaaret FAM (A.A. 1/13-14)
Madana (Randia dumetorum) is the best drug for inducing emesis, as itis very safe

to use for emesis, because it does not cause any complications.

2. Jwara (Fever)
Hex ftracfifirat pfestieert ar qrequmgay ta east aCe
(afa. 3/228)

Madana (Randia dumetorum) mixed with Pippali (Piper longum) or Indrayava
(Seeds of Holarrhena antidysenterica) or Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra) if administered
with hot water will induce vomiting there by alleviate fever.

3. Parshva Shula (Pain in flanks)

aipeastereatet Wea: caifereniad: | (4.8.31 11)

Madana kalka (Paste of Randia dumetorum) prepared from sour gruel if applied
over naval will relieve all kinds of pain including pain in flanks.

Matra (Dosage)

Chikitsarta - 500 mg to 2 g
Vamanartha (to induce vomiting) -3to6g
Phytoconstituents

Fruits yielded saponins, ursosaponin, essential oil, 6 saponins named as dumetoronin
A,B,C, D, E&F, randialic acid-A & Randialic acid-B, Pulp contains citric acid, tartaric
acid, tannis, pectin and mucilage.

Research corner
1. Randia dumetorum (RD) fruits in different form have been
ethnopharmacologically reported to possess antiasthmatic property. Therefore,
present study was undertaken to evaluate two different extracts of RD i.e., ethyl
acetate (RD-EA) and methanol (RD-ME) for bronchorelaxant, anti-
inflammatory, mast cell stabilizing and antioxidant effect along with safety
margin, according to OECD guidelines for toxicity. RD extracts also exhibited
antioxidant activity in DPPH, reducing power and metal chelation method,

----- PAGE 459 -----
Madanaphala 451

Ww

along with safe margin for oral administration as observed in acute toxicity
evaluation. Ghante MH, Bhusari KP, Duragkar NJ, Jain NS, Warokar AS.
Bronchorelaxant, mast cell stabilizing, anti-inflammatory and antioxidant
activity of Randia dumetorum (Retz.) Lamk. extracts. Acta Pol Pharm. 2012
May-Jun; 69 (3):465-74.

. The present study was conducted to evaluate the protective effect of methanolic

fruit extract of Randia dumetorum (L.) on alcohol-induced liver damage in rats.
Histology of the liver section of the animals treated with R. dumetorum
improved the hepatotoxicity caused by alcohol. Hence the study concluded that
R. dumetroum has potential hepatoprotective activity. Noorani AA, Kale MK.
Pretreatment of Albino Rats with Methanolic Fruit Extract of Randia
Dumetorum (L.) Protects against Alcohol induced liver Damage. Korean J.
Physiol Pharmacol. 2012 Apr; 16(2):125-30. doi; 10.4196/kjpp. 2012.
16.2.125. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

. Two new triterpene-saponins, 3-O-[O-beta-D-glucopyranosyl-(1——4)-O-

beta-D-glucopyranosyl- (1...3)-(beta-D-glucuronopyranosyl)] oleanolic acid
(1), 3-O-[O-beta-D-glucopyranosyl-(1....6)-O-beta-D-glucopyranosyl- (1.....3)-
(beta-D-glucuronopyranosyl)] oleanolic acid (2) together with five known
saponins (3-7) were isolated from the methanolic extract of the fruits of Randia
dumetorum (Retz) Lam. (Rubiaceae). Dubois MA, Benze S, Wagner H. New
biologically active triterpene-saponins from Randia dumetorum. Planta Med.
1990 Oct; 56(5):451-5.

. Extracts of Randia dumetorum Lamk (SD) could inhibit pregnancy in 50-60%

of rats. Prakash AO, Saxena V, Shukla S, Tewari RK, Mathur S, Gupta A,
Sharma S, Mathur R. Anti-implantation activity of some indigenous plants in
rats. Acta Eur Fertil. 1985 Nov-Dec; 16(6):441-8.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo: Formulation Indications

Madanadi lepa Shula

Kalpa - Charakacharya has mentioned 133 Yogas of Madanaphala for Vamana
karma in Kalpasthana \st chapter named Madanaphala kalpadhyaya.

----- PAGE 460 -----
452 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Kshira & Ghrata yoga

Phanita yoga
Churna yoga

Nasya yoga
Varti yoga
Leha yoga
Modaka yoga
tkarika yoga
haskuli yoga
Pupa yoga

Shadava yoga

Botanical Name — Randia dumetorum Lamk.
Randia —In memory of Issac Rand, Botanist from London.
dumetorum — of throny bushes, of hedges.
Family — Rubiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Manjishtha kula

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Asthapanopaga varga, Anuvasanopaga varga
Sushruta  Aragwadhadi gana, Mushkakadi gana
Bha.Pr.Ni — Haritakyadi varga 160-161

Basonym of Drug
Treerter tered teres STAT

Madana produces horripulation and discomfort.
Synonyms
Habitat

1, Rea: YRS Wreat BTA |

Madana (Randia spinosa) commonly grows in dry region.

Morphology
2. @rele:-at geata carafe, avefencarc |

----- PAGE 461 -----
Madanaphala ~ 453

When touched without notice it injures the hand because of its thorns.
3. faaqura:-faarrh gerne |
Madana flowers are toxic in nature.
4, frodtaa: fivstant wet dts |
Fruits and seeds of Madana are round.
5, WeTHeT:- MTT HCTATL |
Madana fruits are round in shape.
6. ARMA: AA HTT |
Madana fruits have streaks on its surface.
7. Wa WRTRT HOTT HOTTA WANT:
Madana fruits are best used as medicines.
Properties and Actions
8. Wet: Meat Saat Hewat |
Madana has a property to eliminate Kapha.
9. OTA: arrahea, TT WHAT |
Madana is best Vamaka dravya.
10. ferratgrt-fert arerercttfer
Madana phala alleviates poison from the body.
11. afergttert:-attrrt: carcercitter, after aariftr wepeacare |
Madana is very useful drug for Basti karma.
12. Ug: TeTa Kare ster
Everybody praise the fruit of Madana as best and safe Vamaka dravya.
Regional Names

----- PAGE 462 -----
4n4 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Habitat

Madanaphaia plant grows throughout out India but
very common in hilly regions.

Morphology
A large shrub or small tree armed with strong straight
nearly opposite decussate spines | to 3 cm long, coming
off from above the branchlets.
Branches are horizontal, rigid, many of the lateral
ones suppressed and very short.

Leaves — Opposite but looks like fascicled on the
suppressed branches, 3 to 5 cm long and 2 to 3 cm wide,
obovate, obtuse, wrinkled, shining above, base is cuneate,
main nerves are 6-10 pairs, petiole very small and | mm
to 3 mm long, densely pubescent.

Inflorescence — Solitary and terminal or axillary or} Randia dumetorum Lamk.
leaf opposed cymes.

Flowers — White or yellowish, stamens are five and ovary is two celled.

Fruits — Berry, globose, ovoid or ellipsoid, two celled, many seeded.

Seeds — Often immersed in pulp & angled.
Varieties

Ka. Dev. Ni.— 1. Madanaphala_ 2. Pinditaka

Ra. Ni.—1.Madana_ 2. Varaha

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Fruits are globular or ovate, 2 to 4 cm in diameter, crowned with the rim of the calyx,
which appears like a disc. Surface is minutely or roughly wrinkled and longitudinally
ribbed, reddish brown in colour. The fruit is two celled and contains numerous oblong,
translucent and shining seeds attached to a yellowish grey gelatinous pulp. It has got

characteristic disagreeable odour.

Classical references

Synonyms : ,
neavoda: frvdt we: frodicareter | eareret wares: werent fryers:
(arr, weiraarfe a 160)

----- PAGE 463 -----
Madanaphala 455

Properties and Actions :
Tent went date cheat og: | aaa: wives:
Ba: PSHAMASM ATA: (AH. rene Th 161)
Wea: wehrmetar wit ave: | setorsufwarayeny fagety a
virmetarael aett at Ve wreae u (af. yee af 166)
Heat Hehtteal dato Cat ry: wait org: wiewares varfaaer Heer |
TRnyiTeAedvEs AAAI: uN (sb.Fy. steht af 901-902)
frogtta (Het Ae)
frudta: yftact: tare: Hae: saenftreter i (H.. sttaf aT 905)
Aca:
Wet: wef: Hae: | wracteesfa ant MT Wee I
(aft. merene at 68)

ae (Heataet Fe )

att a vet set aekrmnbadt 1 odet emedht cearereTeTey
(aft. merene at 70)

Aether

acact Seared ag wets: un (R.A. etre af 63)
SAA FAT Hee Head, sAaTfercaregy (aA. 1/13)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Madanaphala

a. Twak b. Mula c. Madanapippali d. Pushpa
Ans: c. Madanapippali

2. Vamaka Karma of Madanaphala is attributed to
a. Rasa b. Prabhava c.Vipaka d. Virya
Ans: b. Prabhava

3. Madanadi Lepa is beneficial in

a. Shula b. Kushtha c. Vyanga d. Vatarakta

Ans: a. Shula

—y

----- PAGE 464 -----
456 Dravyaguna Vijnana

4. Total number of Vamana yogas mentioned for Madanaphala
a, 60 b. 24 c. 109 d. 133
Ans: d. 133
5. Botanical name of Madanaphala
a. Randia dumetorum _ b. Operculina turpethum
c. Croton tiglium d. Strychnos nux-vomica
Ans: a. Randia dumetorum
6. Vishapushpaka is the synonym of
a. Jati b. Madanaphala__c. Shankhapushpi d. Champaka
Ans: b. Madanaphala
7. Raatha & Karahata are the synonyms of
a. Hingu b. Lodhra c. Madanaphala_ d. Manjishtha
Ans: c. Madanaphala
8. Types of Madanaphala as per Raja Nighantu
a. 2 b. 4 c. 5 d. 6
Ans: a. 2

sea

----- PAGE 465 -----
Chapter

Mandukaparni

\

Useful part — Patra (Leaf) or Panchanga (whole herb).

Karma (Action)

Medhya, Rasayana, Swarya, Smritivardhaka, Kushthaghna, Pandujit, Mehaghna,
Kasahara, Vishaghna, Shothahara, Jwarahara, Hridya, Ayushyakara, Kandughna,
Ruchikara, Shwasahara.

Pharmacological Actions

Memory enhancer, Anti-inflammatory, CNS depressant, Sedative, Hypotensive and
Hepatoprotective.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka. Vatahara due to Madhura vipaka, Pittahara because of Shita

virya, Madhura vipaka and Tikta Kashaya Madhura rasa. Kaphahara because of Tikta
Kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Smritidourbalya, Unmada, Apasmara, Swarabheda, Hriddourbalya, Kushtha,
Kandu, Pandu, Prameha, Kasa, Vishavikara, Shotha, Jwara, Aruchi and Shwasa.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Medhya (Intellect promoter)
mugemmtate serra seat yet ANAT Mea: |
Garter aaret Faget MATT HT EATVAT TATA AEM: Ut (37.8.3. 39/165)

Regular usage of Mandukaparni (Centella asiatica) fried with ghee for a month
promotes intellect.

----- PAGE 466 -----
458 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Kasa (Cough) and Shosha (Wasting)
augHaval: Heatse ae fratrerer a 1 (aefa. 3/119)

Combination of Mandukaparni (Centella asiatica), Yashthi (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
and Vishwoushadha (Zingiber officinale) taken 5 gm first and gradually increased up to
40 g ina month, relieves Kasa (Cough) and Shosha (Wasting).

3. Vagvikara (Disorders of voice)
reat area | vier gett tar Vea arat fey
(A0.5.Fa. 1/659)

To get the clear voice one has to take Mandukaparni (Centella asiatica), Malura
mula root of (Aegle marmolos), Amaya (Saussurea lappa), Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus
pluricaulis) mixed with honey.

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) -3to5¢g
Swarasa (Juice) — 10 to 20 ml
Phytoconstituents

Asiaticoside, Brahmoside, Brahminoside, Hydrocotylin, Thankuniside, Thankunic
acid, Madegascaric acid, Brahmic acid, Centelloside, Centic acid, Centellic acid and
Centoic acid.

Research corner

1. To evaluate the specific effect of Centella asiatica (CA), vitamins, glycolic acid
and their mixture preparations to stimulate collagen and fibronectin synthesis in
cultured human fibroblast cells. The results showed that CA, glycolic acid,
vitamins A, E and C significantly stimulate collagen and fibronectin synthesis
in the fibroblast. Hashim P. The effect of Centella asiatica, vitamins, glycolic
acid and their mixtures preparations in stimulating collagen and fibronectin
synthesis in cultured human skin fibroblast. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2014 Mar,
27(2):233-7.

2. The accumulation of amyloid-(3 (AR) is a hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease and
is known to result in neurotoxicity both in vivo and in vitro. Study
demonstrated that treatment with the water extract of Centella asiatica (CAW)
improves learning and memory deficits in Tg2576 mice, an animal model of
AR accumulation. Each compound not only mitigated A (B-induced cell death,
but was able to attenuate A(B-induced alterations in tau expression and

----- PAGE 467 -----
Mandukaparni 459

phosphorylation in both cell lines, as seen with CAW. Gray NE’, Morre J2,
Kelley J2, Maier CS2, Stevens JF3, Quinn JF4, Soumyanath A’.
Caffeoylquinic Acids in Centella asiatica Protect against Amyloid-R Toxicity.
J Alzheimers Dis. 2014 Jan 21.

3. The present study was undertaken to assess analgesic and anti-inflammatory
properties of Centella asiatica leaf extracts. Study demonstrated that Centella
asiatica bears significant analgesic and anti-inflammatory activities in those
models. Saha S’, Guria T2, Singha T2, Maity TKz. Evaluation of Analgesic
and Anti-Inflammatory Activity of Chloroform and Methanol Extracts of
Centella asiatica Linn. ISRN Pharmacol. 2013 Nov 21;2013: 789613. doi:
10.1155/2013/789613. Collection 2013.

4. This study was to investigate the effects of Asiaticoside (AS) on memory
impairment and inflammatory cytokines expression induced by transient
cerebral ischemia and repertusion in mice, as well as the potential signaling
pathway. The results suggested that AS showed the neuroprotective effect
against transient cerebral ischemia and reperfusion in mice, and this effect
might be associated with the anti-inflammation effect of AS via inhibiting over
activation of p38 MAPK pathway. Chen S’, Yin ZJ’, Jiang C2, Ma ZQ’, Fu
Q3, Qu R4, Ma SP5. Asiaticoside attenuates memory impairment induced by
transient cerebral ischemia-reperfusion in mice through anti-inflammatory
mechanism. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2014 Mar 12;122C:7-15. doi:
10.1016/j.pbb.2014.03.004.

5. The study was conducted to determine the antioxidant properties of two well
known memory enhancer medicinal plants Baccopa monnieri and Centella
asiatica. The study that regular use of Baccopa monnieri as a supplement could
be more helpful compared to Centella asiatica in treatment of neurological
disorders caused by free radical damage. Meena H’, Pandey HK, Pandey P,
Arya MC, Ahmed Z. Evaluation of antioxidant activity of two important
memories enhancing medicinal plants Baccopa monnieri and Centella asiatica.
Indian J Pharmacol. 2012 Jan;44(1):114-7. doi: 10.4103/0253-7613.91880.

Yoga (Formulations)

Indications

L

----- PAGE 468 -----
460 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name — Centella asiatica Linn.
Centella —- Many
asiatica — of Asia
Family — Apiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Shatapushpa
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Vayasthapana Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Varga
Bha.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 279-281

Basonym of Drug
Huge sa gular | USeHrale TOT | Bel AV EH FaleATat TUT
Leaves of Mandukaparni(Centella asiatica Linn.) resemble frog in its shape and it is
a runner.
Synonyms
Morphology
1, Wogal-nigenttra teste ste |
Mandukaparni has got runner and growth pattern resemble how frog jumps.
Properties and Actions
2. aetaeht-aedt after: |
Mandukaparni is one among best medicinal plants.

3. feear-fefer star AAT OTT

Mandukaparni is appreciated by all owing to its extraordinary qualities.
4. feortan-feet taqed ast aeM: |

Mandukaparni is having best qualities hence it is given great importance.
5. varedt-caer arferer oft SararseaT: |

Mandukaparni is believed to be an abode of goddess Laxmi.
6. Wreadt—-

Mandukaparni imparts good knowledge by enhancing memory.

----- PAGE 469 -----
Mandukaparni 461

Regional Names

Habitat

Mandukaparni is a common weed found through-
out India and especially grows in moist regions.

Morphology
Habit — Annual prostate herb.
Root — Tap root, branched.

Stem -— Prostate, herbaceous, weak, fistular, green,
stolons are present, rooting at nodes.

Leaf — Simple, arising in groups from nodes, or-
bicular or reniform, crenate, lobed, glabrous, shining,
petiolar, long petioled, stipulate, unicostate reticulate
veined.

Inflorescence — Racemose, simple umbels, 3 to 6
flowers in each group. Centella asiatica Linn.

Flowers — Pedicellate, bracteate, actinomorphic, bisexual, epigynous, complete, regu-
lar, pedicels and bracts are small, sepals are 5 in number, gamosepalous, petals are 5,
polypetalous. Androecium has 5 stamens polyandrous, alternate to petals. Gynocium has
2 carpels, with inferior ovary.

Fruit — Cremocarp, laterally compressed, cremocarp breaks into 2 mericarps, one
seed in each mericarp.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Sample of Centella asiatica consisting of reniform or orbicular leaves, up to 3.5 cm
long and 2 cm broad with crenate or lobulate margins and broadly cordate base. Upper
surface glabrous, greenish brown, lower surface grayish green, palmately veined. The
leaves are borne on long wiry petioles. Has got strong odour and tastes bitter.

The fresh herb consists of long slender slightly succulent, creeping stems with long

----- PAGE 470 -----
462 Dravyaguna Vijnana

internodes and bearing rosettes of long stalked, frequently cupped leaves, crowded at
nodes underside of which gives out fibrous roots.

Classical references

Synonyms :
Hugenuult wrogat rast feear weteeht 1 (ay. Teens HT 279)
Properties and Actions :
arealt Fear ferear HEAT ST MAST | HATA AAT FATS UTEAT SSE TATA
waat wyfmer qeagtersaratrd | fragitesaet agave aft ui
(WF. Teas TT 280-281)
aiferasret Heal TAT Hee | UTA wT taal Taree fea
(aft. axcrafe at 8s)
areht vite eer fercet HATA AT AT: | AeA Laer LATS UTEHT RETTEM TATA
airegiral seat HSHVESA Ac | vilHraferewaeaHratera Wg: N
(HFA. staf af 722-723)
wet nvgnauf were afaet aaaq guile
weraet cafe |= wafarrer—efterftregegqantt
Wat Ferg cle uRett wt aad enter
(B.A. margene at 178)
atelt fear nearer a freer arrears, | afd wat a tet at peaterqerestt u
(aft. Terie af 66)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Vipaka of Mandukaparni
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: b. Madhura
2. Medhya Karma of Mandukaparni is attributed to its
a. Rasa b. Vipaka c. Virya d. Prabhava
Ans: d. Prabhava ,

----- PAGE 471 -----
Nn

nN

foe)

Mandukaparni 463

. Regular usage of Mandukaparni (Centella asiatica) fried with ghee for a month

is beneficial for

a. Medha karma b. Swedana Karma c. Dipana d. Stambhana
Ans: a. Medha Karma

A chemical called Asiaticoside is present in

a. Bhallataka b. Brahati c. Kantakari d. Mandukaparni
Ans: d. Mandukaparni

. Sarasvatarishta is indicated in

a. Kushtha b. Shotha c. Manasika vikara_ d. Prameha
Ans: c. Manasika Vikara

Botanical name of Mandukaparni

a. Bacopa monneri b. Centella asiatica

c. Convolvulus pluricaulis d. Evolvulus alsinoides

Ans: b. Centella asiatica

Saraswati is the synonym of

a. Mandukaparni b. Jyotishmati c. Kushmanda_ d, Vacha
Ans: a. Mandukaparni

. Habit of Mandukaparni plant
a. Tree b. Shrub c. creeper d. Herb
Ans: d. Herb

2h KK

----- PAGE 472 -----
Chapter

Manjishta

Useful part — Mula (Root)

Kashaya, Tikta, Madhura
Guru, Ruksha
;
Karma (Action)

Varnya, Raktashodhaka, Swarya, Vishaghna, Shothahara, Netrya, Kushthaghna,
Pramehahara, Vranahara, Yonirogahara, Arshoghna, Jwaraghna.

Pharmacological Actions

Blood purifier, Astringent, Diuretic, Emmanogogue, Anthelmintic, Haemostatic,
Uterine stimulant, Antidiabetic.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Pittakapha Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka because of its Kashaya, Tikta and Madhura
rasa. Kapha Shamaka due to Ushna Virya, Katu vipaka and Kashaya Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Kushtha, Twak roga, Visarpa, Vaivarnya, Vishavikara, Yoniroga, Shotha, Karnaruja,
Netraroga, Raktatisara, Prameha, Vrana, Arshas, Jwara.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vyanga (Freckle)

adrsur ar feet wafer | (31.3.3. 37/24)

Manyishtha (Rubia cordifolia) root has to be triturated with honey to prepare a paste.
This paste of applied over the Vyanga, it brings back the normal colour of the skin.

2. Prameha (Diabetes)

uasmtedt afar art aay | (yf. 11/9)

The decoction prepared from Manjishtha (Rubia cordifolia) and Candana (Santalum
album) is very useful in Manjishta meha a type of Pittaja prameha.

----- PAGE 473 -----
Manjishta 465

3. Bhagna (Fracture)

aretaarel TARE TERT Ul (F.41. 46/3)

The paste prepared from Manjishtha (Rubia cordifolia) and Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza
glabra) triturated with sour gruel if applied will heal the fracture.

Matra (Dosage)
Kwatha(Decoction) -— 60to 100ml
Churna (Powder) - lto3g

Phytoconstituents
Root consists manjishtin, purpurin, xanthopurpurin, pseudopurpurin, rubifolic acid,
rubianin, ruberythric acid, -sitosterol, B-scopoletol and fatty acids.

Research corner

1. An immunoassay system was established for the estimation of the quantity of
an antitumor cyclohexapeptide, deoxybouvardin (RA-V) from Bouvardia
ternifolia (Cav.) Schlecht, Rubia cordifolia L., and R. akane Nakai
(Rubiaceae). Two clones were isolated, one producing MAb IgG (1) and the
other MAb IgG(2b), both having a K light chain. Hasuda T, Hitosuyanagi Y,
Takeya K. Monoclonal antibodies from Rubia cordifolia against antitumor
cyclohexapeptide deoxybouvardin and their use in immunoassay. Hybridoma
(Larchmt). 2012 Feb; 31(1):20-4. doi:10.1089/hyb. 2011.0084.

2. This study was undertaken to investigate the possible effect of hydroalcoholic
root extract of Rubia cordifolia against indomethacin-induced enterocolitis in
rats. The present data suggests protective effect of Rubia cordifolia in
indomethacin-induced enterocolitis and may be beneficial in patients with
inflammatory bowel diseases. Pawar AT, Anap RM, Ghodasara JV, Kuchekar
BS. Protective Effect of Hydroalcoholic Root Extract of Rubia cordifolia in
Indomethacin-Induced Enterocolitis in Rats. Indian J. Pharm Sci. 2011 Mar; 73
(2):250-3.

3. The ameliorative effect of the Rubia cordifolia methanol extract on N-
nitrosodiethylamine-induced experimental hepatocellular carcinogenesis in rats.
The findings demonstrated that Rubia cordifolia can be a source of potent
antioxidants for treatment of diseases such as cancer. Shilpa PN,
Venkatabalasubramanian §, Devaraj SN. Ameliorative effect of methanol
extract of Rubia cordifolia in N-nitrosodeithylamine-induced hepatocellular
carcinoma. Pharm Biol. 2012 Mar; 50(3):376-83. doi: 10.3109/
13880209.2011.608073. Epub 2011 Dec 1.

----- PAGE 474 -----
466 Dravyaguna Vijnana

4. The neuroprotective potential and in vivo antioxidant status of extract of roots
and rhizomes of Rubia cordifolia L (MERC) in reserpine-induced orofacial
dyskinesia was studied. It is concluded that oxidative stress might play an
important role in reserpine-induced abnormal oral movements and MERC
significantly protected animals against reserpine-induced orofacial dyskinesia
and has great potential in treatment of neuroleptic induced orofacial dyskinesia.
Patil RA, Kasture SB. Protective effect of Rubia cordifolia on reserpine-
induced orofacial dyskinesia. Nat Prod Res. 2012: 26(22):2159-61. doi:
10.1080/14786419.2011.635341. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

5. To evaluate the in vivo antioxidant activity of the ethanolic extract of the roots
of Rubia cordifolia (RC) and to study its influence on lead nitrate-induced
immunosuppression is due to oxidative stress and RC can prevent the same by
virtue of its in vivo antioxidant property. Lodi S, Sharma V, Kanasal L. The
protective effect of Rubia cordifolia against lead nitrate-induced immune
response impairment and kidney oxidative damage. Indian J Pharmacal. 2011
jul; 43(4):441-4. doi: 10.4103/0253-7613.83118.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo. Formulation Indications

re Mahamanjishthadi kashaya
;

Manisa ep

Botanical Name — Rubia cordifolia Linn.
Rubia - red, redness alluding to the dye obtained from it.

cordifolia — Heart shaped leaves
Family — Rubiaceae (See Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Manjishta
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Varnya varga, Vishaghna varga, Jwarahara varga
Sushruta Priyangvadi gana
Bh.Pi.Ni Haritakyadi varga 188-191

Basonym of Drug

Traht vitera aot oritt earch, Tengiterancae, |

----- PAGE 475 -----
Manjishta 467

Manjishta imparts normal colour to the skin as it purifies blood.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. fraan-fraate wate |
Manjishta (Rubia cordifolia) spreads on the ground.
2. Aeraceht-aert Aa WIA ACTEM: |
Manjishta is a climber spreads on the ground.
3. quet-aoster wate |
Manjishta creeper spreads extensively on the land.
4. Pargh-frgte meme weechihe
Manjishta expands very quickly and covers larger area.
5. WASH MAaAaSHet WERET
Manjishta spreads extensively on the ground.
Morphology
6. area feent-aret Prater ered, Wen ale Yet Horraas state |
When completely dried the root becomes black.
7. BIAM-HOTATT, PATA Tet |
On drying root of Manjishta becomes black.
8. AAA arrerat Hore: srelypes Ala Yet aaah sar |
When half dried the root becomes copper coloured.
9. TRIST-TeHAg HVS TATE: |
Fresh root of Manjishta will be red and even stem also red in colour.
10. ASiMl-TrHIAAVST |
Stem is reddish in colour.
11. TRB RT-Te TVS: |
Stem of Manjishta will be red in colour.
12. fasaeff-feontr aera Reranfer corte: |
Leaves are arranged in equal distance and in a circle.
Properties and Actions

13. Tatert-aet teat, Tata Waa: |

----- PAGE 476 -----
468 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Manjishta imparts colour to cloth hence used as dyeing agent.

14, Taret-tardiat engqararanret, ereedrarct |
Manjishta may be used as rejuvenating agent.
15. Todas welthirate weg weacifer, afer franca: |

Manjishta may be used for glandular growths as a medicine.

Regional Names

Habitat

Manjishta is growing throughout India, most com-
monly seen in Hilly areas.

Morphology

Perennial, herbaceous, climber, roots are very
long, cylindrical with a thin red bark.

Stem-— Often many yards long, rough, grooved,
becoming, slightly woody at the base, bark is white,
branches are scandent by means of numerous
divaricate or deflexed branch lets and petioles, qua-
drangular, sometimes prickly on the angles, glabrous
and shining.

Leaves — 4 leaves in one whorl, 4 to 9 cm long
and 1.5 to 3.5 cm wide. Usually two leaves in whorl Rubia cordifolia Linn.
are larger when compared to other two leaves, ovate,
acute, base rounded or slightly cordate, 5 nerved, all starts from base. Petioles are triangu-
Jar with many recurved sharp prickles on the edges and exstipulate.

Inflorescence - Terminal panicle cymes with trichomatous branches.

Flowers — Small pedicels are articulated with the calyx, petals are greenish and
divided nearly to the base.

Fruits — Globose, 4 to 6 mm in diameter, smooth, shining, purplish black when ripe.

----- PAGE 477 -----
Manjishta 469

Varieites

Ra.Ni.-— 1. Chola 2. Yojani 3.Crounci — 4. Simhali

Market samples—1. Nepali 2.Afghani 3. Eshani 4. Hindustani
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Root is hard, woody and cylindrical. Root will be upto to 1 cm in diameter. Outer
surface is smooth, faintly striated longitudinally, rusty brown in colour. Transversely cut
pieces show a closely adhering bark, followed by a reddish brown tissue full of minute
pores and hollow centre. On breaking it becomes very short pieces. It has got bitter taste.

Classical references
Synonyms :
aRast fener first art creattent (avgenaulf sesh sost aterracate it
THATSUT Ge Tea gt Terateent | sushrat at Tht war cee
(aa. Seema aT 188-190)

Properties and Actions

TST HET ferret HITT Laat | PHS erascraiteraraernutag |
THe Heras Ut (AT. eirMe FE 190-191)

TRAST WT Tae SVT Yea | wastes

(af. Tents wt 18)
aRaSt qae fear eaafon wep ye: | Uae aagiferetet
Pradtegaritaurcmitrarntid | wr tag oe fret het araftrafire

(Fy. aiteftrert 1426-1427)

ARST AYN Tale were yee 1 que warsctar fawarraeRT
(w.F. frorenfe af 194)

fran gannasq «= fefact et tert

aya
etritaftratter caneg wfetear eh: 1 ereraft cee teh aret ert fereretarer
(BLA. froreente at 76-77)

Types of Manjishtha

aes atertt ast Recht a agfeien afer ete at witcer free STAT It
(af. froreanfe aT 195)

----- PAGE 478 -----
470 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Manjishta
a. Kanda b. Mula c. Patra d. Pushpa
Ans: b. Mula

2. Pradhana Rasa of Manjishta
a, Tikta b. Katu c. Madhura d. Kashaya

Ans: d. Kashaya
3. Main action of Manjishta
a. Stambhana b. Medhya c. Raktashodhaka d. Shulahara
Ans: c. Raktashodhaka
4, Manjishtadi Lepa is specifically indicated in
a. Shotha b. Vidradhi c. Shirashula d. Vyanga
Ans: a. Shotha
. Botanical name of Manjishta
a. Sida cordifolia b. Rubia cordifolia
c. Tinospora cordifolia d. Vitex negundo
Ans: b. Rubia cordifolia
. Yojanavalli is a synonym of
a. Jyothishmathi b. Kushmanda c. Manjishta d. Nagavalli
Ans: c. Manjishta
7. Tamra mula & Chitraparni are the synonyms of
a. Vidanga b. Eranda c. Jyothishmati d. Manjishta
Ans: d. Manjishta
. Habit of Manjishta plant
a. Tree b. Climber c. Herb d. Shrub
Ans: b. Climber

w,y

lon

o

oR

----- PAGE 479 -----
Chapter

Maricha

Useful part — Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi panchaka
Shushka (dry) Ardra (Fresh)

Katu

aan aa

Karma (Action)

Maricha - Dipana, Shwasahara, Krimighna, Shulahara, Rochana, Hradrogahara,
Chedana, Avrsya.

Shwetamaricha — Vishaghna, Avrashya, Rasayana, Netrarogahara.
Pharmacological Actions

Stimulant, Carminative, Stomachic, Appetizers, Vermifuge.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

KaphaVata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka be-
cause of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Agnimandya, Shula, Krimi, Kasa, Shwasa, Hradroga, Vatavyadhi, Mutrakrachra.
Shwetamaricha

Netraroga, Visharoga.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Pravahika (Dysentery)

fovea: frat: Gert watt afteratrar ar | Rerceprerrgerenrste areracary Wanieer 1

(3t.3.Fa. 9/40)

Fine powder of Pippali (Piper longum) and Maricha (Piper nigrum) if taken will
check even chronic dysentery immediately.

----- PAGE 480 -----
472 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Grahani (Spure)
aan a: frafiret gu ute dey | faretecieited mevtt aes agate
(W.4. 2/6/53)

The powder prepared from Maricha (Piper nigrum), Chitraka (Plumbago zeylanica)
and Sauvarcala lavana (Sochal salt) if taken with butter milk will cure Grahani dosha.

3. Kasa (Cough)

fram akarepat ar weet attaereey t (a.Fa. 18/180)
Intake of fine powder of Maricha (Piper nigrum) mixed with ghee, honey and sugar
will cure all kinds of cough.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) — 500 mg to 1 g

Phytoconstituents

Pepper contains an alkaloid (5 to 9%), volatile oil (1 to 2.5%), pungent resin, (6.0%),
piperidine, starch.

Volatine oil contains l-phellandrene & caryophyllene.

Research corner

1. Piperine, the chief alkaloid present in Piper nigrum (black pepper), has a wide
array of uses in alternative and complementary therapies. The effect of piperine
on blood glucose level was studied in alloxan-induced diabetic mice in acute
and subacute study models. Subacute administration of piperine has statistically
significant antihyperglycemic activity while acutely it raises blood glucose at
high doses. Atal S, Agrawal RP, Vyas S, Phadnis P, Rai N. Evaluation of the
effect of piperine per se on blood glucose level in alloxan-induced diabetic
mice. Acta Pol Pharm. 2012 Sep-Oct; 69 (5):965-9.

2. Piperine (CAS no:94-62-2), an alkaloid obtained (CYP isozymes) responsible
for biotransformation of drugs. By inhibiting the metabolism of drugs, piperine
improves the bioavailability of drugs. In-the present study piperine (10 mg./kg)
significantly increased the dose-dependent anti-hyperglycemic activity of
nateglinide (CAS no: 105816-04-4) as evaluated by glucose challenged and
alloxan-induced diabetic models, when it was administered with nateglinide.
Sama V, Nadipelli M, Yenumula P, Bommineni MR, Mullangi R. Effect of
piperine on antihyperglycemic activity and pharmacokinetic profile of
nateglinide. Arzneimittelforschung. 2012 Aug;62 (8):384-8. doi: 10.1055/s-
0032-1314849. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

----- PAGE 481 -----
Maricha 473
3. To investigate the effect of piperine, a major pungent alkaloid present mouse
4Tl mammary carcinoma in vitro and in vivo, and clucidate the underlying
mechanisms. The results demonstrated that piperine is an effective antitumor
compound in vitro and in vivo, and has the potential to be developed as a new
anticancer drug. Lai LH, Fu QH, Liu Y, Jiang K, Guo QM, Chen QY, Yan
B, Wang QQ, Shen JG. Piperine suppresses tumor growth and metastatis in
vitro and in vivo in a 4 T1 murine breast cancer model. Acta Pharmacol Sin.
2012 Apr; 33(4):523-30. doi: 10.1038/aps. 2011.209. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

4. The insecticidal activity of Piper nigrum fruit-derived piperidine alkaloid
(piperine) and N-is obutlyamide alkaloids (pellitories, genuineness, pipercide
and retrofractamide A) against female adults of Culex pipiens pallens and
Aedes aegypti was examined. Park IK. Insecticidal activity of isobutlylamides
derived from Piper nigrum against adult of two mosquito species, Culex
pipiens pallens and Aedes aegypti. Nat Prod Res. 2012;26(22):2129-31.
doi:10.1080/14786419.2011.-628178. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

5. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of black pepper fruit hot
water extract (BPE) on rat ileum contractility and the mechanisms (s) of its
action. The extract was prepared by adding black pepper powder to boiling
distilled water followed by evaporated the solvent. Naseri MK, Yahyavi H.
Antispasmodic effect of Piper nigrum fruit hot water extract on rat ileum. PaK
J Biol Sci. 2008 Jun 1:11(11):1492-6.

Yoga (Formulations)

SINo- Formulation Indications |

,

Botanical Name - Piper nigrum Linn.

Piper - Derived from Sanskrit word pippali or called Peperi in Greek.
nigrum — Black in colour

Family — Piperaceae

Kula — Pippali kula

----- PAGE 482 -----
474

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka __Dipaniya varga, ShulapraSamana varga, Krimighna varga,

Shirovirechanopaga varga

Sushruta _ Pippalyadi gana, Trayushana
Bh.Pr.Ni — Haritakyadi varga 59-61

Basonym of Drug
frat aeaatsaate, et sera: |

Maricha is efficacious anthelmintic drug.

Synonyms

Morphology

1.

Aoorany-aocrtea Wadler eet: Aeehthet aad |

Maricha (Piper nigrum) plant is a climber.

. aeeltaq-accrat TAH |

Maricha is obtained from a climber.

. FARA -TaIAN HAA |

Maricha fruits are round in shape.

. Prtqraq-vittart gare |

Maricha fruits have a minute cup on the top.

. POA FUTTTA |

Maricha fruits are black in colour.

Properties and Actions

6.

HANF-HAle Als Battsy TAA

Maricha causes burning sensation and pain.

. Atearq-cfreorgory |

Maricha is having sharp qualities.

, BAS BATT |

Maricha causes dryness.

. HESH-HTA fears S|

Maricha has pungent taste.

----- PAGE 483 -----
Maricha 475

10. akey-were ahetgrny |
Maricha has a very strong potency.
Others
11, wleeay-alerHare araeaater aT |
Maricha is commonly stored in ports to export.
12. oduarayq-adore eae |
Maricha is stored in ports as an item to export to different countries.
13. AaAsA-TaAat ss ay |
Maricha is having a great demand by the foreigners.
14, USAMA Hea WATT MATA seer |
Maricha is commonly used spice and stored in kitchen.
Regional Names

3

Habitat

Maricha is indigenous to Western coast of India,
now it is grown all over South India because of its
high commercial value.
Morphology

Stout glabrous climber.

Stem —Terete, sparingly rooting, much thick-
ened at the nodes.

Leaves —Coriaceous, 10-18 cm long and 5-12
cm wide, broadly ovate, heart shaped, glabrous, 5 to
9 nerved, suprabasal nerves are usually alternate, base,

usually rounded, more or less oblique petioles 1 to 2.5
cm long.

Piper nigrum Linn.

----- PAGE 484 -----
476 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Inflorescence - Spikes of variable length (5 to 15 cm).

Flowers — Dioecious or sometimes polygamous, bracts of the female spikes more or
less adnate to the rachis, forming a short hemispheric cup beneath the ovary, stamens are
two in number.

Fruit — Globose, 6 mm in diameter, when young green in colour turn to red when
fully ripe. On drying fruits will have wrinkles and on removing outer layer of fruit will
have white with vertical lines.

Varieties
Dha.Ni & Ra. Ni- 1. Maricha 2. Shweta maricha

Adulterants
Vidanga
Substitutes
1. Piper longum 2. Piper attenuatum 3. Piper brachystachyum

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Fruits are dry, globose shaped, 3.5 to 6 mm in diameter. The surface is coarse, deeply
and reticulately wrinkled, having a brown or brownish black colour. The fruit bears re-
mains of a sessile stigma at the apex. The pericarp is closely adherent to the seed. It has
got strong spicy odour and pungent taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
Ute aectet Porat eet wT | (ALT. irae TF 59)
Properties and Actions
Aas Wat Ure ATT Mech Te | fahren yor scrorates arate
(ana. eiteate FT 60-61)
afte aehrntat trapeestererny | art Pana seq PATA I
(afr. mAs FT 86)
arg att aia cargorenatirreny | aes mech fafa cies Te
Ue aot wa Uh Heh oY etary | ages thet devi wat ary
aii arageret fe giregferceny, ul (3.F. staf at 1162-1164)

----- PAGE 485 -----
Maricha ATT
afte aight oq scram | wlicahtetrers oferemrcnt t
(uf. frorenfe af 32)
Ata Fort Haft sary sare Arter: | pheniteat amaresent dost oe
(Pr.fr. Prevent at 4)
Seater. Ago aferwat wt alee Ate ferry, 1 (aA. wagons at 87)
weet deat fret yee | strqet efetrret ee wa carat

(afr. froreate at 34)
daaenT eaura Pras Sars | geet gq Prater: dfs Aaretrg
(fF. froreanfe a s)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Maricha
a. Patra b. Mula c. Phala d. Pushpa
Ans: c. Phala
2. Pradhana Karma of Maricha
a. Grahi b. medhya c. Trishna hara_ d. Dipana
Ans: d. Dipana

3. Fine powder of Pippali (Piper longum) and Maricha (Piper nigrum) if taken
will check
a. Prameha b Raktapitta c. Pravahika d. Shwasa
Ans: c. Pravahika

4. Intake of fine powder of Maricha (Piper nigrum) mixed with ghee, honey and
sugar will cure

a. Shotha b. Kasa c. Sthoulya d.Sandhivata
Ans: b. Kasa

5. Marichadya Taila is mainly indicated in
a. Shwasa b. Atisara c. Daha d. Kushtha
Ans: Kushtha

6. Botanical name of Maricha
a. Piper nigrum b. Piper longum
c. Piper cubeba d. Solanum nigrum

Ans: a. Piper nigrum

----- PAGE 486 -----
478 Dravyaguna Vijnana

7. Dharmapattanam is the synonym of
a. Pippali b. Shunthi c. Maricha d. Bakuchi
Ans: c. Maricha

8. Habit of Maricha plant
a. Climber b. Herb c. Tree d. Shrub
Ans: a. Climber

ERK

----- PAGE 487 -----
Chapter

Meshashringi

Part used - Patra (Leaf) and Mula (Root).

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Mehaghna, Shwasahara, Kasahara, Vranahara, AkshiShulahara, Kushthaghna,
Dipana, Sramsana, Krimighna, and Vishaghna.

Pharmacological Actions
Antidiabetic, Hypoglycemic, Antiviral, Antimicrobial, Antiatherosclerotic and Spas-
molytic.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)
Kapha Vata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka because of Ushna virya. Kaphahara due to
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Prameha, Shwasakasa, Kushtha, Akshishula, Agnimandya, Krimi, Akshiroga and
Vishavikara.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus)

Kesha Churna (Powder) of dried leaves of Meshashringi (Gymnema sylvestrae) is
given in Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus) which always checks the blood Sugar level.
2. Sandhi Shotha (Inflammation of Joints)

Leaf paste of Mesha Shringi (Gymnema sylvestrae) is applied over the joints. It is a
very good remedy in case of Sandhi Shotha (Inflammation of joints).

Matra (Dose)
Patra Churna (Leaf powder) - 3 to 6 gm

----- PAGE 488 -----
480 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Mula Kwatha (Root decoction) - 50 to 100 ml

Chemical constituents - Leaf contains Gymnamine (Alkaloid), Alananine, Valine,
Adenine, Betaine, Hentriacontane and Nonacosane.

Research corner

The anti obesity effect of water soluble fraction of Gymnema sylvestre extract (120
mg/kg, p.o. for 21 days) in HFD fed rats was evaluated by the measurement of body
weight gain, food intake, hemodynamic changes (systolic, diastolic, mean blood pressure
and heart rate), serum lipid profiles (triglycerides, total cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, HDL-
cholesterol), leptin, insulin, glucose, apolipoproteins Al and B, lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) and antioxidant enzymes such as reduced glutathione (GSH), glutathione peroxi-
dase (GPx), glutathione reductase (GR), glutathione-S transferase (GST), superoxide
dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) levels in liver tissues. Organs and visceral fat pad
weight were measured. Histopathological studies were also carried out. Water soluble
fraction of G.sylvestre ethanolic extract and rimonabant significantly reduced serum lip-
ids, leptin, insulin, glucose, apolipoprotein B and LDH levels while it significantly in-
creased the HDL-cholesterol, apolipoprotein Al and antioxidant enzymes levels in liver
tissue as compared to the HFD fed rats. Histopathological studies of tissues showed no
pathological changes. The results of this study show that water soluble fraction of G.
sylvestre extract possess antiobesity effect. Kumar V1, Bhandari U2, Tripathi CD3,
Khanna G4. Anti-obesity effect of Gymnema sylvestre extract on high fat diet-induced
obesity in Wistar rats. Drug Res (Stuttg). 2013 Dec;63 (12):625-32. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-
1349852. Epub 2013 Jul 10.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo.

Name Indications |

Madhumehantaka Churna Madhumeha
Nyagrodhadi Churna Madhumehaja vrana

Maha Vishagarbha Taila Vatavikara, Gridhrasi
MeshashringiTaila | Kushtha
Latin Name

Gymnema sylvestre R.Br. in Mem.

Gymnema-—Gymnos=naked
sylvestre— Sylva wood land
Family - Asclepiadaceae
Kula - Arka kula

----- PAGE 489 -----
Meshashringi 481

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not included in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Guduuchyadi varga

Basonym of Drug
AUTH Fa Hels ATT |
Fruits of Mesasrifigi (Gymnema sylvestre R.Br) resembles like that of horns of goat.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. HAIG saa Fa YR Heh ATE |
Meshashringi fruits resemble the horns of a goat.
2. Reraroft- were asaya FATT: |
Meshashringi fruits are appearing similar to the horns of goat.
Properties and Actions
3. wef meee ae sored Tee |
If one eats the leaves of Meshashringi he can not taste sweet taste for some-
time.

Vernacular Names

English Periploca of the woods

Gurmar
Sanna gere, Madhunashini

a ae |

'

'

Habitat
Meshashringi is found through out India especially in dry forests.

Morphology
Habit - Large woody much-branched climber running over the tops of high trees.
Stem - Young stems are pubescent.

----- PAGE 490 -----
482 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Leaves - Opposite, simple, 3 to 5 cm long and |
to 3 cm wide, ovate, elliptic, acute or shortly acumi-
nate, more or less pubescent on both the sides. Petiole
is 1 cm long.

Flowers - Seen in sessile cymes. Yellow, tube is
companulate.

Fruits - Follicles 6 to 7.5 cm long, 1 cm wide,
lanceolate, attenuated into a beak. Seeds are 1 cm long,
narrowly ovoid-oblong, flat with a thin broad mar-
ginal wing and brown in colour.

Substitutes
1. Gymnema hirsutum

2. Gymnema montanum

Classical references Gymnema sylvestre R.Br.

Synonyms
Teasygt frarat earteacerrstsset | (ALF. Teeaert: 253)
Properties and Actions
Tes ST TS force ae ATTRA, | WAT Ute He: ferrarorserorfeargyer yc, I
Reagted fxh petenamy | det eet crater aunfeared
(a5. Feenfeat: 253-255)
oofsent get ferent cefirraareet | fréfer fafirearccraaunferrsty
Tate fh aeteen | det ced da aficatador i
(df. siteftert: 738-739)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Meshashringi
a. Patra b. Phala c. Pushpa d. Niryasa
Ans: a. Patra
2. Pradhana Rasa of Meshashringi
a. Madhura b. Katu c. Tikta d. Amla
Ans: c. Tikta

----- PAGE 491 -----
Meshashringi

. Pradhana Karma of Meshashringi

a. Shwasahara b. Kasahara
Ans: d. Mehaghna

. Main indication of Meshashringi

a. Atisara b. Trishna
Ans: c. Madhumeha

. Gymnamine is an alkaloid present in

a. Karkatashringi b. Meshashringi
Ans: b. Meshashringi

. Botanical name of Meshashringi

a. Andrographis paniculata

c. Gymnema sylvestre

Ans: c. Gymnema sylvestre

. Madhunashini is the synonym of

a. Shalmali b. Meshashringi
Ans: b. Meshashringi

. Habit of Meshashringi plant

a. Herb b. Tree

Ans: d. Climber

ARK KK

c. Jwaraghna

c. Madhumeha

c. Durva

483

d. Mehaghna

d. Vibandha

d. Ahiphena

b. Pistacia integerrima

d. Aquillaria agallocha

c. Ativisha

c. Shrub

d. Manjishtha

d. Climber

----- PAGE 492 -----
Methika

Part used - Panchanga (Whole plant) and Bija (Seed).
Rasadi pancaka

Karma (Actions)

Jwaraghna, Ruchikara, Dipana, Nadibalya, Balya, Shulahara, Vrushya. :
Pharmacological Actions

Hypoglycaemic, Fungitoxic, Insecticidal, Antibiotic, Antineoplastic, Antiinflamma-
tory, Antipyretic, Analgesic and Hypocholesterolemic.
Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha shamaka, Vata shamaka due to Ushna virya. Kaphas shamaka because
of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Vatavyadhi, Jwara, Aruchi, Agnimandya, Nadidourbalya, Dourbalya, Shula and
Sukradourbalya.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata)

Tftrent SaaS caret serra | Meee Ed Beh agaist VAT Ut

aoqut wftt Fret Prete cea | staff yermenrt ureeret wfeareny

(a.a.f. 1/98-99)

Powder of Chaturbija-Methika (Trigonella foenum graecum), Chandrashura
(Lepidium sativum), Kalajaji (Nigella sativa) and Yavani (Trachyspermum ammi) if taken
will destroy all the Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata). This is also useful in Ajirna (Indiges-

tion), Shula (Abdominal pain), Adhmana (Flatulance), Parshva Shula (Pain in flanks)
and Kativyatha (Low backache).

----- PAGE 493 -----
Methika 485

Matra (Dose)
Bija Churna (Seed powder) - 1 to 3 gm

Chemical constituents - Whole plant contains §-Carotene, Choline, Essentrial amino
acids, Diosgenin Tigogenin, B-sistosterol, Kaempferol, Quercetin and Saponins, Graecunin
A, B,C, D, E, F& G.

Seeds contain Vitexin, Isovitexin, Vitamins, Carbohydrates, Proteins, Fatty acids,
Fenugrin B and Cholesterol.

Research Corner

This study is done to evaluate the antihyperglycemic and antioxidative potential of
seed powder of Trigonella foenum-graecum L in alloxan (55 mg/kg) induced diabetic
rats. The results obtained showed that extensive oxidative stress is generated in tissues of
diabetic rats as evidenced by increased production of hydrogen peroxide, increased accu-
mulation of malondialdehyde (MDA) and 4-hydroxynonanal (4HNE) and decreased ac-
tivities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), and catalase (CAT)
in tissues of diabetic rats. It was observed that the transcription of genes of SOD, GPx,
and CAT was also significantly decreased when compared with control. Treatment of
Trigonella for 15 days to diabetic rats showed hypoglycemic effect and improved the
altered levels of H202, MDA, and 4HNE, the activities of SOD, GPx, and CAT as well
as transcription of these genes in the liver and the brain of diabetic rats. Sharma S1,
Mishra V1, Jayant SK1, Srivastava N2. Effect of Trigonella foenum graecum L on the
Activities of Antioxidant Enzyme and Their Expression in Tissues of Alloxan-Induced
Diabetic Rats. J Evid Based Complementary Altern Med. 2015 Jul; 20(3):203-11. doi:
10.1177/2156587215573664. Epub 2015 Apr 7.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo. Name Indications

Chaturbija Churna Shula, Vataroga
Pramehamihira Taila

Latin Name
Trigonella foenum-graecum Linn.
Trigonella-Tries=three, Gona-angle, little triangle, foenum-graecum-hay or large.
Family - Fabaceae
Kula - Aparajita kula

----- PAGE 494 -----
486 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Gana Vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not included in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni. Haritakyadi varga

Basonym of Drug

Rafe atta arrears |

Methika (Trigonella foenumgraecum Linn) is very useful in Vatakaphaja Jwara.
Synonyms
Morphology

1. Utasitar-ttarhs atari area: |

Seeds of Methika are yellow in colour.

Properties and Actions
2. atert-aterafa wert sf |
Methika increases appetite.
3. dtat- Methika acts as Dipana.

Vernacular Names

Habitat
Methika is cultivated throughout India.

Morphology
Habit - Nearly smooth erect annual.
Stipules - Not toothed.

Leaves - Compound, leaflets are 2 to 2.5 cm long,
oblanceolate-oblong, toothed. Trigonella
foenumgraecum Linn.

Flowers - Axillary, sessile.

----- PAGE 495 -----
Methika 487

Fruits - Pods, 5 to 7.5 cm long, with a long persistent beak, often falcate, 10 to 20
seeded.
Varieties
Ra.Ni.- Twotypes: 1. Gramya (Cultivated)
2. Vanya (Wild)
Classical references
Synonyms
Afra At det chet agahran | at ageion a watferteren aati
aert afxar ven Fragen a arat | rent agautf a utes green 1
(a1.5. etree: 93-94)

Properties and Actions
After araert screed Sar | at: ASTM ata ATF UP STAT N
(ALI. Weert: 95)
Afar aceon a waftramantedt 1 ont afta aay i
(afr. gaonfeat: 100)
Afra seemtt a taftramentoct 1 anteremet afta atcerdtostt
(dF. attsftrert: 70)

Arar Hee aT Tafentaot | anternent ditt atari
(afr. frorenie FT 69)
sor sfteretirenrarsttre caret fear Sta, Saat Prt ae ctrahratdateat Tate
KATE SRAUSTA BfeaeAT FEM ATMA, EN Arete fereoeten fara eT eoH ALA
(B.A. wrergeaie at: 22)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Methika is one among
a. Trijataka b. Chaturbija c. Chaturjataka d. Trikatu
Ans: b. Chaturbija
2. Chaturbija Churna is indicated in
a. Shula & Vataroga b. Pinasa
c. Kasa d. Atisara

Ans: a. Shula & Vataroga

----- PAGE 496 -----
488 Dravyaguna Vijnana

ee
3. Botanical name of Methika
a. Hemidesmus indicus b. Glycyrrhiza glabra
c. Trigonella foenum-greacum d. Amomum subulatum
Ans: c. Trigonella foenum-greacum
4, Peetabija is the synonym of
a. Jiraka b. Chakramarda cc. Lanka d. Methika
Ans: d. Methika
5. Habit of Methika plant
a. Shrub b. Herb c. Under shrub. d. Tree
Ans: b. Herb

RRA ARR

----- PAGE 497 -----
Musta

Useful part - Kanda (Tuber)

Rasadi panchaka

Tikta, Kashaya, Katu
Laghu, Ruksha

Vipaka Katu

Karma (Action)

Shitagrahi, Jwaraghna, Trashnahara, Rochaka, Krimighna, Atisaraghna, Pachaka,
Dipana.

Nagaramusta
Jwaraghna, Atisaraghna, Rochaka, Daha Shamaka, Trishna nigrahana,
Shramahara.

Agrya Karma

aad cinigendtefaurettarry | (FF, 25/40)

Musta (Cyperus rotundus Linn.) is Astringent, Appetizer and Digestant.
Pharmacological Actions
Appetizer, Digestant, Astringent, Anthelmintic.
Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)
Pitta kapha Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to its Shita virya and Tikta Kashaya rasa.
Kapha Shamaka because of Katu vipaka and Tikta Kashaya, Katu rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Atisara, Jwara, Aruchi, Daha, Trishna, Krimi.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Atisara (Diarrhoea)
Het waaretes at Uet BEATA | (YS. 40/72)

Decoction of Musta (Cyperus rotundus) root is prepared then taken with honey will
check all kinds of diarrhoea.

----- PAGE 498 -----
490 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Jwara (Fever)
gern wie ah yuan septs ot | Uret vile a......... TT
(a.@.fa 1/45)

Administration of decoction or cold infusion prepared from Musta (Cyperus rotundus)
and Parpata (Fumaria parviflora) is beneficial in fever.

3. Halimaka (Chronic obstructive jaundice)
wiftt ores Got yet yor wee | aferer career fished eethrHy
(mPa. 8/45)
Ayasa curna (Iron powder) mixed with Musta curna (Cyperus rotundus) taken with
Kashaya (Decoction) of Khadira (Acacia catechu) will relieve from Halimaka.
4, Vatarakta (Gout)
watt | Warf aT TTT I
(aa.fa. 29/78)

Continuous usage of decoction prepared from Musta (Cyperus rotundus), Amalaki
(Emblica officinalis) and Nisa (Curcuma longa) taken with honey will cure Vatarakta
assocaited with Kapha dosa.

5. Madatyaya (Alcoholism)
wet Wet: at ait cere craferarasy | Uae a atts wetonth wereret
(a.fa. 24/167)

Decoction prepared from Musta (Cyperus rotundus) is very useful in all kinds of
Madatyaya (Alcoholism).

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) - lto3g
Kwatha (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
Phytoconstituents

Tubers yielded cyperene, c-selinine, cypernone, keto-alcohols, B-rotunol, a-rotunol,
essential oil which contains pinene, cineol, linolenic, linolic, oleic, myristic acid, steoric
acid and glycerol.

----- PAGE 499 -----
Musta 49]

Research corner

—

. The present study explored the analgesic, anti-inflammatory and genotoxic

activities of extracts from the aerial parts of C. rotundus. The antioxidant
capacity and the modulation of splenocyte functions by these exacts were also
investigated in mice. The phytochemical analysis was carried out using
standard methods. It appears that C. rotundus extracts contain potent
components such as flavonoids that may potentially be useful for modulating
the immune cell functions, provoking analgesic, antiinflammatory and
antioxidant effects. Soumaya KJ, Dhekra M, Fadwa C, Zied G, llef L, Kamel
G, Leila CG. Pharmacological, antioxidant, genotoxic studies and modulation
or rat splenocyte functions by Cyperus routundus extracts. BMC Complement
Altern Med. 2013 Feb 6;13:28, doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-13-28.

. A new iridoid glycoside, rotunduside (1), along with four known iridoid

glycosides, 10-O-p-hydroxy-benzoyltheviridoside (2), 10-O-
vanilloyltheviridosise (3), 6"-O-(trans-p-coumaroyl)-procumbide (4) and
loganic acid (5), was isolated from the rhizomes of Cyperus rotundus L. Zhou
Z, Yin W, Zhang H, Feng Z, Xia J. A new iridoid glycoside and potential
MRB inhibitory activity of isolated compounds from the rhizomes of Cyperus
rotundus L. Nat Prod Res. 2013 Jan. 28.

. Two novel compounds, 1i-methoxy-3i-hydroxy-4i- (3',4'-dihydroxyphenyl)-1,

2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalin (1) and 11,3i-dihydroxy-4i-(3',4'-dihydroxypheny])-
1,2,3,4-tetrahydronaphthalin (2), were isolated along with six known
compounds 3-8 from the rhizomes of Cyperus rotundus. Zhou Z, Yin W. Two
novel phenolic compounds from the rhizomes of Cyperus rotundus L.
Molecules. 2012 Oct 25;17(11):12636-41. doi: 10.3390/molecules 171112636.

. An extract of the rhizomes of Cyperus rotundus L. afforded two new

sesquiterpenoids (2 and 3) with rearranged secoeudesmane and germacrane
skeletons, and a new 9,10-seco-cycloartane triterpenoid (9), as well as seven
previously reported terpenoids, including a monoterpenoid (1), five
sesquiterpenoids (4-8) with guaiane, patchoulane, and eudesmane skeletons,
and a 3,4-seco-dammarane nortriterpenoid (10). Yang JL, Shi YP. Structurally
diverse terpenoids from the rhizomes of Cyperus rotundus L. Planta Med. 2012
Jan; 78(1):59-64. doi:10.1055/s-0031-1280216. Epub 2011 Sep 16.

. To study the antidiarrhoeal activity of the decoction of Cyperus rotundus Linn.

tubers using representative assays of diarrheal pathogenesis and understand its
mechanism of action. Antibacterial, antigiardial and antirotaviral activities were
studied. Effect on adherence of enteropathogenic Escherichia coli (EPEC) and

----- PAGE 500 -----
492 Dravyaguna Vijnana

invasion of enteroinvasive E. coli (EJEC) and Shigella flexneri to HEp-2 cells
was evaluated as a measure of effect on colonization. The decoction of C.
rotundus does not have marked antimicrobial activity and exerts its
antidiarrheal action by mechanisms other than direct killing of the pathogen.
Daswani PG, Brijesh, S, Tetali P, Birdi TJ. Studies on the activity of Cyperus
rotundus Linn. tubers against infectious diarrhea Indian J Pharmacol. 2011
May; 43(3):340-4. doi: 10.4103/0253-7613.81502.

Yoga (Formulations)

Formulation Indications:

Mustakad vata

Mustakarishta Grahani, Ajirna

Mustakadi leha Kshaya, Kasa

Mustadi churna Amapachaka, Kaphajashula

Botanical Name — Cyperus rotundus Linn.
Cyperus — Derived from Greek word kuperos, rotundus - means round.

Family — Cyperaceae
Kula — Musta

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Truptighna varga, Trushnanigrahana varga, Lekhaniya varga,
Kandughna varga, Stanyashodhana varga

Sushruta Mustadi gana, Vachadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 92-94

Basonym of Drug

Wet Herat Braet gee

Musta is a plant grows gregariously with clustered tubers.
Synonyms
Habitat

1, Weteh-wraretcattwery war |

Musta is commonly growing near to water resources, so it is very common on
the banks of river Ganga.

----- PAGE 501 -----
Musta

493

2. HBaA-HVOy HerTayferg ara se |

Musta (Cyperus rotundus) grows in marshy land.

3. Wea:-yrhat Wa: |

Musta is common in north eastern region of India.

4. aReamay-sile: oa: atte searfe Nears |

Musta grows near water resources hence the synonyms related to water is also

synonyms of Musta.
Morphology
5. Ofee-TeTT |
Musta tubers are nodular
Properties and Actions
6. Qaer:- MATT: |
Musta has an agreeable odour.
Others
7. PALSeT-sAlSrat aATRTOTTAET AT |
Musta is liked by pigs.
— Names

Musta grows like a weed in waste fields with water resources.

Morphology
Habit — Rhizomatous perennial herb.

Stem — Caespitose or solitary, sparsely tufted, rigid trigonums, solid and septate.
Leaves —Basal, lower ones often scale like, sometimes reduced to sheaths, several,

flat, nerves, prominent, scabrous.

----- PAGE 502 -----
494 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Inflorescence — Spike with spikelets, spikelets
2-8, spicate, narrow-oblong, pale or purple, 10 to 20
flowered, rachilla is present, winged, glumes closely
imbricating.

Flower — Small, bisexual subtended by glumes,
upper ones are male flowers. Perianth is bristles or
scales, stamens are 3, red-crusted, ovary is superior,
unilocular.

Fruit — Nut, oblong and trigonums.
Varieties
Ra.Ni. — 1. Musta — Cyperus rotundus
2. Nagaramusta - Cyperus scariosus

Purification of Musta

Rhizome of Musta to be cut into two pieces and
immersed in an earthen pot filled with Kanji (Sour
gruel) for three days. On 4th day it is take out and Cyperus rotundus. Linn
washed with water. Then Swedana (Fomentation) is
done with Pancapallava kwatha (Decoction of 5 tender leaves) in a Dolayantra and
dried in sunlight. Then it is boiled with water mixed with jaggery, dried, again triturated
with goat’s urine and Shigru twak kwatha (Decoction of bark of Moringa oleifera). Lastly
it should be kept with Jasmine flowers for sometimes.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Tubers of Musta (Cyperus rotundus) is hard, ovoid and sometimes elongated, with a
wiry stolon attached to the tips, up to 5 cm long and 1 cm in diameter at the thickest part.
Surface is dark brown or black in colour with a number of annular ridges densely clothed
with root hair. A transversely cut portion shows a mealy flesh coloured surface, differen-
tiated into an outer cortex and a central core region with a number of dot like structures
representing vascular bundles. It is very difficult to break and if broken also then becomes
very small piece, Has got strong aromatic odour and bitter in taste.

Classical references

Synonyms
Weth a feat get firg arfterrreny | pefrasr terdiso: mlscreeh:
UGA TM ST AM APSA: AT. HLS TE 92-93)

----- PAGE 503 -----
Musta 495

Properties and Actions
yet welts ants fare des crea | Hart waftireagesatefa Aya, |
am tenn gant wet Lert qPhe: gir at arg
(aa. afate at 93-94)
Wet fare wareansfahrore sctereraferd. | frerseraftrarcett qorephrfernyertt
(afi. Weare at 41)
Wen fare fea mnie det wrest Ge | Hare Heft Tesateha aah
(& fA. siete at 1358-1359)
wae Haren a ferret eter a Ure fica eet a Het Tegectt 7 AT A
(afr. frereanfe FF 140)
APRA
fever ANGE he: HITT a vittew HHI!
frasaufrarretat = eM Tea LU
(afr. froreanie af 143)
aed fara me fe derarrarey | wat cleswerart Teves WA
(B.A. wagEest 43)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Musta .
a. Phala b. Pushpa c. Kanda (Tuber) d. Patra
Ans: c. Kanda (Tuber)
2. Musta is a best example for
a. Dipana b. Kasahara c. Shothahara _— d.. Shitagrahi
Ans: d. Shitagrahi
3. As per Vagbhata Agrya karma of Musta is
a. Jwaraghna b. Shwasahara c. Samshodhana d. Kushthaghna
Ans: a. Jwaraghna

4. Administration of decoction or cold infusion prepared from Musta (Cyperus
rotundus) and Parpata (Fumaria parviflora) is beneficial in

a. Prameha b. Jwara c. Pinasa d. Shiroroga
Ans: b. Jwara

----- PAGE 504 -----
496

Dravyaguna Vijnana

. Mustakarishta is specifically indicated in

a. Grahani b. Amlapitta c. Kasa d. Trishna
Ans: a. Grahani

. Botanical name of Musta

a. Calotropis procera __b. Randia dumetorum
c. Bacopa monneri d. Cyperus rotundus
Ans: d. Cyperus rotundus

. Krodeshta is the synonym of

a. Kakamachi b. Kakanasa c. Musta d. Ashwagandha
Ans: c. Musta

. Habit of Musta plant
a. Tree b. climber c. Herb d. Shrub
Ans: c. Herb

RR RK

----- PAGE 505 -----
Chapter ~

Nagakeshara

Useful part - Keshara (Stamens)
Rasadi panchaka

Kashaya Tikta

R
Karma (Actions)

Pachana, Jwaraghna, Kandughna, Trishnahara, Dourgandhyahara, Kushthaghna,
Hrillasanashaka, Shophahara, Chardighna, Swedapaha and Vishaghna.

Pharmacological Actions

Astringent, Stomachic, Aromatic, Stimulant, Carminative, Appetizer, Antiemetic,

Tonic, Digestant, Haemostatic, Cardiotonic.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)
Kapha pitta Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to its Kashaya and Tikta rasa.
Kaphahara due to its Katu vipaka and Kashaya Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Ajirna, Jwara, Kandu, Twakroga, Atisweda, Chardi, Hrallasa, Dourgandhya,
Kushtha, Visarpa, Visharoga, Bastiruja, Vatarakta, Trishna, Adhoga raktapitta and
Raktarshas.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Raktarshas (Bleeding piles)
semernsnessesnsssns OP RATATASTERATEAATEATEL, Uo sessssssenssevnsees sierra TathT 0
(a-Fa. 14/210)

Regular usage of combination of Nagakeshara (Mesua ferra), butter and sugar will
cure bleeding piles.

2. Hikka (Hiccough)

aig feat anorenet a free TAT | (8.3. 50/23)

----- PAGE 506 -----
498

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Intake of Nagakeshara (Mesua ferrea) mixed with sugar, honey, sugarcane juice

and Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra) will relieve from Hikka (Hiccough)

3. Raktatisara (Blood mixed diarrhoea)

ARTA Bot THATS TSU WA (aS. ara 119)

Usage of Nagakeshara (Mesua ferrea) powder will check blood mixed diarrhoea.

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) — 0.5 to 2 g

Phytoconstituents

Flower bud contains mesuol, mammeisin, mammeigin, and mesuagin.

Stamens afforded two biflavanones designated as mesuaferrone-A & mesuaferrone-

B, also have mesuanic acid, o-amyrine, B-amyrine and B-sitosterol.

Research corner

1. In the present study, antibacterial efficacy of leaf and fruit extracts on the

growth and morphology of Staphylococcus aureus is evaluated. Both extracts
display good antibacterial activity against S. aureus with a minimum inhibition
concentration of 0.0.48 mg/mL. Both extracts are bacteriostatic at a minimum
bacteriostatic concentration of 0.39 mg/mL. Aruldass CA, Marimuthu MM,
Ramanathan S, Mansor SM, Murugaiyah V. Effects of Mesua ferrea leaf and
fruit extracts on growth and morphology of Staphylococcus aureus. Microsc
Microanal. 2013 Feb;19(1):254-60. doi: 10.1017/S14319276120-13785. Epub
2013 Jan 18.

. In present investigation, activity of Mesua ferrea and its evaluation in the

formaldehyde and complete Freund’s Adjuvant (CFA)-induced arthritis in rats
is reported. The results indicate that Mesua ferrea protects rats against
formaldehyde and CFA induced arthritis. The body weight chances and
hematological perturbations induced by CFA were maintained. The overall
results indicated that Mesua ferrea exerts a potent protective effect against
formaldehyde and adjuvant-induced arthritis in rats. Jalalpure SS, Mandavkar
YD, Khalure PR, Shinde GS, Shelar PA, Shah AS. Antiarthritic activity of
various extracts of Mesua ferrea Linn. seed. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Dec
8:138(3):700-41.doi: 10.1016/j.jep.-2011.09.042. Epub 2011 Oct 1.

3. The present study was performed to evaluate immunomodulatory activity of

mesuol isolated from M. ferrea seed oil in experimental animals. The study
indicated immunomodulatory activity of mesuol. Chahar MK, Sanjaya Kumar

----- PAGE 507 -----
Nagakeshara 499

DS, Lokesh T, Manohara KP. In-vivo antioxidant and immunomodulatory
activity of mesuol isolated from Mesua ferrea L. seed oil. Int
Immunopharmacol. 2012. Aug; 13(4):386-91, doi:10. 1016/j.intimp.
2012.05.006. Epub 2012 May 24.

4, The antibacterial efficacy of the methanol extract of whole flowers of Mesua
ferrea Linn. was studied against various strains of bacteria. The extract at 200
microg/g body weight dosage, could significantly reduce the viable count of the
strain Sulmonella typhimurium ATCC 6539 in liver, spleen and heart blood of
the extract treated challenged mice. Mazumder R, Dastidar SG, Basu SP,
Mazumder A, Singh SK. Antibacterial potentiality of Mesua ferrea Linn.
flowers. Phytother Res. 2004 Oct; 18(10):824-6.

. The cured native oil and purified seed oil of Mesua ferrea were studied for their
effect on isolated rat ileum by taking standard spasmodic and antispasmodic
drugs. The cured oil of seed showed significant antispasmodic activity but
purified oil was devoid of any antispasmodic activity of the cured and purified
oil of Mesua ferrea seed. Anc Sci Life. 1999 Jul; 19 (1-2):74-5.

WN

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications

Bhaskara lavana Agnimandya, Shula

Chandanadi Taila Daha, Raktapitta
Eladi Churna Aruchi, Chardi
: Haridrakhanda Shitapitta, Kandu

: Pippalyadyasava Grahani, Gulma
Mahakushta, Panduroga

Botanical Name — Mesua ferrea Linn.

Mesua — After the name of the two Arab scientists.
ferrea—Rust coloured

Family - Calothyllaceae

Kula — Nagakeshara

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Mahakashaya varga
Sushruta Eladigana, Priyangvadi gana, Anjanadi gana
Bh. Pr.Ni. Karpuradi varga

----- PAGE 508 -----
Nagakeshara is liked by elephants.

Mrophology

1. APTASG:- APTA AUT ATTN POAT AT |
Petals of Nagakeshara (Mesua ferrea) resembles hood of Cobra.

2. ISAS: wauaraele: Utter |
Stamens of Nagakeshara is yellow in colour.

3. BT: ATONE TATE: |
Stamens have yellow colour like that of Champaka (Michelia champaca)
flower.

4, SAQUA-TAVAUT: YOY BRA |
Nagakeshara has yellow coloured stamens.
5. Hea: -HTAN Hee |
Fruits of Nagakeshara are pitcher shaped.
Properties and Actions
6. CAV WOTET: AYN UTES |

Stamens of Nagakeshara are very useful as a medicine.
Others
7. fya:-eferat fre: |
Nagakeshara is liked by elephants.

Regional Names

----- PAGE 509 -----
Nagakeshara 501

Habitat
Grows commonly In Western Ghats, Eastern
Ghats, Bengal and Assam up to the height of 5,000 ft

altitude. As It Is very attractive tree with scented flow-
ers itis also grown in gardens.

Morphology

Habit = Medium sized glabrous tree. Trunk is
straight.

Bark = Smooth, ash-coloured, young branches
are twiggy and slender.

Leaves = Simple, opposite, 7.5 to 12.5 cm long
2.5 to4.cm in width. oblong-lanceolate, acute tip, red
when young, afterwards shining above, glaucous and pruinose beneath, nerves are incon-
spicuous. Petiole is 6 to 8 mm long.

Mesua ferrea. Linn

Flowers = Solitary or in pairs, subsessile, fragrant, 2.5 to 7.5 cm in diameter, buds
are subglobose, sepals are 4 in number and petals are 4 in number and bright white in
colour, stamens are numerous and golden yellow.

Fruit = Ovoid shaped with a conical point, surrounded by the enlarged sepals, 2.5 to
5cm in diameter. Pericarp is tough and sémi-woody.

Seeds = 1 to 4 angular, smooth and brown coloured.
Substitutes
1. Raktanagakeshara — Mammea suriga flower, buds Ochrocarpus longifolius
2. Krishnanagakeshara — Cinnamomum tamala
3. Malabar nagakeshara — Dillenia pentagyna
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Stamens when dried becomes golden brown in colour. The stamens are upto 5 mm
long and very thin that is less than 1 mm on thickness and tapering at both the ends.
Stamens have copper coloured filaments and some what thick elongated anther lobes. If
the market sample mixed with broken pieces of petals then it will be creamish white in
colour. It has got pleasant odour and on keeping in mouth becomes mucilaginous.

Classical references
Synonyms
AMTgEt Harare wet eA | VATU TARACoEceMa ATA, |

----- PAGE 510 -----
502

Dravyaguna Vijnana

dhiaaarschad anaftrs frame i (as. afufe at 70-71)

anrerenedrent wy fers eared, | aerate HUGE VTA, 1
(afr. magenta af 49)

aMTgES Haratat evi cearaarery | wet firernaeateygs auger hr |

qroededhing as qerferaraey i (am.A. sitar at 1346-1347)

APTA Aether wy frre araraed | afttarmaet ow Huasittesraer, Ul
(afr. fraeate at 178)

SIA APTS HUTA TY: Wat aTagaher fiers Fast wat AA 1

aa watt g tnrsife gf sat 1 carat fogs a artaere gerd

(f.Fi. eitene at 98-99)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Nagakeshara
a. Root b. Stem c. Fruit d. Stamens
Ans: d. Stamens
. Pradhana Rasa of Nagakeshara
a. Madhura b. Kashaya c. Tikta d. Lavana
Ans: b. Kashaya
3. Pradhana Karma of Nagakeshara as per Sharangadhara Samhita

_

i)

a. Grahi b. Kasahara c. Pachana d. Vajikara
Ans: c. Pachana %

4. Botanical name of Nagakeshaea
a. Mesua ferrea b. Crocos sativus

c. Nelumbo nucifera __ d. Aistolochia bracteata
Ans: a. Mesua ferrea
5. Habit of Nagakeshara plant

a. Herb b. Tree c. Shrub d. Creeper
Ans: b. Tree

6. Mammea suriga is the substitute for
a. Punnaga b. Pippali c. Nagakeshara d. Surapunnaga

Ans: c. Nagakeshara

7. Mesuol a chemical constituent present in
a. Jatiphala b. Maricha c. Dhanvayasa d. Nagakeshara
Ans: d. Nagakeshara

----- PAGE 511 -----
Chapter

Nimba

Useful part - Patra (Leaf), Twak (Bark), Bija (Seed), Phala (Fruit), Pushpa (Flow-
ers) and Niryasa (Resin).

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Patra (Leaf)

Krimighna, Netrya, Vishaghna, Kushthagna, Ruchikara, Vranaghna, Kasahara and
Shwasahara.
Twak (Bark)

Kushthaghna, Krimighna, Shramahara, Trishnahara, Jwaraghna, Chardighna,
Kandughna, Pramehahara, Ruchikara, Shothahara and Rakta Shodhaka.

Phala (Fruit)
Kushthaghna, Arshoghna, Krimighna, Bhedana, Mehahara and Gulmanashaka.

Pushpa (Flower)
Krimighna, Vishaghna
Bija (Seed)
Krimighna and Kushthaghna
Pharmacological Actions
Leaves — Insect repellent, Blood purifier, Antidiabetic
Seed — Antiviral
Bark — Antiviral and Antibacterial
Flower — Insecticidal
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Pitta kapha Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to its Shitavirya and Tikta Kashaya rasa.
Kaphahara due to Katu vipaka and Tikta Kashaya rasa.

----- PAGE 512 -----
504 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Rogaghuata (Therapeutic indications)

Patra (Leaf) — Kushtha, Krimi, Netra roga, Aruchi, Kasa, Shwasa, Visharoga and
Vrana

Twak (Bark) — Kushtha, Krimi, Kandu, Prameha, Aruchi, Raktadushti, Trishna,
Shrama, Chardi and Shotha.

Phala (Fruit) — Kushtha, Arshas, Krimi, Prameha and Gulma.

Brija (Seed) — Krimi and Kushtha

Pushpa (Flower) — Krimi and Visha roga
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kushtha (Skin disease-Psoriasis)

woe oeanagay Tag SraY wot Pra hres AM Ue wees It

(a.Fa. 7/157)
Affected part of skin of wounded and eaten by maggots, is cleaned and Nimba

(Azadirachta indica) and Vidanga (Embelia ribes) powder is mixed with cow’s urine and
applied. Then the same combination may be used internally also.

2. Surameha (Acetonuria)

Bast Pre wera | (gfe. 11/9)

Decoction of Nimba (Azardirachta indica) is used internally in case of Surameha.
3. Twagroga (Skin diseases)

Pramcraret: caeent fa SeaTaT Aad, | (37.9.5. 37/6)

Paste prepared from Nimba (Azadirachta indica) and Aragwadha (Cassia fistula) is
applied in skin diseases.
4. Arumshika (Head boils)

araftent et Teh Aaahera aR | (GFA. 20/27)

In case of Arumshika (Head boils), First, blood letting should be done then decoc-
tion of Nimba (Azadirachta indica) is sprinkled over the head boils.

Matra (Desxge);
Swarasa (Juice) — 10to20ml
Kalka (Paste) - 10to20g

Kashaya (Decoction) -— 50 to 100ml
Churna (Powder) — 2to4g

----- PAGE 513 -----
Nimba 505

Taila (Oil) - Sto 10 drops
Phytoconstituents

Leaves contain Nimbin, Nimbinene, Nimbandiol, Nimbolide, Quercitin, g-sitosterol,
Azadirone, Azadiradione and Azadirachtin. Bark has Nimbin, Nimbinin, Nimbidin,
Margolone and Margolonone. Seeds contain Nimbin, Nimbidin, Azadirachtin, Chloro-
genic acid, Salanin and 4-Epinimbin. Flowers possess Nimbosterol, Myricitin and
Kaempferol.

Fruits yielded gedunin, Azadiradione, Azadirone and Deacety] Azadirachtinol.

Research corner

1. Experimental cerebral malaria was induced in mice by infection with
Plasmodium berghei ANKA. Infected mice were administered with
Azadirachta indica ethanolic extract as doses of 300, 500, or 1000 mg./kg
intraperitoneally (i.p.) in experimental groups, or with the anti-malarial drugs
chloroquine (12 mg/kg, i.p.) or artemether (1.6 mg/kg, i.p.), in the positive
control groups. Azardiachta indica ethanolic extract mitigated neuro
inflammation, decreased the severity of brain oedema, and protected pyramidal
neurons from apoptosis, particularly at the highest dose used, comparable to
chloroquine and artemether. The findings suggest that Azadirachta indica
ethanolic extract has protective effects on neuronal populations in the
inflammed central nervous system, and justify at least in part of it is used in
African and Asian folk medicine and practices. Bedri S$, Khalil EA, Khalid SA,
Alzohairy MA, Mohieldein A, Aldebasi YH, Seke Etet PF, Farahna M.
Azadirachta indica ethanolic extract protects neurons from apoptosis and
mitigates brain swelling in experimental cerebral malaria. Malar J. 2013 Aug,
29312(1):298.

2. This study analysed the antimicrobial effect of five irrigants formulated from
different parts of the tree Azardiachta indica (Neem) and compared with 2.5% ‘
sodium hypochlorite and 0.2% chlorohydrins gluconate through an agar
diffusion test. A clinical isolate of Candida albicans was inoculated on
Seaboard Dextrose Agar and Enterococcus faecalis (ATCC 291212) on sheep
blood Agar. Two neem irrigants displayed antimicrobial properties. Dutta A,
Kundabala M. Antimicrobial efficacy of endodontic irrigants from Azadirachta
indica: An in viro study. Acta adonitol scand. 2013 May 3.

Ww

. The aqueous extract of A. indica leaf and bark has been evaluated for its effect
on antioxidant status of alloxan diabetic rats and compared with insulin
treatment. The oral effective dose of A. Indica leaf (500 mg/kg body weight)

----- PAGE 514 -----
506 Dravyaguna Vijnana

and A. indica bark (100 mg/kg body weight) were given once daily for 21 days
to separate groups of diabetic rats. Diabetic rats showed high blood glucose
(P<0.01), increased level of malonialdehyde (P<0.05) and a significant
decrease in the activity of antioxidant enzymes. Shailey S, Basir SF.
Strengthening of antioxidant defence by Azadirachata indica in alloxandiabetic
rat tissues. J Ayurveda Integr Med. 2012 Jul; 3(3):130-5. doi : 10.4103/0975-
9476.100174.

4. The present study aims at evaluating the activity of two polysaccharides (P1
and P2) isolated from the leaves of Azadirachta indica and their chemical
sulfated derivatives (P1S and P2S) against poliovirus type 1 (PV-1). The
cytotoxicity of the compounds was analyzed by MTT and the antiviral effect
was determined by plaque reduction assay in different protocols. The
polysaccharides did not show any cytotoxic effects on HEP-2 cells at the
highest tested concentration (200 Ig/ml) and exhibited significant antiviral
activity with inhibitory concentrations (IC5O) of 80 Ig/ml, 37.5 Ig/ml, 77.5 Ig/
ml, and 12.1 [g/ml for P1, P1S, P2 and P2S, respectively and the selectivity
indexes (SI) ranged from 18 to 131.9. Faccin-Galhardi LC, Yamamoto KA,
Ray S, Ray B, Carvalho Linhares RE, Nozawa C. The in vitro antiviral
property of Azadirachta indica polysaccharides for poliovirus. J
Ehtnopharmacol. 2012 Jun 26:142(1):86-90.

Yoga (Important formulations)
SI.No.

Name of Yoga Indications

Pk | Nimbad churns
4. J

Panchanimba churna Sarvakushtha, Visarpa
Tiktaka ghrata Kushtha, Visarpa
f 6 Panchatikta ghrata guggulu

Botanical Name —- Azadirachta indica Juss.

Kushtha, Prameha

Azadirachta — Persian name meaning best tree

indica — Native of India

Family — Meliaceae (Refer appendix-II for family features)
Kula — Nimba kula

----- PAGE 515 -----
Nimba 507

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Kandughna varga
Sushruta Aragvadhadi gana, Guduchyadi gana, Lakshadi gana
Bh.Pr. Ni. Guduchyadi varga 93-96

Basonym of Drug

Prafe ate wareatite, crearghracttte aac |

Nimba (Azadirachta indica) is very useful drug, which maintains health.
Synonyms
Mrophology

1. fegtrata:-ftg ya rates |

The exudate from Nimba resembles Hingu Niryasa (Gum of Ferula narthex).

Properties and Actions
2. afte:- + Reg, TAT H STA: |
Nimba cures many diseases, does well always if used.
3. oplter-griy ata ster |
Nimba is very efficacious in helminthiasis.
4. Praaa-Prereote wate wearer
Nimba alleviates many diseases.
5. Unftag-uftt: x: HeATUTAT: |
If used, Nimba always does well.
6. frqd:-fre as ucerter arererchitter |
Nimba is very efficacious drug when it comes to skin diseases.
Vs Olanan:- arferteren: fereaxeary ATI: |
Nimba is one of the best among drugs having bitter taste.
8. Aaa: AT HST TEAL
Bark of Nimba is very useful.

Regional Name

----- PAGE 516 -----
508 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Habitat
Nimba (Neem) tree grows all over India. It is
commonly planted as avenue trees.
Morphology
Habit = A large tree
Root = Tap root and branched
Stem = Woody, bran-ched solid, erect and cy-
lindrical.
Leaf = Compound, alternate, imparipinnate,

exstipulate, pinnae are lanceolate, oblique, serrate,
acuminate with unicostate reticulate venation.

Inflorescence = Axillary panicle

Flower = Actinomorphic, bisexual, complete, bracteate, pedicellate, hypogynous,
sepals are 5 and gamosepalous, petals are 5, polypetalous and white in colour, stamens
are 10, Gynoecium : Tricarpellary, syncarpous, superior ovary.

Fruit = Drupaceous with one seed.

Azadirachta indica (Nimba) Juss

Varieties
1. Nimba — Azadirachta indica
2. Mahanimba — Melia azadirachta
3. Parvata Nimba (Aralu) -—  Ailanthes excelsa
4. Akasha Nimba —  Malingtonia horensis

Note~ Nimba can be considered as Kalpa vruksa as every parts of itis very useful.
Caraka opines that one who uses parts of Nimba to take bath, in food and for preparing
bed to sleep for a year will never suffer from skin diseases.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Leaf —Pinnately branched leaves with ovate lanceolate, subfalcate and bluntly ser-
rate leaflets having an acute apex, measuring upto 5 cm in length and 1.5 cm in breadth.
The leaves are upto 50 cm long clustered at the end of the branches, which also bear
bunches of lilac flowers in terminal panicles. Leaflets when fresh are bright green but turn
greyish on drying. Has got disagreeable odor. Taste is very bitter.

Bark ~ Bark is Channelled or quilled pieces of tough and fibrous bark ranging from

3 mm to 10 mm in thickness. Outer surface is greyish brown to black in colour, rough,
scaly, irregularly fissured, especially in the bark obtained from older stems. Inner surface

----- PAGE 517 -----
Nimba 509

is creamish in colour, conspicuously laminated and coarsely fibrous. Transversely cut
portion shows a smooth, minutely chequred surface. On breaking becomes fibrous, has
got bitter and astringent taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
Pra: eafergrdsr fares fermen: | afte: uiftans fighrats sere ii
(a5. Temas FT 93)
Properties and Actions
fra: ict wyatt agarentshrarmgd | ter srdearerenteterphiape |
aUirreopseciategd (AF. Wee TT 94)
Fra UA (Leaf)
Rraud tad At aftr Prema | aac MeN WaranHsyd, |
(a3. Tee TT 95)
freer eT (Fruit)
franc ta faith ure g meter | ere ret eet yourst: HiAeTa
(ALT. Yerate TT 96)
Pratt: vic ag: seraratiregg | penrgareted crarenttegtttera:
quad Ureereayitte aut west faeittad 1 (af. TEAMe TT 29-30)

da wart Peace surety fagtea: | gretent Peace area
atten § ater eid Fetes | wept Pragarsy patra,
aide BOT MAL Tarra | thet fees TS UI es Tet TT
ath Wored TAA, at eet Te foreaers |
Pradiona asst a aftrpstagtert: 1 (a.f. sitsftr af 879-885)

wage: waate vtaterenen: aaquephrarryig ae |

aeratugg erated fastrct eqaterareentetare, tt (aA, sHETe TT 10)

----- PAGE 518 -----
510

Dravyaguna Vijnana

fra: vial wafer: aaftrrerae: | Eopfhrears Aeet Tages:
aur frare freer Temes Teitafer: 1 (A.A. eeierafe aT 180-181)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Pradhana Karma attributed to Nimba
a. Kushthaghna b. Dipana c. Pachana d. Medhya
Ans: a. Kushthaghna
. Main action of Nimba Bija
a. Shothahara b. Krimighna c. Rasayana d. Grahi
Ans: b. Krimighna
3. Decoction of Nimba (Azardirachta indica) is used internally in case of

—

Nw

a. Sikata Meha b. Haridra Meha_ c. udaka Meha_ d. Sura Meha

Ans: d. Sura Meha
4. Nimbandiol a chemical constituent present in
a. Shallaki b. Shala c. Nimba d. haridra
Ans: c. Nimba
5. Botanical name of Nimba
a. Melia azadirach b. Azadirachta indica
c. Ailanthes excels d. Malingtonia horensis
Ans: b. Azadirachta indica
6. Hingu niryasa is a synonym of
a. Nimba b. Hingu c. Shala d. Sarala
Ans: a. Nimba
7. Pichunarda and Arshta are the synonyms of

a. Katuki b. Paribhadra c. Nimba d. Kalamegha
Ans: c. Nimba

8. Habit of Nimba plant is
a. Creeper b. Tree c. Undershrub — d. Herb

Ans: b. Tree

SRB R RE

----- PAGE 519 -----
Chapter

Nirgundi

Parts used - Mula (Root), Patra (Leaf).
Rasadi Panchaka

Karma (Actions)
Shweta nirgundi - Keshya, Netrya, Shulahara, Shothahara, Krimighna.
Kushthaghna, Jwaraghna, Kandughna, Kasahara, Medhya.
Nila nirgundi - Kasahara, Shophahara, Pradaranashaka, Adhmanahara.
Shephali — Sandhivatahara, Gudavatahara.
Nirgundi patra (Leaf) - Krimighna
Nirgundi pushpa (Flower) - Krimighna, Gulmanashaka, Pleehaghna,
Kushthaghna, Kandughna and Shophahara.

Pharmacological Actions

Leaf -— Antiparasitic, Vermifuge, Anodyne and Alterative

Root — Tonic, Febrifuge, Expectorant, Diuretic

Fruit - Emmanogogue :
Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to its Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka
because of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta Katu Kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Shwetanirgundi — Shula, Shotha, Krimi, Vatavyadhi, Kushtha, Kandu, Kasa,
Keshavikara.

Nila Nirgundi — Kasa, Shopha, Pradara, Adhmana
Shephali - Sandhivata, Guda vata
Nirgundi patra (Leaf) - Krimi, Gulma, Kushtha, Kandu and Shopha.

----- PAGE 520 -----
512 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata)

Prfdt qe yurg ad tert eed  aPerara: afeara: aerate greater

(LL. 21/164)

One Karsha (12 g) powder of root of Nirgundi (Vitex negundo) is taken with oil. It
is very useful in case of Sandhivata (Osteo arthritis), Kativata (Lumbago) and Kampavata
(Trembling).
2. Kasa (Cough)

Fafftsusrard a uacatt: ate ferret ary | (Gs. 52/30)

Ghee processed with juice extracted from leaves of Nirgundi (Vitex negundo) is
efficacious in Kasa (Cough) originated from Kapha dosha.
3, Apasmara (Epilepsy)

Pafoctaereh sree aoe, ferqeae ul (LL. 21/57)

Powder of Nirgundi (Vitex negundo) root if taken internally, very useful in case of
Epilepsy.

Matra (Dosage)
Mula churna (Root powder) - l1to3g
Swarasa (Juice) - 10to20ml
Kwatha (Decoction) - 40to50ml
Phytoconstituents

Bark yielded Vanillic acid, Luetolin, B-sitoslerol, Seed oil contains vanillin, amino
acids like glycine, alanine, valine and leucine, o-pinene, camphene, caryophyllene.

Research corner

1. To evaluate the possible antifilarial effect of ethyl acetate extract of Vitex
negundo (Verbenaceae) leaves against Setaria cervi filarial parasite in vitro. In
vitro screening was done by the method of motility inhibition and MTT
reduction assay with concentration of 0.03 to 1.00 mg/mL for 2 to 24 h
incubation periods respectively, for possible antifilarial effect by comparing
with control. The present study recorded significant antifilarial effect of Vitex
negundo plant extract and contributed toward the development of database for
novel drug candidates for lymphatic filariasis. Sahare KN, Singh V. Antifilarial
activity of ethyl acetate extract of Vitex negundo leaves in vitro. Asian Pac J.
Trop Med. 2013 Sep;6(9):689-92. doi:10.1016/S 1995-7645(13)60119-4.

2. The hepatoprotective activity of ethanolic extract from the leaves of Vitex

----- PAGE 521 -----
Nimba +13
negundo (VN) was conducted against thioacetamide (TAA) induced hepatic
injury in Spurge Dawley rats. Rats were administered with VN extract at two
different doses, 100 mg/kg and 300 mg/kg body weight. After 12 weeks, the
rats administered with VN should a significantly lower liver to body weight
ration. Their abnormal levels of biochemical parameters and_ liver
malondialdehyde were restored closer to the normal levels and were
comparable to the levels in animals treated with the standard drug, SY. Kadir
FA, Kassim NM, Abdulla MA, Yehye WA. Hepatoprotective Role of
Ethanolic Extract of Vitex negundo in Thioacetamide-Induced Liver Fibrosis in
Male Rats. Evid Based Complement Alternate Med. 2013;2013:739850.
doi:10.1155/2013/739850. Epub 2013 May 19.

3. Two new glycosides, 2-methyl pyromeconic acid 3-0-i-d-glucopyranoside-6'-
(O-4”-hydroxybenzoate) (1), 6'-O-p-hydroxybenzoly-gardoside (2) and four
known iridoid glycosides (3-6) were isolated from the whole plant of Vitex
negundo. Huang J, Wang GC, Wang CH, Huang XJ, Ye WC. Two new
glycosides from Vitex negundo. Nat Prod Res. 2013 Jan 29.

4. Chemical investigations of the seed extract afforded a new labdane diterpenoid,
named negundol (1a+1b), as an inseparable mixture of two diastereoisomers in
a 5:4 ratio. Zheng CJ, Lan XP, Wang Y, Huang BK, Han T, Zhang QY, Qin
LP. A new labdane diterpene from Vitex negundo. Pharm Biol. 2012
Jun;50(6):687-90. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2011.597410. Epub 2012 Apr 10.

5. This study was carried out to investigate its cough-relieving potential. The
antitussive effect of the butanolic extract of V. negundo (Vn) on sulphur
dioxide (SO(2))-induced cough was examined in mice. In toxicity tests, no
signs of neural impairment and acute behavioral toxicity were observed at
antitussive doses and extract has been well tolerated at higher doses. The results
indicate that V. negundo exhibits antitussive effect and it was found devoid of
toxicity. Haq RU, Shah AU, Khan AU, Ullah Z, Khan HU, Khan RA, Malik
A. Antitussive and toxicological evaluation of Vitex negundo. Nat Prod Res.
2012;26(5):484-8. doi: 10.1080/14786419.2010. 534472. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Yoga (Formulations)

SILNo. (Name of Yoga Indications

----- PAGE 522 -----
514 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name = Vitex negundo Linn.
Vitex — Chaste tree
negundo — From the word Nirgundi
Family —Lamiaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Nirgundi
Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Vishaghna varga, Krimighna varga
Sushruta Surasadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 113-115

Basonym of Drug
Prenrer arrefty usater greet carter
Nirgundi (Vitex negundo) cures many diseases and protects the body.
Synonyms
Mrophology
1. QURTRT- IAT TSM: |
Leaves and other parts of Nirgundi has Aromatic odour.
2. aal-yy sete wetter
The Aroma of Nirgundi spreads all around.
Properties and Actions
3. SAGTA-MAAAS EAT: AAT, FHT YA FRGTT |
The juice extracted from leaves of Nirgundi is an efficacious medicine.

Nirgundi alleviates evil spirits.
5. Ufterae:- vit wet, TeTATT |

The plant is having Ushna virya, hence it can alleviate Shitatva.

Regional Name

English Five leaved chaste tree
Hindi Nirgandi, Mewri

----- PAGE 523 -----
Nimba 515

Habitat

Nirgundi grows all over India. As it is an attrac-
tive shrub, it is cultivated in gardens.

Morphology

Habit — Shrub grows upto 12 ft. in height

Root — Branched, cylindrical

Stem — Pinnately compound, digitately 3 to 5
foliate, leaflets are oblanceolate, grey-pubescent be-
low.

Inflorescence — Dichasial cyme

Flower — Bracteate, pentamerous, bisexual, zy-
gomorphic and complete, sepals are 5, shortly 5-
toothed, petals are 5, upper lip two to bed, much shorter
than the lower, purple to violet in colour stamens are
5 in number. Gynoecium is bicarpellary syncarpous
superior ovary.

Vitex negundo Linn. (Nirgundi)

Fruit — Small, globose, drupe, seeds are ovate oblong shaped with a straight em-
bryo.

Ra.Ni. — 3 types

1. Sinduvara 2. Nila Nirgundi 3. Shephali

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Roots are stout cylindrical 2 to 7 cm in diameter. External surface is greyish brown
colour, longitudinally wrinkled with occasional warty proturberences and circular root
scars. Transversely cut surface shows a light brown surface with dark coloured concen-
tric rings and a thin closely adhering bark. On braking becomes fibrous and it is difficult
to break. Has got slight aromatic odour and bitter in taste.

Leaf — Leaf is 3 to 5 foliate, leaflets are shortly petiolate, narrow lancelolate, acute or
acuminate, 5 to 12 cm long and 1.5 cm to 4 cm broad. The upper surface is sub-glabrous,
black in colour, lower surface greyish white. Has got pleasant aromatic odour and has
bitter taste.

----- PAGE 524 -----
516 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references
Synonyms
firgar: dager: fiega: fiegare: i frerqedt g Prlust srarctt qaer a aT
(aa. Teena FF 113)
Properties and Actions
fiega: wate: Horr: Heat oy: lahat Fate tet Bera EAT
pitgarehascterserattents tae ui (aa. THM TF 114)
fegar cet Weqarasteret TE (AT. YSeaTe aT 115)

saferfost—

Frfoct mefirntom pitpsresaet | arson wierearectsta
(af. Teens at 74)

fergar

: weft: srRaTaaae: | HecHveteyaa: 2
(afr. seareerfe at 152)

atePrtst-

maemrteaatost fereet wa at arabe | serotonin waceartenatt
(aA. werent FT 154)

wrnttet—

Safe Helena BAT AAAI | Magara Yearaearryd tt
(WA. wareefe GT 156)

Frfost gan fer dear vitro erg: | reqeer dros hye searhretferaraet

SIA | wnaslufeeHaa agar |

Sronferer cat: weer feraftrs frase 1 (aA. steht et 127-1297

Prost wa-

sobre wy cette Pricer aftrenter wa (af. sitet at 130)

Frfvet gor

Prydt get ferntont ahrarcanrey | yeretiereta: Hs HVS with wa HE UU
(SF. ateft af 130)

firgansd fark we dot gaftger | araycrrat yormtaasaniy ete

----- PAGE 525 -----
Nimba 517

amare faster uaeare seat ui (A. ethane FF 203-204)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Parts used from Nirgundi
a. Stem b. Root & Leaf cc. Fruit '  d. Latex
Ans: b. Root & Leaf
2. Pradhana Karma of Nirgundi Patra
a. Shulahara b. Krimighna c. Jwaraghna d. Rasayana
Ans: b. Krimighna
. Nirgundi Ghrata is specifically indicated in
a. Rajayakshma b. Nidranasha c. Sthoulya d. Daha
Ans: a. Rajayakshma
. Nirgundyerandadi Kashaya is indicated in
a. Pitta Vyadhi b. Kapha Vyadhi c. Vata Vyadhi d. Jwara
Ans: c. Vata Vyadhi
5. Botanical name of Nirgundi
a. Aconitum heterophyllum b. Ficus glomerata
c. Azadirachta indica d. Vitex negundo
Ans: d. Vitex negundo
. Indrasurasa is a synonym of
a. Nimba b. Nirgundi c. Brahmi d. Varuna
Ans: b. Nirgundi
7. Habit of Nirgundi Plant
a. Herb b. Tree c. Shrub d. Creeper

Ans: c. Shrub

—

LS)

=

ON

8. Types of Nirgundi as per Raja Nighantu
a. 3 b. 4 eS d. 6
Ans: a. 3

Fo

----- PAGE 526 -----
Palasha

a
Useful part — Bija (Seed)

Rasadi panchaka

Biya (Seed) Pushpa (Flower)

Karma (Actions)

Bija (Seed) — Krimighna, Dipana, Bhagna Sandhanakara, Sangrahi, Arshoghna,
Vrishya.

Pushpa (Flower) — Tririshnahara, Dahanashaka, Kushthaghna.
Pharmacological Actions

Seeds — Anthelmintic, Laxative

Leaves & Flowers — Tonic, Aphrodisiac and Diuretic
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Bija (Seed) —Vatakapha Shamaka

Vatashamaka due to Ushna virya and Snigdha guna, Kapha Shamaka because of
its Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta Kashaya Katu rasa.

Pushpa (Flower) —Pitta Shamaka

Pitta Shamaka due to Shita virya, Madhura rasa and Vipaka.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Bija (Seed) — Krimi, Agnimandya, Bhagna, Arshas

Pushpa (Flower) — Trishna, Daha and Kushtha
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Krimiroga (Worms)

Wee Stst CR Teck AT MTYAMAAT | (Ys. 54/25)

----- PAGE 527 -----
Palasha 519

Paste or Juice of Palasha (Butea monosperma) seed if taken with rice water, is very
useful in Krimi (Worms).

frrargtsanceh at aah afta | (a09.Fa. 7/21)
Paste prepared from seeds of Palasha (Butea monosperma) should be taken with
butter milk in case of Worm infestation.

2. Daha (Burning sensation) in Jwara (fever)
Wea aaat at Praerygaena: | serfs: Weratset FAL eA TAT
(41.5.F8. 1/360)
Paste prepared from tender leaves Palasha (Butea monosperma) and Nimba
(Azadirachta indica) or Badara (Zizyphus jujuba) with sour gruel, if applied reduces
Daha (Burning sensation) in fever.

3. Paittika Shula (Colic)
Tete arat att first Te AyTTT | (GS. 42/107)

In colic one should take soup prepared from Palasha (Butea monosperma) or
Dhanyaka (Coriandrum sativum) with sugar.

Matra (Dosage)

Bija churna (Seed powder) -1to8&g

Kwatha (Decoction) —50 to 100 ml

Patra swarasa (Leaf juice) -—10to20ml

Phytoconstituents ~ Seeds contain Palasonin, Aleuritic acid and stable oil (18%).
Flowers yielded five flavonoid glucosides like butrin, Isobutrin, Coreospsin, Isocoreopsin,
Sulphurein and two new compounds called Monospermoside and Isomono-spermoside.
Root bark afforded B-sitosterol, Leucoantho-cyandin, Tannic acid and Gallic acid (50%).

Research corner

1. To study the efficacy of ethanolic extract of B. monosperma bark in cafeteria
and atherogenic diet fed rats and monosodium glutamate (MSG) obese rats,
different doses (200, 400 and 800 mg/kg) of ethanolic extract of B.
monosperma bark showed dose dependent decreases in body weight. Dixit P,
Prakash T, Karki R, Kotresha D. Anti-obese activity of Butea monosperma
(Lam) bark extract in experimentally induced obese rats. Indian J. Exp Biol.
2012 Jul;50(7):476-83.

2. The antihyperglycemic, antihyperlipidemic and antioxidative properties of
hydroethanolic extract of Butea monosperma bark were investigated in
alloxan-induced diabetic mice. The daily treatment of diabetic animals with

----- PAGE 528 -----
520 Dravyaguna Vijnana
crude extract of B. monosperma bark (300 mg kg (-1) for 45 days significantly
lowered blood glucose level and elevated hepatic glycogen content, bringing
the values close to those observed in normal control and gliberncalmidetreateg
diabetetic mice. Furthermore, the level of various lipid profile parameters wa.
also reversed towards normal. Sharma N, Garg V. Anithyperglycemic ang
antioxidant effect of hydroethanolic extract of Butea monosperma bark jn
diabetic mice. Indian J. Biochem Biophys. 2012 Feb; 49(1):55-62.

Aqueous extract of flowers of Butea monosperma (Fabaceae) was evaluated at
different dose levels (200. 400, 800 mg/kg, p.o) for its protective efficacy
against CCl (4) (1.5 ml/kg i.p.) induced acute liver injury. Therapy of B.
monosperma showed its protective effect on biochemical and histopathological
alterations at all the three doses in dose dependent manner. Sharma N, Shukla
S., Hepatoprotective potential of aqueous extract of Butea monosperma against
CCI (4) induced damage in rats. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2011 Nov; 63(7-8):671-
6. doi: 10.1016/j.etp. 2010.05.009. Epub 2010 Jun 18.

4. Phytochemical investigation from the stem bark of Butea monosperma, led to
the isolation and identification of three new compounds named buteaspermin A
(1), Buteaspermin B (2) and buteaspermanol (3), along with 19 known
compounds. Maurya R, Yadav DK, Sing G, Bhargavan B, Narayana Murthy
PS, Sahai M, Singh MM. Osteogenic activity of constituents from Butea
monosperma. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2009 Feb 1;19(3):610-3. doi: 10.1016/
j-bmcl.2008. 12.064. Epub 2008 Dec 24.

5. One new dihydrochalcone, Dihydromonospermoside (7), was isolated from the
flowers of Butea monosperma together with three known chalcones, butein (2),
monospermoside (4) and isoliquiritigenin (8), one flavone, 7,3',4-
trihydroxyflavone (6), four flavanones,

(-)-butrin (1a), (-)-butrin (3a), (+)-isomonospermoside (5b) and (-)-liquiritgenin (94);
and three isofavones, formononetion (10), afromosin (11) and formononetin-7-O-beta-D-
glucopyranoside (12). Chokchaisiri R, Suaisomn C, Sriphota S, Chindaduang A; Chuprajob
T, Suksamrarn A. Bioactive flavonoids of the flowers of Butea monosperma. Chem Pharm
Bull (Tokyo). 2009 Apr;57(4):428-32.

>

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No, Name of Yoga Indi¢ations

Palasha bijadi churna bias tins"

----- PAGE 529 -----
Palasha 521

Krimimudgara rasa Krimi,
Krimihara rasa Krimi
Krimighna rasa Krimi

4.
P 6 Rnigi vara | rin

8. Paribhadrakavaleha Krimi, Shula

Agnimandya

Botanical Name — Butea monosperma Lan-Kutze
Butea — Named after John Earl of Bute, Patron of Botany
mono — One, sperma - seed
Family — Fabaceae
Kula — Aparajita kula
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Rodhradi gana, Mushkakadi gana, Ambashthadi gana, Nyagrodhadi
gana

Bh.Pr.Ni Vatadi varga 49-53

Basonym of Drug

WORT TATA I

The leaves of Palasa (Butea monosperma) is very auspicious and the plant bears
characteristic leaves.

Synonyms

Mrophology
1. AAWES:- aA WEA STASI
Palasha grows in forest.
Morphology
2. fraa:-sfiftrasraroere anf |
A leaf bears three leaflets.
3. TRUUT:-Tes ToT |

Palasha leaves have rough surface.

----- PAGE 530 -----
522 Dravyaguna Vijnana

4, THYWH:-TeHler YouITE |
Flower of Palasha are red in colour.
5. GRY: Aah FIA |
Palasha flowers are curved.
6. RYH: YRIVS ATT HAT |
The flower of Palasha resemble beak of a parrot.
7. dtreg- cht Meqare |
The seeds of Palasha have more oil content.
Properties and Actions
8. ATAS:-AKINy HB: |
Palasha is regarded as best among plants yielding alkali.
9. aaftrer:~artey Bat Sh |
Seeds of Palasha are very useful in Krimi (Helminthiasis).
10. Qldet:- ATT Bt: IITA: |
The drug Palasha passifies Vata.
Others
11. Bftet:- aAy WEA ater HB:
Palasha is one of the best among the plants which are used for rituals.
12. Otften:- Ga WERT: |
Palasha is commonly used for performing religious rites.
13. WeAga:- Tet gar: Shem AeENy WaSTaL |

The plant is commonly used in rituals.

Regional Name

----- PAGE 531 -----
Palasha 523

Habitat
Palasha plant grows all over India. It is also cultivated as its leaves are commonly
used.

Morphology

Habit — An erect tree grows upto 50 ft. height.
Trunk is crooked.

Branches — Irregular, bark is rough, ash-coloured,
young parts are tomentose.

Leaves — Compound, trifoliate, petioles are 10
to 15 cm long, stipules are linear-lanceolate. Leaves
deciduous, leaf lets are coriaceous, the terminal leaflet
is 10-20 cm long, and 10-15 broad, broadly obovate,
from a cuneate base, lateral leaflets are smaller, 10 to
15cm long and 7.5 to 10 cm wide, obliquely rounded u
at the base, glabrous above. Petiolules are 6 mm long | Butea Monosperma Lan-Kutza.
and stout. (Palaga)

Inflorescence — Raceme, 15 cm long.

Flower — Long pedicel, calyx densely velvety outside, dark olive green. Petals are
orange or salmon coloured, 4 to 5 cm long standard petal is 25 cm broad, keel is semi
circular, beaked and veined.

Fruit — Pods, stalked, 12 to 20 cm long, 2-4 cm wide, thickened at the sutures.

Varieties
Ra. Ni — 4 types acc to colour of flowers
1. Rakta palasha 2. Pita palasha 3. Shweta palasha 4. Nila palasha

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Seeds are flat Kidney shaped, 3 to 3.5 cm long, 2 to 2.5 cm broad and upto 2 mm
thick. Surface is leathery, glossy veined and wrinkled with a deep reddish brown colour.
The seed has a conspicuous hilum which is situated near the middle of its concave edge.
Seed does not have any odour.

Classical references

Synonyms

Tete: faye: Wot arat THOT: | asET aaa warger: AER:
(aa. dare aT 49)

----- PAGE 532 -----
524 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Properties and Actions
TET Ca TUT: AAO HOTT CHA | TTS STMT: BHT SUT,
ware: Heftareh: are Jerre i (A. FVTte Ft 50)
Wetet Yer
aeqe tag Ure Y whe feat HoT | ate Mafia Heats ale wetter
TSSTS WAH AAT PSST WT (ALT. Fave TT 51-52)
UST wHet-
Tact Het Aerst: frat warmer | fears Heh Wet HS Yewar Wy uu
(ay. aefe af 53)
anae: afters dart tor: ae: wile yor Tevet aratscror Fae: |
fagnentt pat grb wey a ad dist g ae Rrerqut pt gerard
(af. ste +f 149-150)
Teeth: Rae det: we: LAG We Tat Wag sea
Teoh TRYST, AL YOR Tag ferranyl | Teeenatireapsadl HAT TU
aU Hoch Ue Atetet UMS vitrery | Gat fears Hea eet aaa
saytarctenat: HA yr | yee vert gy Pitarmet wu
(afr. staf af 833-836)
TATE HUTT: SPAT: | Aalst UATE he B_ra ATTA, |
Tee Ys rs Bugera | (a. adhert 37-38)
ware OF one get Aes Piet a ast wet were (BA. eae ah 156)
Varieties
(w.A. adios af 38-39)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Main useful part of Palasha

a. Mula b. Bija c. Kanda d. Niryasa
Ans: b. Bija

2. Pradhana Karma of Palasha Bija
a. Dipana b. Rechana c. Krimighna d. Medhya

Ans: c. Krimighna

----- PAGE 533 -----
3. Paste or Juice of Palasha (Butea monosperma) seed if taken with rice water,
is very useful in
a. Atisara b. Krimi c. Vibandha d. Arshas
Ans: b. Krimi

4. Palashabijadi Churna is indicated in
a. Krimi b. Klaibya c. Kasa d. Shula
Ans: a. Krimi

5. Botanical name of Palasha
a. Vitex negundo b. Butea monosperma
c. Saraca asoca d. Glycyrrhiza glabra
Ans: b. Butea monosperma

6. Kimshuka is a synonym of
a. Shalmali b. Vidari c. Palasha d. Shirisha
Ans: c. Palasha

7. Kshara Shreshtha is a synonym of

a. Palasha b. Snuhi c. Chincha d, Arka
Ans: a. Palasha

8. Samidvara is a synonym of
a. Ashwattha b. Arjuna c. Arka d. Palasha

Ans: d. Palasha

RRR KK

----- PAGE 534 -----
Pashana Bheda

Useful part — Kanda (Rhizome) / Mula (Root)

Rasadi panchaka
Kashaya Tikta (Madhura-Ra.Ni.)

Karma (Action)

Ashmaribhedana, Bastishodhaka, Arshoghna, Pramehahara, Shulahara,
Vranahara, Yoniroga nashaka, Mutrala, Pliharogahara, Dahahara and Hridrogahara.

Pharmaclogical Actions
Diuretic, Antiinflammatory, Haemostatic, Cardiotonic and Antitoxic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to its Snigdhaguna and Pitta Shamaka be-
cause of Kashaya Tikta and Shita virya, Kaphahara because of Kashaya tikta rasa and
Katu vipaka.

Rogaghanta (Therapeutic indications)

Ashmari, Mutrakrichra, Arshas, Prameha, Shula, Yoniroga, Pliharoga, Daha,

Hridroga and Vrana

Amayika Prayoga (Thereapeutic administration)
1. Ashmari (Calculus), & Mutrakrichra (Dysuria)
Aeateatgaydatedtrar | aft usar aa free aft: waar tt
(4.3. 57/47)
Milk boiled with Nala (Arundo donax) Ashmabheda (Bergenia ligulata), Darbha
(Desmostachya bipinnata), Ikshu (Saccharum officinarum), seeds of Trapusha (Cucumis

sativus), and Ervaruka (Cucums utilissimus) then it has to be taken with ghee. This is
efficacious in Ashmari (Calculus) and Mutra krichra (Dysuria).

----- PAGE 535 -----
Pashana Bheda 527

Matra (Dose)
Mula/Kanda churna (Powder of rhizome) -lto3g

Phytochemistry — Roots and Rhizomes contains a C-glycoside called Bergenin, B-
sitosterol, gallic acid, gallic acid, tannic acid, bergenin, amino acids-isoleucine, leucine,
methionine, phenylalanine and threonine.

Research corner

1. To rationalize the Bergenia ligulata use in kidney stones and explain the
underlying mechanisms. The crude aqueous-methanolic extract of Bergenia
ligulata rhizome (BLR) was studied using in vitro and in vivo methods. BLR
inhibited calcium oxalate (CaC(2)O(4)) crystal aggregation as well as crystal
formation in the metastable solutions and exhibited antioxidant effect against
1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazy] free radical and lipid peroxidation in the in vitro.
The antiurolithic activity in Bergenia ligulata mediated possibly through
CaC(2)O(4) crystal inhibitions diuretic, hyper mageneseuric and antioxidant
effects. Bashir S, Gilani AH. Antiurolithic effect of Bergenia ligulata rhizome:
an explanation of the underlying mechanisms. J Ethnopharmacol. 2009 Feb
25:122(1):106-16. doi: 10.1016/j.jep. 2008.12.004. Epub 2008 Dec 11.

2. Inhibitory compound of alpha-glucosidase activity (+)-afzelechin (1), was
isolated from rhizomes of Bergenia ligulata. The structure was identified by IR,
EI-MS, (1) H and (13) C NMR spectroscopy. The ID (50) (50% inhibtion
dose) value of compound 1 was 0.13 mM. To investigate the structure-activity
relationship, (+)-afzelechin tetra acetate (2), (+)-5,7,4'-trimethoxyaf-zelechin
(3), (+)-tetramethoxyafzelechin (4), and (+)-3-acetyl-5,7,4'-trimethoxya-
fezelechin (5) as the derivatives of compound 1 were evaluated as well. Saijyo
J, Suzuki Y, Okuno Y, Yamaki H, Suzuki T, Miyazawa M. Alpha-glucosidase
inhibitor from Bergenia ligulata. J Olea Sci. 2008;57(8):431-5.

3. The action of the putatively litholytic medicinal plants Tribulus terrestris and
Bergenia ligulata on the growth of CHPD crystals was studied. The effects of
artificial reference urine (ARU) and human urine (HU), along with the plant
extracts, are also reported. Attempts were made to understand the role of these
inhibitors on urinary crystal formation. HU, ARU, extracts of B. ligulata and
T. terrestris exhibit appreciable amounts of inhibition, but B. ligulata and T.
terrestris with ARU and HU do not show inhibition at all. Joshi VS, Parekh
BB, Joshi MJ, Vaidya AD. Inhibition of the growth of urinary calcium
hydrogen phosphate dihydrate crystals with aqueous extracts of Tribulus

terrestris and Bergenia ligulata. Urol Res. 2005 May; 33(2):80-6. Epub 2005
Mar 25,

----- PAGE 536 -----
528 Dravyaguna Vijnana

4, Methanol water extract from rhizomes of Bergenia ligulata, a plant used in
Nepalese ethnomedicine, inhibited in vitro the replication of influenza virus in
a dose dependent manner and did not show virucidal activity at effective
concentration. Pretreatment of cells with B. ligulata extract was shown to be
most effective to prevent cell destruction. The extract inhibited viral RNA
synthesis and reduced viral peptide synthesis at 10 microg/ml. The virus
inhibitory effect is related to the presence of condensed tannins in the extract.
Rajbhandari M, Wegner U, Schopke T, Lindequist U, Mentel R. Inhibitory
effect of Bergenia ligulata on influenza virus A. Pharmazie. 2003
Apr;58(4):268-71.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo. Name of Yoga Indications

Pashanabhedad kwath

Pashanabhedadi ghrita Vataja Ashmari
Gokshuradyavaleha Ashmari, Mutrakrichra
Pashanabheda kashaya Mutravarodha

Botanical Name — Bergenia ligulata Wall.
Bergenia — After the name of K.A. Von Bergen a German botanist.
ligulata —Strap like
Family — Saxifragaceae
Kula — Pashanabheda
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Mutra virechaniya
Sushruta Viratarvadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Haritakyadi varga 184-185
Basonym of Drug
Urarat areTrtt Farrer |
The plant Pashanabheda (Berginia ligulata) breaks the stone and sprouts. It is the
best among drugs which are useful in Ashmari (Calculi).

Synonyms
1. TVAVSA-sIVH Weare Pca Brae ster | stg sree rere 1
Pashanabheda break open the ground and sprout.

----- PAGE 537 -----
Pashana Bheda §29

Regional Name

Habitat
Pashanabheda grows in Hemalayan region |

about 6,000 ft. altitude.

Morphology

Habit — Pashanabheda is much branched pe- |:
rennial herb grows 60 to 180 cm in height.

Root — Red in colour and 2 to 5 cm thick
Stem — Short thick, fleshy and procumbent.

Leaves —Ovate, 12 to 25 cm in diameter, sessile,
rounded at the apex, fringed with short hairs.

Bergenia ligulata wall.
(Pasanabheda)

Flowers — White, Pink or purple in colour and
flowering occurs in April and May. Flowers are 3 cm
in diameter forming a cymose panicle.

Fruit — Drupes, orange or red in colour.
Substitutes

1. Aerva lanata Juss — Whole herb

2. Didymocarpus pedicellatus R.Br — Root

3. Coleus amboinicus Benth — Root

4. Bergenia ciliata — Root

5. Bergenia stracheyi — Root
Controversy

Pashanaabheda is one of the most controversial drugs in Ayurveda. Different spe-
cies are used as Pashanaheda in various parts of India.

----- PAGE 538 -----
530 Dravyaguna Vijnana

SI.No. Species Region

South India (AP & Karnataka)

Rotula aquatica Lour Karnataka

Bryophyllum calicynum Salisb | Bengal

Ocimum basilicum a eer

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Transversely cut pieces of dried rhizome will be up to 6 cm long and 1 to 2 cm in
diameter. External surface is reddish brown in colour, wrinkled or irregularly shrivelled,
bearing leaf scales in the upper part and root scars below. A transversely cut portion
shows 2 to 3 mm thick bark, followed by a light coloured cambium ring and a woody
portion which surrounds a central pith. Breaking is difficult and on breaking exposes a
light brick red surface. Has characteristic faint odour, tastes bitter and astringent.

Classical references

Synonyms
UTeTaTaecn sere PRAT | (aT. elias FT 184)

Properties and Actions

ayaa Batra: Haat Aa Mera: | Neat sha SIM HOSA: I

SPaaraaeer wettest ST (aa. eitaeMe HT 184-185)

araatal fenttarn: veut, | eaereteqeraret atteyfernt: We
(aft. Teeate Gf 154)

aryaiat fener: Haat ates vier: | Yack afer StareiyeT PITA Tyw: |

areret water wttegret aoa 0 (4.Fa. sitet af 1145-1146)

ureroraat wapfercat Bef: | de eqerpege: viltetsrerfet:

(at. Weert 40)

sR framers act wentar 1 sree a arena aa: urerorsteen:

----- PAGE 539 -----
Pashana Bheda 531

marmste =o sft  oienaftegarmt «= weet axfereciifecryeraue: |
itt Pare TST: areearatiertantant states:

—_

w

~—

oo

(B.f. warqenfe at 85-86)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Pashanabheda

a. Mula b. Bija c. Phala d. Pushpa
Ans: a. Mula

. Ashmarighna Karma of Pashanabheda is attributed to

a. Rasa b. Vipaka c. Prabhava d. Virya
Ans: c. Prabhava

. Important pharmacological action attributed to Pashanabheda

a. Analgesic b. Hepatoprotective c. Antidiuretic  d. Diuretic
Ans: d. Diuretic

. Main indication of Pashanabheda

a. Jwara b. Ashmari c. Atisara d. Prameha
Ans: b. Ashmari

. Pashanabhedadi Kwatha is indicated in

a. Mutrakricchra - b. Shotha c. Grahani d. Kasa
Ans: a. Mutrakricchra

. Botanical name of Pashanabheda

a. Premna integrifolia b. Plumbago zeylanica
c. Bergenia ligulata d. Asparagus racemosus
Ans: c. Bergenia ligulata

. Ashmabhedana is asynonym of

a. Pippali b. Shigru c. Punarnava d. Pashanabheda
Ans: d. Pashanabheda

. Habit of Pashanabheda plant

a. Tree b. Herb c. Creeper d. Shrub
Ans: b. Herb

. South Indian substitute for Pashanabheda is

a. Gorakshaganja b. Varuna c. Punarnava d. Apamarga
Ans: a. Gorakshaganja

FoR

----- PAGE 540 -----
Chapter

Patha

Part used - Mula (Root).

Rasadi panchaka

Laghu Tikshna
Karma (Actions)

Jwaratisara, Stanyashodhana, Shulahara, Chardighna, Atisarajit, Kushthaghna,
Kandughna, Daha Shamaka, Vishaghna, Krimighna, Gulmanashaka, Vranahara,
Vrishya, Hridrogahara and Bhagna sandhanakara.

Pharmacological Actions

Hypoglycaemic, Muscle relaxant, Antibacterial, CNS depressant, Fungitoxic and
Antitumour activity.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka, Vatahara because of Ushna virya. Kapha Shamaka due to
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Jwara, Stanyadushti, Bhagna, Shula, Chardi, Atisara, Kushtha, Kandu, Vishavikara,
Krimi, Daha, Gulma, Hridroga and Vrana.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Prameha (Diabetes)

manratet wreisyeaoray | afer. 11/5

In case of Lavana meha decoction of Patha (Cissampelos periera) and Aguru
(Aquillaria agallocha) is much beneficial.

2, Atisara (Diarrhoea)

wet fast a Meet ter aera | atta caer are SAY TANT:
(aa. fa. 2/42)

----- PAGE 541 -----
Patha 533

In case of burning sensation in Atisara (Diarrhoea) Patha (Cissamelos periera) is
triturated with curd and given internally.

Matra (Dose)
Kwatha (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
Churna (Powder) - | to 3 g

Chemical constituents - Root contains alkaloids like Hayatine & Hyatinine,
Hayatidine. Also contains quercitol, sterol and saponins.

Leaves contain Cycleanine, 1-bebeerine, Hyatidin, Hyatinin, Hayatin and d-quercitol.

Research corner

1. Study done to evaluate antiurolithic activity of alcoholic extract of roots of
Cissampelos pareira (AERGP) in chemicals induced urolithiasis in albino rats.
The rats treated with alcoholic extract of roots of C. pareira at 03 different
doses significantly (p< 0.05) reduced urinary calcium, uric acid and increased
urinary magnesium levels, reduced serum calcium, creatinine and increased
serum magnesium. Rats treated with 200 mg/kg and 400 mg/kg doses revealed
less tissue damage and the cytology of the nephrotic tissue was almost similar
to normal control Group I rats. Results showed that alcoholic extract of roots
of C. pareira has exhibited a significant antiurolithic effect against urolithiasis
in experimental rats. Sayana SB1, Khanwelkar CC2, Nimmagadda VR3,
Chavan VR4, Bh R5, S NK6. Evalution of antiurolithic activity of alcoholic
extract of roots of Cissampelos pareira in albino rats. J Clin Diagn Res. 2014
Jul; 8 (7) : HCO1-4. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2014/9604.4528.

2. A study done to evaluate Cissampelos pareira (C. pareira) for in vitro
cytotoxicity and in vivo antitumor activity against Dalton’s Lymphoma Ascites
(DLA) cells in Swiss mice. Methanol Extract of Cissampelos pariera (MECP)
showed a potent cytotoxic activity, with an IC50 value of 95.5 pg/ml and a
significant (P < 0.001) decrease in packed cell volume, viable cell count, and
an increased lifespan (54 and 72%). The hematological and serum biochemical
profiles were restored to normal levels in MECP-treated mice. The MECP-
treated group significantly (P < 0.001) decreased SOD, lipid peroxidation, and
CAT to normal. This study demonstrated that C. pariera exhibited significant
in vitro and in vivo anti-tumor activities and that it was reasonably imputable
to its increasing endogenous mechanism of antioxidant property. Thavamani
BS1, Mathew M2, Dhanabal SP3. Anticancer activity of Cissampelos pareira
against dalton’s lymphoma ascites bearing mice. Pharmacogn Mag. 2014
Ju1;10(39):200-6. doi: 10.4103/0973 1296.137356.

----- PAGE 542 -----
“34 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3. A study done to evaluate the preliminary phytochemicals of petroleum ether
and ethanolic extracts of Cyclea peltata and their diuretic activity. Preliminary
phytochemical screening reveals the presence of phytosterols and alkaloids as
major phytoconstituents in petroleum ether extract. The ethanolic extract
showed the presence of alkaloids, flavonoids, tannins, diterpenes and saponins.
Pharmacological investigation revealed that ethanolic extract of C. peltata
leaves possessed significant diuretic activity in a given dose of 200 and 300
mg/kg body weight (Diuretic action 1.7 and 2.6, respectively). Whereas
petroleum ether extract has shown moderate diuresis at a dose of 300 mg/kg
body weight (Diuretic action 1.1). The present study justifies the use of C.
peltata in the Ayurvedic system of medicine as a diuretic drug. Hullatti KK1,
Gopikrishna UV, Kuppast IJ. Phytochemical investigation and diuretic activity
of Cyclea peltata leaf extracts. J Adv Pharm Technol Res. 2011 Oct;2(4):241-
4. doi: 10.4103/223 1-4040.90880.

Yoga (Formulations)

Name Indications

Pathadi Churna Atisara, Aruchi

Botanical Name

Cissampelos pareira Linn.

Cissampelos—Ciss means Ivy, Ameloc means vine, resembling Ivy in rambling habit
and vine.

pareira- Hairy
Family - Menispermaceae
Kula - Guduchi

Gana vargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka _| Sandhaniya Varga, Jwarahara Varga, StanyaSodhana Varga

Sushruta | Aragwadhadi Gana, Ambashthadi Gana, Pippalyadi Gana, Patoladi
Gana, Brihatyadi Gana, Mustdi Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni. | Guduchyadi Varga

----- PAGE 543 -----
Patha §35

Basonym of Drug
Wreate aret sent aeletther, Weare KIA Ar Yorenrh carey, |
Patha (Cissampelos pareira Linn.) if used will strengthen the voice. Hence it is
always praised.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. Wreftar-prfer wrest war:

Patha is seen in eastern part of India.

Morphology
2. afagafttar-a fag: Hut GaTeRISeT: |
Patha has got peltate leaves.
3. faferr-feretsferenr at feet: |
Leaves of Patha will have three or more prominent veins.
4. Wersten-Terstet dist wesc: |
Fruit of Patha will have one seed.
Properties and actions
5. aelettemeat-aeT ST FT ATTRT: |
Patha has got bitter taste and it is best among bitter drugs.
6. UrTetferent-ure Ter Vrererter Praca
Patha cure many diseases.
7. wag-araa ounda frst wate, aq ut wade a,
ALMGAMTAATT |
Patha will act as Stambhaka and also improves health of the person.
Habitat

Patha (Cissampelos pareira) is seen mainly in
Northern part of India and Rajapatha (Cyclea peltata) is
more common in South India.

Morphology
Habit - Climbing shrub.
Branches - Striate, pubescent. ;
Leaves - Peltate, 4 to 6 cm in diameter, cordate or | Cissampelos pareira Linn.

----- PAGE 544 -----
536 Dravyaguna Vijnana

truncate at the base. Petioles are long, 4 to 10 cm long,
pubescent, inserted 3 to 6 mm within the basal margin.

Flowers - Male flowers are pedicelled and seen in
axillary cymes.

Fruit - Drupe, subglobose, compressed, red on rip-
ening. Endocarp is transversely ridged.
Varieties

Ka. Ni- Twotypes : 1. Patha 2. Kuchelika

P.V. Sharma —Two types:

Cyclea peltata Linn.

1. Patha (Cissampelos pareira)

2. Raja Patha (Cyclea peltata)
Classical references
Synonyms
Wretstasistagant at ureter ureretferenr | Wenrstert Tat reat Ulfser attehHeae UI
(as. TSeafert: 191)
Properties and actions
Ueto agar dient ascent wy: | sha yeraatdgenttanegs: |
eS MAHA AI Ut (ALT. Yeeeah: 192)
uret farrateat gen feat penrgqd | wfdasrrsahre Pretagrt wer |
UlStstraneeret Heatrtseraen (ah. WSeaeat: 70-71)
uret g ager cleo eget fratear | at HErareoiaarerttareaest: |
Teraug aaa (S.A. steftreat: 678-679)
wort fret a vit amanda qe ed!
aaa uit cae vitae? wet qemfe frefateru

(af. siteftrert: 681)
Kucélika
qrateran ference targaren fear org: vanfeutt aren frrenrcnfrneyrt
(HA. steftert: 680)

urer ferent Yeo at arahtrarsaae | TT MMT Hearst aTerdanNeered,
(afr. froreanfe at: 121)

----- PAGE 545 -----
Patha 537

uraret FTA fercar meat Mary, | eet YoTsatofdperarega:

—

ge

(fr. Prorat af: 21)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Patha is

a. Patra b. Mula c. Kanda d. Pushpa
Ans: b. Mula

. Pradhana Rasa of Patha is

a. Tikta b. Kashaya c. Katu d. Madhura
Ans: a. Tikta

. Main indication of Patha is

a. Kasa b. Kamala c. Jwaratisara d. Kushtha

Ans: c. Jwaratisara

. Decoction of Patha (Cissampelos periera) and Aguru (Aquillaria agallocha) is

much beneficial in
a. Udakameha b. Lavana Meha cc. Sikata Meha d. Shukra Meha

Ans: b. Lavana Meha

. Pathadi Churna is mainly indicated in

a. Atisara b. Kushtha c. Kandu d. Arshas
Ans: a. Atisara ,

. Botanical name of Patha

a. Boerhavia diffusa §_b. Desmodium gangeticum
c. Cissampelos pareira d. Centella asiatica
Ans: c. Cissampelos pareira

. Ekashtila and Ambashta are the synonyms of
a. Nagakeshara b. Guduchi c. Bhallataka d. Patha
Ans: d. Patha

Botanical source of Rajpatha

a. Cyclea peltata b. Bauhinia variegate
c. Adhatoda vasica d. Fumaria parviflora
Ans: a. Cyclea peltata

oe ie ok oR a8

----- PAGE 546 -----
Chapter

Pippali & Pippali Mula

Useful part — Phala (Fruit) & Mula (Root).
Rasadi panchaka

Tikshna Laghu Snigdha
Vi

Madura

Karma (Actions)

Dipana, Rasayana, Vrishya, Rechaka, Shwasahara, Kasahara, Jwarahara,
Kushthaghna, Pramehahara, Arshoghna, Shulanashaka.

Pippalimula (Root) — Dipana, Pachana, Pliharogahara, Gulmaghna, Krimighna,
Shwasahara.

Gajapippali — Mala vishoshaka

Saimhali pippali - Dipana, Jantughna, Shulahara, Shwasahara and
Koshthashodhaka.

Vanadi pippali — Dipana, Ruchikara
Agrya Karma

froreiiqe doteoretrareysrrarery | (FY, 25/40)

Root of Pippali (Piper longum Linn.) is Appetizer, Digestant and Carminative.
Pharmacological Actions

Fruit — Appetizer, Digestant, Carminative, Aphrodisiac, Stimulant, Diuretic, Ver-
mifuge, Rubefacient.

Root — Stimulant
Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka, Kaphahara due to Katurasa and Vata Shamaka because of
Madhura vipaka.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indiations)
Pippali— Agnimandya, Jwara, Shwasa, Kushtha, Prameha, Arshas and Udara Shula.

----- PAGE 547 -----
Pippali & Pippali Mula 539

Pippali mula — Agnimandya, Gulma, Krimi, Shwasa and Pliharoga.
Gajapippali - Agnimandya
Saimhali pippali - Agnimandya, Shula, Krimi and Shwasa.
Vanadi pippali — Agnimandya, Aruchi
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Shula (Colic)
ftroreft sygattes setorereh Arahat, (G.s. 42/110)

Combination of Pippali (Piper longum) and Shrangavera (Zingiber officinale) is the
best remedy for Udara Shula (Colic) caused by Kapha.

2. Chardi (Vomiting)

ate: alstrdttat arreft ar fers aat u(.s. 49/32)

Pippali (Piper longum) consumed with ghee, honey and sugar is very useful in
vomiting.
3. Kasa (Cough)

USHA: HUTA Or MAES | (AAP. 12/34)

Powder of Pippali (Pipper longum) and Kantakari (Solanum xanthocarpum) if taken
with honey alleviates Kasa (Cough).

4. Jwara (Fever)

agyataresren at frorean ar syct fret 1 (at.8.Fa. 2/41)

Decoction prepared by Pippali (Piper longum) with four times water if taken allevi-
ates Jwara (Fever).

Pippali mula (Root)
1. Krimi Roga (Worm infestation)

frag on frortyerrargar WaT | (YS. 54/32)

Decoction prepared by Pippali mula (Root of Piper longum) should be taken with
Goat’s urine. This is effective in Krimi roga (Worm infestation).

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) — 5 to 10 g

Phytoconstituents — Fruit yielded Piperine, Piplartine, Pipernonaline,
Piperundecalidine, n-hexadecane, n-heptadecane, n-octadecane, n-nonadecane, n-eicosane,

----- PAGE 548 -----
540 Dravyaguna Vijnana

a.-thujene, Zingiberene, P-cymene and Terpinolene. Root yielded piperine, Piperlongumine
& Piperlonguminine.

Research corner

1. The present study was undertaken to evaluate the antihyperglycemic and
antihyperlipidemic effects of Piper longum root aqueous extract (PlrAge) in
streptozotocin (STZ) induced diabetic rats. During the short term study the
aqueous extract at a dosage of 200 mg/kg.b.w. was found to possess significant
antidiabetic activity after 6 h of the treatment. The administration of aqueous
extract at the same dose for 30 days in STZ induced diabetic rats resulted in
a significant decrease in FBG levels with the corrections of diabetic
dyslipidemia compared to untreated diabetic rats. Sheik Abdul Nabi 1, Ramesh
Babu Kasetti2, Swapna Sirasanagandlal, Thandaiah Krishna Tilak1, Malaka
Venkateshwarulau Jyothi Kumar 3 and Chippada Appa Raol* Antidiabetic
and antihyperlipidemic activity of Piper longum root aqueous extract in STZ
induced diabetic rats. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2013,
13:37.

2. Bioactivity guided fractionation concludes that Piperine is the only active
ingredients in various fractions of fruit extract evaluated for antibacterial
activity. Fraction having piperine has significant activity against multi drug
resistant strains of Mycobacterium spp. than other purified fractions of fruit
extract. The current finding encourages us to develop new alternative medicine
that includes piperine alone and/or in combination with other drugs to fight
against the drug residence among Mycobactrial strains. Chandan Singh,
Santosh Kumar Singh, Gopal Nath, N P Rai. Anti-mycobacterial activity of
Piper longum L, fruit extracts against multi drug resistant Mycobacterium Spp-
International Journal of Phytomedicine. Vol 3. No. 3 (2011).

. 28 compounds with high purity were obtained and their structures were
comprehensively charactrised by electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry
(ESI-MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The results
demonstrate that the 2D NPLCxRPLC method with good orthogonality
(58.3%) was effective for the preparative separation and purification of amide
alkaloids from Piper longum L. Kuiyong Lia, Wenya zhu,a Qing, Fu,@
Yanxiong Ke,a Yu Jin*a and Xinmiao Liang*a Purification of amide alkaloids
from Piper longum L. using preparative two-dimensional normalphase liquid
chromatography x reversed-phase liquid chromatography Analyst.

Ww

----- PAGE 549 -----
Pippali & Pippali Mula 541

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Indications

Name of Yoga
Pippalyadyasava
Pippalighrata Kshayaja kasa

Pipal vt
Pippali khanda
Pippalipaka

Pippalyadya taila Arshas, Udarashula

Grahani, Gulma

Pippalyadya loha Hikka, Shwasa

Botanical Name — Piper longum Linn.

Piper —Pepri (Greek) or Pippal (Derived from Sanskrit names).

longum — Long
Family - Piperaceae
Kula - Pippali kula
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Kasahara varga, Kanthya varga, Hikkanigrahana varga,

Asthapanopaga varga, Triptighna varga, Shirovirechanopaga varga,
Dipaniya varga, Shulaprashamana varga, Shitaprashamana varga

Sushruta Pippalyadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Haritakyadi varga 53-65

Basonym of Drug

frat urerate you yreter or after, emreterter
Pippali (Piper longum) increases depleted Dhatu (Tissues) and acts as Rasayana
(Rejuvenative).

Synonyms
Habitat
1. Arreft-wTery aT |

----- PAGE 550 -----
542 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Pippali is abunduntly available in Magadha deéa.
2. degt-fresy var |
Pippali is very common in Videha deéa.
3, SARC HEAT SAT WaT ATTA |
Pippali grows near or along side of water streams.
Morphology
4, HOM-HMTHA, Teh Alt HEMT Tear, ATT HOTT eT |
Fruit of Pippali is red in colour on ripening but turns to black once it is dried.
5. BUT- HUTA |
Fruits of Pippali are small berries.
6. vlog - usta weraeT |
Pippali fruits are adhered to solid fleshy which resembles an elephant’s trunk.
Properties and Actions
7. BON-Tatet TH AAA HEAT |
Pippali has got pungent taste, if taken causes burning sensation in tongue.
8. CALC-HeraTET |
Pippali has got pungent taste, if taken causes burning sensation in tongue.
9. chenrcrgen dteuretagen Stsrerea: |

Seeds of Pippali are spicy.
10. CARATS MTT VAT TTT TCE
Pippali is very useful drug which cures many diseases.

Regional Name
Habitat
Pippali plant is cultivated in Bengal, Bihar, Assam and Tamilnadu.

----- PAGE 551 -----
Pippali & Pippali Mula 543

Morphology
Habit — Ascending or prostrate climber.
Root stock — Erect, thick, jointed branched.

Stem —Numerous, stout, 60 to 90 cm, cylindrical, thick-
ened above the nodes, finely pubescent.

Leaves — 6 to 9 cm long, lower leaves are broadly
ovate, very cordate with broad rounded lobes at base, up-
per-ones oblong oval, cordate at base, all subacute, entire,
glabrous, thin, bullate with reticulated venation sunk above
and dull beneath, petiole of lower leaves 5 to 7.5 cm where
as lower leaves are very short. Stipules are 1 cm long, mem-
branous, lanceolate.

Inflorescence — Spike, pedunculate. Male inflorescence is slender with narrow bracts.
Female inflorescence is 1 to 2.5 cm long, bracts are circular and flat.

Fruit — Small, ovoid and completely sunk in solid fleshy spike which is 2.5 to 4cm
long, and blackish green in colour.

ey y
SX

Piper longum (Pippali)

Varieties
Ra.Ni-4types 1. Pippali
2. Gajapippali
3. Simhali pippali
4. Vanadi pippali
Adulternants - Piper peepuloides Roxb.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Big variety Pippali has straight blunt spikes of grayish brown colour measuring 3 to
4 cm in length and up to 8 mm in diameter. The spike is composed of minute baccate fruits
closely packed around a common axis. The spikes are often supported by a short stalk.
Easily breaks, has got very strong and spicy odour, taste is pungent.

Short variety is less than 2 cm long and up to 5 mm in diameter, having a rough
beady surface with dark brown or greenish black colour. It has got strong and spicy
odour.

Root — Transversely cut pieces of root is 0.5 to 1 cm thick, sometimes branched in
Zigzag fashion. On breaking becomes short pieces or powdery. Odour is characteristic
and very strong and taste is pungent.

----- PAGE 552 -----
S44 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references
Synonyms
Teoreft-
ftoreft arreft om Sedt ae HoT | Seer vio eater areas ATS CAT ti
aise: wets eg SITS (AT. Aiteae TT 53)
Propet Wer
Uirek Racha wens: (a. Kaas at 64)
Properties and Actions
frorctt dust qe eargure Tare | argo agent ferret arersetoHEtt TY:
frei tert ePa areata | Heute yours: wheeerararTary |
anat arayer Raver efttem wept ye: | rent ar g gent frente
fret negra Besant | srercrasarett ger aearsfratest 1
ahiststrard ow great weft 1 aranivietrarmeangepirrrgd
faqu: froasitqoig aster resi rat: (Ae. ives TT 54-58)
frorett yA-
amectaqrret pitraraararrey tl (as. Siete aT 64-65)
ftroreft mean earefeer feren Breer | Teter a Tart
(afr. magne at 74)
wou froretyst yeror UA | aiifeottent sha HaatewdttersHed,
(oF. magenie at 76)
ferorcarrat fer ett caret Rarer aeATaT | ESAT AE: PATS UTCRT ENO TA HE?
wmrada wear aT gen wart i diodt urett cer frac array Ul
Peta moneaeitectis seta | denier sara sere eres
Sreamarenrepate fret wha a Peroreh 1 attorney AAA Weare ATTA TAT
(af. atteft af 1166-1169)
ftrorett -
ftroreft sarer ger Rearetromt Hefercnent taht ARNT HTT SLOT aTATTRTN
(afr. frorenfa at 13)

----- PAGE 553 -----
Pippali & Pippali Mula 545

Tle He a war Heeger | aera areata erareratferahes st
(aA. froreanfe af 15)

dech ageom a aged det oe | aware edtatt wet araviertt 1
(a.FA. froreante af 18)

arte fort -

aattrorefter atent cteom wear a cost | Seat wergUTEN YF Year ASTON STAT
(a.P. froreate +f 20)

froretige -

went firorefiqge seterpfiterre t det arathret thet firrentary
(aft. fracas +f 23)

frre aeaceh SI HIN YF HUA We | Hct Yes HEH Yereatost UTA Il
amarrany arefeg a reat t ada yattor feat gq ward i
cect aftr Te erates HET Ae HettOoTT | MeTTaAT TATRA Halo fore
(BAA. faoreanfe aT 1-3)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful parts of Pippali

a. Stem b. Fruit & Root c. Exudate d. Flower

Ans: b. Fruit & Root
2. Vipaka of Pippali is

—

a. Katu b. Amla c. Madhura d. Kashaya
Ans: c. Madhura

3. Pradhana Karma of Pippali
a. Dipana b. Shothahara c. Arshoghna d. Virechaka
Ans: a. Dipana

4. Main indication of Pippali is
a. Arshas b. Shotha c.Agnimandya_ d. Ashmari

Ans: c. Agnimandya

----- PAGE 554 -----
546

Dravyaguna Vijnana

LL LLBRBDBDLLLLLLLLLLLLLL LLL LCCC,
Powder of Pippali (Pipper longum) and Kantakari (Solanum xanthocerpum), if

5.

taken with honey alleviates

a. Kasa b. Ajirna c. arshas
Ans: a. Kasa
. Pippalyadyasava is specifically indicated in
a. Amlapitta b. Udarashula c. Grahani
Ans: c. Grahani
. Botanical name of Pippali
a. Piper nigrum b. Piper lomgum
c. Piper cubeba d. Piper retrofractum
Ans: b. Piper lomgum
. Magadhi & Tikshna Tandula are the synonyms of
a. Maricha b. Nirgundi c. Vidanga
Ans: d. Pippali
. Habit of Pippali plant
a. Tree b. Herb c. Climber

Ans: c. Climber

sR RR

d. Shotha

d. Jwara

d. Pippali

d. Shrub

----- PAGE 555 -----
Punarnava

[aoa eneneeeieeneeeinnniieniaiaaae”

Useful part - Mula (Root) or Panchanga (Whole plant)

Vipaka

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)
Rakta punarnava ~— Grahi, Shophanashaka, Pandughna

Shweta punarnava — Dipana, Shophahara, Pandughna, Bradnahara, Udara roga
hara, Kasahara, Hridroga shamaka, Shulahara, Vishahara.

Nila punarnava — Rasayana, Hridrogahara, Pandughna, Shwayathuhara,
Shwasahara.

Pharmacological Actions

Diuretic, Stomatic, Laxative, Expectorant, Febrifuge, Anthelmintic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Rakta punarnava — Pitta Kaphanashaka

Pittahara due to Shita virya and Tikta rasa and Kaphahara due to Katu vipaka and
Tikta rasa.

Shweta punarnava — Vatakaphanashaka

Vatahara becaue of Ushna virya and Kaphanashaka due to Ushna virya, Katu
vipaka and Katu Kashaya rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Rakta punarnava — Shopha and Pandu

Shweta punarnava - Shopha, Pandu, Bradna, Kasa, Udara, Hridroga, Shula and
Visha vikara.

Nila punarnava — Hridroga, Pandu, Shwayathu and Shwasa.

----- PAGE 556 -----
548 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Shotha (OQedema)

TAAAMER RTT Wea eft: Tees ATA | (a.FA. 12/23)

Paste is prepared from Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa), Nagara (Zingiber officinale)
and Musta (Cyperus rotundus) is taken with 640 ml of milk in case of Shotha (Oedema).

2. Ashmari (Calculus)

autsy firegta ar 1 (9.f8. 7/26)

Milk cooked with Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa) is very useful in Ashmari (Calcu-
lus).

3. Rakta Shthivana (Haemoptysis)

ut trata cenerfertugeechey | Teste free fires MaTTT ATA:
(a.fa. 11/2626)

Red variety of rice is cooked with Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa) powder, sugar,
juice of Draksha (Vitis vinifera), milk and ghee should be taken internally in case of
Raktashthivana (Haemoptysis).

Matra (Dosage)
Swarasa (Juice) —10to 20 ml
Kwatha (Decoction) -40to 80 ml

Phytoconstituents — Punarnava contains Punarnavine an alkaloid, Punarnavoside,
g-sitosterol, Tetracosanoic, Hexacosanoic, Stearic acids, Hentriacontane, Ursolic acid,
Mysristic acid, Oxalic acid, Potassium nitrate and Asparagine.

Research corner

1. Punarnavine, a quinolizidine alkaloid isolated from Boerhvia diffusa is known
to possess analgesic, anti-inflammatory, hepato-protective, immunomodulatory
and anti-proliferative properties. Anti-angiogenic effects and mechanisms of
Punarnavine is examined in vitro and in vivo. Punarnavine (15mg/kgbw/d)
treatment showed dose-dependent decrease in the ascitic fluid volume by
60.94% and tumour volume by 86.40% in Ehrlich ascites model. Reduction in
peritoneal angiogenesis with punarnavine treatment suggests the anti-
angiogenic activity of punarnavine. Saraswati S, Alhaider AA, Agrawal SS.
Punarnavine, an alkaloid from Boerhaavia diffusa exhibits anti-angiogenic
activity via down regulation of VEGF in vitro and in vivo. Chem Biol Interact.
2013 Sep 20. pii: S0009-2797(13)00232-9. doi:10.1016/j.cbi.2013.09.007.

----- PAGE 557 -----
Punarnava 549

te

. Five new (2,3,5,7 and 9) and four known rotenoids (1,4,6 and 8) were isolated
from a methanol extract of Boerhaavia diffusa roots. The structures of the new
rotenoids were elucidated by spectroscopic data interpretation. The 70%
ethanol extract, a reotenoid-rich fraction, and all isolated rotenoids were
evaluated for their COX-1 and COX-2 inhibitory activities. Boeravinone B (6)
exhibited significant anti-inflammatory activity (56.6% at 50 mg./kg) when
evaluated in an in vivo carrageenan-induced rat paw model. Bairwa K, Singh
IN, Roy SK, Grover J, Srivastava A, Jachak SM. Rotenoids from Boerhaavia
diffusa as potential Anti-inflammatory Agents. J. Nat. Prod. 2013 Aug
23;76(8):1393-8. doi; 10.1021/np 300899w. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

The present study was designed to investigate the ameliorating effect of
aqueous extract of B. diffusa rotos (BDBDE extract was found to possess a
high total phenolic content and exhibited significant free radicals scavenging
activity. E) in hyperoxaluric oxidative stress and renal cell injury. The present
study reveals that antioxidant activity of BDE significantly protects against
hyperoxaluric oxidative stress and renal cell injury in urolithiasis. Pareta
hyperoxaluric oxidative stress and renal cell injury in urolithiasis. Pareta Sk,
Patra, KC, Mazumder PM, Sasmal D. Aqueous extract of Boerhaavia diffusa
root ameliorates ethylene glycol-induced hyperoxaluric oxidative stress and
renal injury in rat kidney. Pharm Biol. 2011 oxidative stress and renal injury
in rat kidney. Pharm Biol. 2011 Dec; 49(12):1224-33. doi: 10.3109/
13880209.2011.581671. Epub 2011 Aug 16.

4. The present study evaluates the efficacy of ethanolic extract of Boerhaavia
diffusa L (BD) administered orally at a dose of 500mg/kg body weight for a
period of 30 days to alloxanized diabetic rats and its efficacy compared with
the standard hypocalcaemic drug metformin. Administration of BD not only
maintained renal Na+-K+ ATPase activity but also significantly minimized
diabetic hypercalcaemia. Singh PK, Baxi D, Doshi A, Ramachandran AV.
Antihyperglycaemic and renoprotective effect of Boerhaavia diffusa L. in
experimental diabetic rats. J. Complement Integr Med. 2011 Jan; 8, doi:
10.2202/1553-3840.1533.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No

Ww

Indications

Name of Yoga

Punarnavadi kwatha Vidradhi
Punarnavadi guggulu Shotha, Pandu

----- PAGE 558 -----
550 Dravyaguna Vijnana
Punarnavashtaka kwatha
Punarnavadi taila Shotha, Pandu

Punarnavadi mandura
Punarnavasava

Punarnavadyarishta
Botanical Name — Boerhavia diffusa Linn.
Boerhavia — Name of a discoverer.
diffusa — Which spreads on ground
Family — Nyctaginaceae
Kula — Punarnava kula

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Kasahara varga, Vayasthapana varga, Swedopaga varga,
Anuvasanopaga varga

Sushruta Vidarigandhadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 231-233

Basonym of Drug
addf qatar safe, iter pata aarchtfet
Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa) regenerates in rainy season and it regenerates the
body as well if it is used.
Synonyms
Habitat

1. aaty-aatat adat gastactiter |

Punarnava is a perennial plant gets regenerated during rainy season.

2. Wraarauft-wrgecnret gastater ster

Punarnava plant regenerates during rainy season.

3. adehg-ad add charata qererciter
Punarnava regenerates in Varsa ritu (Rainy season) hence it indicates the
season.

Morphology
4. AAT At EMT |

----- PAGE 559 -----
Punarnava 551

Punarnava root is white in colour.
S. feyrren:~ forget: yar are |
The Punarnava plant spreads on the ground.
6. THATST-Tth HUVSARM: |
The stem of Punarnava is reddish in colour.
7. WUseafrear-AvSet GAA TANT: |
Leaves of Punarnava are round in shape.
8. -Tth YAM: |
Flowers of Punarnava are red in colour
Properties and Actions
9. Merett-yitet eft
Punarnava reduces oedema.
10. Rraftan-Rrarea aearorrearetawrarchtter |

Punarnava plant always does well if-used.

Regional Name

Habitat
Punarnava grows commonly in waste places as
a weed throughout India.
Morphology
Habit — Annual herb

Stem — Prostrate or ascending glabrous stem
with distinct swollen nodes, stem is diffusely branched.
Leaves — Opposite, unequal, exstipulate, simple,
ovate with rounded or cordate base, margin is entire, Boerhavia diffusa Linn.
apex is obtuse, dorsal surface is green and lower sur- (Punarnava)
face is silvery white in colour.

----- PAGE 560 -----
552 Dravyaguna Vijnana

PA

Inflorescence — Flowers crowded in heads at the end of long slender stalks forming
terminal panicle.

Flowers — Bracteate, small, minute, red in colour, perianth lobes are 5, pink in colour,
gamophyllous, stamens are 2 to 3 in number, slightly exerted, Gynoecium is
Monocarpellary, Ovary is unilouclar, superior with single basal ovule.

Fruit — A clavate and 5-ribbed achene.
Varieties
Acc to Bh.Pr.Ni, Dh.Ni and Ka.De.Ni - 2 types
1. Shweta punarnava (Trianthema portulacastrum)
2. Rakta punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa)
Acc to Raja Nighantu - 3 types
1. Shweta punarnava =. 2. Rakta punarnava 3. Nila punarnava

Substitue
Boerhavia repanda Willd.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Roots will be 30 cm or more long, 0.5 to 1.5 cm thick, stout, tapering, somewhat
knotty and twisted. Roots often crowned with stem bases. Outer surface is brown in
colour, finely striated longitudinally. Peeled off surface of the root will be creamish in
colour. A transversely cut portions of the root shows a thin bark, followed by a yellowish
white cortical region and a central woody portion. On breaking root becomes fibrous,
odour is characteristic and taste is slightly bitter. .

Classical references

Synonyms

meagan

Qatar sergen oat Hetatsrear | (AT. Wee FT 231)

Teyay-

Gatarsar ter teegea Rrenfeer 1 weet gaaatsyecticng: afaccre:
(A. WSeae GT 232)

Properties and Actions

gaqatar- :

we ama wegedt dot ar 1 vitae ceded |
(ae, Weare TT 231)

----- PAGE 561 -----
Punarnava 553

Tega

Gadarseur ferrar agate fear ey: | Arete afer seronfirercenferforst
(an. Tees at 233)

daqar-

gadar wager freer War HHT | Avie UT ATCHTAAreeTAA, |
(aft. Tene TH 265)

RHRr-

vet Gadar ferret afte wear 1 cameretaedt ureter
(aft. yee at 267)

grat

aatypiene ferent Hare aaeeat EAT | areroore arett Ba MAT Te HATTT
GEN SEM Walaa gay (a. stat at 753-754)
aloe ( Saqatat )-

waloeota fart fark fore Heh ory | Soret arate T
(fA. atsft af 756)

Hagaar-

Jat Garter atom freer seaferaraer | HIST UToSyiT eye
(afr. Were at 116)

THya-

THT farvar erftuft staat 1 ceyateterett ung firwafest u
(aA. Werfe aT 120)

sreagatan-

stern qatar ferret Bevo a Tare | EAT WG aay ATT ATT HTHTTRT
(aft, were at 122)

Get Ff wieetaeha UIy HTT: | LATTA, 5] Te BAT Ml
(BAY. erargsafe eT 153)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Important useful part of Punaranava
a. Stem b. Root c. Fruit d. Seed
Ans: b. Root

----- PAGE 562 -----
554 Dravyaguna Vijnana

SS
2. Pradhana Karma attributed to Punarnava
a. Jwaraghna b. Stambhana c. Shothaghna  d. Arshoghna
Ans: c. Shothaghna
3. Important Pharmacological action attributed to Punarnava
a. Diuretic b. Antidiuretic c. Antidiabetic d. Analgesic
Ans: a. Diuretic

4. As per Sushruta milk cooked with Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa) is very
useful in

a. Atisara b. Ashmari c. Arshas d. Kasa
Ans: b. Ashmari
5. Punarnavine an alkaloid present in
a. Shigru b. Jambu c. Aragwadha — d. Punarnava
Ans: d. Punarnava
6. Botanical name of Punarnava
a. Bauhinia variegata __b. Allium sativum
c. Boerhavia diffusa  d. Boswellia serrata
Ans: c. Boerhavia diffusa
7. Varshabhu and Shothaghni are the synonyms of
a. Kakamachi b. Punarnava c. Lajjalu  d. Bhumyamalaki
Ans: b. Punarnava
8. Botanical name of Shweta Punarnava
a. Trianthema portulacastrum b. Boerhavia diffusa
c. Butea monosperma d. Achyranthes bidentata
Ans: a. Trianthema portulacastrum

ae 2k ak

----- PAGE 563 -----
Rasna

Useful parts — Mula (Root), Patra (Leaf) and Panchanga (whole plant)

Rasadi panchaka
Vipaka Katu
Karma (Actions)
Shophahara, Shwasahara, Vatashulahara, Kasahara, Jwarahara, Vishahara,
Sidhmahara, Pachaka.
Agrya Karma
TET STO | (FZ, 25/40)
Raasna (Pluchea lanceolata Oliver & H.) best for Vatvyadhi (Diseases of Vata).

Pharmacological Actions
Aromatic, Stimulant, Carminative, Antibacterial
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka, Vatahara because of Ushna virya and Kaphahara due to
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Vatavyadhi, Shopha, Shwasa, Kasa, Shula, Jwara, Sidhma, Agnimandya,
Vishavikara, Amavata.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatvyadhi (Disorders of Vata)
WEN Atte | (4.9, 25/40)

Rasna (Pluchea lanceolata) Churna (Powder) or Kwatha (Decoction) is useful and
best in case of Vatavyadhi (Disorders of Vata).

2. Vatarakta (Gouty arthritis)

----- PAGE 564 -----
556 Dravyaguna Vijnana

seer wutyearonint = eitemennt | fern (4.41. 23/6)

In case of Vatarakta (Gout) the decoction prepared from Rasna (Plucheq lanceolar,
or Alpinia calcarata), Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia) and Chaturangula (Cassig fisty la
is taken with Eranda (Ricinus communis) Taila (Oil).

3. Amavata (Rhumatoid arthritis)
wat [eats gaara aeleeny | free watet art aa weafterssry
(3.71. 25/6)

Decoction prepared from Rasna (Alpinia calcarata). Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia)
Eranda (Ricinus communis), Devadaru (Cedrus deodara) and Mahoushadha (Zingiber
officinale) is very effective in case of Amavata affecting joints, bones and bone marrow,

Matra (Dosage)

Kwatha (Decoction) — 40 to 60 ml
Churna (Powder) -3to6g
Phytoconstituents

Pluchea lanceolata — Pluchine, Betain hydrochloride, Taraxasterol, i and g-sito-
sterol, flavone glycoside, Quercitin and isorhamnetin,

Alpinia calcarata ~ Green rhizomes contain 0.6% to 1.5 % of volatile oil. The oil
contains methyl cinnamate (48%), Cineole (25%) Camphor and Pinene. It also contains
resin, pungent galangol, alpinol, yellow crystalline substances known as galangin.

Research corner

1. To evaluate antimalarial and safety profile of Pluchea lanceolata : an in-vitro,
in-vivo for its ethno-pharmacological validation. Hexane extract and TxAc
showed promising antimalarial activity in-vitro and in-vivo condition. TxAC
attributed in inhibition of the pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as affroad to
significant increase in the blood glucose and haemoglobin level when
compared with vehicle treated infected mice. Mohanty S, Srivastaa P, Maurya
AK, Cheema HS, Shanker K, Dhawan S, Darokar MP, Bawankule DU.
Antimalarial and safety evaluation of Pluchea lanceolata (DC.) Oliv. & Hiern:
In-vitro and in-vivor study. J, Ethnophar-macola. 2013 Oct 7;149(3):797-802.
doi: 10,1016/j.jep. 2013.08.003. Epub 2013 Aug 14,

2. To investigate the immunosuppressive potential of Pluchea lanceolata 50%
ethanolic extract (PL) and its bioactive chloroform fraction (PLC). Oral
administration of PL at dosess of 50 to 800 mg/kg in mice, with sheep red
blood cells (SRBC) as an antigen, inhibited both humoral and cell-mediated

----- PAGE 565 -----
Rasna 557

immune responses, as evidenced by the production of the circulating antibody
titer and delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction results, respectively, and the
immune suppression was statistically significant (P<0.01) in Balb/C mice. The
findings reveal that P. Lanceolata causes immunosuppression by inhibiting
Th1 cytokines. Bhagwat DP, Kharya MD, Bani S, Kaul A, Kour K, Chauhan
PS, Suri KA, Satti NK. Immunosuppressive properties of Pluchea lanceolata
leaves. Indian J. Pharmacol. 2010 Feb; 42(1):21-6. doi: 10.4103/0253-
7613.62405.

3. Oral pre-treatment with Pluchea lanceolata extract at doses of 100 and 200 mg
kg-l for 7 consective days before CdC12 intoxication caused a significant
reduction in malanodialdehyde formation and xanthine oxidanse activity
(P<0.001). A significant restoration of the activity of antioxidant defence
system enzymes such as catalase, glutathione peroxidase (P<0.05), glutathione-
S-transferase and glutathione reductase (P<0.001) was observed. Jahangir T,
Khan TH, Prasad L, Sultana S. Pluchea lanceolata attenuates cadmium
chloride induced oxidative stress and gentoxicity in Swiss albino mice. J.
Pharm Pharmacol. 2005 Sep; 57(9):1199-204.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo:

Indications

Name of Yoga

Rasnadi kwatha Vataja jwara
tava, Shi

Rasnadashamula kwatha Arditavata, ShiraShula

Rasnadilepa Vatarakta
Rasna panchakam Amavata, Sandhigata Vata

Botanical Name — Pluchea lanceolata DC., Alpinia calcarata Roscoe

Alpinia — Alpini-Italian botanist

Family —Zingiberaceae — Alpinia calcarata
Rosacoe, Asteraceae- Pluchea lanceolata DC.
Kula - Haridra kula — Alpinia calcarata,

Bhringaraja kula — Pluchea lanceolata

----- PAGE 566 -----
558 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Anuvasanopaga varga, Vayasthapana varga
Sushruta Arkadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Hariakyadi varga 162-164

Basonym of Drug
TTT STA HUH ATA SAM UTA THT | AST AS area MATA TAT: Seer
Rasna plant is always praised owing to its Kapha vatahara properties. This is the
best drug for Shotha (Swelling) etc. diseases.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. Terran ga AUTEM: |
Leaves of Rasna (Alpinia officinarum) resemble leaves of Cardamomum.
Properties and Actions
2. TEN-TH AY: BT TET |
The taste of Rasna is very pleasant.
3. Oem Tal-Aet Tal AEM: |
Plant has full of juices.
4. QV-Gy Wet GET AT |
The odour of Rasna is very pleasant.
5. QRal-Yy Tae: eer
The juice has good qualities.
6. Seret-srfereres werent aetareratatg ste sere |
Rasna is regarded as the best drug for Vataroga.
Other
7. Apelt-aqerrat Fa Praca, |
Rasna is liked by Mungoose.

Regional Name

English Lesser galanga
Hing [Rasen |

----- PAGE 567 -----
Rasna 559

Rasna, Chikkadumparasme

Habitat

Alpinia calcarata (South Indian Variety) grows very commonly in Karnataka, Kerala
and Andhrapradesh.

Pluchea lanceolata (North Indian Variety) grows in Punjab and states having
Gangetic plain.
Morphology
Pluchea lanceolata
Habit — An erect undershrub
Stem — Slender, terete, softly ashy pubescent
Branches — Slender, terete softly pubescent.

Leaves — Sessile, coriaceous, 2 to 7 cm long and
0.5 to 1 cm oblong or oblanceolate, obtuse, narrowed
at the base, finely ashy pubescent on both sides, entire
margin. Main nerves are prominent.

Inflorescence — Heads in compound corymb.

Involucre — Contracted at the mouth. Outer
bracts are 2 to 3 seriate, oblong, obtuse, pubescent usually tinged with purple the inner
most bracts are linear, subacute and few.

Fruit - Achene
Morphology
Alpinia calcarata
Habit — Root stock is perennial, not tuberous.
Stem — Stem is slender, 60 to 120 cm high,

Leaves ~ 15 to 30 cm long, 2.5 to 5 cm wide,
lanceolate, acuminate, green and glossy.

Inflorescence - Panicle, 7.5 to 10 cm long.

Flowers — Numerous, Calyx tube is funnel

shaped, 6 to 8 mm long, corolla segments 1-3 m long. (Rasna)
Lip is 2.5 to 4 cm long, ovate-oblong, sessile, yellow

----- PAGE 568 -----
560 Dravyaguna Vijnana

in colour, streaked with purple veins.

Fruit — Capsule, globose and red on ripening.
Varieites

Ra.Ni. — 3 types

1. Mula Rasna — Rauwolfia serpentina

2. Patra Rasna — Lochnera rosea

3. Trina Rasna — Vanda tessellata

Controversy — Rasna is one of the controversial drugs in Ayurveda. Various spe-
cies are used as Rasna.

Plant name Family |

Solanaceae

Rauwolfia serpentina Benth
: Lochnera rosea Reichb.
10. Enicostema littorale Blume

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Pluchea lanceolata —Rootis cylindrical, some what irregularly bent or twisted, root
is upto 21 cm long and 3 to 4cm in diameter. Outer surface is covered with a dark brown
thick bark having longitudinal striations and transverse cuts. The bark peels off at a num-
ber of places, exposing a fibrous, creamish tissue. On breaking becomes fibrous, has got
spicy odour and tastes bitter.

Alpinia calcarata

The rhizomes are reddish brown externally and light orange brown internally. Hav-
ing a characteristic odour, aromatic. Rhizomes are about 2 to 8 cm in length and 2 cm in
thickness. Rhizome is irregularly branched and marked with fine annulations. Rhizomes
are tough becomes fibrous on breaking.

----- PAGE 569 -----
Rasna 561

Classical references

Synonyms
WET FRAT TAT Yaar TAT TAT | Tealf ae great Bren ser aa
(arm. eerie FT 162)

Properties and Actions

Tessa fra ROT aaa | Maa ATT |

HATA AAT eraicrenreT ATE UA. SeTMe TAT 163-164)

Tet yes fereaen Rrrararet sarah, | vitae HM ITTeT UTA
(aft. Teme TT 261)

Tren free Joost arate | reba viewers core ferrsTs,

Renvtamannerartgyetentar = i (FF. atefrert 1043-10)

TEA TRA Pereat oO PTAA, | RATT STAT OTT AT
(afr. frorenfe FT 82)

TAT araerser ferrater sama | aU arerorfereersaTeT
(B.A. MTEMe TT 165)

Varieties
wen g Beer wheat yet wat Gor tar | HAT Actact AS TOT AT ALAAT I
(af. frorenfe FT 81)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Agrya Karma attributed to Rasna as per Charaka
a. Dipana b. Vatahara c. Pachana d. Shothahara
Ans: b. Vatahara
2. A chemical constituent Pluchine is present in

a. Rasona b. Rohitaka c. Rasna d. Nirgundi
Ans: c. Rasna

3. Rasna Saptaka Kwatha is indicated
a. Prishtha Shula b. Jwara c. Shotha d. Ajirna

Ans: a. Prishtha Shula

----- PAGE 570 -----
562

wm

Dravyaguna Vijnana

. Botanical name of Rasna

a. Azadirachta indica _b. Ferula foetida
c. Crocus sativus d. Pluchea lanceolata
Ans: d. Pluchea lanceolata

. Elaparni is a synonym of

a. Ela b. Sudarshana c. Rasna
Ans: c. Rasna

. Shreyasi and Sugandha are the synonyms of

a. Rasona b. Palasha c. Ela
Ans: d. Rasna

. Botanical source of South Indian Rasna

a. Amomum subulatum b. Alpinia calcarata
c. Embelia ribes d, Allium sativum
Ans: b. Alpinia calcarata

. Types of Rasna as per Raja Nighantu

a. 4 b. 5 c. 3
Ans: c. 3

2h OK A KK

d. Palandu

d. Rasna

d. 7

----- PAGE 571 -----
Chapter

Rasona

Useful part — Mula (Bulb)

Rasadt pancaka

Katu Madhura Lavana Tikta Kashaya

Guna Tikshna Snigdha, Guru, Sara
ee

Ushiia

Notes — 5 tastes are present in different parts of the plant.

Madhura rasa Bija (Seed)

itr

Karma (Action)

Rasona — Brimhana, Vrishya, Pachana, Bhagnasandhanakara, Kanthya, Balya,
Varnya, Netrya, Rasayana, Hridroga hara, Jwaraghna, Shulaghna, Vibandha hara,
Ruchikara, Gulmaghna, Kasahara, Shophahara, Arshoghna, Kushthaghna, Jantughna,
Shwasahara, Medhya, Hikkanigrahana, Mehaghna, Switranashaka.

Mahakanda — Hridrogahara, Jirnajwarahara, Snulahara, Vibandhahara,
Gulmaghna, Ruchikara, Shophaghna, Arshoghna, Kushthghna, Dipana and Jantughna.

Shweta rasona — Atibalya, Vrishya, Medhya, Swarya, Varnya, Netrya,
Bhagnasandhanakara.

Rakta rasona — Jirna jwarahara, Hridroga nashaka, Shulaghna, Vibandhahara,
Ruchikara, Sophahara, Arshoghna, Kushthaghna and Jantughna.

Agrya Karma

TY: WAAL | (BL.ES. 40)
Lashuna (Allium sativum) is best in Vaata Vyadhi.

----- PAGE 572 -----
564 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Pharmacological Actions

Carminative, Aphrodisiac, Expectorant, Stimulant, Disinfectant, Anthelmintic and
Rubefacient.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka, Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka because
of Ushna virya and Katu vipaka.

Regaghuata (Therapeutic indications)

Rasona—Karshya, Klaibya, Agnimandya, Bhagna, Dourbalya, Varnya, Netra roga,
Hridroga, Jwara, Kukshi Shula, Aruchi, Vibandha, Gulma, Kasa, Shwasa, Shopha,
Arshas, Kushtha, Jantuvikara, Hikka and Shwitra.

Mahakanda — Hridroga, Jirnajwara, Shula, Vibandha, Gulma, Aruchi, Shopha,
Arshas, Kushtha, Agnimandya and Jantuvikara.

Shweta rasona —Dourbalya, Klaibya, Swarabheda, Vaivarnya, Netra vikara and
Bhagna.

Rakta rasona—Jirna jwara, Hridroga, Shula, Vibandha, Aruchi, Shopha, Arshas,
Kushtha and Jantu.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatvyadhi (Disorders of Vata)

TEACH: TANT | (MI. 2/5/7)

The paste of Rasona (Allium sativum) is mixed with Tila taila (Oil of Sesamum
indicum) is very useful in all kinds of Vatavyadhi.
2. Amavata (Rhumatoid arthritis)

vata fea Prfostecrerarerteer: Prete (.5.Fe. 26/39)

Decoction of Rasona (Allium sativum), Vishwa (Zingiber officinalis) and Nirgundi
(Vitex negundo) is efficacious in Amavata.
3. Vishama jwara (Malarial fever)

TST HAT WIT TATA | (*FH. 3/304)

Rasona (Allium sativum) mixed with oil should be taken internally before having
food.

Matra (Dosage)
Swarasa (Juice) — 10 to 20 ml
Kalka(Paste) -—2to5g

----- PAGE 573 -----
Rasona 565

Phytoconstituents

Garlic bulbs contain 29% of Carbohydrates, 56% of protiens (Albumin), 0.1% of
fat, Mucilage, 0.1% of volatile oil. It also contains phosphorus, iron and copper. Volatile
oil contains allyl propyl disulphide, diallyl disulphide, alliin and alliun.

Research corner

1. Garlic (Allium sativum) products tested against a major aquarium pathogen,
Gyrodactylus turnbulli, infecting the guppy (Poecilia reticulata). All garlic
products significatly reduced parasite mean survival time in vitro, from 13h to
<ih. In fully randomised trials, the number of parasites was also significantly
reduced on infected fish exposed to garlic from different sources. Schelkle B,
Snellgrove D, Cable J. In vitro and in vivo efficacy of garlic compounds
against Gyrodactylus turnbulli infecting the guppy (Poecilia reticulate). Vet
Parasitol. 2013 Sep 6. pii: S0304-4017(13)00490-1. doi: 10.1016/j
vetpar.2013.08.027.

2. This study was aimed to find out whether garlic preparation (Allium sativum L)
has ameliorative effects on gentamicin nephrotoxicity. Serum creatinine and
BUN levels were significantly high in the gentamicin group (Group 2) after the
experiment. However, the levels of these parameters in group 3 (co-treatment
with gentamicin and garlic) were significantly lower than those in group 2.
Garlic has regenerative potential after tubular injury induced by gentamicin in
animal models. Nasri H, Nematbakhsh M, Rafieian-Kopaei M. Ethanolic
Extract of Garlic for Attenutation of Gentamicin-induced Nephrotoxicity in
Wistar Rats. Iran J Kidney Dis. 2013 Sep; 7(5):376-82.

3. The present study evaluated the effects of garlic on blood pressure in patients
with essential hypertension. Patients (n=210) with stage 1 essential
hypertension were divided into 7 groups named as A, B, C, D, E, F and G.
Each group comprised of 30 patients. Each patient in group A, B, C, D and
E has received garlic tablets at the dose of 300/mg. 600/mg, 900/mg, 1200/mg
and 1500/mg in divided doses per day respectively for 24 weeks while group
F & group G were given tablet atenolol and placebo respectively. Blood
pressure readings were recorded at weeks 0, 12 and 24. Present study showed
significant decrease in both Systolic and Diastolic blood pressure in both dose
and duration dependent manner. In each garlic treated group, significant
reduction in SBP and DBP (pé&lt; 0.005) were observed when compared with
atenolol (p&lt;0.005) and placebo. Ashraf R, Khan RA, Ashraf I,Qureshi AA.
Effects of Allium sativum (Garlic) on systolic and diastolic blood pressure in

----- PAGE 574 -----
566 Dravyaguna Vijnana

patients with essential hypertension. Pak J. Pharm Sci. 2013 Sep;26(5):859-63.

4. The objective of this in vitro study was to assess the antibacterial effect of
different concentrations of garlic extract against human dental plaque
microbiota. All bacterial strains were inhibited by all test materials. The
inhibitions zones of the different concentrations of garlic extract were not
significantly different for S. mutans, S. sanguis, and S. Salivarious. For P,
aeruginosa and lactobacillus spp. the inhibition zones of 5%, 10% and 20%
concentrations were not significantly different from one another, but they were
significantly more than that of the 100% extract. Houshmand B, Mahjor F,
Dianat O. Antibacterial effect of different concentrations of garlic (Allium
sativum) extract on dental plaque bacteria. Indian J Dent Res. 2013 Jan-Feb;
24(1):71-5. doi; doi;10.4103/0970-9290.114957.

Yoga (Formulations)

Name of Yoga Indications

Lashunadya ghrita Arshas, Unmada
: Lashunadya taila Badhirya

Jwara, Vataroga
Gulma, Anaha

Lashuna kshira Udavarta, Gridhrasi

Botanical name — Allium sativum Linn.
Allium — Garlic
sativum — Cultivated
Family — Amaryllidaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Rasona kula
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Haritakyadi varga 217-223

Basonym of Drug
Tear sft |
atrar weefeat Tees ate: |

----- PAGE 575 -----
Rasona 567

Rasona (Allium sativum) is named because it is deficient with one Rasa i.e. Amla
(Sour).
Synonyms
Properties and Actions
1. SRR: - Sredtent ws |
The odour of Rasona is very potent.
2. verde: oft adaft gfe sitererc |
Rasona alleviates cold because of its hot potency.
3. AYA SVGd caratfer gee eaatefaTre er
Rasona spreads all over the body because of its potency.
4. Yee ae eather |

Rasona alleviates evil spirits.

5. AWUA- Hevea sive, siteety Wea |

Rasona is very useful medicinces and used in many diseaes.

6. afte:- aReaep ATT |

Rasona, if it is used, will be beneficial.

Others :
7. TaAS:- TEATS: , ARAL |
Rasona is liked by foreigners.
8. eeer:- Wee fra: Gee: A WaT I
Liked by Mlecha as it is used to prepared dishes.
Regional Names

----- PAGE 576 -----
568 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Habitat
Rasona (Garlic) is cultivated throughout India.

Morphology

Erect herb, usually grown as an annual from small
bulbs (Cloves), up to 150 cm tall. Real stem is very
short, formed at the base of the plant in the form of a
disk, with adventitous roots at the base, bulb is soli-
tary, depressed globose to ovoid, upto 7 cm in diam-
eter, whitish, composed of 7 to 15 sessile cloves, each
clove consisting of a protective sheath a single thick-
ened storage leaf sheath and a small central bud,
pseudo stem formed by sheathing bases of successive
leaves.

Leaves—4 to 10, distichously alternate, glabrous,
with tubular sheath, blade is linear oblong, upto 30
cm long and 2.5 cm wide, nearly flat, V-shaped in
cross-section, acute at apex, smooth or crenulate at margins.

Inflorescence — Spherical umbel upto 2.5 cm diameter, on a solid scape up to 150
cm long. Umbels composed of flower and bulbils, initially surrounded by a mebranous
spathe.

Allium sativum Linn (Rasona)

Flowers — Usually poorly developed or absent, pedicels are slender, upto 1.5 cm
long, tepals are 6 in number and 2 whorls, free, lanceolate, upto 3 mm long, greenish
white or pale pink, stamens are six usually rudimentary, ovary is superior.

Fruit —Js abortive and seedless.
Varieti

Dh.Ni. - 1. Rasona - Allium sativum Linn.

2. Mahakanda - Allium asacalonicum Linn.
Ra.Ni- 4 types
1. Rasona 2. Shweta rasona 3.Granjana 4, Rakta rasona

Hitahara (Conducive) during Lashuna Sevana

Madya (Alcohol), Mamsa (Meat) and Amla dravyas (Sour substances).
Ahita (Non conducive) during Lashuna sevana

Vyayama (Excercise), Atapa (Sunrays), Atinira (Excess water), Paya (Milk) and
Guda (Jaggery).

----- PAGE 577 -----
Rasona 569

Substitute

Allium ampeloprasma Linn.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Bulb is sub-globular, upto 6 cm in diameter, consisting of 8 to 20, ovoid, 3 to 4 sided
cloves which are attached to flattened circular woody axis, the axis has numerous thin
wiry roots on the underside; each clove is surrounded by papery scale leaves of white or
pinkish white colour. It has got very strong odour and tastes pungent.

Classical references

Synonyms

AUR WH: Sige veer | ake wrens saet tars: Il
(5. eerrahe at 217)
aya

AaSHet Sata HA GAT, | dal TetsuAg ferg: B Tatswag ye

(ara. eiaaate TT 218)
Tas Prefta-
wahtar weet Wares afta: | ceRaT sepa RETO ToTafahA:
(a5. Staats FT 219)
TRAM TYA-

acnatt yg: wy aaa: | at Hare ShegSt ATT Ha: TA:
aft g Far: viet taeaguraerr: u (ara. etree et 220)
Properties and Actions

Tat Seutt ger: eave: Urea: AE: TS Us ae genet weeAl Aa:
TEI Gears Je: rare sega: | aerate Renfeet Aart ares: Ul

wam whi ofieer fraenqerehrearasiar |

qin aeremergqeiko = areata I

AS. RTA FT 221-223

waa-

Tat sor: Hefaheos Rare To: Tagen stkeraea: |

gas teen autagedutederar: ydte: u
(af. arathrfe at 62)

----- PAGE 578 -----
570 Dravyaguna Vijnana

ARTS
wr ofthe | pfhtyrertarenqenrafagreaeirar |
Singermann eet Here:
(afi. axahofe at 63)
PAYA: HTH: UG WH feet TH: AE: | alate weet qeat eet Fer ara:
fran sertenitt autehgr erat, | EET Fee HATTA

Raararasatore qsderdttary | frergiqenestryyeryirary, Tare
(df. ata of 1219-1221)

wr ,
TASHA: CAL, TROT: HHATATT | STeReraHEReT VET TAT:
(aA. ara PT so)
ga Waa-
wast sor: Blakes Rare Te: Tages atferarcs: |
qs 8 aearantaguankerrenrat: «= -Oeitent: 1
(uP. qerafe at 51)
Wea-
Wt aac ATeTeafeght =a |
alle a fe get wana aah
(aA. aerate at 53)
Tata-
war sfvisear aftxget frerenqearefr sega t
ain getter aearmar ata were: ui
(aft. Ferme FF 54)

Brit Wines erdisepors tenn: | aagatcet: Rerrearct Get TAA:
areentirg yrery atearel feat car cat: rere aah: eioneg Pare
THAT Tereahir water area | HN HLA MEAP Tae ara Ta Ul
ut arentset uRexte yor fatter erat Wry atten gia Tart feerara:
(B.A. magene at 25-27)
agra ater fea-
ae aie comers eyerery, | (rT. era aT 225)

----- PAGE 579 -----
Rasona 57)

AYA feat sthea-
aramarad went wat qeq | tar gerteniear, Prana

—

i)

oo

(ars, etree at 225)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Rasona

a. Stem b. Bulb c. Leaf d. Flower
Ans: b. Bulb

. The taste which is absent in Rasona

a. Madhura b. Katu c. Amla d. Lavana
Ans: c. Amla

. The paste of Rasona (Allium sativum) is mixed with Tila taila (Oil of Sesamum

indicum) is very useful in
a. Ajirna b. Vatavyadhi c. Kushtha d. Arshas

Ans: b. Vatavyadhi

_ Decoction of Rasona (Allium sativum), Vishwa (Zingiber officinalis) and

Nirgundi (Vitex negundo) is efficacious in
a. Amavata b. Raktapitta c. Arshas d. Kushtha
Ans: a. Amavata

. Lashunadya Taila is specifically indicated in

a. Padashula b. Vaivarnya c. Anidra d. Badhirya
Ans: d. Badhirya

. Botanical name of Rasona

a. Allium cepa b. Allium sativum
c. Pluchea lanceolata dd. Aquillaria agallocha
Ans: b. Allium sativum

. Yavaneshta is a synonym of

a. Jiraka b. Dhanyaka c. Lashuna d. Pippali
Ans: c. Lashuna

. Habit of Rasona plant

a. Herb b. Shrub c. Creeper d. Tree
Ans: a. Herb

RR

----- PAGE 580 -----
Chapter

Saireyaka

Useful parts — Panchanga (Whole herb) & Mula (Root)
Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)

Pita saireyaka — Kushthaghna, Kandughna, Vishaghna, Kesharanjaka, Shophahara,
Trishnahara, Dahahara, Dipana, Twakdoshanashaka.

Rakta saireyaka— Shophanashaka, Jwarahara, Shulaghna, Kasahara, Shwasahara,
Varnya.

Nila saireyaka — Shulahara, Kandughna, Kushthaghna, Vranahara, Sophanashaka,
Twakdoshahara.

Shweta saireyaka — Dantamayahara, Shulaghna, Shophanashaka, Kasahara,
Twakdoshahara.
Pharmacological Actions

Antiinflammatory, Expectorant, Analgesic, Antipyretic.

Doshakarma

Vata kapha Shamaka, Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Kapha Shamaka because
of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Pita saireyaka— Kushtha, Kandu, Visha, Twakdosha, Shopha, Keshavikara, Dipana,
Trishna and Daha.

Rakta saireyaka — Shopha, Jwara, Shula, Kasa, Shwasa and Vaivarnya.
Nila saireyaka — Kushtha, Shula, Kandu, Shopha, Vrana and Twak vikara.
Shweta saireyaka — Danta roga, Shula, Shopha, Kasa and Twak dosha.

----- PAGE 581 -----
Saireyaka 573

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vatarakta (Gout)
(a.¢fa. 22/33)

Roots of Saireyaka (Balrleria prionitis) and Jivanti (Leptadenia reticulata) is pounded
with Goat’s milk then mixed with ghee and applied as a paste.

2. afar fis (Rat poison)
Setar aot Vals TSH | (3.7.5. 38/30)

Root of Saireyaka (Barleria prionitis) is powdered and mixed with honey, then
given with Tandulodaka (Rice water).

3. Sidhma
AirgruearreReres tamtrage: | era Aetenctst: fiber eres UI
(4%. 50/31)

In case of Sidhma first one should apply paste of Bana (Barleria strigosa) on the
lession, followed by application of paste of seeds of Mulaka (Raphanus sativus).

Matra (Dosage)
Kwatha (Decoction) -—50to 100ml
Swarasa (Juice) -10to 20 ml

Botanical name —Barleria prionitis Linn.

Barleria — named after Rev. J. Barrelier of Paris

prionitis — Saw like

Family — Acanthaceae (Refer Appendix-II for Key features)

Kula - Vasa kula
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Aragwadhadi Gana, Varunadi Gana, Veeratarvadi Gana, Kantaka

Panchamula
Bh.Pr.Ni Pushpa varga 51-53
Basonym of Drug

SR Yatra srecoreest ath west archer: |

----- PAGE 582 -----
574 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Tat ets Bay Bey arrears UI
Saireyaka (Barleria prionitis Linn.) grows in temperate conditions. Its flowers shine
like sun,
Synonyms
Habitat
1. BR-TE Ale seer
Saireyaka grows in groups.
Morphology
2. Heaa-Hlera: Fag G: ed: areftt sea Fhe | TPTAAT CATT |
Saireyaka flowers have less quantity of nectar, so few honey bees will visit
flowers.

Properties and Actions

3, arel-aead arya Hartera Het S sa: ste |

Saireyaka is very useful drug in Kusta etc. diseases.

Others
4, BT: aoa Very ashes a art BAA: ste

Saireyaka flowers are beautiful hence described by many poets.

Regional Names

English Yellow Hedge Barleria, Porcupine flower

Habitat
Saireyaka grows in hilly areas of Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamilnadu and Punjab.

Morphology
Habit - A wild prickly shrub
Root — Branched tap root

----- PAGE 583 -----
Saireyaka x15

Stem — Acrial, woody, erect, cylindrical, solid,
ridged and furrowed, branched, green and glabrous.

Leaf - Simple, opposite, decussate, petiolate,
stipulate, lanceolate, entire margin, acuminate apex,
venation is unicostate reticulate venation.

Inflorescence - Terminal spike, dichasial cyme
in lower region.

Flower — Bracteate, barcteolate (Bracteoles are
six in number 2 larger and 4 smaller) sessile, bisexual,
zygomorphic, hypogynous, complete, sepals are 4 in
number, polysepalous, in two whorls of 2 each, pet-
als are 5 in number, gamopetalous, cranny yellow,
bilabiate having 4 petals in upper lip and one petal in lower lip. Stamens are 4 in number,
polyandrous, Gynoecium is bicarpellary syncarpous, ovary is superior.

Barleria prionitis Linn (Saireyaka)

Fruit - A capsule with two chambers, dehiscing elastically by 2 values.
Seed — Non-endospermic with hooked jaculators.

Varieties
Ra.Ni & Bh. Pr. Ni. — 4 types

1. Aadtas - Barleria cristata Linn
2. tha ata - Barleria prionitis Linn
3. Wh aae - Barleria cristata Linn
4. ate ae - Barleria strigosa Willd
Ka.Dh. Ni. - 3 types

1. Waas - Barleria cristata Linn
2. tiaetas - Barleria prionitis Linn
3. ata das - Barleria strigosa Linn

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Market sample consists of highly spinerscent, dry herb, consisting of branched, cy-
lindrical root; stem pieces of greyish brown colour having longitudinally arranged tiny
warts on the surface and ellipitc lanceolate, acuminate leaves, 3 to 4 cm long and upto 2
cm broad. It also contains dried flowers with dusty yellow petals and capsular fruits. The
leaves are clustered in whorls at nodes which also bear sharp straight interpetiolar spines
of white colour. Has got faint and disagreable odour. It tastes bitter.

----- PAGE 584 -----
576 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Classical references

Synonyms

da Vas -

faa: gage: Wa: aeatar | were: Wee: a a firatt Heat

tha Sears - Hevecntsate......

Th RAG - WIRTH FT Ih: Ae: |

sta Rew - Ate avon getreret aret ereiretara: (ALF. Gat 51-52)
Properties and Actions

ea: Hears atnenvyg ferarag: | ferratont Heist: YR: ceeNSA:

(AL. Fret 53)

qrucat Rattan: Magnet | aerat Gets geass Prete waa Aa:
(af. TeeMe FT 269)

@tat ay: feraferator: Sees: | eval aera ERIS Ta
(af. atsft af 1050)
th Was-

SO BS: FLAY AAA HAT SAT | STATS TTA META TTT:
(aA. archaea 131)

Uta ataaH-

fafa: woreiren Rarcasy aan | Stas: MRIS THAT:
(aft. arte af 133)

diet Raa-

ardent cag ferent GHMATEd VIL | HIGHS VrEaaeaTT
(a. arctae af 135)
Xa as -
faftcer: aaeerftercat aaier yiiitetsr eter: |
ATAH HM Ha TaT feraTet warhtva:
(aft. are af 138)

Rasen: war Heer: set Tet: 1 (LA. Tae af 69)

----- PAGE 585 -----
_

bad

Nn

lon

~“

go

Saireyaka 577

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. As per Sushruta Saireyaka is included in

a. Trina Panchamula _b. Kantaka Panchamula
c. Laghu Panchamula_ d. Brahat Panchamula
Ans: b. Kantaka Panchamula

. Roots of Saireyaka (Balrleria prionitis) and Jivanti (Leptadenia reticulata) is

pounded with Goat’s milk then mixed with ghee and applied as a paste in
a. Vatarakta b. Sandhishula b. Kushta d. daha
Ans: a. Vatarakta

Botanical name of Saireyaka

a. Albizia lebbeck b. Berberis arstata

c. Barleria prionitis d. Hemidesmus indicus

Ans: c. Barleria prionitis

. Sahachara is a synonym of

a. Ativisha b. Saireyaka c. Dadima d. Bhringaraja
Ans: b. Saireyaka

. Dasi is a synonym of

a. Dhanvayasa b. Daruharidra c. Devadaru d. Saireyaka
Ans: d. Saireyaka

. Bana is a synonym of

a. Saireyaka b. Ushira c. Kantakari d. Jatamansi
Ans: a. Saireyaka

. Habit of Saireyaka is
a. Herb b. Prickly Shrub _c. Tree d. Creeper

Ans: b. Prickly Shrub

Types of Saireyaka as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu

a. 5 b. 3 c. 4 d. 2
Ans: c. 4

ERK

----- PAGE 586 -----
Chapter

Sarpagandha

Useful part — Mula (Root)
Rasadi pancaka

Karma (Actions)

Nidrakara, Vedanasthapana, Vishaghna, Jwaraghna, Krimighna, Vranahara,
Unmadahara.
Gandhanakuli (Sarpakshi)

Krimighna, Vishaghna and Vrana ropaka.
Pharmacological Actions

Antihypertensive, Tranquillizer, Febrifuge, Bitter tonic and Sedative.
Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)

Vata kapha Shamaka, Vatahara due to Ushna virya. Kapha Shamaka because of
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)
Raktabharadhikya, Nidranasha, Vedanayukta vikara, Visha vikara, Jwara, Krimi,
Vrana and Unmada.
Gandha Nakuli
Krimi, Vishavikara and Vrana
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Raktachapa (Hypertension)
Powder of Sarpagandha (Rauwolfia serpentina) to be given in the quantity of 125
mg to 1 g in case of Raktachapa (Hypertension).
2. Sarpa visha (Snake bite)

In Sarpa visha (Snake bite) 1 to 2 Tola (10 to 20 g) of powder of Sarpagandha
(Rauwolfia serpentina) is triturated with water and administered.

----- PAGE 587 -----
Sarpagandha 579

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) ~ 125 mg to 1 g

Phytoconstituents — About 30 indole alkaloids have been reported in drug and total
alkaloidal content of rauwolfia roots ranges from 0.7 to 3% depending upon the source.
The important alkaloid is reserpine. Apart from the alkaloids it also contains oleo-resin,
phytosterol, fatty acids, alcohol and sugars. The other alkaloids present in the drug are
ajmaline, Ajmalicine, Rauwolfinine, Reserpine, Yohimbine, Serpertine and serpentine.

Research corner

1.

S

Le)

4,

To evaluate the ant diarrheal property of methanol extract of the leaves of
Rauwolfia serpentina (R. Serpentina) in experimental diarrhoea induced by
castor oil in mice. All doses of the extract and the reference drug atropine
sulphate (3 mg./kg, i.p.) produced a dose-dependent reduction in intestinal
weight and fluid volume. The extracts also significantly reduced the intestinal
transit in charcoal meal test when compared to diphenoxylate Hel (5 mg/kg, p/
o/). Ezeigbo 1, Ezeja M, Madubuike K, Ifenkwe D, Ukweni la, Udeh N,
Akomas S. Antidiarrhoeal activity of leaf methanolic extract of Rauwolfia
serpentina. Asian Pac J. Trip Biomed. 2012 Jun; 2(6):430-2. doi: 10.1016/
$2221-1691 (12)60070-7.

The aim of the study was to evaluate the phytochemistry and the effect of
methanolic root extract (MREt) of Rauwolfia serpentina on alloxan-induced
diabetic Wister male mice. MREt found effective in improving the body
weights, glucose and insulin levels, insulin/glucose ratio, glycosylated and total
hemoglobin in test groups as compared to diabetic control. Azmi MB, Qureshi
SA. Methanolic Root Extract of Rauwolfia serpentina Benth improves the
Glycemic, Antiatherogenic and Cardioprotective indices in Alloxan-Induced
Diabetic Mice. Adv Pharmacal Sci. 2012; 2012:376429. doi: 10.1155/2012/
376429. Epub 2012 Dec 18.

. From the dried roots of Rauwolfia serpentina were isolated five new indole

alkaloids, N(b)-methylajmaline (1), N(b)-methylisoajmaline (2), 3-
hydroxysarpagine (3), Yohimbinic acid (4), Isorauhimbinic acid (5), A new
iridoid glucoside, 7-epiloganin (6), and a new sucrose derivative, 6'-0-(3,4,5-
trimethoxybenzoyl) glomeratose A (7), together with 20 known compounds.
Itoh A, Kumashiro T, Yamaguchi M, Nagakura N, Mizushina Y, Nishi T,
Tanahashi T. Indole alkaloids and other constituents of Rauwolfia serpentina.
J Nat Prod. 2005 Jun; 68(6):848-52.

Three new monoterpenoid indole alkaloids, 19(S),20(R)-dihydroperaksine (1),

----- PAGE 588 -----
580 Dravyaguna Vijnana

19(S),20(R)-dihydroperaksine-17-al (2), and 10-hydroxy-19(S),20(R)-dihydro-
peraksine (3), along with 16 known alkaloids 4-19 were isolated from hairy
root culture of Rauwolfia serpentina, and their structures were elucidated by 1D
and 2D NMR analyses. Sheludko Y, Gerasimenko J, Kolshorn H, Stockigt J.
New alkaloids of the sarpagine group from Rauwolfia serpentina hairy root
culture. J Nat Prod. 2002 Jul; 65 (7):1006-10.

5. The conventional experimental techniques showed that ajmaline derived from
Rauwolfia serpentina Benth. biomass grown in tissue culture was effective in
attesting canine ventricular arrhythmias induced by coronary occlusion,
strophanthin and epinephrine, displaying antiarrhythmic effects in aconitine
induced intoxication of rats and substantially elevating the threshold of
venticular fibrillations in cats. Kostin laV, Tsybusov AP, Minina SA,
Kuznetsova VA, Borodulina MV, Balashov VP. Antiarrhythmic activity of
ajmaline obtained from Rauwolfia serpentina biomass grown in tissue culture.
Kardiologiia. 1990 Aug:30(8):72-4.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No: Name of Yoga Indications

2.
Botanical Name — Rauwolfia serpentina Benth.
Rauwolfia — Leonard Rauwolf-Name of a physician at Augsberg (Bararia).
serpentina — Pertaining to serpents
Family — Apocynaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Kutaja
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga
Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Haritakyadi varga 165-166
Basonym of Drug
wary wreereter area ster

Because of the strong odour of Sarpagandha (Rauwolfia serpentina) the snakes
won’t stay near the plant and it acts as antidote for snake venom.

----- PAGE 589 -----
Sarpagandha 581

Synonyms

Properties and Actions

1. TRATHell-Wey TH ATHelt | ATaelt Aeperst Reet Ate aT |

Sarpagandha has got similar odour to [wari (Aristolochia indica) and the
plant has got great potency to pacify cobra’s venom like that of Mon-
goose.

2. waar: aaa: mea rrant arerchiher
Sarpangandha is very useful drug in mental disorders.
3. fasndst-fad acacia |
Sarpagandha acts as an antidote to poison.

Regional Names

Habitat

Sarpagandha grows all over India, especially
in Bihar, West Bengal, Deccan states and Uttar
Pradesh.

Morphology

Habitat - Small erect shrub grows upto 90 cm
high.

Bark — Pale

Leaves — 3 Leaves in one whorl, 7.5 to 18 cm
long, 2.5 to 6 cm wide, lanceolate, acute or acumi-
nate, glabrous bright green above, pale beneath, base
is tapering, main nerves are 8 to 10 pairs, and petiole is 8 mm long.

Rouwolfia serpentina Benth Kurz

Inflorescence — Many flowered, irregular corymbose cyme.

Flower ~ White, 3 to 6 mm long, bright red, bracts beneath the pedicels triangular,
acute, Calyx is glabrous, bright red, Corolla 1 to 15 cm long, tube is slender.

----- PAGE 590 -----
582 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fruit - Drupes, Single, 6 mm in diameter, becomes purplish black when ripe.

Varieties
Dh. Ni -2 Types
1. Nakuli — Rauwolfia serpentina Benthex Kurz.
2. Gandhanakuli — Ophiorhiza mungos Linn.
Ra. Ni — 2 types
1. Nakuli 2. Mahasugandha
Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics):

Root is stout, cylindrical, somewhat crooked, up to 20 cm long and 1.8 cm in diam-
eter the external surface is rough, longitudinally fissured and yellowish brown in colour.
It bears occasional root scars. In older roots the bark becomes thick, corky and friable and
constitutes a substantial part of the root. Transversely cut surface shows a thick bark
enclosing a brownish tissue having prominent growth rings and medullary rays. On break-
ing root become short pieces and taste very bitter.

Classical references
Synonyms
aTacht Get aren Wee | Heer ASTETalt watt ferrari
(aa. eireraie a. 165)
Properties and Actions
Areett get fret mento rasa | aPreeTarangeaaHitanrsy |
(a1. Riterae TT. 166)
ATeaeh mew earkrearste aRantian afters fers shat Hitrate erat
(aA. aedrae af. 92)
Tere (-aatat )-
aatatt meer freer aan a aire | abrarge aaifeterreht aorraatt 1
(af. archaea &t 94)

ape Hefterra Harare Prereate | aur adeperghrenregrerst WT, Mt
(Sf. aiteftrert 777)

aitrenstthream ar Pome | eet yematianent cradkory ul
(B.A. mageniert 164)

----- PAGE 591 -----
Sarpagandha 583
arepeftgaret ferris argu a retain | are feraftrecife Renfree fetter
(a.FA. Here TT 96)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Sarpagandha is

a. Kanda b. Mula c. Bija d. Phala
Ans: b. Mula
2. Pradhana Rasa of Sarpagandha
a. Tikta b. Kashaya c. Madhura d. Katu
Ans: a. Tikta
3. Pradhana Karma of Sarpagandha
a. Balya b. Vrashya c. Nidrakara  d, Kushthaghna

Ans: c. Nidrakara
4. Important Pharmacological action of Sarpagandha
a. Diuretic b. Analgesic
c. Antidiabetic d. Antihypertensive
Ans: d. Antihypertensive
5. Main indication of Sarpagandha
a. Madhumeha b. Sthaulya c. Raktabharadhikya d. Kushtha
Ans: c. Raktabharadhikya
6. Reserpine is present in
a. Rasna b. Sarpagandha cc. Eranda = d. Ashwagandha
Ans: b. Sarpagandha
7. Botanical name of Sarpagandha
a. Withania somnifera b. Gymnema sylvestre
c. Rauwolfia serpentina d. Azadirachta indica
Ans: c. Rauwolfia serpentina
8. Chandramara and Gandha nakuli are the synonyms of
a. Sarpagandha b. Ikshu b. Dhamargava_ d. Kutaja
Ans: a. Sarpagandha

KAKEK

----- PAGE 592 -----
Karma (Actions)

Shukravardhaka, Ruchikara, Vishaghna, Shwasahara, Kasahara, Raktapradara
nashaka, Jwaraghna, Kushthaghna, Kandughna, Mehahara, Dourgandhyanashaka,
Trishnahara, Raktapittahara, Raktashodhaka, Balya, Sangrahi & Dipana.

Agrya Karma

SAAT AM SHH | (FY, 25/40)

Ananta (Hemidesmus indicus R. B.) is Astringent and useful in Raktapitta (Bleed-
ing disorder).
Pharmacological Actions

Alterative, Tonic, Demulcent, Diaphoretic and Diuretic.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vatahara because of Madhura vipaka. Pitta Shamaka because
of Shita virya, Madhura vipaka and Tikta Madhura rasa. Kaphahara due to Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Raktavikara, Kushtha, Kandu, Shukradourbalya, Aruchi, Vishavikara, Shwasa,
Kasa, Jwara, Meha, Dourgandhya, Trishna, Daha, Raktapitta, Atisara and Agnimandya.

Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kushtha (Skin disease)

(afa. 7/128)
Drugs like Vasa (Adhatoda vasica), Amalaki (Emblica oficinalis), Haritaki

----- PAGE 593 -----
Sariva 585

(Terminalia chebula), Vibhitaki (Terminalia belerica), Brahati (Solanum indicum), Sevya
(Vetiveria zizaoides), Patola (Tricosanthes dioica) Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus) and
Katuki (Picrorrhiza kurroa) are used for drinking, bathing and for application in combi-
nation or individually.

2. Visarpa (Erysipelas)
Terhraaeteart wetter | aRarreraeegetrat at ferarerr:
eae waa Sar: Rear Shadarerary Ut (aA. 21/54)

Decoction of Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus), Amalaki (Emblica officinalis), Ushira
(Vetivera zizanoides) and Musta (Cyperus rotundus) is very useful in all kinds of Visarpa
(Erysipelas).

Matra (Dosage)

Phanta (Hotinfusion) — 50 to 100 ml
Kwatha (Decoction) - 50 to 100 ml
Phytoconstituents

Hemidesmus indicus— Roots contain essential oil which possess 2-hydroxy
benzaldehye, 4-methoxybenzaldehyde, sterols, saponin, resinic acid, tannins, B-sitosterol,
a. and B-amyrins, lupeol, tetracyclic triterpene alcohols, fatty acids, glycoside and ketone.
It also contains Coumarin (Principle which gives Aroma and taste) volatile oil, hemidesmine
and smilasperic acid.

Ichnocarpus frutescens — Apigenin, Luteolin, Glyco-flavones, Leucoanthocyanins,
Vanillic acid, Syringic acid and Sinapic acid.

Research corner

1. The present study was designed to investigate the protective effect of Hl
aqueous extract against bromoben-zene induced mitochondrial dysfunction in
rat kidneys. Prior administration of HI extract showed a significant protection
against bromobenzen induced changes in the kidney and this effect is attributed
to the antioxidant and free radical scavenging potential of the Hl. The
protection was much better with HI compared to vitamin E. Ramakrishna V,
Gopi S, Setty OH, Protective effect of Hemidesmus indicus L. R. Br. against
bromobenzene-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in rat kidney. Am J Chin
Med. 2012;40(3):560-80.

2. From the roots of Hemidesmus indicus, one new condensed phenylpropanoid
A-C, were isolated along with one known related compound, plocoside A.
Zhao Z, Matsunami K, Otsuka H, Negi N, Kumar A, Negi DS. A condenced

----- PAGE 594 -----
586 Dravyaguna Vijnana

phyenylpropanoid glucoside and pregnane saponins from the roots oj
Hemidesmus indicus. J Nat Med. 2013 Jan; 67(1):137-42. doi: 10.1007/;
11418-012-0659. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

3. To investigate the protective effects of hydroalcoholic and its fractions from
roots of Hemidesmus indicus on arthritis in vitro models of rodents,
Hydroalcoholic extract and its ethyl acetate fraction of Hemidesmus indicus
showed significantly higher anti-arthritic activity than chloroform and residual
fraction. Histopathological analysis demonstrate that both of hydroalchoholic
extract and its ethyl acetate fraction had comparable antiarthritic activity with
methotrexates. The present study suggests that Hemidesmus indicus has
protective activity against arthritis and the activity might be attributed to
protective activity against arthritis and the activity might be attributed to
presence of terpenoid in hydroalcoholic extract, as well as in ethyl acetate
fraction. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2012 Feb; 5(2):1305. doi: 10.1016/S1995-
7645(12)60011-X. Anti-arthritis activity of roots of Hemidesmus indicus R.Br.
(Anantmul) in rats. Mehta A, Sethiya NK, Mehta C, Shah GB.

4. The genotoxic and antigenotoxic potential of the ethanolic extract of
Hemidesmus indicus roots were evaluated in culturaed human lymphocytes
using cisplatin as the po9stive mutagen. Hemidesmus indicus root extract
possesses sigfnificant genoprotective effet as the lower concentraions although
it is cytotoxic and probably genotoxic at higher doses. Ananthi R, Chandra N,
Santhiya ST, Ramesh A. Genotoxic and antigenotoxic effects of Hemidesmus
indicus R. Br. root extract in cultured lymphocytes. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2010
Feb 3:127(2):558-60. doi: 10.1016/j. jep. 2009.10.034. Epub 2009 Nov 5.

5. Data indicate that treatment with H. Indicus extract offers protection against
free radical-mediated oxidative stress in plasma, erythrocytes, and liver of
animals with ethanol-induced liver injury. Saravanan N, Nalini N. Antioxidant
effect of Hemidesmus indicus on ethanol-induced hepatotoxicity in rats. J. Med
Food. 2007 Dec; 10(4):675-82.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name of Yoga Indications

Sarivadi vati Karna vikara, Prameha
Sarivadi louha Pramehapidaka, Vatarakta

----- PAGE 595 -----
Sariva 587

Sarivadi kashaya Daha, Raktapitta
= Pinda taila Vataratka, Ruja

Botanical Name — Shweta sariva — Hemidesmus indicus R.Br.

Hemidesmus — Half bond, so named in allusion to the subconnate filaments at their
base-joint pods and connected stamens.

indicus — of India
Family — Apocynaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Arka Kula

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Jwarahara varga, Varnya varga, Dahaprashamana varga, Kanthya
varga, Stanyashodhana varga, Purisha sangrahaniya varga

Sushruta Sarivadi gana, Vidarigandhadi gana, Vallipancamula
Bh.Pr.Ni | Guduchyadi varga 236-238
Basonym of Drug
PUR: WARUTATETEAT: |
Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus) is a twinner spreads on the ground.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. We Preat- WATT SHTET: |
Sariva is twinner
2. SAM-T SANS: TYTTATS |
Sariva spreads extenesively on the ground.
3. Qubengen-girenerreM: |
Root of Sariva has got good Aroma.
4. ydt-wrefe year |
Sariva blossom in Sharad ritu (autumn season)
5. Balet-entena ferdteia Terre: |

Fruits of Sariva are dehiscent in nature.

----- PAGE 596 -----
588 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Properties and Actions

6. MHA MATA Hale TAT |
The plant may be protected because of its useful medicinal properties.

7, Weay:- Wort aya weartatt |
Sariva plant may be preserved at houses owing to its best medicinal prop-
erties.

8. Teh sirereter terchther
Sariva protects the person who uses it.

9. Mraeeh-omt aech tormenta: |

Sariva is very useful medicine in many diseases.

Regional Names

Indian Sarsaparilla

Malayalam
Marat

Habitat
Sariva grows all over India, especially in Karnataka, Kerala, Bihar, West Bengal
and Maharashtra.
Morphology
Hemidesmus indicus R.BrMorphology

Habit — Perennial prostrate or twining shrub. Root
stock is woody.

Stem - Numerous, slender, terete, glabrous or
pubescent, striate, thickened at the Nodes.

Leaves ~ Simple, opposite, variable, elliptic-ob-
long to linear-lanceolate, 5 to 10 cm long, 0.8 to4.cm
broad, apiculate, glabrous, dark green, often varie-
gated with white above, pale and sometimes, silvery
white and pubescent beneath, reticulate venation, peti-
ole 3 to 4 mm long.

Hemidesmus indicus R.Br.
(Sweta sariva)

----- PAGE 597 -----
Sariva 589

Inflorescence —Subsessile cyme.

Flower — Pedicel short, clothed with numerous bracts, calyx 2.5 mm Jong, glabrous
outside, ovate, acute corolla 5 to 6 mm long, greenish outside, purple inside.

Fruit — Follicles, 10 to 15 cm by 6 mm, cylindric, tapering to a point at the apex,
straight or sometimes slightly curved, striate glabrous.

Seed-— 6 to 8 mm long, ovate-oblong, flattened, black coma is silvery white, 25 cm
long.

Morphology

Ichnocarpus frutescens

Habit — Large, much branched twining shrub.
Young branches are finely fulvous-tomentose.

Leaves — Simple, 4.5 to 7.5 cm long and 2 to 4
cm wide, elliptic-oblong, acute or acuminate, glabrous
above, slightly pubescent and pale beneath, base
rounded, main nerves 5 to 7 pairs, with finely reticu-
late venation. Petioles 3 to 6 mm long.

Inflorescence — Axillary and terminal rusty-pu-
bescent trichotomous pedunculate cymes.

(Krishna sarira)

Flowers — Greenish white, Numerous, Pedicels
3 to 4 mm long, Calyx fulvous-hairy, lobe ovate, Acute. Corolla tube 2.5 to 3 mm long,
with a narrow portion below.

Fruit — Follicles 1.0 to 1.5 cm long and 4 mm wide, straight or slightly curved,
slender and cylindric.

Seeds — 1 to 2 cm long, linear, black, not beaked.
Varities
Bh.Pr.Ni., Dh.Ni, & Ra.Ni—2 types
1. Sariva (Hemidesmus indicus)
2. Krishnasariva (Ichnocarpus frutiscens)
Substitutes
Hemidesmus indicus — Cryptolepsis buchanani RxS.
-  Ichnocarpus frutescens R-Br.
— Decalepis hamiltoni Wt. and Arn.

----- PAGE 598 -----
590 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)
Hemidesmus indicus — Root.

Root is woody, cylindrical, upto 30 cm long and 6 mm in diameter. The outer sur-
face is greyish purple or reddish brown in colour, longitudinally fissured and transversely
cracked. A transversely cut portion shows a narrow hollow strand in the center surrounded
by a yellowish cambium ring and mealy white cortical layer. On breaking it becomes a
short pieces when cut at the periphery, fibrous when cut at the centre. Has got agreeable
odour and tastes bitter.

Ichnocarpus frutescens — Root

Root is hard, cylindrical, straight or sometimes arched, upto 2.5 cm in diameter.
Outer surface in thin roots is purplish brown in colour, longitudinally wrinkled and occa-
sionally lenticillate. The thick roots have a dark brown prominently shrivelled surface.
Removal of bark exposes lamellated wood. Transversely cut surface of the root shows a
closely adhering thin bark, a well marked cortical zone, a cambium ring and a pith which
appears as a central hole. On breaking, root becomes short pieces, has bitter taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
Shweta sarira—
STAT MUAAT MAT THAT MM | LHLST FATT MATCH AS SERA A ASAT
(aL. Tee aT. 237)
Krishna sarira—
HOT F Mar vara wet Mayer AT 1 (AT. TSHAMS FT. 236)
Properties and Actions
mRagiet tare Rare yet Te | afmrastrararamtarery |
AAT SATA TAT 1 (AT. SEAMS TT. 238)
aka & g wet arama | geavgsat Aegis i
sort g deri award Poet vert crabtree AAT
(aft. Tgeate FT. 160-161)
aiftar wept freer gta genet feat 1 ydisnrdtanrreterateraraar |
atfirarereha SRAaTATAMANTL HA (3.FY. attafe aH. 995)

ara 3 g Bat wearer | Heavgeet egies
(a. aaa GT. 119)

----- PAGE 599 -----
Sariva
wRagrt weet | wig sere doe dot freer
ATG Fer Teh freer ser | Arar Hat |
Ged wiftrerant ta Aer A ema ut (AY. frereenfe ef, 32-33)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Sariva

—_

a. Bija b. Mula c. Phala d. kanda
Ans: b. Mula

2. Pradhana Rasa of Sariva
a. Madhura b. Tikta c. Kashaya d. Katu
Ans: b. Tikta

3. Agrya Karma of Sariva as per Charaka Samhita
a. Rakta Pitta Prashamana b. Vatashamana
c. Jwaraghna d. Buddhi vardhaka

Ans: a. Raktapitta Prashamana

4. Sarivadi Vati is indicated in
a. Mutrakricchra b. Ajirna c. Karna Roga_ d. Arshas
Ans: c. Karna Roga

5. Botanical name of Shweta Sariva
a. Psoralea corylifolia b. Woodfordia cordifolia
c. Swertia chirata d. Hemidesmus indicus
Ans: d. Hemidesmus indicus
6. Botanical name of Krishna Sariva
a. Hemidesmus indicus b. Ichnocarpus frutiscens
c. Pureria tuberosa d. Tecoma undulate
Ans: b. Ichnocarpus frutiscens
7. Ananta and Gopavadhu are the synonyms of
a. Tulasi b. Kapikacchu c. Sariva d. Dhataki

Ans: c. Sariva

8. Types of Sariva according to Bhava Prakasha Nighantu
a. 2 b. 3 c. 4 d. 5
Ans: a. 2

ARK

591

----- PAGE 600 -----
Chapter

Shallaki

TE I RE A TNA TS SEI PES UR AAT PS NS OPIS,

Useful part - Niryasa (Exudate)

Rasadi panchaka

Shallaki Kunduru
Rasa Kashaya Tikta Madhura Madhura Tikta
Guna Laghu Ruksha Tikshna, Snigdha
Virya

Karma (Actions)

Shallaki — Atisarahara, Raktapittahara, Vranahara, Kushthaghna, Arshoghna,
Stambhaka.

Pushpa (Flowers) — Kushthaghna, Aruchinashaka

Kunduru (Exudate) - Twacya, Jwaraghna, Swedahara, Mukharogahara, Grahi,
Bhutagrahanashaka, Yoni rogahara, Shulahara.
Pharmacological Actions

Diuretic, Emmanogogue, Aromatic, Demulcent, Stimulant.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Pittakapha Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to Shita virya and Kashaya Tikta, Madhura
rasa, Kaphahara because of Katu vipaka and Kashaya Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic indications)

Shallaki - Atisara, Raktapitta, Kushtha and Vrana

Pushpa (Flowers) — Kushtha and Aruchi

Kunduru (Exudate) - Jwara, Atisara, Yoniroga, Atisweda, Bhutagraha, Mukharoga
and Sandhishula.
Amayika prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Vrana (Wound)

vienat wrerettar aftrexita at a: atat aut wer abt aegarerenaTrEaT

(9.4. 25/28)

----- PAGE 601 -----
Shallaki 593

Powder of Shallaki (Boswellia serrata) fruit is applied over the Vrana (Wound) then
it is to be bandaged.

2. Shwasa (Asthma)

FeeHyeeTaaSs YRe: TareweT aT Tet we eafthee: eye: areal fers

(%3. 51/52)

Fumigation is done with Turushka Shallaki (Boswellia serrata), Guggulu
(Commiphora mukul) and Padmaka (Prunus cerasoides) and ghee.

Matra (Dosage)
Niryasa (Exudate) - 1 to 3 g

Research corner

1. A penetacyclic triterpendiol (TPD) from Boswellia serrata has significant
cytotoxic and apoptotic potential in a large number of human cancer cell lines.
To enhance its anticancer potential, it was successfully formulated into solid
lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) by the micro emulsion method with 75% drug
entrapment efficiency. Bhushan S, Kakkar V, Pal HC, Guru SK, Kumar A,
Mondhe DM, Sharma PR, Taneja SC, Kaur IP, Singh J, Saxena AK.
Enhanced anticancer potential of encapsulated solid lipid nanoparticles of TPD:
a novel triterpenediol from Boswellia serrata. Mol Pharm. 2013 Jan
7:10(1):225-35. doi:10.1021/mp 300385m. Epub 2012 Dec 13.

2. The resinous part of Boswellia serrata possesses monoterpenes, diterpenes,
triterpenes, tetracyclic triterpenic acids and four major pentacyclic triterpenic
acids i.e. ?-boswellic acid, acetyl-?-boswellic acid, 11-keto-?-boswellic acid
and acetyl-11-keto-?-boswellic acid, responsible for inhibition of pro-
inflammatory enzymes. Out of these four boswellic acids, acetyl-11-keto-?-
boswellic acid is the most potent inhibitor of 5-lipoxygenase, an enzyme
responsible for inflammation. Siddiqui MZ. Boswellia serrata, a potential
antiinflammatory agent and overview. Indian J. Pharm Sci. 2011
May;73(3):255-61. doi: 10.4103/0250-474x.93507.

3. To evaluate the antioxidant effect of an extract of the plant Boswellia serrata
in an experimental model of acute ulcerative colitis induces by administration
of acetic acid (AA) in rats. The anal sphincter pressure in the groups treated
with B. serrata showed a significant increase compared to the colitis group
(P<0.0001). Histological analysis of treated animals showed less edema with
preservation of mucosal crypts. Lipid peroxidation showed a significant
decrease in the treated groups compared to the colitis group (P<0.001).

----- PAGE 602 -----
594

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Hartmann RM, Morgan Martins MI, Tieppo J, Fillmann HS, Marroni NP.
Effect of Boswellia serrata on antioxidant status in an experimental model of
colitis in rats induced by acetic acid. Dig Dis Sci. 2012 Aug;57(8):2038-44;
doi: 10.1007/s10620-012-2134-3. Epub 2012 Mar 27.

. This study was conducted to evaluate the antioxidative and antithrombotic

properties of stem bark gum resin extracts of Boswellia serrata (BS). Present
study demonstrated antioxidant and antithrombotic anticoagulant activities of
water and hydroalcoholic extracts of Boswellia serrata’s gum resin. Kokkiripati
PK, Bhakshu LM, Marri S, Padmasree K, Row AT, Raghavendra AS, Tetali
SD. Gum resin of Boswellia serrata has inhibited human monocytic (THP-1)
cell activation and platelet aggregation. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011, Sep
1;137(1):893-901. doi: 10.1016/j.jep. 2011.07.004. Epub 2011 Jul 8.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNO: Name of Yora Indications

Botanical name — Boswellia serrata Roxb.

Boswellia — named after Dr. Boswell Edinburgh
serrata — saw toothed

Family — Burseraceae

Kula - Guggulu kula

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Purshavirajaniya varga
Sushruta Eladi gana, Rodhradi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Vatadi varga 22-23 & Karpuradi Varga 50-51 (Kunduru)

Basonym of Drug

Betta deter afi, Aaa stated TATRA |

Leaves of Shallaki (Boswelia serrata) are liked by elephants.

Synonyms
Habitat

1. OeM-at VAT |

Grows wild.

----- PAGE 603 -----
Shallaki 595

Morphology
2. Hret-yaft Rratetet |
Shallaki releases exudates
3. att-quee: |
Exudates of Shallaki are aromatic.
4, Grae ges: Paar: Ba: ATA SEAT: |
Exudates of Shallaki have Aroma.
5, Wgaat-agaadite, wyretfercad: |
Shallaki releases profuse quantity of exudates.
6. aaaeh-staer wate areitsem: |
The exudate of Shallaki resembles urine of horse.
7. Sqeal-Hgelaratsed: |
The exudates of Shallaki are called Kunduru.
8. PAAR RTT HTT: |
Fruit of Shallaki is trigonus.
Properties and Actions
9. Wert-greatet GAA |
Shallaki pleases the mind because of its Aroma.
Others
10. WHAT Vat VTA |
The leaves of Shallaki are liked by elephants.
11. WARON-Aerdt Terra Weert |
Shallaki leaves are eaten by elephants.
Regional Names

----- PAGE 604 -----
596 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Habitat

Shallaki grows in Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan and parts of South India.
Morphology

Habit — A deciduous middle sized tree.

Bark —Ash-coloured, peeling off in thin flakes, young
shoots and leaves pubescent.

Leaves — Compound, 20 to 40 cm long, leaflets are

‘ : Boswellia serrata Roxb.
at 5 1
opposite, 2.5 to 6 cm long, | to 3 cm wide, sessile, 8 to 15 (Shallaki)

pairs and an odd one. Variable in shape, ovate or ovate-
lanceolate, usually in equilateral and obtuse, crenate-ser-
rate, more or less pubescent, base in acute, rounded.

Inflorescence— Axillary raceme

Flowers — Calyx pubescent outside lobes broadly triangular-ovate, Petals are 5 mm
long, ovate, stamens are inserted at the base of and annular crenate disk.

Fruits — Drupe, Trigonums, Pyrepes heart-shaped, and Cotyledons are trifid.
Substitutes

Boswellia carteri

Boswellia frereana
Adulterants

Garuga pinnata Roxb.
Grahya laxana (Genuine characteristics)

Market sample will have hardened, opaque or translucent tears of greenish white,
golden yellow or light brown colour, occurring in various sizes. The shape ranges from
round and club shaped to typical stalactite. On breaking become short pieces exposing a
shining glossy surface. It has got turpentine like odour, tastes astringent.

Classical references
Synonyms
wieerent—
Weeteat TAHT A THT Gt TAT | HEMT Guat aa A ARAAT I
(aa, aerfe at. 22)
HSE PINT FHra: Paya: Fg graf i (ay. afafs af. 50)

----- PAGE 605 -----
Shallaki 597

Properties and Actions

viecrat qau vita frarserenftrartre, | tafe aorertt gfepeegditar i
(1.5. Ferfe at. 23)

Pyrigtrarctarcaca: wget | wte Tereihpeernarer
(a3. afore aT. 51)
Veerat KIA Haar sHergftar Ses warren teers ete reer wenragreh Aa
(af. wane Tt 123)

vecat gar yitat mau veda: 1 aeraftrveatran auf

Ae HHAATAHERTHAIAT | (HA. steht 863)
verat ferraaeyT Hara wneatt wet | PErerHmarangit aureterhtaryrat
(a.F. sree at 195)
errant Gat Bitar seafarers | ETE aT Tele AUTETS ST VTA |
eee: ahaa yar: 1 ahah feet gat a waerd
(B.A. ettaaenfe at 119-120)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful Part of Shallaki
a. Mula b. Patra c. Niryasa d. Phala
Ans: c. Niryasa

2. Niryasa of Shallaki is called
a. Kunduru b. Shriveshtaka c. Sarala d. Mocharasa
Ans: a. Kunduru

3. Surabhisrava is a synonym of
a. Guggulu b. Devadaru c. Shallaki d. Arjuna

Ans: c. Shallaki
4, Botanical name of Shallaki
a. Uraria picta b. Boswellia serrata
c. Myristicafragrans _ d. Inula racemosa
Ans: b. Boswellia serrata
5. Gajabhakshya and Maherana are the syncnyms of

a. Kutaja b. Kampillaka c. Chandana d. Shallaki
Ans: d, Shallaki

6. Habit of Shallaki plant
a. Herb b. Creeper c. Tree d. Shrub
Ans: c. Tree

RRR

----- PAGE 606 -----
Shalmali

cae CC CL LTT

Useful part — Niryasa (Exudate)
Rasadi panchaka

Shalmali Mocharasa

Me odes age
Laghu, Snigdha, Picchila
Vicia | Mada Bae
ving | Shia Cid

Karma (Actions)

Shalmali — Raktapittahara, Rasayana, Shukravardhaka, Brimhana & Vrishya.
Shalmali pushpa — Grahi
Shalmali kanda - Malasangrahaka, Dahanashaka, Santapanashaka.

Mocharasa — Grahi, Vrishya, Dahahara, Rasayana, Balya, Pushtivardhaka, Varnya

and Stambhana.
Kuta Shalmali -— Vishaghna, Gulmanashaka, Vibandhahara and Shulaghna.

Pharmacological Actions — Astringent, Styptic, Antin-flammatory, Diuretic, An-
thelmintic, Tonic, Demulcent, Aphrodisiac.

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vata Shamaka because of Madhura vipaka and Madhura rasa. Pitta Shamaka due

to Shita virya, Madhura vipaka and Madhura rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Shalmali — Raktapitta, Dourbalya, Shukrakshaya, Karshya.
Shalmali pushpa — Atisara

Shalmali kanda — Atisara, Daha and Jwara
Mocharasa — Atisara, Raktatisara, Raktapitta, Dourbalya, Daha, Vaivarnya.
Kuta Shalmali — Gulma, Vibandha, Shula and Visha vikara.

----- PAGE 607 -----
Shalmali 599

4mayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Pravahika (Gastro enteritis)
afta: mrenttgramt efit) garaa: | ea: vareut age ae: mrenfernet eT
(aa. 10/36)
Basti (Enema) of Shalmali (Salmalia malabarica) leaf petioles or exudates boiled
with milk then mixed with ghee is very useful in case of diarrhoea with tenesmus.

2. Vyanga (Freckles)

maar wera firear deur, erenfernveenr | anferet sree wee, Warr
FSA UC FAT 57/38)

Powder prepared from sharp thorns of Shalmali (Salmalia malabarica) triturated
with milk if applied over face, it removes Vyanga (Freekles) and face becomes smooth
and lustrous.

3. Gudagata Raktapitta (Intrinsic haemorrhage)

fastadt frenedvadt cat eat rere Perey (Fa. 4/86)

Milk processed with Mocharasa (Exudate of Salmalia malabarica) is efficacious in
case of bleeding per rectum.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) of Bark -— 3to5g
Swarasa (Juice) - 10to20ml
Niryasa (Exudate) - l1to3g

Phytoconstituents — Root bark yielded napthaquinone, B-sitosterol, lupeol, and {-
D-glucoside.

Stem bark contains Lupeol and f-sitosterol.

Flowers yielded o-D-glucoside, B-sitosterol, hentriacontane, hentriacontanol, essential
oil, Kaempferol and quercitin.

Seeds contain n-hexacosanol, palmitic acid, gallic acid, tannic acid and ethy] gallate.

Research corner
1. The aim of the present study was to confirm its anti-inflammatory activity and
to search for the possible mechanism of action for methanol extract of Bombax
malabaricum leaves (MEBM). MEBM possesses anti-inflammatory activity,
mediated through inhibition of NO production. Hossain E, Sarkar D, Chatterjee

----- PAGE 608 -----
600

Dravyaguna Vijnana

M, Chakraborty S, Mandal SC, Gupta JK. Effect of methanol extract of
Bombax malabaricum leaves on nitric oxidae production during inflammation.
Acta Pol Pharm. 2013 Mar-Apr; 70(2):255-60.

. A new lignan bombasinoal A (1), together with three known compounds was

obtained from the ethanol (95%) extract of roots of Bombax ceiba L. Through
its being subjected to silica gel and Sephadex LH-20 chromatography. Wang
GK, Lin BB, Rao R, Zhu K, Qin XY, Xie GY, Qin MJ. A new lignan with
anti HBV activity from the roots of Bombax ceiba. Nat Prod Res. 2013 Aug;
27(15):1348-52. doi:10.1080/14786419.2012.740032. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

. Bio-efficacy of n-hexane fraction of sepal of Salmalia malabarica was

evaluated covering the biochemical sensors for the management of
hyperglycemic and hyperlipidemic effects. Evaluation of n-hexane fraction of
Salmalia malabarica (SMH) from hydro-metahanolic (2:3) extract at the dose
of 0.1 gm/kg body weight twice a day were investigated in normal and
streptozotocin (STZ) induced diabetic rats. Histologic studies of pancreas
showed a qualitative diminution in the area of the islet’s of Langerhans in
diabetic group which was recovered by said fraction. Phytochemical screening
of the fraction revealed the presence of flavonoids, terpenoids and steroids. De
D, Ali KM, Chatterjee K, Bera TK, Ghosh D. Antihyperglycemic and
antihyperli-pidemic effects of n-hexane fraction from the hydro-metahanolic
extract of sepals of Salmalia malabarica in streptoxzotocin-induced diabetic
rats. J. Complement Integr Med. 2012 Jun 21:9: Article 12. doi:10.1515/1553-
3840.1565.

. The present study was aimed to investigate the diuretic effects of aqueous and

crude ethanol extracts of Bombax ceiba L. fruits (family, Bombacaceae) using
acute model in rats. A single individual dose of aqueous and ethanol extract of
B. ceiba fruit (200 mg/kg and 400 mg/kg, p.o. each), furesemide and
hydrochlorothiazide, (25 mg/kg, p.o., each) as reference diuretic drugs, were
administered orally to dehydrated rats. Study gave positive results. Jalalpure
SS, Gadge NB. Diuretic effects of young fruit extracts of Bombax ceiba L. In
rats. Indian J. Pharm Sci. 2011 May; 73(3):306-11. doi. 10.4103/0250-
474X.93525.

. The objective of this study was to evaluate anthelminitc activity of the methanol

extract of B. malabaricum leaves (MEBM). The study established the
anthelmintic activity of MEBM. Hossain E, Chandra G, Nandy AP, Mandal
SC, Gupta JK. Anthelmintic effect of a methanol extract of Bombax
malabaricum leaves on Paramphistomum explanatum. Periosteal Res. 2012

----- PAGE 609 -----
Shalmali 601

Mar; 110(3):1097-102.doi:10.1007/s00436-011-2594-y. Epub 2011 Aug 19.
Yoga (Formulations)

Indications

2

Yonidosha, Rajadosha

SILNo. Name of Yoga

— | Shalmali Ghrita

6.

Botanical Name — Salmalia malabarica De.
Salmalia — Derived from Sanskrit name Salmali.

Pushyanuga churna

malabarica — of Malabar
Family — Malvaceae
Basonym of Drug
Viera VAS Het TTA VAT
Shalmali (Salmalia malabarica) bears beautiful red flowers and which stops Diar-
thoea.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. Guuft-fersitfercart |
Shalmali plant lives for many years.
2. farsttferer-fer state |
Shalmali is a long lived tree.
3. ARGH: Haas AA MAY Be: , Area Stag eATET |
Shalmali is a tall and long-lived tree.
4, BUEHSA-TATHVCHA THT |
Shalmali trunk and branches are studded with prickles.
5, Brar-qate Praterete |
Shalmali releases juice which is called as Mocha.

6. THYMT-Teerber YOAV |

----- PAGE 610 -----
602 Dravyaguna Vij. *.a

Flowers of Shalmali are red in colour.
7. erpeal-paperarag Taal For: |
Flowers are red in colour like that of Rooster’s Comb.
8, FRHeT-Fet HetseM: |
Fruit has cotton like substance.
Properties and Actions
9. fafeacr-Rresiseet |
Juice released by Shalmali is slimy.
10, Weaft-acercttfer |
The juice of Shalmali is very slimy.
11. ageltd:-wepe wieTTteT |
Shalmali is very efficacious drug, especially in Diarrhoea.

Regional Names

Marathi Tambadi savaru

Gabavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Purishavirajaniya varga, Sandhaniya varga, Shonitasthapana
varga, Purisha sangrahaniya varga, Vedanasthapana varga
Sushruta Priyangvadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Vatadi varga 54-59
Habitat

Shalmali is found all over India, where as Kuta Shalmali is seen more in South
India.

Morphology

Bombax ceiba Linn / Salmalia malabarica De.Morphology:Bombax ceiba Linn/
Salmalia malabarica De.

----- PAGE 611 -----
Shalmali 603

Habit - A tall deciduous tree
Trunk ~ Straight and buttressed
Branches — Spreading

Bark — Grey covered with hard sharp conical
prickles.

Leaves - Compound, large, leaflets are 3 to 7
in number, entire, 7 to 18 cm long, glabrous,
penninerved, reticulately veined, lanceolate or oval,
acute at the base. Petioles are very long; 20 cm long,
glabrous, petiolules 1 to 2.5 cm long, stipules are
small, triangular and caducous. Bombax ceiba Linn.
(Shalmali)

Flowers — Numerous, appearing before the new
leaves, near the ends of the branches. Calyx is thick,
usually 3-lobed; lobes are rounded, densely silky within. Corolla is bright red, tomentose
on the outside. Petals are elliptic-oblong and re curved. Stamens more than 60, arranged
in 5 bundles of about 9 to 12 each, and an inner bundle of 15 of which the 5 inner most are
longest.

Fruits - Capsule, 10 to 12.5 cm long, ovoid, 5-
valved, lined within with white silky hairs.

Seeds — Seeds are 9 mm long numerous, ovoid,
packed in white cotton.
Morphology

Cieba pentandra Gaertn

Habit — A tall tree

Trunk — Prickly when young

Branches — Horizontal in whorls of 3.

Leaves — Compound, glabrous, petioles 10 to
15 cm long, leaflets 5 to 8 in number, lanceolate, 5 to
12.5 cm long, cuspidate, entire, glaucous beneath, Ceiba pentandra Gaertn.
petiolules are 2.5 mm long, stipules filiform. (Kuta Shalmali)

Flowers — Pedicels 2.5 to 5 cm long in clusters
of 2 to 8. Calyx 1 to 2 cm long, glabrous outside, hairy at the base within, 5-lobed, lobes
rounded or triangular. Flowers 4 to 5 cm in diameter, dirty white, appearing with the
young leaves at the ends of the branches. Ovary is conical, glabrous.

----- PAGE 612 -----
604

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fruit - Capsule, fusiform, blunt, lined with long white silky hairs.
Seeds - 6 mm long or more, pyriform, glabrous, black, enveloped in silky wool.

Varieties

Bh.Pr.Ni — 2 types
1. Shalmali — Salmalia malabarica DC.

2. Kuta Shalmali — Ceiba pentandra

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics):

Market sample consists round or irregularly shaped tears, up to 4 cm across. Outer

surface is opaque, brick red to reddish brown in colour, resembling shellac. Some of the
large sized tears are hollow. The tears swell to a large size on soaking in water. Has got
faint disagreeable odour. Taste is astringent and mucilaginous nature.

Classical references

Synonyms

wren vaste fifesen wuts a cyan eR areata a ert i
(415. Ferert. 54)

Mocarasa-

Prate: oer: freon irenicht aecantsf a i areraratareret araPrate gears
(ana. Ferfeart 56)

Kuta shalmali-

apiera: wreate: wireat teat: Hewrenter: Ul (AF. Feet 58)

Properties and Actions

wrench vitae carat TH OTe Tare | setorent frrarareaehatt tears, Ut

(a5. Feteat 55)
Mocarasa-
ararerat fear oret Rearett ger: Harrah: | verivarshranmtanattrreteteye tl
(AT. Fetert 57)
Kuta shalmali-

pementratern: wea: AHAIyd, | Aeon: wietowngefearay: |

eae Pera: BICTHATAG: 1 (ALT. FeTfeaT 59)

wiretieft vitcrer feerenr yenscroaterarh | perereraet Ot Yet Aaa Her Ul
(af. sinfert 118)

----- PAGE 613 -----
Shalmali 605

greater: vite caret a Urea Tare | severe seutt gem fever frat ares
WSs Targets wat fares at ye | Hart araet aly aaeaftrretfsr, WTA, 1
Prata: oftacr: feared ot ger: porte: | warfgentcitarmencnftrrearcregd, |!
(df. attafeert 911-973)
Mocarasa-
ARR HUT: HATS Tara aT
acraftcautctetyas sqaqetttagat met
(aA. meneame TT 13)
went mencthyet Rat get Tare, | vitae Eat aa gash Teva
frata: yreaet: arava geahreltare | para: eres: vitreadtaRrarerrge, It
ward wreaciget wet wert ae | wae APRRseuEt @ Weed I
(B.A. irene FT 158-160)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Shalmali
a. Mula b. Niryasa c. Patra d. bija
Ans: b. Niryasa

2. Important Guna present in Niryasa of Shalmali
a. Ruksha b. Vishada c. Picchila d. Sandra

Ans: c. Picchila

3. Pradhana Karma of Shalmali Niryasa
a. Dipana b. Pachana c. Bhedana d. Stambhana
Ans: d. Stambhana

4. Main indication of Shalmali Niryasa
a. Ajima b. Raktatisara c. Arshas d. Shotha
Ans: b. Raktatisara

5. Shalmali Kantaka is useful in
a. Yauvana Pidaka b. Kushtha c. Shotha d. Daha
Ans: a. Yauvana Pidaka

6. Picchabasti is mainly indicated in
a. Agnimandya b. Prameha c. Pravahika d. Mutrakricchra

Ans: c. Pravahika

----- PAGE 614 -----
606 Dravyaguna Vijnana

7. Botanical name of Shalmali
a. Pinus roxburghi b. Salmalia malabaricum

c. Boswellia serrata d. Shorea robusta

Ans: b. Salmalia malabarica
8. Chirajivika and Kantakadhya are the synonyms of
a. Tejohwa b. Kantakari c. Salmali d. Shatavarj

Ans: c. Salmali

9. Habit of Shalmali plant
a. Tree b. Herb c. Shrub d. Creeper

Ans: a. Tree

28 oR aK oR

----- PAGE 615 -----
Shankhapushpi

Useful part — Panchanga (Whole herb)
Rasadi panchaka

Rasa Kashaya, Katu, Tikta
Guna Snigdha, Picchila, Guru, Sara
Vipaka Madhura

Prabhava

Karma (Action)
Shankhapushpi - Medhya, Vrishya, Rasayana, Smriti Vardhaka, Kantivardhaka,
Balya, Kushthaghna, Krimighna, Vishaghna, Kasahara, Swarya.

Dosha karma (Action on Dosha)

Vata Shamaka due to Madhura Vipaka, Pittahara because of Shita virya, Madhura
vipaka and Kashaya rasa. Kapha Shamaka due to Kashaya Katu Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Manasika Vikaras, Unmada, Apasmara, Dourbalya, Kushtha, Krimi, Vishavikara,
Kasa, Swarabheda.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Medhya Rasayana (Intellect promoter)

teat fagtant g mqGEe | (a.fa. 1/3/31)

Different preparations of Shankhapushpi, (Convolvulus pluricaculis) help in pro-
moting memory.

wgyatyay | (8.2.5. 39/47)
Ghee processed with juice of Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis) if used regu-
larly improves intellect.

2. Unmada (Insanity) and Apasmara (Epilepsy)
TA ATA PSM GTS ST | TTT FAAS ARTA TIT, Ut (FAA. 10/25)

Puranaghrita (Old ghee) processed with juice of Brahmi (Bacopa moneri), Powder

----- PAGE 616 -----
608 Dravyaguna Vijnana

of Vacha (Acorus calamus) & Kushtha (Saussurea lappa) and paste of Shankhapushp;
(Convolvulus pluricaulis) is efficacious in alleviating insanity and epilepsy.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) - 3to5g
Swarasa (Juice) — 10to 20 ml

Phanta (Hot infusion) - 40 to 80 ml

Phytoconstituents — Shankhapushpi has Carbohydrate-D-Glucose, Maltose, Rham-
nose, Glacial acetic acid, Scopoletin, B-sitosterol, Tropane alkaloids, Kaemferol, Convoline,
Convolidine, Convolvine, Confoline, Convosine and tetratriacontanoic acid.

Research corner

1. Methanolic extract of whole plant of Convolvulus pluricaulis Choisy was
evaluated for antioxidant activity by using 1, 1-diphenyl-2-picryl-hydrazyl
(DPPH) free radical scavenging model and anticonvulsant activity by using
maximal electroshock seizure model. Methanolic extract of C. pluricaulis was
evaluated for anticonvulsant activity at 250, 500 and 1000 mg/kg. Experimental
results have shown that at the dose of 500 and 1000 mg/kg, C. Pluricaulis
didn’t abolish the hind limb extension, but reduced the mean recovery time
from convulsion. Verma S, Sinha R, Kumar P, Amin F, Jain J, Tanwar S.
Study of Convolvulus pluricaulis for antioxidant and anticonvulsant activity.
Cent Nerve Syst Agents Med Chem. 2012 Mar; 12 (1):55-9.

2. Investigation done for neuroprotective effects of aqueous extract from
Convolvulus pluricaulis (CP) against aluminium chloride induced neurotoxicity
in rate cerebral cortex. Convolvulus pluricaulis possesses neuro protective
potential, thus validating its use in alleviating toxic effects of aluminium. Bihaqi
SW, Sharma M, Singh AP, Tiwari M, Neuroprotective role of Convolvulus
pluricaulis on aluminium induced neurotoxicity in rat brain. J Ethnopharmacol.
2009 Jul 30;124(3):409-15. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2009.05.038. Epub 2009 Jun 6.

. The chloroform fraction of the total ethanolic extract of Convolvulus pluricaulis
elicited a significant antidepressant-like effect in mice by interaction with the
adrenergic, dopaminergic, and serotonergic systems. Dhingra D, Valecha R.
Evaluation of the antidepressant-like activity of Convolvulus pluricaulis choisy
in the mouse forced swim and tail suspension tests. Med Sci Monit. 2007 Jul;
13(7):BR 155-61.

4. The present study was conducted to evaluate the potential anti-ulcerogen'¢

effect of juice of fresh whole plants of C. pluricaulis (CPJ) against various

Ww

----- PAGE 617 -----
Shankhapushpi 609

experimental gastric ulcer models induced by ethanol, aspirin, 2 hr cold
restraint stress and 4 hr pyloric ligation in rats. The drug was given orally twice
daily for five days in the doses of 375 and 750 mg/kg body weight. CPJ
showed nati-ulcerogenic effect at both doses in all the experimental gastric
ulcer models and was comparable to the reference drug sucralfate (250 mg/kg).
Sairam K, Rao CV, Goel RK. Effect of Convolvulus pluricaulis Chois on
gastric ulceration and secretion in rats. Indian J. Exp Biol. 2001 Apr;39(4):350-
4.

5. Plants commonly used under the name Shankhpushpi are : Convolvulus
pluricaulis chois, Evolvulus alsinoides Linn., both from Convolvulaceae, and
Clitoria ternate Linn. (Leguminosae). To find out the true source of
shankhpushpi by evaluating and comparing memory-enhancing activity of the
three above mentioned plants. Anxiolytic, antidepressant and CNS-depressant
activity. Malik J, Karan M, Vasisht K. Nootropic, Anxiolytic and CNS-
depressant studies on different plant sources of Shankhpuspi. Pharm Biol. 2011
Dec; 49(12):1234-42. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2011.584539. Epub 2011 Aug
16.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name of Yoga Indications

Shankhapushpi taila Balaroga, Medhavardhaka

: Manodosha, Medhavardhaka
, Medhavardhaka, Pushtivardhaka

; Aindri Rasayana Apasmara, Unmada

; Brahma rasayana Ayuvardhaka, Rasayana
Botanical Name — Convolvulus pluricaulis Chois

Convolvulus — Convolvo-to twine-twining

pluricaulis — Pluri-Many, Caulis-Stem (Having many stems)

Family —- Convolvulaceae (Ref. Appendix-II for key features)

Kula - Trivrit kula

Basonym of Drug
VETER YOM: Bert
Flowers of Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis) is bell shaped.

----- PAGE 618 -----
610 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Synonyms
Habitat
1. sera afer ora xfer |
Shankhapushpi plant grows on ground.
Morphology
“es Us Fane: |
Shankhapushpi flowers are beautiful.
3. APTA HYM-ATct HA YAHAT |
Shankhapushpi flowers are beautiful and regarded as very auspicious.

Regional Names

Ganavargikarana (Classica) categorization)

Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 269-270
Habitat

Convolvulus pluricaulis grows mainly in
Gujarat state.
Morphology

Habit — Perennial prostate herb.

Root - Tap root, branched

‘

A

ie
K
Y

)
ap

y
<
branched, cylindrical, solid, hairy and green. of CS A vy,
Leaf - Simple, alternate, sub-sessile, exstipu-
late, oblong or oblanceolate, entire, hairy, acute,
coriaceous with unicostate reticulate venation.

Zs
Stem — Prostrate, aerial, herbaceous, weak,

----- PAGE 619 -----
Shankhapushpi 611

Inflorescence — Dichasial cyme.

Flowers — Pedicellate, actinomorphic, regular, bisexual, complete, pentamerous,
hypogynous and light purple in colour. Sepals are 5, polysepalous, hairy and green. Pet-
als are 5, gamopetalous, infundibuliform. Andorecium contains 5 stamens, polyandrous
and epipetalous. Gynoecium is bicarpellary, syncarpous, superior ovary.

Fruit — A capsule.

Seed - Endospermic.

Substitutes
Evolvulus alsinoids Linn.
Camscora decussate Schult.

Controversies

Shankhapushpi is one among controversial drugs. Shankha means conch, Pushpi
mean flower. Different plants having conch shaped flowers are being used as
Shankhapushpi in different regions.

1. Convolvulus pluricaulis chois Convolvulaceae

2. Evolvlulus alsinoides Linn. Convolvulaceae

3. Canscora diffusa R.Br. Gentianaceae

4. Clitoria ternatea Linn Papilionaceae

5. Lavendula bipinnata Okze Lamiaceae

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics):

Market sample consist dried whole herb with small woody, profusely branched root,
slender, terete, sparsely fulvous and pilose stems; linear, oblanceolate, hairy leaves, upto
3.5 cm long. 2 to 4 mm broad and small, white funeral shaped flowers occurring solitary
or in pairs in the axil of the alternately arranged leaves. The herb depicts dusty yellowish
green colour in dry condition. Has got mild phenolic odour, taste is slightly bitter and it is
mucilaginous.

Classical references

Synonyms
wget y mgr weer Haast a (aLs. aereat. 269)

Properties and Actions
wrgyett war Hear Fer ATA TEd, | Tat Harare Valarie AeTTAT |
ararrean yerht safenhr erm (ALT. TAs Tt 269-270)

----- PAGE 620 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

vifgeht ae ferentonn eprettrerererrert ere, | ferarereae Herat Btect Hea TATA I
(af. acdrafe af 102)

Vishnukranta-
fersupsareat cefterear arenerrerrerraet | (ef. aaa at 104)
wget ar wat weft caret | argu auftentiracry: caifrer Br, |
Serra ittqassrererrspetty (3.4. sttaftrert 1496-1497)
wget fear ferret Aerpe cacao | meyenfeatrett aefternfefeger
(aA. aeemhe wt 133)
ferensefter saate ert arahrtagat | tear oer at are TTA
vragedt an fra ae fofsen Ye: | Terie GearTaeAETRUHT
(RL. ergata at 116-117)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Shankhapushpi
a. Pushpa b. Panchanga c. Bija d. Niryasa
Ans: b. Panchanga
2. Prabhavajanya Karma of Shankhapushpi
a. Dipana b. Jwaraghna c. Medhya d. Varnya
Ans: c. Medhya
3. Best Medhya Rasayana as per Charaka
a. Yashtimadhu b. Mandukaparni
c. Guduchi d. Shankhapushpi
Ans: d. Shankhapushpi

4. Ghee processed with juice of Shankhapushpi (Convolvulus pluricaulis) if used
regularly will be beneficial in

a. Medhya b. Vajikara c. Balya d. Vrashya
Ans: a. Medhya
5. Botanical name of Shankhapushpi

—_

a. Evolvulus alsinoides b. Convolvulus pluricaulis
c. Clitorea ternatea d. Plumbago zeylanica
Ans; b. Convolvyulus pluricaulis

----- PAGE 621 -----
Shankhapushpi 613

6. Mangalya Kusuma is a synonym of

a. Champaka b. Mallika c. Shankhapushpi d. Amalaki
Ans: c. Shankhapushpi
. Habit of Shankhapushpi Plant

a. Herb b. Shrub c. Creeper d. Tree
Ans: a. Herb

. Substitutes for Shankhapushpi
a. Clitorea ternatea b. Evolvulus alsinoides

c. Angelica glauca d. Aconitum heterophyllum
Ans: b. Evolvulus alsinoides

----- PAGE 622 -----
pam bs
F; e =| 283 |

<> Shatavari

Useful part — Mula (Root)
Rasadi panchaka

Rasa Madhura Tikta
Guru, Snigdha
Karma (Actions)

Shatavari — Rasayana, Medhya, Pushti vardhaka, Netrya, Atisarajit,
Shukravardhaka, Stanyavardhaka, Balya, Shothahara, Vrishya, Gulmanashaka.

MahaShatavari - Medhya, Hridya, Vrishya, Rasayana, Arshoghna,
Grahanyamayahara, Netrya, Bulya, Shukravardhaka, Stanyavardhaka and Shulahara.

Maha Shatavari Ankura — Vrishya, Hridya, Arshoghna.
Pharmacological Actions

Galactogogue, Tonic, Diuretic
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatapitta Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Madhura vipaka and Madhura rasa.
Pitta Shamaka due to Shita Virya, Madhura vipaka and Madhura Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Shatavari — Dourbalya, Stanyakshaya, Vata vikara, Grahani, Shotha, Gulma,
Shukradourbalya, Manasika vikara and as a Rasayana.

Maha Shatavari — Hridroga, as a Rasayana, to improve Medhya, Grahani,
Akshivikara, Shula, Dourbalya and Stanya kshaya.

Maha Shatavari Ankura - Arshas, Hridroga and Vajikaranartha.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Stanya vardhanartha (Galactogogue)

vrarertt afteftreer tar erateraett | (att.7. 427)

Paste of Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) prepared by triturating with milk, it has

----- PAGE 623 -----
Shatavari 615

oss tense SSS sss Snes

to be taken with one glass of milk which acts as Stanyavardhaka (Galactogogue).
2. Rasayana (Rejuvenative)
yraratt Feary | (31.8.3. 39/157)

Ghee prepared from paste and decoction of Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) taken
with sugar acts as best Rasayana (Rejuvenative).

3. Swarabheda (Hoarseness of voice)
free ATH at aul wepaggary | vara wort aergqerras arn
(4.3. 53/4)

Powder of Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) if taken with honey and ghee is very
useful in Swarabheda (Hoarseness of voice).

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) —3to6g
Swarasa (Juice) - 10 to 20 ml

Phytoconstituents — Roots contain shatavarin I to V sistosterol, Saponins A4, AS,
A6, A7 and A8, Sarsapogenin, Glycosides of quercetin, rutin, D-glucose, D-mannose
and Diasaccharide. Fruits yielded, Sistosterol, Stigmasterol, Sarsapogenin, Sitosterol-a-
D-glucoside, Stigmasterol-c.-D-glucoside.

Research corner

1. The present study was designed to evaluate the effect of standardized
methanolic extract of AR (MAR) on experimentally un-manipulated animals to
observe the per se effects on stress pathways. MAR showed a physiological
modulation of the stress pathways. Interestingly, in most brain regions the
change in monoaminergic systems was limited by a ceiling effect at a dose of
100 mg/kg. These observations could explain the traditional use of AR as an
adaptogen and a functional food. Asparagus racemosus modulates the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and brain monoaminergic systems in rats.
Krishnamurthy S, Garabadu D, Reddy NR. Nutr Neurosci. 2013 Nov;
16(6):255-61. doi: 10.1179/1476830513Y. 0000000053. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

2. The antioxidant activities of the crude hydro-alcoholic extract (CE) and its four
fractions viz. methanol (MF), ethyl acetate (EF), n-Butanol (BF), and
precipitated aqueous (PAF) of A. racemosus roots tested decreased in the order
of EF>MF>CE>BF>PAF when investigated by DPPH free radical scavenging
assay. Under iron induced lipid peroxidation almost similar results were
observed except that the activity was more in PAF than BF. Hepatoprotective

----- PAGE 624 -----
616

Dravyaguna Vijnana

activity of the extracts was also demonstrable in vivo by the inhibition of CCL4
induced formation of lipid peroxides in the liver of rats by pre treatment with
the extracts. Acharya NS, Bhangale JO, Shah SK, Pandya SS. Antioxidant and
hepatoprotective action of Asparagus racemosus Willd. root extracts. Indian J.
Exp Biol. 2012 Nov;50(11):795-801.

3. The anticancer activity of Shatavarins (Containing shatavarin IV) isolated from

the roots of Asparagus racemosus (Wild) was evaluated using in vitro and in
vivo experimental models. The result suggests that the shatavarins (containing
shatavarin IV) rich faction (AR-2B) exhibits significant anticancer activity in
both in vitro and in vivo experimental models. Mitra SK. Prakash NS,
Sundaram R. Shatavarins (Containing Shatavarin IV) with anticancer activity
from the roots of Asparagus racemosus. India J. Pharmacol.2012 Nov-Dec;
44(6):732-6. doi:10.4103/0253-7613.103273.

4. The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of ethanolic extract of

Asparagus racemosus in urolithiasis in rats. The rats treated with ethanolic
extract of A. racemosus at doses 800 and 1600 mg/kg significantly (P<0.05)
reduced the serum concentration of calcium, phosphorus, urea, and creatinine.
Histopathology of the kidneys in Groups V and VI revealed less tissue damage
and were almost similar to Group I rats. Jagannath N, Chikkannasetty SS,
Govindadas D, Devasankaraiah G, Study of antiurolithiatic activity of
Asparagus racemosus on albino rats. India J. Pharmacol. 2012 Sep-Oct;
44(5):576-9. doi:10.41103/0253-7613.100378.

5. Ethanolic extract of the roots of A. racemosus improved the stress tolerance in

chemical writhing test and swimming endurance test at all the doses as
compared to stress control group. The result suggests antistress property of
Asparagus racemosus in different model of stress. Joshi T, Sah SP, Singh A.
Antistress activity of ethanolic extract of Asparagus racemosus Willd roots in
mice. Indian J Exp Biol. 2012 Jun; 50(6):419-24.

Yoga (Formulations)

| ape jag Shatavari taila
2 Shatavari Mandura

Name of Yoga Indications

;

Raktapitta, Daha

ol
.

Shatavari Modaka
Shatavaryadi kwatha

----- PAGE 625 -----
Shatavari 617

rdita, Manyastambha
j

Botanical Name — Asparagus racemosus Willd.

Asparagus — Derivated from-A = Intesive, Sparasso- in allusion to strong prickles.
racemosus — Having raceme inflorescence.
Family -— Asparagaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Basonym of Drug
VAS TAM, ATA- MIE HST |

Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus) has numerous succulent tuberous roots and all
those roots are very best.

Synonyms
Morphology
1. WaTat- Vet WaT YTAET: |
Shatavari has numerous succulent roots.
2. SRYA-AEA: YaT: ral BT |
Shatavari has numerous tuberous roots.
3. Wratt-wyeterct |
Tuberous roots of Shatavari are succulent in nature.
4. adte:-4 ote: waa: Hvefeacare |
Shatavari has sharp spine.
5. ARVEH- ANGST: HVEHT STM: |
Spines in Shatavari are recurved.
6. Yenual-yearter wav: |
Cladodes of Shatavari are very thin.
7. wattrfrearautt - adfsregracy TATTETET: |
Cladodes resemble Snake’s tongue.
Properties and Actions

8. TAQTA-TaTg: TAISEN: |

----- PAGE 626 -----
618 Dravyaguna Vijnana

The taste of Shatavari is sweet.
9. at-airefing ser |
Shatavari is regarded as best among medicines.
10. ATTeUA-ART are: aT ara: Arena, atren feronperaferent, steer ae |

Shatavari is rich with water elements and it protects the body by nourishing the
tissues.

Regional Names

a

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka — Balya varga, Vayasthapana varga

Sushruta _ Vidarigandhadi gana, Kantakapanchamula

Bh.Pr.Ni_ — Guduchyadi varga 184-188
Habitat

Shatavari commonly grows all over India now days it is commonly cultivated ow-
ing to its commercial values.

Morphology

Habit — A tall climbing under shrub.

Stem — Aerial, erect, or weak, angular, green,
solid, whorl of one internodal leafy structure called
cladodes found at every node.

Root — Adventitious root, many be tuberous or
fasciculate type.

Leaves— Scale like, membranous and caducous.

Inflorescence — Fascicle, araceme of white flow-
ers.

Asparagus racemosus Will.
(Shatavari)

Flower — Pedicellate, bisexual, actinomorphic,
complete, regular, hypogynous, perianth members are

----- PAGE 627 -----
Shatavari 619

six, arranged in two whorls of 3 each. Stamens are 6, in two whorls of 3 each; gynoecium
is tricarpellary syncarpous, superior ovary and axile Placentation,

Fruit — Berry.
Varieties

Bh.Pr.Ni & Ka.Ni. — 2 types

1. Shatavari— Asparagus racemosus, Willd.

2. Maha Shatavari — Asparagus sarmentosus, Willd.
Adulterant

Peeled root of Asparagus adscendens Roxb.
Grahya laxana (Genuine characteristics):

Root is peeled, dried, unbranched roots, 5 to 15 cm long and up to 1 cm broad at the
thickest part. These are slightly arched or almost straight, fusiform and somewhat translu-
cent. The tubers are generally deeply wrinkled longitudinally. The wrinkle appears as
flaps extending to the whole length of the roots. The surface is smooth, waxy, having
fawn or flesh colour. A transversely cut portions of the root shows a mealy white surface
with a yellowish central strand. The margin of the cut surface is wavy or sometimes star
shaped on breaking becomes short and uneven pieces, not having any characteristic odour,
tastes sweetish with a bitter after taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
waret agger hafta aft 1 arrenit waadt wredtat a dtedt u
Mahaégatavari-
TerraTat wiser waedaiican | weedtat Fast weve Helatt
(aS. Feeaie GT 184-185)
Properties and Actions
vrarertt we-ettar farce wat Tart | Aershrghe|n Rarer Asa year |
Qrarrattacn aaftrarsnatstd 0 (a5. Tene et 186-187)

Mahashatavari-

reread Feat Tet set Tat | eladtat Pexavitaeniaaaaar |
maga creel: aTaTTET Ul (AT. TSeMS TT 187-188)

----- PAGE 628 -----
620

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Shatavari-
vravant fear fareet wa wag: erarerferet | arate gear Tara BAT I

(oF. Wee TF 282)
Mahashatavari-

aeadtat teat gq ger gen tart | vitactat Prexavifrectaearrars,
aagiirataet crereteraae: | (aA. yeas af 283-284)
Shatavari-
vravent earfercat Carat Wel caret | Often yeaa eresHrghzaT
ayer areata Youtethare viteah ste, | (a. sitef Th 1063-1064)
Mahashatavari- .
Herat ger enfr aerypRat | Tevasifstetrett vfladtat caret 1
agi vga gat gataegt | Pefrarciiremeniqenaear,
(df. aiteft af 1066-1067)
wataedt fet ga agt frafiraat i amare fire was Ta
wearatest aot net firafregery | ved amare fore ster Tare |
SUTRA THAT WaT: SHAT: (TAY. Meee HT 122-123)
vielatigad vit firrh tag TARA | Unerent aed arate
veraaiss wet firageratt Ta: | wigena fife aw aeqyaary i
waren auetraste Gert Yonfrencaahrrad Fe: |
wetetratsaat a atte, 7 crenata corre mead
(B.A. frente FT 40-42)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Shatavari
a. Bija b. Mula c. Kanda d. patra
Ans: b. Mula

2. Pradhana Rasa of Shatavari Mula
a. Katu b. Kashaya c. Madhura d. Amla

Ans; c. Madhura
. Important Karma attributed to Shatavari
a. Shodhana b. Bhedana c. Jwarghna’ d. Stanya janana

Ww

Ans: d. Stanya Janana

----- PAGE 629 -----
fon

~

~

Shatavari 621

. Ghee prepared from paste and decoction of Shatavari (Asparagus racemosus)

taken with sugar acts as
a. Rasayana b. Stambhaka c. Grahi d. Trishna hara
Ans: a. Rasayana

. Shatavari Guda is indicated in

a, Jwara b. Raktapitta c. Arshas d. Ardita
Ans: b. Raktapitta

. Shatavaryadi Churna is indicated

a. Trishna b. Jwara c. Shukra kshaya d. Atisara
Ans: c. Shukra kshaya

. Botanical name of Shatavari
a. Asparagus racemosus b. Boerhavia diffusa
c. Gmelina arborea d. Bacopa monneri

Ans: a. Asparagus racemosus

Vari and Narayani are the synonyms of

a. Haritaki b. Majishta c. Varuna d. Shatavari
Ans: d. Shtavari

. Types of Shatavari acc to Bhava Prakasha Nighantu

a. 3 b. 4 c. 6 d.2
Ans: 4.2

RK

----- PAGE 630 -----
Shigru

(NRE SEY et SE ST ST
Useful parts ~ Twak (Bark), Phala (Fruit), Patra (Leaf) and Beeja (Seed).

Rasadi panchaka

Ruksha Tikshna Sara Laghu
Karma (Action)

Dipana, Rochana, Vidahakara, Sangrahi, Shukrala, Hridya, Chakshushya,
Shwayathuhara, Krimighna, Vishaghna, Vranahara, Medohara, Kushthaghna,
Shulahara, Shwasahara, Mukhajadyahara.

Shigru valkala (Bark) — Shulahara, Chakshusya, Bramhana, Medahara,
Krimihara, Ruchikara, Dipana, Pachana.

Shigru pushpa (Flowers) — Jantuhara, Chakshushya, Krimi
Shigruphala (Fruit) — Shulahara, Kushthahara, Shwasahara, Gulmaghna, Dipana.
Shigru bija (Seed) — Chaksushya, Vishaghna, Avrashya, Shirortinashaka.
Madhu Shigru — Dipana
Nila Shigru — Jantughna, Artinashaka, Shulaghna, Chakshushya and Rochana.
Shweta Shigru — Shophahara, Ruchya, Dipana, Mukhajadyahara
Rakta Shigru — Rasayana, Shophahara, Artihara.
Pharmacological Actions
Antioxidant, Antiinflammatory, Antispasmodic, Stimulant, Expectorant, Diuretic,
Emmanagogue.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)
Vatakapha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya and Kaphahara because
of Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Shigru — Netraroga, Vishavikara, Shotha, Krimi, Kushtha, Medoroga, Shwasa,
Shula.

----- PAGE 631 -----
Shigru 623

Shigru valkala (Bark) — Shula ®
Shigru patra (Leaves) — Netraroga, Shula, Medohara, Krimi, Aruchi, Agnimandya.
Shigru pushpa (Flowers) — Netraroga and Krimi.
Shigru phala (Fruit) — Shula, Kushtha, Gulma, Agnimandya
Shigru bija (Seed) — Netraroga, Shirashula
Madhu Shigru — Agnimandya
Nila Shigru —Jantu vikara, Arti, Netraroga
Shweta Shigru — Shopha, Aruchi, Agnimandya.
Rakta Shigru — Shopha, Arti and as a Rasayana.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Netraroga (Eye disorders)
araftrrenmatrartat saree terete etary |
vieta wate wate: Bryaecta Ta: WATT: U1 (3.ES. 16/9)

Intake of juice prepared from tender leaves of Shigru (Moringa oleifera) alleviates
many diseases of eye caused by vitiation of Vata, Pitta, Kapha and combination of all
three Doshas.

2. Shira Shula (Head ache)

(8.4. 3/40/21)
Nasya (Snuff therapy) with juice of leaves of Shigru (Moringa oleifera) mixed with
Jaggery is very effective in Head ache.
3. Krimi roga (Worm infestation)
waits: ofits: ta: fatter: Srp sare: 1 (4.8.-HFA. 22)
Decoction of Shigru (Moringo oleifera) and Vidanga (Embelia ribes) is mixed with
honey and taken in case of Krimi (Worm infestation).

Matra (Dosage)
Swarasa (Juice) — 20to30ml
Kwatha (Decoction) - 30to50ml

Phytoconstituents — Total plant contains amino acids like leucine, i-alanine, aspar-
tic acid, glutamic acid, glycine, valine, asparagine and glutamine and two amid along
with organics acids like citric, malic, malonic, fumaric and oxalic acids.

----- PAGE 632 -----
624 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Pods and leaves contain Vitamin A, Nicotinic acid, Ascorbic acid, Essential amino
acids like arginine, histidine, lysine, leucine and isoleucine.

Root bark contains three alkaloids like moringine, moringinine and spirochine.

Flowers are having quercetin and Kaempferol. Exudates from stem consists Arabi-
nose, Galactose and Glucuronic acid.

Seeds showed presence of stigmasterol and a glycoside called moringyne.

Research corner

1. To evaluate and compare the antioxidant potential and anti-inflammatory actiity
of ethanolic extract of flowers of Moringa oleifera (M. oleifera). Phytochemical
analysis of extract showed flavonoids, cardiac glycosides etc. M. Oleifera
flowers were found to contain 19.31 mg/g of gallic acid equivalent of total
phenolics in dry extract but exhibited moderate antioxidant activity. The anti-
inflammatory activity of plant extract was significant and comparable with the
standard drug diclofenac sodium. Alhakmani F, Kumar S, Khan SA.
Estimation of total phenolic content, in-vitro antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
activity of flowers of Moringa oleifera. Asian Pac J. Trop Biomed. 2013 Aug;
3 (8):623-7; discussion 626-7. doi:10.1016/S2221-1691 (13)60126-4.

2. To evaluate the antioxidant activity of aqueous extract of Moringa oleifea (M.
Oleifera) Young leaves by in vivo as well as in vitro assays. Significant
increase in activities of SOD, CAT, GST while, a decrease in LPO content
was observed. Whereas, total phenolic, Flavonoid and flavonao contents in the
extract were found to be 120 mg/g of GAE, 40.5 mg/g of QE and 12.12 mg/
g of QE, respectively. On the other hand, FRAP assay results of M. oleifera
leaves was (85.00- 5.00) M/g of extract powder. Jaiswal D, Rai PK, Mehta S,
Chatterji S, Shukla S, Rai DK, Sharma G, Sharma B, Khair S, Watal G. Role
of Moringa oleifera in regulation of diabetes-induced oxidative stress. Asian
Pac J Trop Med. 2013 Jun; 6(6):426-32. doi: 10.1016/S1995-7645(13)60068-
1.

3. 4-(alpha-L-Rhamnosyloxy) benzyl isothicocynate (1) and 4-(4'-O-acetyl-alpha-
L-rhamnosyloxy)-benzyl isothiocyanate (2) isolated from Moringa oleifera
seeds were screened for their antibacterial activities against Staphylococcus
aurous, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli,
Enterobacter aerogenous, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and for their antifungal activities against Candida albicans,
Trichophyton rubrum, and Epidermophyton floccosum using the disk diffusion
method. Isothiocyanates 1 and 2 were found active at the lowest inhibitory

----- PAGE 633 -----
Shigru 625

concentration of 1 mg/ml against all Gram-positive bacteria tested (S. aureus.
S. epidermidis, B. subtilis) and against the dermatophytic fungi E. floccosum
and T. rubrum. Padla EP, Solis LT, Levida RM, Shen CC, Ragasa CY.

Antimicrobial isothiocyanates from the seeds of Moringa oleifera Lam. Z
Naturforsch C. 2012 Nov-Dec; 67 (11-12):557-64.

. To investigate the potential of hydroethanolic extract of Moringa oleifera
(MOHE) against 7, 12-dimethylbenz (a) anthracene (DMBA)-induced toxicity
in male Swiss albino mice. Single oral administration of 15 mg/kg of DMBA
resulted in significant increases in Cyt P450 and Cyt b5 (P<0.01). The toxic
effect of DMBA was justified by the significant decreases in the activities of
GSH and GST in renal tissues (P<0.05). The levels of renal AST, ALT and
ALP and protein content which are indicate of renocellular damage were also
found decreased along with significant increae in total cholesterol content in
DMBA-treated mice (P<0.01). The DMBA-induced alterations inth tissues
were significantly reversed after pretreatment with 200 and 400 mg/kg of
MOHE orally for 14 d (P<0.01). Sharma V, Paliwal R, Janmeda P, Sharma S.
Renoprotective effects of Moringa oleifera pods in 7,12-dimethylbenz (a)
anthracene-exposed mice. Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Xue Bao. 2012 Oct; 10(10):
1171-8.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name of Yoga Indications

2. Shobhanjanadi lepa Apachi
Shwetakaraviradya taila Kushtha

Botanical Name — Moringa oleifera Linn.
Moringa — Derived from Malayalam name
oleifera— Oil bearing

Family — Moringaceae

Kula - Shigru kula

Basonym of Drug
foratfer ftewret fereerter |

Shigru (Moringa oleifera) having very potent qualities.

----- PAGE 634 -----
626 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Synonyms
Morphology
1, MeTS- wears, vite sere: |
Shigru plant is very beautiful.
2. AgAet- ARPT ATRL |
Shigru plant has many roots.
3. Atae:- Tate Fata ar
Shigru plant releases exudates.
4, FACS: TAT: WEA SHAT STAT |
Shigru plant will have dense foliage.
Properties and Actions
5. dteuge:- cteut yore |
Shigru root is very sharp in quality.
6. Ferennult-yerenete cents were |
Shigru leaves have strong qualities like that of Radish.
7. PONTT-Houi Ate Te AST |
Odour of Shigru is very strong like that of Black pepper.
8. fasftrer-agter exitte |
Shigru is very useful in abscess.
9. wefta-a aftat nagen: HeATeTH sere: |
Shigru is useful in intoxication.
10. @ftererren:-eftergres Ware: |
Shigru is used as green vegetable.
Others
11. Geeaht-eitfenent Gat |

Shigru is known as Murangi especially in Malayalam language and even the
later name Moringa oleifera is derived from this word.

Regional Names

English Drum stick, Horse radish tree

----- PAGE 635 -----
Shigru 627

Nugge Mara
Malaya

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Swedopaga varga, Krimighna varga, Shirovirechanopaga varga

Sushruta — Varunadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni — Guduchyadi varga 105-110

Habitat
Shigru is cultivated through out India.

Morphology
Habit — Small or Middle sized tree.

Bark — Corky
Wood - Soft
Root -Young parts are tomentose

Leaves — Usually tripinnate, sometimes 45 cm
long, rhachis are slender, thickened and articulated at
the base, pinnae and pinnules are opposite, decidu-
ous, their rhachides are very slender, articulated and
with a gland at the articulations. Ultimate leaflets 12
to 20 mm long, and 6 to 10 mm wide, the lateral ellip-
tic, the terminal obovate and slightly, larger than the lat-
eral ones, nerves obscure, petiolules of lateral leaflets 1 to 2.5 mm, those of the terminal
are 3 to 6 mm long.

Moringa oleifera Lam.
(Shigru)

Inflorescence — Large puberculous panicles

Flowers — White in colour, calyx lobes are linear, lanceolate, reflexed, petals are
spathulate, veined, stamens five and are fertile. Ovary is oblong, villous and style is cylin-
dric.

Fruit - Pod, reaching upto 45 cm long and 9 ribbed.

Seeds — Three-angled and the angles are winged.
Varieties

Bh.Pr. Ni —2 types

1. Shigru— Moringa oleifera 2. Madhushigru — Moringa concanensis

----- PAGE 636 -----
628 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Ra. Ni — 4 types

1. Shigru 2. Nila Shigru
3. Shweta Shigru 4. Rakta Shigru
Classical references
Synonyms

(1.5. Tee TT 105)
Properties and Actions
Py: HY: He: UT entrar wept ory: | dtost Treat wer: ameftaent facreHe
dort yet Ga: fier aT: | eer: Hare farsfraag iets
Faisush Rete Yor THSATTAT | Ie: MATT Var feraraEH KAT |
whtart fast ea sures: frat tHe (aT. WEeaie aT 105-108)
Madhu Shigru-
nergy: wrrequnt fergraretaat: Ue: (S03. Teens at 108)
Shigru Valkala (Bark) and Shigru patra (Leaf)-
RryseHcrann eas: Teta | (AT. TEHAMe TT 109)
Shigru bija (Seed)-
ages ryt atst dente ferearery | stare parted TACT PRT, u
(ata. Tees FT 110)
Pryce: weston: payin | rearferatatet faxtrcteqergsd tl
(af. arthaeat 38)
fog: we: Heures cevitet wept org: 1 stot Tet Bar: arreearcat feraeHe_ Ul
Ma Yao ea: Telia Hloa: | Mayes: Hae Bet seafarers
Aatsoeh frais Terrsau | Heyy: efter: vet cho: UE: |
art arated wast eargetirery | devigmad feet Fa: Bret Te
fy gat wy aofrret wey | weno yen wget pita
TAM YOGA: Yor | sctorct Hey | frag gteaet aH WATT Ut
wes wet wag Hat raf | yeTpsarara youet dhot wT |
sages rast atst ctenitent roars | aged Hated Aaa isha
(af. attsft af 944-951)

----- PAGE 637 -----
Shigru 629

Shigru-

Pras Hefermordtent arene: | yaaa wear drat worarrze_
(afr, Herta ef 27)

Nila Shigru-

viearerreftenteng: targum: fifeseretar | arqarenfelgpercasegeat tert: We:
(uPA, ernie aT 27)

Shigru-

Pras weferrntertent arcane: | EEE west Choa awraraz,
(afr. qeranfe vi 29)

Shweta Shigru-

dairy: weeten: wae: | TRAE wea sett FaTATT I
wir. yerane at 31

Rakta Shigru-

vetatedkat wy tare: | viteemmedhrht frescoes: |
(aw. qerafe at 33)

forg: vittreredtent: aeferrntoreteten: | dhoa: emer Crafter:

we et feserageiy | yet wes a aghst aaEMSTS Aad Ul
(fB.Pi. etree eT 201-202)
Shigru patra-
(a. Fea aT 131)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Shigru Patra is mainly indicated in,
a. Raktapitta b. Shotha c. Netra Roga_—_ d. Arshas
Ans: c. Netra Roga

2. Decoction of Shigru (Moringo oleifera) and Vidanga (Embelia ribes) is mixed
with honey and taken in case of

a. Krimi b. Kushtha c. Visarpa d.Vyanga
Ans: a. Krimi

----- PAGE 638 -----
630 Dravyaguna Vijnana

3, Shigru Kwatha is specifically indicated in
a. Jalodara b. Plihodara
Ans:b, Plihodara

4. Shobhanjanadi Lepa is indicated in
a. Gandamala b. Medoroga
Ans: c. Apachi

5. Botanical name of Shigru
a. Operculina turpathum
c. Alpinia galangal
Ans: d. Moringa oleifera

6. Shobhanjana is a synonym of
a. Shigru b. Daruharidra
Ans: a. Shigru

7. Akshiva is a synonym of
a. Kokilaksha b. Ishvari
Ans; c. Shigru

8. Habit of Shigru Plant
a. Herb b. Tree
Ans: b. Tree

aeRO

c. Hridroga d, Shirashoola

c, Apachi d. Karshya

b. Terminalia chebula
d. Moringa oleifera

c. Nandyavarta d. Katuki

c. Shigru d. Maricha

c. Shrub d. Creeper

----- PAGE 639 -----
Shunthi

aoe eee deena eneemnneemmnemenemanmnennsnenemnenmemnnmemnanmneanaemmnneiadeeeinene
Useful part - Kanda (Rhizome)
Rasadi panchaka

Particulars Ardraka Shunthi

Pha ee Kae
lL ee

Dosha Karma (Action on Dosha)
Vatahara because of Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka. Kaphahara beacause of
Ushna virya and Katu Rasa.

Karma (Actions)
Ardraka: Pachana Bhedana Rochana, Vrishya
Dipana Swarya Vibandhahara — Shulahara
Jihwa Shodhaka Kanthashodhaka
Shunthi Dipana Pachaka Vrishya Swarya
Kasahara Shwasahara — Shulahara Grahi
Ruchya Hradya Vibandhahara
Pharmacological actions
Externally-  Rubefaecient
Stimulant
Internally- Digestive
Gastro intestinal stimulant
Carminative
Stomachic
Sialagogue

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Ajirna, Agnimandya, Amavata, Chardi, Shula, Shwasa, Kasa, Hradroga, Shlipada,
Shotha, Arsha, Anaha, Udara, Vibandha.

----- PAGE 640 -----
632 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Agnimandya (Loss of appetite)
PAYA WAAAY | (37.8.3. 40/55)
MAA Varres aA TarOT | attract Tel Peregrenvs fereterry
(ara. elaeate FA. 51)

Consuming a piece of fresh ginger with a pinch of salt before having food is very
useful in increasing depleted digestive power.

2. Aruchi (Anorexia)
Hal T aPATTTTA: Me: Bey: Sar: | (ATTA. 1/851)
Keeping Luke warm ginger juice and rock salt in mouth is beneficial in Aruchi.
3. Arshas (Haemorrhoids)
HAY TeaAT Hearst: (TFT 6/16)
Kwatha of Ginger and Kulattha (Dolichos biflorus) is beneficial in Kaphaja Arshas.
4, Shitapitta (Urticaria)
(aa.fa. 55/11)
Consuming Ardraka (Zingiber officinale) swarasa with old Jaggery is useful in
Shitapitta (Urticaria) and Agnimandya (loss of appetite).
Shunthi
1. Agnimandya (Loss of appetite)
wtiaent tar Bust vara Ysa a Ares ar ar care aT
(aa.Fa. 6/34)

In Agnimandya (Loss of appetite), Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) and Haritaki
(Terminalia chebula) Churna in equal quantity has to be taken with jaggery or Saindhava
lavana (Rock salt).

2. Parinaima Shula (Duodenal ulcer)
Quat fens: Heh Gas Be asad | Ros TATA ATTA
(Ma. 2/5/18)

Paste of Shunthi (Zingiber officinale), Tila (Seasamum indicum) and Guda (Jaggery).
when consumed with milk is beneficial in Parinama shula and Amavata (Rheumatoid
arthritis).

----- PAGE 641 -----
Shunthi 633

3. Shotha (Oedema)

Teayst at gust Gastar Haranrqarny | (31.4.F4. 19/3)

Consuming equal quantity of Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) and jaggery with
Punarnava (Boerhavia diffusa) Kashaya (Decoction) is beneficial in Shotha.
4. Shira Shula (Headache)

TSAR HHT AT eT YeTGA, tl (AFA. 62/33)

Nasya of Guda (Jaggery) and Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) Kalka (Paste) is benefi-
cial in Shira Shula (Headache).
5. Visuchika (Diarrhoea)

fararrn Peart eareate feng herent (9.FA. 6/112)

Kwatha (Decoction) prepared from Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) and Bilva (Aegle
marmelos) is useful in Visuchika and Chardi (Vomitting).
Matra (Dose)

Swarasa (Juice) — 3-10 ml

Churna (Powder) — 750 mg-1.5 g
Phytochemistry

Aromatic oil (1-4%), Starch (40-60%), Fat (10%), Fibre (5%), Camphene,
Phellandrene, Zingiberine, Cineol, Borneol, Gingerol, Gingerin (Oleo-resin).

Ginger oil contains— Monoterpene hydrocarbons serquiterpene hydrocarbons oxy-
genated mono and sesquiterpene pheny] propanoids.
Research corner

1. Saraswat M, Suryanarayana P. Reddy PY, Patil MA, Balakrishna N, Reddy
GB, Antiglycating potential of Zingiber officinalis and the delay of diabetic
cataract in rats. Mol Vis. 2010 Aug. 10;16:1525-37. PMID: 20806076.

The results indicated that ginger was effective against the development of
diabetic cataract in rats mainly through its antiglycating potential and to a lesser
extent by inhibition of the polyol pathway.

2. Carrasco FR, Schmidt G, Romero AL, Sartoretto JL, Caparroz-Assef SM,
Bersani-Amado CA, Cuman RK, Immunomodulatory activity of Zingiber
officinale Roscoe, and cell-mediated responses. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2009 Jul;
61(7):961-7. PMID:19589240. Ginger essential oil recorded the humoral
immune response in immunosuppressed mice.

----- PAGE 642 -----
634

Dravyaguna Vijnana

WwW

-

an

. Aimbire F, Penna SC, Rodrigues M, Rodrigues KC, Lopes-Martins RA, Sertie

JA., Effect of hydroalcoholic extract of Z. officinalis rhizomes on LPS-induced
rat airway hyperreactivity and lung inflammation. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent
Fatty Acids. 2007 Oct-Nov; 77(3-4):129-38. Epub 2007 Oct. 17.
PMID:17923400.

Ginger exerts an anti-inflammatory effect on lung attenuating RTHR and Cox
metabolites.

. Mansour MS, Ni YM, Roberts AL, Kelleman M, Roychoudhury A, St-Onge

MP, Ginger consumption enhances the thermic effect of food and promotes
feelings of satiety without affecting metabolic and hormonal parameters in
overweight men : A pilot study. Metabolism. 2012 Apr 24. [Equb ahead of
print] PMID: 22538118. The results, showing enhanced thermoge-nesis and
reduced feelings of hunger with ginger consumption, suggest a potential role of
ginger in weight management.

. Iranloye BO, Arikawe AP, Rotimi G, Sogbade AO, Anti-diabetic and anti-

oxidant effects of Zingiber officinale on alloxan-induced and insulin-resistant
diabetic male rats. Niger J Physiol Sci. 2011 Nov 23;26(1):89-96.
PMID:22314994, Dietary ginger has hypoglycaemic effect, enhances insulin
synthesis in male rats and had high antioxidant activity.

Saenghong N, Wattanathorn J, Muchimapura S, Tongun T, Piyavhatkul, N,
Banchonglikitkul C, Kajsongkram T, Zingiber officinale improves cognitive
function of the middle-Aged Healthy Women. Evid based complement
alternate. Med. 2012; 2012:383062. Epub 2011 Dec 22. PMID:22235230.
Ginger is a potential cognitive enhancer for middle-aged women.

Wu KL, Rayner CK, Chuah SK, Changchien CS, Lu SN, Chiu YC, Chiu
KW, Lee CM, Effects of ginger on gastric emptying and motility in healthy
humans. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 May; 20(5):436-40.
PMID:18403946. .

El-Ghorab AH, Nauman M, Anjum FM, Hussain S, Nadeem M, A
comparative study on chemical composition an antioxidant activity of ginger
(Zingiber officinale) and cumin (Cuminum cyminum). J Agric Food
Chem.2010 Jul 28;58(14):8231-7. PMID:20590154.

Ginger and cumin can be used as potential sources of natural antioxidants in
foods.

----- PAGE 643 -----
_Shunthi 635

een

vga (Formulations)

S].No. Name Indications
pe ase Shunthi kashaya Agnimandya, Kasa, Shula
5 al Nagaradi churna Grahani dosha, Arsha
x ns Nagaradi taila Mukha roga

/ Shunthi ghrata Grahani, Pandu, Jwara
is rs Shunthi khanda Amlapitta, Shula, Amavata
i Shunthi rasanadi kashaya Vataja swarabheda

Zingiber officinale Roscoe.
Zingiber — Derived from Shrungber

Officinale — Sold in shops or used as medicine
Family - Zingiberaceae (See appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Haridra kula
Basonym of Drug
quats afta ate aT SA, ster, Yost wr |
AGUAS, AAA, AAAS YHA Ye Weesy
Shunthi subsides Kapha and Vata dosha, dries away Kapha and Ama and itself is
dried product, hence the name Shunthi.
Synonyms
Availability
1. ARS ae preare, eaforsrATTUT BERT TT
Sunthi (Ginger) is available in shops.
Morphology
2. HATE WAY HATH SA GATHATAUT TATA |
Leaves spread out like Umbrella.
3. afteapreny- aeRO YORAM: |
Flowers are like Cobras hood.

Horn shaped rhizomes.

----- PAGE 644 -----
636 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Actions and properties
5. HEMAT: HgaUG ws ferent |
Sunthi is one of the best Katu Dravya.
6. SeHeq- Atery
Rhizome is very strong.
7. BITA- Tear |
Rhizome causes burning sensation.
8. ARTI. Heer Aa, UREA ATATT |
Sunthi is very efficacious drug because of its strong actions.
9. fiatur- fader erfst franaq aaa fea wt faq, Gersrarey
Yorantkteare |
Commonly used by public because of its quality and easy availability.
10. fesat-arrgy wfererfe erie temerfeter |
Quickly enters circulation because of its strong potency.

Regional Names

Classification of Dravya (Gana)

Charaka Triptighna Varga, Arshoghna Varga, Dipaniya Varga,
Shulaprashamana Varga, Shitaprashamana Varga, Trishna
nigrahana Varga, Stanyashodhana Varga

Sushruta _ Pippalyadi gana, Trikatu

Bh.Pr.Ni. — Haritakyadi varga 44-52
Habitat

Ginger is cultivated through out the sub-Himalayan tracts of Uttarpradesh, Deccan,
Karnataka, Kerala and Bihar. Run wild in some places of Western Ghats.

----- PAGE 645 -----
Shunthi 637

External morphology

Perennial herb with elongated leafy stems and
horizontal tuberous root stocks.

Rhizome — Stout and tuberous.

Stem — Erect, Leafy stem, 0.6 to 1.2 Mtr high.

Leaves — Narrow, distichous, subscssile on the
sheaths, linear-lanceolate,

1-2 cm wide and glabrous.

Inflorescence — Spike

Flowers — Greenish with a small dark purple or
purplish black.

Fruit — Dehiscent capsule and oblong.
Curing of Ginge

Ginger is marketed both in the peeled and in the unpeeled condition.

Zingiber officinale Roscoe

In scraped (peeled) the epidermal layer of the rhizome is scraped off with the help of
a sharpened bamboo-splinter and then washed in water and dried in the sunlight for 7-10
days.
Contraindications

Fresh ginger is contraindicated in Kushtha, Pandu, Mutrakrchra, Raktapitta, Vrana,
Jwara, Daha, Grishma and Sharad Ritu.

Market Sample:
Size —- Rhizomes of ginger are about 1.5x1.5 to 6.5 cm.

Shape — Rhizomes are laterally compressed, bearing short flat, ovate and oblique
branches on the upper side, with bud at the apex.

Colour —Externally, it is buff coloured. Transversely cut surface shows well marked
endodermis and stele.

Fracture — Short and fibrous.
Odour — Agreable and aromatic.
Taste — Agreable and pungent.
Classical references
Ardraka Synonyms
Teh THA TaTHS NS marsha | (ATT. eTEMMS TH. 49)

----- PAGE 646 -----
638 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Properties
atiitent Set yeh Atenitonr ost wet | see META HAA ATTEHTATTRT
ATO: fa: Yuouredsh weaTgHsRIeT:
WA Ver vest wade varony | athraedtast Gea fret Hue ferme
(ara.etirrate TT. 49-57)
anifictet tad Prarerenareyerhrd, | Hew Tet Get wel eanssdeh PIAA UI
(a.Fmagente TH. 84)
aera fered Yeast at Ye | ert Wert get gut aretha
warictet tad francs, | stat syarer Tah yerarartay
SS
arvernntraed fasteners | tert det unit vitedeat oe
ara aut aaa | want camer et abana ul
TA Terret freeravs faye | aravetnet wet dhot ore we
Praper a freee peer | (3. f.siteftert: 1155-1161)
memmteh et fork vilaet oy 1 dot eis vin-aHnvermaey, Ul

(af. fracafert: 29)
AH | A ish garages Aa TATA: |
aftrershr reat sarcary ateshipey tt
ager: alxgret arora | arararecitéea wlivart ertefe u
(B.A.frreanfeert: 7-8)

Contra-indications

porgara ges wafra att wet 1 qehrerenetta yf
(aa.etaaae aT 52)

Shunthi Synonyms

id Gian -y eee Tat eden | Seep are
(aT .etreene at 4.4)

Properties
godt wearmarcett orett wget oy: | Raretton wep Ure RET Pa GT,
aon waatafrarayeraracenan, | eat sefceyienet siretarareary ul
sme ype aaeraftentr a | ayer wet AY Uy YvSuaat eer

----- PAGE 647 -----
Shunthi 639

ferarr Set arg ar set arfgott sae 1 eiftafeterer Ae eee A Terre II
(aa etrrerate at 45-38)
ftaretto wear Yudt ger virmancaroehhy | afr artracare wg setoerst
(Fr. mrergenia af 83)
fet wrest get ward arremcaraer | Prefer yerestrettenet: seftacrery,
aTareaTaanreartgenraterreny | (af. sitet af 1151-1153)
yudiacon Rarer a arena | yeaa ae settrearttt
(af. froreafe af 26)

edie yet art oneed fret ag may ATEN

(R.A froreanfe aT 6)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Shunthi
a. Mula b. Patra c. Kanda d. Phala
Ans: c. Kanda
2. Vipaka of Shunthi
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Kashaya
Ans: b. Madhura
3. Pradhana Karma of Shunthi as per Sharangadhara
a. Madakari b. Lekhana c. Medhya d. Grahi
Ans: d. Grahi
4. Consuming a piece of fresh ginger with a pinch of salt before having food is

very useful in
a. Agnimandya b. Daha c. Trishna d. Raktapitta
Ans: a. Agnimandya

. Keeping Luke warm ginger juice and rock salt in mouth is beneficial in
a. Kushtha b. Amlapitta c. Aruchi d. Raktapitta
Ans: c. Aruchi

ws

----- PAGE 648 -----
640

Dravyaguna Vijnana

. Nasya of Guda (Jaggery) and Shunthi (Zingiber officinale) Kalka (Paste) is

beneficial in
a. Netra roga b. Shirashula c. Udara shula_ d. Ajirna
Ans: b. Shirashula

. Shunthi Khanda is specifically indicated in

a. Amlapitta b. Shirashula c. Krimi d. Kasa
Ans: a. Amlapitta

. Botanical name of Shunthi

a. Alpinia galangal b. Pluchea lanceolata
c. Punica granatum d. Zingiber officinale
Ans: d. Zingiber officinale

. Vishvabheshaja is a synonym of

a. Lodhra b. Shunthi c. Ativisha d. Vatsanabha
Ans: b. Shunthi

de KK

----- PAGE 649 -----
Chapter

Talisapatra

Useful part - Patra (Leaf)
Rasadi panchaka

ose __| Kan ies Medhwre |
Via
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Madhura vipaka, Pitta Shamaka because
of Madhura vipaka. Kaphahara because of Katu Tikta rasa.

Karma (Actions)

Shwasahara, Kasahara, Ruchikara, Dipana, Gulmaroganashaka, Mukharogahara,
Hridya, Krimighna, Hikkanigrahana, Chardinigrahana.
Pharmacological Actions

Antispasmodic, Emmenagogue, Antilithic, Antipyretic, Carminative, Expectorant,
Stomachic, Anticancer, Antifungel, Antibacterial, Antinflammatory.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Shwasa, Kasa, Hikka, Hridroga, Chardi, Aruchi, Mukharoga, Agnimandya and
Gulma.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kasa (Cough)

areftearget GaaaTes Beh Vet MATA: GA: SrA | (sa. 3/10/27)

Powder of Talisa (Abies webbiana) mixed with juice of Vasa (Adhatoda vasica)
leaves if taken it alleviates Kasa (Cough) caused by Kapha and Pitta. This combination is
very useful in all respiratory disorders.

2. Aruchi (Anorrexia)

Arete UE SAT: ARTA: ssseesesenenes SPAR: FM | (H.g.FA. 5/49)

Tablets prepared from powder of Talisa (Abies webbiana), Karpura (Cinnamom
camphora) and Sugarcandy promote taste.

----- PAGE 650 -----
642 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) — 1 to 3 g

Phytoconstituents

Taxinine, Taxine-A, Ephedrine, Betuloside, Taxagifin, B-Sitosterol, Hydrocyanic
acid, Tannin, Taxicatin, Taxyphyllin, and Ferredoxin are present in leaves.

Fruit contains Lycopene, B-Carotene, Rhodoxanthin and Zeaxanthin.

Research corner

1. The methanol extract of the dried leaves of Abies webbiana as evaluated for
antimicrobial activity. The methanol extract showed a broad spectrum of
antibacterial activity. Vishnoi SP, Ghosh AK, Debnath B, Samanta S, Gayen
S, Jha T. Antibacterial activity of Abies webbiana. Fitoterapia. 2007 Feb;
78(2):153-5. Epub 2006 Nov 14.

2. The methanol extract of A. Webbiana Lind] was evaluated for its effect on a
cough model induced by sulphur dioxide gas in mice. When administered
orally it exhibited significant antitussive activity compared with the control in
a dose dependent manner. Nayak SS, Ghosh AK, Srikanth, K, Debnath B, Jha
T. Antitussive activity of Abies webbiana Lindl. leaf extract against sulphur
dioxide-induced cough reflex in mice. Phytother Res. 2003 Sep; 17(8):930-2.

3. The leaves of A. Webbiana yielded methyl betuloside and betuloside. The
former had been isolated for the first item from a nasal source and the latter is
reoperated from the PANACEA family for the first time. Sarkar SK, Poddar
G, Mahato SB. Glucosides from Abies webbiana. Planta Med. 1987 Apr;
§3(2):219-20.

4. The present investigation was undertaken to evaluate the bronchodilating effect
and bronchial hyperreactivity of alcoholic extract to Taxus baccata Linn.
(AET) leaves in experimental animals. Treatment with AET (200 and 400 mg/
kg, p.o., for 7 days) showed significant protection against histamine and
acetylcholine aerosol induced bronchospasm in guinea pigs. Significant
decrease in the total leukocyte and differential leukocyte count in the BALF of
the egg albumin sensitized guinea pigs was observed by administration of AET
(200 and 400 mg/kg, p.o., for 15 days). AET dose dependently protected the
mast cell disruption induced by compound 48/80. These results suggest. that
AET not only has bronchodilating activity but also decreases bronchial
hyperreactivity by decreasing the infiltration of inflammatory cells in the airway
and inhibiting the release of histamine like mediators from the mast cell by

----- PAGE 651 -----
Talisapatra 643

stabilizing it Patel p, Patel K, Gandhi T. Evaluation of Effect of Taxus baccata
leaves Extract on Bronchoconstriction and Bronchial Hyperreactivity in
Experimental Animals. J Young Pharm. 2011 Jan; 3(1):41-7. doi: 10.4103/
0975-1483.76418.

5. Three lignan derivatives, (-)-taxiresinol (1), (-)-3’-demethylisolariciresinol-9'-
hydroxyisopropylether (2) and (-)-3-demethylisolariciresinol (3), Previously
isolated from the heart-wood to Taxus baccata L. (Taxaceae) were investigated
for cytotoxicity against the oncology Cell Line Panel (Breast, colon, ovary,
prostate, lung and a normal adult bovine aortic endothelial cell line) as well as
for antimicrobial activities. Erdemoglu N, Sener B,Choudhary Ml. Bioactivity
of Liganas from Taxus baccata. Z Naturforsch C. 2004 Jul-Aug; 59(7-8): 494-
8.

Yoga (Formulations)

Indications

SI.No.
Botanical Name — Abies webbiana Lindle
Abies — A fur tree
webbiana — After the name of Mr P. Barkar Webb a naturalist.
Family — Pinaceae
Kula - Devadaru
Basonym of Drug
acta cerita t aertet i set: wae:

Talisapatra (Taxus buccata) is a plant growing on the high mountains.

Name of Yoga

Synonyms
Morphology
1. eettoa-enst ox eet UareT: |
Leaves of Talisapatra resemble like that of Amalaki (Emblica officinalis).
2. WAEN-WH BSA TEA: WATT: |
Talisapatra plant bears plenty of leaves.

----- PAGE 652 -----
o44 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Regional Names

Bir
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni — Karpuradi varga 114-115
Habitat

Talisapatra grows in Himalayan ranges.
Morphology

Abies Webbiana Lindl.Abies Webbiana Lindl

Habit — A small or medium sized evergreen tree.

Stem — Fluted

Branches — Horizontal, wide spreading, not
whorled

Leaves —2.5 to 4cm long, linear, flattened, dis-
tichous, acute, narrowed into a short petiole which is
decurrent along the twig, dark green and shining
above, pale yellowish brown or rusty red below.

Inflorescence — Male inflorescence is Catkin,
female is with solitary flower.

Flowers — Male flowers subglobose, 10 sta-
mens, with 5 to 9 pollen sacs.

Taxus baccata Linn.
(Talisa patra)

Female flowers resembling leaf buds, each con-
sisting of a few imbricate scales rounds a single erect
ovule, which is surrounded at the base by a membra-
nous cap shaped disk.

Fruit — In fruit the disk enlarges, becomes suc-
culent and bright red, about 7.5 mm long, and sur-

(Talisa patra)

----- PAGE 653 -----
Talisapatra 645

rounds the olive green seed of which only the tip is exposed.
Taxus baccata
Habit — A tree usually stunted.

Leaves — | to 2.5 cm long, spreading in all directions and densely covering the twigs
when viewed from above, more or less distichous when the twigs are seen from below.

Young shoots are clothed with short brown hairs.
Substitute

Rhododendron anthopogon D. Don

Abies pindrow Sparch

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics):
Abies webbiana

Acicular leaves of leathery texture, 2.5 to 4 cm long and 3 to 4 mm broad, with a
prominent midrib, recurved margins and notched apex. The upper surface of the leaf is
rusty brown, while it is mealy white on under surface. The leaf breaks easily, has got
characteristic and agreeable odour. It tastes astringent.
Taxus baccata

Acicular, cuspidate leaves, 1.5 to 2.5 cm long 1 to 2 mm broad with a prominent
midrib and pointed apex. Upper surface is dark green, waxy, lower pale green in colour.
It tastes astringent and had turpentine like odour.

Classical references
Synonyms
aieieagth wage arses ATT (ATT. BETS TT 114)
Properties and Actions
aetet oy citer srerenrrearrearry | Prerereryeaar ena TATA
(a. afte vt 115)
(afi. wagenie aT 54)
acid frennge pitrarcencarrery | (S.A. stat at 1382)
aretrast fereatort met aemeraye | Hraeenreraaeeoted aed
(aA. frorenfa tT 184)

----- PAGE 654 -----
646 Dravyaguna Vijnana
areftaast dtevitent amardet AA aaret areswet agar Genftr greta
(B.fy. siaeenfe aT 102)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Talisapatra

a. Root b. Stem c. Leaf d. Fruit
Ans: c. Leaf

2. Vipaka of Talisapatra
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Amla d. Kashaya

Ans: b. Madhura

3. Pradhana Karma of Talisapatra
a. Shwasahara b. Arshoghna c. Jwaraghna d. Trishnanigrahana
Ans: a. Shwasahara

4. Powder of Talisa (Abies webbiana) mixed with juice of Vasa (Adhatoda
vasica) leaves if taken it alleviates

a. Jwara b. Arshas c. Atisara d. Kasa
Ans: d. Kasa

5. Taxinine is present in
a. Devadaru b. Talisapatra c. Shunthi d. Haritaki

Ans: b. Talisapatra
6. Talisadya Churna is indicated in

a. Hridroga b. Vibandha c. Kasa d. Atisara
Ans: c. Kasa
7. Botanical name of Talisapatra
a. Abies webbiana b. Argemone mexicana
c. Sida cordifolia d. Cinnamomum tamala

Ans: a. Abbies webbiana

8. Dhatri Patra is a synonym of
a. Bhumyamalaki b. Jambu c. Agastya d. Talisapatra
Ans: d. Talisapatra

9. Rhododendron anthopogon is a substitute for
a. Rohitaka b. Talisapatra c. Nagakeshara d. Arjuna
Ans: b. Talisapatra

ROK RR OK

----- PAGE 655 -----
Chapter

Trivrit
TN,
Useful part: Mula (Root)
Rasadi panchaka

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatahara (Bh. Pr.Ni) - because of Ushna virya. Kaphapittahara (Ka.Ni): Pittahara
because of Virechana karma and Kapha Shamaka due to Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and
Katu Tikta rasa.

Karma (Actions)

Shweta trivrit — Rechana, Pittajwarahara, Shothahara, Udararogahara, Krimighna,

Pliharogahara, Pandurogahara, Vranahara, Kushthaghna, Kandughna.

Shyama trivrit - Tikshna rechaka, Dahavardhaka, Murchakara, Bhramaprada,
Kantotkarshanakaraka.

Raka trivrit— Rechana, Malavishtambhaharaka
Agrya Karma

Fra Farraaryry | (FF, 25/40)

Trivrit (Operculina turpathum R.B.) is best for Virechana (Purgation).
Pharmacological Actions

Purgative, Antiinflammatory, Antibacteorial, Cathartic, Anthelminthic, Cardiac de-
pressant, Laxative, Antipyretic and Spasmodic.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Shweta trivrit - Vibandha, Shotha, Jwara, Udara roga, Krimi, Pliha roga, Pandu,
Kushtha, Kandu and Vrana.

Shyama trivrit— As a Tikshna virechaka karma.

----- PAGE 656 -----
648 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Note — It is considered as inferior variety.

Rakta trivrit — Vibandha
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1, Arshas (Piles)

wader Rrgequl Brencreagay, eet yates ate treme Har II

(4.9, 25/40)

Powder of Trivrit (Operculina turpethum) is mixed with decoction prepared from
Triphala-Amalaki (Emblical officinalis), Haritaki (Terminalia chebula) and Vibhitaki
(Terminalia belerica) given internally in case of Arshas (Piles).

2. Kamala (Jaundice)

aarrett freat arte Brera: wa: free | (af. 16/60)

Triphala (Kwatha (decoction) is mixed with powder of Trivrit (Operculina turpethum)
is efficacious in Kamala (Jaundice).

3. Jwara (Fever)

Pramerenracn: frasetorsamag: | (a.Fa. 3/209)
Trivrit (Operculima turpethum) powder taken with Sugar is useful in Jwara origi-
nated by Pitta and Kapha dosha.

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) — 1 to 4 g

Phytoconstituents — Root contains a glycoside resin, which includes turpethin (5%),
ether insoluble glycoside, two ether soluble glycoside namely o:-turpethin (8%) B-turpethin
(0.5%). It also contains volatile oil, Coumarin, Scopoletin, Rhamnose, Vanillic acid,
Turpethinic acids C,D,E and Saponins.

Research corner
1. Ulcer preventive and ulcer protective activites of HAOP and MOP stem bark
extracts of Opercullina turpethum (100 mg/kg, b.w., orally) were evaluated
employing aspirint+pylorus ligation (APL) model in experimental rats. The
results suggested that both extracts (HAOP and MOP) possess enhanced ulcer
preventive and protective activities when compared with their standard drug
ranitidine. Lgnatius V, Narayanam M, Subramanian V, Periyasamy BM.
Antiulcer Activity of Indigenous Plant Operculina turpethum Linn. Evid based
Complement Alterant Med. 2013;2013:2722134. doi: 10.1155/2013/272134.

Epub 2013 Feb 11.

----- PAGE 657 -----
Trivrit 649

2. Three glycosidic acids, turpethic acids A-C, and two intact resin glycosides,
turpethosides A and B, all having a common pentasaccharide moiety and 12-
hydroxy fatty acid aglycones of different chain lengths, were obtained from the
aerial parts of Operculina turpethum. Ding W, Jiang ZH, Wu P, Xu L, Wei
X. Resin glycosides from the aerial parts of Opeculina turpethum.
Phytochemistry. 2012 Sep; 81:165-74. doi. 10.1016/j. phytochem. 2012.05.
010, Epub 2012 Jun 18.

3. Four new dammarane-type saponins, operculinosides A-D (1-4), were isolated
from the aerial parts of Operculina turpethum, of which 1 and 2 are the first
two dammarane-type triterpenoids having an oxymethyl group at C-24, Ding
W, Zeng F, Xu L, Chen Y, Wang Y, Wei X. Bioactive dammarance-type
saponins from Operculina turpethum. J. Nat Prod. 2011 Sep 23:74(9):1868-74.
doi. 10.1021/np 200274m. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

4. Antioxidant activity of methanolic extract of Operculina turpethum stems
(MEOT) on 7,12 dimethyllbenz (a) anthracene (DMBA) induced breast cancer
was investigated in female Sprague-Dawley rats. Changes in the levels of lipid
peroixidantion and antioxidants system was evaluated in addition to tumour
development. The result suggests that MEOT shows antioxidant activity and
play a protective role against DMBA induced breast cancer, Anbuselvam C,
Vijayavel K, Balasubramanian MP. Protective effect of Operculina turpethum
against DMBA induced breast cancer. Anbuselvam C, Vijayavel K,
Balasubramanian, MP. Protective effect of Operculina turpethum against 7,12-
dimethyl benz(a) anthracene induced oxidative stress with reference to breast
cancer in experimental rats. Chem Biol Interact. 2007 Jul 20;168(3):229-36.
Epub 2007 Apr 22.

5. In the present study it is examined that the therapeutic effects of OTE root
extract against NDMA-induced hepatotoxicity and clastogenicity in rats.
Results suggest that OTE has hepatoprotective and anti-clastogenic effects
against NDMA-induced hepatic fibrosis. Ahmad R, Ahmed S, Khan NU,
Hasnain AU. Operculina turpethum attenuates N-nitrosodimethylamine
induced toxic liver injury and clastogenicity in rats. Chem Biol Interact. 2009
Oct 7;181(2):145-53. doi:10.1016/j.cbi. 2009. 06.021. Epub 2009 Jul 7.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name of Yora Indications

Trivritadi ghrita Antravikara, Prameha

----- PAGE 658 -----
650 Dravyaguna Vijnana

4, Trivritadi modaka Agnimandya
Avipattikara churna

Amlapitta, Arshas
In Charaka Kalpasthana 7th Chapter totally 110 Virechana Yogas are mentioned:

Name of Yoga Number

Gomutra 18
Ksheeraadi ees
|
a Caaaeanees

Panaka

10 Rutu Anusara
11 Modaka
12

1 Tarpana
14

1

6

Botanical Name — Operculina turpethum Linn.

Operculina — Opening by a lid

turpethum — From English name

Family — Convolvulaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Trivrut kula

Basonym of Drug

Ae atone aa TN sft Frac Re: andar Brae, Pratorenvserel: 1

The stem of Trivrit (Operculina turpethum Linn.) is triangular.

----- PAGE 659 -----
Trivrit

Synonyms
Morphology
1. Prger-aa: Yer: fratoreargeM: |
Stem of Trivrit is triangular,
2. Bravdt-fAAr: arth: qosaa Hee seer
Trivrit has got triangular stem.
3, RTH TASTE: HLT TET |
Trivrit stem has got three angles.
4. wletaredt-alet got aed, srt: cHlerguiteard: |
Flowers of Trivrit are funnel shaped.
Properties and Actions
s. fyita:-Parate vite tara |
Trivrit is very useful drug in Oedema.
6. Yart-teacife |
Trivrit is regarded as one of the safest purgative.
7, WeT-aRate wet ole a Sra; Ge ara aT
Trivrit is regarded as safe purgative.
8. Matqyfe:-aeeqyadtsea: Ware gle
Trivrit is one of the useful drugs and utilized in many disorders.
Regional Names
English
Hindi Nisoth

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Bhedaniya varga, Asthapanopaga varga
Sushruta Shyamadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Guduchyadi varga 193-196

Habitat
Trivrit is found throughout India, especially grows in plains.

651

----- PAGE 660 -----
652 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Morphology

Habit - Perennial twiner with milky juice.

Root - Long, slender, fleshy, much
branched..

Stem - Very long twining and twisted to-
gether, angled and winged, pubescent, tough and
becomes brown after sometimes.

Leaves — Simple, 5 to 10 cm long, 1 to7 cm
wide, ovate or oblong more or less pubescent or
both the sides. Petiole is 2 to 5 cm long.

Inflorescence — Few flowered cyme, pe-
duncle stout, 2 to 5 cm long.

Operculina turpethum Silva. M

Flower — Pedicels 0.5 to 2.5 cm long, stout,
pubescent, slightly thickened upwards. Outer se-
pals 2 cm long, inner sepals are smaller. Corolla is white, 4 to 5 cm long, subcompanulate.

Fruit — Capsule, 8 mm in diameter, globose, enclosed in enlarged brittle imbricate
sepals.

Varieties
Bh.Pr.Ni—2 types: 1. Shweta trivrit 2. Shyama trivrit
Ra.Ni- 2 types: 1. Trivrit 2. Rakta trivrit

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics)

Root is stout, cylindrical 1 to 3 cm diameter surface is reddish brown in colour,
having longitudinal furrows. Internally the root shows a thick bark and a central woody
portion which is twisted and gives a rope like or columnar appearance; transversely cut
portion shows an easily separating bark followed by a porous surface of dirty white colour
depicting distinct cortical and vascular zones. The cortex is loaded with a resin of pale
yellowish colour. On breaking becomes short at bark portion and fibrous in central woody
part. Does not have any odour.

Classical references
Synonyms
Shweta trivrit -
dara Bast ere frgen Bryetstr a water: wen Fryttear Tarte ea
(a. Weeae aT 193)

----- PAGE 661 -----
Trivrit 653

Shyama trivrit -

Prevoorsaerar a urferdt a yafirent | referer areft aaftrent arereftrear
(a3. Tene TH 195)

Properties and Actions

Shweta trivrit -

dat fare ereageomn wihed | war frrsaserafirrgiararce 1
(Ly. Weeate at 194)

Shyama trivrit -

vant Baad dagen diafetest 1 qeataeneutravctendurenkott 1
(a5. Female FT 196)

Paar aceon g Hitsatetarsard | vinaTTgarrectter eet Her aA
(afr. quate wt 237)

Shuktabhandi -

aaa TERT ato feratas Heat Pra | rafter wan Tbe
(afr. Wweae wt 239)

Trivrit -

fragam mefterat wareatat Perret | aera HTT ae aHeAf ITE Ut

wanteroteurgaurrertrert 0 (af. sitet at 10716-1017)

Shyama trivrit -

act daqungarn diem diafitadt | austenite yeotae Wavy
(fA. sitet af 1019)

Trivrit -

faafren wae o feattrscreterietard, | HeRTSATMT Ehet Wee a PTT Ut
(aA. foreenfe eT 167)

Rakta trivrit -
cet Prager agen tadt a at 1 Devitrerfrsrrerftot fecenitatt

(a.Fr. frorente TT 169)
don aataitety Gaar sacar ar rae | var Brea act UT Aten
saa yet Hater oat ui (A. frorenfe ef 37-38)

----- PAGE 662 -----
654

—

to

10.

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Trivrit

a. Phala b. Mula c. Keshara d. Kanda
Ans: b. Mula

. Virechana Karma of Trivrit is attributed to

a, Rasa b. Guna c. Prabhava d. Virya
Ans: c. Prabhava

. Trivrit is regarded as

a. Tikshna Virechana b. Mradu Virechana
c. Vibandhakara d. Sukha Virechaka
Ans: d. Sukha Virechaka

. Triphala (Kwatha (decoction) is mixed with powder of Trivrit (Operculina

turpethun) is efficacious in
a. Kamala b. Ajirna c. Atisara d. Anidra

Ans: a. Kamala

. Avipattikara churna is indicated in

a. Madhumeha b. Amlapitta c. Atisara d. Raktapitta
Ans: b. Amlapitta

. Total number of Virechana Yogas of Trivrit mentioned in 7" Chapter of Kalpa

Sthana
a. 133 © b 18 c. 60 d. 110
Ans: d. 110

. Botanical name of Trivrit
a. Papaver somnifera b. Andrographis paniculata
c. Operculina turpethum d. Croton tiglium

Ans: c. Operculina turpethum

. Nishotha is a synonym of

a. Haritaki b. Trivrit c. Haridra d. Daruharidra
Ans: b. Trivrit

. Habit of Trvrit Plant

a. Tree b. Shrub c. Twiner d. Herb
Ans: c. Twiner

Varieties of Trivrit

a, Shyama and Aruna_ b, Nila and Shyama

c. Shyma and Krishna d. Shweta and Pingala

Ans: a. Shyama and Aruna

3 2 2 ak oR

----- PAGE 663 -----
a

Useful parts — Patra (Leaf)
adi panchaka

Ras

Karma (Actions)

Shwasahara, Kasahara, Hi ikkanig rahana, Hridya, Dahakara, Dipana, Kushthaghna,
parshwaShulanashaka, Krimighna, Ruchikara, Chardighna, Dourgandhyahara,
Vishaghna and Jwarahara.

Pharmacological Activities

Antiasthmatic, Antirheumatic, Antistress, Antibacterial, Antifungal, Antiviral, Anti-
fertility, Abortifacient, Hypogly-caemic, Antispasmodic, Antifertility, Abortifacient,
Hypoglycaemic, Antispasmodic, Antipyretic, Antiulcer, Antiinflammatory, Anticancer
and Hypotensive.

Doshkarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya and Kaphahara owing to
its Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Shwasa, Kasa, Hikka, Parshwashula, Hridroga, Agnimandya, Kushtham, Krimi,
Mukhadourgandhya, Aruchi, Chardi, Jwara and Vishavikara.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Vishama jwara (Malarial fever)

ett cr epafat GET TATAT THE evs Praha frersaey ui (MG. 2/1/10)
Juice of Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) taken with powder of Maricha (Piper nigrum) is
Very useful in Vishama jwara (Malarial fever)

2 Kasa (Cough)
Waly: aamenrerer: BeeeerTea | CIR. 18/117)

----- PAGE 664 -----
656 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Juice of black Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) if taken will honey alleviated Kasq (Cough
originated by Kapha dosha.
3. Shitapitta (Uriticaria)

Brareardatea creat weary tl (ALLY. 348)

Applications of Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) juice is th best remedy for Shitapitta (y,.
ticaria).
Matra (Dosage)
Swarasa (Juice) — 10 to 20 ml
Bija churna (Powder) — 1 to2 g
Phytoconstituents —- Leaves contain Cardinene, Camphere, Carvacro],
Caryophyllene, 1:8-Cineole, Decyladehyde, Eugenaol, Humelene, Limonene,
Methylchavicol, a and B-pinenes, Ascorbic acid, B-Carotene, Apigenin, Oreantin and
Ursolic acid.
Total plant has ascorbic acid, Carotene, Alkaloids, Glycosides, Saponins and Tan-
nin.
Seed contains sitosterol, Palmitic, Stearic, Oleic, Linoleic and Linolenic acids.
Research corner
1. In gastric epithelial tissue different derivatives of Ocimum sanctum had
antiulcer and anti-secretary characteristics and could heal gastric ulceration.
These beneficial properties of this medicinal plant fan mainly contribute to its
major biochemically active constituents like eugenol, carvacrol, rosolic and,
Anti-Inflammatory, Gastrointestinal and Hepatoprotective Effects of Ocimum
sanctum Linn: and Ancient Remedy with New application. Inflamm Allergy
Drug Targets. 2013 Nov 24. [Epub ahead of print].
2. In the present study, effect of different pharmacological doses (1.0, 0.1, 0.01
and 0.001 mg/mL) of O. sanctum crude extract were used to determine their
impact on life span, thermotolerance and ROS scavenging activities in C.
elegans. The results revealed that 1 mg/mL of O. sanctum extract significantly
extended the life span of C. elegans. Pandey R, Gupta S, Shukla V, Tandon
S, Shukla V. Antiaging, antistress and ROS scavenging activity of crude
extract of Ocimum sanctum (L.) in Caenorhabditis elegans (Maupas, 1900).
Indian J. Exp Biol. 2013 Jul;51(7):515-21.
3. The aim of this study was to study the anxiolytic effects of Ocimum sanctum
stress-induced anxiety. Ocimum sanctum possess significant anti stress activitY

----- PAGE 665 -----
Tulasi 657

but the magnitude and efficacy for relieving stress is less, when compare to
standard anxiolytic agent, i.c. Alprazolam, Bathala LR, Rao ChY, Manjunath
S, Vinuta S, Vemulapalli R. Efficacy of Ocimum sanctum for relieving stress:
a preclinical study. J Contemp Dent Pract. 2012 Nov 1:13(6):782-6.

4. An ameliorating effect of Ocimum sanctum on the toxic effect of meloxicam,
a new non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug was studied by evaluating
haemato-biogeochemical parameters, oxidative stress, grows and
histopathological changes in various orangs of Wistar rats. The Ocimum
sanctum could only counteract the toxic effect of meloxicam in liver and
gastrointestinal tract. Maharprabhu R, Bhandarkar AG, Jangir BL,
Rahangadale SP, Kurkure NV. Ameliorative effect of Ocimum sanctum on
meloxicam induced toxicity in wistar rats. Toxicol Int. 2011 jul; 18(2):130-6.
doi: 10.4103/097 1-6580.84265.

5. The antioxidant effects of Ocimum sanctum in experimental streptozocin-
induced diabetic rats was evaluated in this study. Administration of O. sanctum
to streptozocin-induced diabetic rats for 30 days significantly reduced the
plasma level of TBARS and improved the status of the antioxidant enzymes
catalase, SOD and glutathione peroxide in vital organs such as the liver and
kidney. Muralikrishnan G, Pillai SK, Shakeel F. Protective effects of Ocimum
sanctum on lipid protestation and antioxidant status in streptozocin-induced
diabetic rats. Nat Prod Res. 2012;26(5):474-8. doi: 10.1080/14786419.2010.
531016. Epub 2011 Jul 15.

Yoga (Formulations)
SLNo.

Name of Yoga Indications

Surasadi kwatha
Vataguina
Botanical Name— Ocimum sanctum Linn.

Ocimum — Derived from a Greek word Okimon. Okimon in Greek means smell
sanctum — Holy, used for religious purpose.

Family — Lamiaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Tulasi kula

----- PAGE 666 -----
658 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Basonym of Drug

areata wits, aitafirg wheter:
Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) is regarded as the best drug.
Synonyms
Habitat
1, THRT-DTA TTA sar |
Tulasi is very common plant grown in all villages.
2. YRM- aaa |
Tulasi plant can be seen everywhere.
Morphology
3. Agratl-aet ARa SM: |

Tulasi has got many spikes.

4. Sageha:-sarat Fela: Tar |

The spikes of Tulasi resemble a trumpet.

Properties and Actions
5. yeet-qure: |
Tulasi leaves are having particular odour.
6. Weett-et Setter |

Tulasi is effective in painful conditions.

7. GOATS VASE: MTT TET Aa TTS TAS |

Juice extracted from Tulasi is very useful in many diseases.

8. atenrardt-arten: Prarkter wearer stare: yeaa: |

Tulasi brings back normalcy by alleviating many diseases.

Regional Names

English Holy basil

----- PAGE 667 -----
Tulasi 659

Malayalam Shiva Tulasi

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka — Shwasahara varga

Sushruta — Surasadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Pushpa varga 62-63

Habitat

Tulasi is found throughout India. Commonly
cultivated in front of the house and worshipped.
Morphology

Habit— A perennial herb with a typical aromatic
smell.

Stem — Erect, branched, quadrangular, slightly
woody, solid, branches covered with soft hairs.

Leaf — Simple, opposite, short petioled, exstipu-
late, ovate, serrate, acute, gland dotted and has} Ocimum sanctum Linn. (Tulasi)
unicostate reticulate venation.

Inflorescence — Verticillaster

Flowers —Pedicellate, bracteate, bracts are small and caducous, bisexual, zygomor-
phic, complete, purple and hypogynous. Sepals are five, gamosepalous, bilabiate, peta-
loid, gland dotted with imbricate aestivation. Petals are five, gamosepalous and bilabiate.
Androecium contains four stamens, polyandrous and didynamous. Gynoecium is
bicarpellary synacarpous, ovary is bilocular in early stage but tetralocular in later stage.

Fruit — Schizocarps, carcerulus, four nut lets developed.
Varieties
Bh.Pr.Ni —2 types : 1. Shweta tulasi 2. Krishna tulasi

Different varieties

SI.No: English Name Sanskrit Botanical Name
[i | Holybasl
Shurby basil Phaninjaka Ocimum gratissimum

----- PAGE 668 -----
660 Dravyaguna Vijnana

i ; 0
P 6 [Bush bast | arubaka [Ocimum minimum

Graliya laxana (Genie characteristics)

Leaves are elliptic oblong, entire or sub serrate leaves with round or sub cordate
base, up to 6 cm long and 2 to 3 cm broad, sometimes attached to tender branches. Upper
surface is downy, bright green in colour. Lower surface is lighter colour with prominent
pinnately reticulate veins with minute gland dots. Has got aromatic odour, taste is pungent
with cooling after taste.

Classical references
Synonyms

geet Gear ore Yer AEH | antaardt wht yao sageghr: 1
(AF. I at 62)

Properties and Actions
Gert agar force gato settee | det epee RATATAT, I
Yat Ho a Gere Preqea wafer ui (as. YT TT 63)
qeet agen a ean wake | phat Pextet where atedtett
(afi. arth at 46)
Gert qeafercer fantom agate wer ger ery: weet areftreny ae
Warmannare aaa | chiar deR Hoerrpeagyrgy Wary Il
(df. atsftert 1554-1556)
aor weft yee: seorarahe | qatar efahard Miche
sarearetenttrerttrsparcerttutt gat u (wf. acts Ft 150-151)
geet wean fer ator amarced | fren atett eareasay STATTATTRT
(R.A. magne wt 150)

----- PAGE 669 -----
—

Tulasi 661

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Pradhana Karma of Tulasi

a. Arshghna b. Stambhana c. Shwasa hara_ d. Dipana
Ans: c. Shwasa hara

. Juice of Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) taken with powder of Maricha (Piper

nigrum) is very useful in
a. Vishama Jwara b. Kushtha c. Krimi d. Ajirna
Ans: a. Vishama Jwara

. Applications of Tulasi (Ocimum sanctum) juice is th best remedy for

a. Vyanga b. Vaivarnya c. Sthoulya d. Shitapitta
Ans: d. Shitapitta ,

. Tulasiswarasadya Taila Nasya is beneficial in

a. Shiroroga b. Putinasa c. Vishwachi d. Ardita
Ans: b. Putinasa

. Botanical name of Tulasi

a. Ocimum basillicum b. Oroxylum indicum
c. Ocimum sanctum _— d. Leucas aspera
Ans: c. Ocimum sanctum

. Sulabha and Devadundubhi are the synonyms of

a. Apamarga b. Tulasi c. Ardraka d. Punarnava
Ans: b. Tulasi

. Apetarakshasi is a synonym of

a. Musta b. Vidanga c. Devadaru d. Tulasi
Ans: d. Tulasi

. Habit of Tulasi plant

a. Herb b. Shrub c. Creeper d. Tree
Ans: a. Herb

. Types of Tulasi as per Bhava Prakasha Nighantu
a. 3 b, 2 c. 4 d. 5
Ans: b. 2

Do 2 a

----- PAGE 670 -----
Twak

Useful part — Twak (Bark)

Rasadi panchaka

Karma (Actions)
Dourgandhyahara, Balya, Trishnahara, Vishaghna, Mukharoga hara,

Bastishodhaka, Jantughna, Ruchya, Kandughna, Kanthashuddhikara, Dipana, Pachana,
Kasahara, Arshoghna.

Pharmacological Actions

Carminative, Antispasmodic, Aromatic, Stimulant, Haemostatic, Antiseptic, Sto-
machic, Germicide, Antiinflammatory, Antiarthritic, Antihyperglycemic and
Antihyperlipidemic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vatakapha Shamaka. Vatahara due to Ushna virya, Kapha Shamaka because of
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Kasa, Shwasa, Pratishyaya, Pinasa, Chardi, Trishna, Agnimandya, Mukharoga,
Jantu vikara, Aruchi, Kandu, Arshas and Shirashula.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Kasa (Cough)

catrenftorett aftiterche ayo: ware afttar: afer: attxatier areca:

Tara: rae alee HATTA: WN (31.g.FF 5/33-34)

Powder of Twak (Cinnamomum zeylanicum), Ela (Elattaria cardamomum), Pippali
(Piper longum), Kshira (Curcuma angustifolia) and Sugar mixed in successively double

quantity taken with honey and ghee in case of Kasa (Cough). It is also useful in Asthma,
Chest pain and to improve voice.

----- PAGE 671 -----
Twak 663

2. Paittika Shiroroga (Headache due to Pitta)
catrenftrorelt afthtercher fire: srerrer, | epfofer: srfézerr: etterftter erreretfgar:
waar: HraaaaTaaraeas BHATIA: WN (31. 5/33-34)
Paste of Twak (Cinnamomum zeylanicum), Patra (Cinna-momum tamala) and Sugar

should be mixed with rice water and used as a Avapida nasya (Snuff) it is efficacious in
headache originated by Pitta dosha.

Matra (Dosage)

Churna (Powder) —- 0.5tolg

Taila (Oil) — 3to6drops

Phytoconstituents — Bark and leaf contains volatile oil, cinnamic acid, resin, tannin,
sugar, starch mucilage, phellandrene, pinne, linalol, caryophyllene and eugenol.

Research corner

1. The objective of the present study was to evaluate the efficacy of the
polypheno fraction from Cinnamomum zeylanicum bark (CPP) in animal
models of inflammation and rheumatoid arthritis. Dose-response studies of CPP
(50, 100 and 200 mg/kg) used in a separate set of in vivo experiments were
conducted in acute (Carrageenan-induced rat paw edema), subacute (Cotton
pellet-induced granuloma) and sub-chronic (AIA, adjuvant-induced established
polyarthritis) models of inflammation in rats and the acetic acid-induced
writhing model of pain in mice. CPP demonstrated prominent action in animal
models of inflammation and arthritis and therefore can be considered as a
potential anti-rheumatic agent with disease-modifying action. Rathi B,
Bodhankar, S, Mohan V, Thakurdesai P. Ameliorative Effects of a
Polyphenolic Fraction of Cinnamomum zeylanicum L. Bark in Animal Models
of Inflammation and Arthritis. Sci Pharm. 2013 Jun; 81(2):567-89. doi:
10.3797/scipharm. 1301-16. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

2. This study aimed to investigate the likelihood of detrimental effects of carbon
tetrachloride (CCl (4). Yuce A, Turk G, Ceribasi S, Guvenc M, Ciftci M,
Sonmez M, Ozer Kaya S, Cay M, Aksakal M. Effectiveness of cinnamon
(Cinnamomum zeylanicum) bark oil in the prevention of carbon tetrachloride-
induced damages on the male reproductive system. Andrologia. 2013 Feb 15.
doi: 10.1111/and.12072.

3. The present work investigates the acute and chronic antihypertensive effects of
the methanol extract of Cinnamomum zeylanicum stem bark (MECZ) in L-
NAME-induced hypertensive rats. MECZ possesses antihypertensive and

----- PAGE 672 -----
664 Dravyaguna Vijnana

organ protective effects that may result from its ability to increase the
production of the endogenous NO and/or to regulate dyslipidemia. 7. Nyadjeu
P, Nguelefack-Mbuyo EP, Atsamo AD, Nguelefack TB, Dongmo AB,
Kamanyi A. Acute and chronic antihypertensive effects of Cinnamomum
zeylanicum stem bark methanol extract in L-NAME-induced hypertensive rats.
BMC Complement Altern Med. 2013 Jan 31;13:27. doi:10.1186/1472-6882-
13-2.

4. To investigate the effects of cinnamaldehyde (CA), an active and major
compound in cinnamon, on glucose metabolism and insulin reistance in
C57BLKS/J db/db miec. CA has antihyperglycemic and antihyperlipidemic
actions in db/db mice and could be useful in the treatment of type-2 diabetes.
Li J, Liu T, Wang L, Guo X, Xu T, Wu L, Qin L, Sun W. Antihyperglycemic
and antihyperlipidemic actions in db/db mice and could be useful in the
treatment of type-2 diabetes. Li J, Liu T, Wang L, Guo X, Xu T, Wu L, Qin
L, Sun W. Antihyperglycemic and antihyperlipidemic actions of
cinnamaldehyde in C57BLKS/J db/db mice. J Tradit Chin Med. 2012 Sep;
32(3):446-52.

5. The goal of this study is to investigate the in vivo and in vitro inhibitory effect
of necrosis factor (TNF)-i and its underlying intracellular mechanisms.
Treatment with CWE decreased LPS-induced TNF-i in serum. In vitro
inhibiton of TNF-{ gene by CWE may occur vita the modulation of IkB?
degradatin and JNK, p38, and ERK 1/2 activation. Our results also indicate
that the observed anti-inflammatory action of CWE may originate from the
presence of polyphenols. Hong JW, Yang GE, Kim YB, Eom SH, Lew JH,
Kang H. Anti-inflammatory activity of cinnamon water extract in vivo and in
vitro LPS-induced models. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2012 Nov
28;12:237. doi:10.1186/1472-6882-12-237.

Yoga (Formulations)

SLNo. Name of Yoga ~ | Indications

Talisadya churna Kasa, Shwasa

----- PAGE 673 -----
Twak 665

Botanical Name — Cinnamomum zeylanica Blume.

Cinnamomum — Derived from a Greek word. Kinno-mononon means bright colour,
brown mixed with yellow and red.

Family — Lauraceae

Kula - Karpura kula

Basonym of Drug
WHAT aH, eer HOTA Tarek
Bark of Cinnamomum zeylanicum plant is commonly used.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. aafreaqeat wragit arery |
Twak plant grows wild.
2. Seerq-Rgerast aT |
Twak plant is very common in Sri Lanka.
Morphology
3. adare-adageT Taare |
Leaves of Cinnamomum are leathery.
Properties and Actions
4. GTT-WIT TAS |
The bark is very useful.
5. Sem|enq-ctant Teer |
The bark is highly aromatic.
6. AE TYTT TAT |
The bark is having strong odour.
7. TSAR-TS FA MAGA A |
Bark is having sweet taste.
8. aen- faut dea |

Bark has got good Aroma.

. Favtery-ye viteractt qayitert wae |

ie}

----- PAGE 674 -----
666 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Cleanses the mouth hence used for cleaning the mouth.

Regional Names

Malayalam

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Eladi gana

Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 66-67
Habit

Twak plant is cultivated in Western and
Southern India.

Morphology
Habit — Moderate sized ever green tree.

Bark — Thick, smooth, pale coloured.
Twigs are often compressed, young parts gla-
brous except the buds which are finely silky.

Leaves — Opposite, or sub opposite, hard
and coriaceous, 7.5 to 20 cm long 4 to 7.5 cm
wide, ovate or ovate lanceolate, subacute, gla-
brous and shinning above, slightly paler be- . -
neath, base acute or rounded, main nerves 3 to Cinnamomum zeylanica Blume.
5 from the base or nearly so, strong, reticulate
venation, petioles 1 to 2.5 cm long, flattened above.

Inflorescence — Panicle, peduncles are long, often clustered, glabrous or pubescent.
Flowers — Numerous, pedicels are long. Perianth 5 to 6 mm long.

Fruit — 1 to 1.5 cm long, oblong or ovoid-oblong, minutely apiculate, dry or slightly
fleshy, dark purple, surrounded by the enlarged campanulate perianth which is 8 mm in
diameter.

----- PAGE 675 -----
Twak 667

Varieties

Classical texts have not mentioned varieties, but commercially three types are avail-
able in the market.

1. Chinese 2. Sinhali 3. Indian
Substitute

Cinnamomum tamala Nees and Ebem.
Market Sample

Market sample contains single, double or closely packed, compound quills of vary-
ing length up to 2.5 cm in diameter and 0.5 mm to 1 mm in thickness. Outer surface is
deep fawn or yellowish brown in colour with shining wavy lines running longitudinally
and occasional scars and holes. Inner surface is dark brown with faint straight striations.
On breaking become short pieces. Does have a characteristic pungent and mucilaginous
taste.

Classical references
Synonyms
TARAS Ff TSR SSAA Ae | (ALT. HYAMS TT 66)
Properties and Actions
sent ateften tart frrerahreaftrrat, | GAT: YReM AEM FSMATATET
(ais. adate at 67)
aig oy aeniteat marae | Hvsderest eed Steger Me UN
(af. magenfe at 51)
ireraferenusenraragarayened | (4.9. staftrert 1337-1338)
TIE hoch Miler Hay, | RTT Set Hua fegat A Ul
(aA. froenfert 172)
wae tara Heferratem fren ernated | tart wrest Sear Sra arsaraGe Mt
(RA. etree FT 90)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Twak
a. Mula b. Pushpa c. Bija d. Twak

Ans: d. Twak

----- PAGE 676 -----
Dravyaguna Vijnana

_ Main indication of Twak
a. Kushtha b. Amlapitta c. Kasa d. Atisara
Ans: c. Kasa

_ Cinnamic acid a chemical constituent present in
a. Arka b. Twak c. Apamarga d. Punarnava
Ans: b. Twak

. Botanical name of Twak

a. Cinnamomum zeylanica

c. Cinnamomum tamala

Ans: a. Cinnamomumzeylanica

_ Simhala and Chocham are the synonyms of
b. Maricha

b. cinnamomum camphora
d. Solanum nigrum

a. Pippali c. Kankola d. Twak

Ans: d. Twak
_ Charmanama and Gudatwak are the synonyms of

a. Arjuna b. Twak c. Lodhra d. Ashwattha
Ans: b. Twk

. Habit of Cinnamomum plant
a. Herb b. Shrub c. Tree d. Creeper

Ans: c. Tree

eR

----- PAGE 677 -----
Chapter

Ushira

Useful part = Mula (Root)
Rasadi panchaka

[Rose [Tea aura

Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vata pitta Shamaka vatahara due to Madhura vipaka. Pittashamaka because of
Shita virya, Madhura vipaka and Tikta Madhura rasa.

Karima (Actions)

Trishnahara, Dahashamaka, Mutrala, Jwarghna, Chardinigrahana, Vishaghna,
Visarpahara, Vranaropaka, Mehahara, Swedahara, Dourgandhyanashaka, Pachana,
Kushthaghna, Rakadoshahara.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Trishna, Daha, Jwara, Chardi, Mutra krichra, Kushtha, Visarpa, Prameha,
Dourgandhya, Atisweda and Raktapitta.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Jwara (Fever)
qerndeayit aeteermt: | petted wet cere rarer SaTTTS
(aft 3/145)
Ushira (Vetiveria zizanoides) is one of the ingredients of Shadanga paniya and effi-
cacious remedy in case of Jwara (Fever).
2. Chardi (Vomiting)
Ret fra arate at wares aUgeeTagg tt (af 20/32)

In case of vomiting patient has to take Ushira (Vetiveria zizanoides) and Balaka
(Pavonia odorata) with rice water. It checks vomiting.

:

----- PAGE 678 -----
670 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) - 3to5¢g
Phanta - 30 to 60 ml

Phytoconstituents — Root contains, Isobisabolene, Khusol, Husinol, Khusilal.
Isokhusimol, Khusimol, Khusimone, Vetiselinenol, Zizanol, Zizanene, Zizanoic acid,
epizizanoic acid, Acoradiene, -Vetivone, eregenol, Vanillin and B-Vetivones.

Research corner

1. To evaluate anticonvulsant activity of ethanol extract of V. zizanioides (EEVZ)
in experimental mice. Findings demonstrate that V. zizanioides shows
significant anticonvulsant activity in mice. Gupta R, Sharma KK, Afzal M,
Damanhouri ZA, Ali B, Kaur R, Kazmi I, Anwar F. Anticonvulsant activity
of ethanoil exacts of Vetiveria zizanioides roots in experimental mice. Phrm
Biol. 2013 Dec; 51(12):1521-4. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2013. 799710. Epub
2013 jul 18.

2. Vetiveria zizanioides L. Nash (Family: Poaceae) root (Intact and spent) extracts
and fractions were evaluated for antimycobacterial activity against
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H(37)Rv and H(37)Ra strains using radiometric
BACTEC 460 TB system. Results suggest that ethanolic extract and hexane
fraction exhibited potent antimycobacterial activity. Saikia D, Parveen S, Gupta
VK, Luqman S. Anti-tuberculosis activity of Indian grass KHUS (Vetiveria
zizanioides L. Nash). Complement Their Med. 2012 Dec; 20 (6):434-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ctim. 2012.07.010. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

3. In the present study, ferric reducing, free radical scavenging and antioxidant
activity of two genotypes namely KS1 and gulabi of V. zizanioides L. Nash
root were investigated using in vitro assays-the ferric reducing antioxidant
power (FRAP), 1,1-diphenyl-2-picylhydrazyl (DPPH), total phenolic content
(TPC), total antioxidant capacity (TAC) and reducing power (RP). The cv KS1
showed better antioxidant activity, compared to cv gulabi indicting the
possibility of exploring the presence of different phytoconstituents in the two
varieties. Luqgman S, Kumar R, Kaushik S, Srivastava S, Darokar MP,
Khanuja SP. Antioxidant potential of the root of Vetivera zizanioides were (L.)
Nash. Indian J Biochem Biophys. 2009 Feb; 46(1):122-5.

4. The chemical components of the volatiles from Vetiveria zizanioides were
analyzed by SPME and GC-MS. In the roots, the main component was
valencne (30.36%), while in the shoots and leaves, they were 9-
octadecenamide (33.50%), 2,6,10,15,19,23 hexamethyl-2,6,10,14,18,22-

----- PAGE 679 -----
Ushira 67)

tetracosahexaene (27.46%), and 1,2-benzendicarboxylic acid, diisooctyl ester
(18.29%). The results showed that there were many terpenoids in theviolates.
In shoot volatiles, there existed 3 monoterpenes, 2 sequiterpenes and |
triterpene. Most of the volatiles in roots were sesquiterpenes. Huang J, Li H,
Yang J, Chen Y, Liu Y, Li N, Nie C. Chemical components of Vetiveria
zizanioides volatiles. Ying Yong Sheng Tai Xue Bao. 2004 Jan; 15 (1):170-2.

5. Study investigated the effects of volatile compounds emitted from the cut roots
of V. zizanioides (1.0 g, low-dose conditions; 30 g, high-dose conditions) on
individuals during a visual display terminal task. The findings indicate that
volatile compounds emitted from the roots of V. zizanioides under low-dose
conditions may have helped subjects to maintain performance in visual
discrimination tasks while maintaining high sympathetic nerve system activity,
Matsubara E, Shimizu K, Fukagawa M, Ishizi Y, Kakoi C, Hatayama T,
Nagano J, Okamoto T, Ohnuki K, Kondo R. Volatiles emitted from the roots
of Vetivera zizanioides suppress the decline in attention during a visual display
terminal task. Biomed Res. 2012;33(5):299-308.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI-No.

Name of Indications
Ushiradikwatha
Ushiradichura

Botanical Name — Vetiveria zizanoides Linn. Nash

Ushiradya taila

Vetiver — Derived from Tamil word which means root that is dug up.
zizanoides — Which means by the river side.

Family — Poaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)

Kula — Yava kula

Basonym of Drug

Bet FATS Tea: TEAS OHA Fe |

Ushira (Vetiveria zizanoides) is liked by many people because of its sweet scent and
taste.

----- PAGE 680 -----
672 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Synonyms
Habitat
1, WAATAT-Het Tete get I
Ushira grows commonly near water resources.
Morphology
2. YOMAA- TOT FF ge
Ushira stem appears similar to lotus stem.
Properties and Actions
3, Aes Ae We carla ster
Ushira has got pleasant Aroma.
4, AMAA Wet AEM: AT |
Ushira is useful in many diseases, so no fear of any disease.
5. Beary aferg aires Serafegrencary seer |
Ushira is very useful in diseases like fever etc.
Regional Names

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Varnya varga, Stanyajanana varga, Chardinigrahana varga,
Angamardaprashamana varga, Dahaprashamana varga,
Shukrashodhana varga

Sushruta  Sarivadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Karpuradi varga 86-88

Habitat

Ushira is grown throughout India especially in plains of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and South Indian states.

----- PAGE 681 -----
Ushira 673

Morphology

Habit - A densely tufted perennial grass. Root
stock branching with spongy aromatic roots. Culms
stout, upto 5 ft high, usually sheated all along.

Leaf sheaths compressed, especially the lower
sheaths which are sharply keeled, fan-like, very
smooth and firm, ligules reduced to a scarious rim,
blades narrowly linear, acute, 30 to 90 cm long and
4 to 10 mm wide, erect, rigid, firm or somewhat
spongy, pale green, midrib slender, lateral nerves
close, six of more on each side, margin spinousely | Vetiveria zizanoides Linn-N.
rough. (Usira)

Inflorescence — Raceme, upto 5 cm long, very
slender, more or less rough, minutely and unequally cililate, pedicels similar.

Sessile spikelet linear-lanceolate to almost linear, acute 4 mm long, yellowish or
violet brown or purplish in colour. Involucral glumes are acute, coriaceous, 5 nerved.
Lower floral glume as long as the involucral glumes.

Grahya laxana (Genuine characteristics):

Roots are fibrous, wiry, up to 2 mm in diameter, longitudinally grooved, cream, grey
or light yellow to brown in colour. Has got very strong aromatic odour. Taste is slightly
bitter.

Classical references
Synonyms
dione g yet Srgeht ares ad | Tes Hers Tarbes Praft
(a1.9. HYate Tt 86)
Properties and Actions
Tonsetractadae Prapaqwrgey i (AT. HYUe FT 87-88)
Suit vitcet fereh creaerPaet A Ad | arte VataUAETareh ea arta:
soit Medhizatieret Rarafermeany i (af. aaert 14)
qTorafarchiaa peppeattrarary it (Ft. siteftract 1369-1370)

----- PAGE 682 -----
674

Dravyaguna Vijnana

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Ushira

a. Mula b. Twak c. Bija
Ans: a. Mula

. Vipaka of Ushira
a. Katu b. Madhura c. Tikta

Ans: b. Madhura

. Ushirasava is indicated in

a. Madhumeha b. Kushtha c. Raktapitta
Ans: c. Raktapitta

. Shadanga Paniya is specifically indicated in

a. Kushtha b. Raktapitta c. Kshavathu
Ans: d, Jwara

. Botanical name of Ushira

a. Vetiveria zizanoides b. Achyranthes aspera
c. Saussurea lappa d. Albizzia lebbeck
Ans: a. Vetiveria zizanoides

. Nalada and Sevya are the synonyms of

a. Jatamansi b. Musta c. Ushira

Ans: c. Ushira

. Habit of Ushira plant

a. Tree b. Tufted grass —_c. Creeper
Ans: b. Tufted grass

seo aR eK

seit vitret fark STATUTE | WaT ae Teafrt Wes ACY aa
qorrestateraty erarttrera werere 1 (A.A. wage at 40-41)

d. Patra

d. Amla

d. Hridroga

d. Jwara

d. Manjishtha

d. Twinner

----- PAGE 683 -----
Chapter

Vacha

Useful part - Kanda (Rhizome)

Rasadi pancaka

Laghu Tikshna

Karma (Actions)

Medhya, Lekhana, Vamaka, Dipana, Vibandhahara, Adhmanahara, Shulaghna,
Mutra vishodhaka, Jantughna, Kanthya, Pachana, Mukharogahara, Swaraprada,
Unmada rogahara, Apasmarahara, Jwaraghna, Atisaraghna, Bhutaghna.

Shweta vacha

Medhya, Vrishya, Krimighna, Dipana.
Pharmacological Actions

Vermifuge, Carminative, Tranguilizer, Sedative.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kapha vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya. Kapha Shamaka because of Ushna virya,
Katu vipaka and Katu Tikta rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Unmada, Apasmara, Sthoulya, Murcha, Agnimandya. Ajirna, Arshas, Krimi,
Udarashula, Jwara, Adhmana, Vibandha, Mukharoga, Swarasada, Atisara and
Mutradosha.

Shweta vacha

Smritinasha, Klaibya, Krimi and Agnimandya.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Apasmara (Epilepsy)

smnscnisisdeewied area aT wea | (AAA 10/64)

----- PAGE 684 -----
676 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Vacha (Acorus calamus) powder taken with honey is very useful in Apasmara (Epi-
lepsy).
2. Shotha (Oedema)

TAATT Hes WAT: MATA: | (FZ. 40/22)

Paste of Vacha (Acorus calamus) and Sarshapa (Brasica campestris) if applied
reduces Shotha (Oedema).

3. Suryavarta

aist erga garaged: | Atay aT AAT HE AYA: (GS. 26/33)

Paste of Vacha (Acorus calamus) and Magadhi (Piper longum) is mixed with honey,
then used as an Avapidana Nasya (Snuff). It will be useful in Suryavarta.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna_ — 0.5 to 1 g (Oushadhartha)

1 to 3 g (Vamanartha)

Phytoconstituents — Rhizome of Vacha contains 1.5 to 3.5% of volatile oil, Starch,
Resin (2.5%) and tanin (1.5%). Volatile oil contains asaraldehyde, Asarone and eugenol.
Other constituents include B-asarone, Calamenol, Calamene, Calamenone, Methyl eu-
genol, o-Pinene and camphene.

Research corner

1. The study aims to evaluate the anti-Candida efficacy of asaronaldehyde and its
three structural isomers, namely, 2,3,4-trimethoxybenzaldehyde, 3,4,5-
trimethoxy-benzaldehyde, and 2,4,6-trimethoxybenzaldehyde. Asaronaldehyde
and 2, 4, 6-trimethoxybenzaldehyde showed anti-Candida efficacy. Rajput SB,
Shinde RB, Routh MM, Karuppayil SM. Anti-Candida properties of
asronaldehyde of Acorous gramineous rhizome and three structural isomers.
Chin Med. 2013 Sep 8;8 (1):18. doi:10.1186/1749-8546-8-18.

2. Ten compounds were separated from A. calamus and identified as 1 beta, 4
beta, 7 alphatrihydroxyeude-smane (1), bullatantriol (2), teuclatriol (3), threo-1',
2'-dihydroxyasarone (4), erythro-1], 2'-dihydroxyasarone (5),(+)-de-4'-0-
methyleudesmin (6), (+)-de-4'-0-methylmagnolin (7), (+)-eudesmin (8), (+)-
eudesmin (8), (+)-magnolin (9) and beta-sitosterol (10), respectively. Qiao D,
Gan LS, Mo JX, Zhou CX. Chemical constituents of Acorus calamus.
Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;37(22):3430-3.

3. In the present study a comparative anticonvulsant activity of raw and Shodhita
(Classically processed) Vaca rhizomes were screened against Maximal Electro

----- PAGE 685 -----
Vacha 677
Shock (MES) seizure model to assess the effect of classical purificatory
procedure on pharmacological action of Vaca. The results obtained from the
present study clearly confirmed the anticonvulsant activity of raw Vaca and
subjecting to classical Shodhana procedure did not alter the efficacy of Vaca
rhizomes instead it enhanced the activity profile of the Vaca. Bhat SD, Ashok
BK, Acharya RN, Ravishankar B. Anticonvulsant activity of raw and
classically processed Vaca (Acorus calamus Linn.) rhizomes. Ayu. 2012 Jan;
33(1):119-22. doi. 10.4103/0974-8520.100328.

4. Present study focuses on the evaluation of saponin rich extract of Acorus
calamus (SREAC) in chronic constriction injury (CCI) of sciatic nerve induced
neuropathic pain and neuronal functional changes in rats. SRE-AC has shown
ameliorate effect in CCl-induced neuropathic pain which may be attributed to
its multiple actions including antioxidative, anti-inflammatory . and
neuroprotective actions. Muthuraman A, Singh N. Neuroprotective effect of
Saponin rich extract of Acorus calamus L. in rat model of chronic construction
injury (CCI) of sciatic nerve-induced neuropathic pain, J. Ethnopharmacol.
2012 Aug 1;142(3):723-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jep. 2012.05.049. Epub 2012 Jun
15.

. Eight new sesquiterpenes (1-8) and one new norsesquiterpene (9) named
calamusins A-l were isolated from the ethanol extract of AcOrus calamus
rhizomes. Hao ZY, Liang D, Luo H, Liu YF, Ni G, Zhang QJ, Li L, Si YK,
Sun H, Chen RY,Yu DQ. Bioactive sesquiterpenoids from the rhizomes of
Acorus calamus. J Nat Prod. 2012 Jun 22;75(6):1083-9. doi: 10.1021/np
300095c. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Nn

Indications

Vachadi churna Kaphaja Shula
Vachadi taila Apachi

;
> aa

Name of Yoga

Mahapaishachika ghrita Buddhivardhaka, Medhya
Manodosha, Smritihani

Botanical Name — Acorus calamus Linn.

Acorus — A= private, marked by the loss, kore-pupil of the eye (Useful in eye dis-
eases).

----- PAGE 686 -----
ons Dravyaguna Vijnana
—__

calamus — Derived from a Greek word meaning marshy, grows in marshy lang,
Family — Acoraceae

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka — Lekhaniya varga, Arshoghna varga, Triptighna varga, Asthapanopa Ba
varga, Shitaprashamana varga, Sanjnasthapana varga

Sushruta — Pippalyadi gana, Vachadi gana, Mustadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni— Haritakyadi varga 102-103
Basonym of Drug
afte amruiferaata agp treat are vith aefereticael: |
The drug Vacha (Acorus calamus) is used to improve voice.
Synonyms
Morphology
1. STRUT-STRVTAUT Hay |
The rhizome of Vacha has reddish brown colour.
2. Tettht-nreffartte waft ease: |
Rhizome of Vacha has hairs over it resembling the hair of cow.
3, wraeft-Weytarae |
Vacha rhizome is hairy

4, WEAM- ASA VATA |
Vacha rhizome has hair
5. weatelet-wret at Wave: |
Vacha rhizome has numerous nodes.
6. Wenra-weltrent at Wa: Wears: Talfot eset: |
Rhizome of Vacha has more than six nodes on it.
Properties and Actions
7. sorren-saretigntt Wee: |
Rhizome of Vacha has very strong odour.
8. sar-dteum afte |
Vacha has got very strong qualities.

9, Hinrear-agee fear |

----- PAGE 687 -----
Vacha 679

The drug Vacha is regarded as an auspicious drug.
10. eaduft-qerechtte |
Vacha if used reduces the weight.
Regional Names
Kannada Baje

Malayalam Vayambhu

Habitat
Vacha is culitvated throughout India. It is also found wild in Himalayan region and
Sikkim.
Morphology
Habit — A perennial terrestrial herb of marshy
places.

Stem — Stout, creeping
Rhizome — Is aromatic.

Leaves — Two-ranked, distichous, sword shaped
(ensiform), erect, sharp pointed, closely sheathing each
other, midrib is stouts, striate parallel venation, and
leaves are glabrous, weakly differentiated into petiole
and blade.

Inflorescence —Spadix, scapes 3-angled, keeled
on the back, spathe is leaf-like long, green, narrow.

Acorus calamus Linn (Vaca)

Flower — Flower densely cover the entire spadix, bisexual, trimerous, compactly
arranged, actinomorphic, hypogynous, greenish yellow, bracts and bracteoles absent.
Perianth contains six tepals in two equal series, narrowly oblong, equalling the pistil with
vaulted tips. Androecium contains six stamens in two whorls of three each. Gynoecium is
tricarpellary, syncarpous; ovary is trilocular with few ovules.

Fruit —Turbinate, prismatic and top pyramidal.

Varieties
Ra.Ni- 2types: 1. Vacha - Acorus calamus, 2. Shweta vacha — Iris germanica

----- PAGE 688 -----
O80 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics)

The Rhizome is sub-cylindrical or compressed, upto 20 cm long and 1 to 1.5 crn
broad, having a light brown colour. The upper surface shows triangular leaf scars, while
lower surface bear small, raised circular root scars. The fracture is short, granular and
porous. The cut pieces are some what circular, mealy white in colour and upto 1 cm thick.
Has got strong and characteristic odour, taste is pungent.

Classical references
Synonyms
TANT Terran Tet rerafeier | aust a agen wfeeita a eT
(a. eireate FT 102)

aarrean wear ferate artabeae | Prenat yeret waa fers 1
TAA SINS Yost UAT. SeeMe TT 103)
ST HEPAT AAAS STUT | HVS HEAT ST Playa VMAM MAG I
wae FT Heh Balt Hee | dest Hares Hegel aT UT
eet VT Career HUST TST, 11 (eA. errgeate FT 7-8)
wer fara He: Ue HEVOATTTE | tat ara ear lat arepeNTET
Sepa wigan | yet fener weft
(fa. attefrert. 1216-1217)
SAT AAMT HOT ST HATTA, | ATA AH ASAT Mt
(aA. froreenfe of 52 )
Shweta vaca -
aera arated a dost a rer uw. frente at 54)
weft casegem ant abeakiat | aaa tear amarcteaeaay
are watare yoeaaarad | frat yaoerg aareot wera u
(B.A. margqenfe aT 46-47)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Vacha
a. Rhizome b. Fruit c. Leaf d. Flower
Ans: a. Rhizome

----- PAGE 689 -----
Vacha 681

. Medhya Karma of Vacha is attributed to
a. Virya b. Prabhava c. Rasa d, Vipaka
Ans: b. Prabhava
. Vacha (Acorus calamus) powder taken with honey is very useful in
a. Ajirna b. Atisara c. Apasmara d. Hridroga
Ans: c. Apasmara
. Paste of Vacha (Acorus calamus) and Magadhi (Piper longum) is mixed with
honey, then used as an Avapidana Nasya (Snuff) is beneficial in
a, Suryavarta b. Sandhivata c. Vatarakta d. Amavata
Ans: a. Suryavarta
. Vachadi Churna is specifically indicated in
a. Vataja Shula b. Pittaja Shula _—c. Kaphaja Shula d. Shirashula
Ans: c. Kaphaja Shula
. Botanical name of Vacha is
a. Abutilon indicum — b. Aconitum ferox
c. Abies webbiana d. Acorus calamus
Ans: d. Acorus calamus
. Golomi and Shadgrantha are the synonyms of
a. Durva b. Shatavari c. Vacha d. Kokilaksha
Ans: c. Vacha
. Habit of Vacha plant
a. Tree b. Herb c. Creeper d. Shrub

Ans: b. Herb

KEKKK

----- PAGE 690 -----
Chapter

Varuna

Useful part — Kanda Twak (Stem bark)

Rasadi panchaka

Kashaya Tikta Madhura
Laghu Ruksha

Ushna
Ashmaribhedaka

Karma (Actions)
Mutrala, Agnidipana, Krimighna, Ashmaribhedana, Vidradhihara,
Raktadoshanashaka, Hridrogahara.

Varuna pushpa (Flowers)

Grahi
Pharmacological Activities

Lithotriptic, Spasmodic, Anti-inflammatory, Antipyretic, Antibacterial and Diuretic.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka, Vatahara due to Ushna virya and Kaphahara due to Ushna
virya, Katu vipaka and Kashaya, Tikta rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Ashmari, Mutrakrichra, Basti Shula, Jwara, Krimi, Agnimandya, Vidradhi, Hridroga
and Rakta vikara.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Ashmari (Urinay calculus)

FAT AQUA Tenens Cafeaa: | uta Parra Aer: Sea

(45 7/11)

Prepare decoction of Varuna (Crataeva nurvala) root bark, then add the paste of
Root bark. If it is taken it is efficacious in Ashmari (Urinary calculus).

----- PAGE 691 -----
Varuna 683

2. Gandamala (Goitre)
TOS Ta Farer: allAur aetna: | (VWF. 2/2/126)

In case of Gandamala (Goitre) decoction prepared from root bark of Varuna
(Crataeva nurvala) is taken with honey.

Matra (Dosage)
Kwatha (Decoction) -—50 to 100 ml
Swarasa (Juice) — 10 to 20 ml

Phytoconstituents— Root bark contains Lauric acid, Stearic acid, Oleic acid, Li-
noleic acid, Rutin, Quercitin, Lupeol and Pentacyclic triterpene alcohol.

Stem bark has Friedelin, Betulinic acid, Diosgenin, Lupeol, Volatile components, P-
cymene, Limonene, Linalool, o and B-ionones. Leaf contains 1-stacydrine.

Research corner

1. The aim of this study was to investigate the antidiabetic activity of Crataeva
nurvala stem bark (Family: Capparidaceae) extracts in alloxan-induced diabetic
albino rats. C. nurvala pertroleum ether extract (CNPEE) and ethanolic extract
(CNEE) showed significant (P<0.001) anti diabetic activities. Sikarwar MS,
Patil MB. Antidiabetic activityof Crataeva nurvala stem bark extracts in
alloxan-induced diabetic rats. J. Pharm Bioallied Sci. 2010 Jan; 2(1):18-21.
doi: 10.4103/0975-7406.62700.

2. Chemical investigation of stem bark of Crataeva nurvala afforded 5,7-
dimethoxy-3-phenyl-1-ethyl-1, 4-dihydro-4-quinolone and a steroidal glycoside
with unprecedented pentacyclic ring system named crateamine (la) and
crataenoside (2) respectively. Sinha S, Mishra P, Amin H, Rah B, Nayak D,
Goswami A,Kumar N. Vishwakarma R, Ghosal S. A new cytotoxic quinolone
alkaloid and a pentacyclic steroidal glycoside from the stem bark of Crataeva
nurvala: study of anti-proliferative and apoptosis inducing property. Eur J. Med
Chem. 2013 Feb; 60:490-6. dol: 10.1016/j. ejmech. 2012.12.017. Epub 2012
Dec 17.

3. In this study, lupeol, a pentacyclic triterpene isolated from Crataeva nurvala
stem bark, and its ester, lupeol linoleate, were investigated for their possible
hypocholesterolaemic effect against cyclophosphamide-induced lipidaemic
instabilities. Treatment with lupeol linoleate was more effective than leupeol in
rendering protection to the cardiac tissue challenged by cyclophosphamide.
Sudharsan PT, Mythili Y, Sudhahar V, Varalakshmi P. Role of lupeol and its

----- PAGE 692 -----
684 Dravyaguna Vijnana

ester on cyclophosphamide-induced hyperlipidemic cardiomyopathy in rats
Pharm Pharmacal. 2005 Nov; 57 (11):1437-44.
Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No.

Name of Yoga Indications

Ashmari, Sharkara
Mutraghata, Mutra krichra
Ashmari, Mutrakrichra
Vataja Ashmari
Sharkara, Ashmark
Basonym of Drug

athe quitter after qercarc |

Leaves of Crataeva nurvala resemble those of Bilva (Aegle marmelos).

Synonyms
Morphology
1. BaRs:- Han: RATA |
Leaves of Varuna remain tender for many days.
Properties and Actions
2. ferraytten:—fereh: Pret see |
Leaves of Varuna are bitter in taste.
3. aemttet-anhy Baa |
Varuna destroys Ashmari (Urinary calculus).
4. Aqaa-featte dae at

Varuna is very potent drug in removing urinary calculus.
Regional Names

----- PAGE 693 -----
Varuna 685

Botanical Name — Crataeva nurvala Roxb.
Crataeva — Crativas- a Greek botanist.
nurvala — From Nir-Malayalam name for water.
Family — Capparidaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Varuna
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not mentioned in Varga

Sushruta Varunadi gana
Bh.Pr.Ni Vatadi varga 65-66
Habitat

Varuna is found through out India especially in
upper Gangetic plains, Bengal, Bihar; Orissa, Gujarat
and Konkan region. It is also cultivated in gardens as
it is very beautiful tree.

Morphology
Habit — Small tree with grey bark.
Root - Long, tap-root
Stem — Erect, woody, branched, cylindrical,
solid with horizontal wrinkles. Crataeva nurvala Roxb. (Varuna)
Leaf -— Compound, 3- foliate, alternate, decidu-
ous, petiole is 4 to 7.5 cm long, leaflets are 5 to 15 cm and 4 to 6 cm wide, ovate, lan-

ceolate or obovate, acute or acuminate, entire, glabrous on both the surfaces, reticulately
veined, lateral leaflets oblique at the base. Petiolules 6 to 9 mm long.

Inflorescence — Densely flowered terminal corymb.

Flowers — Greenish white, pedicels 2.5 to 4.5 cm long, stout, hypogynous, sepals
are four and polysepalous, petals are four and polypetalous, Androecium contains many
stamens. Gynoecium is bicarpellay syncarpous, superior ovary, unilocular.

Fruit - Berry and many seeded.

Seeds — Woody and non-endospermic
Adulterant

Stem bark of Aegle marmelos.

----- PAGE 694 -----
686 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Grahya Laxana (Genuine Characteristics)

Bark is channelled, flat or slightly curved pieces, outer surface is rough and scaly,
greyish black in colour, minutely fissured, bearing numerous small lenticels. Inner surface
is lemon yellow in colour, longitudinally striated. Transversely cut portion of bark shows
a porous surface with numerous dark yellow specks, representing vascular bundles. On
breaking it becomes short pieces, does not have any odour. Taste is slightly bitter.
Classical references

Synonyms
RU GUT: Ager: HANH: 1 (ALT. Ferart 65)
Properties and Actions
aan: firieit Adisctrgrearsrreary | Peta yorararerphrsieantstretat: |
Hea: HEH TY: Ul (ALT. area 65-66)
aeur: vittoria faxing | qa wa Hewes Tereleet: UE: UI
(aft. ame at 110)
arent eae: Haat TY: Reto: ferret vet chat: rRaTaTT_
Reta ators, | get firareeg ale wet ret At Te
aTemt Bet Urs aTetet crraftrahare | (S.A. sitefert 849-850)
AST: HEV Thaset: Ut: | vittaraer: ferret det fasts ara u
(a. sage at 137)
sem ae ua aera Prorttiar fea arent
uRaet gq yaestt wad feeaft arrarete: u
antares: aanathrann: | tt Pett pear feel
(B.A. settee at 163-164)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
1. Useful part of Varuna
a. Niryasa b. Kanda twak c. Phala d. Patra
Ans: b. Kanda twak
2. Ashmaribhedaka action of Varuna is attributed to
a. Rasa b. Vipaka c. Virya d. Prabhava
Ans: d. Prabhava

----- PAGE 695 -----
Varuna 687

. Pradhana Karma of Varuna is

a. Kushthaghna b. Jwaraghna c. Mutrala d. Nidrakata
Ans: c. Mutrala

. Decoction prepared from root bark of Varuna (Crataeva nurvala) is taken with
honey in case of

a. Ajima b. Atisara c. Arshas d. Gandamala
Ans: d. Gandamala

. Varunadi Kashaya is indicated in

a. Ashmari b. Jwara c. Kushtha d. Apasmara
Ans: a. Ashmari

. Setu Vriksha is a synonym of

a. Sarja b. Arjuna c. Varuna d. Aragwadha
Ans: c. Varuna

. Botanical name of Varuna

a. Cedrus deodara b. Creteava nurvala

c. Pureria tuberosa d. Argemone Mexicana

Ans: b. Creteava nurvala

. Habit of Varuna plant

a. Tree b. Herb c. Shrub d. Creeper
Ans: a. Tree

FERRER

----- PAGE 696 -----
Vasa

Useful part — Patra (Leaf)
Rasadi panchaka

[Rasa Tikta Kashaya
Ruksha Laghu
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphapitta Shamaka, Pitta Shamaka due to Shita virya and Tikta Kahasya rasa.
Kaphahara because of Katu vipaka and Tikta kashaya rasa.

Karma (Actions)

Shwasahara, Kasahara, Swarya, Hridya, Raktapittahara, Trishna Shamaka,
Artihara, Jwarghna, Chardighna, Mehahara, Kushthaghna, Ruchya, Kamalahara,
Varnya.

Agrya Karma

Basar | (3.7.3. 40)

Vrusha (Adhatoda vasica) is best in Raktapitta (Bleeding disorder).
Pharmacological Activities

Bronchodilator, Expectorant, Abortificient.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Raktapitta, Shwasa, Kasa, Swarabheda, Hridroga, Trishna, Jwara, Chardi,
Prameha, Kushtha, Aruchi, Kamala, Vaivarnya.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Raktapitta (Haemorrhage)
waMEayeh: Here ar sesh ar | Pe: We Weare Se eT TAT ENT
(a1.g.Fa. 2/24-25)

Juice or decoction prepared from leaves of Vasa (Adhatoda vasica) if taken alone or
with honey or sugar checks haemorrhage immediately and it is regarded as best drug for
it.

----- PAGE 697 -----
SS 689

i Jwara (Fever)
) : Rretsctorsert after argpfirst eranrerer tl
ice of leaves of Vi (aA Fa. 1/92)
eas er a Ls (Adhatoda vasica) if taken with sugar and honey relieves
Jwara d € 8 rom Pitta and Kapha and this remedy is also useful in Raktapitta
(Intrinsic haemorthage) and Kamala (Jaundice),
3, Kasa (Cough)

arararal fea: care Crnftrerserry eT tt (eM. 2/4/7)

Cold infusion of Vasa (Adhatoda vasica) is very useful in Kasa (Cough).

Matra (Dosage)

Swarasa (Juice) - 5toiSml
Churna (Powder) - lto3g
Kwatha(Decoction) —-— 20to40ml

ives such as vasicine,

Phytoconstituents — Leaves contain quinazoline derivat
Vasicolinone and

yasicinone, B-sitosterol, Kaempferol, 1-peganine, Aadhatodine,

Anisoline.

Research corner

1. The effectiveness of aqueous extracts of various medicinal plants in
detoxification of aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) was tested in vitro by thin-layer
chromatography and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Among
the different plant extracts, the leaf extract of Vasaka (Adhatoda vasica Nees)
showed the maximum degradation of AFB1 (798%) after incubation for 24h at
370C. Vijayanandraj S, Brinda R, Kannan K, Adhithya R, Vinothini S, Senthil
K, Chinta RR, Paranidharan V, Velazhahan R. Detoxification of aflatoxin B1
by an aqueous extract from leaves of Adhatoda vasica Nees. Microbial Res.
2013 Aug 5. pii: $0944-5013(1300118-3. doi:10.1016/j.micres. 2013.07.008.
2. The purpose of this study was to characterize the most bioactive

phytochemicals viz., vasicine, vasicinone, vasicine acetate, 2-acetyl
benzylamine, vasicinolone present in the chloroform fraction having anti-
inflammatory and antimicrobial activities. The anti-inflammatory activity was
tested by using carrageenan and CFA-model induced paw oedema. The
observed results revealed that vasicine showed most potent anti-inflammaory
effects (59.51%) at the dose of 20.0 mg/kg at 6h after carrageenan inejection
and maximum inhibition rate was observed of vasicinone (63.94%) at the dose

----- PAGE 698 -----
690

-

Nn

Dravyaguna Vijnana

of 10.0 mg/kg at 4 days after CFA injection. Singh B, Sharma RA. Anti-
inflammatory and antimicrobial properties of pyrroloquinazoline alkaloids from
Adhatoda vasica Nees. Phytomedicine. 2013 Mar 15;20(5):441-5. doi:
10.1016/j.phymed. 2012.12.015. Epub 2013 Jan 26.

3. The larvicidal activities of methanolic fractions from Adhatoda vasica leaf

extracts were investigated against the bancroftian filariasis vector Culex
quinquefasciatus and dengue vector Aedes aegypti. The results indicated that
the mortality rates was high at 100, 150, 200 and 250 ppm of methanol extract
of fractions III with R (f) value 0.67 and methanol extract of fraction V with
R (f) value 0.64 of A. Vasica against all the larval instars of C.
quinquefasciatus and A. aegypti. Thaingaivel A, Chandrasekaran R, Revathi
K, Nisha S, Sathish-Narayanan S, Kirubakaran SA, Senthil-Nathan S.
Larvicidal efficacy of Adhatoda vasica (L.) Nees against the bancroftian
filariasis vector Culex quinquefasciatus Say and dengue vector Aedes aegypti
L. in in vitro condition. Parasitol Res. 2012 May; 110(5):1193-9. doi: 10.1007/
s 00436-011-2728-2. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

. Study demonstrated that both the compounds, vasicine acetate and 2-acetyl
benzylamine, could be evaluated further for developing a drug to control M.
tuberculosis. Ignacimuthu S$, Shanmugam N. Antimycobacterial activity of two
natural alkaloids, vasicine acetate and 2-acetyle benzylamine, isolated from
Indian shrub Adhatoda vasica Ness. leaves. J Biosci. 2010 Dec; 35(4):565-70.

. The present investigation was carried out to study the anti-ulcer activity of
Adhatoda vasica leaves using two ulcer models (1) Ethanol-induced, and (2)
Pylorus ligation plus aspirin-induced models. Results of the study suggest that
in addition to its classically established pharmacological activities, the plant also
has immense potential as an anti-ulcer agent of great therapeutic relevance.

. Shrivastava N, Srivastava A, Banerjee A, Nivasarkar M. Anti-ulcer activity of
Adhatoda vasica Nees. J Herb Pharmacother. 2006; 6(2):43-9.

Yoga (Formulations)

ili lly

Name of Yoga Indications

SI.No.

Vasaguduchyadi kashaya Raktapitta, Kamala
Vasakhanda Raktapitta, Shwasa
Rajayakshma, Kasa

----- PAGE 699 -----
Vasa 691

Botanical Name — Adhatoda vasica Nees.

Adhatoda — Derived from Malabar Name.

vasica — From the Sanskrit term Vasaka which means scented.
Family — Acanthaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula — Vasa kula.

Basonym of Drug

areata warrata oat ware, aed atreaTeahet aT |

Adhatoda vasica alleviates many diseaes there by restores the health.

Synonyms

Morphology
1, SURTET:- AAEM FA FAFA |

Zi.

Se

Flowers of Vasa are white in colour as like that of teeth of horse.
ftiera-fieer fearhaqgaagt Fars |
Flowers of Vasa are bilabiate which resemble wide opened mouth of a Lion.

Rifger-fiereracqeaatt ar |

‘Flowers of Vasa resemble mouth of a lion.

Properties and Actions

4.

MSSI-BLET Mesa Wary Water AT |

Vasa is very useful drug in many diseases.

. Teaftraaredt-teaftrt wareate sree

Vasa is regarded as a best drug in Raktapitta otilipagl disorders).

. frag-sraereltat were: |

Vasa cures many diseases, hence supports like a mother.
Trat-area fecrenthtont ror FeTTT

Vasa always does well like a mother.

aera fet He OMT MITA TAT, |

Flowers have sweet nectar in large quantity.
aael- sath Ste |

Vasa passifies Kapha dosha.

----- PAGE 700 -----
692 Dravyaguna Vijnana

10. HAAS: BAA: |

Vasa alleviates cough

Regional Names

Kannada
Marathi

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka Not Mentioned In Varga
Sushruta Not Mentioned In Gana
Bh.Pr.Ni — Guduchyadi varga 88-90

Habitat
Vasaka is indigenous to India, especially found in Maharashtra, Karnataka, Goa and

Kerala.

Morphology
Habit — Perennial under shrub.
Root — Tap-root, branched.

Stem — Herbaceous above, woody below,
branched, branches swelled at the nodes, solid, an-
gular, hairy, greenish-yellow.

Leaf — Simple, opposite, lanceolate, entire
acute, coriaceous with unicostate reticulate vena-
tion, small petiole.

Inflorescence — Racemose, A terminal spike.

Flower — Bracteate, bracteolate, zygomorphic,
bilabiate, bisexual, hypogynous, complete, pentam-
erous, whitish with pink streaks. Sepals are five,
gamosepalous, green and valvate aestivation. Petals are five bilipped, gamopetalous, pos-
terior lip with two lobes. Androecium contains two fertile stamens and two small
staminodes. Gynoecium is bicarpellary syncarpous and superior ovary.

Adhatoda vasica Nees (Vasa)

----- PAGE 701 -----
Vasa 693

Fruit — Capsule
Substitute
Adhatoda beddomi in Kerala.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics):

Leaves are lanceolate, entire, tapering 12 to 20 cm long, 2.5 to 5 cm broad, having a
long petiole, upper surface glabrous, dark green in colour. The dry leaves are extremely
brittle, occuring in small pieces of brownish green colour. These are generally mixed with
twigs and flowering or fruiting spikes. Has got characterisitc disagreeable odour. Taste is
very bitter.

Classical references

Synonyms
arent atftent arar Rreenrat a fifeenr | great afte CArelSeasSoaH: |
seat geen: Riguutss a aya: | (AF. Fewest 83-89)

Properties and Actions

amat aprad: aafrarcasr: | firaegant ta: cwaeitadettad

grarsneeigasarame: | (AT. Wert 89-90)

atest fatter: fraser | cageafdpsett vargas: Ul

(afr. Waafert 23)

Rigen qerfarer ger waat fear ory: | ate TAT BL |

wgeroREgMada, Nl aeet adet yet gest safari

(& fA. 13-14)

aren fercat Hester cararett Teale, | HTH HAHCASATATT TATTRT
(w.F. wereee TT 49)

ara fereet oq: efter anfirafearrt | tatsaret avat areata

Tens are aaa HOTT TAS
arasvart fafeeny, faftrat went _ | fraraafa wget grit
area wemedgageagt adt afte frei amt |
(B.A. rargenfe FT 141-143)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Main useful part of Vasa

a. Whole plant b. Leaf c. flower d. Fruit

Ans: b. Leaf

----- PAGE 702 -----
694 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Pradhana Rasa of Vasa
a. Katu b. Kashaya c. Tikta d. Madhura
Ans: c. Tikta

3. Agrya karma of Vasa is
a. Raktapitta hara b. Stambhana c. Kushthaghna d. Dipana
Ans: a. Raktapitta hara

4, Cold infusion of Vasa (Adhatoda vasica) is very useful in
a. Jwara b. Kasa c. Anidra d. Arshas
Ans: b. Kasa

5. Vaiscine a chemical constituent present in
a. Shunthi b. Punarnava c. Shala d. Vasa
Ans: d. Vasa

6. Vasarishta is mainly indicated in
a. Kasa Shwasa b. Jwara c. Vibandha 7. Shotha
Ans: a. Kasa Shwasa

7. Botanical name of Vasa is
a. Salacia reticulata b. Mesua ferrea
c. Adhatoda vassica _ d. Citrullus colocynthis
Ans: c. Adhatoda vassica

8. Vajidanta and Simhasya are the synonyms of
a. Ashwagandha b. Vasa c. Kshiravidara d.Shatavari
Ans: b. Vasa
9. Atarusha and Mata are the synonyms of

a. Vasa b. Kalamegha c. Haritaki d. Amalaki
Ans: a. Vasa

10. Habit of Vasa Plant
a. Herb b. Creeper c. Shrub d. Tree

Ans: c. shrub

28K A aR

----- PAGE 703 -----
Chapter

Vatsanabha

Useful part — Mula (Root)
Rasadi panchaka
Rasa LO” Se |

Guna Ruksha, Tikshna, na LG TE Se a Vikasi, Sukshma & Vyavayi

Karma (Actions)

Swedajanaka, Jwaraghna, Shothahara, Dipana, Vedanahara, Kasahara.
Pharmacological Actions

Febrifuge, Antidiarrhocal, Spasmogenic, Psychostimulant, Cardiac stimulant, Anal-
gesic, Diaphoretic, Anodyne, Irritant and Sedative.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Tridosha Shamaka, Vatahara due to Ushna virya, Madhura vipaka and Madhura
rasa. Pittahara because of Madhura vipaka and Madhura rasa and Kapha Shamaka due
to Ushna virya.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Jwara, Shotha, Agnimandya, Vedanayukta Vikara and Kasa
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Jirna jwara (Chronic fever)
Tere Vera Gees: | afftor at fet arm situisaret WA
(AAS. 48/2:

Powder prepared from Lodhra (Symplocos racemosa), Chandana (Santalum ¢
bum), Shadgrantha (Acorus calamus), Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox) is taken with Sug:
Ghee, Honey and Milk is best remedy for Jirna jwara (Chronic fever).

2. Rasayana (Rejuvenating)
Wears | (af. 1/3/25)

----- PAGE 704 -----
696 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox) is regarded as one of the Rasayana (Rejuventative)
drugs; hence it is one of the important ingredients of Aindra rasayana.

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) — 30 to 62.5 mg

Phytoconstituents — Root contains Indaconitine, Chasmaconitine, Chasmanine,
Lycoctonine, Aconitine, Delphinine, Bikhacontine & Pseudaconitine.

Research corner

1. Ayurvedic method of detoxification of such products involves Shodhana.
Hence, in present paper it has been decided to replace Ayurvedic Shodhana
process by chemical purification method and to study the benefits and/or
drawbacks of the traditional Ayurvedic Shodhana process. Crude aconite root,
Ayurvedic Shodhana treated aconite root and chemical Shodhana treated
aconite root samples were evaluated for toxicity and changes by animal studies
and thin layer chromatography (TLC) respectively. The results of the toxicity
study suggest that the modified method of Shodhana is less efficient as
compared to the traditional Ayurvedic Shodhana process. TLC studies have
shown that pseudoaconitine and aconitine were converted into far less toxic
substances like vertroyl pseudoaconine and benzoylaconine respectively only
in traditional Ayurvedic Shodhana. Deore SL, Moon KV, Khadabadi SS,
Deokate UA, Baviskar BA. Evaluation of toxicity of ‘Vatsanabha’ (Aconitum
feerox, Ranuculaceae) Before and After Shodhana. J Young Pharm. 2013 Mar;
5(1):3-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jyp. 2013.01.001. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

2. Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox Wall.) is a very well-known ingredient of
Ayurvedic formulations and is prescribed as an antipyretic, analgesic,
antirheumatic, appetizer and digestive. The recommended dose of purified
Vatsanabha (A. ferox Wall.) root is 15 mg. A case of hypotension and
bradycardia due to aconite poisoning caused by overdosing of an Ayurvedic
medicine (Mahashankaha Vati), which was primarily managed by Ayurvedic
treatment. Panda AK, Debnath SK. Overdose effect of aconite containing
Ayurvedic Medicine (‘Mahashankha Vati’). Int J Ayurveda Res. 2010 jul;
1(3):183-6. doi. 10.4103/0974-7788.72493.

3. Simple and rapid stability-indicating HPLC method were developed for the
individual analysis of aconitine (ACN) and piperine (PIN) in Mahamrutynjaya
rasa, and herbal dosage form containing Aconitum ferox, Piper nigrum, and
Piper longum in combination. Separation of the ACN from its major and minor
degradation products was successfully achieved on a reverse-phase C18

----- PAGE 705 -----
Vatsanabha 697

column (250x4.6 mm id, 5 microm particle size), with isocratic elution using
a mixture of acetonitrile-KH2PO4 buffer (10 mM, pH 8+/-0.1; 50+50, v/v) at
flow rate of 0.7 mL/min with UV detection at 227 nm. PIN separation was
performed on a reversed-phase C18 column (250x4.6 mm id, 5 microm particle
size), with isocratic elution in acetonitrile-KH2P04 buffer (10mM, pH 7+/-
0.1;35+65, v/v) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with UV detention at 343 nm, Rai
P, Pathak A, Rajput SJ. Stability-indicating reverse-phase liquid
chromatographic methods for the determination of aconitine and piperine in a
polyherbal formulation. J AOAC Int. 2009 Jul-Aug; 92(4):1044-54,

Yoga (Formulations)

SIL.No. ‘Name of Yoga Indications

: Mratyunjaya rasa Jwara, Vatapittajwara
3 Shitajvara, Shula

Ananda bhairava rasa Sannipata jwara

Jwaramurari rasa Jirna jwara, Amavata

; Jwarankusha rasa Tridoshaja jwara

Basonym of Drug
area fafa arfiaert ste at |
The tuber of Aconitum ferox resembles the umbilicus of Calf.

Synonyms
Properties and Actions

1. fad-faas arr |
Vatsanabha is a poison and it spreads very quickly all over the body.

2. eas acted Wieetet Bee |
Consumption of Vatsanabha makes the individual unconcious.

3. TReTA-PRrefer sitearz
Vatsanabha kills the person.

Regional Names

English Monk’s hood, Indian aconite

----- PAGE 706 -----
698 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name — Aconitum ferox Wall.
Aconitum — Aconite-Monk’s hood
ferox—Ferocious, Terrible, Very poisonous
Family — Rananculaceae (Refer Appendix-II for key features)
Kula - Vatsanabha kula
Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)
Charaka  Notmentioned in Varga

Sushruta Not mentioned in Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni_ — Dhatwadi varga 192
Habitat

Vatsanabha is found in alpine and subalpine western Himalayan region at the height
of 6,000 to 10,000 ft. altitude.
Morphology

Habit — Herb

Roots — Biennial, paired, tuberous, daughter tube
is ovoid-oblong, to ellipsoid, 2.5 to 4 cm long, 1 to
1.5 cm thick, with few filiform root-fibres, dark brown
externally, mother tuber much shrunk and wrinkled
with more numerous root fibres.

Stem — Erect, 40 to 90 cm high, slender, cov-

ered with short spreading yellow hairs in the upper
part, glabrous below.

Leaves — Scattered, distant, petioles slender, 25 (Vatsanabha)
cm in lower leaves, upper leaves have short petioles.
Blade is orbicular-cordate to reform in outline with a rather wide sinus upto 8 cm deep, 11
cm high from the sinus to the tip, upto 20 cm across.

Inflorescence — Raceme, 10 to 25 cm long, rachis slender.

Flower — Slender pedicels, erect, sepals are blue, hairy, uppermost helmet shaped,
shortly beaked, lip deflexed, lanceolate, acute and entire. Carpels are five in number.

----- PAGE 707 -----
Vatsanabha 699

Fruit — Follicle, 1.5 to 2 cm long, 4 to 5 mm broad, almost glabrous.
Seeds — Obovoid to of pyramidal 2.5 to 3 mm long, winged along the rhaphe.

Visha laxana (Toxic signs and Symptoms)

As Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox) is a ferocious poison it causes several harmful
effects. In a few minutes after consuming any of the preparations of aconite, there will be
tingling sensation followed by numbness in the lips, mouth, tongue and pharynx, fol-
lowed by salivation, pain in the stomach and vomiting. Tingling and numbness extend
over the whole body. The person sweats profusely and there will be a sensation of im-
pending paralysis. The person feels giddiness, his vision and speech will be impaired,
limb becomes weak, unable to stand or walk. Twiching of muscles and convulsions may
occur. Pulse will be slow and become irregular. First breathing will be rapid but soon
becomes slow. Pupils alternately contract and dilate but remain fully dilated in the later
stages. Death ensures from ventricular fibrillation or respiratory paralysis.

Fatal dose — 1 gm (Root), 250 mg (Extract) 4 mg (Alkaloid)

Fatal period — 20 minutes to 24 hrs. Average is 6 hrs.

Treatment
e Patient should be kept warm.
e Gastric lavage with tannic acid or Postassium permanganate solution.
¢ Heart and respiration support with hypodermic injections.
e Artificial respiration and oxygen supply if necessary.
Purification
1. Mature tubers of Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox) are cut into small pieces (To
size of Bengal gram) and put into a vessel made of mud or stone filled with
Gomutra (Cow’s urine). This vessel is kept under hot sun. Fresh Gomutra is
used every morning and process is repeated for 3 days. Later tubers are
removed, deskined and dried.

2. Vatsanabha (Aconitum ferox) is cut into small pieces and placed in a Potali
formed out of cloth. This Potali containing Vatsanabha is immersed in a vessel

containing milk and boiled for 3 to 6 hours.
Antidote — Tankana (Borax)
Substitutes
Acointum laciniatum stapf.
Aconitum denorrhizum stapf.

----- PAGE 708 -----
700 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Aconitum falconeri
Aconitum spicatum stapf.

Aconitum violaceum jawab.

Market sample

Market sample consist abconical, abruptly tapering roots, more often paired as mother
and daughter tubers, 2 to 5 cm in length and 2.5 cm in diameter at the thickest part.
Surface dark brown in colour, transversely shrivelled, and densely covered with remanants
of rootlets or root scars arranged in an annular fashion. On breaking become short pieces,
exposing a mealy surface of yellowish brown in colour. Doesn’t possess any odour, taste
is slightly sweet followed by tingling sensation.

Classical references

Morphology
Regan wequt aaaraireta | sear a atghaderars: @ area:
(a3. aranfe GT 192)
Synonyms

aad ware aoa faery else et AU At wate WOE, UI
(uF. fracae aT 222)

Properties and Actions

ARSE: Aleut ATTA: | AS wRa TUTTE: PTAA: UI
(aA. fraeanfe at 223)

aanit wdguit arascerraae: | firrayterenft artaret walag:
mrad shagd ast Aaaae: | AAraTAl wat aa afar | SAA
(B.A. erergenie at 195-196)
Purification
1 maith Yur Most Acs WAN | Aa Ae TST: SALAH It
Oreo aes arte BET ATS Aa: | TTT AT Ae TITAS I
vee oe ft ahora g 1 aart a at at dlaenig fasaq ul
ud fant Hen rae: | Meter fare cast YgTaTe STAAL, |
(Ra. 24/19-22)

2. fae aire Heart Hen Ugrarmny | yore Ue afar BTA: I

----- PAGE 709 -----
—

Vatsanabha

701

amg ar ante ataterreta: | centres feet erat ferypaerer a Mera:

(Lt. 24/23-24)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

. Useful part of Vatsanabha

a. Root b. Rhizome

Ans: a. Root
Vipaka of Vatsanabha is
a. Katu b. Madhura

Ans: b. Madhura

. Pradhana Karma of Vatsanabha

a. Shwasahara

Ans: d. Jwaraghna
Mratyunjaya Rasa is indicated in
b. Kushtha

b. Medhya

a. Kasa

Ans: c. Jwara
Botanical name of Vatsanabha
a. Aconitum heterophyllum

c. Acorus calamus

Ans: b. Aconitum ferox

. Habit of Vatsanabha Plant

a. Tree b. Creeper

Ans: c. Herb

. Antidote for Vatsanabha

a. Manashila b. Tankana

Ans: b. Tankana

Te RR AR

c. Leaf d. stem

c. Amla d. Lavana

c. Vajikara d. Jwaraghna
c. Jwara d. Anidra

b. Aconitum ferox
d. Areca catechu

c. Herb d. Shrub

c. Gandhaka d. Sarjakshara

----- PAGE 710 -----
Chapter

Vibhitaki

Useful part— Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi Panchaka

Karma (Actions) — Kasahara, Netrya, Keshya, Krimighna, Swarya, Chardighna,
Mukharogahara, Bhedana.

Majja — Madaka.

Pharmacological Actions — Astringent, Tonic, Expectorant

Doshakarma — Tridosha Shamaka (Mainly Kapha Shamaka) Kaphahara because
of Ushna virya and Kashaya rasa, Pittahara because of Madhura vipaka and Kasshaya
rasa, Vatahara because of Ushna virya and Madhura vipaka.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications) — Kasa, Netra roga, Kesha vikara, Krimi,
Swarabheda, Mukharoga, Shotha, Visarpa, Mutradosha and Ashmari.

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic Administration)
1. Kasashwasa (Cough and Asthma)

aay arerenray sare ar fersiterenry | (3..F8. 3/173)

Vibhitaka (Terminalia bellerica) is used in different forms in case of Kasa (Cough)
and Shwasa (Asthma).
2. Shotha (Oedema)

Rasfirenrat Hemera: wety atentet: wee: (af. 12/71)

The Lepa (Application) of Phalamajja (Fruit pulp) of Vibhitaki (Terminalia belirica)
will relieve Daha (Burning sensation) and Arti (Pain) in all kinds of Shotha (Oedema).
3. Netra roga (Shukra)-Corneal opacity

fasftrenrterrsar at Walls: BSAA: (B.S. 12/13)
Anjana (Collyrium) of Vibhitakasthi majja (Seed pulp of Terminalia belirica) is
very beneficial in case of Shukra (Corneal opacity).

----- PAGE 711 -----
Vibhitaki 703

4. Drishti Balartha (To improve eyesight)
fretemante ypeRalseared Pref: 1 srerearaterrert antther geatet Tear II
(H.Z3. 13/46)
Nasya (Instillation) of combination of Tila taila (Sesamum oil), Akshataila (Oil of
Terminalia belirica), Bhringa swarasa (Juice of Eclipta alba) and Asana niryuha (De-
coction of Pterocarpus marsupium) cooked in iron vessel improves vision.
5. Granthi visarpa
fasta erat ast aerators Weed | (aA. 21/124)
Kalka (Paste) of Vibhataka twak (Bark of Terminalia belirica) is prepared, warm it
and applied.
6. Mutra dosha (Disorders of Urinary tract) and Ashmari (Calculus)

aeadies gar acta fidar: 1 ate fagead atari

(G3. 58/45)
Churna (Powder) of Aksha bija (Seeds of Terminalia belirica) is mixed with Sura

(Wine) to prepare a paste and taken orally. It cures all Mutra dosha (Disorders of Urinary
tract) and Ashmari (Calculus).

Matra (Dose)
Churna (Powder)-1-2 g

Phytoconstituents

Fruit - Contains-Tannin (20-30%), gallic acid, ellagic acid, phyllemblin, ethyl gal-
late, gallocyl glucose, g - sitosterol, chebulagic acid, mannitol, glucose, galactose, fruc-
tose, rhamnose, bellericanin (Cardiac glycoside).

Kernel — Contains-Yellow fatty oil possessing fatty acid, like palmitic, oleic and
linoleic acids.

Seeds — Contain-Protein, Oxalic acid and non-edible oil.

Bark — Contains Tannin, Oxalic acids.

Research corner
1. The antiulcer activity of 70% methanolic extract of fruits of Terminalia belerica
Roxb. (Combretaceae) was evaluated using ethanol induced, aspirin induced,
cold stress restraint and pylorus ligated ulcer in rats. Results suggested that the
70% methanolic extract of Terminalia belerica increased resistance to
necrotizing agents, providing a direct protective effect on the gastric mucosa

----- PAGE 712 -----
704

-

Nn

Dravyaguna Vijnana

and exhibited antiulcer effect. Jawanjal H, Rajput MS, Agrawal P, Dange V
Pharmacological Evaluation of Fruits of Zerminalia belerica Roxb, for
Antiulcer Activity. J. Complement Integer Med. 2012 Jun 18:9(1), pity
jcim.2012.9.issue-1/1553-3840. 1556/1553-3840.1556.xml. doi:10.1515/1553.
3840.1556.

_ Effect of continuous administration of dried 757% methanolic extract of fruits of

Terminalia belerica (Combretaceae) suspended in water was studied in alloxan
induced hyperglycemia and antioxidant defense mechanism in rats. Results
suggested that T. belerica fruit extract possessed anti-diabetic and antioxidant
activity and these activities may be interrelated. Sabu MC, Kuttan R.
Antidiabetic and antioxidant activity of Terminalia belerica. Roxb. Indian J
Exp Biol. 2009 Apr; 47(4):270-5.

. Fruits of T. Belerica were extracted with petroleum ether, chloroform, acetone,

alcohol and water and efficacy of extracts against Salmonella typhi and
Salmonella typhimurium was evaluated. Pretreatment of mice with aqueuous
extract of T. belerica conferred protection against experimental Salmonellosis
and 100% survival of animals has been reported when challenged with lethal
doses of S. typhimurium. Madani A, Jain SK. Anti-Salmonella activity of
Terminalia belerica: in vitro and in vivo studies. Indian J Exp Biol. 2008 Dec;
46(12):817-215

Study done to evaluate the protective effect of Terminalia belerica fruit extract
and its active principle, gallic acid (3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid) at different
doses against carbon tetrachloride intoxication. It is concluded that 200mg/kg
dose of gallic acid was found to be most effective against carbon tetrachloride
induced liver and kidney damage. Jadon A, Bhadauria M, Shukla S. Protective
effect or Terminalia belerica Roxb. and Gallic acid against carbon tetrachloride

induced damage in albino rats. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2007. Jan 19:109(2):214°8:
Epub 2006 Aug 12. ,

. Hypercholesterolaemia and atherosclerosis were induced experimentally in

rabbits by cholesterol feeding. The effect of an indigenous drug, T. beleric4,
was evaluated in these hypercholestrorlemic rabbits. 7. belerica reduced the
levels of lipids in hypercholesterolemic animals. There was also a significant
decrease in liver lipids and heart lipids (P<0,05) j ‘oials

‘ -05) in the drug-treated anima™
Shaila HP, Udupa AL, Udupa SL. Preventive actions of Terminalia belerica

in experimentally induced atherosclerosis, Int J. Cordial. 1995 Apr; 49(2):101-

----- PAGE 713 -----
Vibhitaki 705

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Name of ormulations Indications |

Vibhitaki Churn

Triphala Kashaya Jwara, Shula
Triphala Guggulu

Bhagandhara, Shotha
Triphaladi taila Shiroroga, Keshavikara

~~ [Tribhatad ghrita

Botanical Name

wn

Terminalia belerica, Roxb.
Terminalia - Terminus-end leaves are terminal in position.
belerica - Bely-which is an Arabic name.
Family — Combretaceae
Kula — Haritaki
Basonym of Drug
Vibhitaki removes fear about diseases.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. faaara:-freagest ages Te: |
Vibhitaki grows commonly in Vindhya region.
Morphology
2. TAA: Bert Yfercarg, |
Vibhitaki blossoms in Vasanta Ritu (spring)
3. wadtaet:-HaTATUT THETA |
Fruits weigh about 1 Karsha (app. 10gm)
4, Aemet:-AerT eh et ST |
Kernel of Vibhitaki yield oil.
Properties and Actions
5, Stat:-arerter carcatter SrA earehtetatier; steer otarhiexet, AheReTATTRT: |

Vibhitaki is very useful for sense organs.

----- PAGE 714 -----
706 Dravyaguna Vijnana

6. HUTT Sele |
Vibhitaki cures Kasa (Cough).

7. agatd:-yayaerHary |
Vibhitaki fruit is very potent.

8. faven:-fasraur Arata tare
Vibhitaki if used removes the diseases from the root.

Others

9. wHferga:-actda:, ae we Ba Hla wees: |
Regarded as auspicious plant as it is abode of Goddess Kali and in ancient
times it was used as dice.

10. YMANA:- Yet: THI, HfergAas waar er: fagrarctararara: |
Vibhitaki plant is an abode of Bhuta (Evil spirit).
Regional Names
Classification of Dravya (Gana)
Charaka Virechanopaga, Jwarahara
Sushruta Mustadi, Triphala
Bh.Pr.Ni Haritakyadi Varga 35-37
Habitat
Vibhitaki is very common tree found in Indian
forests and plains.

Morphology
Habit — Large deciduous tree grows up to 60 ft.
height.

Leaves — Gathered at the extremities of the

branches, simple, alternate, coriaceous, 10-20 cm long, Terminalia et Roxb

----- PAGE 715 -----
Vibhitaki 707

7-15 cm wide, broadly elliptic or elliptic-obovate, rounded or rarely subacute, or shortly
acuminate, both surfaces are puberculous when young, margin is entire, base is narrowed,
main nerves are 6-8 pairs, spreading, prominent, midrib is prominent on both sides, peti-
ole is 2-10 cm long, without glands at the apex.

Inflorencence — Axillary slender spike.

Flowers— Greenish yellow, with an offensive odour, flowers in upper part of spikes
are male, which is shortly pedicelled and those in the lower part are hermaphrodite and
sessile.

Fruit—Drupe, 1 to 2.5 cm in diameter, ovoid, grey, suddenly narrowed into a short
stalk, velvety, obscurely S-angled when dried.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics);

Fruit is hard, ovoid or obovoid, more often pentagonal drupe, suddenly narrowed
into a short stalk or a scar of pedicel, up to 2.5 cm long and 2 cm broad. Surface is velvety,
covered with a close fulvous tomentum, having light amber colour. Fruits are dark brown
to black in colour and globular in shape. The fruit contains a hard stony seed with five
longitudinal ridges. The kernel is oily, having three prominent ridges. Fruit does not have
any characteristic odour.

Classical references
Synonyms
fasitanfattg: rea: aitnetreg U: | afegar yerareeter eAfererera: Ut
(aa. BireMeaT 35)
Properties and Actions

fasftaeh targus wort arate | corded fereast tet area I
wet Aafed tet afrdectaer | fasta desttemarett og: UI
wert Hepes afasashe ag: u (ay. eiaeasat 36-37)
fanfice: we: Ure creeeaetfrcet: | earenher aeahTet: Aaya hega: UT: I
(afr. yeast 210)
arat maremeyt ures frrerarren | sorte fereret cage ceaetsrg here,
age Yad wat TY BAT, | AAAS Wea: GUHATOMAITA: UI
(a. aiteftrert 243-244)
fasten: aeftath: aroretor: eames: erase: Ufereterar rare ME STE:
(a.fa. srenfert 232)

----- PAGE 716 -----
708

Dravyaguna Vijnana

fice we iW wae agreed aaa

_

(B.A. etiaeenfeart 14)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)
. Useful part of Vibhitaki
a. Mula b., Phala c. Patra d. Kanda
Ans: b. Phala

. Vipaka and Virya of Vibhitaki

a. Katu and Ushna b. Katu and Shita
c. Madhura and Ushna d. Madhura and Shita
Ans: c. Madhura and Ushna

. Pradhana Karma attributed to Vibhitaki is

a. Dipana b. Kasahara c. Pachana d. Stambhana
Ans: b. Kasahara

. Anjana (Collyrium) of Vibhitakasthi majja (Seed pulp of Terminalia belirica)

is very beneficial in case of
a. Ajima b. Kushtha c. Visha Vikara d, Netra Roga

Ans: d. Netra Roga

. Main indication of Vibhitaki Churna is

a. Atisara b. Shotha c. Shwasa d. Ajima
Ans: c. Shwasa

. Botanical name of Vibhitaki is

a. Terminlia belerica _b. Terminalia chebula
c. Terminalia arjuna = d. Terminalia tomentosa
Ans: a. Terminalia belerica

. Karshaphala and Aksha are the synonyms of

a. Amalaki b. Haritaki c. Vibhitaki d. Pippali
Ans: c. Vibhitaki

. Kalidruma and Bhutavasa are the synonyms of

a. Arjuna b. Kutaja c. Haritaki d. Vibhitaki
Ans: d. Vibhitaki

. Habit of Vibhitaki plant is

a. Herb b. Tree c. Creeper d. Shrub
Ans: b. Tree

----- PAGE 717 -----
Chapter

Vidanga

Useful part — Phala (Fruit)

Rasadi pancaka
[Rasa | Rat Rashaya
Laghu, Ruksha, Tikshna

Karma (Action)
Krimighna, Dipana, Shulahara, Adhmanahara, Vibandhahara, Vishaghna, Ruchya,
Medohara, Mehahara, Garbhanirodhaka, Varnya, Rasayana and Kushthaghna.

fers¢ faftrearany | (4.9, 25/40)

Vidanga (Embelia ribes Burm. F.) is best Anthelmintic.
Pharmacological Actions

Anthelmintic, Antifungal, Antioxidant, Protective, Anticonvulsant, Stimulant, Al-
ternative.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Kaphavata Shamaka, Vata Shamaka due to Ushna virya. Kaphahara because of
Ushna virya, Katu vipaka and Katu Kashaya rasa.

Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)
Krimi, Agnimandya, Ajirna, Udarashula, Adhmana, Vibandha, Aruchi, Medoroga,
Prameha, Vaivarnya and Kushtha.
Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)
1. Krimi (Worm infestation)
UPTER fart WAY eos wee a 1 feats reg ferfyrert Feet Gre:
(af. 7/159)
How Khadira (Acacia catechu) is useful in Kushtha (Skin) diseases) likewise Vidanga

(Embelia ribes) should be used for food and drinks, for bath, for fumigation and for
application.

----- PAGE 718 -----
710 Dravyaguna Vijnana

2. Kushtha (Skin diseases)
frssirmerponreul od arrirany | eft ape fealty Ae arta wae I
(far. 12/33)
Powder of Vidanga (Embelia ribes), Amalaki (Emblica officinalis), Haritaki
(Terminalia chebula), Vibhitaki (Terminalia belerica) and Pippali (Piper longum) should
be taken with honey. It is useful in Kushtha (Skin disease), Krimi (Worm infestation),
Meha (Diabetes melitus) and Bhagandhara (Fistula in ano).

3. Rasayana (Rejuvenating)

fase Tee APT as thet BETTE |

SRAa Trae ct reve HT Gear Ut (B.S. 39/152)

One should take Vidanga (Embelica ribes) Powder with ghee and honey. It acts as
Rasayana (Rejuvenative).

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) -lto2g
For Krimi roga 10 g of Churna in a single dose to be given.

Phytoconstituents — Fruits yielded Embelin, Quercitol, Taninn, an alkolied
Christembine, Iodoembolin, Bromoembelin, Embelic acid, Quercitol, Fatty ingredients,
Volatile oil, Vilangin.

Research corner

1. Antifungal activity of Embelia ribes was evaluated on eight different fungal
species by employing various concentrations of seed extract (0.5-2.0 mg). All
the concentrations of seed extract inhibited the fungal growth, whereas
maximum activity was observed at 2.0 mg concentration of seed extract. The
present study clearly demonstrated the antifungal properties of Embelia ribes.
Rani AS, Saritha K, Nagamani V, Sulakshana G. In vitro Evaluation of
Antifungal Activity of the Seed Extract of Embelia ribes. Indian J Pharm Sci.
2011 Mar;73(2):247-9.

2. The purpose of this study was to investigate the preventive effect of embelin
against hyperlipidemia and oxidative stress in HFD-induced obesity in rats. The
present study indicated the preventive effect of embelin in HFD-induced
obesity and its related complications. Embelin could be valuable in the
development of new drug therapies to prevent obesity, hyperlipidemia, and
oxidative stress. Chaudhari HS, Bhandari U, Khanna G. Preventive effect of
embelin from Embelia ribes on lipid metabolism and oxidative stress in high-

----- PAGE 719 -----
Vidanga 71
fat diet-induced obesity in rats. Planta Med, 2012 May;78(7):651-7. doi:
10.1055/s-0031-1298379. Epub 2012 Mar. 26

3. The present study was designed to investigate the protective effects of embelin
from Eribes on global ischemia/reperfusion-induced brain injury in rats.
Observations suggested that embelin is a neuroprotective agent and may prove
to be useful adjunct in the treatment of stroke. Thippeswamy BS, Nagakannan
P, Shivaharan BD, Mahendran S, Veerapur VP, Badami S. Protective effect of
embelin from Embelia ribes Burm. against transient global ischemia-induced
brain damage in rats. Neurotox Res. 2011 Nov; 20 (4):379-86. doi: 10. 1007/
s12640-011-9258-7. Epub 2011 Jul 13.

4. Anticonvulsant activity of embelin (2.5, 5 and 10mg/kg, i.p.) was studied. It
showed a significant inhibition of the seizures induced by electroshock and
pentylenetetrazole in a dose dependent manner and the activity was comparable
to phenytioin and diazepam. Significant decrease in locomotion revealing its
CNS depressant activity was observed. The findings suggest that embelin
possess anticonvulsant activity against both grand mal and petit mal epilepsy.
Mahendran S, Thippeswamy BS, Veerapur VP, Badami S. Anticonvulsant
activity of embelin isolated from Embelia ribes. Phytomedicine. 2011 Jan
15;18(2-3): 186-8. doi: 1016/j. phymed.2010.04.002. Epub 2010 Jun 1.

5. Forty days of orally feeding the aqueous E. ribes extract (100 and 200 mg/kg)
to streptozotocin (40 mg/kg, iv, single dose) induced diabetic rats produced
significant decrease in heart rate, systolic blood pressure, blood glucose, blood
glycosylated hemoglobin, serum lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase and
increase in blood glutathione levels as compared to pathogenic diabetic rats.
Bhandari U, Ansari MN. Antihyperglycaemic activity of aqueous extract of
Embelia ribes Burm in streptozotocin induced diabetic rats. Indian J Exp Biol.
2008 Aug; 46(8):607-13.

Yoga (Formulations)
SENo.

1

Name of Yoga Indications

Vidangarisht

----- PAGE 720 -----
712 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Botanical Name — Embelia ribes Burn. F.

Embelia — Embe is from Simhali word which means sour.
ribes — Rubarb’s sour.

Family — Primulaceae

Basonym of Drug
fersta Brahe Hate
Vidanga (Embelia ribes) kills the worms.
Synonyms
Habitat
1. Ratteq-fate wdatrat arat |
Vidanga grows commonly in hilly regions.
Morphology
2. Foay-anerareanhrdeetta ead ae |
Due to its delicate and flexible branches Vidanga looks like a creeper.
3. faaauge-feer: fatrranterngen: ast |
Seed of Vidanga has white spots on its surface.
4. FAATZA- PA FATEATAT BT |
Vidanga Seed is white spotted.
Properties and Actions
5. aTaret-ateqat |

Vidanga is very efficacious drug in case of worm infestations and it never fail
in this condition.

6. @itrer-Haty ata ste
Vidanga kills the worms.
7. WaPAM-sey arya seer
Vidanga is an efficacious drug in case of worm infestation.
Others
8. SRAT-ALATAN WAM AAEM |

Vidanga is commonly used in Kerala.

9. raft ytreatty treater wasert geet |

----- PAGE 721 -----
Vidanga 743

Vidanga is also used as veterinary medicine.

Regional Names

indi | Baberng

Kannada Vayu vidanga
Malayalam

Ganavargikarana (Classical categorization)

Charaka Krimighna varga, Triptighna varga, Kushthaghna varga,
Shirovirechanopaga varga

Sushruta  Pippalyadi gana, Surasadi gana

Bh.Pr.Ni_ Haritakyadi varga 111-112

Habitat
Vidanga is found in hilly parts of India.

Morphology
Habit — Large scandent shrub.

Branches — Long, slender, flexible, terete with
long internodes.

Bark — Studded with lenticules

Leaves —5 to 9 cm long, 2 to 4 cm wide, ellip-
tic or elliptic lanceolate, coriaceous, shortly and ob-
tusely acuminate, entire, glabrous on both the sides,
shining above, paler and silvery beneath, whole sur-
face covered with scattered minute reddish sunken
gland. Base is rounded or acute, main nerves are
numerous. Petiole 0.5 to 1.5 cm long.

Inflorescence — Laxed terminal or axillary
panicled raceme. Branches are 7.5 to 10 cm long.

Embelia ribes Burn. F

Flowers— Numerous, small, greenish yellow
colored. Pedicels are 1.5 to 2 mm long. Glandular pubescent bracts are minute. Sepals
1.25 mm long, ciliate, petals are 5 in number, free, 4 mm long, stamens are 5, shorter than
the petals.

----- PAGE 722 -----
714 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Fruit — Globose, 3 to 4 mm in diameter, smooth, succulent, black when ripe, like a
pepper corn when dried, tipped with the persistent style.
Different species

1. Embelia ribes Burm. f. 2. Embelia robusta C.B.Cl.
Substitute

Myrsine africana Linn.

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics): Market sample contains globular fruits
dull red or brown colour, up to 4 mm in diameter, more often with a five partite persistent
calyx and a short stalk. The surface of the fruit is warty. The thin pericarp encloses a
single seed of red colour which is enveloped in a delicate membrane. It has got faint spicy
odour, tastes pungent.

Classical references
Synonyms
Oft ace freg: treated Sa: | Age Tat deere ferarvge:
(aetrerne TT 117)

Propertis and Actions

fas¢ ae center wet afgant Ty ysreminaineincaases u
(any. etree at 112)

Rat Hee Ules AY ATTSHTATIEH, | gUhach fear het freg Birra lt
(aA. mages ST 1 2 )

freg mech ures vet farentet ory | dtahet dat wed Hitartanraay, |

fasmremmyeraaatterentir a ut (aA. sitefirerf 1148-1149)

fares meee a eatery | ataarerete ua fat crater
(aA. frorenfe aT so)

dias amaraer vrerrens ferererge ul (PA. eitreenfe af 54-55)

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)d. Seed
1. Useful part of Vidanga is
a. Mula b. Phala c. Patra d. Twak

Ans: b. Phala

----- PAGE 723 -----
Vidanga 715

mM

. Krimighna Karma of Vidanga is attributed to

a. Prabhava b. Rasa c. Guna d. Virya

Ans: a. Prabhaya

. Agrya Karma of Vidanga as per Charaka

a. Jwaraghna b. Kasaghna c.Krimighna —_d. Medhya
Ans: c. Krimighna

. One should take Vidanga (Embelica ribes) Powder with ghee and honey. It
acts as

a. Vajikara b. Rasayana c. Medhya d. Shwasahara
Ans: b. Rasayana

. Botanical name of Vidanga

a. Emblica officinalis  b. Embelia tsjerium-cottam

c. Phyllanthus amarus d. Embelia ribes

Ans: d. Embelia ribes

. Kirita and Vella are the synonyms of

a. Maricha b. Pippali c. Vidanga d. Nagavalli
Ans: c. Vidanga

. Chitra Tandula is a synonym of

a. Eranda b. vidanga c. Kapikacchu d. Manjishta
Ans: b. Vidanga

. Habit of Vidanga

a. Large Scandant shrubb. Herb c. Large Tree = d. Small Tree
Ans: a. Large Scandant shrub

. Substitute of Vidanga

a. Alpinia galanga b. Myrsine Africana

c. Carica papaya d. Vitex negundo

Ans: b. Myrsine Africana

TBR ORR

----- PAGE 724 -----
Chapter

Yashtimadhu

Useful part - Mula (Root) and Stolons.

Guru Snigdha
Karma (Action)
Yashtimadhu - Balya, Chakshushya, Varnya, Shukrala, Keshya, Swarya,
Vranahara, Shothahara, Vishaghna, Trishnahara, Ruchya, Kasahara, Shwasahara,
Shirashuia hara, Kanthya.
Klitanaka - Trishnhara, Ruchya, Balya, Vrishya, Vranahara, Chakshushya,
Raktapittahara.

Agrya Karma
Tech AY wrErvaHvadea awitseaUAMANy | (FA. 25/40)

Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra Linn.) will improve Vision, acts as Aphrodisiac, good
for hair & throat, improves complexion and heals the wound.

Rasadi panchaka

Pharmacological Actions

Hepatoprotective, Antimicrobial, Antiviral, Spasmolytic, Antiulcer, Antimutagenic,
Antipyretic, Antioxidant, Antiinflammatory and Expectorant.
Doshakarma (Action on Dosha)

Vata pitta shamaka. Vatahara due to Madhura vipaka and Madhura Rasa, Pitta
Shamaka due to Shita Virya, Mdhura Vipaka and Madhura rasa.
Rogaghnata (Therapeutic Indications)

Yashtimadhu - Dourbalya, Klaibya, Khalitya, Palitya, Shwaasa, Kasa, Swarabheda,
Vishavikara, Aruchi, Trishna, Daha, Vaivarnya and Sirashula.

Klitanaka - Trishna, Aruchi, Dourbalya, Klaibya, Raktapitta, Netra Vikara.

----- PAGE 725 -----
Yashtimadhu wal

Amayika Prayoga (Therapeutic administration)

1. Shwasa (Hoarseness of Voice)

adfiared atch astray tl (Fs. 53/13)

Intake of ricemilk processed with Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra) and ghee is
very useful in Swarabheda.

2. Hikka (Hiccough)
Beas T AaMTaMsS forest at warty: | (YS. 50/16)

Avapidaka (pressed snuff) Nasya with mixture of Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra)
and honey is good for Hikka (Hiccough).

3. Pandu (Anaemia)

feat a AAS Hart Yor as at AeATsateteMd, Ul (Ys. 7/28)
Powder or decoction of Madhuka (Glycyrrhiza glabra) if taken with honey is useful
in Pandu (Anaemia)

Matra (Dosage)
Churna (Powder) - lto3¢

Phytoconstituents

Root contains glycyrrhizine, prenylated biaurone, licoagrone, liqcomarin, isoflavone,
glyzaglabrin, quercitin, kaempferol, stragaion, liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenis, licuraside,
liquiritoside, liquoric acid, glabrotide, deoxoglabrolide, glycyrrhizic acid, liconicone,
blabridin, liqurazid, liquiritin, glabranine and glabrene

Research corner

1. Isoliquiritigenin (ISL), a chalcone and liquiritigenin (LTG), a flavonoid found
in licorice roots. ISL displays antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antitumor and
heatoprotective activities whereas LTG is an estrogenic compound, acts as an
agonist selective for the b-subtype of the oestrogen receptor. Both the phenolics
were isolated from the rhizomes of Glycyrrhiza glabra. Compunds 1, 4 and 10
were selected for in vivo antidiabetic ‘activity and found to be potential
candidates for treatment of diabetes. Gaur R, Yadav KS, Verma RK, Yadav
NP, Bhkuni RS. In vivo anti-diabetic activity of derivatives of isoliquiritigenin
and liquiritigenin. Phytomedicine. 2013 Nov. 18. pii : S0944-7113 (13)00424-
8.doi : 10.1016/j. phymed. 2013.10.015.

2. The present study was designed to investigate the beneficial effects of Gg root
extract on learning and memory in 1-month-old male Wistar albino rats. Four

----- PAGE 726 -----
18 Dravyaguna Vijnana

doses (75, 150, 225, and 300 mg/kg) of aqueous extract of root of Gg was
administered orally for six successive weeks. Results showed that all the doses
of aqueous root extract of Gg significantly enhanced the memory; however, in
the doses of 150 and 225 mg/kg, it showed a significant (p <0.01) enhancement
in learning and memory. Ghakravarthi KK, Avadhani R. Beneficial effect of
aqueous root extract of Glycyrrhiza glabra on learning and memory using
different behavioral models; An experimental study. J. Nat Sci Biol Med. 2013
Jul;4(2) : 420-5. doi : 10.4103/0976-9668. 117025.

3. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the anit-convulsant potential of
aqueous and ethanol extract of Glycyrrhiza glabra (AEGG and EEGG) and its
action on markers of oxidant stress in albino rats. The results demonstrate that
EEGG poses anti-convulsant potential and ameliorates ROS induced neuronal
damage in PTZ-induced seizure. Chowdhury B, Bhattamira SK, Das MC.
Anti-convulsant action and amelioration of oxidative stress by Glycyrrhiza
glabra root extract in pentylenetetrazole-induced seizure in albino rats. Inddian
J. Pharmacol. 2013 Jan-Feb; 45(1) : 40-3. doi : 10.4103/0253-7613.106433.

4. In this study, investigation done about the anti-obesity effect of glabridin and
glabridin rich supercritical fluid extract of licorice (LSC). Results suggest that
glabridin and glabridin-rich licorice exract would be effective anti-obesity
agents. Ahn J, Lee H, Jang J, Kim §, Ha T. Anti-obesity effects of glabridin-
rich supercritical carbon dioxide extract of licorice in high-fat-fed obese mice.
Food Chem Toxicol. 2013 Jan; 51:439-45. doi : 10.1016/j-fict. 2012. 08.048.
Epub 2012 Sep 4.

5. The present work was to study the effect of licorice aqueous extract on
carbendazim-induced testicualr toxicity in albino rats. The present results, it is
concluded that licorice aqueous extract can imporove the testicualr toxicity of
acarbendazim and this effect may be attributed to antioxidant porperties of one
or more of its constituents. Sakr S, Shalaby SY. Carbendazim-induced
testicular damage and oxidative stress in albino rats: Ameliorative effect of
licorice aqueous extract. Toxicol Ind Health. 2012 Aug 17.

Yoga (Formulations)

SI.No. Formulation Indications

I! eee, | Yashtimadhuvadi taila
SP Qieerrae | Yashtyadi kashaya
a | Yashtivasadi kashaya

Madhukadi Ghrita

----- PAGE 727 -----
Yashtimadhu

Botanical Name — Glycyrrhiza glabra Linn.
Glycyrrhiza —Glykas-means sweet, rhiza-means root
glabra - Smooth and hairless
Family — Fabaceae
Basonym of Durg
ated Hye ght
Stem of Glycyrrhiza glabra is sweet.
Synonyms
Properties and Actions
1. Wey: Aey Fa ALTA: |
Yashtimadhu has got sweet taste.
2. alee - aettact wate sien setters cant Gerard |
Yashtimadhu cures male infertility.

Regional Name

Liquorice, sweetwood
Mulathee

Kannada Jestamadhu

Malayalam Tratimadhuram
Jashtimadhu

Gana vargikarana (Classical Categorization)

les}
a

z
iso

<

719

Charaka _ Jivaniya Varga, Sandhaniya Varga, Varnya Varga, Kanthya Varga,
Kandughna Varga, Chardinigrahana Varga, Snehopaga Varga,
Vamanopaga Varga, Asthapanopaga Varga, Mutravirajaniya Varga,

Shonita sthapana Varga, Angamarda prashamana varga
Sushruta Kakolyadi Gana, Sarivadi Gana, Anjanadi Gana

Bh.Pr.Ni — Haritakyadi varga 145-146
Habitat

In India, Yashtimadhu is cultivated in Jammu Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Delhi.

Morphology

Habit -Tall perennial plant grows 50 cm to 1 mtr in height.

----- PAGE 728 -----
720 Dravyaguna Vijnana

Stem - Erect

Leaves — Compound, leaflets are 4 to 7 pairs ob-
long to elliptical-lanceolate, acute or obtuse.

Inflorescence — Raceme, shorter than the leaves.

Flowers — | cm long, bluish or violet coloured.
Calyx are 2 lipped, upper teeth connate higher than the

lower ones. Standard petal is narrow, wings and keel
are acute. Stamens are diadelphous. Ovary many ovuled.

Fruit — Pod, oblong to linear, 1 to 3 cm long, flat-
tened, straightish, more or less densely echinate glan-
dular many seeded. Glycyrrhiza glabra Linn.
Adulterants (Yastimadhu)

Roots of Glycyrrhiza uralensis Fisch and Abrus precatorius Linn. are often adulter-
ated with liquorice. Even stem pieces of Glycyrrhiza glabra is used as an adulterant.

Varieties
Dh. Ni. & Ra. Ni. - 2 types: 1. Yashtimadhu — 2. Klitanaka

Grahya Laxana (Genuine characteristics):

Market sample consists transversely cut pieces of dry clyindrical roots and stolons,
more often with a fibrous cut surface, 1 to 3 cm in diameter. External surface is shrunken,
rusty brown in colour, long tediously wrinkled with occasional small buds, circular root
scars and remnants of encircling leafy scales. Transversely cut surface shows a yellowish
brown fibrous structure depicting loose bark, followed by a well marked campus ring and
radiating vascular tissue. On breaking becomes fibrous, has got faint characteristic odour,
taste is sweet and mucilaginous.

Classical references
Synonyms
asiny cen adtaeyes aeftte aa | strech TY Aare weferar
(a3. etcaanfa af 145)
Properties and Actions
ast fear ye: tag ayEN seal Ofer Yen yar carat fraeaPAaT, |
auafrrcsfegorrentreraaen ul (a5. are +t 146)
mgerst wargrar efter fran 1 ger vivecen faster u
(af. yeeieet 139)

----- PAGE 729 -----
Yashtimadhu 721

Klitaka

afsergnet tag Toftrerentrfegery ui (a. Teaert 40)

nysh Hat get que wad fit ye 1 gard det ay arafier wore 0
Pears Tewrearagieaaa Be (a. atufireat 148)

Yashtimadhu

nyt afi fastarh a vittery | wager firreget viragomaurrey |
(a. froreafe at 145)

Klitanaka

acid vat wet art get aUTGET | vitact Ie aemeatirag UA I
(af. frorenfe aT 148)
ayaearré Yet Pair qed Wer, | aaa Preyer Aaa
(R.A. meargenie at 92)
Multiple Choice Questions (MCQ)

1. Useful part of Yashtimadhu
a. Stem b. Root and Stolon c. Fruit c. Seed
Ans: b. Root and Stolon

2. Pradhana Rasa of Yashtimadhu
a. Katu b. Tikta c. Madhura d. Kashaya
Ans: c. Madhura

3. Intake of rice milk processed with Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza glabra) and ghee
is very useful
a. Jwara b. Swarabheda c. Ajima d. Kushtha
Ans: b. Swarabheda

4. Avapidaka (pressed snuff) Nasya with mixture of Yashtimadhu (Glycyrrhiza
glabra) and honey is good for
a. Kasa b. Pandu c. Hikka d. Ajirna
Ans: c. Hikka

5. Glycyrrhizine a chemical constituent present in
a. Vidari b. Manjishtha c. Vatsanabha d. Yashtimadhu

Ans: d. Yashtimadhu

----- PAGE 730 -----
722 Dravyaguna Vijnana

6. Yashtimadhuvadi Taila is specifically indicated in
a. Khalitya b. Vyanga c. Kushtha d. Udarashula
Ans: a. Khalitya
. Common English Name of Yashtimadhu
a. Nutmeg b. Marking Nut __c. Liquorice d. Flax seeds
Ans: c. Liquorice
8. Types of Yashtimadhu as per Dhanvantari Nighantu
a. Yashtimadhu & Klitanaka b. Yashtimadhu & Mahayashti
c. Yashtimadhu & Laghyashti d. Klitanaka & Maha Klitanaka
Ans: a. Yashtimadhu & Klitanaka

~

FoR
