
----- PAGE 1 -----
Herbal Treatment of Common
Diseases in West Africa

----- PAGE 2 -----
ORGANISATION OUEST AFRICAINE DE LA SANTE
BOBO-DIOULASSO (BURKINA FASO)
Tel. (226) 20 97 57 75/Fax (226) 20 97 57 72
E-mail : wahooas@fasonet.bf -
Site web: www.wahooas.org

Herbal Treatment of Common Diseases
in West Africa

Bobo-Dioulasso, Décembre 2011.

----- PAGE 3 -----
Contents

Introduction ...........
Sickle cell anaemia
HIV/AIDS.........020
Tuberculosis
Malaria
Diabetes ...
Arterial hypertension
Asthma
Azoospermia
Gallstones ......
Kidney stones ....
Liver cirrhosis ..........
Erectile dysfunction .
Gonorrhoea
Haemorrhoids
Hepatitis
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
Urinary tract infections
Sexually transmitted infections
Male infertility-oligospermia ...
Otitis media ....
Allergic rhinitis .
Sinusitis ..........
Breast cancer
Prostate cancer
Leukaemia
Diarrhoea

Peptic ulcer disease
Insomnia ............200++
Depression ..
Schizophrenia ...
Alcoholism .........
Anxiety disorders
Boils
Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
Gingivitis and stomatitis
Oral thrush
Malnutrition...
Stroke ..........
Eczema (Dermatitis) ...
Rheumatoid arthritis .
Osteoarthritis ...........
Liver cancer

----- PAGE 4 -----
Foreword

The manner in which herbal medicines are used varies widely among populations worldwide.
Whilst some people use herbal medicines alone (often as an alternative to a conventional
medical treatment), others used them in combination with other alternative therapies, or
along with conventional medical therapies.

Given the increasing popularity of herbal medicine globally, it is imperative that all healthcare
professionals, health training and research institutions as well as all other stakeholders have
some basic knowledge of the most common herbs patients often use for disease treatment.

This is important for two main reasons. Firstly, it is important for health personnel to have an
understanding of all the health services their patients may be accessing. Secondly, since
health personnel (especially doctors, nurses and pharmacists) are often used by patients to
access information on all health and health-related issues, knowledge of the main indications
and actions of these herbs will enable them to advise their patients appropriately.

In view of this, the WHO/AFRO developed some generic training modules, guidelines and
model protocols, with the aim of deepening understanding of both Traditional Medicine
Practitioners and Conventional Medical Practitioners in key aspects of traditional medicine,
especially herbal medicine. These tools included a training module on primary health care
and malaria for conventional health practitioners and traditional health practitioners; and
model protocols for priority diseases such as HIV/AIDS, sickle cell anaemia, diabetes and
hypertension. PROMETRA International has also added to this repertoire of training tools
and protocols.

Using these materials, some institutions in Ghana, Kenya, Burkina Faso, Mali, Benin, Guinea
and Nigeria have already conducted systematic research on traditional medicines used for
the management of diseases such as malaria, hypertension, diabetes, sickle cell anaemia
among others.

However, to date there appears to be no reference document of African origin that provides
basic information on the herbal treatment of the most common diseases that affect the
populations.

The development of this booklet is a modest attempt by the West African Health
Organisation to address this need.

Among other things, the booklet will serve as a useful source of information on the herbal
treatment of these diseases for doctors, pharmacists, Traditional Medicine Practitioners,
medical herbalists and students of African Traditional Medicine.

Dr Johanna Austin Benjamin
Director, Department of Primary Healthcare and Disease Contol

----- PAGE 5 -----
Preface

Herbal medicines are assuming greater importance in the primary health care of many
countries around the world, with an attendant increase in international trade. For example,
between 2003-2004 annual revenues in Western Europe reached US$ 5 billion, whilst in
China, sales of products totaled US$ 14 billion in 2005. Revenue from herbal medicines in
Brazil amounted to US$ 160 million in 2007.

Herbs are used to treat a wide variety of both acute and chronic conditions such as simple
bruises, skin disorders, fever, malaria, hypertension, diabetes, sickle cell anaemia, sexual
weakness, piles, and even for combating rapid development of AIDS in People Living With
HIV.

Apart from being used directly as therapeutic agents, medicinal plants are also important for
pharmacological research and drug development, as they provide new leads for the
synthesis of essential medicines.

Herbs contain a multiplicity of related compounds that interact. For this reason, herbalists
argue that the sum of the biological effects of these compounds is often greater than the so-
called "major active ingredient", and that these families of compounds can act on several
different targets simultaneously to give overall biological benefit. For example, the compound
lycopene found in tomato is thought to be a potent antioxidant, but has also been found to
have effects on prostate cells, on DNA and on cellular communication. However, research in
experimental animals have shown that purified lycopene lacks the anti-prostate cancer
activity characteristic of tomato paste, which contains the plant’s full complement of related
phytochemicals including lycopene, phytoene, and phytofluene. Furthermore, it has been
shown that the contributions of other analogues of the so-called active compound, or even
unrelated compounds to the biologically effective dose, can minimize the risk of toxicity.

In the light of the foregoing, vis-a-vis the current upsurge of interest in herbal preparations as
alternatives to pharmaceuticals, it has become even more necessary for doctors and other
health care professionals to understand the actions and indications of medicinal plants to
ensure consumer safety. This is all the more pertinent given the erroneous view many
people have of herbal medicines as being totally free of adverse effects because they are
natural.

This document, which has been prepared through a series of meetings of experts drawn from
the ECOWAS sub-region and coordinated by the Programme Officer for Traditional
Medicine, Dr Kofi Busia, outlines the causes, clinical features, methods of investigation and
the the modern approach to treatment of some of the most common diseases that affect
West Africans. Above all, information on the herbs used to treat the various diseases
together with prevention and control measures is also provided.

It is hoped that this booklet, together with others yet to be produced, will serve as a useful
adjunt to the West African Herbal Pharmacopoeia.

Dr Placido Cardoso
Director General

----- PAGE 6 -----
List of Abbreviations

ECOWAS

WHO

WAHO

TMP

PROMETRA

WAHP

Economic Community of West African States
World Health Organisation

West African Health Organisation

Traditional Medicine Practitioner

Promotion de la Médecine Traditionnelle

West African Herbal Pharmacopoeia

----- PAGE 7 -----
Introduction

According to the World Health Organization (WHO), nearly four billion people, 80% of the
world's especially in Asia and Africa presently use herbal medicine for some aspect of
primary health care.

Interest in and usage of herbal preparations as alternatives to pharmaceuticals and the
search for drugs and dietary supplements derived from plants have accelerated in recent
years. Many of the pharmaceuticals currently available to physicians, such as opium, aspirin,
digitalis, and quinine, are derived from herbal remedies. In fact, according to the World
Health Organisation, approximately 25% of modern drugs used in the United States have
been derived from plants.

The rise in popularity of herbal medicine is also attributed to disenchantment with the cost,
complexity and perceived limitations of modern medicine.

Herbal remedies are available in many forms, such as teas, infusions, pills, powders,
capsules, extracts, and syrups. Many can be bought over the counter. While complete safety
and efficacy data for all herbal remedies are not available, many have been well established
through historic use.

This manual is brilliantly organized to serve as a “ready reference” on the most common
diseases that affect West Africans and the available treatment methods (conventional and
traditional).

The information presented in the following pages has been obtained from extensive
academic research of herbal literature that ranges from ancient herbal texts to modern
phytopharmaceutical journals. Moreover, much of the language used throughout the text is in
the vernacular of modern orthodox medicine and the diseases are outlined using
conventional medical terminology, and the plants indicated for diseases have been listed as
it is done in conventional medicine.

However, it must be emphasized that in herbal medicine, disease is not seen as a separate
entity and therefore is not treated as such. Herbs work to strengthen weakened body
systems by stimulating the body's own innate, self healing mechanisms. Indeed, the best
way to obtain the benefits of herbal medicine is to combine herbs with each other. Although a
single herb such as echinacea can be helpful, the really dramatic results are obtained
through the synergistic reaction that occurs when herbs are combined together.

Thus, herbal treatment must be part of a multi-modal holistic programme that embodies a
natural wholesome diet, ample exercise and rest, a positive attitude, fulfilling work, and a
simple lifestyle. This combination will almost always have a favorable influence on one's
health and often induces healing where modern medicine has failed.

However, it must be understood that there can never be any guarantees that herbs will
always help or heal every health problem for which they are indicated. There is no form of
medicine, herbal or otherwise, that can make such a guarantee.

Dr Kofi Busia

Programme Officer, Traditional Medicine

West African Health Organisation

01 BP 153 Bobo Dioulasso 01, Burkina Faso

Tel: (226) 20 97 57 75/20 97 01 00

Cel: +226 76 74 62 89

Fax: (226) 20 97 57 72

Email: kbusia@wahooas.org/Kofi_busia@hotmail.com

----- PAGE 8 -----
N° 1: SICKLE CELL ANAEMIA

1. Description

Sickle cell anaemia (or anaemia, SCA) or “drepanocytosis” is caused by an inherited
abnormal haemoglobin (an oxygen-carrying protein within the red blood cells). The abnormal
haemoglobin causes distorted (sickled) red blood cells, which are fragile and prone to
rupture. Decrease in the number of red blood cells from rupture (haemolysis), results in
anemia. The irregular sickled cells can block blood vessels causing tissue and organ
damage and pain.

Sickle-cell disease occurs more commonly in people (or their descendants) from parts of
tropical and sub-tropical regions where malaria is or was endemic. In these areas, carrying
only a single sickle-cell gene (sickle cell trait) appears to confer immunity from malaria.
Those with only one of the two alleles of the sickle-cell disease, while not totally resistant, are
more tolerant to the infection and thus show less severe symptoms when infected.

Nearly 120 million people worldwide are carriers. According to the WHO in the coming
decades, the number of carriers of hemoglobin disorders would peak at around 8% of the
world population. Approximately one fifth of those who have the disease may show
symptoms. The incidence in Africa varies from 8-15%, sometimes 20 to 30%. Previously,
patients had shortened life expectancy. For example in 1994, in the US, the average life
expectancy of persons with this condition was estimated to be 42 years in males and 48
years in females, but today, due to improved diagnostic methods and better management of
the disease, patients can live into their 50s or beyond.

2. Causes

Sickle cell anaemia is inherited as an autosomal (i.e. the gene is not linked to a sex
chromosome) recessive condition, which is passed from parent to child. The inheritance of
just one sickle gene is called sickle cell trait or the "carrier" state. Sickle cell trait does not
cause sickle cell anemia. Persons with sickle cell trait usually do not have many symptoms of
disease and have normal hospitalization rates and life expectancies. In order for sickle cell
anaemia to occur, a sickle cell gene must be inherited from both the mother and the father,
so that the child has two sickle cell genes. The offspring of two carriers of sickle cell trait, a
one in four chance of having sickle cell anemia. (In some parts of Africa, one in five persons
is a carrier for sickle cell trait.) This is why some communities discourage marriages between
two people with the disease or trait.

The sickling is promoted by conditions which are associated with low oxygen levels, cold,
humidity, increased acidity, or low volume (dehydration) of the blood. These conditions can
occur as a result of injury to the body's tissues, dehydrating states, or anesthesia.When not
receiving enough oxygen, red blood cells become sickle-shaped and grows, and can not
easily pass through small capillaries that are in the body, causing pain.

3. Signs and symptoms

Virtually all of the major symptoms of sickle cell anemia are the direct result of the
abnormally shaped, sickled red blood cells blocking the flow of blood that circulates through
the tissues of the body. The tissues with impaired circulation suffer damage from lack of
oxygen. Damage to tissues and organs of the body can cause severe disability in patients
with sickle cell anemia. The patients endure episodes of intermittent "crises" of variable
frequency and severity, depending on the degree of organ involvement.

Some features of sickle cell anemia, such as fatigue, anaemia, pain crises, and bone infarcts
can occur at any age. Many features typically occur in certain age groups.

Sickle cell anemia usually first presents symptoms in the first year of life. Infants and younger
children can suffer with fever, abdominal pain, pneumococcal bacterial infections, painful
swellings of the hands and feet (dactylitis), and splenic sequestration. Adolescents and
young adults more commonly develop leg ulcers, aseptic necrosis, and eye damage.

----- PAGE 9 -----
Symptoms in adult typically are intermittent pain episodes due to injury of bone, muscle, or
internal organs.

Complications of sickle cell disease are: priapism leading to impotence, circulatory collapse
and stroke.

4. Investigations

Sickle cell anemia is suggested when the abnormal sickle-shaped cells in the blood are
identified under a microscope. In industrialized countries, the diagnosis is made in the
neonatal period when parents are at risk or afflicted. In non-industrialized countries, the
diagnosis is often the first manifestation or complication.

Apart from the findings common to all hemolytic anemias, diagnosis relies on the detection of
hemoglobin S. This can be done:

- Observation under a microscope of a smear of blood using a special low-oxygen
preparation, called sickle prep. Other prep tests can also be used to detect the
abnormal hemoglobin S, including solubility tests performed on tubes of blood
solutions.

By haemoglobin electrophoresis test of the hemolysate of red blood cells which show, in the
homozygote, a single band of hemoglobin migrating abnormally slowly, and in the
heterozygous presence of two bands of hemoglobin, which is the fastest hemoglobin A and
the other hemoglobin S. Prenatal diagnosis (before birth) of sickle cell anemia is possible
using amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. The sample obtained is then tested for
DNA analysis of the fetal cells.

5. Treatment
5.1. Modern

The treatment of sickle cell anemia is designed according to which of the individual features
of the illness are present. In general treatment is directed at the management and prevention
of the acute manifestations as well as therapies directed toward blocking the red blood cells
from stacking together. There is no single remedy to reverse the anemia. It is, therefore,
important that family members have an optimal understanding of the illness and that
communication with the doctors and medical personnel be maintained.

Treatment of sickle cell anaemia is based on:
- Treatment of vaso-occlusive crisis: painkillers and oxygen therapy;
- Prevention of the triggers of the crisis (cold, altitude, infections, dehydration);
- Folate supplementation;
- Preventive treatment of meningococcal and pneumococcal infections;
- Blood transfusion in cases of severe anaemia or severe infection.

Hydroxyurea is a medication that is currently being used in adults and children with severe
pain from sickle cell anemia. It acts by increasing the amount of fetal haemoglobin (a form of
haemoglobin resistant to sickling of the red blood cells) in the blood. This drug appears to
significantly reduce the number of painful crises and mortality of the disease. However, its
effect is variable and unpredictable from patient to patient. Hydroxyurea can be toxic to the
bone marrow. The other obstacle to its use is its cost.

5.2. Herball treatment

Treatment may be beneficial through: education, empowerment, symptomatic pain
management, use of medicinal plants such as Zanthoxylum zanthoxyloides, Calotropis
procera, Khaya senegalensis, Sorghum bicolor and Carica papaya.

6. Prevention and control

Prevention of pneumococcal infections in young children is by vaccination. Blood
transfusions could significantly reduce the risk of vascular-cerebral accidents in some

----- PAGE 10 -----
children particularly at risk. To avoid attacks, it is recommended to follow the following simple
steps:

Drink water frequently;

Sleep in or use well-ventilated rooms

Maintain stable weigh

Keep warm

Eat foods rich in iron, or facilitate iron absorption (red meat, liver pate ...)

Avoid cold environments and respiratory infections;

Wear loose clothing;

Avoid extreme heat (dehydration triggers crises by increasing blood viscosity).

7. Références

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html
http://www.medicinenet.com/sickle_cell/article.htm

----- PAGE 11 -----
N° 2: HIV/AIDS

1. Description

HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) is the cause of AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome). HIV is a type of virus called a retrovirus, which infects humans when it comes
into contact with a break in the skin or tissues such as those that line the vagina, anal area,
mouth, or eyes or through a break in the skin.

All countries of the world are affected by the disease, but Sub-Saharan Africa is by far the
worst affected region. According to the World Bank, in 2008, more than five million adults
and children were infected with HIV. In Céte d'Ivoire, the prevalence is 4.7%, Ghana 2.2%,
rising 1.8% in Burkina Faso. In Benin, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali,
Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Togo, the prevalence rate is between 1.2% and 1.5%, while the
prevalence rate according to the Centers ANC is between 2.8% and 6.7%. Senegal, Niger
and Cape Verde have a prevalence of less than 1%. The available data is much more
"mixed" and complex. AIDS is the final stage of infection with HIV. An AIDS patient
necessarily has HIV infection, while all people infected with HIV do not necessarily have
developed AIDS.

Generally, three stages of HIV infection are described:

Initial stage (primary infection): occurs within weeks of acquiring the virus; often
characterized by a flu- or mono-like illness that generally resolves within weeks.

Stage of chronic asymptomatic infection: a long duration of infection without symptoms,
which lasts an average of 8-10 years.

Stage of symptomatic infection: the body's immune (or defence) system has been
suppressed and complications have developed, i.e. acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS). The symptoms are caused by the complications of AIDS, which include one or more
unusual infections ("opportunistic infections") or cancers, severe loss of weight, and
intellectual deterioration (called dementia).

2. Causes

HIV is present to variable degrees in the blood and genital secretions of virtually all
individuals infected with HIV, regardless of whether or not they have symptoms. The spread
of HIV can occur when these secretions come in contact with tissues such as those lining the
vagina, anal area, mouth, eyes (the mucus membranes), or with a break in the skin, such as
from a cut or puncture by a needle. The most common ways in which HIV is spreading
throughout the world include sexual contact, sharing needles, and by transmission from
infected mothers to their newborns during pregnancy, labour (the delivery process), or
breastfeeding.

3. Signs and symptoms

Rarely, some individuals develop complications of HIV that define AIDS within one year,
while others remain completely asymptomatic after as many as 20 years from the time of
infection. However, in the absence of antiretroviral therapy, the time for progression from
initial infection to AIDS is approximately eight to10 years.

Within weeks of infection, many people will develop the varied symptoms of primary or acute
infection, which typically has been described as a "mononucleosis" or "influenza"-like illness
but can range from minimal fever, aches and pains to very severe symptoms. The most
common symptoms of primary HIV infection are

e fever,

e aching muscles and joints,

e sore throat,

e swollen glands (lymph nodes) in the neck

Shortly after primary infection, most individuals enter a period of many years where they
have no symptoms at all. During this time, CD4 cells may gradually decline, and with this
decline in the immune system, patients may develop the mild symptoms of HIV such as
vaginal or oral candidiasis thrush (a fungal infection), fungal infections of the nails, a white

10

----- PAGE 12 -----
brush-like border on the sides of tongue called hairy leukoplakia, chronic rashes, diarrhoea,
fatigue, and weight loss. With a further decline in function of the immune system, patients are
at increasing risk of developing more severe complications of HIV, including many more
serious infections (opportunistic infections), malignancies, severe weight loss, and decline in
mental function.

4. Investigations
e ELISA for HIV antibodies-confirmed by a Western blot tes
e Tests can be done for these same antibodies in saliva, some providing results within
one to 20 minutes of testing

HIV antibodies usually develop within several weeks of infection. During this period, patients
may have symptoms of primary HIV infection, but will test negative by the standard testing
methods ("window period"). For the avoidance of doubt, a test that specifically detects the
presence of virus in the blood rather than the antibodies (e.g. tests for HIV RNA or p24
antigen) or a test that measures both HIV antibodies and p24 antigen, reducing the duration
of the window period from infection to diagnosis. Identifying and diagnosing individuals with
primary infection is important for early care and counseling and prevention of transmission to
others.

5. Treatment

e When HIV grows (that is, by reproducing itself), it acquires the ability to change
(mutate) its own structure. This mutation enables the virus to become resistant to
previously effective drug therapy.

e The goals of drug therapy are to prevent damage to the immune system by the HIV
virus and to halt or delay the progress of the infection to symptomatic disease.

e Therapy for HIV includes combinations of drugs that decrease the growth of the virus
to such an extent that the treatment prevents or markedly delays the development of
viral resistance to the drugs.

The best combination of drugs for HIV has not yet been defined, but one of the most
important factors is that the combination be well tolerated so that it can be followed
consistently without missing doses.

It is important to note that with effective antiretroviral therapy many of the signs and
symptoms of HIV as well as severity of immunosuppression can be completely reversed,
restoring even the most symptomatic patients to a state of excellent health.

5.1. Modern treatment

Management of HIV/AIDS is primarily assumed by practitioners of conventional medicine
including diagnosis, treatment with anti-retroviral (ARV) drugs, biological monitoring and
prevention.

5.2. Herbal treatment

Many patients use herbal therapy to treat HIV/AIDS symptoms. These resources, however,
remain poorly explored and exploited. Although many traditional healers consider themselves
able to treat HIV / AIDS, the evidence is insufficient. Among the most commonly used herbs
are: Zanthoxylum xanthoxyloides (root bark); Guiera senegalensis (leaves); Moringa oleifera
(leaves); Spirulina platensis; Adansonia digitata (stem bark); Momordica charantia (leaves);
Phyllanthus niruri (leaves); Alstonia boonei (stem bark) and Allium sativum (bulb).

6. Prevention and control

In Africa, five main sources for the spread of HIV have been noted:
e Multiplicity of sexual partners/infidelity;
e Poor perception of risk and denial of AIDS;
e The socio-economic subordination of women;
e Poverty;
e Prostitution

Other determinants that play a role in the spread of HIV are:
11

----- PAGE 13 -----
Degeneration of moral and social values
Illiteracy

Refusal to use condoms

Migration

Early sexual activity of girls with older partners
Prevalence of STls

Stigmatization of PLWHA

Lack of support for PLHHA

7. References

République du Bénin (2007) : Manuel de formation des praticiens de la médecine
traditionnelle sur la prise en charge des IST et du VIH/sida, Cotonou.

Banque Mondiale (2008) : Synthése de la réponse et épidémiologie du VIH/sida en
Afrique de l’ouest: implications pour la prévention, Programme mondial de lutte
contre le VIH/sida de la Banque mondiale.

ONUSIDA (2006) : Rapport sur Il’épidémie mondiale de Sida : profils de pays.

12

----- PAGE 14 -----
N° 3: TUBERCULOSIS

1. Description

Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious, transmissible disease, caused by Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. |t is the third leading cause of death from infectious disease worldwide,
affecting mostly people living in poor conditions, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Over 8
million new cases of TB occur each year worldwide. The incidence of the disease is very
high in Africa, with almost 13% against less than 1% in Asian countries. It is common among
intravenous drug users and HIV patients. TB can affect anyone, but the most susceptible
groups are people, who live with individuals with an active TB infection, poor or homeless
people, nationals from countries that have a high prevalence of TB, nursing-home residents
and prison inmates, alcoholics, and intravenous drug users, diabetics, certain cancers, and
HIV infection and health-care workers. Because of the frequent occurrence of relapses
(emergence of multidrug-resistance) and the fact that it is one of the opportunistic infections
of HIV/AIDS, pulmonary tuberculosis remains a public health concern in Africa and is
responsible for many deaths.

2. Causes

TB is most often caused by a germ called Mycobacterium tuberculosis or Mycobcaterium
Koch (BK). Tuberculosis is spread (transmitted). Human transmission is primarily from
person to person by inhaling infected air during close contact. The bacteria get into the air
when an infected person coughs, sneezes, shouts or spits. Thus, TB cannot be contrated by
just touching the clothes or shaking the hands of someone who is infected. When the inhaled
tuberculosis bacteria enter the lungs, they can reproduce and cause a local lung infection
(pneumonia). This may then provoke an enlargement of the local lymph nodes associated
with the lungs are even those adjacent to the heart in the central part of the chest. TB can
also spread to other parts of the body. There is also a form of atypical tuberculosis, caused
by the bacteria Mycobacterium bovis that is transmitted by drinking unpasteurized milk. It
used to be a major cause of TB in children, but it rarely causes TB now with the introduction
of pasteurized. Other forms of TB causatives agents are Mycobacterium africanum and
Mycobacterium canetti (mainly in Djibouti).

3. Signs and symptoms

TB can remain in an inactive (dormant) state for years without causing symptoms or
spreading to other people. The most common symptoms are generalized tiredness or
weakness, fever, weight loss, coughing, and night sweats, but in general the disease
progresses in two phases:

e A phase marked by early signs of tuberculosis comprising of a fever in the evening,
wasting (weight loss more than 10 kg), asthenia (fatigue), anorexia (lack of appetite),
amenorrhoea (absence of menstruation) in women, night sweats, etc.

e A phase state where cough is the main sign- chronic cough of more than three weeks
with muco-purulent, blood-stained sputum or chest pain and shortness of breath,
combined with the early signs of TB.

4. Investigations

The diagnosis of TB involves skin tests, chest X-rays, sputum analysis (smear and culture),
and PCR tests to detect the genetic material of the causative bacteria.

5. Treatment

5.1. Modern

The body's immune system is capable of fighting off the infection and stopping the spread of
the bacteria. However, when the immune system of a patient with dormant TB is weakened,
the TB can become active and cause infection in the lungs or other parts of the body.
e Inactive TB-treated with an antibiotic, isoniazid (INH), to prevent the infection from
becoming active

13

----- PAGE 15 -----
Active TB-treated with INH in combination with one or more of several drugs,
including rifampin (Rifadin), ethambutol (Myambutol), pyrazinamide, and
streptomycin.

Poor patient compliance, lack of detection of resistant strains, and unavailable
therapy are key reasons for the development of drug-resistant TB.

5.2. Herbal treatment

The most commonly used herbs for the treatment of TB include: Albizia lebbeck (stem bark);
Cassia sieberiana (stem bark); Zanthoxylum xanthoxyloides (stem bark)

6. Prevention and control

Bacille Calmette Guérin (BCG), derived from an atypical Mycobacterium, but offers some
protection from developing active tuberculosis, is a vaccine given throughout many parts of
the world, especially in infants and children.

Other preventative measures include:

Referrals to speciaist/TB clinics to avoid spread of the disease

Cover mouth and nose with a tissue when coughing,

Avoid spitting

Spit in a box with a lid containing bleach

Empty the contents every night in the toilet

Do not use the other covered during the treatment

Sleep alone if possible during the first month of treatment in a well ventilated room
Do not consume alcohol or tobacco

7. References

Tuberculose, Wikipédia

Guide de formation des ASC sur la prise en charge de la tuberculose, PNLT, Céte
d'Ivoire

Méthode FAPEG, PROMETRA

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.

http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

14

----- PAGE 16 -----
N° 4: MALARIA

1. Description

Malaria is an infectious disease caused by the Plasmodium parasite, which infects red blood
cells. The term "mal aria" (meaning "bad air" in Italian) was first coined in 1740 by H. Walpole
when describing the disease, and was shortened to "malaria" in the 20th century. Malaria
can be life-threatening, and is usually characterized by cycles of chills, fever, pain, and
sweating. Currently, about 2 million deaths per year worldwide are due to Plasmodium
infections. The majority occur in children under 5 years of age in sub-Saharan African
countries. There are about 400 million new cases per year worldwide. Plasmodium is
transmitted to humans by the bite of the female Anopheles mosquito. Mosquitoes breed in
stagnant water.

2. Causes

Four common species of the parasite cause malaria, but the most serious type is
Plasmodium falciparum, which causes 80% of cases and 90% of deaths. However, another
relatively new species, Plasmodium knowlesi, is also dangerous and is typically found only in
long-tailed and pigtail macaque monkeys. The other three common species of malaria (P.
vivax, P. malariae, and P. ovale) are generally less serious and are usually not life-
threatening.

3. Signs and symptoms

The symptoms characteristic of malaria include:

e Flulike illness with cycles of chills, fever, and sweating that repeat every one, two, or
three days

e Muscle ache ; headache ; nausea, repeated vomiting

e Lack of appetite, coughing, diarrhoea and yellowing (jaundice) of the skin and whites
of the eyes due to destruction of red blood cells and liver cells

e Inability to drink or breastfeed

e Convulsions, lethargy, severe pallor, difficulty breathing

e Dark coloured urine

People with severe P. falciparum malaria can develop bleeding problems, shock, liver or
kidney failure, central nervous system problems, coma, and can die from the infection or its
complications. Cerebral malaria (coma, or altered mental status or seizures) can occur with
severe P. falciparum infection. It is life-threatening if not treated quickly; even with treatment,
about 15%-20% die.

4. Investigations

e Blood smear on a microscope slide that is stained (Giemsa stain) to show the
parasites inside red blood cells-classic and most used diagnostic test

e Other tests based on immunologic principles exist; including RDTs (rapid diagnostic
tests) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests

e Detailed consultation to elicit onset the first signs, progression of the signs and
treatments received (including traditional)

e Physical examination for the following: temperature, weight, height and blood
pressure for adults.

5. Treatment
5.1. Modern

Three main factors determine treatments: the infecting species of Plasmodium parasite, the
clinical situation of the patient (e.g. adult, child, or pregnant female with either mild or severe
malaria), and the drug susceptibility of the infecting parasites (different areas of the world
have malaria types that are resistant to certain medications)
e Chloroquine phosphate (Aralen) is the drug of choice for all malarial parasites except
for chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium strains

15

----- PAGE 17 -----
Multiple drug-treatment protocols for treatment of drug-resistant Plasmodium strains
(for example, quinine sulfate plus doxycycline [Vibramycin, Oracea, Adoxa, Atridox] or
tetracycline [Achromycin], or clindamycin [Cleocin], or atovaquone-proguanil
[Malarone])

The WHO's treatment policy, recently established in 2006, is to treat all cases of
uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria with artemisinin-derived combination therapy
(ACTs). ACTs are drug combinations (for example, artesunate-amodiaquine,
artesunate-mefloquine, artesunate-pyronaridine, dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine, and
chlorproguanil-dapsoneartesunate) used to treat drug-resistant P. falciparum.
Unfortunately, as of 2009, a number of P. falciparum-infected individuals have
parasites resistant to ACT drugs.

5.2. Herbal treatment

In many countries category | and II herbal medicines are approved and even on the list of
essential medicines for the treatment of uncomplicated malaria. Some of the plants
commonly used in the preparation of these medicines are part of the WAHO monographs:
Moringa lucida (stem bark), Guiera senegalensis, Senna occidentalis (leaves), Tinospora
baki, Combretum micranthum, Khaya senegalensis (inner bark), Carica papaya, Cryssopterix
febrifuga; Cryptolepis sanguinolenta (root); Moringa oleifera (leaves); Cymbopogon citratus
(leaves); Cassia alata (leaves); Psidium guajava (leaves)

6. Prevention and control

The goals of prevention are:

Avoid contact with mosquitoes. Thus the use of nets designed to repel or kill
mosquitoes and;

Prevent mosquito breeding in the immediate environment

Reduce the susceptibility of vulnerable people being infected by mosquitoes

Avoid traveling in areas of known malaria outbreaks

Wear appropriate clothing: travelers can minimize areas of exposed skin by wearing
long-sleeved shirts, long pants, boots, and hats. Tucking in shirts and wearing socks
and closed shoes instead of sandals may reduce risk.

Insecticides: aerosol insecticides, vaporizing mats, and mosquito coils can help to
clear rooms or areas of mosquitoes; however, some products available internationally
may contain pesticides that are not registered in the United States. Insecticides
should always be used with caution, avoiding direct inhalation of spray or smoke.
Apply repellents (containing up to 50% DEET (N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide) to clothing
and gear

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

16

----- PAGE 18 -----
N° 5: DIABETES

1. Description

Diabetes is a chronic condition characterized by persistent high levels of sugar (glucose) in
the blood. It is caused by multiple genetic and environmental factors that result from defects
in insulin secretion, or its action or both. Insulin lowers the blood glucose level. As a result,
absence or insufficient production of insulin causes diabetes. Elevated levels of blood
glucose (hyperglycaemia) lead to spillage of glucose into the urine, hence the term “sweet
urine”. According to the World Health Organization, an estimated seven million Africans
suffer from the disease, which is now ranked as the fourth leading cause of death in most
developing countries.

The two types of diabetes are referred to as type 1 and type 2. Former names for these
conditions were insulin-dependent and non-insulin-dependent diabetes, or juvenile onset and
adult onset diabetes. Type II Diabetes is increasing and is a major public health concern. It is
increasing in line with increasing life expectancy, urbanization, sedentary lifestyle and obesity
development.

2. Causes

Diabetes is due to insufficient or total lack and/or dysfunction of insulin in the blood. Three
common forms of diabetes are known:

* Type 1 diabetes (formerly called insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus): juvenile onset;

* Type 2 diabetes (formerly called non-insulin diabetes dependent): onset in adulthood;

* Gestational diabetes (diabetes that occurs during pregnancy in cases before non-
diabetics)

3. Signs and symptoms
Symptoms of diabetes include increased urine output, thirst, hunger, and fatigue.

The number of people seeking medical care for diabetes is increasing in Africa at a time
when health experts are overloaded, health care systems are ill-equipped to diagnose the
disease and the majority of the poor cannot afford the cost of treatment. Many patients with
diabetes have no symptoms. Their diabetes is only detected by the test. Patients may
present with the following symptoms:

e Polyuria (passing large amounts of urine);

e Polydipsia (thirst and excessive consumption of alcohol and water)

e Polyphagia
e Recurrent boils
e Pruritus vulvae
e Nocturia

The risk factors are: sedentary lifestyle, obesity, genetic factors/family history, pregnancy,
hypertension, drug therapy - hormonal/contraceptive, diet, age, etc.

Complications

The major complications of diabetes are both acute and chronic.

e Acute complications: dangerously elevated blood sugar (hyperglycemia), abnormally
low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) due to diabetes medications leading to dizziness,
confusion, weakness and tremors; severe nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diabetic
ketoacidosis leading to shock, coma, or death. Abnormally low blood sugar due to
excessive levels of insulin or other hypoglycemic drugs causes

e Chronic complications: disease of the blood vessels (both small and large) which can
damage the feet, eyes, kidneys, nerves, and heart (e.g. impotence, foot
gangrene/ulcer, poor vision, heart attack, infertility, obese children, miscarriages,
kidney failure).

Over time, diabetes can lead to blindness, kidney failure, and nerve damage. These types of
damage are the result of damage to small vessels, referred to as microvascular disease.

17

----- PAGE 19 -----
Diabetes is also an important factor in accelerating the hardening and narrowing of the
arteries (atherosclerosis), leading to strokes, coronary heart disease, and other large blood
vessel diseases. This is referred to as macrovascular disease.

4. Investigations

a) Fasting blood glucose (sugar) test- preferred way to diagnose diabetes; easy to
perform and convenient. After the person has fasted overnight (at least 8 hours), a single
sample of blood is drawn and sent to the laboratory for analysis.

e Normal fasting plasma glucose levels are less than 100 milligrams per deciliter
(mg/dl).

e Fasting plasma glucose levels of more than 126 mg/dl on two or more tests on
different days indicate diabetes.

e A random blood glucose test can also be used to diagnose diabetes. A blood
glucose level of 200 mg/dl or higher indicates diabetes.

b) Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)- though not routinely used anymore, it is a gold
standard for making the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes and also gestational diabetes and in
conditions of pre-diabetes, such as polycystic ovary syndrome. Glucose tolerance tests
may lead to one of the following diagnoses:

e Normal response: A person is said to have a normal response when the 2-hour
glucose level is less than 140 mg/dl, and all values between 0 and 2 hours are less
than 200 mg/dl.

e Impaired glucose tolerance: A person is said to have impaired glucose tolerance
when the fasting plasma glucose is less than 126 mg/dl and the 2-hour glucose level
is between 140 and 199 mg/dl.

e Diabetes: A person has diabetes when two diagnostic tests done on different days
show that the blood glucose level is high.

e Gestational diabetes: A pregnant woman has gestational diabetes when she has
any two of the following:, a fasting plasma glucose of 92 mg/dl or more, a 1-hour
glucose level of 180 mg/dl or more, or a 2-hour glucose level of 153 mg/dl, or more.

5. Treatment

An important goal of diabetes treatment is to keep the blood glucose levels near the normal
range of 70-120 mg/dl before meals and under 140 mg/dl at two hours after eating. Diabetes
treatment depends on the type and severity of the diabetes. Type 1 diabetes is treated with
insulin, exercise, and a diabetic diet. Type 2 diabetes is first treated with weight reduction, a
diabetic diet, and exercise. When these measures fail to control the elevated blood sugars,
oral medications are used. If oral medications are still insufficient, insulin medications and
other injectable medications are considered.

5.1. Modern

Non-pharmacological: in patients with type 2 diabetes, diet should be tried first.

Diet: all patients with diabetes need diet therapy. In general, patients should avoid soft
drinks, alcohol, tobacco, dates, sugar cane, pineapple, plantain, condensed milk, pastries,
croissants, ice cream, honey, etc.. Feeding a day should consist of carbohydrates (60%),
protein (15%) and fat (25%), mainly of plant origin.

Exercise: do simple exercises (walking 45 minutes to an hour per day) is useful to ensure
good glycaemic control. Any advice on exercise should take into account the patient's age
and the presence of complications and other medical conditions.

18

----- PAGE 20 -----
5.2. Herbal treatment

Mangifera indica, Momodica charantia, Psidium guajava, Anthocleista nobilis, Desmodium
adscendens, Vernonia amygdalina, Lippia multiflora, Nauclea latifolia, Tetrapleura
tetraptera, Catharantus roseus, Bridelia ferruginea, Sclerocarya birrea, Moringa oleifera,
etc.

6. Prevention and control

Preventative measures will help prevent the chronic complications of diabetes.

e Maintain a steady weight-get as close to your ideal weight as possible; more than 80
percent of people with type 2 diabetes are overweight.

e Undertake regular exercise in your schedule-working out regularly, at least four hours
a week, can significantly lower your risk for diabetes.

e Avoid diets high in saturated fat (animal products)-can raise the LDL (bad) levels of
cholesterol in your body

e Don't overeat on a regular basis

e Increase intake of fiber

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

19

----- PAGE 21 -----
N° 6: ARTERIAL HYPERTENSION

1. Description

Hypertension is a condition in which the blood pressure of an adult aged 18 or over is
consistently higher than 140/90 mm Hg in a non-diabetic, or above 130/80 mm Hg in a
diabetic. Hypertension leads to an increased risk of damage to blood vessels in the eye,
thickening of the heart muscle and heart attacks, hardening of the arteries (arteriosclerosis),
kidney failure, and strokes and early death, if it is not properly controlled. Once the diagnosis
of hypertension is made, the individual must be monitored regularly and treated for life. In
Africa, hypertension is a public health problem with an average incidence of 15 to 40%. The
average incidence of hypertension in West Africa is 16% in adults, ranging from 3 to 30%,
from rural to urban areas. In Ghana, it is 4.5% in rural and 13% in urban areas. In Guinea,
the prevalence is 43.6% in urban and 14.9% in rural areas, whilst in Senegal it is 25% and
23.7% in rural Mali. High blood pressure is called "the silent killer" because it often causes no
symptoms for many years, even decades, until it finally damages certain critical organs.
High blood pressure in pregnancy can lead to preeclampsia or eclampsia (toxemia of
pregnancy). Pregnant women should be monitored closely by their obstetrician for
complications of high blood pressure.

2. Causes

Genetic factors (approximately 30%) are thought to play a prominent role in the development
of essential hypertension.

Risk factors are increasing age, family history, obesity, excessive alcohol consumption,
smoking, type 1 or type 2 diabetes, kidney disease, sedentary lifestyle/lack of exercise,
steroids/contraceptives, etc. High salt intake, obesity, lack of regular exercise, excessive
alcohol or coffee intake, and smoking may all adversely affect the health of an individual with
high blood pressure

3. Signs and symptoms

Most patients with uncomplicated hypertension may have no symptoms. Some people with
uncomplicated hypertension, however, may experience symptoms such as headache (which
do not respond to analgesics), tinnitus, palpitation, dizziness, shortness of breath, and
blurred vision usually with blood pressure that is very high. About 1% of people with
hypertension is diagnosed with severe high blood pressure (accelerated or malignant
hypertension) at their first visit to the doctor. In these patients, the diastolic blood pressure
exceeds 140 mm Hg. Affected persons often experience severe headache, nausea, visual
symptoms, dizziness, and sometimes kidney failure. Malignant hypertension is a medical
emergency and requires urgent treatment to prevent a stroke (brain damage).

Complications are: atherosclerosis (narrowing of the arteries), stroke (bleeding or blood clot
in the brain), aneurysm (dangerous extension of the main artery or in the chest or abdomen,
which weakens and can break) heart attack, heart failure (reduced pumping capacity - pedal
edema), renal failure - periorbital edema, eye injuries, etc.

4. Investigations

Measurement of blood pressure.

5. Treatment

Most antihypertensive medications can be used alone or in combination. Some are used only
in combination. Some are preferred over others in certain specific medical situations. And
some are not to be used (contraindicated) in other situations.
e Several classes of antihypertensive medications are available, including ACE
inhibitors, ARB drugs, beta-blockers, diuretics, calcium channel blockers, alpha-
blockers, and peripheral vasodilators.

20

----- PAGE 22 -----
e The goal of therapy for hypertension is to bring the blood pressure down below
140/85 in the general population and to even lower levels in diabetics, African
Americans, and people with certain chronic kidney diseases.

5.1. Modern

Lifestyle changes in diet and exercise and compliance with medication regimes contribute
significantly to the reduction of blood pressure: low salt intake, low fat intake, weight
reduction in obese and overweight people, regular exercise among sedentary patients,
reducing alcohol consumption and smoking, stress management. These lifestyle changes
must be pursued even when treatment is completed.

5.2. Herbal treatment

Common plants used are: Rauwolfia vomitoria, Bridelia feruginea, Ceiba pentandra, Allium
sativum, Persia americana, Lippia multiflora, Taraxacum officinalis, Cassia occidentalis,
Desmodium adscendens

6. Prevention and control

Prevention and control measures should aim at:
e Recognizing the signs and symptoms of hypertension;
Identifying the two forms of hypertension;
Recognizing the complications of hypertension;
Recognizing the relationship between hypertension, diabetes and
hypercholesterolemia.

Each middle-aged person of over 40 years should know his/her height, weight, blood
pressure, blood sugar and cholesterol. They should also make regular blood pressure tests if
there is a familial tendency to hypertension. In this way, treatment can be started before any
complications.
Adjustments in the following lifestyle habits are necessary:

e Lose weight
Exercise regularly
Reduce alcohol consumption
Adopt a balanced diet
Reduce stress by trying different relaxation techniques, or avoid stressful situations.

7. Reference

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

21

----- PAGE 23 -----
N° 7: ASTHMA

1. Description

Asthma is a chronic disease characterized by inflammation of the bronchial tubes (airways)
that causes swelling and narrowing (constriction) of the airways. The result is difficulty
breathing. Asthma attacks may be interspersed with periods where breathing is normal. In
some people, however, asthma may induce permanent respiratory discomfort that interferes
with daily activities. In sensitive individuals, the bronchial tubes are more likely to swell and
constrict when exposed to triggers such as allergens, tobacco smoke, or exercise.

2. Causes

The causes of asthma are not well known, although both genetic and environmental factors

are thought to be implicated. The following factors may contribute to trigger an asthma attack

or aggravate respiratory problems, but they are not the cause of asthma. The risk factors are:

Airborne allergens (dust, pollen, pet dander, dust mites)

Air pollutants (irritants in the workplace, fire smoke, exhaust fumes, air pollution, etc.)

Tobacco smoke

Foods (food allergies) or food additives

Certain drugs (aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, beta-blockers

used for heart problems or high blood pressure)

e Respiratory infections (colds, bronchitis, sinusitis, etc.). Because they cause
inflammation

e Exercise, especially if practiced outside in winter, cold weather and dry

e Strong emotions (laughter, tears, anger, excitement), especially in children;

3. Signs and symptoms

Symptoms may be intermittent or persistent. They may occur after exercise or in the
presence of another trigger, and they are usually worse at night and early morning
The following are the four major recognized asthma symptoms:

e Shortness of breath, especially with exertion or at night

e Wheezing is a whistling or hissing sound when breathing out

e Coughing may be chronic, is usually worse at night and early morning, and may occur

after exercise or when exposed to cold, dry air
e Chest tightness may occur with or without the above symptoms

The above symptoms may be accompanied by:

Sweating

Increase in heart rate

Difficulty speaking or coughing

High anxiety, confusion and restlessness (especially in children)
Bluish fingers or lips

4. Investigations

Asthma is usually diagnosed based on the presence of wheezing and confirmed with
breathing tests.
e Spirometry (lung function test)
e Endurance test (if test show normal lung function despite the problems described by
the patient),

Chest X-rays are usually normal in asthma patients.

5. Treatment

The treatment of asthma is based on three pillars: avoid inhalation of allergens, treatment of
airway inflammation and bronchial constriction treatment.
e Most asthma medications work by relaxing bronchospasm (bronchodilators) or
reducing inflammation (corticosteroids).

22

----- PAGE 24 -----
Inhaled medications include beta-2 agonists, anticholinergics, corticosteroids, and
cromolyn sodium. Oral medications include aminophylline, leukotriene antagonists,
beta-2 agonists, and corticosteroid tablets

5. Herbal treatment

Abrus precatorius (leaves) and Euphorbia hirta with honey

Allium sativum (bulb) and Zingiber officinale (rhizome) with honey

Abrus precatorius (leaves), Euphorbia hirta (leaves) and Tetrapluera tetraptera (fruit)
Otherm are Boswellia, Lobelia, Gingko biloba

Magnesium

Combination of vitamins C and E

Buteyko Method

Dietary advice: Foods rich in quercetin, chiropractic, homeopathy, fish oils, autogenic
training, vitamin C, pycnogenol

Exercise: Yoga and psychotherapy

6. Prevention and control

Avoiding precipitating factors is important in the management of asthma.

General measures to prevent asthma include:

Develop an action plan with the doctor to identify the factors (e.g. allergies, activities,
behaviours, etc.) that cause crises in order to avoid them

Be alert to precipitating signs in order to quickly act

Avoid exposue to moisture, animals, pollen and other respiratory irritants

Avoid exposure to tobacco smoke.

Exercise; make time for relaxation.

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

23

----- PAGE 25 -----
N° 8: AZOOSPERMIA

1. Description

Azoospermia refers to the complete absence of sperm in the semen during ejaculation.
Azoospermia affects about 1% of men, in whom it is the cause of infertility. It must be
differentiated from oligospermia which is defined as a small amount of sperm in the semen
and asthenospermia, which is inadequate sperm motility.

There are two types of azoospermia:

e Excretory azoospermia: usually due to an infectious disease of the reproductive
system, inflammation or surgery performed in the groin area. In this case, the sperm
are quite normal but can not migrate to the seminal vesicles.

e Secretory azoospermia: the formation of spermatozoa is either incomplete or
impossible.

2. Causes

The causes of azoospermia are:

Cancer treatment;

Epididymo-orchitis (inflammation of the testes and epididymis)
Klinefelter's syndrome (presence of an extra X chromosome)
Cryptorchidism (testicle remains in the abdomen)

Cystic fibrosis (too high viscosity of bronchial secretions and digestive)

Diseases commonly encountered in the epididymis in order of frequency of occurrence, are:
e Epididymal agenesis, a congenital incomplete development of the epididymis
e Inflammation of the epididymis, also called epididymitis, which is almost always
associated with inflammation of the testicle
e Cyst of the epididymis
e Epididymectomy-removal of all or part of the epididymis

3. Signs and symptoms

Usually asymptomatic, but may be confirmed wih testicular biopsy. The main complication is
male infertility.

4. Treatment

4.1. Pharmacologic

The treatment of secretory azoospermia is impossible for the moment.
- Modern treatment
- Herbal treatment

4.2. Herbal treatment
e Saba camorensis (stem bark), Entandrophragma angolensis (leaves) and Cyperus
esculentus (root).
e Dietary advice
e Exercise
e Psychotherapy

5. Prevention and control

Treat all urinary tract infections

6. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

24

----- PAGE 26 -----
N° 9: GALLSTONES

1. Description

Gallstones are "stones" that form in the gallbladder or bile ducts. The common types of
gallstones are cholesterol, black pigment, and brown pigment. Cholesterol gallstones occur
more frequently in several ethnic groups and are associated with female gender, obesity,
pregnancy, oral hormonal therapy, rapid loss of weight, elevated blood triglyceride levels,
and Crohn's disease. Black pigment gallstones occur due to increased destruction of red
blood cells, whereas brown pigment gallstones occur when bile flow is slowed. The risk of
gallstones increases with age, probably due to the decreased efficiency of the contractions of
the gallbladder.

2. Causes

Bile is composed mostly of water, bile salts, cholesterol, phospholipids, pigments and
electrolytes. Gallstones form when cholesterol:

a) Bile contains too much cholesterol;

b) Bile does not contain sufficient bile salts;

c) Gallbladder does not contract regularly (the gallbladder is then called "lazy").

The risk factors for developing cholesterol gallstones include:

Gender-gallstones occur more commonly in women than men.

Age-gallstone prevalence increases with age.

Obesity-obese individuals are more likely to form gallstones than thin individuals.

Pregnancy-pregnancy increases the risk for cholesterol gallstones because during

pregnancy, bile contains more cholesterol, and the gallbladder does not contract

normally.

e Birth control pills and hormone therapy-the increased levels of hormones caused by
either treatment mimics pregnancy

e Rapid weight loss-rapid weight loss by whatever means, very low calorie diets or
obesity surgery, causes cholesterol gallstones in up to 50% of individuals

e Crohn's disease-individuals with Crohn's disease of the terminal ileum are more likely
to develop gallstones. Gallstones form because patients with Crohn's disease lack
enough bile acids to solubilize the cholesterol in bile

e Increased blood triglycerides-gallstones occur more frequently in individuals with
elevated blood triglyceride levels

3. Signs and symptoms

In the vast majority of cases gallstones do not cause symptoms. The most common
symptoms of gallstones are biliary colic (usually lasts from 30 minutes to 4 hours) and
cholecystitis, an intense and sustained pain felt in the middle or upper right abdomen.
Sometimes the pain radiates to the shoulder blade, nausea and vomiting Gallstones do not
cause intolerance to fatty foods, belching, abdominal distention, or gas.

In most cases, gallstones do not cause complications, but untreated it can lead to situations
that would be life threatening. Complications of gallstones include acute cholecystitis
(inflammation of the gallbladder), acute cholangitis (inflammation of the bile ducts) or acute
pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas), gangrene, jaundice, sepsis, fistula, and ileus.
Gallbladder sludge is associated with symptoms and complications of gallstones;

4. Treatment

4.1. Pharmacologic

Modern treatment (medical, surgical, ultrasound)

Gallstones are managed primarily with observation (no treatment) or removal of the
gallbladder (cholecystectomy). Less commonly used treatments include sphincterotomy and

25

----- PAGE 27 -----
extraction of gallstones, dissolution with oral medications, and extra-corporeal shock-wave
lithotripsy (ESWL).

Herbal treatment
e Artichoke, combination of essential oil of peppermint and caraway
e Boldo, milk thistle, turmeric, peppermint (leaf), dandelion
e Dietary advice
e Intake of olive oil

5. Prevention and control
e Maintain a normal weight
e Regular exercise
e Eat good "fat", especially polyunsaturated fats and monounsaturated fats lower risk of
gallstones. The main sources of these "fata" are vegetable oils, nuts and seeds
e Eat fiber
e Limit the intake of sugars (carbohydrates), especially those with high glycemic index

6. Verification

The best single test for diagnosing gallstones is transabdominal ultrasonography. Other tests
include endoscopic ultrasonography, magnetic resonance cholangio-pancreatography
(MRCP), cholescintigraphy (HIDA scan), endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography
(ERCP), liver and pancreatic blood tests, duodenal drainage, oral cholecystogram (OCG),
and intravenous cholangiogram (IVC).

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html
http://www.passeportsante.net/fr/Maux/Problemes/Fiche.aspx?doc=lithiase_biliaire pm#P58
6051.

26

----- PAGE 28 -----
N° 10: KIDNEY STONES

1. Description

Kidney stones, also called renal stones or nephrolithiasis are hard, crystalline mineral
materials formed within the kidney or urinary tract. Kidney stones are a common cause of
blood in the urine (haematuria) and often severe pain in the abdomen, flank, or groin. Kidney
stones are sometimes called renal calculi.

2. Causes

Kidney stones form when there is a decrease in urine volume and/or an excess of stone-
forming substances in the urine. The main risk factors include:
e Dehydration
e Certain medications (diuretics such as triamterene, antacids containing calcium,
sulfonamides and some antiviral drugs such as indinavir), or supplements
Diet very rich in salt or sugar
Diet containing excess protein or deficient in calcium
Genetic disease (cystic fibrosis)
Metabolic disease (diabetes)
Urinary tract malformations (especially in children)
Family history of kidney stones (more common in Asians and Caucasians than in
Native Americans, Africans, or African Americans)
e People with certain medical conditions, such as gout
e Some pregnant women

Possible complications include:
e Sepsis related to infection and secondary to obstruction of a ureter by a calculus;
e Colic in a patient with only one kidney

3. Signs and symptoms

The main signs and symptoms include:

Flank pain (sudden and intense pain in the back (one side of the trunk, under the ribs)
Nausea and vomiting

Blood in the urine or cloudy urine

Sometimes an urge to urinate and frequent

Burning sensation during urination and frequency (in case of concomitant urinary tract
infection)

e Fever and chills

4. Investigations
e Diagnosis of kidney stones is best done with a computed tomography (CT) of the
kidneys, ureters and bladder
e Also urinalysis to check for blood and crystals in the urine, and to determine its pH

5. Treatment
5.1. Modern treatment

With time, most kidney stones will pass through the ureter to the bladder on their own.
Treatment includes pain control medications and, in some cases, medications to facilitate the
passage of urine. Where necessary, lithotripsy or surgical techniques may be used for stones
which do not pass through the ureter to the bladder on their own.

5.2. Herbal treatment and Supplementation
e Prevention: asparagus, nettles, parsley, dandelion, goldenrod
e Treatment: nettle, parsley, horsetail, goldenrod, butterbur, magnesium, pumpkin
seeds, fish oils, vitamin B6 prevention
Dietary advice

27

----- PAGE 29 -----
6. Prevention and control

NB:

Preventive measures are intended primarily for those at risk or those who have had
kidney stones. Measures to reduce the risk or prevent recurrences:

Drink enough: the best way to prevent kidney stones is to drink at least 2 liters of
water or other beverages every day (juices, soups, coffee, etc.). Attention! It is best
not to drink grapefruit juice

Reduce intake of foods rich in oxalate (spinach, rhubarb, beets, chard, peanuts,
chocolate, tea, wheat germ, okra, sweet potatoes and soybeans)

Ensure good dietary intake of calcium

Eat foods rich in potassium: potatoes (with skin), cantaloupe, avocado, lima beans
and bananas

Eat enough fiber

Medications: to prevent recurrence of stones, various medications or supplements
that vary depending on the type of calculation (thiazide diuretics, allopurinol,
potassium citrate, etc.) may be prescribed

Prolonged use of high doses of vitamin D can cause kidney stones;

Long-term intake of high doses of vitamin C contributes to the formation of kidney
stones. The recommended dose to benefit from the antioxidant effect of vitamin C is
500 mg per day

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

28

----- PAGE 30 -----
N° 11: LIVER CIRRHOSIS

1. Description

Cirrhosis is an irreversible liver disease characterized by progressive scarring that disrupts
the liver’s normal lobular architecture and nodule formation. This leads to three major effects:
e Hepatic insufficiency- functional deficit related to the decrease in the number of
hepatocytes and poor quality of vascularization;
e Portal hypertension-cause gastrointestinal bleeding;
e Precancerous condition: the development of carcinoma after 15-20 years of evolution

Cirrhosis can cause yellowing of the skin (jaundice), itching, and fatigue.

2. Causes

There are many causes of cirrhosis, which include:

e Chemicals (such as alcohol, fat, and certain medications), viruses, toxic metals (such
as iron and copper that accumulate in the liver as a result of genetic diseases)

e Chronic hepatitis C: 15 to 25% of cases;

e Chronic hepatitis B: 5% of cases

e Other causes: 5% of cases (hemochromatosis, primary biliary cirrhosis, autoimmune
hepatitis, Wilson's disease, alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency, secondary biliary cirrhosis,
etc.)

3. Signs and symtoms

Patients with cirrhosis may have few or no symptoms and signs of liver disease. Some of the
symptoms may be nonspecific, and may not suggest that the liver is their cause. Some of the
more common symptoms and signs of cirrhosis include:

e Increase in size of the liver (hepatomegaly) with a hard consistency

e Signs of liver failure such as jaundice, spider naevi, palmar and plantar erythema
(very red palms), foul odor of the breath, flapping tremor
Yellowing of the skin (jaundice) due to the accumulation of bilirubin in the blood
Fatigue
Weakness
Loss of appetite
Itching
Easy bruising from decreased production of blood clotting factors by the diseased
liver.
e Signs of portal hypertension: splenomegaly (enlarged spleen),

Complications of cirrhosis include mental confusion, coma, fluid accumulation (ascites),
internal bleeding, hepatic encephalopathy, jaundice and kidney failure.

4. Investigations

Diagnosis is suggested by physical examination and blood tests, and it can be confirmed by
liver biopsy.

e Liver function test

e Abdominal ultrasound

e Endoscopy of the Upper GI tract

5. Treatment

5.1. Pharmacologic

There is no cure for cirrhosis, but early treatment can prevent the development of
complications. Treatment includes 1) preventing further damage to the liver, 2) treating the
complications of cirrhosis, 3) preventing liver cancer or detecting it early, and 4) liver
transplantation.

29

----- PAGE 31 -----
Modern

Suppress the immune system with drugs such as prednisone and azathioprine to
decrease inflammation of the liver in autoimmune hepatitis.

Treat patients with a bile acid preparation, ursodeoxycholic acid. Other medications
such as colchicine and methotrexate also may have benefit in subsets of patients with
PBC.

Herbal treatment

Viscum album (leaves), Mangifera indica (leaves), Anthocleista nobilis (leaves),
Phyllanthus fraternus (leaves)
Dietary advice

6. Prevention and control

Consume a balanced diet and one take multivitamin daily

Avoid drugs (including alcohol) that cause liver damage

Avoid nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs, e.g., ibuprofen)

Eradicate hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus by using anti-viral medications

Remove blood from patients with hemochromatosis to reduce the levels of iron and
prevent further damage to the liver. In Wilson's disease, medications can be used to
increase the excretion of copper in the urine to reduce the levels of copper in the
body and prevent further damage to the liver.

Immunize patients with cirrhosis against infection with hepatitis A and B to prevent a
serious deterioration in liver function

7. References

http://sante-guerir.notrefamille.com/sante-a-z/cirrhoses-du-foie/cirrhose-prevention-et-
traitement-073392.html

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

30

----- PAGE 32 -----
N° 12: ERECTILE DYSFUNCTION

1. Description

Erectile dysfunction (ED), also known as impotence, is the repeated inability to achieve or
sustain an erection for satisfactory sexual activity over a period of at least three months. It
varies in severity thus:

e Recurring difficulty or inability to achieve erection;

e Getting an erection but with a penis that is not firm enough for penetration;

e Inability to maintain a satisfactory erection after penetration;

It is more common in men over 50 years, but can occur at the end of adolescence. The risk
of erectile dysfunction increases with age. The ability to achieve and sustain erections
requires

e ahealthy nervous system

e healthy arteries in and near the corpora cavernosa,

e healthy smooth muscles and fibrous tissues within the corpora cavernosa,

e adequate levels of nitric oxide in the penis.

2. Causes

The following are causes of erectile dysfunction:

Aging

Diseases (e.g. hypertension; atherosclerosis, Diabetes mellitus)

Cigarette smoking-aggravates atherosclerosis

Nerve or spinal chord damage

Substance abuse (e.g. marijuana, heroin, cocaine, methamphetamines, crystal meth,

and alcohol)

Low testosterone levels

e Medications (e.g. antihistamines, antidepressants, tranquilizers, and appetite
suppressants)

e Depression and anxiety

3. Signs and symptoms
e Inability to achieve an erection;
e Lack of stiffness which does not allow adequate penetration

4. Investigations

e Candid communication between the patient and the doctor

e Physical examination

e Lab tests (complete blood counts, urinalysis, lipid profile, blood glucose levels, serum
creatinine, liver enzymes and liver function tests, total testosterone levels, PSA levels,
etc.)

e Imaging tests

e Prostaglandin E1 injection test

5. Treatment

5.1. Pharmacologic

Making life style changes (e.g. quitting smoking and exercising more)

Taking drugs such as sildenafil (Viagra), vardenafil (Levitra) or tadalafil (Cialis)
Inserting medications into the urethra (intraurethral suppositories)

Injecting medications into the corpora cavernosae (intracavernosal injections)
Vacuum constrictive devices for the penis

Penile prostheses

Herbal treatment
e Mondia whitei (root), Sphenocentrum jollyanum (root), Paullinia pinnata (root) and
Sida acuta (root)

31

----- PAGE 33 -----
Cissus populnea (stem), Paullinia pinnata (root), Mondia whitei (root) and Zea mays
(silk)

Mondia whitei (root), Sphenocentrum jollyanum (root), Paullinia pinnata (root),
Bombax buonopozense (stem)

Aframomum melegueta (seed), Hymenocardia acida (leaves), Zanthoxylum
xanthozyloides (stem bark) and Zingiber officinale (rhizome)

6. Complications

None

7. Prevention and control

Limit alcohol consumption.

Quit smoking.

Exercise regularly

Lose excess weight

Curtail excessive alcohol consumption
Control hypertension

Optimize blood glucose levels in patients with diabetes
Relaxation

Get enough sleep

Adopt a healthy lifestyle

Eat healthy foods

8. Références

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

32

----- PAGE 34 -----
N° 13: GONORRHOEA

1. Description

Gonorrhoea, commonly known as "the clap" is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused
by the bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae. It occurs more often in men than women. Men aged
20-24 years and young women aged 15 to 19 are the most affected. It can infect the penis,
vagina, urethra, rectum, throat and sometimes the eyes. In women, the cervix may also be
damaged.

Men with gonorrhoea may have a yellowish discharge from the penis accompanied by itching
and burning. More than half of women with gonorrhoea do not have any symptoms.

2. Causes

Gonorrhoea is spread during unprotected anal or vaginal sex with an infected partner,
through the exchange of bodily fluids and contact with mucous membranes. It is rarely
transmitted by oral sex. It can also be transmitted from an infected mother to an infant during
delivery, causing eye infection.

3. Signs and symptoms

Symptoms usually appear 2 to 5 days after the time of infection, but they can take up to 30
days before being noticed. Symptoms may include burning or frequent urination, yellowish
vaginal discharge, redness and swelling of the genitals, and a burning or itching of the
vaginal area.

Men: some men have little or none of these symptoms:
e tingling or urethral discharge;
e burning on urination;
e pain or swelling in the testicles;
e pain or discharge from the rectum.

Women: many women have no symptoms:
e burning sensation during urination;
yellowish vaginal discharge, or sometimes bloody;
Abnormal vaginal bleeding;
Lower abdominal pain;
Pain during intercourse.

If untreated, gonorrhoea can lead to severe pelvic infections and even sterility. Complications
in later life can include inflammation of the heart valves, arthritis, and eye infections.
e In women, gonorrhoea can cause pelvic inflammatory disease, infertility, chronic
pelvic pain or increase the risk of ectopic pregnancy.
e In men, gonorrhoea can cause inflammation of the prostate (prostatitis) or testicles
(epididymitis), which can cause infertility.

Gonorrhoea also increases the risk of HIV transmission.

4. Investigations

Urethral or vaginal sampling with culture and susceptibility testing

5. Treatment
5.1. Pharmacologic
Treated with antibiotics (e.g. examples are ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin and levofloxacin)

Herbal treatment
e Alchornea cordifolia (leaves), Euphorbia hirta (leaves), Bridelia ferruginea (leaves),
Combretum smeathannii (leaves)

33

----- PAGE 35 -----
6. Prevention and control
e Basic preventive measures: use of condoms helps prevent transmission of
gonorrhoea during vaginal or anal sex.
e Screening measures: a regular screening helps to prevent the spread of infection to
new partners. In the case of a positive result, it is important to notify any person with
whom you have had sex and could have been exposed.

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

34

----- PAGE 36 -----
N° 14: HAEMORRHOIDS

1. Description

Haemorrhoids also known as piles are dilated veins that form in the walls of the anus and
sometimes around the rectum. They are usually caused by untreated constipation but
occasionally associated with chronic diarrhoea. Although haemorrhoids occur in everyone,
they become large and cause problems in only 4% of the general population including both
men and women. Their prevalence peaks between 45 and 65 years of age.

There are two main types of haemorrhoids:
e Internal haemorrhoid-the haemorrhoid originates at the top (rectal side) of the anal
canal
e External haemorrhoid- the haemorrhoid originates at the lower end of the anal canal
near the anus

2. Causes

There are several theories about the cause of haemorrhoids. The main physiological causes
are: prolonged sitting on the toilet, constipation, pregnancy and age. Other common causes
include: prolapsed haemorrhoids, tumours in the pelvis and colorectal tumours. Rare causes
include anal fissure, skin abrasions from scratching, diverticular disease (excessive
bleeding), proctitis: inflammatory, infectious or iatrogenic (NSAID suppositories, external
radiotherapy) and squamous cell carcinoma of the anus

3. Signs and symptoms

Symptoms start with bleeding after defecation. Untreated haemorrhoids can worsen, and
protrude from the anus. The signs and symptoms are:

e Internal haemorrhoids-are usually painful and somewhat inconspicuous; sometimes
associated with bleeding and anal itching; often the first and second stage (stage 1
and 2) of hemorrhoids.

e External haemorrhoids: at more advanced stages (stages 3 and 4), haemorrhoids

protrude from the anus and become visible; more pronounced pain, especially during
defecation.
External haemorrhoids cause a few of the symptoms that are typical of internal
haemorrhoids, perhaps, because they are low in the anal canal and have little effect
on the function of the anus. External haemorrhoids rarely cause serious
complications, however, blood can clot inside them (thrombosis) causing a painful
anal lump that often requires medical attention. The thrombosed haemorrhoid may
heal with scarring and leave a tag of skin protruding from the anus, which can make
anal cleaning difficult or irritate the anus.

4. Investigations

e Rectal examination with a gloved finger may uncover an internal hemorrhoid high in
the anal canal-helpful in excluding rare cancers that begin in the anal canal and
adjacent rectum

e Anoscope (a three-inch long, tapering, metal or clear plastic hollow tube
approximately one inch in diameter at its viewing end)

e Flexible sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy-helps to exclude important causes of bleeding
other than haemorrhoids

5. Treatment

Treatment involves changing the diet to prevent constipation and avoid further irritation, the
use of topical medication, and sometimes surgery. Products used for the treatment of
hemorrhoids are available as ointments, creams, gels, suppositories, foams, and pads.

The main forms of treatment are:
a) Local anesthetics- e.g. benzocaine; benzyl alcohol, dibucaine; lidocaine, etc
b) Vasoconstrictors-ephedrine sulfate; epinephrine; phenylephrine
35

----- PAGE 37 -----
c) Protectants-e.g. aluminum hydroxide gel, cocoa butter; glycerin; kaolin; lanolin;
mineral oil (Balneol); white petrolatum; starch; zinc oxide or calamine (which contains
zinc oxide) in concentrations of up to 25%; cod liver oil or shark liver oil

d) Astringents-e.g. calamine, zinc oxide; witch hazel

e) Antiseptics: e.g. boric acid; hydrastis; phenol; benzalkonium chloride; benzethonium
chloride

f) Keratolytics: e.g. aluminum chlorhydroxy allantoinate; resorcinol

g) Analgesics: e.g. menthol; camphor; juniper tar

Herbal treatment

e Venotonics: witch hazel, usually taking in the form of tablets, ointments, suppositories

e Chamomile added to a sitz bath or wipe

e Chestnut, usually taking the form of a capsule

e Picralima nitida (seed), Garcinia kola (seed), Aloe vera (leaves), Eugenia aromaticum
(flower bud)

e Picralima nitida (seed), Cassia podocarpa (eaves), Eugenia aromaticum (flower bud),
Xylopia aethiopica (fruit)

e Nauclea latifolia (root), Khaya senegalensis (bark), Xylopia aethiopica (fruit), Zingiber
officinale (rhizome)

e Exercise

e Psychotherapy

e Dietary advice

e Sitting in a sitz bath with a solution of witch hazel ointment

6. Prevention and control

e Increase intake of dietary fibre-found in numerous foodstuffs including fresh and dried
fruits, vegetables, grains, and cereals; supplemental fiber (psyllium, methylcellulose,
or calcium polycarbophil) also may be used to increase the intake of fiber

e Take stool softeners and increase drinking of liquids

e Eat breakfast in the morning

e Regular exercises— twenty minutes of walking per day at a good pace can stimulate
intestinal transit.
Avoid sitting for long hours; if not possible, get up for 1 or 2 minutes.

e Empty bowels regularly-do not delay the time to defecate if the need arises

e At the time of defecation, avoid forcing with bated breath

e Do not sit on the toilet seat for longer than necessary

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

36

----- PAGE 38 -----
N° 15: HEPATITIS

1. Description

Hepatitis is an inflammation of the liver, most commonly caused by a viral infection (hepatitis
A, B, C ...), but sometimes by alcohol, or by a drug or a chemical. There are several hepatitis
viruses; they have been named types A, B, C, D, E, F (not confirmed), and G. The most
common hepatitis viruses are types A, B, and C.

Hepatitis A (acute viral hepatitis): This is the least serious of the hepatitis viruses. Hepatitis
A is transmitted through the ingestion of food or water contaminated by human waste
containing hepatitis A (the faecal-oral mode of transmission). It is typically spread among
household members and close contact through the passage of oral secretions (intimate
kissing) or stool (poor hand washing).

Hepatitis B ("serum hepatitis"): Hepatitis B is transmitted by sexual intercourse and the
transfer of blood through shared needles in drug abusers, accidental needle sticks with
needles contaminated with infected blood, blood transfusions, haemodialysis, and by
infected mothers to their newborns. Hepatitis B also can be spread by tattooing, body
piercing, and sharing razors and toothbrushes. About 6-10% of patients develop chronic HBV
infection, which may last for about six months and often years to decades. Patients with
chronic hepatitis B infection also are at risk of developing cirrhosis, liver failure and liver.

Hepatitis C ("non-A, non-B hepatitis"): it is the most insidious form of viral hepatitis. Up to
80% of infections with hepatitis C become chronic. The virus is most often transmitted by
direct contact with infected human blood, through shared needles among drug abusers,
blood transfusion, haemodialysis, and needle sticks. Approximately 90% of transfusion-
associated hepatitis is caused by hepatitis C. Transmission of the virus by sexual contact has
been reported, but is considered rare. Patients with chronic hepatitis C infection are at risk
for developing cirrhosis, liver failure, and liver cancer.

Hepatitis types D, E, F (not confirmed yet), and G-the most important of these at present
is the hepatitis D virus (HDV), also known as the delta virus or agent. HDV requires
concomitant infection with hepatitis B to survive, because it needs a protein that the hepatitis
B virus makes to enable it to infect liver cells. Hepatitis D is spread by shared needles among
drug abusers, contaminated blood, and by sexual contact, essentially the same ways as for
hepatitis B. Patients with chronic hepatitis due to hepatitis B and hepatitis D viruses develop
cirrhosis (severe liver scarring) rapidly. Moreover, the combination of delta and B virus
infection is very difficult to treat.

Autoimmune hepatitis: this is a chronic inflammatory disease of the liver characterized by
the presence of autoantibodies.

The most common risk factors of viral hepatitis are health care professionals, people with
multiple sexual partners, intravenous drug users, and hemophiliacs. Viral hepatitis is
generally thought to be as much as ten times more common among lower socioeconomic
and poorly educated individuals and about one third of all cases of hepatitis come from an
unknown or unidentifiable source.

The period of time between exposure to hepatitis and the onset of the illness is called the
incubation period. This period varies depending on the specific hepatitis virus. For example,
Hepatitis A has an incubation period of about 15-45 days; hepatitis B from 45-160 days, and
hepatitis C from 2 weeks to 6 months.

2. Signs and symptoms

In many cases, patients infected with hepatitis A, B, and C have few or no symptoms. For
those who do develop symptoms, the most common are flu- like symptoms including loss of
appetite, nausea, vomiting, fever, weakness, tiredness and abdominal discomfort (especially
right side)aching in the abdomen. Less common symptoms include dark urine (the color of
tea), light-colored stools, fever and jaundice (yellow skin and cornea).

Rarely, individuals with acute hepatitis A and hepatitis B infections develop severe
inflammation, and the liver fails (acute fulminant hepatitis). These patients show the typical

37

----- PAGE 39 -----
symptoms of acute hepatitis and the additional problems of confusion or coma (due to the
liver's failure to detoxify chemicals) and bruising or bleeding (due to a lack of blood clotting
factors). The condition is life-threatening and up to 80% of people who develop it can die
within days to weeks.

3. Investigations

Testing for hepatitis A, B or C is recommended for people at high risk, in particular: people
with HIV, pregnant women and people with pre-existing liver disease. There are three types
of blood tests for evaluating patients with hepatitis: liver enzymes, antibodies to the hepatitis
viruses, and viral proteins or genetic material (viral DNA or RNA). Ultrasound testing can be
used to exclude the possibility of gallstones or cancer.

4. Treatment

Treatment of acute viral hepatitis involves relieving symptoms and maintaining adequate
intake of fluids. Treatment of chronic viral hepatitis involves medications to eradicate the
virus and taking measures to prevent further liver damage.

Herbal treatment:
e Cochlospermum tinctorium (rhizome), Entada africana (roots), Combretum
micranthum (leaves), Phyllanthus amarus (leaves)
e Cochlospermum tinctorium (rhizome), Tinospora bakis (rhizome)
e Phyllanthus amarus (aerial parts), Chrysantellum americanum, Combretum
micranthum (leaves), Cochlospermum tinctorum (rhizome), Entada africana (roots)
e Others are liquorice, schisandra, milk thistle
e Dietary and lifestyle advice to relieve discomfort and promote healing:
stop drinking
have adequate rest
stop smoking
avoid large meals
seek support
avoid exposure to toxic chemicals, etc.

>oaoom

6. Prevention and control

Hepatitis A and B
e Never eat mussels or shells found on the sea without cooking for less than 6 minutes.
e When traveling to areas where hepatitis A is common, be vaccinated one month
before departure
Always use condoms during sexual intercourse
Wash hands routinely after defaecating, before handling food and before eating
Ensure that equipments/tools for tattoos or body piercing are sterilized or disposable
Wear gloves before touching a person's blood (infected or not)
Avoid sharing a razor or toothbrush with another person
Never share needles or syringes to inject drugs
Vaccination is highly recommended

Toxic hepatitis
e Follow the dosage on the package of drugs (including those OTC) and natural health
products.
Pay attention to possible interactions between drugs and alcohol
Store medicines in a safe place away from children
Adopt adequate safety measures in the workplace
Take only herbal medicines that are safe and of good quality

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

38

----- PAGE 40 -----
N° 16: BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERPLASIA

1. Description

Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is nonmalignant (noncancerous) enlargement of the
prostate gland. Almost all men suffer from BPH one time or another. It generally begins in
men from the age of 30, evolves slowly, and most commonly only causes symptoms after 50.
BPH occurs in more than 50% of men aged 60 and 90% of those over 80 years. The cause
of BPH is unknown, although it has been speculated that it may be due to reduced
testosterone levels, which occurs naturally with age.

2. Signs and symptoms

Growth in size of the prostate gland in BPH may compress the urethra and thus impede the
flow of urine from the bladder through the urethra to the outside. Common symptoms include:
Compelling urge to urinate

Urinary retention leading to the need to urinate frequently during the day and night
Slow flow of urine

Urgency and difficulty starting the urinary stream

Painful urination

Intermittent flow

Sensation of not emptying your bladder completely

Signs of complications observed are:
e Lack of sleep
Urinary tract infections
Kidney stones
Distension of the bladder wall
Complete blockage of the urethra leading to kidney damage

3. Investigations
e Rectal examination of the urethra, prostate, and bladder
Urine culture
Assessment of renal function
Abdominal x-ray
Renal ultrasonography
Watching act of urination and measuring the flow rate

4. Treatment

Medical treatment of BPH is usually reserved for men who have significant symptoms. The
available drugs include alpha blockers to relax the smooth muscles of the prostate, and the
bladder neck, which helps to relieve urinary obstruction. Surgery or office procedures may
also be used to treat BPH, most commonly in men who have not responded satisfactorily to
medication or those who have more severe problems, such as a complete inability to urinate.
Other treatment methods include transurethral resection of the prostate, laser procedures
and microwave therapy

Herbal treatment

Alchornea cordifolia (leaves), Flugea virosa (leaves), Euphorbia hirta (aerial part) or;

Tetrapleura tetraptera (fruit), Flugea virosa (leaves), Euphorbia hirta (aerial parts)

Sabal serrulata Serenoa repens

Stinging nettle: Urtica dioica

African plum: Prunus africanus = Pygeum africanum

Squash or Pumpkin, Cucurbita pepo

Pollen of certain grasses.

Empty bladder as much as possible at each urination

Reduce alcohol and coffee

Regular urination, e.g. every 4 hours

Intake of dietary supplements containing zinc

Stay physically active: physical activity diminishes retention of urine in the bladder
39

----- PAGE 41 -----
e Psychotherapy
e Avoid stress

5. Prevention and control

The best protection against prostate problems is to have regular medical checkups that
include a careful prostate examination. Regular checkups are important even for men who
have had surgery for BPH.

6. References

http://www. passeportsante. net/fr/Maux/Problemes/Fiche.aspx?doc=hypertrophie_benigne_pr
ostate_pm

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

40

----- PAGE 42 -----
N° 17: URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS

1. Description

A urinary tract infection is an infection that may affect one or more parts of the urinary
system: kidneys, ureters, bladder and urethra. The majority are caused by E. coli bacteria,
but many other bacteria, fungi, and parasites may also cause UTIs. The type of UTI depends
on the affected part of the urinary system:

e Cystitis is an infection of the bladder and urethra. It is very common among women.

e Urethritis only affects the urethra. It is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) common

in men.
e Pyelonephritis means inflammation of the kidney and is a serious condition.

2. Causes

Urinary tract infections are usually caused by the abnormal proliferation of bacteria. Factors
that increase the risk are:

In women
e Poor hygiene of the genital area
e Frequent and intense sexual intercourse after a period of abstinence
e Pregnancy
e Contraceptives-diaphragm or spermicide

In men
e Benign prostatic Hyperplasia or prostatitis
e Anal sex without a condom

Generally
e Malformation of the urinary tract
e Kidney Stones
e Urinary catheter

In a pregnant woman, UTIs can cause:
e Threatened abortion
e Premature birth

In men, repeated UTIs can cause:
e = Male infertility
e Prostatitis
e Pyelonephritis

In severe cases, urinary tract infection may progress to renal failure

3. Signs and symptoms

Common urinary tract infection (UTI) symptoms in women include:
e Urge to urinate frequently, often in small amounts
e =Burning with urination
e Cloudy urine
e Strong unpleasant smell of urine
e Dark or bloody urine
e Pelvic pain
e Flank or back pain (kidney infection)
e Fever, chills (usually with kidney infection)
e Other possible symptoms include bloating, vaginal discharge
Common urinary tract infection (UTI) symptoms in men include:
e Urge to urinate frequently, often in small amounts
e ~=Burning with urination
e Cloudy urine
e Strong unpleasant smell of urine
e Dark or bloody urine

41

----- PAGE 43 -----
e Rectal pain (kidney infection)

e Flank or back pain (kidney infection)

e Other symptoms may include penile, testicular and abdominal pain, and penile
discharge

Common urinary tract infection (UTI) symptoms in children include:
e Urge to urinate frequently, often in small amounts
Burning with urination
Cloudy urine
Strong unpleasant smell of urine (not as reliable in children)
Dark or bloody urine
Abdominal pain
Fever
Vomiting
Other symptoms (especially in newborns and infants) may include hypothermia,
diarrhea, jaundice, poor feeding and in some children, bedwetting

There can be many complications of urinary tract infections, including dehydration, sepsis,
kidney failure, and death. If treated early and adequately, the prognosis is good for most
patients with a UTI.

4. Investigations
e Urinalysis
e Other tests may include blood cultures, a complete blood count, intravenous
pyelogram, a CT scan, or other specialized tests.

In general, UTIs are diagnosed usually by isolating and identifying the urinary
pathogen from the patient.

5. Treatment

Although there is no vaccine available for UTIs, there are many ways a person may reduce
the chance of getting a UTI.
e UTIs are treated with antibiotics
e Over-the-counter (OTC) medicines offer relief from the pain and discomfort of UTIs
but they don't cure UTIs

Herbal treatment

e There are home remedies for UTI, but most may, at best, help reduce the risk or
discomfort of UTIs. Common herbs used include echinacea, nettle, horsetail,
horseradish, bearberry (Uva ursi), golden rod.

e Others are Ageratum conyzoides (leaves), Zanthoxylum xanthoxyloides (bark) and
Cassia alata

e Dietary advice

e Intake of cranberry juice for people prone to recurrences
Physical exercise

e Psychotherapy

6. Prevention and control

Increase fluid intake: 6 to 8 glasses of water or various beverages (juice, broth, tea, etc..) per
day can increase urinary flow and prevent bacteria from forming in the bladder.

Women:
e Wash the vulva and around the anus daily
e Avoid genital deodorant and douching
e Urinate shortly after sex
e After urination or a bowel movement, wipe from front to back to avoid contaminating
the urethra with bacteria from faeces

42

----- PAGE 44 -----
Men:
e Use condoms with a new partner or in the case of anal sex
e Must treat enlarged prostate, if applicable
e Temporarily avoid coffee, alcohol, soft drinks containing caffeine, orange juice or
grapefruit and spicy foods. These foods irritate the bladder and make you want to
urinate more frequently.

7. References
Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

43

----- PAGE 45 -----
N° 18: SEXUALLY-TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS

1. Description

Sexually-transmitted Infections (STI) are diseases transmitted by sexual contact including
sexual intercourse (vaginal and anal) and also kissing, oral-genital contact, and the use of
sexual "toys," such as vibrators. Examples of some of the sexually transmitted infections
(STIs) are HIV/AIDS, chlamydia, chancroid, trichomoniasis, genital herpes, genital warts,
gonorrhoea, hepatitis B, and syphilis.

2. Causes

The main causes are bacteria, viruses, parasites or fungi. Currently, the most common
Sexually transmitted infections are:
e Chlamydia;
Warts (HPV infection);
Genital herpes;
Hepatitis B;
HIV / AIDS

3. Signs and symptoms

The signs and symptoms vary because they are symptomatic of the underlying disease.
Sexually transmitted infections can have an impact on fertility and the foetus.

4. Investigations

e General examination for neurological or cardiovascular evidence of advanced
syphilis, lymphadenopathy, Kaposi’s sarcoma and opportunistic infection in patients
suspected of AIDS

e Gram-stain for leucocytes and organisms should be made and wet prepartation
should be examined for Trichomonas vaginalis

e Immunofluorescent technique

e Micobiological culture

e Protoscopy

5. Treatment

Many STIs are treatable, but effective cures are lacking for others, such as HIV, HPV, and
hepatitis B and hepatitis C. Even gonorrhea, once easily treated, has become resistant to
many of the older traditional antibiotics. Many STDs can be present in, and spread by,
people who do not have any symptoms of the condition and have not yet been diagnosed
with an STD. Therefore, public awareness and education about these infections and the
methods of preventing them is important.

Herbal treatment
e Parkia biglobosa (stem bark), Zanthoxylum xanthxyloides (stem bark), Spathodea
campanulata (stem bark)
e Drink cranberry juice
e Physical exercises
e Psychotherapy

6. Prevention and control
e The most effective way to prevent the spread of STDs is abstinence. Alternatively, the
diligent use of latex barriers, such as condoms, during vaginal or anal intercourse and
oral-genital contact helps decrease the spread of many of these infections.
e Health education
e Avoidance of sexual contact with individuals known to have STD or in high risk
groups

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

44

----- PAGE 46 -----
N° 19: MALE INFERTILITY-OLIGOSPERMIA

1. Description

Oligospermia or oligozoospermia refers to abnormally low sperm count (less than 20 million
spermatozoa per millilitre of ejaculate) and is a common finding in male infertility. We talk
about Cryptozoospermia (or extreme oligozoospermia) in the case of sperm showing the
presence of less than one million sperm per ml of semen. It differs from azoospermia, which
is the complete absence of sperm in the ejaculate and asthenospermia, which is the absence
of sperm motility.

2. Causes

Causes of oligospermia include:

e Obstruction of the normal flow of sperm due to such conditions as testicular trauma
and vasectomy

e Scarring due to surgery on the male reproductive system or from infection and
sexually transmitted diseases.

e Decrease in sperm production due to such conditions as varicoceles, hormonal
disorders, diseases of the testicles, and obesity

e Sexually transmitted disease, such as chlamydia, and gonorrhea

e Other causes include stress, smoking, drug or alcohol use, some medications,
exposure to some toxins, malnutrition, and being underweight. Some

e Hormone deficiency (congenital or induced by an external cause)
Abnormally located testis (undescended, cryptorchidism) or exposure to high
temperatures

e Drug inhibition of spermatogenesis (eg high doses of spironolactone or ketoconazole)
and/or the effects of chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy, especially if it is testicular
cancer

e Autoimmune disorders

3. Signs and symptoms

The main symptoms and complications of oligospermia are sub-fertility or infertility. There are
also a variety of symptoms of underlying causes of oligospermia, such as sexually
transmitted diseases and hormonal disorders.

4. Investigations
e Making a diagnosis of oligospermia includes:
e Taking a medical and sexual history and completing a general physical examination
as well as an exam of the penis and testicles
e Diagnostic testing includes performing a semen analysis, lab tests, testicular biopsy
e Other tests may be done to rule-out other potential causes of oligospermia, such as a
hormonal disorder

5. Treatment

Treatment varies depending on the type and severity of oligospermia, the individual case,
and the presence of complications.

e The first step in the treatment of oligospermia is prevention, which includes
preventing sexually transmitted diseases by abstaining from sexual activity or having
sex only within a mutually monogamous relationship in which neither partner is
infected with oligospermia

e Latex condoms also provide some protection from some sexually transmitted
diseases when used properly

e Oligospermia caused by chlamydia or gonorrhea can be treated with oral antibiotic
medication Surgery may be needed if the cause is a varicocele or if scarring is
causing a blockage of the flow of sperm.

e Vitamin E, vitamin C, antioxidants suplementation may be helpful

45

----- PAGE 47 -----
Herbal treatment

Harungana madagascariensis (leaves), Bridelia ferruginea (leaves) and Euphorbia
hirta (eaves)

Dietary advice

Exercise

Psychotherapy

6. Complications

Severe oligospermia
Male infertility

7. Prevention and control

Improving the diet

Losing or gaining weight as needed

Avoiding smoking

Reducing alcohol intake

Avoiding hot tubs, tight underwear, and other factors that may create excessive heat
around the testicles and reduce sperm count

Proper treatment of STIs

8. Références

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www.healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

46

----- PAGE 48 -----
N° 20: OTITIS MEDIA

1. Description

Otitis media is an infection or inflammation of the middle ear. "Otitis" means inflammation of
the ear, and "media" means middle. The inflammation often begins with infections that cause
sore throats, colds or other respiratory problems, and spreads to the middle ear. Infections
can be caused by viruses or bacteria, and can be acute or chronic.

Acute otitis media: usually of rapid onset and short duration. It is typically associated
with fluid accumulation in the middle ear together with signs or symptoms of ear
infection; a bulging eardrum usually accompanied by pain, or a perforated eardrum,
often with drainage of purulent material (pus, also termed suppurative otitis media).
Fever can be present.

Chronic otitis media: is a persistent inflammation of the middle ear, typically for a
minimum of a month. Following an acute infection, fluid may remain behind the ear
drum for up to three months before resolving. Chronic otitis media may develop after
a prolonged period of time with fluid or negative pressure behind the eardrum. It can
cause ongoing damage to the middle ear and eardrum, and there may be continuing
drainage through a hole in the eardrum. Chronic otitis media often starts painlessly
without fever and sometimes a subtle loss of hearing can result

2. Causes

Risk factors are many in children, which is not the case in adults. Factors that
increase the risk in children are:

Attending a daycare or nursery

Exposure to tobacco smoke or high levels of pollution

Bottle feeding rather than breastfeeding

The frequent use of dummies

Malfunction of the Eustachian tube that drains liquids poorly

3. Signs and symptoms

In children and infants

Fever

Signs of upper respiratory infection such as a runny or stuffy nose, or a cough
Pain in one or both ears, leading the child to touch the ear frequently

Tears, irritability, difficulty falling asleep

Lack of appetite

Liquid flowing in one ear

Loss of hearing (the child does not respond to soft sounds)

In some children, otitis is manifested by digestive disorders (diarrhea, vomiting)
Severe ear infections may cause the eardrum to rupture ; the pus then drains
from the middle ear into the ear canal

Complications of otitis media include:

Adults

Perforation of the eardrum with risk of deafness
Risk of sinusitis and meningitis

Throbbing (punctuated by heartbeats) in the ear, which may radiate into the head
Sensation of plugged ear causing hearing loss

General malaise (lack of energy, irritability, difficulty sleeping, etc.); sometimes
accompanied by a high fever

Tinnitus

Sometimes a yellowish secretions flow through the ear canal (which indicates that the
eardrum is perforated)

Dizziness, loss of balance, dizziness

Cold, which often precedes otitis media

47

----- PAGE 49 -----
4. Investigations

Three criteria are needed to diagnose acute otitis media; acute onset, middle ear effusion,
and middle ear inflammation. Recurrent acute otitis media is defined as three acute otitis
media episodes in 6 months, or 4 acute otitis media episodes in a year. There is no definitive
lab test for acute otitis media. Identification of the three criteria is dependent on clinical
observation and use of pneumatic otoscopy.

5. Treatment
e Use of antibiotics (e.g. amoxicillin)
e Both oral and topical analgesics are effective in controlling the pain associated with
ear infections

Herbal treatment

Blighia sapida (leaves), Aloe vera (gel) and Ocimum basilicum (leaves)
6. Prevention and control

There are several ways to prevent ear infections.

e Drink a lot (water, broth) to help relieve pain

e Sit, especially when fever is present

e Apply a little heat on the ear can reduce pain. Use a hot water bottle, a towel warmed
(but dry) or a heating pad (low intensity)
Avoid airplanes, scuba diving and swimming head under water
Avoid wetting the ear if the eardrum is perforated
Wear earplugs during swimming and always dry the ears
Exercises to equalize pressure in the ear
Swallowing often simulate a yawn, chew gum
Avoid giving babies a feeding bottle when lying down
Avoid exposure to cigarette smoke

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

48

----- PAGE 50 -----
N° 21: ALLERGIC RHINITIS

1. Description

Rhinitis means "irritation of the nose" and is derived from the word rhino, meaning nose.
Allergic rhinitis which occurs during a specific season is called "seasonal allergic rhinitis" (hay
fever) when caused by pollen (trees, grass, ragweed, etc.). When it occurs throughout the
year, it is called "perennial allergic rhinitis." Rhinosinusitis is the medical term that refers to
inflammation of the nasal lining as well as the tissue lining of the sinuses. This term is
sometime used because the two conditions frequently occur together. Allergic rhinitis can
lead to other diseases such as sinusitis and asthma.

2. Causes

The major risk factors of allergic rhinitis are:
e Hereditary: when both parents have an allergy (no matter which), the risk for the
child to suffer from allergic rhinitis is even higher
e Repeated exposure to airborne allergens (eg, pollen)
e Exposure to cigarette smoke, especially during the first year of life, and other
substances such as fireplace smoke and air pollutants

3. Signs and symptoms

Symptoms of allergic rhinitis, or hay fever, frequently include:
e Nasal congestion

Clear runny nose

Sneezing

Eye itching, redness, and excess tears in the eyes

Nose itching

Postnasal dripping of clear mucus frequently causes a cough

Loss of the sense of smell and taste

Nose bleeding

Tension in the sinus area

Sore throat, cough

The eye symptoms are referred to as "allergic conjunctivitis" (inflammation of the whites of
the eyes). These allergic symptoms often interfere with one's quality of life and overall health.

4. Investigations
e Identify the offending substances (allergens)-e.g. cats, grass
e Skin testing is often needed to identify exactly the specific substance causing the
allergy
e Blood tests

5. Treatment
e Many patients respond to antihistamine medications
Decongestants
Nasal sprays
Allergy desensitization or immunotherapy
Herbal medicine- e.g. Butterbur
Homeopathy

Herbal treatment

e Desmodium adscendens (leaves), Euphorbia hirta (leaves), Zingiber officinale
(rhizome) and Allium sativum (bulb)

e Tounblock the nose of a baby or a young child, remove some of the mucus using a
nasal bulb. Then place a drop of warm saline solution in each nostril so that the drop
sinks to the bottom of the nose. Straighten the child as soon as the drop has
penetrated into the nose.

e Exercice

e Psychotherapy

49

----- PAGE 51 -----
6. Prevention and control
e Treating the symptoms of allergic rhinitis as they arise helps to prevent complications
such as otitis media, asthma and chronic sinusitis.
e Avoid smoking and second-hand smoke.
e Reduce exposure to allergens (pollen, mold, dust mites, etc.)

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

50

----- PAGE 52 -----
N° 22: SINUSITIS

1. Description

Sinusitis refers to inflammation of the air cavities within the passages of the nose. The
sinuses are bony cavities (in four pairs) located in the facial bones. This inflammation of the
sinus mucosa, also known as rhinosinusitis is usually caused by a bacterial or viral infection
(usually cold). Sinusitis can also be caused allergies and chemical or particulate irritation of
the sinuses. The five most common bacteria causing sinus infections are Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Staphylococcus aureus, and
Streptococcus pyogenes.

Sinusitis can be of two types:
e Acute: caused in most cases by a viral infection type cold
e Chronic: it is the result of inadequately treated infectious episodes

Complications of a sinus infection that may develop are meningitis, brain abscess,
osteomyelitis, and orbital cellulitis.

2. Causes

Sinus infections are caused by infections from a pathogenic microorganism (virus, bacterium,
or fungus), which grows within a sinus and causes intermittent blockage of the sinus ostium.
Bacterial infection of the sinuses is suspected when facial pain, pus-like nasal discharge, and
symptoms that persists for longer than a week and are not responding to over-the-counter
nasal medications.

3. Signs and symptoms

The main symptoms are sinus headache, facial tenderness (above the eyebrows, nose,
cheeks, around and behind the eyes), pressure or pain in the sinuses or on one side of the
face, fever, cloudy discolored drainage, and feeling of nasal stuffiness, sore throat, and
cough.

Factors that increase the risk are:
Cold or other respiratory infection
e Humid or polluted environment
e Smoking or exposure to smoke
e Asthma or respiratory allergies

In rare cases, serious complications can occur. These include:
e Eye disease (especially ethmoidites)
e Brain disorders (frontal and sphenoid sinusitis)
a. Meningitis
b. brain abscess
c. cavernous sinus thrombophlebitis
d. osteomyelitis (mainly in children)

4. Investigations

Sinus infection is most often diagnosed based on a history and examination. Because plain
X-ray studies of the sinuses may be misleading and procedures such as CT and MRI scans,
are so expensive and not readily available, most cases of sinus infection are initially
diagnosed and treated based on clinical findings on examination. These physical findings
may include:
e redness and swelling of the nasal passages,
e purulent (pus like) drainage from the nasal passages (the symptom most likely to
Clinically diagnose a sinus infection),
e tenderness to percussion (tapping) over the cheeks or forehead region of the sinuses,
and swelling about the eyes and cheeks

Occasionally, nasal secretions are examined for secreted cells that may help differentiate
between infectious and allergic sinusitis.

51

----- PAGE 53 -----
5. Treatment

Bacterial sinusitis is usually treated with antibiotic therapy

For sinusitis caused by virus infection, no antibiotic treatment is required. Frequently
recommended treatments include pain and fever medications (such as
acetaminophen), decongestants and mucolytics

Herbal treatment

Home remedies for sinus infections include, decongestants, and mucolytics. Nasal
irrigation can be accomplished with a Neti-pot or rinse kit (nasal bidet).

Steam inhalation with or without essential oils (peppermint, eucalyptus)

Inhalation of salt water (saline or home preparation available in pharmacies)
Drinking plenty of fluids (8 to 10 glasses of water or other liquids per day) to avoid
dehydration and evacuate secretions more easily

Ocimum gratisimum, Heliotropium indicum, Cymbopogon citratus and Allium sativum
Others are Gentian, primrose, common sorrel, lemongrass and elderberry, Cape
Geranium, Andrographis, Eucalyptus, Peppermint

6. Prevention and control

Preventive measures include:

Avoid colds and allergies

Avoid smoking or exposure to second hand smoke

Encourage the removal of nasal secretions by:

- Wiping nose, drinking plenty of water, using a humidifier to liquefy secretions
- Nasal irrigation with salt water

Increase water consumption to lighten and evacuate secretions more easily
Avoid exposure to temperature changes, a cold and dry air.

Avoid bending head down, as this can increase the pain

Avoid swimming underwater, or flying during the acute phase

Avoid aircraft or any other activity involving changes in pressure (diving,
mountaineering, ...)

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

52

----- PAGE 54 -----
N° 23: BREAST CANCER

1. Description

Breast Cancer is the commonest cancer affecting women. Early detection of this cancer is
possible through monthly breast self examination, which is especially recommended for
women of child-bearing age, and periodic screening through clinical breast examination (3
yearly for women below 40 years and yearly for women above 40years) as well as
mammography every 2years for women 40 years and above. Various modalities are
available for the treatment of breast cancer which depends on the biological characteristics

of the tumour, stage of disease and other patient factors.

2. Causes

Unknown

Associated risk factors

Female sex

Family history of breast cancer
Previous personal history
Oestrogen therapy

3. Signs and symptoms

Lump in the breast

Other changes in breast: change in size and/or shape

Skin changes in breast:

- Peau d’orange

- Skin nodules

- Ulceration

Changes in the nipple and areola:

- Nipple discharge

- Nipple retraction

- Eczema/ulceration of nipple or areola

- Swelling in axilla

- Swelling of upper limb

Metastatic disease:

- Bone pain

- Pathological fractures

- Back pain

- Paraplegia

- Breathlessness from pleural effusion and lung metastasis
- Brain metastasis (Headache, vomiting altered consciousness, localizing signs)
Breast lump:

- Hard

- Edges may be indefinite

- Surface may be rough

- May be tethered to skin or attached to skin and underlying tissues
Skin:

- Peau d’ orange , tethering, nodules or ulceration

- Nipple retraction

- Bloody nipple discharge

- Palpable axillary nodes

- Look for evidence of metastatic disease

4. Investigations

Mammography
Ultrasonography of the breast
Biosy and fine Needle Aspiration for cytology and histology

53

----- PAGE 55 -----
5. Treatment

The goals of treatment are:
e To achieve a cure
e To prevent local and distant metastasis
e To relieve pain in incurable cases
e To prolong survival in metastatic disease

5.1. Orthodox treatment

Treatment plans for breast cancer are developed based on a several factors: the type and
stage of the cancer, the sensitivity of the cancer to certain hormones, and the medical history
of the patient.
e Primary treatment: surgery, either a lumpectomy or mastectomy.
e Adjuvant Therapy Treatment:
a. Biological or targeted therapy
b. Chemotherapy
c. Hormone therapy
d. Radiation, a local adjuvant therapy

5.2. Herbal treatment
e Vernonia amygdalina (leaves), Emilia sonchifolia (leaves), Citrus aurantifolia (leaves),
Momordica charantia (leaves) and Allium sativum (bulb)
e Stress management and relaxation techniques, including meditation and visualization,
can also assist in overcoming the fatigue associated with breast cancer

6. Prevention and control
e No single key to preventing breast cancer
e For the 90% of breast cancer patients who are not genetically predisposed to the
disease, some potential causes have been suggested:
a. Healthy Living
b. Preventative Medication (e.g. tamoxifen)
c. Preventative surgery (women who have a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation
may want to consider a preventative mastectomy)

d. Pre-emptive Screening

However, a preventative strategy is difficult to create with any degree of accuracy.

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

54

----- PAGE 56 -----
N° 24: PROSTATE CANCER

1. Description

Prostate cancer is a form of cancer that develops in the prostate, a gland in the male
reproductive system. Most prostate cancers are slow growing, although some may be
aggressive.Ninety-five per cent of these tumours are adenocarcinomas. The majority of men
affected are aged between 65 and 85 years. The incidence increases with age. It is
recommended that every male of 40 years and above, should have annual screening by
Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) tests and Digital Rectal Examination (DRE) since early
detection is associated with better prognosis. It is worth noting that not every prostate on
DRE is malignant. Likewise a normal-feeling prostate does not exclude a malignancy. A

prostatic biopy is therefore necessary to establish a diagnosis.

2. Causes

Ageing

Functional testes

Family history

Race (more common in blacks)
High dietary fat intake

3. Symptoms

Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms(LUTS)

e Retention of urine
e Haematuria
e General debility anorexia, weight loss, listlessness
e Bone pain (commonly in the waist or limbs)
e Paralysis in the lower limbs or inability to walk
4. Signs

On DRE clinical signs include:

Hard prostate gland with an irregular surface and edges

Obliterated median sulcus
Adherent rectal mucosa
Advanced or metastatic disease:
Anaemia

Uraemia

Wasting

Bone tenderness

Paraplegia

Pathological fracture

5. Investigations

FBC

Blood urea, electrolytes and creatinine
Prostate specific antigen (PSA)

Liver functions tests

Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound
Transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) of the prostate, if available
Transrectal needle biopsy of the prostate
TRUS — guided or finger-guided

6. Treatment
Treatment objectives are:

To relieve symptoms

To control complications

To achieve cure for early disease

To prevent local progression and metastases

55

----- PAGE 57 -----
Orthodox

The method (or methods) chosen is determined by how advanced the cancer is, whether it
has spread outside the prostate, and the overall health of the patient.
e Surgery
e Radical Prostatectomy (complete removal of the prostate gland) -cancer is confined
to the prostate alone, which can be done multiple ways:
e Open Surgery: a large incision is made in the abdomen or the perineum (the area
between the rectum and the scrotum) to access the prostate.
a. Laparoscopic Surgery: several specialized cameras and tools are used to see
inside the body through small incisions.
b. Robotic-assisted Laparoscopic Surgery: the surgeon controls very precise
robotic arms to perform laparoscopic surgery.
e Radiation Therapy
e Hormone Therapy- a drug (or combination of drugs) that affects androgens in the
body The classes of drugs used in prostate-cancer hormone therapy include:
a. Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) analogs, LHRH agonists, and
LHRH antagonists, which prevent the testicles from making testosterone.
b. Antiandrogens, which block the action of androgens in the body.
e Other androgen-suppressing drugs, which prevent the adrenal glands from making
testosterone
Another hormone-therapy option is orchiectomy, the surgical removal of the testicles.
Chemotherapy
Immunotherapy
High-Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU)

5.2. Herbal treatment

Bridelia ferruginea (leaves), Momordica charantia (leaves), Trichilia monadelpha (bark) and
Zingiber officinale (rhizome)

6. Prevention and control

e Regular, decaf, half-caf, coffee

e Intake of trans-fatty acids: increase inflammation and insulin resistance, both of which
may play a role in prostate cancer

e Avoid commercially baked doughnuts and cookies, as well as packaged baked goods
containing hydrogenated oil

e Eat more cooked tomato products (lycopene, more potent after they're cooked)

e Regular exercise (playing tennis, running, swimming, or biking, etc.)

e Increase intake of omega-3 fatty acids DHA and EPA (fish oil)

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

56

----- PAGE 58 -----
N° 25: LEUKAEMIA

1. Desription

Leukaemia is the uncontrolled production of white cells at different stages of maturation.
There are two main types of leukaemia depending on the type of white cell affected. These
are lymphoid leukaemia and myeloid leukaemia. Each can further be divided into acute
(where the patient falls suddenly ill) and chronic (where the patient may have been harboring
the disease for months and occasionally years without knowing). Leukaemia may therefore
present as Acute Myeloid Leukaemia (AML) and chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML). All is
commonest in children especially boys, CLL is commonest in the elderly, AML and CML cut
across all age groups and sexes.

2. Causes
e Usually no cause in any particular case
e Viruses e.g. Human T Lymphotrophic Virus Type 1 (HTLV-1) and Epstein Barr Virus
(EBV)
e Chemicals e.g. alkylating agents such as Melphalan
e Radiation

3. Symptoms

Acute leukaemia:

Fever

Easy fatigability

Bruising tendencies

Bone and joint pain especially in children

Chronic leukaemia
e Asymptomatic
Dragging sensation left side of abdomen
Easy satiety
Weight loss
Generalized itch
Lymph nodal swellings

4. Signs

Acute leukaemia
e  Pallor
Fever
Skin and mucosal haemorrhages
Gum hupertrophy (AML subtype 5)
Firm, rubbery, non-tender lymph nodes (lymphoid leukaemia)
Splenomegaly

Chronic leukaemia
e Splenomegaly, often massive in CML
e Generalized lymph node enlargement in CLL

5. Investigations
e FBC and blood film comment
e Chest X-ray
e Bone marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy
e BCR-ABL rearrangement in ALL and CML

57

----- PAGE 59 -----
6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To aim for a cure for ALL in children
e To aim for a cure for good prognostic cases of ALL in adults
e To achieve remission and prolong good quality life in AML
e Tocontrol white cell counts and symptoms and prolong good quality life in CML

The main orthodox treatment approaches are:
= Chemotherapy
= Radiation Therapy
= Biologic Therapy

Herbal treatment
e Curcumin (turmeric), green tea, olive leaf, Ginseng, peels of citrus fruit
e Ganoderma lucidum, Silybum marianum, Solanum sp., Hedyotus diffusa, Graviola
fruit, Vitex negundo
e Watchful waiting or careful observation in CLL
e Good hydration

7. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://www. healthscout.com/nav/ency/1/main.html

58

----- PAGE 60 -----
N° 26: DIARRHOEA

1. Description

Diarrhoea means passing frequent, loose, watery stools 3 or more times in a day. Diarrhoea
is often accompanied by vomiting. It is very common in children. The commonest cause in
this age group is viral. There is therefore usually no need to prescribe antibiotics. Fluid loss
occurs quickly in children because of their size. If this is not corrected it may result in
dehydration which can be fatal. In children, other diseases like malaria, pneumonia, ear
infections, urinary infections, may cause diarrhoea. Examine the child fully to make sure
there is no obvious cause for the diarrhoea. The presence of a fever usually indicates an
underlying cause. Never take the complaint of diarrhoea lightly. Always ask how many times
that day and the day before the patient has been to the toilet, and the texture of the stools.
To one person who usually passes stool once in three (3) days, a motion every day seems
like diarrhoea, but to another person this is normal. Giving antibiotics may cause or prolong
the diarrhoea except in special circumstances (see below). Malnutrition causes diarrhea,
which in turn also causes malnutrition, setting up a vicious cycle. Never give enemas or
laxatives to patients with diarrhoea.

2. Causes
e Viral e.g. Rotavirus
e Bacterial e.g. Shigella
e Protozoal e.g. Amoabae
e Side effects of some medications e.g. Penicillins

3. Symptoms

e Frequent watery stools
Bloody or mucus in the stool
Presence of fever
Reduced urine output
Associated vomiting

4. Signs
e Dehydration

5. Investigations

e FBC
Blood film for malaria parasite
Stool routine examination
Stool for culture and sensitivity
Blood urea and creatinine

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:

e To prevent dehydration: this is very important since so much of the child’s body fluid
is being lost through the stool and vomiting

e To replace lost fluid: as much fluid as goes into the stools should be given to the child
to drink for replacement

e To maintain nutrition: mothers tend not to give a child who has diarrhea anything or
very little to eat, at a time when he needs all the food he can get! Continue to feed as
much as can be tolerated

e To maintain personal hygiene: or else you end up taking the germs from the stools,
back into the mouth, continuing the diarrhea you are trying to stop

e To eliminate infecting organisms where appropriate

59

----- PAGE 61 -----
Herbal treatment

e Ocimum gratissimum (leaves), Psidium guajava (leaves), Alchornea cordifolia
(leaves) or;

e Bridelia ferruginea, Ocimum gratissimum (leaves), Alchornea cordifolia (leaves) or;

e Bridelia ferruginea (leaves), Adansonia digitata (stem bark), Alchornia cordifolia
(leaves)

e Keep surroundings clean

e Improve personal hygiene e.g hand washing after toilet

7. Prevention and control

To avoid developing diarrhea from food poisoning, consider:
" washing the cooking and food preparation areas more frequently
= serving food immediately
= refrigerating leftovers promptly
= thawing food in the refrigerator

Traveler's diarrhea can also be prevented. If you are planning a long vacation to a
developing country, consider:
= asking your doctor if you can begin an antibiotic treatment before you leave. This will
greatly reduce your risk of developing traveler’s diarrhea.
"avoiding tap water, ice cubes, and fresh produce likely washed with tap water. Drink
bottled water and eat cooked food only.

If you are suffering from diarrhea as the result of a viral or bacterial infection, you can take
the following actions to prevent spreading your infection to others:

= Wash your hands more frequently.

= Use soap to wash your hands for 20 seconds.

= Use hand sanitizer when washing your hands is not possible.

8. References

Health Encyclopedia - Diseases and Conditions.
http://health._yahoo.net/health/diarrhoea

60

----- PAGE 62 -----
N° 27: PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE

1. Description

Peptic ulcer may be duodenal or gastric. Duodenal ulcers are more common and occur more
often in younger adults. Gastric ulcer usually occurs after middle age.

2. Causes
e Excessive secretion of gastric acid
e Inadequate protection of the lining of the stomach and duodenum against digestion by
acid and pepsin
e Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection
e Medicines e.g. non — steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), corticosteroids

3. Symptoms

e Abdominal pain
a. May be a minor discomfort, gnawing, burning, dull ache or very severe pain
b. Typically in the epigastrium or right hypochondrium
c. Occasionally high up behind the sternum or low down around the umbilicus
d. In duodenal ulcer, typically comes on when the patient is hungry and may wake

the patient up in the middle of the night.

e. In gastric ulcer, it is typically worsen by food
f. Is relieved by alkalis and food in duodenal ulcer

e Vomiting may occur in both duodenal and gastric ulcers

4. Signs
e Tenderness in the epigastrium, right hypochondrium or umbilical region during an
attack

5. Investigation
e Haemoglobin
e Oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy
a. With biopsy for histology and staining (for H.pylori)
b. With urease test (for H. pylori)
e Barium meal in the absence of endoscopy
e Stool examination to exclude intestinal parasites

Complications of gastric ulcer include perforation, gastric outlet obstruction and haemorrhage
that does not respond to conservative measures.

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To relieve pain and reduce gastric acid secretion
To promote healing of the ulcer
To eradicate H.pylori of the ulcer
To prevent recurrence of the ulcer
To avoid complications

Treatment will depend on the underlying cause of your ulcer. If tests show that you have an
H. pylori infection, a combination of medication will be prescribed:

e antibiotics—medications that help kill infections

e proton pump inhibitors (PPls)—medications that help reduce stomach acid

e over-the-counter PPI (such as Prilosec or Prevacid)

e Acid blockers (like Zantac or Pepcid)

61

----- PAGE 63 -----
Herbal treatment

Aloe vera juice, Euphorbia hirta (leaves), Momordica charantia (leaves) and Ximenia

americana

Avoid smoking and alcohol intake

Avoid foods that aggravate the pain

Allay anxiety and stress

Surgery-indications for surgery:

a. Chronicity-crippling periodic attacks

b. Economic factors which make it difficult for the the patient to persevere with
medical treatment

6. Prevention and control

Certain lifestyle choices and habits can reduce your risk of developing peptic ulcers. These
include:

quitting smoking and other tobacco use

eating a healthy diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and whole grains
not drinking more than two alcoholic beverages a day

not mixing alcohol with medication

washing your hands frequently to avoid infections

limiting your use of ibuprofen, aspirin, and naproxen sodium

7. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/peptic-ulcer

62

----- PAGE 64 -----
N° 28: INSOMNIA

1. Description

Insomnia is the ability to obtain adequate sleep, irrespective of whether the patient has
trouble getting to sleep, suffers frequent nocturnal arousals, or awakens too early. Assssing
a complaint of sleep disorders requires a thorough history and clinical examination and
specific sleep-wake history. Insomnia may suggest an underlying medical, psychological,
psychiatric (especially depression) or environmental problem.

2. Causes
e Medicines e.g. Ephedrine, phenylephrine
Caffeine — containing beverages e.g. coffee,tea
Alcohol
Drugs of abuse e.g. cocaine marijuana, amphetamines
Underlying medical , psychological and environmental factors
Anxiety disorder
Depression

3. Investigation
e FBC
e LETs
e BUE and creatinine
e Sleep study

4. Treatment

When lifestyle changes and behaviour therapies aren't relieving the symptoms of insomnia,
doctors will often turn to medication. Doctors don’t generally recommend relying on
prescription sleeping pills for more than a few weeks, as they can become addictive. Some of
the most prescribed brand name sleep medications include Ambien, Lunesta, Rozerem, and
Sonata.

Herbal treatment
e Lippia multiflora (leaves), Cymbopogon citratus (leaves) and Hibiscus sabdarifa
(calyx)

e Valeriana officinalis

e Herbal teas made from chamomile, hops, passion flower, or St. John’s Wort

e Educate patients to adopt a lifestyle that promotes good sleep

e Have regular exercise

e Avoid strenuous exercise close to bedtime

e Establish good sleep hygiene i.e a routine for ‘winding down’, going to bed and
preparing for sleep

e Avoid alcohol and caffeine — containing beverages close to bedtime

e Ensure a comfortable and quiet environment for sleep

e Relaxation therapy

e Stimulus control treatment of sleep by going to go to bed only when sleepy and to get

out of bed if sleep is interrupted.

5. Prevention and control

= Prevention techniques, such as maintaining a healthy lifestyle, learning how to
manage stress, and cutting out bad habits can have a significant impact on promoting
quality sleep. In addition the following may be helpful:

" Stick to your sleep schedule-when possible, try to go to bed and get up at the same
time every day; try not to take naps during the day, and if a daytime nap is needed,
keep it under 30 minutes in the early afternoon

= Don’t stay in bed when you're not sleeping

= Resist the urge to linger in bed if you wake up feeling rested; ilf you can’t sleep, don’t
lie there staring at the ceiling for hours on end; instead, if it’s been more than 15

63

----- PAGE 65 -----
minutes of sleeplessness, get out of bed and do something relaxing, such as
meditation or reading, until you feel sleepy

Relax

Try taking a warm bath or have your partner give you a massage before going to bed
Create a soothing bedtime ritual such as listening to soft music, doing gentle yoga, or
reading. Acupuncture

Create seclusion

Make your bedroom conducive to sleep

Close the door when you go to sleep and run a fan (if you like) to help eliminate
outside noises. Keep your bedroom cooler at night than in the day, and as dark as
possible.

Exercise for 20-30 minutes every day, five hours or more before bedtime

Avoid caffeine, alcohol, and nicotine

Skip late-night snacks and meals

Maintain a healthy diet, and avoid foods that are high in saturated fat, which may
cause heartburn and indigestion

Eliminate pain

Hide the time-tThe less you know what time it is—particularly when you wake in the
middle of night—the better you’re likely to sleep

Know what’s causing your sleepless nights

6. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/insomnia-prevention

64

----- PAGE 66 -----
N° 29: DEPRESSION

1. Description

Depression is a mood disorder. It occurs in all age groups although symptoms may be
different in children. It has a tendency to recur, although some may become bipolar, when
episode of mania may also be observed. Some patients present mainly with bodily
symptoms, sleep disturbances as well as morbid dreams and “worrying excessively”. They
hardly mention a depressive mood unless they are asked specifically, and even then many
deny or trivialize it as a consequence of acknowledged symptoms like headaches or
insomnia. Most cases of suicide or attempted suicide are from depression; one should not
dismiss or take for granted statements made by patients such as ‘I want to die, ‘life is not
wealth living’, ‘| am fed up with life’. All cases of attempted suicide should be referred to a
psychiatrist after initial management of the presenting complication e.g. self inflected
accident or poison. Recurrent depression or unipolar depression is treated differently (with
antidepressants) from bipolar depression, which responds more to mood stabilizers

2. Causes
e Genetic
Familial
Environmental
Psychosocial factors
Endocrine disorders e.g. hypothyroidism, Cushing‘s syndrome

3. Symptoms

The diagnoses criteria for major depression relies on the presence of at least five of the

following symptoms experienced every day for at least two weeks.
e Depressed mood

Loss of interest or pressure

Significant weight loss or gain

Insomnia or sleeping too much

Psychomotor agitation or retardation

Fatigue or loss of energy

Feelings of worthlessness or excessive guilt

Impaired thinking or concentration ; indecisiveness

Multiple bodily complaints

Suicidal thoughts/thoughts of death

Hallucinations /delusions of morbid themes in severe cases

In children

e Truancy or refusal to go to school
Poor school performance
Bedwetting in a previously ‘dry’ child
Odd behavior, aggression or defiance
Irritability
Appetite changes
Some of the ‘adult’ symptoms

4. Signs
e Depressed mood
e Evidence of weigh loss or obesity
e Agitation or retardation
e Hallucinations

5. Investigations
e FBC
e BUE and creatinine

65

----- PAGE 67 -----
e FBS
e Thyroid function and cortisol levels if indicated

6. Treatment
e Treatment objectives
e To reduce symptoms
e To prevent disruption to normal life at home, work or school
e To prevent suicide

Herbal treatment
e Cola nitida (cotyledons), Aframomum melegueta (seeds) and Zingiber officinale
(rhizome)
e St. John's Wort, Kava kava

7. References

http://health.yahoo.net/articles/depression/depression-facts

66

----- PAGE 68 -----
N° 30: SCHIZOPHRENIA

1. Description

Schizophrenia is probably the most severe and potentially disabling form of mental illness
and occurs in about 1% of the people in every community worldwide. Schizophrenia may
present as an acute or chronic illness. The clinical features include characteristics of
‘positive’ or ‘negative’ symptoms, deterioration in social, work or interpersonal relationships
and continued evidence of disturbed behaviour for at least 6 months. The clinical features
may be numerous and can change over time. Psychosis associated with substance abuse
and mood disorders with psychotic features may mimic schizophrenia.

2. Causes
e Cause is largely unknown
e Possible causes include:
a. Genetics
b. Birth defects
c. Environmental triggers
d. Illicit drugs

3. Symptoms

‘Positive’ symptoms
e Hallucinations
e Delusions
e Incoherent speech or illogicality
e Odd or disorganized behavior
e Disorders of thought possession
‘Negative’ symptoms
e Poverty of speech or of content of speech
Apathy
Reduced social contact or withdrawal
Flattened effects (showing little facial expressive responses)
Delusions may be persecutory (undue suspicion) or totally bizarre like being
controlled or being made to feel emotions or sensations.
e Hallucinations may involve any of the senses but auditory ones are most common;
experienced as voices speaking clearly or in mumbled tones.
e Disorders of thought possession include feeling of the patient’s thoughts being
accessible to others.
e Motor disorders often occur but are not essential for diagnosis.

4. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To abolish symptoms and restore functioning to the maximum level possible
e To reduce the chances of recurrence
e Non-pharmacological treatment

Treatments include electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), sometimes called "shock treatment,"
and, tranquilizing antipsychotic medications, such as the phenothiazines and more recently,
a new generation of medications (known as atypical antipsychotics), which tend to have
fewer side effects than older medications.

Herbal treatment
e Rauwolfia vomitoria (roots), Lippia multiflora (leaves), Hos/undia opposita (leaves),
Zingiber officinale (rhizome) and Xylopia aethiopica (fruits)
e Vitamin D- may play a role in reducing inflammation and boosting immune system
function

67

----- PAGE 69 -----
e Fish Oil- a natural source of omega-3 fatty acid

e Glycine
Diet Management- a healthful diet, characterized by low-fat, high-fiber, whole grains,

e
fresh fruits and vegetables, and fatty fish (a good source of omega-3 fatty acids)

5. References
http://health.yahoo.net/health/schizophrenia/alternative-treatments

68

----- PAGE 70 -----
N° 31: ALCOHOLISM

1. Description

Dependence on alcohol and development of related problems is a common and often
unrecognized disorder. Alcoholism is often associated with many physical health problems.
The greatest problem is the recognition and diagnosis of alcoholism since affected
individuals are often in denial of their problem. They under-declare the amount and
frequency of alcohol consumption and usually appear in hospital only with complications. The
coexistence of other psychiatric illnesses like Depression with alcoholism is common.

2. Causes

Genetic, familial and environmental factors are all important.

3. Symptoms

These may be observed by relatives or co-workers
e Recurrent use of alcohol resulting in failure to fulfill major obligations at work, school
or home.
e Recurrent use in situations where it is physically hazardous e.g. driving
Continued use despite having persistent or recurrent social, legal or interpersonal
problems caused by effects of alcohol
Development of tolerance
Withdrawal syndromes
Taking increasingly larger amounts over longer periods than intended
Previous unsuccessful attempts at stopping

4. Signs
e Reddening

Smooth red palms

Painless enlargement of liver

Bruises from minor accidents etc.

Parotid gland enlargement

5. Investigations
e Mean Corpuscular Volume(MCV) is increased in majority of alcoholism patients
e Liver Enzymes(AST, ALT) are often increased
e Serum Gamma Glutamyltransferase (GGT) is increased in majority of alcoholics
e Ultrasound scan of liver

6. Treatment

Allopathic treatment of alcoholism has two parts. The first phase is the treatment of acute
effects of alcoholism, called detoxification. The second phase involves learning how to live
with the disease of alcoholism.

Treatment objectives:
e To treat complications
e To achieve total abstinence from alcohol use

Herbal treatment

e Alternative treatments can be a helpful adjunct for the alcoholic patient once the
medical danger of withdrawal has passed. Because many alcoholics have very
stressful lives (because of, or leading to, the alcoholism), many of the treatments for
alcoholism involve dealing with and relieving stress. These include massage
meditation, and hypnotherapy. Others include acupuncture, biofeedback, behavioral
therapy, motivational enhancement therapy, and aversion therapy

e Use of nutritional supplements, such as vitamins A, B complex, and C; certain fatty
acids; amino acids; zinc; magnesium; and selenium

69

----- PAGE 71 -----
e Supplements that support antioxidant, detoxifying, restorative and corrective
deficiencies

e Herbal treatments include milk thistle (Silyoum marianum), which is thought to protect
the liver against damage. Other herbs are thought to be helpful for the patient
suffering from withdrawal. Some of these include the antidepressive properties of
lavender (Lavandula officinalis), the calming and restorative nerve tonifying effects of
skullcap (Scutellaria_lateriflora), chamomile (Matricaria recutita), and valerian
(Valeriana officinalis), the stimulating and GI effects of peppermint (Mentha piperita),
and the bladder aid, yarrow (Achillea millefolium).

e Cassia occidentalis, Phyllanthus fraternus, Azadiractha indica and Moringa oleifera

7. References

http://health.yahoo.net/galecontent/alcoholism/5

70

----- PAGE 72 -----
N° 32: ANXIETY DISORDERS

1. Description

Anxiety is a common symptom that occurs in all psychiatric disorders including depressive
illness and most psychoses. Some patients have a mixture of anxiety and depressive
symptoms, but pure states exist. Due the the similarity of symptoms, it may be difficult to
differentiate an anxiety state from minor depressive illness. Anxiety may also significantly
overshadow many serious illnesses. It may be worthwhile to exclude any underlying physical
diseases especially hyperthyroidism, cardiac disease or hypertension. Although there are
various forms of anxiety disorders (generalized anxiety disorder , panic disorder, phobias,
obsessive compulsive disorder, acute stress disorder, post traumatic stress disorder), the
commonest seen in generalized anxiety disorders are panic disorders.

Generalised Anxiety Disorders

1. Description

In this condition, there is excessive anxiety and worry about events or activities, such as
performance at school or work, occurring on most day for at least 6 months.

2. Causes
e LIFE experience
e Environmental factors
e Personality
e Genetics

3. Symptoms

Excessive anxiety and worry occurring on most days, for at least 6 months
The anxiety or worry is associated with at least 3 of the following
e Muscle tension (often reported as pain in various parts like neck, trunk or headaches )
Crawling and burning sensation around the body
Restlessness or feeling on edge
Being easily fatigued
Difficult concentrating or mind going biank
Irritability
Sleep disturbance(difficulty falling asleep or frequent wakening)
Palpitation

4. Signs
e Restlessness
e Sweating
e Anxious mood
e Tachycardia

5. Investigations

No laboratory tests confirm the diagnosis. However, exclude underlying conditions,
especially hyperthyroidism, phaeochromocytoma, cardiac arrhythmias

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To reduce anxiety
e To attain relief of somatic symptoms
a) Psychotherapy
b) Medication
c) Lifestyle Changes
e getting an adequate amount of sleep (about eight hours a night)
e exercise regularly

71

----- PAGE 73 -----
e devoting time to stress relief
e avoiding unnecessarily stressful situations
e career change, if anxiety is focused around work

Herbal treatment
Gossypium arboreum (leaves), Lippia multiflora (leaves), Hoslundia opposita (leaves)
Eat a Balanced Diet
Drink More Water
Limit Your Caffeine
Get Regular Exercise
Massage Your Muscles
Meditation
Nutritional supplements and herbs include:
. vitamin B12
. fish oil
. chamomile
. Kava root
. inositol
St. John’s Wort

™-7™>oQa008

7. Prevention and control
= Stress relief
= Proper diet
= Keeping a journal- to track moods, stress, and anxiety
= Avoiding unhealthy substances

While tobacco, drugs, and alcohol are often called stress relievers, using them actually
damages the body, making it harder for it to handle stress

8. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/anxiety-treatments

72

----- PAGE 74 -----
N° 33: BOILS

1. Description

A boil or furuncle is a deep bacterial infection of the hair follicles. A more superficial infection
is termed folliculitis and a group of boils in an area is termed a carbuncle. Patients with
recurrent boils or carbuncles should be screened for diabetes mellitus and/or
immunodeficiency.

2. Causes

Infection of the skin with staphylococcus aureus

3. Symptoms
e Single or multiple swellings on the skin which may discharge pus
e Painful swellings on the skin

4. Signs
e Purulent swellings on the skin in single or multiple areas of skin
e Swellings may be warm and/or tender

5. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To treat infection
e To relieve pain
e To identify and treat any predisposing condition

a) Compresses- boils are usually treated with application of antibiotic creams, following the
application of hot compresses. The compresses help the infection to come to a head and
drain and are an important part of the treatment regime.

b) Carbuncles and furunculosis are usually treated with oral antibiotics as well as antibiotic
creams or ointments

c) Boils or carbuncles that are very large or that do not resolve may be opened with a sterile
needle or surgical knife to allow the pus to drain

d) Resveratrol, which is a phytoalexin, appears to be highly effective in treating boils and
other skin infections in humans caused by S. aureus.

5.1. Herbal treatment

Bidens pilosa (leaves), Rauwolfia vomitora (root) and Alchornea cordifolia (leaves)

6. Prevention and control

To minimize the risk of developing bacterial skin infections the skin should be kept clean; to
avoid spreading the infection, washcloths, towels, and facial cosmetics should not be shared
with others. A healthy diet should be maintained and allergic foods should be eliminated.
This will ensure that the immune system will be supported, and that boils will be prevented.

7. References

http://health.yahoo.net/search?q1=boils

73

----- PAGE 75 -----
N° 34: GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE

1. Description

Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is caused by backflow of gastric or duodenal
contents or both past the lower oesophageal sphincter into the oesophagus without belching
or vomiting.

The disease is classified into two groups based on endoscopy findings as non-erosive
gastroesophageal disease (non erosive GERD) and erosive gastroesophageal disease (
erosive GERD). Failue to treat may result in oesophagitis, ulceration, strictures and rarely
adenocarcinoma.

2. Causes

Hiatus hernia

Increased intra-abdominal pressure e.g in pregnancy

Obesity

Long term use of nasogastric tube

Agents that decrease lower oesophageal sphincter pressure e.g. alcohol, cigarrettes,
anticholinergics (e.g. Propantheline bromide) , other drugs — Morphine , Diazepam
and Meperidine

Children with chronic neurological disease

3. Symptoms

Heartburn — worsens with vigorous exercise , bending forward , lying; relieved by
antacids and sitting upright

Dyspepsia

Early satiety

Retrosternal and epigastric pain:mimics angina pectoris radiating to neck, jaw and
arm; the pain is worse on bending down e.g. sweeping Pain on swallowing
Nocturnal regurgitation : wakes patients up with coughing , choking and filling of the
mouth with saliva

Nocturnal asthma

In children:

Failure to thrive
Forceful regurgitation which may lead to aspiration pneumonia
Iron deficiency anaemia

4. Signs

Epigastric tenderness occationally

5. Investigations

Barium swallow with fluoroscopy (especially useful in children)
Oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (OGD) or upper gastro-intestinal track endoscopy
Abdominal ultrasound (to exclude other diseases)

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:

To relieve symptoms
To prevent complications

a) Medication-include everything from antacids to H2 receptor blockers or proton pump
inhibitors

b) Nissen fundoplication-surgical procedure, in which a portion of the stomach is lifted over
the junction between the stomach and esophagus to increase pressure on the lower
esophageal sphincter (LES). This prevents stomach acids from entering the esophagus.
Although highly effective, the Nissen fundoplication may result in increased bloating,
flatulence, and trouble swallowing.

74

----- PAGE 76 -----
6.1. Traditional treatment
e Ficus cordata (stem bark), Spathodea campanulata (stem bark) and Zingiber
Officinalie (rhizome)
Chinese honeysuckle flower
Melatonin
Peppermint
Hynopsis, massage, and relaxation techniques such as guided imagery have been
found to be helpful for some people

7. Prevention and control
e Standard Treatments -some of the best treatments for GERD can be lifestyle changes
such as quitting smoking, losing weight, or eating smaller meals more frequently
e Avoid foods such alcohol, citrus fruits, caffeinated and carbonated beverages, fried or
fatty foods, and spicy foods, including garlic and onions

8. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/gerd/alternative-treatment

75

----- PAGE 77 -----
N° 35: GINGIVITIS AND STOMATITIS

1. Description

These are inflammatory conditions involving the gums and mucosa of the oral cavity.

2. Causes
e Bacterial, from poor oral hygiene
e Viral e.g. herpes simplex, measels
e Vitamin deficiency
e Chemicals allergic reaction

3. Symptoms

e Sore mouth
Bleeding gums expecially after brushing
Pain while swallowing
Cracks at the corners of the mouth
Poor appitite
Nausea

4. Signs
e Hyperaemic buccal mucosa and gums
e Ulcers may be present

5. Investigations

FBS
Mouth swab

6. Treatment
e Treatment objectives
e To relieve pain and inflammation

To treat gingivitis you must practice proper oral hygiene. You should also cut back on any
smoking and control your diabetes. Other treatments include deep cleaning your teeth,
medications, and surgery.

e Antibiotic mouthwash containing chlorhexidine can be used to disinfect the mouth.

e Time-release antiseptic chips containing chlorhexidine can be inserted into pockets

after root planing.

e Antibiotic microspheres made with minocycline can be inserted in pockets after
scaling and planing.
Oral antibiotics can be used to treat persistent areas of gum inflammation.
Doxycycline, an antibiotic, can help keep enzymes from causing tooth damage.
Surgery
Flap
Bone and tissue grafts

Herbal treatment

Adenia lobata (leaves), Alchornea cordifolia (leaves) and Plumbago zeylanica (leaves)

7. Prevention and control

Gingivitis can be prevented by proper and consistent oral hygiene. Make certain to eat a
balanced diet and visit the dentist regularly. Brush your teeth twice daily with fluoride
toothpaste. Floss your teeth every day.

8. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/gingivitis

76

----- PAGE 78 -----
N° 36: ORAL THRUSH

1. DESCRIPTION

It mainly affects the very young , the very old or those whose immunity is impaired. It occurs
more frequently in HIV/AIDS patients, the malnourished, diabetics, patients on long term
antibiotics and corticosteroids.

2. CAUSES

Candida albicans

3. SYMPTOMS

White patches in the mouth

Burning sensation in the mouth.
Diffuculties in swallowing

Breast fed babies may refuse to suck

4. SIGNS

White patches in the mouth

5. INVESTIGATIONS

FBC
Fasting blood glucoce
HIV status indicated

6. TREATMENT

Treatment objectives

To eradicate infections
To identify and treat any underlying condition

Treatment for oral thrush varies depending on age and overall health. The purpose of
treatment is to prevent the growth and spread of the fungus.

Treatment for oral thrush may consist of:

clotrimazole lozenge (an antifungal medication that you leave in your mouth until it
dissolves)

nystatin (an antifungal mouthwash that you swish around in your mouth and then
swallow)

fluconazole or itraconazole (oral antifungal medications used for cases that are
resistant to initial treatments or for patients who have HIV/AIDS)

amphotericin B (an oral or intravenous drug used to treat patients with very resistant
infections or whose infection has spread to other parts of the body)

Your at-home regimen for treating oral thrush should include:

brushing with a soft toothbrush to avoid scraping the lesions

replacing your existing toothbrush regularly until the oral thrush clears up

not using mouthwashes or sprays

using a 3 percent hydrogen peroxide solution or saltwater mixture to rinse your mouth
maintaining appropriate blood sugar levels if you have diabetes

eating unsweetened yogurt with Lactobacillus acidophilus or taking acidophilus
capsules to help restore and maintain healthy levels of “good” bacteria

When a breastfeeding infant has oral thrush, both the mother and infant should be treated to
prevent a cycle of reinfection. Treatment in these cases may include:

using an antifungal medication for the baby and an antifungal cream for the mother’s
breasts

rinsing pacifiers, bottle nipples, and all pieces of a breast pump in a half water/half
vinegar solution and allowing the items to air dry

using nursing pads to prevent the fungus from spreading to your clothes

77

----- PAGE 79 -----
Traditional treatment

7. Prevention and control

e Practice good oral hygiene by brushing and flossing your teeth daily. This is
especially important if you have diabetes or wear dentures.

e Rinse out your mouth after using a corticosteroid inhaler.

e Add acidophilus capsules or yogurt with Lactobacillus acidophilus to your diet when
you are taking prescribed antibiotics.

e Promptly treat a vaginal yeast infection, especially if you are pregnant.

e Avoid foods that are high in sugar and/or yeast, since they could encourage the
fungus that causes oral thrush.

8. References
http://health.yahoo.net/health/thrush

78

----- PAGE 80 -----
N° 37: MALNUTRITION

1. Description

Food is necessary for proper growth, development of the body and maintenance of health. A
normal and properly balanced diet, consists of food that has sufficient amounts of protein
necessary for growth and maintenance, carbohydrates and fats necessary for energy and
vitamins and minerals for protection against disease. Malnutrition occurs when there is a
deficiency in intake of some or all of the above nutrients. It is most commonly seen in
children less than five years, particularly after weaning. In many cases, the malnourished
child is brought to the health unit because of other complaints such as diarrhoea, vomiting,
fever, worms or cough. In adults, malnutrition frequently occurs in association with chronic
alcoholism. Malnutrition can result in a breakdown of the child’s or adult’s ability to fight
disease and infection. An infection in a malnourished individual may thus become very
severe and result in death. A child suffering from malnutrition may have features of marasms,
kwashiorkor or both [marasmic-kwashiokor]. These children lack both protein and sources of
energy [protein Energy Malnutrition, PEM]. Protein Energy Malnutrition (PEM) is divided into
three stages using weight/age, weight/height and upper arm circumference. The mild form of
PEM is the commonest type in Ghana.

Mild PEM
e Weihgt for age:<80% but >70%
e Weight for height: 70-80%
e Mid upper Arm circumference: 12.5-13.5cm
e The child is thin with some muscle wasting
e The child plays less because of lack of energy.

Moderate PEM
e Weight for age : <70% but > 60%
e Mid upper Arm circumference: 12.0-12.5cm
e Early signs of Kwashiorkor or marasmus may be present.
e The symptoms and signs are as in mild PEM but more pronounced

Severe PEM
e Weight for age :<60% of expected weight for age
e Weight for height :<70%
e Mid Upper Arm circumference: <12cm.
e Inthe stage there are signs of maramus, kwashiorkor or marasmic-kwashiorkor.

2. Causes

e Inadequacy of quality and/or quantity of food intake

e Social neglect

e Chronic illness and cancers
a. Infections and infestations(children):
b. Measles, pertussis HIV, pulmonary tuberculosis
c. Worm infestations

e Alcoholism (adults)

3. Symptoms

e Weight loss

e Poor weight gain (marasmus)

a. May be noted as drop or flattening in weight on the “Road to Health “ chart

Body swelling (Kwashiorkor)
Lack of energy
Apathy
Disinterest in food

79

----- PAGE 81 -----
4. Signs

Marasmus
e Thin (reduced muscle bulk)
Prominent bones
Hanging skin folds especially over the buttocks
Unusually alert
Looks like an old man

Kwashoirkor
e Thin and wasted arms
Puffy face and legs due to oedema
Brownish or reddish hair
Flaky skin rash especially on the legs
Sores on the oedematous parts of the body in severe cases
Miserable and apathetic appearance
Disinterest in food

5. Investigations
e FBC
Urea and electrolytes
Urine culture and sensitivity
Chest X-ray
HIV testing
Gastric lavage for acid fast bacilli

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To correct the nutrirional deficiency
To prevent reoccurrence
To check and correct complications
Anaemia
To identify and treat underlying infections and infestations
To adequately manage chronic illness

Herbal treatment
e Launea taraxacifolia, Moringa oleifera, Cinnamomun zeylanica, Soya bean or;
e Soya bean, Moringa oleifera, Launea taraxacifolia and Cinnamomun zeylanica

7. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/malnutrition

80

----- PAGE 82 -----
N° 38: STROKE

1. Description

A Stroke or cerebrovascular accident is a rapidly developing focal (or global), disturbances of
cerebral function lasting 24 hours or longer or leading to death, with no apparent cause other
than a vascular origin. The risk factors for a stroke include hypertension, diabetes mellitus,
cigerette smoking , cardiac arrhythmias , obesity, plasma lipid abnormalities, heart and
peripheral vascular disease and excessive alcohol intake. Stroke are usually sudden in onset
or may show progression over several hours or occasionally days. The site of the brain

lesion causing the stroke usually determines the neurological presentation.

2. Causes

Cerebral infarction form

a. Thrombosis of the cerebral vessel

b. Embolism from a distant site (Atrial fibrillation)
Intracerebral haemorrhage
Subarachnoid haemorrhage

3. Symptoms

4. Signs
e

Weeakness of one side of the boby including face

Inability to rise up from a sitting or lying position

Sudden fall

Loss of speech

Severe headache and /or neck pain (subarachnoid haemorrhage)
Unconciousness in some patients

Seizures

Paralysis of a limb and/or the face

Initial flaccidity, but spasticity and exaggerated reflexes occur later
Loss of one-half of visual field (Hemianopia)

Loss of sensation of one —half of body(hemi-anaesthesia)
Extensor plantar response

Alteration of speech (dysarthria/dyspasia)

Neck stiffness(in subarachnoid haemorrhage)

5. Investigations

FBC

Blood glucose

Serum lipid profile

Blood urea, electrolytes and creatinine
Uric acid

ECG

CT scan/MRI of the head

Chest X-ray

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:

To limit the progression area of brain damage

To protect patients from the dangers of unconsciouness and immobility
To treat the underlying cause if possible

To institute measures to improve functional recovery

To support and rehabilitate patients who survive with residual disability
To prevent recurrence of cerebrovascular lesions

81

----- PAGE 83 -----
Treatment for a stroke should begin as soon as possible. The quicker emergency treatment
begins, the greater the chance of preventing any lasting damage. Treatment depends on the
type of stroke a person is having.

Emergency treatment for ischemic stroke must start within 4.5 hours of the event.
Treatment for an ischemic stroke—the most common kind that involves a blood clot in
the brain—will be to break up the clot that is blocking or disrupting blood flow in the
brain.

One of the most common treatments doctors use during stroke emergencies is simple
aspirin

Other drugs designed to break up clots. These drugs can be injected via via a
catheter—or thin tube—through your arteries. The most common medication used to
treat stroke is known as tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), and will help break up
clot that has formed in the brain. Other oral drugs that may eventually be used to thin
the blood and reduce risk of future stroke include clopidogrel, stains, and warfarin.

Herbal treatment

Phyllanthus fraternus (leaves), Allium sativum (bulb), Strophanthus hispidus (roots) and
Momordica charantia (leaves)

7. Prevention and control

Preventing a stroke is all about taking care of the heart and blood. This means keeping good
cholesterol high, and bad cholesterol low with diet, exercise, and avoiding some specific bad
habits. Here are some ways to lower the risks for stroke:

Eat a diet rich in fibre, whole grains, fresh fruits, and lots of vegetables

Avoid foods that are processed, high in cholesterol, high in saturated fat, and loaded
with sodium

Exercise-thirty minutes of exercise a day can help

Mind Your Blood Pressure-avoid sodium and get some regular exercise; eat a diet
that is high in fruit, vegetables, and potassium

Don’t Smoke

Limit Alcohol

Control Chronic Conditions-if you suffer from high cholesterol, high blood pressure,
obesity, or diabetes, then the more you actively manage your condition, the better
chance you have of avoiding a stroke.

8. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/stroke/prevention

82

----- PAGE 84 -----
N° 39: ECZEMA (DERMATITIS)

1. Description

Eczema is an itchy reaction of the skin to a number of factors, either exogenous (e.g. contact
dermatitis ) or endogenous (e.g. seborrhoea and atopy). Papules, blisters (vesicles, pustules
and bullae) and oozing characterise the lesions when acute. There is_ thickening
(lichenification), prominent skin lines and scaling chronic. There are three main types as
follows:

Atopic eczema

This presents as remitting and relapsing itchy conditions of the face, wrists, ankles, cubital
and popliteal fossae. Onset is in childhood often with a familial background of atopy (asthma,
hay fever , eosinophilia and similar skin problem). Spontaneous resolution often occurs by
teenage.

Seborrhoeic eczema and dandruff

This presents as a scaly weeping rash of the scalp, eyebrows, perinasal and periauricular
skins; sometimes it presents as hypopigmented macules. It occurs in infancy, adolescence
or adulthood. It may be associated with dandruff and pityrosporum ovale infection. Extensive
forms are associated with immunosusuppressive states, particularly AIDS.

Contact eczema

It may be an irritant (concentration dependent) or allergic (idiosyncratic) reaction to specific
chemicals such as metals, rubber etc. In constrast to the endogenous types, the skin
reaction is confined to the areas directly in contact with the offending chemical.

2. Causes
e Familial
e Atopy
e Reaction to metals, rubber, chemicals, drugs, foods etc
e Immunosuppression

Several factors can increase the risk of an eczema flare-up. These include fabrics that are
rough to the touch, such as wool as well as harsh soaps, cleansers and detergents, and
even cold weather that can dry out skin.

3. Symptoms
e Scaly weeping rash
e Hypo-pigmented macules
e Itching

4. Signs
e Erythema
Vesicles
Fissures
Scale rash
Lichenification (thickened skin)

5. Investigations

Closed patch testing (may be used for identification of allergens in contact eczema)

6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To eliminate symptoms
e To identify and avoid predisposition factors

83

----- PAGE 85 -----
The most effective way to manage eczema symptoms is by taking medications, along with
make some behavioral changes. Eczema drugs fall into several categories: antihistamines,
corticosteroids, antibiotics and immunosuppressants. There are several medications
available that can help control and prevent eczema outbreaks.

Herbal treatment
e Cassia nodosa (leaves), Cassia alata (leaves) and Hos/undia opposita (leaves
e Some natural treatments that may help with the eczema include:
a. Tea
b. Borage Oil
c. Evening Primrose Oil
d. Mind/Body Approaches-techniques that lower stress may reduce the risk of the
eczema (meditation, yoga, progressive muscle relaxation or guided imagery)
. Acupuncture
Aromatherapy helps promote relaxation and reduces stress, which can put you
at greater risk of an eczema occurrence. Put a drop of water infused with
essential oil such as chamomile or lavender onto your pillow at night can help
ease stress and anxiety.

mo

7. Prevention and control

Behavioural changes can have a significant impact in reducing the likelihood of an eczema
flare-up and they don’t require any medication. There are several ways that can help keep
eczema under control or at least reduce the severity of an outbreak:

Avoid Scratching

Try Rubbing Instead

Reduce Stress

Moisturize-Dry skin can trigger an eczema flare up and make the skin condition more
uncomfortable

Get Adequate Sleep

e Avoid Irritants

8. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/eczema-prevention

84

----- PAGE 86 -----
| N° 40: RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS

1. Description

This is a chronic systemic autoimmune inflammatory disease characterised mainly by
symmetrical inflammation of the synovial tissue of joints resulting in destruction of the joints
and peri-articular tissues. It occurs more commonly in young and middle-aged women. The
symptoms fluctuate widely with periods of remission and exacerbation. Other organs such as
the lungs, kidney, eyes and the haematopoietic system may occasionally be affected.
Rheumatoid arthritis should be treated as early as possible with disease modifying anti-
rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) to control symptoms and delay disease progression.

2. Cause

Autoimmune disease

3. Symptoms
e Pain and swelling in small joints of the hands and wrists for several weeks
Morning joint stiffness
Fever
Weight loss, lethargy, depression
Poltmyalgia-systemic illness with muscle pain, minimal joint Involvement and
explosive overnight joint pain

4. Signs

e Sindle-shape fingers, often symmetrical
Limitation of small joint movement
Joint deformities e.g. ulnar deviation at wrists, finger deformities
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Synovitis swelling and tendeness over joints
Anaemia — normocytic normochromic in character
Rheumatoid nodules
Muscle wasting around affected joints if long standing
Dry eyes
Peripheral sensory neuropathy
Depression
Cardiac and pulmonary involvement

5. Investigations
e Rheumatoid
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
FBC
ESR
X-ray of affected joints

5.1. Herbal treatment

Saba camorensis (aerial parts), Cassia sieberiana (stem bark) and Trichilia monadelpha
(stem bark)

6. References
http://health.yahoo.net/health/rheumatoid arthritis

85

----- PAGE 87 -----
N° 41: OSTEOARTHRITIS

1. Description

This is a degenerative joint disease that damages the articular cartilage leading to reactive
new bone formation. Weight bearing joints (hips, knees), cervical and lumbar spine and the
metacarpo-phalangeal and distal-interphalangeal joints of the hands are commonly affected.
Osteoarthritis is more common in females than males.

2. Causes
e Ageing
e Trauma
e Obesity

3. Symptoms
e Pain at initiation of exercise(walking)
e Morning stiffness which improve with exercise
e Diminution of joint movement

4. Signs
e Crepitus on moving affected joints
e Heberden ‘s nodes and deformed joints in the hands
e Joint swelling, warmth and effusions (knee especially)
e Osteoarthritis of cervical cancer and lumbar spine may lead to muscle weakness in
hands and legs respectively (myelopathy)

5. Investigations

e FBC

e ESR-mildly elevated

e X-ray of affected joints-narrowing and irregularity of the space
6. Treatment

Treatment objectives:
e To relieve pain
e To prevent and manage deformities
e To educate patient
6.1. Herbal treatment
Entandophragma angolensis (stem bark), Cassia sieberiana (stem bark), Trichilia
monadelpha (stem bark) and Morinda lucida (leaf)
7. References
http://health.yahoo.net/health/osteoarthritis

86

----- PAGE 88 -----
No 42: LIVER CANCER

1. Description

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a primary malignancy of the liver cell and must be
differentiated from malignancies elsewhere that metastasize to the liver. HCC occurs more
commonly in men than in women and is often dignosed several years after establisment of
the initial causative condition. The disease has a poor prognosis resulting from early
metastases to the lung, portal vein, per-portal lymph nodes, bone or brain and complications
such as hepatic failure, variceal bleeding or tumour rupture with bleeding into the
peritoneum. The tumour is often resistant to chemotherapy. Current strategies to prevent or
treat hepatitis B and C infections and liver cirrhosis have a potential for reducing the
prevalence of HCC in the long term.

2. Causes
e Alcoholism liver cirrhosis
e Chronic hepatitis B virus infection
e Cronic hepatitis C virus infection
e Chronic exposure to hepatic carcinogens e.g. Aflatoxin
3. Symptoms
e Jaundice
Itching
Weight loss
Haematemesis
Abdominal distension
Right upper abdominal pain

4. Signs
e Jaundice
Cachexia
Hepatomegaly(irregular surface, multiple nodules, may be tender)
Ascites
Bruit over the liver

5. Investigations
e LEFs
e Blood level of alpha — fetoprotein
e Abdominal ultrasound scan
e Chest X-ray

6. Treatment
Treatment objectives:
e To reliave pain
e To relieve discomfort from gross ascites
e To prevent or treat hepatic encephalophy
6.1. Herbal treatment
Morinda lucida (leaves), Tectonia regia (leaves), Phyllanthus fraternus (leaves) and
Catharantus roseus (leaves)
7. References

http://health.yahoo.net/health/liver cancer

87

----- PAGE 89 -----
List of Contributors

Name

Position and Contact Details

Prof Dr Yaw BIO

Director, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and
Technology Hospital, Kumasi-GHANA

(233) 32 20 60 300 / 20 81 53 302

E-mail: bioy97@yahoo.co.uk

Dr Ehoule KROA

Directeur Coordonnateur du Programme National de
Promotion de la Médecine Traditionnelle; COTE d’IVOIRE
Tél: +225 20 32 47 68/05 68 86 23

Fax: +225 20 33 27 81

Email: ekroa2002@yahoo.fr & pnpmt_ci@yahoo.fr

Dr Kofi Annan

Head of Department, Department of Herbal Medicine,
Faculty of Pharmacy

College of Health Sciences

Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology,
Kumasi-GHANA

E-mail : annan.kofi82@yahoo.com

Dr Bunmi Omoseyindemi

Chairman, Lagos State Traditional Medicine Board, Ministry
of Health, 7 King George V Road, Onikan, Lagos-NIGERIA
Tel: +234 80 23 20 63 03/+234 80 54 25 76 59

Email: bunmiomoseyin@yahoo.com

Dr Roch HOUNGNIHIN

Coordonnateur du Programme National de la Pharmacopée
et de la Médecine Traditionnelles

01 BP 882 Cotonou-BENIN

Tél. +229 21 33 45 83/95 06 13 35

Email : roch_houngnihin2001@yahoo.fr

Rita KUSI-APPIAH

Medical Herbalist

Accra-GHANA

Tel: +233 244 97 70 29

E-mail: naa3calotropis@yahoo.co.uk

Charles KATTY

Chargé de Programme et Coordinateur des recherches au
Centre Expérimental des Médecines Traditionnelles de
Fatick - Sicap Liberté II n°1538 Dakar-SENEGAL

Tel : +221 824 96 48/832 28 50

Cel: +221 581 96 21

E-mail : prometra@prometra.org &

erickg@refer.sn

Ms Diana OPARE

St Luke Natural Health Clinic
Tema-GHANA
E-mail: naa3calotropis@yahoo.co.uk

Mme Agnes I. EHOLY

Secrétaire

c/o Directeur Coordonnateur du Programme National de
Promotion de la Médecine Traditionnelle, COTE d’IVOIRE
Tél. +225 20 32 47 68 / 07 92 30 52/01 16 29 11

E-mail: imby2003@yahoo.fr

88
