
----- PAGE 1 -----
BP 603 T. HERBAL DRUG TECHNOLOGY (Theory)

UNIT - ONE

Prepared by,

Dr. MALAVIKA MR
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR
FACULTY OF PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES,
RAMA UNIVERSITY

KANPUR

UNIT-I 11 Hours

Herbs as raw materials

Definition of herb, herbal medicine, herbal medicinal product, herbal drug preparation
Source of Herbs

Selection, identification and authentication of herbal materials

Processing of herbal raw material

Biodynamic Agriculture

Good agricultural practices in cultivation of medicinal plants including Organic farming.
Pest and Pest management in medicinal plants: Biopesticides/Bioinsecticides.

Indian Systems of Medicine

a) Basic principles involved in Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homeopathy

b) Preparation and standardization of Ayurvedic formulations viz Aristas and Asawas,

Ghutika,Churna, Lehya and Bhasma.

----- PAGE 2 -----
HERBS AS RAW MATERIALS

HERB

It consists of entire plant or any part of the plant like leaves, flowers, fruits, roots and rhizomes, bark,
tubers, stems and branches

HERBAL DRUG

These consist of plants or any part of plants, usually in unprocessed or crude forms (crude drug)
which have medicinal value.

They include different parts of plant like entire aerial part, flowers, fruits, seeds, bark, leaves, roots
rhizomes etc The constituents and their therapeutic activity may be known or unknown.

HERBAL DRUG PREPARATION

They are processed form of herbs. They are derived from herbal drugs by various techniques like
extraction, fractionalization, purification, concentration, fermentation and may be in the form of
powders, extracts, tinctures, fixed oils, volatile oils, resins, gums, etc.

They contain a mixture of various constituents. However pure isolated compounds do not come under
this category.

HERBAL MEDICINAL PRODUCTS (FINISHED HERBAL PRODUCTS)

These are the medicinal products which contain exclusive herbal drugs or herbal drug preparations
which are made from one or more herbs.

It includes various herbal formulations like tablets, syrups, capsules, semisolid dosage forms, etc.
They may contain excipients in addition to active ingredients.
FIXED COMBINATION
It includes herbal medicinal products which contain more than one herbal drug preparations
SOURCE OF HERBS
Herbs or medicinal plants can be obtained from two sources viz:-
a) Wild source b) Cultivated source
a) Wild source

The plants are obtained from the wild source such as forests, plains, river banks, etc, where they are
found in their wild form.

Collection from wild sources is suitable for plants which are abundant in nature and are easily
available.

----- PAGE 3 -----
Obtaining herbs from a wild source is easy, economical, less time consuming, and has a decreased
cost of labour, however it also offers various disadvantages such as the quality of the plants cannot be
predicted due to various environmental changes.

The plants will not be uniform in their growth and yielding characteristics.
Modern scientific techniques cannot be applied to increase the yield as well as quality.

If the plants are obtained continuously from wild sources for prolonged periods it may lead to
depletion of raw materials from the wild.

b) Cultivated source

In recent times, medicinal plants have been systematically cultivated by applying modern scientific
techniques.

Obtaining herbs from cultivated sources offer various advantages which are as follows.
> Quality and purity is ensured.

> Better yield and more profit

> Ensures regular supply of raw material

> Application of modern scientific techniques is possible.

STEPS INVOLVED IN THE SELECTION, IDENTIFICATION, AND PROCESSING OF
HERBAL RAW MATERIALS

Herbs are subjected to various stages starting from their selection, identification, cultivation,
collection, storage and processing until the final product is formed. The detailed steps involved in the
processing of herbal drugs are discussed below.

Steps involved in processing of Herbal Drugs
Selection of Herbs

¥

Identification & Authentication

¥

Cultivation of Herbs

¥

Collection of Herbs

¥

Processing of Herbal Raw Material

----- PAGE 4 -----
a) Selection of herbs

The species or botanical variety selected for cultivation should be the same as specified in the official
Pharmacopoeia or national documents. In case of newly introduced medicinal plants, the variety
selected for cultivation should be identified and documented.

b) Identification and authentication of herbal materials

= Botanical identity

The species, subspecies, genus, variety etc of the plant for cultivation should be verified from a
qualified botanist/ institute and recorded.

= Specimens

In case of a new plant with medicinal properties whose identity is not known, a specimen el the plant
should be submitted to a regional national herbarium for identification and documentation.

= Seeds and other propagation materials

The suppliers of seeds and other propagation materials should specify all the necessary information
relating to the identity, quality as well as their breeding history. The seeds and propagation material
should be free from contamination and diseases in order to promote healthy plant growth

Cultivation of medicinal plants

Cultivation of medicinal plants requires intensive care and management as various factors such as
environment, soil, irrigation pests, etc, play a vital role. These factors vary from one plant to another.
Scientific documented methods should be followed, if no data available traditional methods should be
adopted and a systematic method should be developed through research Good agricultural practices in
cultivation (GACP) and conservation agriculture (CA) which aims to improve, conserve and make
more efficient use of natural resources.

d) Collection of herbs

For the collection of medicinal plants, a proper time should be selected. Herbs are selected for
collection at a stage when they yield the maximum amount of chemical constituents. Skilled labour
should be employed as they are trained to identify and select the herbs at a proper stage. The age of
the plant also plays a vital factor for their selection. Diseased plants should be rejected. Season of
collection should also be given due consideration while selecting the plants for collection.

e) Processing of herbal raw materials

Processing of herbal raw materials involves various stages from which the crude drugs undergo after
harvesting.It can be classified into primary and secondary processing which are further sub
categorized as follows.

PROCESSING OF HERBAL RAW MATERIAL

----- PAGE 5 -----
Primary processing
1. Garbling
2. Washing
3. Parboiling
4. Leaching
5. Drying
Secondary Processing
1. Cutting/sectioning
2. Aging/sweating
3. Baking/roasting
4. Boiling/steaming
5. Stir frying
6. Fumigation
7. Extraction
“+ Primary Processing

It includes simple procedures by which the herbs are prepared like sorting of different parts, garbling,
cleaning, drying, etc. The details of these processes are as follows:

1. Garbling (Sorting)
This process helps in ensuring the purity and cleanliness of the harvested material.

Dirt like soil, dust, impurities like insects, dead tissues and residual non medicinal plants are separated
from the raw material.

The process depends on the part of the plant to be prepared.

The process may involve procedures such as removing dirt and foreign substances, discarding
damaged parts, peeling of barks, sieving, trimming, removal of hairs from roots, removal of seeds
from fruits, stripping of leaves from stems.

This may be done by mechanical means but in some cases it is usually performed manually by hands.
2. Washing

After garbling the herbal raw material should be cleaned well to remove the traces remaining soil, dirt
and other impurities from the surface.

The roots, rhizomes and tubers are washed with clean water.

----- PAGE 6 -----
During the washing process, scraping and brushing may be necessary.
3. Parboiling (Blanching)

After washing, certain herbal raw materials need to undergo a parboiling process in which they are put
in boiling water for a short period.

This may help in improving the storage of the raw material and prevent insect/mould contamination.

It may also facilitate in further processing such as removal of stubborn impurities as well as outer
coats/ covering of raw materials.

4. Leaching

Some impurities can be removed by subjecting the plant material under running water known as
leaching.

However the duration of leaching should be controlled to prevent loss of chemical constituents
present in the drug.

5. Drying

In some cases, the plant material should be thoroughly dried after washing in order to prevent the
deterioration and degradation of active constituents.

They must be dried as soon as possible to remove moisture and reduce the damage due to microbial or
mould infestation.

Drying also prevents the activation of certain enzymes which may otherwise degrade the active
ingredients and also facilitate grinding and milling of the raw material Depending on the drug and
nature of ingredients, different drying methods can be used which are as follows:

= Natural drying
= Sun drying

Most herbal raw material can be dried in open air under direct sunshine provided the climate is
suitable. The duration of the drying process depends on the physical structure of the plant material and
weather conditions.

The plant material should be spread out in thin layers, care should be taken to prevent contamination
by dust impurities.

While drying the plant material should also be protected from insects, birds rodents, pests and other
domestic animals.

Shade drying:
Some medicinal plants cannot be directly exposed to sunlight, hence one to be dried under shade.

This drying process is slow but helps in minimizing loss colour, volatile oils and aromatic
components from being evaporated.

Artificial drying:

----- PAGE 7 -----
Drying by artificial heat is more rapid than open air drying and is necessary in rainy season and
regions where there is high humidity.

The temperature and equipment used for drying depends on the physical and chemical nature of the
drug and its constituents.

Various equipment such as tray dryers, spray dryers, vacuum dryers are used.

Overheating may lead to excessive loss of volatile components as well as decomposition of chemical
constituents.

The temperature should be kept below 60°C wherever possible.

B) SECONDARY PROCESSING

It refers to the steps applied to herbs in addition to primary processing.

The secondary processing differs from one herb to another depending on the nature of active
ingredients as well as therapeutic properties.

Secondary processing includes techniques such as removal of foreign substances, prevention of
microbial/ infestation, enhancing the efficacy of drugs, reducing the toxicity, extraction using suitable
solvents, concentration and drying of extracts.

These are further standardized by different methods
The following processes are carried out in the secondary processing of herbal raw materials.
Cutting Sectioning and Communition

After thoroughly drying, the herbal materials are processed by cutting and sectioning into smaller
sizes which are convenient for storage as well as extraction.

Various sizes can be obtained depending on the part of herb and extraction methods used.
It may be small particles, coarse powder or fine powder.
Aging/ Sweating

Aging refers to storing the raw material for a specified time after harvesting It is generally done under
sun or in shade for up to a year.

During the process of aging excessive water is evaporated and enzymatic reactions may occur to alter
the chemical composition of herbal material.

Example: Cascara bark should be aged for at least one year prior to use in medicinal preparations to
reduce its irritant effects.

Sweating is done by subjecting the herbal materials at a temperature between 45 to 656 with high
humidity for a period ranging from one week to few months.

The herbal materials are stacked between woollen blankets or other kind of cloth. The sweating
process is considered a hydrolytic and oxidative process in which some of the chemical ingredients of
the herbs are hydrolysed or oxidised.

----- PAGE 8 -----
Example: Vanilla beans are subjected to sweating between woollen blankets for about 2 months
during which they lose up to 80% of weight and develop a characteristic desirable colour and odour.

Baking/ Roasting
It is a process of drug heating where the herbal material is heated in ovens.

The temperature of heating and duration of baking/ roasting vary from one herbal material to another
until the drug develops a specific colour.

Example: Nutmeg is roasted till they turn to a yellowish brown colour.
Boiling Steaming

In the boiling process the drug is cooked in water or any other liquid solvent such vinegar, wine, milk
or animal urine.

Example: Acorus calamus rhizome is boiled in cows urine to enhance its anticonvulsant effects.

In the steaming process the herbal material is kept in contact with steam using a steamer resulting in
development of moist texture.

Example: Roots of Polygonum multiforum are steamed in the presence of black bean decoction to
enhance its tonic effects

Stir frying

It is a process in which the herbal materials are put in a pot of frying pan and continuously stirred or
tossed for a specific period under heat until the external colour changes, charred or even carbonized.

To facilitate uniform heating the drug material can be admixed with sand, talc or clay.
Example: Liquorice roots and rhizomes are stir fried with honey.

Fumigation

Sometimes the harvested raw materials are subjected to fumes.

Fumigation with sulphur dioxide is commonly employed for some medicinal herbs for the purpose of
preserving colour, improved appearance, bleaching and preventing the growth of insects and moulds.

Extraction of herbal materials

Extraction is a process of separation in which the chemical constituents present in plants and tissues
are removed by using selective solvents which are called as menstruum.

Herbal extracts include infusions, decoctions, fluid extracts, tinctures and powdered extracts. The
herbal preparation so obtained may be ready for use as a medicinal agent or it may be further
processed to finished products as tablets, capsules and pills.

i. Infusion

It is a liquid preparation obtained by extracting herbal materials with either cold or hot water without
boiling. Other solvents may also be used.

----- PAGE 9 -----
ii. Decoction
It is a liquid preparation obtained by boiling the herbal materials with water.
iii, Fluid extract

It is a liquid preparation obtained by maceration or percolation of herbal materials in alcohol. The
ratio will be one part of liquid containing one part of herbs (1:1).

iv. Tinctures

It is a dilute alcoholic extract of herbal materials typically made up of | part of herbal material with 5
to 10 parts of the solvent

v. Powdered extract

It is a form of herbal preparation which is processed into dried, granulated or powdered materials

BIODYNAMIC AGRICULTURE

Biodynamic agriculture is a form of organic farming which includes various concepts introduced by
Rudolf steiver in 1924.

Bio dynamics is a system of organic agriculture which recognises the biological and chemical values
of soil and treats soil fertility, plant growth and livestock care as ecologically interrelated tasks.

Biodynamic farming is an alternative where the chemical fertilizers are totally replaced by microbial
(biological) nutrients derived from bacteria, algae, fungi and it emphasizes the use of manures and
composts.

Biodynamic farming treats animals, crops and soil as a single system and facilitates the use of
traditional systems and development of new local breeds and varieties.

It uses various herbal and mineral additives in the manufacture of composts and field sprays.
Biodynamic farming also emphasizes on the use of astronomical sowing and moon planting calendar.
Bio dynamic farming promotes composting, green manuring crop rotations, inter cropping, mixed
cropping, etc, as well as employing predators, parasites, which are natural enemies of pests.

----- PAGE 10 -----
PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES FOR GOOD
AGRICULTURE PRACTICE (GAP) OF MEDICINAL PLANTS

The guidelines described for GAP are intended to streamline the cultivation of medicinal plants as per
the well regulated methods and follow a systematic way in the cultivation process as it is important
for the production of good quality plant material.

The various stages of processing which are included in good agricultural practice (GAP) are described
as follows.

1) Seeds and propagation material

= The seeding materials are to be identified botanically, indicating plant variety, cultivar, chemo
type and its origin.

"The material used should be 100% traceable.
= The above same rule applies to vegetative material as well

= The parent material of vegetative part used in organic production should be certified and
authentically organic.

2) Cultivation

= Depending on the method of cultivation conventional or organic growers should be allowed to
follow different standards operating procedures (SOP) for cultivation

= Care should be taken to avoid environmental disturbances

= The principles of good crop husbandry must be followed including appropriate rotation of
crops

3) Soil and fertilization
"Medicinal and aromatic plants should not be grown in soils that are contaminated by sludge

« The soil should also not be contaminated by heavy metals, pesticidal residues and other
unnatural chemicals.

= The use of fertilizers and other chemical products should be as minimum as possible and in
accordance with the demands of the plant.

4) Irrigation

= Irrigation should be minimized as much as possible and only applied as per the needs of the
plant

= Irrigation water should be free from contaminants such as faeces, heavy metals, pesticides,
herbicides and other hazardous substances.

5) Crop maintenance

----- PAGE 11 -----
= Tillage (preparation of land for growing crops) should be adapted to enable good plant growth
and must be carried out whenever required.

= Pesticides and herbicides should be avoided as far as possible.
= The use of pesticides and herbicides has to be documented.
6) Harvesting
= Harvesting should be done when the plants are in their best quality and quantity.

= Harvesting should be done in optimum conditions as wet soil, dew, rain, high humidity can
produce unfavorable effects.

7) Primary processing
= It includes steps such as washing, drying, freezing etc,

= Buildings used for processing should be clean, aerated and provide protection for the
harvested crop from birds, insects, rodents and animals.

= Processing equipment must be cleaned and regularly serviced.

= All the processed material should be inspected and substandard products must be discarded.
8) Packaging

e The product should be packed in clean, dry preferably new sacs, bags or cases

e The label must be clear, permanently fixed and made from non toxic material.

e Reusable packaging materials should be well cleaned and dried before use, care should be
taken that they do not cause contamination.

9) Storage and transport

e Packaged dried materials and essential oils should be stored in a dry, well aerated building in
which temperature fluctuations are controlled and good aeration is provided.

e Fresh products should be stored between 1 to 5°C, while frozen products should be stored
below -18°C or below -20°C for long term storage.

e Essential oils should be stored as per the chemical storage standards.
e During transportation, sufficiently aerated vehicles should be used.
e National regulations on transport have to be followed

10) Staff requirements

Personnel involved in the good agricultural practice (GAP) should receive adequate training and
education related to the nature of the work being carried out.

e The staffs who works with the plant material must have a high degree of personal hygiene.

----- PAGE 12 -----
e Staff with infectious diseases should not be allowed into the rooms in which they can come
into contact with plant material

11) Documentation
e All the propagation material and steps in the production process must be documented.

e All the starting materials, processing steps including location of cultivation have to be
documented

e All agreements between producer and buyer should be fixed in a written form.
12) Quality assurance

= In order to ensure a good quality of the produced crude drug, it is extremely advisable to
educate all personnel dealing with the crop at various stages.

= Consultation and feedback should be taken from buyers of medicinal and aromatic plants
regarding the quality and other properties of plant material and an agreement have to be
made.

PEST AND PEST MANAGEMENT IN MEDICINAL PLANTS

Pest is an undesired animal or plant which causes loss of cultivated plants. The different types of pests
infecting medicinal plants are as follows.

Types of pests
1) WEEDS
2) INSECTS
3) FUNGI/ VIRUSES
4) NON INSECT PESTS
a) Fungi and viruses
Examples: Ascochyta atropae causes necrosis of leaf. Cercospora atropae produces leaf spot disease.
b) Insects

Insects such as flea beetles, flies, moths, cutworms, grasshoppers, spiders, termites, etc, also produce
significant loss of cultivated plants.

c) Weeds

A weed is an undesired plant, it can produce losses more than any other pests or diseases. They cause
depletion and shortage of nutrients, water, light, and space to the cultivated plants. They also increase
the cost of labour and equipment and reduce the quality of cultivated plants.

Examples of weeds are Parthenium, Ragweed, Medican tea, Varnish tree, etc.

----- PAGE 13 -----
E) Non insect pests
They are further sub classified as follows.
e Vertebrates: Animals like monkeys, rats, rabbits, squirrels, birds, pigs etc.
e Invertebrates: Animals like crabs, snails, mites, nematodes, etc.
METHODS OF PEST CONTROL

Different techniques are followed to achieve pest control effectively. These methods are discussed as
follows.

1) Agricultural method
2) Biological method
3) Mechanical method
4) Chemical method
Mechanical method

It includes simple techniques like hand picking, pruming burning, using of pest traps, collection and
destruction of eggs, larvae and insects. Construction of concrete warehouses to protect from rodents
and animals. Rats and mouse traps are also used.

Agricultural method

It includes various methods such as crop rotation, inter cropping, integrated weed management
methods, solarisation etc. Production of pest and insect resistant plants through genetic engineering
technique is another approach.

Biological method

This method involves combating pests with other living organisms such as employment of cats to
combat rats and squirrels, employment of birds to combat insects. Some chemical substances
produced by female insects such as sex attractants, which can be used to lure male insects and prevent
reproduction.

Chemical control

Pests are controlled using chemical pesticides which include insecticides, fungicides, herbicides,
rodenticides. However these chemical substances are highly toxic to human beings. Improper use of
these chemical pesticides may lead to toxic effects on humanand animals. Examples:

o  Rodenticides: Arsenic trioxide
o Insecticides: Malathion, Parathion, Methoxychlor.
o Miticides: Tetradifon, Chlorobenzolate

o Fungicides: Chlorophenols, Quaternary ammonium compounds, etc.

----- PAGE 14 -----
o Herbicides: 24 dichloro phenoxy acetic acid, Calcium arsenate, etc.
BIOPESTICIDES/BIOINSECTICIDES FOR PEST MANAGEMENT

These are pesticides obtained from natural sources like microorganisms, plants, animals, insects and
certain minerals. They offer enormous advantages over chemical pesticides which are as follows.

Advantages of bio pesticides over chemical pesticides
Vv They are non-toxic to plants as well as humans.
Vv They are biodegradable and do not leave any toxic residues.

v They are less expensive and can be grown along with the cultivated medicinal plants. >They
are eco friendly and do not affect soil fertility.

Vv They are safe to handle and use.
TYPES OF BIOPESTICIDES
They can be categorized depending on their source as follows.
> BIOCHEMICAL
> MICROBIAL

> PLANT PESTICIDES

Microbial pesticides:

They consist of microorganisms, microbial pesticides can control different kinds of pest:and are
relatively specific for its target pests. It is reported that some fungi are used to control weeds and
insects.

Biochemical pesticides

These are naturally occurring chemical substances which are obtained from insects and animals which
have the ability to control the pests by non toxic mechanisms. These include substances like insect sex
pheromones.

Plant pesticides

Various plants are reported to possess pesticidal and insecticidal properties. They can be grown along
with cultivated plants to combat insects and can be used in powdered form or the constituents can be
extracted from them and used to spray on the crops.

Example: Neem, Tobacco, Pyrethrum, Sabadilla, Derris, Ryania.

----- PAGE 15 -----
INDIAN SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE

TRADITIONAL SYSTEMS OF MEDICINE

Traditional system of medicine also known as indigenous/ folk medicine/ alternative medicine
comprises of medical aspects of knowledge, skills, and practices based on different cultures and
different people which are used to treat the diseases. It includes various systems being practiced
throughout the world such as Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, Homeopathy, Chinese systems etc. These
systems of medicine are based on theories, beliefs and experiences of different practitioners from the
ancient periods.

AYURVEDA SYSTEM OF MEDICINE

Ayurveda is one of the oldest system of medicine which came into existence in about 900 BC. The
word "Ayur" means Life and "Veda" means Science. Literally Ayurveda means science of life.
Charaka and Sushruta made significant contributions to Ayurveda. The book "Charak Samhita" was
written by Charaka and he was known as father of Ayurveda.

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF AYURVEDA

PRINCIPLES OF AYURVEDA

PANCHAMAHABHUTA TRIDOSHA GUNA-RASA SIDDHANTHA

----- PAGE 16 -----
e PRITHVI e VATA e RASA

e JALA e PITTA e GUNA

e VAYU e KAPHA e VIRYA

e AGNI e VIPAKA

e AKASHA e PRABHAVA

Ayurveda is based on the following principles

a) Panchabhuta Siddhanta

b) Tridosha theory

c) Guna-Rasa-Virya-Vipaka-Prabhava Siddhanta.
Pancha Bhoota Siddhanta

According to this theory, It believes that the whole universe is made up of five basic elements known
as "Mahabhutas" and they are present in the human body. They are Prithvi (Earth) Jala (Water), Vayu
(Air), Agni (Fire), Akasha (Void/Sky). Combinations of these five elements form seven basic tissues
of the body which are referred as "Sapta Dahu" which are as follows:

1. Rasa (Lymph/ Plasma), 2 Rakta (Blood), 3. Mamsa (Flesh), 4. Meda (Fat), 5. Asti(Bones), Moja
(Marrow), 7. Shukra ( Reproductive organs). These Sapta dahu undergo wear and tear to form "Mala"
(Excretory products).

Tridosha theory

According to this theory, the five basic elements (Pancha Mahabhuta) exist in human body in three
different forms, together known as "Tridosha", they are

= Vata (Space + Air).
= Pitta (Fire + Liquid).
= kapha (Liquid + Solid).

These tridoshas when present in balanced form in the body is considered as healthy condition, any
imbalance in tridosha is considered as disease condition. Ayurveda tries to maintain the balance in
these elements.

Vata: It regulates the psychic and nervous system. Imbalance of this leads to disease of ENT heart,
urinary tract, skin, etc.

Pitta: It regulates energy production, digestion, tissue building, etc. Imbalance of this lead to disease
like acidity, indigestion, liver and skin disease.

Kapha: It regulates heat, formation of fluids, mucous, etc. Imbalance of this results in join pain, brain
disease, drowsiness, etc.

Guna-Rasa-Virya-Vipaka-Prabhava Siddhanta

----- PAGE 17 -----
These are considered as five pharmacological principles / properties of "Dravya" (dru substance), they
are Rasa (Taste), Guna (Quality), Virya (Active principle), Vipaka (Digestive products), Prabhava
(Pharmaco therapeutic action).

DIAGNOSIS IN AYURVEDA

Diseases are diagnosed by-

Observation of Doshas (vata, pitta, kapha).
Observation of skin, eyes, hair, nails and tongue.
Recording the pulse.

Investigation of Mala (urine, stools and sweat).

TREATMENT

The different treatments in Ayurveda are as follows

Elimination therapy
Alleviation therapy
Psychic therapy

Surgery therapy

In addition to single drugs, compound formulations are generally used to treat disease in the form of
tablets, pills, powders and syrups. Following are the examples of few Ayurvedic drugs along with
their uses.

List of some Ayurvedic drugs and their uses

Drug Uses

Arjunaristha Heart disease
Khadirarishta Skin disease

Kumaryasava Tonic, liver diseases
Triphala churna General diseases, stomachic

----- PAGE 18 -----
Ashwagandha churna Adaptogenic diseases
Parad bhasma Diarrhoea, dysentery
Chirayanta arka Fever

Kasturi gutika Aphrodisiac

Dashmula quath Ailments of kapha and vata

BRANCHES OF TREATMENT IN AYURVEDA
i. Kayachikitsa (General medicine).

ii. Salya chikitsa (Surgery).

iii. Salakya chikitsa (ENT).

iv. _ Bala chikitsa (Pediatrics)

v. Jara chikitsa Treatment related to genetics).

vi.  Rasayana chikitsa (Treatment with chemicals).
vii. Vajikarana chikitsa (Treatment related to reproductive organs and aphrodisiacs).
viii. | Graham chikitsa (Planetory effects).

ix.  Visha chikitsa (Toxicology).
SIDDHA SYSTEM OF MEDICINE

This system was practised in south India especially Tamil nadu. This system is believed to be older
than Ayurveda and the latter was derived from Siddha system. ““Agastya" believed to be the father of
Siddha medicine and he wrote a book known as Charkku "Agattiya

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF SIDDHA SYSTEM

----- PAGE 19 -----
PRINCIPLES OF SIDDHA

TRIGUNA

It is based on three principles vata, pitta and kapha, which are known as "Trigunas".

e Vata: People with predominant vata are characterized by stout, black, cold and inactive
personalities. Increased vata develops flatulence, acidity, obesity, heart attacks, etc.

e Pitta: People with predominant pitta are characterized by lean, whitish complexioned ha
personalities. Increased pitta shows early greying of hair, reddish eyes, burning chest,mental
derangement, anaemia.

e Kapha: People with predominant kapha are characterized by well built, good complexioned well
behaved personalities. Increased kapha leads to jaundice, heart attack, high fever anaemia, etc.

A particular guna in the body increases according to the time.
= Vata is predominant at 6.00am to 10.00am and 6.00pm to 10.00pm.
= Pitta is predominant at 10.00am to 200pm and 10.00pm to 2.00am.
= Kapha is predominant at 2.00pm to 6.00pm and 2.00am to 6.00am.
DIAGNOSIS IN SIDDHA SYSTEM

During the diagnosis the physician studies eight things, they are Nadi (Pulse), Dhwani (Speech),
Twaka (Tongue), Deham (Body), Neeram (Colour), Malam (Faeces), Mutram (Urine) and Vizhi
(Eyes).

Treatment

Siddha physicians give knowledge of one thousand herbs and their effectiveness in specific
composition and formulation. Commonly medicines are prepared freshly for specific diseases.

The formulations are prepared using plants animals, minerals, metals like mercury, gold, silver,
sulphur, zinc, copper, aluminum, borax and arsenic are used in small quantities.

The following formulations are commonly used in Siddha system.

----- PAGE 20 -----
o Kashayam (Decoction).

o Churna (Powder).

o Tailam (Medicated oils).

o Kuligai (Pills & Tablets).

o Chenduram (Metal complexes).

o  Bhasma (Calcinated drugs).

DIET IN SIDDHA

Siddha system also gives importance to "Pathya" (restriction on diet), following are the examples of
restricted and non-restricted diets.

Non restricted foods: wheat, milk, ghee, pulses, tender vegetables, goat meat, sugar, etc.
Restricted foods : chicken, mangoes, coconut, fenugreek, mustard, sesame, almonds, etc.
UNANI SYSTEM OF MEDICINE

Unani system originated in Greece. It was started by a Greek philosopher Hippocrates. He was the
first physician to introduce documentation of medical history which gave rise to development of
"Humoral theory". Unani system was later developed by Arabs and became popular as Arab system of
medicine.

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF UNANI SYSTEM

PRINCIPLES OF UNANI

PYTHOGORIAN THEORY

HIPPOCRATIC THEORY

----- PAGE 21 -----
—

Unani system considers that the entire universe is made of four basic elements viz:- fire, air, earth,
water. These elements are present in human body that represent various qualities. Unani system is
based on two theories.

> Hippocratic theory of four humors.
> Pythagorean theory of four proximate qualities.
Hippocratic theory of four humours mentions the first products of digestion, they are
e Blood (Dum).
e = Phlegm (Balgham).
e Yellow bile (Safra).
e Black bile (Souda).

Pythogorian theory of four proximate qualities includes hot, cold, moist and dry. These four qualities
are present in the human body in combinations and represent the four basic elements of the universe.
They are.

e Hot & moist (Air).

e Hot & dry (Fire).

e Cold & moist (Water).
e Cold & dry (Earth).

These four qualities are present in different proportions in the body and vary from one person to
another. These 4 qualities represent the nature or temperament/ humor of individual known as
"Mizaj".

Mizaj/ Temperament/ Humors of a person

e = =Mizaj-e-har (Hot).

e = Mizaj e-barid (Cold).
e = Mizaj-e-yabis (Dry).
e = =©Mizaj-e-rath (Moist).

Balance form of these 4 humors is called as healthy condition and imbalance form is known as
pathological condition

DIAGNOSIS

It is done by recording the parameters such as psychology, age, gender, habits, working condition,
history, etc. The following things are analysed during diagnosis

----- PAGE 22 -----
e Pulse reading.
e Examination of sputum, urine, and stools.
e Patient counselling.
TREATMENT IN UNANI SYSTEM
Two things are attempted during the treatment they are:

e To remove the cause of ailment, also known as cleansing or detoxification. It is done by
purging, diuresis, vomiting and bleeding.

e To strengthen the natural defence mechanism and prevention of relapse.
Treatment in Unani system involves various therapies which are as follows:

a. Regimental therapy: It includes emesis, purging, diaphoresis, diuresis, massaging, Turkish
bath, etc

b. Diet therapy: It is done by using a special diet. The quality and quantity of foods is

regulated
c. Pharmacotherapy: It deals with the use of medicine, most commonly natural drugs are
used.
UNANI MEDICINE

The Materia Medica describes drugs obtained from herbs, animals and mineral sources. Herbal drugs
include various parts of plants and their products. Animal drugs include organs, flesh, hair, bones, etc.
Mineral drugs include metals like gold, silver, lead, zinc arsenic, etc. Precious stones like emerald,
sapphire are also used.

HOMEOPATHY SYSTEM OF MEDICINE

Homeo means similar and pathos means suffering hence homeopathy means similar suffering. It
means, the cause of the disease itself can be used for its treatment or the substance producing similar
symptoms of disease in healthy individuals can be used to treat that disease. Homeopathy was
introduced by a German physician "Dr. Samue Hahnemann". Basic principle of Homeopathy is
"Similia Similibus Curantur" meaning let like be treated by likes.

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF HOMEOPATHY

It is based on seven principles which are as follows

“* PRINCIPLES OF HOMEOPATHY

> INDIVIDUALISATION

----- PAGE 23 -----
> PRINCIPLE OF SIMILIA

> PRINCIPLE OF SIMPLEX

> PRINCIPLE OF MINIMUM DOSE

> LAW OF PROVIDING

> LAW OF DYNAMISATION

> VITAL FORCE
Individualization

This concept maintains that no two individuals in the world are same, hence disease affecting the
individuals and their response to it cannot be similar. The individual response to the same disease
would be different from person to person. Thus medicines used to cure the same disease in different
individuals are different.

Principle of similia

Substances which are the cause of disease or produce similar symptoms in healthy individuals can be
used to cure the disease in patients (Vaccines)

Principle of minimum dose

This rule states that dose of the drug is inversely proportional to its potency (lower the dose, more
potent the drug is).

Law of proving

The testing of drugs is done on healthy volunteers. If the drug produces similar symptoms in a healthy
person as that of the diseased person, the drug is considered as suitable for treating that disease

Examples:

Cinchona (anti malarial drug produced symptoms of malaria in healthy persons, hence it can be used
to treat malaria. ii. Ipecac (antiemetic drug) produced emesis in healthy persons, hence it can be used
to treat vomiting

DIAGNOSIS IN HOMEOPATHY
e Collection of detailed case history and medical history.

e Investigation of symptoms, location, sensation, etc.

----- PAGE 24 -----
e Build up a symptoms picture of the patient.
TREATMENT

Homeopathy system used drugs in the form of mother tincture, small pills and powders. Preparation of
doses involved three processes, they are trituration, succession and serial dilution. Potentiation is a

physical process denoted by 'C. Three scales are used; they are decimal, centesimal and millesimal.

Sources of Homeopathy medicine

Plants: various plants, fungi, etc.

Animals: secretions, saliva, etc. Minerals and chemicals: toxic metals, inorganic salts, etc.
Serum: protoplasm of animals, hormones, etc.

Vaccines bacterial and viral products, etc

Disadvantages of Homeopathy

v Selection of correct drug is difficult.
v It takes long periods of time to cure in chronic cases.

PREPARATION AND STANDARDIZATION OF AYURVEDIC
FORMULATIONS

Ayurvedic formulations can be categorized into four types based on their physical nature of dosage

forms.

1. Solid dosage forms: Eg Vati, Ghutika.

2. Semi Solid dosage forms Eg Leha, Kalka

3. Liquid dosage forms Eg: Aristas. Asavas

4. Powder dosage forms. Eg Bhasmas Churras

ARISTAS AND ASAVAS

They are also known as preparations containing self generated alcohol (alcoholic preparations). They
are prepared by adding powdered drug or its decoction into a solution of sugar or jaggery, It is then
fermented for a specified time during which alcohol is generated which facilitates the extraction of

active principles present in the drugs. The self generated alcohol also acts as a preservative.

Both Aristas and Asavas are self generating alcoholic preparations, but they differ in the methods of
preparation. Aristas are prepared by extracting the powdered drug in the form of decoction and then

added to the solution of sugar or jaggery.

----- PAGE 25 -----
Asavas are prepared by directly adding the powdered drugs into the solution of sugar or jaggery, the

remaining process of preparation remains the same.

Method of preparation of Aristas

The crude drugs are coarsely powdered and decoction (Kashaya) is prepared and filtered. Other
ingredients are mixed with the decoction and these contents are added to a solution sugar or jaggery or

honey. It is then boiled, cooled and transferred to wooden barrels or pot.

The mouth of the container is covered with an earthen lid and the edges are sealed with clay smeared
cloth which is wound in seven consecutive layers. The container is kept in an underground cellar or a
heap of paddy in order to ensure a constant temperature maintained during the process of

fermentation.

After the specified period, the lid is removed and the contents are examined to ensure that the process

of fermentation (Sandhana) has been completed.The fluid is filtered and stored.
Method of preparation of Asavas

The drug is finely powdered and mixed with other ingredients and these contents are added to a
solution of sugar or jaggery or honey, mixed well. It is then boiled, cooled and transferred to wooden
barrels or pots. The mouth of the container is covered with an earthen lid and the edges are sealed
with clay smeared cloth which is wound in seven consecutive layers. The container is kept in an
underground cellar or a heap of paddy in order to ensure a constant temperature is maintained during
the process of fermentation. After the specified period, the lid is removed and the contents are
examined to ensure that the process of fermentation (Sandhana) has been completed. The fluid is
filtered and stored

Standardization parameters for Aristas and Asavas

e  Aristas and Asavas should be clear without any froth or foam at the top.
e It should not become sour upon standing
e It should have a characteristic aromatic and alcoholic odour.
e There should be no effervescence produced.
Examples:
Aristas: Ashokarista, Dasmularista, Ashwagandhaarista

Asavas: Arvindasava, Kumaryasava, Vasakasava.

VATI & GHUTIKA (TABLETS & PILLS)

----- PAGE 26 -----
These are medicines in the form of tablets (vati) and pills (ghutika). They contain single or
combinations of herbal, mineral or animal drugs.

Method of preparation

The drugs are dried and finely powdered, mineral drugs are converted into calcinated products
(bhasmas) or any other form as specified. As per the mentioned formula, the drugs and other
ingredients are mixed together and made into a soft paste with specified liquids. It is then properly
ground and made into vati (tablets) or ghutikas (Pills).

Standardization parameters for Vati & Ghutikas
= Vati & Ghutikas should be stable up to 2 years after preparation.
= If they contain only mineral ingredients, they can be used indefinitely
"They should not lose their original colour, odour, taste and form upon storage.
= If they contain sugar/ salt, they should be protected from moisture.

Eg: Vati: Gandhaka vati, Sankha vati.

Ghutika: Pranda gutika, Lasunadi gutika.

CHURNA
They contain single or combination of drugs along with other ingredients in a powdered form.
Method of preparation

Drugs and other ingredients mentioned in the formula are separately dried, finely powdered and
sieved to get uniform sized particles, they are mixed to get a uniform powder.

Standardization parameters for Churna
= Churnas should be free flowing powder and should not adhere or become moist
= Churnas are able up to one year if they are stored properly
= Finer the powder, better is its potency and therapeutic value.

Eg. Triphala churna, Drakshadi chuma, Sudarshan churna

LEHA AVALEHA

These are semisolid preparations made by boiling the powdered drug/ extract with solution of sugar or
Jaggery

Method of preparation

----- PAGE 27 -----
Sugar / jaggery is dissolved in a liquid, it is boiled and filtered. The powdered drugs extract along
with other ingredients are added with continuous stirring to form a homogenous semisolid mass. If
necessary ghee or oil is also added while the preparation is hot.

Standardization parameters for Leha
= It should neither become hard nor liquify.
= There should be no growth of fungus over it.
= It should not change its colour odour and taste.
= They can be used up to one year it properly stored.

Eg: Draksavaleha, Vasavaleha Bilvadileha

BHASMA

These are the powdered forms of drugs prepared by calcination (heating the solids in air to change is
original form) of metals, minerals or animal products by a special process in closed crucible or in pits
covered with cow dung

Method of preparation
They are prepared in two stages viz:

i. Sodhana: It is a process of purification of metals, minerals by heating them and immersing in
a specific liquid. This is done to remove its toxicity.

ii. Marana: This is the second stage of preparing bhasmas, in which the purified drugs obtained
from shodhana process are ground and mixed with plants/ extracts as specified. After
specified time, small cakes are made and dried in sunlight. The dried cakes are kept in earthen
vessels, sealed with clay smeared cloth and kept in a pit covered with cow dung and the fire is
put on all the sides. After heating for a specified period, the contents are removed and ground
into a fine powder and stored.

Standardization parameters for Bhasmas

= Bhasmas are grey, whitish, yellowish or black coloured powders. They should not change
their colour on storage.

= They are highly stable for long periods and should not lose their potency.

Eg: Suvarna bhasma, Shankha bhasma, Taura bhasma.
