
----- PAGE 1 -----
MEDICAL
HERBALISM

THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE
OF HERBAL MEDICINE

DAVID HOFFMANN, FNIMH, AHG

author of The Complete Illustrated Holistic Herbal

----- PAGE 2 -----
HOFFMANN:

MEDICAL
ERBALISM

----- PAGE 3 -----
~ & .nS .._.. e

MEDICAL HERBALISM

The Science and Practice
of Herbal Medicine

David Hoffmann, FNIMH, AHG

----- PAGE 4 -----
Healing Arts Press

One Park Street
Rochester, Vermont 05767
www.Inner Traditions.com

Healing Arts Press is a division of Inner Traditions International
Copyright © 2003 David Hoffmann

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or me-
chanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission
in writing from the publisher.

Note to the reader: This book is intended as an informational guide. The remedies, approaches, and techniques described herein
are meant to supplement, and not to be a substitute for, professional medical care or treatment. They should not be used to treat a
serious ailment without prior consultation with a qualified health care professional.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hoffmann, David, 1951-
Medical herbalism : the science and practice of herbal medicine / David Hoffmann.
p-; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-978-089281749-8 (hardcover)
1. Herbs—Therapeutic use. 2. Medicinal plants.
[DNLM: 1. Phytotherapy—methods. 2. Holistic Health. 3. Plants,
Medicinal. WB 925 H711m 2003] I. Title.
RM666.H33H6444 2003

615'.321—de22
2003017536

Printed in India

109876

iscilla Baker

4 d layout by Pr
Text design and layout by th Agenda 20

4 i display typefaces
This book was typeset in Janson, wil d Traian as disp!

----- PAGE 5 -----
DEDICATION

For Lois Stopple,
What can I say, after 600 odd pages (odd pages indeed), I’m tongue tied! You have healed me heart and soul, with
the celebration of life and joy that you are. This book may have been written by me, but it was midwifed by you.

Sweet blossom come on under the willow
We can have high times if you'll abide

We can discover the wonders of nature
Rolling in the rushes down by the riverside

She’s got everything delightful
She’s got everything I need
A breeze in the pines in the summer night moonlight
Crazy in the sunlight, yes, indeed
—THE GRATEFUL DEAD (WHO ELSE. . .)

>) e

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

My deepest appreciation to Cheri Quincy, DO, for the continuing encouragement and support. Thank you for
your confidence in me, even when J couldn’t even spell the word!

It is with love and gratitude that I acknowledge my friends and colleagues in the North American commu-
nity of herbalists for making this escapee from Thatchers’ Britain so welcome. The ideas in this book have been
gestating over the years in discussions with many, many herbalists. The U.S. herb world is blessed with an at-
mosphere of openness and mutual support that is unique and deeply nurturing. We can thank Rosemary Gladstar
for so very much...

There is so much I could say to each of you, so I’m copping out and simply “naming names.” No special order,
I love you all: Cascade Anderson-Geller, Paul Bergner, Jane Bothwell, Mark Blumenthal, Don Brown, Ryan
Drum, Rosemary Gladstar, Mindy Green, Christopher Hobbs, Tori Hudson, Feather Jones, Gail Julian, Kathi
Keville, Tierona Low Dog, David LaLucerne, Rob McCaleb (and everyone at the Herb Research Foundation),
Anne McIntyre, Terence McKenna, Bill Mitchel, Pam Montgomery, Rob Montgomery, Michael Moore, 7 Song,
Ric Scalzo, Ed Smith, Sara Smith, Paul Stamets, Jill Stansbury, Autumn Summers, Jonathan Treasure, Gail
Ulhrich, Roy Upton, Marty Wall, David Winston, Linda Wolf, Tom Wolf, Matthew Wood, Dusty Yeo.

This book is much better than it deserves to be because of the superlative guidance of herbalist/editor ex-
troadinaire Evelyn Leigh. Thank you for being so knowledgeable, insightful, literate, and understanding of this
aging deadhead. You made the process pleasant, rewarding (or is that rewording?), and even entertaining.

To Jeanie Levitan, the first editor to give me her toothbrush! All authors should hope to be blessed with
guidance from someone with your erudition and warmth. To Jamaica Burns for editorial help above and beyond
the call of duty. Sorry about the obscure Chinese citations.

T want to thank the many groups of students I have had the honor of working with over the years. You all
know who you are. In case you’ve forgotten, you went to one (or more!) of the following institutions: the
California School of Herbal Studies, the Rocky Mountain Center of Botanical Studies, Bastyr University,
National College of Naturopathic Medicine, California Institute of Integral Studies, and the National College
of Phytotherapy.

Sonoma County reference librarians have been a great help during the writing of this book. What would we
do without libraries?

To Sasha Shulgin, Grant Morrison, Hakim Bey, Jerry Garcia, and Ozric Tentacles for the help with sanity
maintenance (and furtherance . . .).

----- PAGE 6 -----
CONTENTS

NM

Introduction

Part One

INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES
AND PRACTICES

Herbs, Holism, and Science
Science and Phytotherapy, 17 * Pharmacognosy and Ways to Assess Herb
Quality, 19 * The Conservation of Medicinal Plants, 26

Classification of Medicinal Plants
The Linnaean System of Classification, 32 * Derivation of Botanical Names, 33

An Introduction to Phytochemistry
Primary and Secondary Plant Metabolites, 37 © Commonly Used ‘Terms and
Concepts, 40

Carbohydrates
Monosaccharides, 42 * Polysaccharides, 43 * Glycoproteins, 47 * Glycosides, 48
* Gums and Mucilages, 50

Lipids
Fatty Acids, $4 * Lipids Containing Glycerol, 58

Terpenes
Monoterpenes, 62 * Iridoids, 66 * Sesquiterpenes, 67 * Sesquiterpene
Lactones, 69 * Diterpenoids, 71 * Saponins, 74 * Triterpenoid Saponins, 79
* Cardenolides and Bufadienolides, 83 * Phytosterols, 83 *
Nortriterpenoids, 84 * Plant Exudates, 85 * Resins, 85 * Oleoresins, 86 *
Balsams, 87 * Gum Resins, 87

Polyphenols
Simple Phenols and Phenolic Acids, 92 * Phenylpropanoids and Cinnamic
Acids, 94 * Coumarins, 95 * Quinones, 96 * Xanthones, 99 * Stilbenoids, 99
* Flavonoids, 100 * Flavones and Flavonols, 101 ¢ Isoflavonoids, 106 ¢
Flavanones, 107 ¢ Dihydrochalcones, 107 * Biflavonoids, 108 * Lignans and
Neolignans, 112 ¢ Tannins, 114

Alkaloids
Pyrrolidine and Piperidine Alkaloids, 122 ¢ Tropane Alkaloids, 122 ¢
Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids, 123 ¢ Purine Alkaloids, 124 * Isoquinoline Alkaloids,
125 © Indole Alkaloids, 127 ¢ Ergot Alkaloids, 127 * B-carboline Alkaloids, 128
* Quinoline Alkaloids, 130 ¢ Quinolizidine Alkaloids, 130 ¢ Diterpenoid
Alkaloids, 130 ¢ Steroid Alkaloids, 131 * Miscellaneous Alkaloids, 131

Pharmacology
Pharmacodynamics, 135 * Phytoestrogens, 142 ¢ Pharmacokinetics, 144 *
Immunomodulators, 152 ¢ Inflammation and Anti-Inflammatory Agents, 154
* Cancer and Plant Constituents, 159 * Antiviral Agents, 164 ¢ Antioxidants
and Free Radical Scavengers, 165 * Cardiac Glycosides, 168 ¢ Nonsteroidal
Cardioactive Plant Constituents, 169 * Cholesterol and Lipid-Lowering
Activity, 170 * Hypertension and Hypotensive Agents, 171 © Platelet
Function and Cardiovascular Disease, 173 * Herbs and the Liver, 175 *
Hypoglycemic Agents, 178

30

36

41

54

62

90

120

134

----- PAGE 7 -----
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15,

16.

17.

18.

Toxicity, Contraindications, and Safety.
Evaluating Causality in Adverse Events, 187 * Toxicology, 192 * Oxalic Acid,
198 © Terpenes, 199 * Glycosides, 199 * Polyphenolics, 200 * Alkaloids, 202
* Polypeptides, 205 * Lectins, 206 * Photosensitivity, 209

The Formulation and Preparation of Herbal Medicines
Herbal Medicines, 216 * Infusions, 219 * Decoctions, 221 * Tinctures
(Tincturae), 223 ¢ Fluid Extracts (Fluid Extracta), 224 * Syrups, Elixirs, and
Emulsions (Emulsiones), 225 * Juices (Succi), Linctuses (Lincti), Mucilages,
and Oxymels, 226 * Waters (Aqua), 227 * Capsules, Pills, and Tablets, 227 *
Lozenges (Trochisci) and Pastilles (Pastilli), 228 * Baths (Balneotherapy), 228
* Douches and Enemas, 229 * Ointments and Suppositories, 230 *
Liniments, 231 * Gargles (Gargarisma) and Mouthwashes, 231 * Inhalants
(Vapors) and Spray Solutions (Nebulae), 231 * Oils, 232 ¢ Compresses and
Poultices, 232 * Incompatibility , 232

Part Two

TREATMENT APPROACHES
BY BODY SYSTEM

A Model of Holistic Herbal Medicine
Phytotherapeutic Selection Criteria, 237 * Dosage and Formulation Criteria,
252 © Outline of Treatment Chapters, 256

The Digestive System
Flatulence, 262 * Constipation, 263 * Laxatives, 264 *
Diarrhea, 266 * Aphthous Ulcers, 267 * Periodontal Disease, 268 ¢
Esophagitis and Gastroesophageal Reflux, 269 © Gastritis, 271 * Peptic
Ulcers, 272 * Hiatus Hernia, 274 * Functional Dyspepsia or “Indigestion,”
275 © Irritable Bowel Syndrome, 276 * Inflammatory Bowel Disease, 279 *
Ulcerative Colitis, 279 © Diverticulitis, 280 * Jaundice, 283 * Chronic
Hepatitis, 283 * Viral Hepatitis, 285 * Cirrhosis, 286 * Cholecystitis, 287 *
Cholelithiasis, 288 * Hemorrhoids, 289

The Cardiovascular System
Tonics for the Cardiovascular System, 292 * Cholesterol, 300 *
Hypertension, 302 * Arteriosclerosis, 307 ¢ Congestive Heart Failure, 309 ¢
Angina Pectoris, 310 * Peripheral Arterial Occlusive Disease, 311 * Varicose
Veins, 312

The Respiratory System
Coughs, 322 * Acute Bronchitis, 323 * Chronic Bronchitis, 326 * Pertussis,
329 © Asthma, 330 ¢ Emphysema, 334 ¢ The Common Cold, 336 ¢
Influenza, 338 * Hay Fever, 339 © Sinusitis, 340 * Laryngitis, 341 ¢
Tonsillitis, 342

The Nervous System
Managing Stress: An Overview, 349 * Depression, 354 * Insomnia, 355 *
Withdrawal from Benzodiazepines, 361 * Anorexia Nervosa, 363 *
Headache, 364 * Migraine, 367 * Neuritis, 371 * Tinnitus, 372 * Motion
Sickness, 373 * Shingles, 373

The Urinary System
Frequency, 377 * Dysuria, 378 * Hematuria, 378 * Edema, 379 © Cystitis,
379 * Urinary Calculus, 381

The Reproductive System
Emmenagogues, 385 * Amenorrhea, 386 * Dysmenorrhea, 387 *
Premenstrual Syndrome, 388 * Menopause, 391 * Pregnancy, 393 * Herbs to
Avoid During Pregnancy, 394 * Uterine Fibroids, 403 * Endometriosis, 404 *
Fibrocystic Breast Disease , 405 ¢ Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy, 406

186

216

236

258

291

316

344

375

384

----- PAGE 8 -----
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

Nave ene

The Musculoskeletal System
External Applications for Musculoskeletal Problems, 416 * Myalgia, 417 *
Osteoarthritis, 418 * Rheumatoid Arthritis, 421 * Osteoporosis, 424 *
Gout, 426 * Bursitis and Tendinitis, 427 ¢ Restless Leg Syndrome, 428

The Skin
Herbs for Topical Application, 431 * Eczema and Dermatitis, 432 *
Psoriasis, 435 ¢ Acne, 438

The Immune System
General Support Protocols, 446 * Detoxification, 446 * Postoperative
Recovery, 448 * General Guidelines for Treating Infection, 451 *
Vaginitis, 452 © Prostatitis, 454 * Boils, 455 * Fungal Skin Infection, 455
Cancer, 456

The Endocrine System
Hypothyroidism, 461 * Hyperthyroidism, 462 * Diabetes Mellitus, 463 ¢
The Adrenal Glands, 465

Phytotherapy and the Elderly
Toning and Nurturing Health in Elders, 468 * Prevention and Treatment of:
Disease in Elders, 469

Phytotherapy and Children
Measles, 474 * Mumps, 474 * Colic, 475 * Constipation, 476 *
Diarrhea, 477 ¢ Indigestion, 477 * Nausea, 478 * Otitis Media, 478 ©
Attention Deficit Disorder, 479 * Diaper Rash, 480 * Cradle Cap, 481 ¢
Impetigo, 481

Herbal Actions

Adaptogen, 483 ¢ Alterative, 484 * Anticatarrhal, 485 * Anti-Inflammatory, 487

* Antimicrobial, 491 * Antirheumatic, 493 * Antispasmodic, 494 *
Astringent, 496 © Bitter, 498 * Cardiac Remedies, 501 ¢ Carminative, $02 *
Cholagogue, 503 ¢ Demulcent, 505 * Diuretic, 506 © Emmenagogue, 509 ¢
Expectorant, 511 * Hepatic, 513 * Hypnotic, $15 * Hypotensive, 516 *
Nervine, $17 ¢ Stimulant, 519

Materia Medica

APPENDICES
Glossary

Selected Examples of Binomial Meanings
Herbs by Latin and Common Names
Pharmacy Terms

Weight and Measure Conversion

Herbal Information Sources

‘Taxonomy Hierarchy

Bibliography
Index

408

430

441

461

467

473

483

522

604
622
626
636
638
639
646

652
655

----- PAGE 9 -----
INTRODUCTION

BD

, | ¥ his is an exciting and very challenging time to be
involved in herbal medicine. There is a growing
openness to the insights of clinical herbalism

from practitioners of other health care modalities, and a

plethora of peer-reviewed work on herbs being published

by the research community. Many new insights have been
put forth, and many traditional ideas are being reassessed
and either rejected or embraced anew.

Above all, this is a time of change for Western
medicine, both holistic and orthodox. While herbs have a
unique and valuable contribution to make, no clear con-
text has yet been defined for Western holistic medicine.
In such a rapidly evolving clinical and research milieu, a
book of this sort can at best serve as a building block, a
step on the road toward a more cohesive vision for the fu-
ture of Western holistic healing.

With this book J have endeavored to lay a foundation
for the skilled use of herbal medicine within a holistic
practice by bringing together the modern scientific
movement with traditional herbal practice. The book is
intended for practitioners and students of medical herbal-
ism, as well as practitioners of other modalities who are
interested in the principles and practice of Western
herbal medicine.

A cursory look at the contents reveals two distinct
sections of the book.

Part 1 surveys the scientific underpinnings of medical
herbalism, the chemistry and pharmacology that may
help clarify the mechanisms of herbal activity and clinical
efficacy. While this information may be unfamiliar and
challenging for many herbalists, I feel it is important for
traditional practitioners to have at least a rudimentary
grasp of this subject as we move into the 21st century.

Part 2 deals with the practical therapeutics of the
major body systems and the pathologies that affect them.
It is based on my own 25 years of clinical experience, the
experience and knowledge accrued by the Eclectic and
Physiomedical physicians of the United States, and the
practices developed by the National Institute of Medical
Herbalists in the United Kingdom.

Despite the seeming dichotomy of these two major
sections of the book, I have attempted throughout to
marry biomedical theory with the clinical experience of
the medical herbalist. As a clinician who began his own

herbal practice in 1978, I have seen that Western herbal
medicine is based upon a body of knowledge and experi-
ence that has as much clinical value as any other field of
medicine. Thus the guidelines for protocol development
given throughout the book are based firmly on this
bedrock of Western herbalism. I have not rejected the
clinical approaches of medical herbalism in favor of peer-
reviewed research. Even acknowledging the wealth of
research occurring, there is not yet enough clinically rel-
evant material to justify changing tried-and-true ap-
proaches, an issue that is explored throughout the book.

The focus of the medicinal plant research commu-
nity, however, is rarely on the protocols used in herbal
medicine, but instead on the plants themselves as sources
of novel (and thus patentable) chemical structures. A dis-
quieting trend in North American herbalism is the ten-
dency to be influenced by the marketplace and herbal
fashion. ] have made a point of avoiding such hype in the
treatment section of the book. The following statement,
made by the 19th-century Eclectic physician John King in
writing about Grindelia squarrosa, is as relevant today as it
was 100 years ago:

The fact is, that many physicians have a great proneness
to run after new remedies, especially when introduced
under some pretentious name, and to place a marvelous
credulity in the statements of interested parties, who are
incapable of determining accurate conclusions as to the
value of a remedy.!

Herbalism is a fundamentally conservative activity, al-
though I must say it is the only aspect of my life where
any trace of conservative tendencies will be found!

OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK
PART 1

Chapter 1

Places Western herbalism in a philosophical, therapeutic,
ecological, and multicultural context. This chapter intro-
duces the relationship between science and herbal
medicine, looking at the scientific method and the lan-
guage of research. A discussion of pharmacognosy is fol-
lowed by a review of large-scale screening programs to as-
sess the therapeutic potential of the world’s flora. The

----- PAGE 10 -----
2 @ INTRODUCTION

importance of the conservation of medicinal plants and
the work of organizations such as United Plant Savers is
discussed.

Chapter 2
Explores the diversity of medicinal plants through taxon-
omy and the insights of the Linnaean system of nomen-
clature—actually much more interesting than is often
appreciated!

Chapters 3-8

Plant chemistry is the basis of the therapeutic uses of
herbs. In these chapters, I discuss the nature of primary
and secondary plant metabolites as a foundation for a re-
view of the main categories of constituents considered to
be of therapeutic importance. Each chapter includes an
overview of structure, botanical distribution, and general-
izations about pharmacology, followed by a discussion of
representative molecules described in the herbal litera-
ture. Important groups, such as sesquiterpene lactones,
saponins, and flavonoids, are covered in depth.

Chapter 9

An introduction to the principles of pharmacology rele-
vant to herbal medicine, covering the broad principles of
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Using herbal
examples wherever possible, the chapter explores a range
of pharmacological actions.

Chapter 10

An introduction to the basics of toxicology as they re-
late to issues concerning the safety and toxicity of medic-
inal plants. A discussion of contraindications and
drug—herb interactions is followed by a review of toxic
plant constituents.

Chapter 11

Explores the formulation and preparation of herbal
medicines. The various pharmaceutical forms are dis-
cussed, with examples from official pharmacopoeias as
well as folk medicine.

PART 2
Chapter 12

Presents a model of holistic herbal medicine that is ap-
plied throughout the rest of the book, and describes the
process of developing a protocol that addresses specific
pathologies while supporting the unique individual in-

volved. The criteria for establishing dosage and formula-
tion specifics are given, along with an outline of the struc-
ture of the subsequent treatment chapters.

Chapters 13-24

The therapeutic approach to each body system is ex-
plored in turn, focusing on prevention and wellness but
also addressing a range of conditions that may be ap-
proached herbally. Phytotherapeutic approaches to the
health needs of the young and the elderly are also dis-
cussed. The holistic context is always emphasized. Where
lists or tables are given, the sequence of herbs reflects my
opinion of relative importance.

I must emphasize that the suggested prescriptions are
NOT to be considered “herbal formulae.” The impor-
tance of their inclusion lies in the process of developing a
treatment program that takes advantage of the strengths
of herbalism in addressing individual needs, not simply
pathologies. I have emphasized the application of the
model and identification of any resulting patterns of rela-
tionship between plant and pathology in an attempt to
empower the reader as he or she faces clinical realities.

In practice, however, theory is often secondary to re-
ality. The suggested prescriptions come from personal
observation of many herbally treated cases. Any conclu-
sions or ideas presented come from an interpretation of
such observations and of the healing process in the peo-
ple who have honored me by allowing me to work with
them. In instances where I have no solid foundation in
practice, I have referred to colleagues who do.

Chapter 25

A review of the main herbal actions with an exploration of
the mechanisms underlying their activity (where known).
‘The primary herbal examples are given, along with a dis-
cussion of the other actions of these plants.

Chapter 26

An herbal materia medica, in the traditional sense, cover-
ing 150 of the plants most commonly used in European
and North American phytotherapy. A description of the
structure used throughout these entries is presented at
the beginning of the chapter. The traditional uses of the
plant are covered, along with relevant research data.

Appendices

* Glossary of herbal, medical, and phytochemical terms.

* Meanings of some Latin binomials. Here translations
can be found into English of the meanings of the Latin
or Greek words used in botanical binomials.

----- PAGE 11 -----
* Translation lists of the common names of herbs to their
Latin binomial and, similarly, the Latin binomial to
the common name.

¢ Pharmacy terms. A listing of Latin pharmacy terms and
their shorthand descriptors, which are often encoun-
tered when reading older books on herbal medicine.

* Weight and measure conversion tables.

* Taxonomic classification of medicinal plants.

* Information sources and useful URLs. A brief guide to
finding herbal information using modern biblio-
graphic databases, emphasizing the relevance of
Medline and MeSH terms. (The World Wide Web ad-
dresses given were current as of July 2003.)

* Bibliography. This select bibliography focuses on works

INTRODUCTION @& 3

relevant to the practice of Western herbalism. I have
emphasized the writings of herbal clinicians who not
only present relevant information, but also place it
within the context of real clinical experience.
References are given for phytochemistry, pharmacol-
ogy, and toxicology. The suggested readings at the end
of each chapter are not meant to be a comprehensive
list of resources. Rather, they reflect my opinion of
what is most relevant to the clinical experience.

References
1. Felter and Lloyd, King’s American Dispensatory, vol. 1
and 2, 1892. Reprint. Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical
Publications, 1983.

----- PAGE 12 -----


----- PAGE 13 -----
Part One

cM

INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES
AND PRACTICES

----- PAGE 14 -----
HERBS, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE

hytotherapy is a thriving medical modality that uses

whole plants to treat whole people, facilitating the

healing process within the framework of holistic
medicine. It is both an art and a science. With its roots in
the past, it is still relevant and meaningful in the present, of-
fering great potential contributions to modern medicine.

Herbalism has a scope of use as wide as any form of
medicine, as herbs may be used for any condition that is
medically treatable. This statement is not meant to imply
that herbs are a panacea for the ills of humanity!
However, the ecological integration of plant activity
with human physiology offers the potential for facilitat-
ing the healing process at any time in any situation.

A new understanding of health is dawning. This new
understanding reflects changes in both attitude and ap-
proach, and is often referred to as holistic medicine. This is
a small part of a profound transformation now taking
place in the way our culture views itself and the issues that
affect it. This has been called a paradigm shift: a change in
the patterns of belief and perception that our culture
holds about itself. Such shifts have happened many times
before. From a historical point of view, the transforma-
tion of society from the medieval worldview to what we
now call the Renaissance is strikingly clear. However, to
the people of the time, the process of change was either
imperceptible or totally confusing, except to those with
the vision of, for example, a Leonardo da Vinci.

The current development of new patterns of expecta-
tion and explanation is, of course, affecting the field of
medicine. Questions are being raised about every aspect
of medicine, from the nature of health and disease to ap-
propriate therapeutic techniques.

How, then, do we define health in the context of this
new paradigm? The World Health Organization (WHO)
provides the clearest definition. Its simplicity only serves
to highlight its profound relevance:

Health is a state of complete physical, emotional, mental
and social well being and not merely the absence of dis-

case or infirmity.

This is a wonderfully precise encapsulation of the
point of view of holistic medicine. The holistic approach
to medicine begins with the assumption that health is a
positive and active state, that it is an inherent characteris-
tic of whole and integrated human beings. From a holis-
tic standpoint, a person is not a patient with a disease syn-
drome, but a whole being. Acknowledgment of this
wholeness means that the therapist must appreciate the
mental, emotional, spiritual, social, and environmental as-
pects of his or her patients’ lives—not just the physical. A
holistic practitioner of any particular therapy has a deep
respect for the individual’s inherent capacity for self-
healing. This facilitates a relationship of active partnership
in the healing process, as opposed to an unequal dynamic
between expert healer and passive recipient.

The concept of relating to the whole person is, of
course, not new. It is an inherent part of the healer’s her-
itage. Beginning with Hippocrates, teachers through the
ages have guided every student doctor, herbalist, and
nurse toward a deeply caring support of the patient.
Today’s emphasis on holistic medicine is an attempt to
correct the tendency in modern medicine to equate
“health care” with the treatment of disease entities.

Holism is not limited to any medical technique or
theory. Rather, it provides a context in which the whole
person is considered—his or her physical as well as men-
tal and emotional health, including quality of life and re-
lationships. A medical doctor may be a holistic practi-
tioner, as can a medical herbalist or an osteopath. A
framework that embraces a whole range of therapeutic
modalities—whether labeled orthodox or alternative—
becomes apparent. These modalities may all be used in a
relevant and coherent way in the treatment of the whole
of a person, not just symptoms or syndromes.

Bearing in mind that this is a time of flux, we can ar-
ticulate some provisional ideas about holistic medicine.
Holistic medicine emphasizes the uniqueness of the indi-
vidual coming to the healer for care. The importance of
tailoring treatment to meet the broad needs of each indi-
vidual is fundamental, as is the need to understand and

----- PAGE 15 -----
treat people in the contexts of their families, communi-
ties, and culture.

Because holistic medicine views health as a positive
state of well-being, not simply the absence of disease, it
emphasizes the promotion of health and the prevention of
disease. It employs therapeutic modalities that mobilize
the individual's innate capacity for self-healing. Holistic
practitioners emphasize the role of the individual in their
own healing process, and much responsibility is handed
back to the patient. While swift and authoritative medical
or surgical intervention may still be necessary on occa-
sion, holism focuses on helping people understand health
in order to help chemselves, stressing education and self-
care over treatment and the resulting dependency.
Holistic practitioners also recognize the social and eco-
nomic conditions that perpetuate il] health, and a commit-
ment to change these factors is as much a part of holistic
medicine as is the emphasis on individual responsibility.

A unique and important characteristic of any holistic
approach is the practice of viewing illness as an opportu-
nity for self-discovery. This has many significant implica-
tions for the caring professions, perhaps best exemplified
by the hospice movement. The holistic approach includes
a concern for the quality of life in each of its stages and a
commitment to improving this quality of life.

The therapeutic importance of the setting within
which health care takes place is also fundamental to holis-
tic practice. Part of the problem with medical care is the
alienation and dehumanization that tends to accompany
institutional and laboratory settings. When the healing
process becomes too far removed from the humanity of
the people involved, nothing is left but chemistry and
surgery. There must be a meeting ot the hearts of doctor
and patient, not just skill and symptoms.

Taken together, all of this clearly shows why holistic
medicine transforms its practitioners as well as its pa-
tients. What, then, is the contribution of medical herbal-
ism within this healing framework and the emerging
holistic paradigm? As a healing technique, medical herbal-
ism is inherently in tune with nature. Because herbalism
works within the context of humanity’s shared ecological
and evolutionary heritage with the plant kingdom, it has
been described as ecological healing.

Another of the enduring strengths of herbalism is
that it has solid foundations in traditional healing, but is
at the same time a part of modern science and medicine.
Paradoxically, herbalism is both a wonderfully simple and
a staggeringly complex therapy. It is as simple as picking
cleavers from the hedgerow or chewing on chickweed
stems, and as complex as the multitude of biochemical in-

HERBS, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE @ 7

teractions that occur among all of a plant’s chemical con-
stituents and the various aspects of human metabolism
and physiology. The degree and depth of interaction is
breathtaking.

Practitioners of phytotherapy have the unique oppor-
tunity to introduce their patients to their medicine! A
bridge can be built between person and herb, empower-
ing the patient to be present and responsible in the heal-
ing process. A gift to a patient of a packet of herb seeds
encourages a direct experience of the life of the plant.
This experience of herbal vitality can turn an impersonal
medicine into a living entity with which the individual can
develop a deeper rapport. The patient will receive not
only the medicinal benefit of the herb, but also the en-
livening, empowering experience of growing and prepar-
ing his or her own healing medicine.

DEFINING HERBS AND HERBALISM

The word herb implies different things to different peo-
ple, and definitions varying according to area of interest
and personal bias, What, then, is herbalism? Simply
defining herbalism as “the stady of herbs” begs the ques-
tion. This lack of clarity reflects the changing fortunes of
herbalism in English-speaking cultures over the centuries.

At one time, herbalism was an honorable profession
that laid the foundations of modern medicine, botany,
pharmacy, perfumery, and chemistry. As these areas of
study developed and the cultural infatuation with tech-
nology took hold, herbalism was relegated to history
books or the realm of pleasantly quaint country craft.
This left us with a word that has a variety of uses but no
cultural core. As herbalism develops anew, in what has
been called the “herbal renaissance,” it is time for us to
reclaim this little word.

Each usage of the word herb is relevant to a particu-
lar area of study, but this limits the applicability of the
word to herbalism in general. The Complete Oxford
Dictionary contains almost four pages (in very small print)
of words derived from herb and herbalist. The primary
definition of herb reads:

A plant of which the stem does not become woody or
persistent (as in a shrub or tree), but remains more or less
soft and succulent, and dies down to the ground (or en-
tirely) after flowering.

The second definition indicates that the term herb is

... applied to plants of which the leaves or stem and
leaves are used for food or medicine, or in some way for
their scent or flavor.

----- PAGE 16 -----
8 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

The Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary provides
the following entry:

herb (urb, hurb) n. 1. A plant whose stem does not pro-
duce woody, persistent tissue and generally dies back at
the end of each growing season. 2. Any of various often
aromatic plants used especially in medicine or as season-
ing. 3. Slang. Marijuana.

Botanists view herbs as nonwoody plants—that is,
plants that do not contain woody lignin fibers. Dorling’s
Medical Dictionary similarly defines an herb as “a plant
whose stems are soft and perishable, and which are sup-
ported chiefly by turgor pressure.” Of course, this then
implies that trees like witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana),
ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba), and hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata)
are not herbs. And what about mushrooms?

The science of ecology, or the study of interrelation-
ships among plants, animals, and the environment, uses the
word herb in a very specific way. In descriptions of complex
communities such as forests, herbs are plants that are less
than 12 inches high that complete their life cycles in the
“herb layer.” Again, this suggests that trees and shrubs
like sarsaparilla (Smilax spp.) and cramp bark (Viburnum
opulus) are not herbs.

The culinary arts have explored the use of plants in
many delicious ways, but the understanding of what con-
stitutes an herb is restricted in this field to plants that
smell and taste wonderful. These are plants that are usu-
ally rich in pleasantly aromatic volatile oils, such as basil,
peppermint, and oregano. No chef would think of creat-
ing culinary delights with stinking iris (Iris foetidissima),
skunk cabbage (Symplocarpus foetida), or goldenseal
(Hydrastis canadensis). This does not mean these plants are
not herbs, but simply that they are not appropriate for
cooking because they do not taste good.

In the various branches of medicine, the word herb
usually implies a plant that is a healing remedy, either in
its crude form or as a source of pharmacologically active
chemicals. This useful but limited interpretation leads
to a situation in which only pharmacologically potent
plants are recognized as herbs and gentle tonic remedies
are ignored.

One general definition often given states that an herb
is “any useful plant.” However, in return, an environmen-
talist might ask, What plant is ot useful? Indeed, it could
be argued that the Pacific poison oak (Toxicodendron di-
versilobum), for example, is exceptionally useful. In
California, it is one of the first plants to establish itself on
disturbed ground after disruption due to human activity.
In a way, we might view this plant as a type of vulnerary

(wound-healing) covering, as it tends to keep humans off
the land on which it grows! Because the wholeness of the
environment is vital for individual human health, all plants
in our environment have a medicinal role to play in plane-
tary terms.

From the perspective of phytotherapy, an herb is any
plant that may be used in the field of health and whole-
ness. Plants may be herbs in the strictly botanical sense,
such as remedies like white horehound (Marrubium vul-
gare). However, they may also be a part of a plant of any
kind, as with the flowers of marigold (Calendula offict-
nalis), the heartwood of the lignum vitae tree (Guaiacum
officinale), the seeds of chasteberry (Vitex agnus-castus), or
the roots of coneflower (Echinacea angustifolia).

As a subject, herbalism was once the descriptor for
what is now called botany, again pointing to the impor-
tant past role of herbalism. The Collins Dictionary of the
English Language defines an herbalist as a person who
grows, sells, collects, or specializes in the use of herbs, es-
pecially medicinal herbs. “Herbalist” was once the term
used to describe botanists, although modern botanists
would likely be offended!

Webster’s Revised Unabridged Dictionary defines
herbalism as the “knowledge of herbs” and an herbalist as
“one who grows, collects, or specializes in the use of
herbs, especially medicinal herbs.” A secondary definition
refers to the herb doctor: “One who practices healing
with herbs. Also called herbalist.”

From a very broad perspective, I define an herb as a
plant in relationship with humanity. Thus, herbalism
becomes the study and exploration of the interactions
between humanity and the plant kimdom (see box on
page 9). Such a point of view highlights the range and
depth of human dependence on plants. This relationship
is at the core of agriculture, forestry, carpentry, construc-
tion, clothing manufacture, medicine, and so on. In fact,
as coal is geologically processed wood, this broad view
includes the petrochemical industry as a subset of mod-
ern herbalism!

THERAPEUTIC ECOLOGY

A common idea among holistically orientated practition-
ers of all modalities is that a human being is a self-healing
individual, and, at best, all a medical practitioner can do is
facilitate this profound inner process. Addressing pathol-
ogy is relatively straightforward, but, as emphasized in the
WHO’ definition, health is much more an active state of
well-being than the absence of disease. Such vitalistic in-
sights do not negate the importance of medicine and the

----- PAGE 17 -----
healing arts, but rather provide a context within which to
view them.

A self-healing individual is enmeshed in a therapeutic
ecology, so called because the various components exist in
relationship to each other and the wider world. The indi-
vidual is the core of this therapeutic ecology, embraced by
four groups or branches of therapies: medicine, body-
work, psychology, and spiritual techniques.

The term medicine is used here to mean anything
that is ingested for healing purposes. Medicinal ap-
proaches include medical herbalism, homeopathy, natur-
opathy, and drug-based orthodox medicine. All have in
common the use of some form of medicine that is taken
into the body to achieve the therapeutic goal. While the
specifics vary, all such medicines can be seen as fruits of
the earth. Whether herbs or synthetic drugs, they share
a common origin in the physical world.

Bodywork includes all approaches that do something
with or to the physical body. It focuses on structural fac-
tors as either causative of or contributing to illness. This
category. includes the manipulative therapies, such as os-
teopathy, chiropractic, and the various forms of massage,
as well as surgery. Personal lifestyle ideally will also con-
tribute exercise, dance, or some other expression of bod-
ily vitality.

Therapies that work with the psyche embrace a whole
array of psychological techniques essential for identify-
ing and treating the emotional and mental factors that
contribute to health and disease. All the branches of psy-
chotherapy are involved here, but especially the more

HERBS, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE 2. 9

holistically oriented approaches of humanistic and
transpersonal psychology. A conscious and free-flowing
emotional life is fundamental to achieving inner har-
mony. This does not mean that everyone must undergo
in-depth psychotherapy, but that some attention should
be given in a form appropriate for each individual’s emo-
tional needs. Mental factors are critical, as we are what
we think.

Spiritual factors in human healing are increasingly
recognized by Western medicine. Meditative and prayer-
based techniques help the individual align their being
with higher spirit. Others involve interaction with a
practitioner who works with the energy body of the pa-
tient. Some openness to spirituality is vital in healing.
This might take the form of appreciating an uplifting
sunset, feeling touched by poetry or art, believing in an
established religion, or simply experiencing a dogma-
free joy in being alive.

Holism tells us to focus on an individual’s unique sit-
uation, not simply to treat a diagnosed disease syndrome.
In the context of therapeutic ecology, one person diag-
nosed with colitis might recuperate best when treated
with dietary advice, herbs, and osteopathic manipulation,
while another might respond better to drugs, psycho-
analysis, and surgery. Practitioners have firmly held
opinions about the pros and cons of one approach or an-
other, but the patient is always more important than the
doctor’s belief system.

Such therapeutic relationships point to the possibil-
ities for mutual support. Such support may come in the

The Plant Kindom

My use here of kindom, rather than kingdom, is deliberate. On a political level, | see the use of the
word kingdom—as in “plant kingdom’—as yet another example of the dominant culture's linguistic
straitjacket. As | still hold a British passport, | know what a kingdom is like, and | can assure you that
the plants have no imperialist aspirations! If we must use such terms, then why not plant queen-
dom, or, better yet, plant kindom?

| feel strongly that the practice of holistic medicine is a culturally transformative act. One of
the names for an herbalist in ancient Greece was rhizotomoi, because herbalists collected rhizomes.
I've been suggesting to all my herbal friends that we should be called radicles, after the growing tip
of a plant's root. A plant radicle is one of the strongest things in nature. Just think of little shep-
herd’s purse (Capsella bursa-pastoris) cracking through sidewalks!

The depth of this relationship goes far beyond social and economic issues to the actual life-
sustaining mechanisms of planetary ecology. The health and well-being of the biosphere is gov-
erned by the green mantle of the Earth. Humanity’s rapacious exploitation and destruction of the
forests and seas strike at the very core of the planet's life-support mechanisms. It is becoming evi-
dent that in order to survive the multifaceted crisis at hand, humanity must learn some environ-
mental humility, including how to cooperate with nature. Herbalism is a unique and important
expression of this cooperation.

CS SS ee ee eS eae

----- PAGE 18 -----
10 < INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

form of compensation for the weaknesses inherent in a
particular therapy; for example, homeopathic remedies
cannot put a splint on a fractured arm. From a more pos-
itive perspective, cooperation can lead to the develop-
ment of a synergistic support system in which the whole
of any treatment program becomes more than the sum of
its parts. Cooperation among practitioners of different
therapeutic modalities can create a geodesic relationship
of extraordinary potential and strength. In such a sce-
nario, differences lead to a celebration of the richness of
therapeutic diversity and are no longer a cause for acri-
monious debate and conflict.

A key insight for practitioners is to understand the
limits of both their therapies and themselves. We can take
for granted that well-qualified practitioners will be skilled
in their chosen healing art, but true holistic healers will
think beyond their training to focus on the overall needs
of the sick person. This raises some questions about edu-
cational standards that cannot be meaningfully explored
here. However, the point must be made that a medical
doctor who completes a short training in acupuncture
does not suddenly become an acupuncturist, just as a chi-
ropractor who attends a brief workshop on herbs is not
transformed into a medical herbalist overnight.

COMPLEMENTARY, ALTERNATIVE,
OR ORTHODOX?

The terms alternative and orthodox are often applied in at-
tempts to differentiate among various therapeutic modal-
ities. However, given the rapidly changing cultural cli-
mate affecting the healing professions, it is a mistake to
talk of phytotherapy as a form of “alternative” medicine.
Is it an alternative to acupuncture, osteopathy, or psychi-
atry? Of course not. These different therapeutic modali-
ties complement one another, creating a complex of rela-
tionships in which the whole is much more than the sum
of the parts. In light of the unique strengths and weak-
nesses offered by each approach, mutual support and co-
operation is the way toward truly holistic health service.
Within the context of the patient’s needs, all medical
modalities are complementary.

Shared medical endeavors are often frustrated by
communication blocks, some of which stem from differ-
ences in the language used by practitioners of various
modalities. Apparent disparities in vocabulary and jargon
may mask fundamental agreement in ideas and approach.
On the other hand, lack of clarity can obscure important
differences in both guiding principles and techniques. All
too often, dogmatic attachments to words and specific

formulations of belief, opinion, and theory exist. If the
“correct” words or phrases are not used, then the speaker
must be wrong!

Entrenched disagreement between dedicated ortho-
dox and holistic practitioners becomes irrelevant when
seen in the context of therapeutic ecology. Characteristics
of open-mindedness and tolerance should be common to
all involved in health care, whether practitioners, re-
searchers, or patients. Medical modalities with founda-
tions outside of the biomedical model should not be ig-
nored or discounted simply because they exemplify a
different belief system. They should be respected because
they represent an enrichment of possibilities, not scorned
as a challenge to the status quo.

Such mutually supportive endeavors in health care
bear many kinds of fruit, and everyone involved will ben-
efit. Health service administrators will appreciate the eco-
nomic savings gleaned from a reduced dependence upon
costly medical technology. A proportion of procedures
and treatments that currently utilize expensive drugs or
surgery may be replaced by more appropriate techniques
from other healing modalities. For example, run-of-the-
mill gallbladder removal might be avoided through the
skilled use of appropriate herbs.

TYPES OF HERBALISM

Herbalism is common to all peoples and cultures of the
world. The shared experience of alleviating suffering
through the use of plant medicines bridges cultural di-
vides, religious differences, and racial conflicts. A rela-
tionship exists between each culture and its plant envi-
ronment, in which the herbalist plays a pivotal role.
Herbalism is more than knowledge about healing
plants—it encompasses all of the experience and wisdom
born of this relationship between humanity and plants.

As a number of modalities use plants in their healing
work, confusion exists as to their differences. Plant treat-
ments are at the core of many of the diverse medical sys-
tems of the world, including Indian ayurveda, traditional
Chinese medicine, and Islamic unani medicine. Among
Western therapies, homeopathy, aromatherapy, and the
Bach flower remedies also make extensive use of herbs.
Many drugs currently used in orthodox medicine were ei-
ther derived from plant constituents or are actual plant
products.

As affirmed by the WHO, all medicine is modern as
long as it is directed toward the goal of providing health
care. The essential differences among these various sys-
tems of medicine are related to their cultural contexts,

----- PAGE 19 -----
rather than their goals, techniques, or effects. The WHO
recognizes that all traditions have value and that any par-
ticular worldview is limited, as it operates only within the
belief system of one tradition. Thus, the view of reality
from the cloisters of a Western medical school is as lim-
ited and limiting as that from a shaman’s hut in West
Africa. All perspectives have value in any worldwide ap-
proach to enhancing health for all.

HERBALISM AND HOMEOPATHY

Homeopathy is an important system of medicine that uti-
lizes plants in the treatment of disease, though in a way
fundamentally different from that of medical herbalism.
There is a common misconception that these two healing
modalities are the same, because they both employ plants.
Indeed, herbs are used in both approaches, but in radi-
cally divergent ways that reflect differences in philosophy
and therapeutic technique. A holistic perspective can help
establish a complementary relationship between the two,
but only when the strengths and weaknesses of each are
acknowledged and understood. There is not sufficient
space here to give homeopathy the attention it deserves.
Instead, we will simply compare the use of herbs in these
two different approaches.

As with other approaches to holistic medicine, home-
opathy looks at the patient's total picture, body and mind,
within the socia: setting of his or her life. The system
originated in Germany around 1800 with the work of
Samuel Hahnemann. He treated disease with very low
doses of drugs that at higher doses produce symptoms
similar to those of the disease itself. This is the basis of
the homeopathic principle that “like treats like.”

About 60% of homeopathic remedies are botanical in
nature; the rest are minerals, animal products, or nosodes
(highly diluted extracts of diseased tissue). The medicines
are administered in extremely diluted form and are
thought to work by influencing the vital force within the
human body. The more the dose of the remedy is re-
duced, the more its potency is enhanced. This is why the
homeopathic process of dilution is known as potentiation.
The dilation of 1 part of the active remedy in 10 parts of
the solvent (usually water) is known as a potency of 1X. A
1 in 100 dilution is 2X, and so on, up toa dilution of 200X.
A homeopathic mother tincture is similar to an ordinary
herbal tincture.

A problem that impedes mutual understanding be-
tween the two therapies is the application of the “like
treats like” concept. Many of the herbs in the homeo-
pathic materia medica are prescribed in dilution to treat

HERBS, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE -@ 11

symptom pictures that would supposedly be caused by
a full dose of the herb. This is easy to understand with
very strong or poisonous herbs, such as belladonna and
gelsemium.

However, the medical herbalist has more trouble
with the homeopath’s ideas about many of the remedies
shared by both systems. An example is the homeopathic
remedy pulsatilla, known as pasqueflower (Pulsatilla vul-
garis) to the herbalist. A comparison of the physical symp-
tom picture given for the homeopathic remedy is very
similar to the herbal indications for the plant. The fact
that the herb is used to treat similar conditions in both
approaches would appear to contradict the core idea be-
hind homeopathy.

The value of homeopathy in health care is not in
question here, but its use of plants is in no way “herbal.”
A selection of one or the other therapeutic modality
should be based upon attraction to the philosophical con-
text, recognizing that there is little or no real sharing of
the principles of botanical medicine.

An interesting piece of lexicography becomes rele-
vant here. The word allopathic is increasingly applied to
orthodox medicine, even though the word is not found in
the textbooks used in medical schools. In fact, it is a word
coined by Hahnemann, partially to describe herbalism!
Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary defines homeopathy
and allopathy thus:

homeopathy \ho-me-o-p'a-thy\, n. [Gr. likeness of con-
dition or feeling; like (fr. same; cf. Same) + to suffer: cf. F.
hom[‘elopathie.] The art of curing, founded on resem-
blances; the theory and its practice that disease is cured
(tuto, cito, et jucunde) by remedies which produce on a
healthy person effects similar to the symptoms of the
complaint under which the patient suffers, the remedies
being usually administered in minute doses. This system
was founded by Dr. Samuel Hahnemann, and is opposed
to allopathy, or heteropathy.

allopathy \al-lo-pa-thy\, n. [Gr. other + suffering, to suf-
fer: cf. G. allopathie, F. allopathie. See Pathos.] That sys-
tem of medical practice which aims to combat disease by
the use of remedies which produce effects different from
those produced by the special disease treated; a term in-
vented by Dr. Samuel Hahnemann to designate the ordi-
nary practice, as opposed to homeopathy.

A brief note on the history of this fascinating profes-
sion: Herbalism has thrived in all cultures of the world
and in all historical periods, even, until the very recent
past, in the industrialized West. The rich and colorful

----- PAGE 20 -----
12. @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

history of herbalism is the history of humanity itself. As a
constant and vital thread in human life, it is alive and well.
As a branch of medicine, it has occasionally found itself
on the wrong side of the establishment, but this ebb and
flow of acceptance is just an artifact of changing fashions
and opinions. No attempt will be made to explore the fas-
cinating history of herbalism here, as others have done it
extremely well. The interested reader should consult the
excellent Green Pharmacy, by Barbara Griggs, the best and
most comprehensive history of Western herbalism yet
written.

QUESTIONING AUTHORITY
IN HERBALISM

Herbalism is an aspect of human culture that takes many
forms. While this rich diversity is a gift deserving of cel-
ebration, it can also be a cause of much misunderstanding.
There appears to be an inherent antagonism between
those who see herbalism as an expression of a green flow-
ering in human consciousness and those who view it as a
vehicle for the pharmacology of secondary plant prod-
ucts. Differing worldviews obviously lead to divergent
goals, assumptions, and visions, but, more important, un-
less there is a recognition and acknowledgment of the dif-
ferences among frames of reference, meaningful dialogue
becomes problematic.

For example, consider table 1.1, taken from the
November 15, 1998, edition of the American Medical
Association (AMA) journal Family Practice News, which is
sent regularly to general practitioners. In the journal’s
Clinical Rounds section, this table was presented under
the headline “Herbal Products Being Evaluated Under an
IND Investigation.” (IND stands for Investigational New
Drug Application, a request for authorization from the
Food and Drug Administration to administer an investi-
gational drug or biological product to humans.)

If the AMA considers sharks (an animal), zinc (a
metal), and arginine (an amino acid) to be herbs, there is
a profound educational discrepancy at work here.

It is time for herbalists to lose what might be de-
scribed as our ghetto mentality, a sense of inferiority de-
veloped through years of cultural disdain for and active
suppression of our therapeutic modality. However, this
will also entail abandoning our negative, knee-jerk reac-
tion to the “system,” which often takes the reprehensible
form of an arrogant condemnation of medical doctors and
a delusion of standing on higher moral ground. On the
other hand, those working within the established scien-
tific, medical, and legislative communities must acknowl-

Table 1.1. Herbal Products Being Evaluated Under an
IND Application [November 1998]

HERB INDICATIONS
Antineoplastons Cancer
Arginine Cancer

Chinese herbal HIV-associated chronic synovitis
Plantar warts

Postmenopausal hot flashes
Ginkgo biloba Cognitive impairment
Green tea extract Cancer
Melatonin Chronobiology, reproduction
Ozone therapy Transfusion-related diseases

Saw palmetto Benign prostatic hypertrophy

Shark cartilage Cancer

St. John’s wort Depression

Vitamin D Cancer

Zinc Head and neck cancer

edge the need to apply scientific objectivity in assessing
the existing evidence about herbs. If phytotherapy is illu-
minated with the light of critical evaluation, much of
value will be found.

WHERE IS THE EVIDENCE?

Today, practitioners and consumers alike are being bom-
barded by claims and counterclaims, information and
misinformation about herbs. The confusion is com-
pounded by different, often hidden, agendas. Explanations
for the actions of herbs range from mechanistic science to
channeled guidance, and creative advertising copy further
obscures the facts behind the rhetoric. Where is the road
map when we need it?

The only relevant question is whether any new ther-
apy actually works. What outcome will the patient ob-
serve? Is there evidence of any kind that real people will
experience real improvement? My intention here is not to
imply that herbs don’t work or to deny traditional experi-
ence. Rather, we must attempt to assess the validity of
claims, especially new claims emanating from marketers,
in order to facilitate the healing work that is central to
herbalism. It is time to apply some critical herbal think-

----- PAGE 21 -----
ing to the process of questioning authority—bearing in
mind that questioning is not the same thing as rejecting.

Among those who question almost anything they
hear from medical doctors, the pharmaceutical industry,
or the FDA, some appear willing to unquestioningly em-
brace any new idea or product that magazines advertise.
The existence of this kind of gullibility is lamentable.
Critical thinking and some degree of discrimination are
needed to keep herbalism from drowning in the sea of
misrepresentation, spurious theorizing, and fraudulent
claims that characterize today’s herbal marketplace.
Natural medicine is not simply anything that does not re-

quire a prescription.

Particularly worrisome is the tendency among some
practitioners to embrace marketing trends and fashion-
able theories by rushing to try new protocols. I suggest
this is tantamount to experimenting with patients by
using them to perform field trials of new, unproven, and
nontraditional methods.

Let me make clear that in the material that follows,
I am not attempting to make judgments about right or
wrong or to promote my personal belief system. I am
simply encouraging phytotherapists to inquire about
the evidence behind new therapies and protocols, so
that we can make informed decisions based on some-
thing more substantial than marketing claims. One
must always bear in mind the basic principles of phar-
macology when considering research relevant to plants.
The complex interactions among the numerous con-

stituents in a medicinal herb must be taken seriously on
pharmacokinetic grounds.

Australian phytotherapist Kerry Bone, FNIMH, has
suggested some important guidelines.

Phytotherapists must avoid pseudoscience. If we intend to
incorporate scientific knowledge into our therapies, let it
be good science. Be on your guard for:

* Hypotheses presented as undisputed facts

* Hypotheses which can neither be proved nor dis-
proved, that is, circular arguments

* Conclusions based on insufficient evidence

* Extrapolating from a narrow context of results, e.g.,
from in vitro data to the clinic, without consideration
of factors such as dose, metabolism, absorption and
distribution

* Claiming scientific persecution (this does occur, of
course, but is usually an excuse)

* Developing theories which bear no relationship to
experimental findings!

Herps, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE @ 13

Proanthocyanidins and Pycnogenol
Pycnogenol is a legal trademark that refers to a patented
process for extracting flavonoids and other substances
from pine bark. The product consists of 50% to 65%
proanthocyanidins. Although the proanthocyanidins pre-
sent in Pycnogenol likely have health benefits, not much
published research exists to support their use in specific
conditions. The evidence cited in the marketing of
Pycnogenol is largely extrapolated from more general re-
search on flavonoids and proanthocyanidins.

Is this appropriate? One can expect a wide range of
biological effects from the more than 4,000 individual
flavonoids and 250 proanthocyanidins that have been
identified. The plethora of literature on Pycnogenol cites
a number of medical studies that used this specific source
of proanthocyanidins. However, most of the claims made
for the product itself are extrapolations from research on
the general benefits of proanthocyanidins and flavonoids.
To some extent, the rationale for such extrapolation is
sound, as flavonoids do function as antioxidants.
However, individual flavonoids often display striking dif-
ferences in activity.

For example, pine bark has been called a “super an-
tioxidant” 50 times more powerful than vitamin E, The
basis for this claim is a study that compared the antioxi-
dant properties of various proanthocyanidins. However,
these did not come from pine bark, but from green tea
leaves and persimmons.’ While the marketers claim that
pine bark contains a unique mix of proanthocyanidins, so
do green tea and persimmons. Of the six proanthocyani-
dins analyzed in the study, only one was actually 50 times
more effective than vitamin E, and only in quenching one
type of free radical. Furthermore, proanthocyanidins are
water-soluble and vitamin E is oil-soluble, which invali-
dates the comparison from another angle. The body
needs both water- and fat-soluble antioxidants for effective
antioxidant protection. Also, a diverse intake of antioxi-
dants is far better than intake of only one or two isolated
antioxidants.

An overemphasis on proanthocyanidins increases the
risk that other flavonoids and polyphenols will be under-
emphasized. As discussed in chapters 7 and 9, the
isoflavones genistein and daidzein appear to reduce the
risk of prostate and breast cancers. Ellag:c acid, related
more closely to gallates than to proanthocyanidins, is also
a potent antioxidant and cancer inhibitor. The citrus
flavonoids, hesperidin, quercetin, rutin, and tangeretin,
are abundant and effective. Consider some recent re-
search findings:

----- PAGE 22 -----
14 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

© Hesperidin raises blood levels of high-density lipo-
protein (HDL) and lowers levels of low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) and triglycerides. It also possesses
significant anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties.*

© Quercetin reduces inflammation associated with aller-
gies, can inhibit the growth of head and neck cancers,
and inhibits the activity of reverse transcriptase.*©”

* Tangeretin induces apoptosis (programmed cell death)
in leukemia cells, but does not harm normal cells.®

In one Pycnogenol study, described as an investiga-
tion of the effects of the product on human immuno-
deficiency virus (HIV), mice were infected with a retro-
virus known to cause leukemia.’ Pycnogenol improved
immune function in mice with depressed immune func-
tion. Pycnogenol also increased the activity of natural
killer cells, which attack both cancer cells and virus-
infected cells.

However, in this study, the researchers did not use
HIV, but a mouse retrovirus identified as LP-BMS. A study
involving mice and a leukemia virus cannot be accepted as
a model for an HIV study. The commonly accepted ani-
mal subject for HIV experiments is the monkey, and the
commonly accepted viral agent is simian immunodefi-
ciency virus. The antioxidant activity of Pycnogenol and
other types of proanthocyanidins may well have some
value in the treatment of AIDS. However, the insights
garnered from research to date are not specific to
Pycnogenol, but rather demonstrate that free radicals fuel
replication of HIV and antioxidants slow it.!°

Horsetail and Silica

Horsetail (Equisetum arvense) has been used to maintain
the health and vitality of skin, nails, and hair for many
generations in a number of world herbal traditions. The
explanation often given for the effectiveness of this appli-
cation is that the plant contains silica.

This raises a number of questions that I have seen ad-
dressed in very little objective material. There are two
primary issues: bioavailabilty of silica and evidence for a
role played by silicon in the body, I emphasize evidence
here, rather than opinion or theory. I have found numer-
ous statements about a role in joint capsule physiology,
but no references directing me to research to back up this
claim. A review of the MedLine database and the standard
reference books on human physiology produced no liter-
ature identifying a role for silicon in human metabolism.

Even if there is a role for silicon, where is the evi-
dence that horsetail is a source? Silica itself is silicon diox-
ide, one form of which is quartz. Quartz, for all intents

and purposes, is insoluble in water or alcohol—after all, if
it were soluble in water, there would be no sand on the
beaches. Thus, it is appropriate to ask whether there is
any silica in horsetail tea or extract. A further twist in the
convolution of confusion is the way in which horsetail
formulations are sometimes sold as “vegetable silica,” im-
plying that the need for silica is an established fact and
that the traditional use of horsetail is as a source of silica.
Again [ ask, Where is the evidence?

This all becomes rather surreal with the invocation of
a singular process termed “biotransmutation,” whereby
the silicon is supposedly transmuted into calcium in the
body. We are moving into the realm of alchemy here, but
I would have no problem with this if some evidence ex-
isted to support this claim. It strikes me as rather conve-
nient that silicon is the only substance for which I have
ever seen this aspect of human physiology invoked. If our
bodies can biotransform one element into another, why
limit the application of this process to silicon? Why, then,
are there are deficiency problems at all?

Let me reiterate here that I am questioning not the
efficacy of the herb but the explanation of mechanism
given to explain its actions. I have come across a purely
circular argument that comes to the conclusion that be-
cause horsetail works, it must be because it contains silica.

This is based on a simple lack of knowledge of phyto-
chemistry, as a much simpler hypothesis would invoke
flavonoid effects. Such attachment to hypotheses leads to
a dogmatic adherence to belief systems that is detrimen-
tal for all involved.

Why get enmeshed in bizarre intellectual convolu-
tions to attempt justifications for an outdated hypothesis?
It might be worth invoking Occam’s razor here. The

axiom states that

. entities should not be multiplied needlessly, giving
precedence to simplicity, so that of two competing theo-
ries, the simplest explanation is to be preferred.

This is interpreted to mean that the simplest of two
or more theories is preferable, and that any explanation
should first be attempted in terms of what is already
known. In other words, after all possibilities have been
considered, in all likelihood the correct answer to a prob-
\em is the simplest explanation.

Essiac, Safety, and Oxalic Acid

An herbal combination called Essiac has become well
known in the United States. It has gained a reputation as
a risk-free herbal approach to the treatment of cancer and
other chronic conditions. My intention here is not to dis-

----- PAGE 23 -----
parage its potential contribution to the treatment of can-
cer, but to highlight some of the challenges faced in mod-
ern herbal therapeutics by examining a largely overlooked
safety consideration.

There is an important contraindication to the use of
Essiac that is rarely mentioned, even by well-trained
herbalists who should be able to see it. Essiac consists of
a combination of four herbs, burdock root (Arctium
lappa), slippery elm bark (Usmus rubra), sheep sorrel
(Rumex acetosella), and tarkey rhubarb (Rheuz palmatum).
One of these components, sheep sorrel, is a rich source of
oxalic acid. Intake of oxalic acid or its salts increases the
risk of developing kidney stones. In all of the propa-
ganda surrounding Essiac, ] have seen no mention of
this problem.

HERBS AND PHYTOTHERAPY

A distinction must be made between two separate but
overlapping issues: that herbs are relevant medicinal sub-
stances and that phytotherapy is a valid therapeutic
modality whose practitioners have unique skills and clin-
ical experience. The clinical issues faced by a practitioner
are not the same as the quality-control problems that con-
front product manufacturers and marketers. Different
concerns pertinent to each of these two issues will lead to
different but equally relevant insights.

The quality of attention now being given to medici-
nal plants by science and government must be expanded
to include an assessment of the insights and protocols of
the phytotherapist. A personal example may help clarify
this point. At the height of the media frenzy over the “dis-
covery” that St. John’s wort can help alleviate mild de-
pression, I was asked to present a paper on the topic of
“Herbal Alternatives to Prozac.” This quest to identify an
herbal alternative to Prozac is a perfect example of how
the real gifts of herbalism can be deflected by underlying
assumptions. By phrasing the topic in this way, we are
forced to responé to the issue in terms of the efficacy and
pharmacological mechanism of Prozac, rather than by
highlighting the potential contribution of phytotherapy
to the treatment of depression.

It would, in fact, be more appropriate to consider
holistic alternatives to the current vogue for psychophar-
maceutical solutions. The fact that Prozac (fluoxetine) is
an effective serotonin reuptake inhibitor has led to its use
as a pharmacological antidepressant, but its efficacy begs
the fundamental question about the cause of depression.

No herbal serotonin reuptake inhibitors of any con-
sequence have been identified, leading me to conclude

Herss, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE .@ 15

that there are no herbal alternatives to Prozac. However,
this does not mean there are no herba{ approaches to
treating depression. My point here is that a competent
herbal practitioner, trained to consider approaches to
maintaining wellness in addition to treating specific
pathologies, will be able to help an individual with de-
pression in a variety of ways. Articulating herbal ap-
proaches to depression in terms of alternatives to specific
drugs allows the drug companies to set the herbal agenda.

HERBAL IMPERIALISM

Attempts to bridge and integrate the various herbal tradi-
tions of the world can be problematic, and always require
a high level of critical thinking. Here are a couple of ex-
amples of what might be termed intellectual imperialism,
an assumption in the Western mind-set that we can spon-
taneously understand the concepts and visions of another
culture.

There is a wealth of knowledge and experience in the
traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) community, but not
all herbalists who use these insights have the necessary
training in the principles of TCM. For example, consider
the widely held idea in North American herbalism that,
according to TCM, dang gui (Angelica sinensis) is a
woman’s herb and ginseng (Panax ginseng) is a man’s herb.
This is nonsense! The assumption is a gross simplification
of the TCM concept that dang gui is one of the most
yielding yin tonics and ginseng is the strongest yang
tonic. Yin and yang do not translate simply as “woman
and man.”

In a similar vein, Western herbalists may try to inter-
pret the TCM concept of organs in terms of their under-
standing of anatomical organs, or according to the
Western biomedical model. However, the TCM concept
of organs is energetic and an expression of the TCM
five-element theory. To take a diagnosis of “insufficient
liver chi” to mean that dandelion root (Taraxacum offici-
nale) and milk thistle (Silybum marianum) are indicated
misses the point entirely.

HERBAL MARKETPLACE VERSUS
HERBAL MEDICINE

Another discomforting modern dynamic is that the herbal
tradition suddenly finds itself in an environment appar-
ently created and maintained for the benefit of the “mar-
ketplace.” The importance of critical thinking in the eval-
uation of information about herbs—particularly
information generated by marketers—has never been

----- PAGE 24 -----
16 <+ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

greater. How else can practitioners and consumers make
decisions about protocol development or even which
products to buy?

I would argue that market forces and healing are mu-
tually exclusive. The rapidly growing industry addressing
the material needs of complementary medicine is a man-
ifestation of market forces—it is not a healing modality or
a “holistic” anything. It is merely an expression of the
same rapacious economic forces that treat nature as a re-
source to control and profit from, and will only serve to
obliterate cultural, biological, and herbal diversity.

Embracing economics as the driving force in herbal-
ism leads directly to standardization, not only in product
development, but also in the development of treatment
protocols. Regulators and manufacturers who want to
centralize control and standardize methods ignore indi-
vidual uniqueness, except as a complicating factor.
Practitioner knowledge and wisdom is rarely acknowl-
edged, so regulations, product lines, and research are
predicated on abstract theories and piecemeal informa-
tion. Thus, reductionist, product-based medicine relies
on controlling the patient’s healing process. Surely holis-
tic medicine would reject such an approach as a matter of
principle.

SAFETY, RISK, AND TOXICITY.

Safety and all it entails are major concerns for anyone in-
volved in health care. Any meaningful discussion of safety,
risk, and toxicity must take into account pharmacology,
epidemiology, and statistics, as well as perceptual issues.
Chapter 10 addresses these issues in terms of the herbs
themselves, but here we will focus on the need for critical
thinking in assessing the safety of herbs.

Statements made by “experts” are often unquestion-
ingly accepted as insightful, considered opinion. But who
are the experts in these situations? As an example, con-
sider hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata), an invaluable herb
discussed in chapter 14 of this book. The German
Commission E Monograph cites no warnings, contraindi-
cations, side effects, or drug interactions for hawthorn.!!
Varro ‘Tyler, Ph.D., Professor Emeritus of Pharmacog-
nosy at Purdue University, provides an excellent review of
the published studies on hawthorn in his best-selling
book, The Honest Herbal. However, at the end of his re-
view, he comes to a somewhat tangential conclusion.

Its toxicity is low as well, becoming evident only in large
doses. Until additional research has been carried out,
prospective users of hawthorn for heart and circulation

problems should consider all the consequences. Users of
self-selected medicines almost always do so as a result of
self-diagnosis. This is a very dangerous practice when
such vital systems of the human body as the heart and
blood vessels are involved. For this reason, self-treatment
with hawthorn is neither advocated nor condoned."

Surely this conclusion concerns self-medication, not
any risk posed by hawthorn.

As another example, Dr. Ryan Huxtable, an expert on
the pharmacology of plant toxins, makes a very illuminat-
ing statement in a paper on neurotoxins in herbs.

The modern flora has evolved in the face of continual as-
sault from mammals, which are ultimately dependent on
the plant kingdom."

This comment highlights one of the fundamental
differences among the conceptual frameworks in which
these discussions take place. Some see the natural world
as a Darwinian battleground where natural selection en-
forces the concept of survival of the fittest. This, in turn,
leads to an emphasis on defense as the driving force be-
hind the diversity of secondary metabolites, as in “.
plants and those using them coexist in an uneasy balance
of chemical power.” '* This is the antithesis of the vital-
ist worldview held by most herbalists and naturopaths,
who would rather see the relationship between “plants
and those using them” characterized as coevolutionary
mutualism.

THE HEALING POWER OF NATURE

In light of the issues just discussed, let us look at some of
the principles of naturopathic medicine. The healing
power of nature is the inherent self-organizing and healing
process, present in all living systems, that establishes,
maintains, and restores health. The naturopathic physi-
cian’s role is to facilitate and augment this process by
identifying and removing obstacles to health and recovery
and by supporting the creation of a healthy internal and
external environment.

Identify and Treat the Causes

Illness does not occur without cause.

Underlying causes of illness and disease must be identi-
fied and removed before complete recovery can occur.
Symptoms may be caused by disease, but can also serve as
expressions of the body’s attempt to defend itself, to adapt
and recover, or to heal itself. The naturopathic physician

----- PAGE 25 -----
seeks to treat the causes of disease, rather than merely to
eliminate or suppress symptoms.

Treat the Whole Person

Health and disease result from a complex of physical,
mental, emotional, genetic, environmental, social, and

other factors.

Naturopathic medicine recognizes that the harmonious
functioning of all aspects of the individual is essential to
health.

The multifactorial nature of health and disease requires a
personalized and comprehensive approach to diagnosis
and treatment.

Such principles must be applied in practice and used
as a touchstone for interpreting the plethora of data and
theories we wade through. As powerful and enticing as
pharmacological reductionism is, it might also be seen as
“immunosuppressive” to the vitalist perspective!

A PLEA FOR HERBAL TRADITIONS

The perspectives of holism and wellness now entering the
practice of medicine must be taken seriously, not simply
used as marketing ploys. One of the implications of this
idea is that the holistic treatment of illness must encom-
pass a positive vision of wellness, at the same time ac-
knowledging that wellness is a process, not an endpoint.
A constellation of components contribute to wellness:

Social Physiological/metabolic
Work Genetic

Cultural Intellectual
Environmental Emotional

Behavioral Spiritual

Nutritional

As discussed earlier, each of these components has an
impact on the whole individual, and holistic medicine en-
deavors to address each within a therapeutic ecology. This
leads to some immediate implications for the herbalist.
Holism is a context, not a belief system or a specific phys-
ical form, and as such, herbal products are not and cannot
be holistic in their own right.

The mere use of herbal medicines does not make a
treatment holistic. In fact, using an herbal tincture as a
natural alternative to a prescription medication relegates
the herb to the status of an organic drug delivery system!
What makes herbs part of holistic treatment is the con-
text within which the herbs are prescribed and used.

HeErss, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE @ 17

There is at least one clear conclusion that can be
drawn from the concept that holistic medicine treats the
whole person and not the disease. The use of commercial
formulas cannot be holistic, as these formulations do not
recognize the uniqueness of the individuals who will be
taking them. A formula may well be effective in address-
ing symptoms or even facilitating a cure, but that is not
the issue. This point is further reinforced by the belief
that holistic medicine doesn’t merely treat symptoms, but
addresses the underlying cause of disease. However, when
herbs are used as an adjunct to another therapeutic
modality, formulas may be appropriately used as support-
ive agents to treatment protocols that have been devel-
oped from a holistic perspective.

This all leads me to some specific conclusions about
the challenging interface that exists between traditional
herbalism and the plethora of research findings now avail-
able. There is inherent value in traditional herbalism, and
we must not abandon traditional protocols and remedies
because of a lack of modern research. However, as
herbalists, we must familiarize ourselves with the lan-
guage and processes of research so that we can establish
a meaningfully dialogue with the scientific community.
This dialogue must take the form of a two-way exchange,
encompassing not only what we have to share, but also
what we need to learn.

SCIENCE AND PHYTOTHERAPY

Any conceptual framework for phytotherapy must be
broad enough to embrace the whole spectrum of human
knowledge. This is simply an acknowledgment of the fact
that any holistic approach to human health care must be
as expansive as humanity. itself. However, for a moment,
let us limit our perspective to examine some of the ways
in which science can add to the practitioner’s wnderstand-
ing of how herbs work.

Almost all branches of the biological sciences are rel-
evant to the phytotherapist, as is much of chemistry, and
the application of science to herbs is as relevant as it is to
any other Western healing modality.

The Scientific Method

Science is any system of knowledge concerned with the
physical world and its phenomena that entails unbiased ob-
servation and systematic experimentation. I general, a sci-
ence involves a pursuit of knowledge about general truths or
the operation of fundamental laws. The scientific method,
then, is part of the endeavor to construct an accurate,
reliable, consistent, and nonarbitrary representation of

----- PAGE 26 -----
18 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

the world. It attempts to minimize the influence of the
bias or prejudice of the experimenter when a hypothesis
or theory is tested.

Hypotheses and Theories

In science, the words hypothesis and theory relate to the
stage of acceptance or knowledge about physical phe-
nomena. A hypothesis is an idea to work from. It forms
the basis of a preliminary explanation or line of reasoning,
and is a limited statement about cause and effect in spe-
cific situations. The word theory refers to an idea that is
widely accepted as a correct explanation. When a hypoth-
esis explains many observations and leads to predictions
that are continually supported by experiments, it may
then be called a scientific theory.

A scientific theory represents a hypothesis (or a
group of related hypotheses) that has been confirmed
through repeated experiments. The steps of the scientific
method may be described as follows.

Observation

Defining the problem or question

Formulating a hypothesis

Testing the hypothesis with a controlled experiment
Observing and recording results

SS Se

Forming conclusions by confirming or modifying
the hypothesis
7, Reporting results

Experimental tests may lead either to the confirma-
tion or the ruling out of the hypothesis. The scientific
method requires that a hypothesis be ruled out or modi-
fied if its predictions are clearly and repeatedly incompat-
ible with the results of experimental tests. Because exper-
imentation is a necessary part of the scientific method, a
theory must be testable, If a theory cannot be tested be-
cause, for example, it has no observable ramifications, it
does not qualify as a scientific theory.

The Language of Research

In the language of research, otherwise familiar words
may take on entirely different and very specific mean-
ings. For example, the use of the words validity and reli-
ability in science can cause confusion if misunderstood.
In everyday language, validity implies legitimacy and re-
liability suggests stability and dependability. In the lan-
guage of research, these terms have a precise meaning. A
study has validity if it measures what it claims to mea-
sure. The reliability of a study is a reflection of the like-
lihood that subsequent experiments will yield the same
results.

A research sample is a small group of people (or ani-
mals, or objects) who are the subject of observation dur-
ing the process of research. Thus, each individual in the
study is called a research subject. The term sample means
exactly what it seems to mean: It is a group taken as a
sample of some larger group. This larger group is called
the research population. Researchers cannot study whole
populations, only samples. To this end, they target a pop-
ulation to study, but select a smaller sample from this tar-
get population to serve as the actual research subjects.

Sampling is the process of selecting a research sam-
ple. The results of a study cannot be generalized beyond
the boundaries of the sample. If women are studied, the
results of the research apply only to women. If men 40 to
60 years of age are studied, the results apply only to men
40 to 60 years of age. For this reason, it is important to
know the makeup of research samples in order to inter-
pret claims based on studies.

In scientific research, a variable is a condition in the
experiment that changes, or varies, while other conditions
remain constant. A dependent variable is usually the focus
in a research study that investigates how variables change
in response to one other.

The herbalist may come across a number of different
types of research studies,

Controlled study. The responses of one group (the exper-
imental group) are compared with a second, untreated
group (the control group).

Placebo-controlled study. Here, an experimental treat-
ment is compared with a placebo, an inert substance
that appears to be identical to the treatment. This rep-
resents an attempt to distinguish between the ‘piacebo
effect—the tendency of people to experience symp-
tomatic improvement even when nothing but a sugar
pill is taken—and the actual effects of treatment. If a
treatment works, the effects it produces should be
more pronounced than those seen in subjects receiving
a placebo.

Blinded studies. If subjects are “blind” to the nature of a
study and do not know whether or not they are receiv-
ing the active medication, the outcome is less likely to
be influenced by their expectations. This is a way to
work around research bias.

Double-blind studies. This means that neither patients
nor researchers know which treatment patients are re-
ceiving. This type of study also helps researchers avoid
special treatment of subjects based on whether they are
receiving the active or the placebo substance, as the re-
searchers do not know which subjects are which, Thus,

----- PAGE 27 -----
there is less chance that the results of these studies will
be influenced in an undesirable manner.

Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-
center trial. This is a clinical study that takes into ac-
count a number of potential bias factors. Randomized
means that the patients are randomly assigned to receive
either the study drug or a placebo. Because the study is
double blind, neither subjects nor researchers know who
is receiving what treatment. Multicenter means the study
was conducted at several different research centers.

PUBLISHED PHYTOTHERAPEUTIC
RESEARCH

The usual avenue for communicating experimental re-
sults is through publication in a peer-reviewed journal.
Peer-reviewed journals publish studies only after a thor-
ough review of those studies by a group of the re-
searcher’s peers, fellow researchers who are able to eval-
uate the merits of the research. However, publication
does not guarantee the quality of a study, and a published
study is not necessarily more reliable or valid than an un-
published one.

Herss, HOuIsM, AND SCIENCE @ 19

A number of different kinds of articles may be found
in peer-reviewed journals. Journal articles are based on a
single investigation and published as a contribution to the
progress of science. Review articles and meta-analyses are
based upon analysis of existing literature on a given topic
and evaluate the research performed to date.

PHARMACOGNOSY AND WAYS TO
ASSESS HERB QUALITY

A number of options are available for the assessment of
herb quality. These range from the plethora of scientific
techniques used in pharmacognosy to the traditional skills
employed by the herbalist.

The term pharmacognosy is derived from two Greek
words, pharmakon (drug) and gnosis (knowledge). The
scope of this field encompasses the study of the physical,
chemical, biochemical, and biological properties of drugs,
drug substances, and potential drug substances of natural
origin, as well as the search for new drugs from natural
sources. At one time, it was necessary for sharmacists to
have extensive knowledge in this area, because many
medicinal products were obtained from plants. However,

abstracts select highlights only.

existing literature on the topic.

used to derive results.

the data.

the paper.

articles is invaluable.

Basic Structure of a Peer-Reviewed Journal Article

Summary or abstract: This includes a concise statement of the goal or hypothesis of the
study, explains how the endeavor was undertaken, highlights results of the study, and pro-
vides a concluding thought that puts it all into perspective. Because they must be concise,

Introduction: The introduction provides background information on the topic as well as the
rationale for undertaking the study. The introduction may also offer an extended review of

Methodology: This section details study design and the data-collection techniques that the
researchers employed, and also describes in detail the analytical and evaluative procedures

Results: This is where findings are presented, along with some analysis and interpretation of

Discussion, comments, or conclusion: Here, the study authors provide a further analysis of
the results, and may compare and contrast their results with the conclusions of other stud-
ies in order to place their results in perspective. This is usually the most speculative part of

References: The list of references gives an indication of how far the authors went in review-
ing published research. An extensive, well-done bibliography that provides access to other

----- PAGE 28 -----
20 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

as the culturally dominant medical modality in the United
States moved away from natural products, most pharmacy
schools dropped their courses in pharmacognosy.

Methods Currently Utilized to Evaluate
Herbs and Extracts

A number of approaches to the evaluation of herb quality
are available, ranging from the use of human senses to the
application of advanced technology.

Organoleptic

Organoleptic analysis represents the simplest and the
most human form of evaluation. Organoleptic means “im-
pression of the organs.” Organoleptic analysis of plant
material involves the use of the senses, including sight,
smell, taste, touch, and occasionally even hearing, to
identify the plant and evaluate its quality. The appearance
of a plant or extract can be so specific that it practically
identifies itself, but identification may be difficult in other
cases—for example, if the herb is in powdered form. If vi-
sual analysis is not enough, perhaps the plant or extract
has a characteristic odor or taste that can assist in identi-
fication or help the herbalist assess freshness or quality.

Microscopic

Microscopic evaluation is valuable in the initial identifica-
tion of herbs. It is also an indispensable technique for
identifying the plant by characteristic tissue features, rec-
ognizing small fragments of crude or powdered herbs, or
detecting adulterants or contaminants, such as insects, an-
imal feces, mold, and fungi. Every plant possesses a char-
acteristic tissue structure, which can be demonstrated
through the study of tissue arrangement, cell walls, and
configuration when samples are properly mounted in
stains, reagents, and media.

Physical

In crude plant evaluation, physical methods are often
used to determine solubility, specific gravity, melting
point, water content, degree of fiber elasticity, and other
physical characteristics.

Chemical

Various chemical analysis methods are used to determine
percentages of active principles, alkaloids, flavonoids, en-
zymes, vitamins, essential oils, fats, carbohydrates, pro-
tein, ash, acid-insoluble ash, or crude fiber present. The
final analytical process relies on more precise assays for
determining quality. Sophisticated techniques, such as gas
chromatography (GC), thin layer chromatography (TLC),

and high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), are
often used to separate out molecules to provide a chemical
“fingerprint” or profile of the constituents contained in
the plant or extract. These techniques are useful in identi-
fying herbs, but also invaluable in standardizing extracts to
chosen active ingredients or marker compounds.

Biological

The plant or extract may be evaluated by various biolog-
ical methods, mostly animal tests, to assess pharmaco-
logical activity, potency, and toxicity.

Official Standards

Official standards usually serve as the reference by which
the authenticity and quality of an herb is established.
These standards can be found in pharmacopoeias and
other official publications. Examples include The United
States Pharmacopoeia (USP), The National Formulary (NF),
The European Pharmacopoeia (EP), The British Pharma-
copoeia (BP), and The British Pharmacopoeial Codex (BPC).
The USP, which is published every five years by the
U.S. Pharmacopoeial Convention, describes and defines
approved therapeutic agents and sets standards for purity
and assays. Agents are included in the USP on the basis of
their therapeutic value. The NF, formerly published by
the American Pharmaceutical Association, contained
standards of purity and methods of assay for some drugs,
as well as formulae and methods of manufacture for a va-
riety of pharmaceutical preparations. Drugs were in-
cluded in the NF on the basis of demand as well as ther-
apeutic value. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration
recognizes the NF and the USP as official standards, and
the two are now published as a single volume.
The pharmacognosy literature contains precise de-
scriptions of dried plant material that follow an all-purpose
scheme for describing plant parts. The particulars of
these descriptions sometimes differ from purely biologi-
cal descriptions, because in pharmacognosy, one is fre-
quently concerned with dried structures that may have
been subjected to manipulation during preparation for
the market. In addition, certain points important in
pharmacognosy are of little value in descriptions of sys-
tematic biology.

SCREENING PROGRAMS

The pharmaceutical industry and academic institutions
both conduct screening programs to identify plants that
might be worthy of further study. The interdisciplinary
approach taken to obtain an exploitable pure plant con-

----- PAGE 29 -----
Heres, HOvisM, AND SCIENCE @ 21

Official Standards in Practice

Official standards provide qualitative and quantitative measures that must be met in order for
the quality of a medicinal plant or extract to be considered good enough for use.

Sampling. Official standards often specify the best technique for taking a representative sam-
ple of an herb from a large consignment.

Preliminary examination. This involves the use of human senses to assess characteristics such
as general appearance, presence of appropriate plant parts, odor, and taste.

Foreign matter. Because the natural world is not clean and tidy (thankfully!), official standards
state what percentage of foreign matter is allowed in each sample. For example, the hairy
leaves of mullein are allowed to contain more foreign matter than the smooth, shiny leaves of
bearberry.

Microbial contamination. For some herbs, official standards specify the allowable content of
microbes, such as Escherichia coli.

Toxic residues. Residues commonly found in herbs include pesticides and fumigants. In our all-
too-polluted world, it is next to impossible to obtain completely toxin-free herb or food ma-
terials, so standards have been set for “acceptable” levels of such residues.

Moisture content. Measuring the water content of dried herbs gives some indication of the
likelihood of spoilage. This consideration also has economic importance, as it affects the
weight of herbs in commerce. A whole array of methods have been developed to assess mois-
ture content. The most often cited is loss on drying, which measures the amount of weight lost
through water evaporation. More precise techniques involve the separation and measurement
of moisture, as well as chemical, spectroscopic, and electronic methods for measuring mois-
ture content.

Ash values. This is given as a percentage representing the amount of inorganic ash that should
remain after a sample of dried herb is incinerated.

Volatile oil content. This standard states the minimum acceptable standard for the percentage
of volatile oit that should be present in a sample of a given dried herb.

Swelling index. This is the volume in milliliters occupied by 1 gram of herb after it has soaked
in water for four hours.

R, value. This is a measurement of the rate of flow that a compound has in specific chromato-
graphic analysis techniques.

Refractive index and optical rotation. These are measurements of the optical properties of
compounds and liquids.

Quantitative chemical tests. These are analytical methods for measuring specific compounds
or groups of compounds.

stituent involves botany, pharmacognosy, pharmacology, 3. Extraction with suitable solvents
chemistry, and toxicology, as illustrated in the steps out- 4, Preliminary separations
lined here. 5. Biological and pharmacological screening of crude

, . 1 itis 4 BN extracts
1. Selection, collection, botanical identification

: ' 6. Chromatographic separation of pure bioactive con-
2. Preparation of plant material Brap P P

stituents, guided by bioassay

----- PAGE 30 -----
22. @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

7. Structure determination
8. Analysis and pharmacological profiling of pure
compounds
9. Toxicological testing
10. Partial or total synthesis
11. Preparation of derivatives for the study of structure-
activity relationships

Selection of Plant Material

The basis upon which plants are selected for study is
often pivotal to the success of screening efforts. Random
collection is one possible method, but better results have
been achieved when selection is based on certain criteria.

¢ Plants used in traditional medicine are more likely to
yield pharmacologically active compounds.

¢ Chemotaxonomic insights are often valuable. For ex-
ample, if researchers are looking for xanthones, they
might best start by investigating families known to
contain this class of phenolics, such as Gentianaceae,
Polygalaceae, and Clusiaceae.

* Field observations are important. If a bush'or a tree
shows no signs of attack by pests or microorganisms,
there is a good chance that insecticidal or antimicro-
bial metabolites are present. Foaming in aqueous plant
extracts may indicate the presence of saponins.

Separation and Identification

To identify constituents, it is necessary to separate frac-
tions of the extract to find out where the biological activ-
ity lies. A range of chromatographic techniques are used
to facilitate this process.!5 Chromatography separates
chemicals by taking advantage of the fact that mixtures of
substances in a moving stream of gas or liquid travel at
different rates through a stationary substance. This sta-
tionary substance is usually a finely divided solid, a sheet
of filter material, or a thin film of a liquid on the surface
ofa solid. Very complex mixtures can be separated by this
method, making chromatography ideal for the separation
of chemicals found in herbs. It is impossible to achieve
complete separation with any single method, so a multi-
step process is often used.

Thin Layer Chromatography

In thin layer chromatography (TLC), an extract made
with an appropriate solvent is dropped onto a strip of fil-
ter paper. After drying, the paper is hung inside an air-
tight chamber with a liquid solvent at the bottom. The
bottom of the strip is in the solvent, and as the solvent
moves up the paper, the different constituents move at

different rates because of differences in their molecular
weight and shape. Compounds moving with the solvent
front have characteristic retention times (R; values) that
facilitate identification of compounds. If the constituents
separated on the paper are colorless, the paper is re-
moved, dried, and treated to make specific chemicals vis-
ible. The main application of TLC is in separating out
samples for further analysis.

Column Chromatography

Column chromatography can improve separation of indi-
vidual components. The technique uses a glass column
packed with a resin that serves as the stationary phase,
through which a solvent, or the mobile phase, passes.
Solutes in the solvent move through the column at differ-
ent rates, thus separating the compounds. If the station-
ary phase is a solid, the system is called adsorption chro-
matography, and if the stationary phase is a liquid, the
system is called partition chromatography.

High-Performance Liquid Chromatography
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) oper-
ates on a principle similar to that of column chromatog-
raphy, but has advantages of high speed, resolution, sen-
sitivity, and ease of sample recovery. An HPLC detector
is used to monitor the concentration of solutes in the mo-
bile phase after separation. Detectors may measure refrac-
tive index, dielectric constant, molecular and atomic spec-
troscopy, electrochemistry, and electrolytic conductivity.

Gas Chromatography

Gas chromatography (GC) is a powerful analytical tool
for separating and identifying constituents in relatively
pure mixtures. The herbal extract is vaporized by heating
and then moved through the column in a stream of gas—
for example, helium, hydrogen, nitrogen, or argon. The
vapors move at different rates, separating into clear zones
as they move through the column and emerging via some
detector.

Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry

Final identification of a constituent usually depends upon
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). GC-
MS is a selective and sensitive method of analyzing com-
pounds. However, the compounds to be analyzed must
first be thoroughly purified.

Mass spectrometry itself is a powerful analytical tool
that yields structural information about unknown
molecules. GC-MS instruments combine the ability to
separate chemical mixtures (the GC component) with a

----- PAGE 31 -----
very sensitive detector of the molecules’ mass spectrum
(the MS component), The mass spectrum obtained is
compared with those of thousands of compounds in a
database. The ultimate goal is accurate identification of
a compound,

Bioassays

The availability of suitable bioassays, or biological test
methods, is central to any scientific investigation of plants
with biological activities. The majority of pharmaceuti-
cals have a known chemical composition that can be as-
sayed via quantitative analyses. However, herbs cannot be
assayed satisfactorily in this way, and so are tested by bio-
logical methods, These bioassays help investigators deter-
mine potency by observing the reactions of living organ-
isms or tissues.

Investigators employ broad-based screening (screens
that cover a wide area of biological activity) to find out
if the plant has any pharmacological potential. Spe-
cialized screening utilizes one or two sufficiently accu-
rate bioassays to detect a particular property, such as
anti-inflammatory activity. In some cases, adequate in-
formation may be obtained through in vitro studies, but
additional tests may be undertaken in animals.

Primary Screening Bioassays

Brine Shrimp Lethality Test

The brine shrimp (Artemia salina) lethality bioassay is
sensitive to a broad spectrum of bioactivity, providing an
initial screen that can be backed up with more specific
bioassays.

Crown-Gall Tumor Bioassay

This test assesses inhibition of crown-gall tumor on
potato disks, and is fairly accurate in predicting im vivo
antileukemic activity in mice.

Starfish or Sea Urchin Assay

The eggs of the starfish, Asterina pectinifera, have perme-
able cell membranes, so exposure of fertilized eggs to
chemicals will lead to different outcomes. This assay can
help determine which substances should be investigated
as antineoplastic agents.

Bioassays for Antibiotic Activity

A range of simple tests have been developed to screen for
antibiotic activity. These will determine the strength or
activity of an herb or constituent in killing bacteria grown
in a laboratory.

Heras, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE «23

Plant Growth Regulator Activity

Tests for effects on the regulation of growth in plants can
provide insights into immunosuppressant and antifungal
activities of plants and extracts.

Specialized Screening Bioassays

Testing for Hepatoprotective Properties

Two approaches have been developed to screen for activity
relevant to the treatment of liver disease. In the first ap-
proach, investigators induce liver damage in experimental
animals and then estimate the beneficial effects of plant
extracts with liver function tests that measure factors such
as enzyme levels and hexobarbital sleeping times. The
other approach involves removing part of the liver by
biopsy and measuring the rate of regeneration after treat-
ment with a test substance. This test takes advantage of
the regenerative powers of the liver, as the liver has the
ability to recover completely even after surgical resection
of as much as 90% of the organ,

Because liver disease is often induced by drugs, tox-
ins, viral infections, or reactions to immunogenic agents,
appropriate test methods should mimic natural causes.

Chemical: Acetaminophen- or carbon tetrachloride-
induced damage

Immunological: Complement-mediated cytotoxicity in-
duced by immunization with specific antigens

Consider milk thistle (Silybum marianum) and its
complex of flavolignans known as silymar‘n. This herb is
used to treat many types of liver disease, including severe
toxicity related to ingestion of the death cap mushroom
(Amanita phalloides), which has a fatality rate higher than
50%. Treatment with silymarin (or its principal compo-
nent, silibinin) within 48 hours of mushroom ingestion
usually guarantees a satisfactory outcome.'® Milk thistle
and many other plants have demonstrated activity in
screening tests using mice with carbon tetrachloride-
induced hepatotoxicity.

Rapid Screening for Hepatoprotective Effects

For rapid screening, investigators employ an in vitro
method using cultured hepatocytes, a type of liver cell.
First, they isolate liver cells using collageriase, add a hep-
atotoxin, and culture the sample. They then assess liver
function by measuring transaminase activity in the hepa-
tocytes. After this initial screening, animals can be treated
or pretreated with plant extracts, and the results deter-
mined either by assessing liver function (for example, by
measuring enzyme levels) or by evaluating a parameter
that is affected by liver function.

----- PAGE 32 -----
24 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Hexobarbital Sleeping Time
Hexobarbital induces a consistent pattern of sleep in the
unfortunate experimental animals, so any change in sleep
time suggests a disturbance in metabolism of the sedative.
An increase in sleeping time implies a reduction in the
liver’s ability to metabolize hexobarbital. Carbon tetra-
chloride produces such a change, and is known to cause
dose-dependent acute hepatotoxicity. This hepatotoxicity
occurs because cytochrome P4s9 enzymes transform car-
bon tetrachloride into free radicals, inducing lipid perox-
idation and eventual death of the hepatocytes.
Regardless of the hepatoxin employed, this basic test
method may be applied to assess hepatoprotection.!”
When milk thistle is added, the increase in sleeping time
normally produced by carbon tetrachloride is reduced by
up to 60%, suggesting that the herb defends the liver
against the toxin.

Assessment of Liver Enzyme Levels

Blood levels of the enzymes aminotransferase, aspartate
aminotransferase (AST), and alanine aminotransferase
(ALT) are useful indicators of liver disease. AST is pre-
sent in the liver, heart, muscle, kidney, and brain, and cat-
alyzes the conversion of aspartate to oxaloacetate and glu-
tamate. Necrosis or membrane damage releases the
enzyme into circulation, so it can be measured without
the need to resort to taking liver samples. Increases in
AST are seen in any condition involving necrosis of hep-
atocytes, myocardial cells, or skeletal muscle cells. High
levels indicate liver damage, including that due to viral
hepatitis and toxicity, as well as cardiac infarction and
muscle injury.

ALT catalyzes the conversion of alanine to pyruvate
and glutamate and is released in a similar manner, but is
more specific to liver function. As with AST, increases in
serum levels of ALT are seen in conditions involving
necrosis of hepatocytes, myocardial cells, erythrocytes, or
skeletal muscle cells, High levels of ALT usually indicate
acute hepatitis or other liver damage.

THE U.S. NATIONAL CANCER
INSTITUTE

Since 1955, the U.S. National Cancer Institute (NCI) has
carried outa search for potential cancer drugs, with a goal
of screening all the flowering plants of the world to iden-
tify antitumor activity! So far, NCI has screened 176,000
extracts from 41,000 plant samples collected from 25
countries. The University of Illinois obtains samples from
Southeast Asia, the Missouri Botanical Garden collects in

Africa, and the New York Botanical Garden gathers
plants from Central and South America. Each center col-
lects 1,200 samples per year, and different plant parts
constitute discrete samples.

Collectors submit detailed documentation for each
sample, including taxonomic details, plant part, date, site
of collection, habitat, and, if possible, medicinal uses and
methods of preparation employed by indigenous peoples.
Researchers determine the structures of extracts that
show significant activity and analyze them for active
chemicals. Chemicals showing sufficient anticancer activ-
ity are advanced to preclinical development.

Currently used test systems are classified as either
cytotoxicity-based bioassays or mechanism-based bio-
assays. Cytotoxicity-based assays may indicate activity in
cancers that proliferate rapidly, such as leukemia, lym-
phoma, and a few rare tumors, but are inadequate indica-
tors of activity in slow-growing solid tumors of humans.
New in vitro screening strategies generally test 80 to 100
human cell lines of major tumors.'®

Mechanism-based assays are designed by analogy
with specific types of molecular responses mediated by
clinically effective antitumor agents. Bioassays have been
developed to recognize compounds that inhibit carcino-
genesis by preventing the formation of carcinogens,
blocking binding of the carcinogen to its target, or pre-
venting tumor development. For example, one assay for
blocking agents examines the effect of compounds on the
detoxifying enzyme glutathione-S-transferase. Another is
a mutation assay known as the Ames test, which assesses
mutagenicity by assessing the effects of substances on the
mutation rate of the bacterium Salmonella typhimurium.

Positive results in mechanism-based assays suggest
potential biological activity, but cannot determine
whether a substance will actually generate a clinical re-
sponse. Thus, final identification of anticancer agents re-
quires subsequent evaluation with advanced testing sys-
tems, followed by clinical trials.

Although many antitumor compounds have been iso-
lated through these screening procedures, few have been
found to be clinically effective against slow-growing solid
tumors. This is a consequence of using rapidly dividing
tumors in the primary screens. The development of
chemotherapy agents that destroy only fast-growing cells
grew directly out of the use of mouse tumor cell lines in
drug-screening assays. Fast-growing mouse tumor lines
provide quick turnaround times and minimize animal
handling costs. The agents most effective against these
cell lines are also most effective against fast-growing
human tumors. However, most solid cancers in humans

----- PAGE 33 -----
Taxonomic Distribution of Higher
Plants Containing Anticancer
Compounds”

Gymnosperm Families
Cephalotaxaceae, Podocarpaceae, and
Taxaceae

Angiosperm Orders and Families
Magnoliales: Annonaceae
Ranunculales: Menispermaceae
Myrtales: Thymelaeaceae
Celastrales: Celestraceae
Euphorbiales: Euphorbiaceae
Sapindales: Rutaceae, Simaroubaceae
Gentianales: Apocynaceae
Liliales: Liliaceae

[eget RD ote seh

grow relatively slowly, and therefore do not respond wel
to these agents.

Antitumor activity is a complex process, and it is well
known that isolated constituents may not elicit the same
clinical response as a preparation of the whole plant. The
total therapeutic activity is often greater than or at least
different from the activities of the individual chemicals. It
is common for a fraction from a plant extract with signif-
icant biological activity to contain no single constituent
that demonstrates the activity observed with the whole
plant.

Few compounds reach clinical trials. A low thera-

peutic index, a poor ratio of maximum tolerated dose to
minimum effective dose, undesirable side effects, or high
toxicity may outweigh beneficial antitumor activity. Of
25,000 screens of both synthetic and natural materials
conducted annually by the NCI, only 8 to 12 compounds
will be selected for preclinical testing, and only 6 to 8 of
these will actually enter clinical trials.?°

THE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION AND HERBAL
MEDICINE

‘The World Health Organization (WHO) recognizes that
herbalism is common to all cultures of the world and ac-
tively promotes the development of what it calls tradi-
tional medicine. The Traditional Medicine Program was

HERBS, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE @ 25

established by the WHO in 1977. The WHO Resolution
EB63.R4 of that year expressed the following idea:

... the need for the governments of the countries inter-
ested in the use of traditional medical practice to give
adequate support to engaging traditional medical practi-
tioners in primary health care teams as and when appro-
priate, to the utilization of appropriate technology in these
traditional medical practices and to undertake adequate
measures for effective regulation and control of tradi-
tional medical practices.!

This resolution led to a worldwide effort by the WHO
to enhance traditional medicine. To the WHO, traditional
medicine implies all of the knowledge and practices used in
the prevention, diagnosis, and elimination of physical,
mental, or social imbalance. This knowledge is based on
the experience and observation of generations. It includes
highly developed, complex systems such as ayurveda and
traditional Chinese medicine as well as collections of sim-
ple, local home remedies.

Traditional medicine fits perfectly into the WHO's
wonderfully holistic definition of health as a state of com-
plete physical, emotional, mental, and social well-being,
not merely the absence of disease or infirmity. From this
perspective, one can begin to appreciate the potential for
open dialogue and integration between current scientific
approaches to health and the older traditional techniques.
All perspectives have value in any worldwide approach to
health for all. The WHO’ role is not to endorse any and
all forms of traditional medicine, but instead to ensure
that traditional medicine is examined critically and with
an open mind,

In 1994, Resolution WHA47.27 called on the WHO
director general to

. consider the contribution WHO might make to pro-
moting respect for, and maintenance ol, indigenous
knowledge, traditions and remedies, in particular, their
pharmacopoeia.

The WHO Rationale for Promoting
Traditional Medicine

¢ Traditional medicine has intrinsic value, and in recog-
nition of this fact, it should be promoted and its po-
tential developed for the wider use and benefit of
mankind,

* Traditional medicine has certain advantages over im-
ported systems of medicine, because as an integral part
of the people’s culture, it is particularly effective in
solving certain cultural health problems.

----- PAGE 34 -----
26 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

* Traditional medicine contributes greatly to scientific
medicine, thus justifying its development from the
Western biomedical perspective.

A number of countries are cooperating with WHO
through programs that integrate traditional approaches
with the scientific techniques of modern medicine. One
report from a WHO committee proposes some interest-
ing prerequisites for integration.

* Valid factual data must be provided to overcome the
current lack of information. This data may then be
used to help convince decision makers, health care
professionals, and the general population of the value
of integration.

¢ There must be legal recognition of traditional thera-
pies and practitioners to ensure sociopolitical accept-
ability and access to resources.

* Dialogue among practitioners of different systems
should be established early in any integrative effort.
This should eliminate prejudice and hopefully encour-
age the adoption of more acceptable attitudes.

THE CONSERVATION OF MEDICINAL
PLANTS

The WHO is among a number of international bodies
concerned with the protection of medicinal plants. In
March 1988, the WHO, the International Union for
Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN),
and the World Wildlife Fund (WWE) convened a con-
ference on medicinal plant conservation, which was held
in Chiang Mai, Thailand.??

The stimulus for this conference was the unprece-
dented loss of plant species observed by scientists world-
wide. Between 1600 and 1900, about 75 species of plants
and animals became extinct because of human activity.
During the first 70 years of this century, about the same
number of species became extinct. These numbers, how-
ever, are small when compared to the number of extinc-
tions that were projected to occur during the final 20
years of the last century. Earth is on the verge of experi-
encing an extinction of species unparalleled in human ex-
perience. The IUCN estimated that if present trends
continue, 60,000 higher plant species could become ex-
tinct or near extinct by the middle of the twenty-first cen-
tury. The 60,000 figure accounts for approximately one in
four of all higher plants.

The core Chiang Mai Declaration is extremely sig-
nificant, especially if we remember that this came from
scientists and international bureaucrats.

The 2002 IUCN Red List

of Threatened Species

Biodiversity loss is one of the world’s most pressing
crises, and there is growing global concern about the sta-
tus of the biological resources on which so much of
human life depends. It has been estimated that the cur-
rent species extinction rate is between 1,000 and 10,000
times higher than it would naturally be. Many species are
declining to critical population levels; important habitats
are being destroyed, fragmented, and degraded; and
ecosystems are being destabilized through climate
change, pollution, invasive species, and direct human im-
pact. The IUCN Red List is the world’s most compre-
hensive inventory of the global conservation status of
plants and animals.

The updated 2002 IUCN Red List of Threatened
Species is available as a searchable database at
www.redlist.org. Users can search for species by common
or scientific name to find out about status, distribution,
habitats, threats, and other information that supports the
listing.

There are nine categories of threat in the IUCN Red
List system: extinct, extinct in the wild, critically endan-
gered, endangered, vulnerable, near threatened, least con-
cern, data deficient, and not evaluated. A species is listed
as threatened if it falls in the critically endangered, endan-
gered, or vulnerable category. Classification is accom-
plished through a set of five quantitative criteria that form
the heart of the system. These criteria are based on bio-
logical factors related to extinction risk and include rate of
decline, population size, area of geographic distribution,
and degree of population and distribution fragmentation.

The categories are defined as follows:

© A taxon is “extinct” when there is no reasonable doubt
that the last individual has died.

* A taxon is “extinct in the wild” when it is known to
survive only under cultivation, in captivity, or as a nat-
uralized population (or populations) well outside its
past range.

* A taxon is “critically endangered” when the best avail-
able evidence indicates that it meets any of the criteria
for critically endangered, and is therefore considered
to be facing an extremely high risk of extinction in the
wild.

¢ A taxon is “endangered” when the best available evi-
dence indicates that it meets any of the criteria for en-
dangered, and is therefore considered to be facing a
very high risk of extinction in the wild.

¢ A taxon is “vulnerable” when the best available evi-
dence indicates that it meets any of the criteria for vul-

----- PAGE 35 -----
Heres, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE 2.

Saving Lives by Saving Plants

We, the health professionals and the plant conservation specialists who have come to-
gether for the first time at the WHO/IUCN/WWF International Consultation on
Conservation of Medicinal Plants, held in Chiang Mai, 21-26 March 1988, do hereby reaffirm
our commitment to the collective goal of “Health for All by the Year 2000” through the pri-
mary health care approach and to the principles of conservation and sustainable develop-
ment outlined in the World Conservation Strategy. We:

Recognize that medicinal plants are essential in primary health care, both in self-

medication and in national health services

Are alarmed at the consequences of loss of plant diversity around the world

View with grave concern the fact that many of the plants that provide traditional and

modern drugs are threatened

Draw the attention of the United Nations, its agencies and Member States, other inter-

national agencies and their members and nongovernmental organizations to:

— The vital importance of medicinal plants in health care

— The increasing and unacceptable loss of these medicinal plants due to habitat de-
struction and unsustainable harvesting practices

— The fact that plant resources in one country are often of critical importance to other
countries

— The significant economic value of the medicinal plants used today and the great po-
tential of the plant kingdom to provide new drugs

— The continuing disruption and loss of indigenous cultures, which often hold the key
to finding new medicinal plants that may benefit the global community

— The urgent need for international cooperation and coordination to establish pro-

27

available for future generations

nerable, and is therefore considered to be facing a high
risk of extinction in the wild.

A taxon is “near threatened” when it has been evalu-
ated against the criteria but does not qualify for criti-
cally endangered, endangered, or vulnerable now, but
is close to qualifying or is likely to qualify for threat-
ened status in the near future.

A taxon is categorized as “least concern” when it has
been evaluated against the criteria and does not qualify
for critically endangered, endangered, vulnerable, or
near threatened. Widespread and abundant taxa are in-
cluded in this category.

A taxon is “data deficient” when there is inadequate in-
formation to make a direct or indirect assessment of its
risk of extinction based on its distribution or popula-
tion status.

grams for conservation: of medicinal plants to ensure that adequate quantities are

We, the members of the Chiang Mai International Consultation, hereby call on all peo-
ple to commit themselves to Save the Plants That Save Lives.

The 1997 [UCN Red List of Threatened Plants was
the first such comprehensive listing ever undertaken for
plants on a global scale. Analyses of the data in the*1997
Red List revealed the following unsettling information.

* Of the estimated 270,000 known species of vascular
plants, 33,798 species were considered at risk of ex-
tinction. These plants are found in 369 plant families
scattered throughout 200 countries.

© Of these plants, 91% can be considered to be found
only in a single country (a statistical generalization). A
limited geographic distribution can make a species
much more vulnerable and may reduce options for its
protection.

¢ A great number of species known to have medicinal
value are at risk. For example, 75% of species from the

----- PAGE 36 -----
28 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

yew family, a source of important cancer-fighting
compounds, are threatened. In the willow family,
from which aspirin is derived, 12% of species are
threatened.?3

Many herbalists are profoundly concerned about any
potential impact of their activities on natural communi-
ties. The term “wildcrafting” has been used to describe a
harvest of wild plants that takes into account ecological
balance so that it does not threaten the survival of the
plant species. Keeping in mind ecological principles, a
wildcrafter ideally harvests wild plants in a sustainable
manner, or with the goal of increasing their number and

health.

United Plant Savers

In the United States, a nonprofit organization called
United Plant Savers (UpS) is working to help protect
American medicinal plants.

The organization was formed in a spirit of hope, by
herbalists committed to protecting and replanting threat-
ened species and to raising public awareness of the plight
of wild medicinal plants. Its membership reflects the di-
versity of American herbalism and includes wildcrafters,
seed collectors, manufacturers, growers, botanists, practi-
tioners, medicine-makers, educators, and plant lovers
from all walks of life.

For further information contact United Plant Savers,
PO Box 77, Guysville, OH 45735, (740) 662-0041,
www.unitedplantsavers.org.

United Plant Savers publishes a list of herbs used in
commerce that, because of overharvesting or loss of habi-
tat, or by nature of their innate rareness or sensitivity, are
at risk of a significant decline in numbers within their cur-
rent range. As of December 1998, this list included:

American ginseng (Panax quinquéfolius)
Bethsoot (Trillium spp.)

Black cohosh (Cimifuga racemosa)
Bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis)
Blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides)
Echinacea (Echinacea spp.)

Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)
Helonias root (Chamaelirium luteum)
Kava kava (Piper methysticum)

Lady’s slipper (Cypripedium spp.)
Lomatium (Lomatium dissectum)

Osha (Ligusticum porterti)
Partridgeberry (Mitchella repens)
Peyote (Lophophora williamsii)

Slippery elm (Ulmus rubra)

Sundew (Drosera spp.)

True unicorn (Aletris farinosa)
Venus’s flytrap (Dionaea muscipula)
Wild yam (Dioscorea villosa)

Another list of wild medicinal plants indicates those
in need of attention and further research. United Plant
Savers is watching these herbs and collecting information
on levels of commercial usage while monitoring the via-
bility of these plants within their current range.

Arnica (Arnica spp.)

Butterfly weed (Asclepias tuberosa)
Calamus (Acorus calamus)
Chaparro (Casatela emoryi)
Elephant tree (Bursera microphylla)
Eyebright (Euphrasia spp.)
Gentian (Gentiana spp.)
Goldthread (Coptis spp.)

Lobelia (Lobelia spp.)

Maidenhair fern (Adiantum pendatum)
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum)
Oregon grape (Mahonia spp.)
Pink root (Spigelia marilaandica)
Pipsissewa (Chimaphila umbellata)
Spikenard (Aralia racemosa)

Stone root (Collinsonia canadensis)
Stream orchid (Epipactis gigantea)
Turkey corn (Dicentra canadensis)
Virginia snakeroot (Aristolochia serpentaria)
White sage (Salvia apiana)

Yerba mansa (Anemopsis californica)
Yerba santa (Eriodictyon californica)

References

1. Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1999.

2. Uchida S, et al. Medical Science Research 1987; 15:831-2.

3. Chen H, Tappel AL. Free Radical Biology & Medicine
1994; 16:437-44,

4. Monforte MT, et al. Farmaco 1995 Sept; 50:595-9,

5. Middleton E Jr. International Archives of Allergy and
Immunology 1995; 107:43 5-6.

6. Castillo MH, et al. American Journal of Surgery 1989;
158:351-5.

7. Spedding G, et al. Antiviral Research 1989; 12:99-110.

8. Hirano T, et al. British Journal of Cancer 1995;
72:1380-8.
9. Cheshier JE, et al. Life Sciences 1995 Dec 22; 58:87-96.

----- PAGE 37 -----
. Sappey C, et al. AIDS Research and Human Retroviruses
1994; 10:145 1-61.

. Bisset, ed. Herbal Drugs & Phytopharmaceuticals. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1994.

. Tyler V. The Honest Herbal. Binghamton, NY: Haworth

Press, 1993.

. Huxtable R. Neurotoxins in herbs and food plants. In:

Isaacson, Jensen, eds. The Vatlnerable Brain and Environ-

mental Risks. Vol 1. New York: Plenum Press, 1992.

. Ibid.

. Lik Sun S, Wang J, Wang D. Chromatography of

medicinal plants and Chinese traditional medicines.

Biomedical Chromatography 1998 Mar; 12(2):78-85.

. Vogel G, Temme I. Curative antagonism of liver damage
caused by phalloidin with silymarin as a model of anti-
hepatotoxin therapy. Arzneimittel-Forschung 1969,
19:613-5.

. Kiso ¥ et al. Assay method for antihepatotoxic activity
using complement mediated cytotoxicity in primary cul-
ture hepatocytes. Planta Medica 1987, 52(3):2417.

. Shoemaker, et al. Development of human tumor cell line
panels for use in disease oriented drug screening. In:
Hall TC, ed. Prediction of Response to Cancer Therapy.
New York: Alan R. Liss, 1988.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

Herss, HOLISM, AND SCIENCE <> 29

Barclay AS, Perdue RE. Distribution of anticancer activ-
ity in higher plants. Cancer Chemotherapy Reports. Part 1
1976; 60:1081.

Cragg GM, et al. Drug discovery and development at
the United States National Cancer Institute:
International collaboration in the search for new drugs
from natural sources. Proceedings of the Eighth Asian
Symposium on Medicinal Plants and Spices and other
Natural Products; 1994 Jun 13-16: Melake, Malaysia.
WHO Technical Report. The promotion and development
of traditional medicine 1978; 622.

Akerele O, Heywood V; Synge H. The Conservation of
Medicinal Plants. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 1991.

Walter KS, Gillett HJ, eds. 1997 IUCN Red List of
Threatened Plants. Compiled by the World
Conservation Monitoring Centre (UCN. The World
Conservation Union, Gland, Switzerland, 1998.

----- PAGE 38 -----
CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICINAL PLANTS

edicinal plants can be categorized in a variety
M of ways, reflecting various interests and ful-

filling different purposes. Categorizations
may clarify potentially useful therapeutic relationships,
suggest avenues of research for the pharmacologist (for ex-
ample, in the screening of plants for anticancer activity),
and even provide the environmentalist with data for the
seemingly endless struggle to protect the environment
against the ravages of human activities. Here are some of
the more common methods by which plants may be
classified.

Alphabetical

Plants may be listed alphabetically either by Latin bino-
mial or common name. While this method of classifica-
tion may facilitate access to information, it offers the
practitioner no therapeutic insights.

Taxonomic

Based upon botanical systematics, plants are arranged ac-
cording to botanists’ current opinions as to which class,
order, family, genus, or species they belong.

Morphologic

Here, remedies are grouped according to shared anatom-
ical features: leaves, flowers, fruits, seeds, aerial parts,
whole plant, rhizomes, bark, or roots. Such remedies are
known in pharmacognosy as organized drugs because they
are morphologically whole, or actual plant parts.
Unorganized drugs, on the other hand, are plant materials
that have no cellular structure, such as extracts, gums,
resins, oils, fats, and waxes.

Therapeutic
There are a number of different ways to classify plants ac-
cording to their pharmacological effects.

Action-based, Because an action-based arrangement pro-
vides some indication of the effect of a plant on the

30

human body, this method of classification offers valu-
able information to the holistic practitioner.

Body system or organ affinity. This approach highlights
plants appropriate for different parts of the human
body.

Medical system. Herbs have different therapeutic indica-
tions depending upon the system within which the
practitioner is working, whether ayurveda, the
Western biomedical approach, or traditional Chinese
medicine.

Biochemical. This type of classification groups plants ac-
cording to their content of chemical constituents, such
as saponins, alkaloids, or flavones. The many limita-
tions of such an approach stem from the tendency of
some scientists to perceive plants merely as organic
drug sources.

Biogenetic. This approach categorizes plants by genetic
taxonomy and evolutionary relationships among plant
biochemicals. Other than academic, this categorization
is of little value to the phytotherapist.

Geographical. This type of classification is based on eth-
nobotanical uses, or ways in which plants are used by
people in different parts of the world.

PLANT TAXONOMY AND
PHYTOTHERAPY

The scientific name of a plant, or Latin binomial, can be
a great source of information. Scientific names are all too
often overlooked, as many people are intimidated by
Latin. However, if one gains a basic understanding of
how botanical names are derived and what they can tell
us about plants, intimidation can be transformed into
empowerment—or at least simple bewilderment!

There is at least one vitally important reason for
phytotherapists to be concerned with understanding how
plants are named. When using plants in medicine, it is
essential to know exactly which herb is being prescribed.
Botanical names are exact and internationally recognized,

----- PAGE 39 -----
and each Latin binomial refers to one plant and one plant
only. Common names, on the other hand, vary from
place to place, and much confusion can result when sev-
eral plants are called by the same common name.

The coining of botanical names occurs in the field of
taxonomy. This is the branch of science devoted to the ar-
rangement of living organisms into categories based on
natural similarities, such as structure, development, bio-
chemical or physiological function, and evolutionary his-
tory. Theoretically, this field of study helps scientists
identify relationships among different ancient and mod-
ern groups, can indicate the evolutionary pathways along
which present-day organisms may have developed, and
provides a coherent basis for comparing experimental
data about different plants and animals. As many charac-
teristics as possible are incorporated, including the or-
ganism’s anatomy, biochemistry, embryology, molecular
biology, behavior, and distribution.

Traditionally, organisms have been classified into
two kingdoms, plant and animal. Now, for a number of
practical and theoretical reasons, scientists utilize the
five-kingdom system. In this system, organisms are
classified according to whether they are prokaryotic
(single-celled, like bacteria, with no internal membranes
or organelles) or eukaryotic (composed of one or more

CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICINAL PLANTS @ 31

cells containing membrane-bound nuclei and organ-
elles), and whether they obtain food by photosynthesis,
ingestion, or absorption of organic matter from their
surroundings.

Carolus Linnaeus, a Swedish botanist, introduced the
modern system of classification in 1753. The basic unit in
the Linnaean system is the species: a group of organisms
that resemble each other more closely than those of any
other group and are capable of mating with one another
to produce fertile offspring.

Species are arranged into higher groupings that are
progressively more inclusive, Species that are closely re-
lated are grouped together into a genus. Genera with sim-
ilar characteristics and origins are grouped into families.
Families, in turn, are grouped into orders, orders into
classes, and classes into divisions (if plants) or phyla (if an-
imals). Finally, related phyla or divisions are placed to-
gether into kingdoms.

Sometimes it is desirable to make a finer distinction
between two consecutive ranks. In that case, an additional
rank is inserted between the original two, and the prefix
sub- or super- added to one of the main ranks, Between
an order and a family, for example, there may be several
suborders. Each suborder may contain several superfami-
lies, and each superfamily several families.

molds, and mushrooms.

ferns and seed-producing plants.

reptiles, birds, and mammals).

The Five Kingdoms

The Monera. This group includes bacteria and blue-green algae, single-celled or colony-forrning
prokaryotes. If colonial, no specialization or division of labor occurs among the cells. Organisms
are classified by the nature of their cell walls, type of motility, and mode of nutrition.

The Protista. These organisms have eukaryotic cell structures, as do all other living things except
those in the Monera. Two major subgroups are the algae, which photosynthesize, and protozeans,
which live by ingesting or absorbing organic matter.

The Fungi. These multicellular, plantlike organisms live by absorbing nutrients from their surround-
ings. Classified by body structure and type of reproduction, this group includes yeasts, molds, slime

The Plantae. These are many-celled organisms that usually live by photosynthesis. They have leaves
or leaflike structures adapted for photosynthesis, stems or stemlike structures that hold the leaves,
and roots specialized for anchoring the plant in a growth medium and absorbing water. The plants
fall into two groups: bryophytes (liverworts and mosses), which have no tissues for transporting
water and minerals from roots, and the more numerous vascular plants, a group that includes both

The Animalia. These are the organisms we know as animals, including sponges, coelenterates (such
as jellyfish), annelids (earthworms and leeches), mollusks (snails and squid), arthropods (insects,
spiders, and lobsters), echinoderms (starfish and sea urchins), and vertebrates (fish, amphibians,

----- PAGE 40 -----
32 <+ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Refer to appendix 7 for a list highlighting some of the
kingdoms, classes, orders, families, and genera in which
major phytotherapeutic agents are found, with some ex-
amples of important species.

A plant is identified by a Latin binomial, or two-part
name. The first name identifies the genus, which is a group
of species more closely related to one another than to any
other group. The second, or specific epithet, identifies a
particular species within a genus. Binomials are written in
italics. The genus name always begins with a capital letter,
while the species epithet always begins with a small or low-
ercase letter. An example of a generic name is Eupatorium,
which is used for every species of Eupatorium,

Eupatorium cannabinum: hemp agrimony
Eupatorium perfoliatum: boneset
Eupatorium purpureum: gravel root

The specific epithet describes exactly which of all

Kingdom: Plantae
Division: Magnoliophyta (angiosperms)

form the basis of the code.

rules, although there are some exceptions.
Scientific names are given in Latin.

fe

6. With some exceptions, the rules are retroactive.

species we are talking about. For example, Expatorium
cannabinum is the Eupatorium with leaves resembling
those of Cannabis. Eupatorium perfoliatum is the Eupa-
torium with leaves that appear to be perforated by the
stem, and Exupatorium purpureum is the Eupatorium with
purplish flowers. The abbreviations sp. and spp. are used
to denote one specie or several species of a particular
genus, respectively. For example, “Eupatorium spp.” indi-
cates that we are talking about a number of species in the
Eupatorium genus.

Species are sometimes divided into subsets known as
subspecies (abbreviated as ssp.), varieties (abbreviated as
var.), and forms. For example, the name Lavandula angus-
tifolia ssp. angustifolia differentiates this subspecies of
lavender from Lavandula angustifolia ssp. pyrenaica. Some
plants are hybrids of two other plants of the same genus,
which is denoted by an “x” between the genus and species
names, as in Mentha x piperita var. piperita. In these two

The Linnaean System of Classification

As an example of how the system is applied, consider Salvia divinorum, the divine sage.

Class: Magnoliopsida (dicotyledons). Class names end in -opsida.
Subclass: Asteridae. Subclass names end in -idae.
Order: Lamiales. Order names usually end in -ales.
Family: Lamiaceae. Family names usually end in -aceae.

Genus: Salvia, The genus name should be capitalized and either italicized or underlined.
Species: Salvia divinorum Epling et Jativa. The species name is always preceded by its genus
name. Species names begin with a lowercase letter and, like genus names, are italicized or
underlined. For complete accuracy, the binomial is followed by the name of the botanical
authority who first described the species.

The International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN) governs the naming of plants. The ICBN, in
turn, is regulated by the Nomenclature Section of an International Botanical Congress. The current
botanical code is the Tokyo edition, revised in accordance with decisions made by the XV International
Botanical Congress, held in Yokohama in 1993 and published in 1994.’ A similar code has been devel-
oped for cultivated plants. The International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants is regulated
by the International Commission for the Nomenclature of Cultivated Plants (ICNCP).? Six principles

1. Botanical nomenclature is independent of zoological nomenclature.

2. Names of taxonomic groups are determined through the use of nomenclatural types, or specimens.
3. Nomenclature of taxonomic groups is based on priority of publication.

4, Each taxonomic group can have only one correct name, the earliest that is in accordance with the

----- PAGE 41 -----
examples, the plants are so well known and distinguish-
able by scent and taste that they are usually written sim-
ply as Lavandula angustifolia and Mentha x piperita.

In this book, the full botanical name is usually given
in the text, so that if you need to verify botanical details,
you will be able to look up the correct plant. Otherwise,
please refer to appendix 3 for English common names for
Latin binomials and vice versa.

Plant and family names are occasionally changed to
reflect new discoveries or clarifications. Thus Roman
chamomile, formerly in the genus Anthemis, is now a
member of the genus Chamaemelum. Family names have
changed too, and the major groups Compositae,
Cruciferae, Labiatae, Leguminosae, and Umbelliferae,
among others, have each been renamed after an impor-
tant genus of the family. Thus, the composite family has
become Asteraceae, named after the aster genus, and the
cruciferous or mustard family has been renamed Brassi-
caceae. The two-lipped flowers of the mint family are
now in Lamiaceae, the leguminous plants in Fabaceae,
and the umbelliferous plants in Apiaceae. Plants may be
reclassified into different families, too. For example,
Hypericum has been moved from Hypericaceae to
Clusiaceae.

The botanical authority who named the species is
listed after the species name. The authority is usually ab-
breviated and the correct abbreviation can be found in
any flora, although abbreviations are not universally stan-
dardized. Parentheses have a special meaning in taxon-
omy. For example, the name Vernonia noveboracensis (L.)
Michx. reveals that Andre Michaux transferred to the
genus Vernonia a species originally included in another
genus (Serratula) by Linnaeus. The parentheses indicate a
corrected name. Other conventions include “Britt. et
Rose” or “Britt. & Rose” for N. L. Britton andJ. N. Rose,
indicating that they published the name together. “Muhl.
ex Willd.” indicates that the name is ascribed to G. H. E.
Muhlenberg but was published by K. L. Willdenow.

Although some of these taxonomic details may seem
trivial, actually they are important. Except in the case of
“conserved names” officially designated by the ICBN, the
publication date of a botanical name determines its prior-
ity and hence which of several possible synonyms is most
valid. The ICBN provides rules to govern all possible sit-
uations related to nomenclature, but when one is prepar-
ing a taxonomic monograph, determining the correct
plant name can still require quite extensive historical and
botanical research.

CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICINAL PLANTS - 33

DERIVATION OF BOTANICAL NAMES

Botanical Latin is significantly different from classical
Latin. William Stearn provides a fascinating study of this
subject in his essential text, Botanical Latin (see Suggested
Reading). Stearn has succeeded in making Latin interest-
ing and engaging to this author—no mean feat!

The Latin names used in taxonomy can be grouped
into categories based upon their derivation. A few exam-
ples are given here.

Mythological Names

A variety of names are taken from classical mythology.

Nymphaea: the water lily, from the Latin Nympha, god-
dess of waters, meadows, and forest

Paeonia: from the Greek Paionia, physician ofthe gods

Achillea: from the Greek Achilles, hero of Homer's Iliad,
whose bleeding ankle was treated with yarrow

Geographical or Ecological Names
These may refer to the plant’s habitat or some other geo-
morphologic feature.

montana: growing in mountainous places

riparius: growing by rivers and streams

nivalis: from the Latin nivis, growing in or near snow
hydrocotyle: living in water

Place Names
These are often self-explanatory.

alabamensis: Alabama
californica: California
sinensis: China

Uses or Properties

As many early botanists were also doctors, some names
reflect their knowledge of the therapeutic uses of the
plants, or materia medica.

cardiaca: helps the heart
officinalis: once in the official pharmacopoeia
catharticus: a purgative or cathartic

Classical Names

Apparently every name ofa plant used in classical Greek
has been used in modern nomenclature, and these have
been modified until they form a large number of the
designations in common use. Consider Psyllium from the
Greek word psylla, or flea. Psylla was the Greek name for
psyllium, the seeds of which resemble fleas.

----- PAGE 42 -----
34 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Betonica: from Vettonica, the name of a medicinal plant
from the region of Spain once called Vectones or
Vettones

Anethum: from the Greek anethon, meaning anise or dill

Ligusticum: from the Latin name of a plant growing in
Liguria, Italy

Names Commemorating People

Botanists have been ingenious in their use of binomials to
commemorate people. A botanist might name a plant
after the first botanist to describe the species for which a
genus is named, a respected teacher, or, it seems, just
about anyone else!

Lobelia: named for Matthias de |’Obel, a Flemish botanist
(1538-1616)

Eschscholzia: named after the 19th-century German
botanist Johann Friedrich von Eschscholtz

Larrea: named for Juan Antonio de la Larrea

Historical Names

These are derived from names of historical figures. For
example, Agrimonia eupatoria is named for Eupator, also
known as Mithradates the Great, King of Pontus, north-
ern Anatolia (120-63 8.c.). Eupatoria was a city on the
west coast of the Crimean Peninsula, which legend lo-
cates as the place where Jason and the Argonauts re-
trieved the Golden Fleece.

Asclepias, named for Asklepios, Greek god of medicine
and healing

Artemisia, named for the Greek goddess Artemis, the vir-
gin goddess of the hunt

Narcissus, from the character of the same name in Greek
mythology, who was renowned for his beauty

Anatomical Names

These names highlight visible plant features, as in
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort), which is charac-
terized by small perforations along the leaf edges.
Indications of size are also common. For example,
Plantago major describes the greater plantain.

millefolium: finely cut, from the Latin mille (thousand) and
folium (leaf)

crispus: from the Latin crispus, meaning curled

pendulus: from the Latin pendulus, meaning hanging down

Color Names
A rich vocabulary applies here, as is fitting for the wide
spectrum of color manifested in flowers and leaves.

Whites

niveus: snow white
galacto, lacteus: milk white
albidus: whitish

Blacks

ater, mela, or melano: pure black
niger: black

anthracinus: coal-black

Browns

fuscus, phaeo: brown
‘porphyreus: red-brown
hepaticus: liver-colored

Yellows

aureus, auratus, chryso: golden yellow

Tuteus, xantho: yellow

favus, luteolus, lutescens, flavidus, flavescens: pale yellow

Greens

viridis, chloro: green

glaucus, thalassicus, glaucescens: sea green
flavovirens: yellowish green

Blues

cyaneus, cyano: Prussian blue
caeruleus: blue

azureus: sky blue

Reds

ruber, erythro: red
roseus, rhodo: rosy
‘purpureus: purple

Aroma Names

Some binomials suggest that the plant has a strong odor,
either pleasant or unpleasant. It must be remembered in
these days of fashionable aromatherapy that not all plants
have a sweet bouquet! Disagreeable odors are suggested
by such names as foetidus, as in Symplocarpus foetidus
(skunk cabbage).

odorata: from the Latin odoratus, meaning sweet-smelling
myroxylon: from the Greek myron, meaning sweet-
smelling oil, and xylon, wood

----- PAGE 43 -----
References

1. Greuter W, Barrie FR, Burdet HM, et al., eds.
International code of botanical nomenclature (Tokyo
code). Regnum Vegerabile No. 131. Koeltz Scientific
Books, Konigstein. 1994.

2. Trehane P, Brickell CD, Baum BR, et al., 1995
International. Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants.
Wimborne, UK: Quarterjack Publishing, 1995.

CLASSIFICATION OF MEDICINAL PLANTS = 35

Suggested Reading

Stearn WI. Botanical Latin. Newton-Abbot, UK: David &
Charles, 1992.

Walters DR, Keil DJ. Vascular Plant Taxonomy. Dubuque, Iowa:
Kendall/Hunt, 1996,

----- PAGE 44 -----
he fundamental p
medicine is chemical,

T

can rarely be attributed to

often, effects are due to the va

plant complex interacts with

Consider the example of
meadowsweet (Filipendula ulm
ter 26, it is used as a mild yet|

astringent, and carminative

vant for the treatment of mu
as well as a range of digestiv
dren’s diarrhea. ‘Theory tells

ent” of this herb is a group

lates, found in the aerial part

salicylates play a vital role in

but they are also renowned
dency to cause gastritis (infla
cosa, or the lining of the ston}

If we take the concept o
meadowsweet should be cont
gastric inflammation. Howev
the herb is to mitigate arthriti

by people who already have
lated to use of nonsteroid

(NSAIDs). Clinical observati
both confirm that meadowsw

reducing such gastric inflam:
here? In the absence of detai

on the whole plant, we can only
than those of salicylates also

this herb. Such cases inevita
clude, “The whole is more t!

cal nature of the hum:
follow, I shall discuss the co:
often called the “active ingr.
contend often throughout thi

tisical nature of herbal
is the fundamental physi-
body. In the chapters that
stituents of plants that are
ients.” However, as I will
book, the effects of a plant
single constituent. More
ious ways in which a whole
he human body.

he widely used British herb
‘ia). As is discussed in chap-
ffective anti-inflammatory,
ent. It is specifically rele-
uloskeletal inflammations,
problems, including chil-
s that the “active ingredi-
compounds called salicy-
lof the plant. Undoubtedly,
e activity of meadowsweet,
or their unfortunate ten-
mation of the gastric mu-
ch).

ictive ingredients literally,
uindicated for people with
, the most common use of
pain, and it is usually taken
me degree of gastritis re-
anti-inflammatory drugs
n and historical tradition
et can be very effective in
tion. So what is going on
pharmacological research
surmise that actions other
ntribute to the effects of
blyt{lead the herbalist to con-
han the sum of the parts.”

t

al

36

a “chemical” is something to be avoided, an evil and artificial corruption of
ler, everything tangible is a chemical. All that is good is chemical, just as all that
is natural is chemical, just as all that is artificial.!

The herbal remedies of the world vary in strength
from potentially lethal poisons to gentle tonics that might
be considered to be foods. This variation in the potency
of pharmacological impact is chemically based and has a
profound effect on the therapeutic selection of herbs for
any individual. Herbs may be loosely categorized into the
following broad groups.

Normalizers. These herbs gently nourish the body in
ways that support natural processes of growth,
health, and renewal. They are primarily tonics and
“herbal foods.” Nettles (Urtica dioica), cleavers
(Galinm aparine), and chickweed (Stellaria media) are
good examples.
Effectors. Herbs that have an observable impact upon the
body are used in the treatment of specific illnesses.
Based on their mechanisms of action, the effects of
these herbs may in turn be divided into two groups.
¢ Whole plant actions are the result of some complex of
interactions between the chemistry of the whole
plant and the human body. Examples include echi-
nacea (Echinacea spp.) and meadowsweet (Filipendula
ulmaria).

© Effects of specific active chemical(s) are generally strong
enough to mask any evidence of whole plant effects.
Because of the presence of these intense chemicals,
such herbs are potentially poisonous if taken at the
wrong dose or in the wrong way. The cardioactive
herb foxglove (Digitalis purpurea) and the opium
poppy (Papaver somniferum) are good examples.

As demonstrated in part 2 of this book, the herbalist
focuses on the use of mild normalizers and gentle effec-
tors, and uses strong effectors only if absolutely necessary.
In fact, potent effectors are hardly used at all in herbal-
ism. They are, however, the foundation of pharmacolog-
ical medicine.

----- PAGE 45 -----
The activity of most herbs is more complex than a
mere representation of the effects of an “active ingredi-
ent.” Nonetheless, a review of active plant constituents
can be illuminating for the phytotherapist. For example,
as seen in table 3.1, it is often possible to identify major
contributors to the known actions of an herb.

Table 3.1. Herbs and Constituents

CONSTITUENT GROUP HERB EXAMPLES
Carbohydrates
Mycopolysaccharides Shiitake mushroom (Lentinus edodes)
Inulin Elecampane (Inula helenium)
Mucopolysaccharides Marshmallow root and leaf
(Althaea officinalis}
Glycosides
Cardiac glycosides Lily of the valley (Convallaria majalis)

Cyanogenic glycosides Wild cherry bark (Prunus serotina)

Lipids

Fatty acids Evening primrose oil (Oenothera biennis)
Terpenes

Monoterpenes Peppermint oil (Mentha piperita)

Iridoid Gentian (Gentiana lutea)

Sesquiterpenes Clove (Syzygium aromaticum)

Sesquiterpene lactones Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)

Diterpenes Horehound (Marrubium vulgare)
Triterpenes Wild yam (Dioscorea villosa)
Phenolics

Simple phenolics Meadowsweet (Filipendula ulmaria}

Phenylpropanoids Turmeric (Curcuma longa)

Coumarins Angelica (Angelica archangelica)
Naphthoquinones Sundew (Drosera rotundifolia)
Anthraquinones Purging buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica)
Flavonoids Hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata)

\soflavonoids Red clover (Trifolium pratense}

Lignans Milk thistle (Silybum marianum)

Tannins Agrimony (Agrimonia eupatoria)

AN INTRODUCTION TO PHYTOCHEMISTRY «2 37

CONSTITUENT GROUP HERB EXAMPLES

Alkaloids
Piperidines Lobelia (Lobelia inflata)
Tropanes Henbane (Hyoscyamus niger)
Purines Guarana (Paullinia cupana)
Isoquinolines Bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis)
Indoles Ma huang (Ephedra sinica)
Quinolizidines Scotch broom (Cytisus scoparius)

PRIMARY AND SECONDARY PLANT
METABOLITES

The chemical constituents found in plants are often clas-
sified as either primary or secondary metabolites. In all
living beings, chemical compounds are synthesized and
broken down via a series of chemical reactions, each me-
diated by an enzyme. This complex of processes is known
as metabolism, which comprises catabolism (breakdown)
and anabolism (synthesis).

All organisms possess similar metabolic pathways for
the synthesis and use of certain essential chemicals: sug-
ars, amino acids, common fatty acids, nucleotides, and the
polymers derived from them (including polysaccharides,
proteins, lipids, RNA, and DNA). This is primary
metabolism, and these compounds, which are essential
for the survival and well-being of the organism, are
primary metabolites. In plants, such compounds are re-
sponsible for the primary life processes of respiration,
photosynthesis, growth, development, and other essential
functions.

Plants also use other metabolic pathways to produce
compounds that often have no readily apparent function.
These are the secondary metabolites, and their pathways
of synthesis and utilization constitute secondary
metabolism. Secondary metabolites are derived from pri-
mary metabolites but have a more limited distribution in
the wonderful diversity of plants, often being restricted to
a particular taxonomic group. These secondary com-
pounds appear to play no direct role in a plant’s primary
metabolism, but apparently have an ecological function.
They may attract pollinators, help the plant adapt to en-
vironmental stressors, or serve as chemical defenses
against microorganisms, insects and other predators, or
even other plants.

The dividing line between primary and secondary

----- PAGE 46 -----
38 «@ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

metabolism is not absolute. For example, many steroid
alcohols (sterols) have an essential structural role in or-
ganisms, and must therefore be considered primary
metabolites.’ In addition, these two types of metabolism
are profoundly interconnected. Primary metabolism pro-
vides the small molecules that are employed as starting
materials for all of the important secondary metabolic
pathways.

Secondary metabolites can be broadly divided into
three groups, according to their route of biosynthesis:
terpenes, phenolics, and nitrogen-containing compounds.
Terpenes are lipids synthesized from acetyl coenzyme A
via the mevalonic acid pathway. Phenolic compounds are
aromatic substances formed in various ways via the shi-
kimic or malonic acid pathway. The nitrogen-containing
secondary products, such as alkaloids, are biosynthesized
primarily from amino acids.

A couple of fascinating unanswered questions arise
here. How many secondary plant metabolites are there,
and how many can occur ina single plant? New molecules
are being isolated and characterized at a rate of about
3,000 per year, and the best estimate of the total number
known appears to be 80,000 to 100,000 isolated com-
pounds of determined structure. The Dictionary of Natural
Products, by far the most comprehensive database of natu-
ral products, lists 170,000 compounds, but this covers all
natural sources, including marine and microbial.? How-
ever, the literature is unexpectedly lacking in estimates of
total numbers of constituents in a single plant cell.

The classes of plant constituents discussed in the
chapters that follow are those most strongly implicated in
the activity of medicinal plants. The primary metabolites
are, of course, essential for health, as they form the basis
of the human diet. However, as already noted, there are
times when no clear division exists between primary and
secondary metabolites. This is the case with the funda-
mentally important primary metabolites known as carbo-
hydrates and lipids. These are discussed in this book from
the perspective of herbal pharmacological activity, not
nutrition.

The discussion of other phytochemicals focuses on
the three main groups of secondary metabolites: terpenes,
polyphenols, and alkaloids. These are pivotal to any
chemistry-based understanding of herb activity. Bear in
mind, however, that it is not always possible to identify
the chemical mechanisms that explain the actions of
herbs. This should not be interpreted to mean that the
herbs in question do not work, but rather implies a lack of
research. In turn, lack of research on a plant usually im-
plies that no one has received a research grant!

ORGANIC CHEMISTRY

This book is not intended to provide a foundation in
chemistry. It is assumed that the basics of chemistry and
the conventions of organic chemistry are familiar to the
reader. A brief glossary of relevant terms can be found at
the end of this chapter. However, a few words must be
said about the structures and formulas used in this book.

The molecules discussed in the following pages are or-
ganic. That is, they are compounds that contain carbon and
hydrogen. Compounds that are not organic are called inor-
ganic. Some very simple carbon compounds, particularly
those that do not contain hydrogen (carbon dioxide, chalk,
and other carbonates, for example), are considered inor-
ganic compounds. The term organic does not mean that the
compounds are necessarily made by biological organisms
{although that was once thought to be the case), but indi-
cates that the compounds contain carbon and hydrogen.

Carbon plays a special role in the natural world be-
cause it has a unique ability to form links with itself. A few
other elements can link to themselves, but none as exten-
sively as carbon, and none yields as many stable struc-
tures. It may be helpful to think of the organic com-
pounds found in plants as chains or rings of carbon atoms
that form a carbon frame to which other groups of atoms
are attached. These functional groups are often the chemi-
cally active parts of organic molecules. Their addition to
a carbon frame results in the formation of a new com-
pound with different functions and reactions from that as-
sociated with the bare hydrocarbon. Some principal func-
tional groups are illustrated in table 3.2.

A carbon-carbon double bond is normally a chemi-
cally sensitive part of a molecule, one that is liable to
react. One of the bonds opens, and a group of atoms can
attach to each of the carbon atoms originally joined to-
gether by the bond. A double bond is also responsible for
holding a molecule in a rigid shape. Single bonds act like
hinges, enabling molecules to fold into many different
shapes, but a double bond is rigid and cannot be twisted.
A molecule will probably be more chemically active if it

possesses double carbon-carbon bonds, and the absence
of multiple bonds is a sign that a molecule is flexible.

The variety of structures that carbon can form is due
in part to its ability to form single, double, and triple
bonds with other atoms, including carbon atoms. This
structural fecundity can give rise to very intricate net-
works. However, this also makes it difficult to create two-
dimensional representations of many bond orientations
around carbon atoms. Thus, the structure of secondary
metabolites as depicted on paper should always be taken
with a grain of salt.

----- PAGE 47 -----
Table 3.2. Representative Functional Groups

GROUP STRUCTURE
Hydroxyl/alcohol —on
°
Aldehyde I
aN
fs)
Ketone I
oN
°
Acid/carboxyl Il
~~ ~on
°
Ester I
~~ or
°
i
Amide a ™~
N\
Double bond Nome
Triple bond

The orientation of the bonds around a carbon atom
depends upon the number of bonds present. Thus, in a
three-dimensional representation, the usual four bonds
may be arranged as a tetrahedron, so that all four bonds are
equally spaced about the central carbon atom, separated
by 109.5-degree angles. This means that strings of hy-
drocarbons appear to zigzag, regardless of whether or not
they contain double bonds.

Chemists often represent a molecular structure by a
line formula, which shows only the links and virtually ig-
nores the atoms. As an example, consider benzene. The
benzene molecule is a hexagonal arrangement of six car-
bon atoms and six hydrogen atoms.

AN INTRODUCTION TO PHYTOCHEMISTRY -@ 39

i
HA en ~
i
4 SNF Sa MO
|

Fig. 3.1. Benzene ring Fig. 3.2. Carbon-carbon bonds

in benzene molecule

In the line formula, the hydrogen atoms are ignored,
and only the carbon-carbon bonds are shown.
The related compound toluene is shown as:

H
|
i
Nee —
i | | J
Ne a
H

Fig. 3.3. Toluene Fig. 3.4. Carbon-carbon bonds

of the toluene molecule

with the single spike representing a CH, group.
Atoms other than carbon are always shown explicitly,
as in allicin.

oO

ic)

Fig. 3.5. Allicin

This convention greatly simplifies the depiction of
organic structures. In the following chapters, I have pro-
vided a line formula whenever it seems likely to be useful.
It is sometimes helpful to specify the kinds of atoms that
make up a molecule and the number of atoms of each
type. When such a molecular formula is written, the sym-
bol for each element is followed by a subscript numeral
indicating the number of atoms of that element in the
molecule. Again using allicin as an example, the formula
below shows that the compound consists of six carbon
atoms, ten hydrogen atoms, one oxygen atom, and two

sulfur atoms.
CgHipOS)

----- PAGE 48 -----
40 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

However, one must realize that all of these formulas
represent nothing more than shorthand.

No one knows what atoms or molecules really look
like. This is the realm of quantum mechanics and the un-
certainty principle. The spherical shapes represent an at-
tempt to visualize probability spaces. This is a wonderful
level of reality to contemplate, but it is not herbalism!

COMMONLY USED TERMS AND
CONCEPTS

Here are some terms and concepts that the reader will en-
counter frequently in the phytochemical discussions.

aglycone: A molecule that can exist with or without a
sugar group attached. Without the sugar group, they
are known as aglycones. When they contain a sugar
group, they are known as glycosides.

aromatic ring: A carbon ring structure seen, for example,
in phenolic compounds, alkaloids, and terpenes. It
consists of 6 carbon atoms in a flat, hexagonal pattern.
Different functional groups may be attached to the
ring.

conformation: The three-dimensional arrangement of
the atoms of a molecule.

compound: A chemical composed of more than one type
of atom.

functional group: In organic molecules, these are partic-
ular groups of atoms in which characteristic chemical
reactions take place. Functional groups can be found in
many different kinds of molecules.

glucoside: A glycoside in which the sugar constituent is
glucose.

glycoside: Any compound that contains a carbohydrate
molecule. These can be converted into a sugar and a
nonsugar component (an ag/ycone), and are named
specifically for the sugar contained, as in glucoside
(named for glucose), pentoside (pentose), and fructo-
side (fructose).

hydrolysis: The splitting of a compound into fragments
by the addition of water.

isomers: Two or more compounds with the same molec-
ular composition. The number of possible structural
isomers increases with the size of the molecule.

ligand: An ion, a molecule, or a molecular group that
binds to another chemical entity to form a larger
complex.

optical isomerism: Compounds that have the same
molecular formula but differ in the way they rotate the
plane of polarized light.

oxidation: The process by which oxygen is added or elec-
trons removed from a molecule.

pH: A measure of acidity or alkalinity. Neutral pH is 7,
acidic is less than 7, and alkaline (or basic) is higher
than 7.

phenolic: A molecule containing an aromatic ring bearing
one or more hydroxyl groups.

precipitate: A solid that is separated from a solution.

R: Shorthand that stands for a variable group, meaning
that the group could have any of a number of structures.

reduction: The process by which electrons are added or
oxygen lost.

stereoisomer: Two molecules that contain the same
numbers and kinds of atoms bonded in the same order,
but differ in that certain bonds are oriented differently
in space.

structure-activity relationship: The relationship be-
tween chemical structure and pharmacological activity
for a series of compounds.

References
1. Atkins PW. Molecules. New York: Scientific American
Library, 1987.
2. Mann J. Secondary Metabolism. Oxford; New York:
Oxford University Press, 1987.
3. Buckingham J. Dictionary of Natural. Products. London;
New York: Chapman & Hall, 1994.

----- PAGE 49 -----
SM,

CARBOHYDRATES

arbohydrates are primary metabolites universally
( present in living beings on our planet. As the first

product of photosynthesis, carbohydrates are the
starting point for all phytochemicals, and also, by exten-
sion, for all animal biochemicals. More carbohydrates
occur in nature than any other type of natural compound.
The most abundant single organic substance on Earth is
cellulose, a polymer of glucose, which is the main struc-
tural material of plants.

Functions of Carbohydrates

¢ Primary nutritional components for all animals

¢ Nutritional energy sources for metabolism in both
plants and animals

© Sources of carbon in metabolic processes

¢ Forms of energy storage in the body

¢ Sources of flavor and sweetness in food

¢ Primary dietary fiber sources

¢ Important structural elements of cells and tissues (for
example, cellulose in plant cell walls)

* Components of cell-to-cell contact and biological
recognition processes

The name carbohydrate was originally assigned to
compounds believed to be hydrates of carbon, of the gen-
eral formula C,(H,0),. Of course, we now know that
many other molecules are also hydrates of carbon, so the
word has become an interesting reflection on the early
history of biochemistry. The definition of carbohydrate has
been modified and broadened to include polyhydroxy
aldehydes and ketones, alcohols and acids, and simple
derivatives of these compounds, as well as the products
formed by their condensation into oligosaccharides or
polysaccharides. In fact, many compounds of unusual
structure that do not conform to the general formula are
now included in the expanded group of compounds
known as carbohydrates.

The following material focuses upon carbohydrates
that play a role in the therapeutic activity of medicinal

ay

plants. Carbohydrates are also fundamentally important
in human nutrition, but this subject has been adequately
covered in many excellent nutrition textbooks.

CLASSIFICATION OF
CARBOHYDRATES

In biochemistry, sugars and carbohydrates are now com-
monly termed saccbarides. The name is derived from the
Latin word saccharum, meaning “sugar.” Carbohydrates
are usually classified according to size and thus solubility.
For example, a monosaccharide contains one sugar, a dis-
accharide contains two, and a polysaccharide contains
many sugars. In general, the larger the molecule, the less
soluble it is in water. Most carbohydrates in plants are
bound as oligosaccharides or polysaccharides or attached
to a range of different aglycones as glycosides. Much vari-
ation occurs in the way they are linked in plant glycosides,
oligosaccharides, or polysaccharides.

Carbohydrates may be classified according to the
number and relationships of the monosaccharide groups
present.

Monosaccharides have three to nine carbon atoms, al-
though five or six is most common.

Oligosaccharides are molecules formed by the combina-
tion of 10 or fewer monosaccharides. The bond be-
tween them is called a glycosidal bond. Disaccharides, a
subcategory of oligosaccharides, are extremely impor-
tant in nutrition.

Polysaccharides have 10 or more monosaccharide units.
This group can be broken into subcategories of bo-
mopolysaccharides and heteropolysaccharides. Glycosides are
formed via a bond between a sugar (a 1nonosaccharide
or oligosaccharide) and a nonsugar molecule (known as
the aglycone or genin). The numerous glycosides found
in plants are of great importance to herbal medicine
and are discussed later in this chapter.

----- PAGE 50 -----
42

@ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Major Categories of
Carbohydrates

Monosaccharides

Oligosaccharides
¢ Prebiotics

Disaccharides
« Lactose
« Maltose
« Sucrose

Polysaccharides (glycans)

Homopolysaccharides
* Glucans
e B-p-glucans
« Starches (amylose and amylopectin)
* Glycogen
* Cellulose
« Dextrans
e Fructans
¢ Galacturonans
¢ Inulins

Heteropolysaccharides
e Arabinogalactans
* Glucomannans
* Galactomannans
« Pectins
¢ Xyloglucans
¢ Glycosaminoglycans
¢ Glycoproteins
¢ Mucopolysaccharides

Polysaccharides from fungi
(mycopolysaccharides)

Polysaccharides from algae

Glycosides
« Glucosinolates
© Cyanogenic glycosides
¢ Flavonoid glycosides
e Anthraquinone glycosides
¢ Cardiac glycosides
« Saponin glycosides

MONOSACCHARIDES

Monosaccharides are described by the general formula
C,(H,O ),. Each monosaccharide can exist as more than
one optically active isomer. However, only one form is
normally encountered. Glucose is usually the D-isomer,
rhamnose the L-isomer, and so on. Each sugar can theo-
retically exist in both a pyrano (6-membered) and furano
(5-membered) ring form, although one or the other is
usually favored. Glucose normally takes up the pyrano
configuration, whereas fructose usually occurs in the fu-
rano form.

Fig. 4.1. Pyrano (6-membered) and furano (5-membered)
ring forms of p-glucose

To fully convey the chemistry and hence the bio-
chemical role of monosaccharides would necessitate an
exploration of technicalities that are beyond the scope of
this book. Please refer to Suggested Reading at the end of
this chapter for further reading on this topic.

Principal Plant Monosaccharides

Tetroses (C,H,O,)
These do not occur in free form in plants but play vital
roles in the biosynthesis of polyphenols. Threose and ery-
throse are examples.

Pentoses (C;H,90;)

Ribose is a pentose monosaccharide that is found univer-
sally in nucleic acids. Arabinose and xylose are present in
a range of polysaccharides as well as various glycosides.

HO
HOo—""" OH OH

Fig. 4.2. Xylose C5HioQ,

Hexoses (C,H),0,)

The hexoses glucose and fructose are the free sugars or
monosaccharides that are found most often in plants,
along with the disaccharide sucrose.

----- PAGE 51 -----
HOH

Fig. 4.3. Galactose CgH).O,

Deoxysugars

In deoxysugars, one or two alcohol groups have been lost
via reduction.

2-deoxy-D-ribose (C5H 904)

L-rhamnose (CgH,05)

Amino Sugars

Amino sugars are constituents of many polysaccharides,

glycolipids, and glycoproteins. More than 60 are known.

They contain from three to nine carbon atoms. Five-

carbon pentoses and 6-carbon hexoses are most abundant.
b-glucosamine (Cs5H,;NO;)
D-galactosamine (CsH,;NOs)

Five sugars are commonly found as components of
glycosides and polysaccharides: two are hexoses (glucose
and galactose), two are pentoses (xylose and arabinose),
and one is a methylpentose (rhamnose). Fructose is a
common component of oligosaccharides, such as sucrose,
and of the polysaccharides known as fructans.

OLIGOSACCHARIDES

Oligosaccharides are composed of monosaccharides or
their derivatives linked together via glycosidal bonds. The
plant world contains a wide variety of oligosaccharides.
The term is derived from the Greek word ofigos, meaning
“few”: oligosaccharides contain between two and ten
sugar units. Their various names reflect the number of

Table 4.1. Disaccharides and Trisaccharides

CaRBOHYDRATES @ 43

monosaccharides they contain, as in disaccharide (2 sac-
charides) and trisaccharides (3 saccharides).

CHZOH CHZOH
0. OH
HOG +)
3 OH ‘y)No {OH |
j 2
OH OH
Fig. 4.4. Lactose
Prebiotics

A prebiotic is defined as an indigestible food ingredient
that selectively stimulates the growth or activity of certain
bacteria in the colon. To be effective, prebiotics must es-
cape digestion in the upper gastrointestinal tract and be
used by a limited number of the microorganisms that
make up the colonic microflora. Prebiotics are principally
oligosaccharides that stimulate the growth of
Bifidobacteria, and are referred to as bifidogenic factors.
Prebiotics may have anticarcinogenic, antimicrobial, hy-
polipidemic, and glucose-modulating activities.

POLYSACCHARIDES

Polysaccharides, also known as giycans, are defined as high
molecular-weight polymers created through the conden-
sation of a large number of monosaccharide molecules.
Like oligosaccharides, polysaccharides are built up of
monosaccharide units and their derivatives. They differ
from oligosaccharides in that their molecules contain
from 10 to as many as several thousand units. The most
frequently occurring building block is D-glucose, though
D-mannose, D- and L-galactose, D-xylose, L-arabinose,
uronic acids (D-glucuronic acid, D-galacturonic acid, and

TYPE NAME MONOSACCHARIDE COMPONENTS OCCURRENCE
Disaccharide Sucrose Glucose, fructose Sugarcane, sugar beet
Maltose Glucose, glucose Enzymatic breakdown of starch
Lactose Glucose, galactose Milk
Trisaccharide Gentianose Glucose, glucose, fructose Gentiana spp.
Planteose Glucose, fructose, glucose Psyllium seeds
Raffinose Rhamnose, glucose, fructose Many seeds (eg., cottonseed}

----- PAGE 52 -----
44 «> INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

L-iduronic acid), and amino sugars (D-glucosamine and
D-galactosamine) also occur. Unlike oligosaccharides,
many polysaccharides are insoluble in water.
Polysaccharides fulfill a number of fundamental
functions. They act as structural substances: for example,
cellulose in plants, chitin in insects and crustaceans, and
chondroitin sulfate as a component of mammalian carti-
lage tissue.

They also serve as energy reserves, in the forms of

starch and inulin in plants and glycogen in animals. The

lubricant function of hyaluronic acid and the anticoagu-

lant activity of heparin provide some specific examples.
Polysaccharides can be subdivided according to

structure into homopolysaccharides and hetero-
polysaccharides.
Homopolysaccharides

Homopolysaccharides are composed of building blocks of
a single type of monosaccharide. Depending on the type
of monosaccharide they contain, homopolysaccharides
are given various names, such as glucans, fructans, man-
nans, and xylans.

Glucans

Although glucose is the most important sugar for energy
metabolism in most cells, it is not present to any great ex-
tent in the form of a free monosaccharide. Cells store glu-

cose for future use as polymers, and in this form, glucose
can be stored compactly until needed. The two major
polysaccharides used for energy storage are starch in
plants and glycogen in animals and bacteria.

Starch

Starch is a constituent of some algae and all higher plants.
It occurs both as amylose, an unbranched molecule, and
amylopectin, a branched molecule. Amylose consists
chiefly of linear chains of glucose and is water-soluble.
Amylopectin, also water-soluble, is a highly branched
molecule that is substantially larger than amylose. Starch
molecules contain between 100 and 6,000 units of glucose.

Cellulose

Cellulose is the most abundant organic compound in
plants and the most abundant single polymer in the bio-
sphere. It is also a homopolymer of glucose (a large polymer
that consists entirely of a single monomer, in this case
glucose). However, the glycosidic linkages in cellulose are
in the B-configuration instead of the a-configuration of
starch and glycogen. Cellulose is insoluble in water be-
cause of the high affinity of the polymer chains for one
another. Its individual polymeric chains have molecular
weights of 50,000 or greater. Unlike those of amylose, the
linear chains are very rigid and lie parallel to each other,
stabilized by intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bridges.

Agaricus blazel (himematsutake)
Auricularia auricula (wood ear)
Flammulina velutipes {enoki)
Grifola frondosa (maitake)
Lentinus edodes (shiitake)

Coriolus versicolor (coriolus mushroom)

Please refer to chapter 9 for more information.

Mycopolysaccharides

Mycopolysaccharides and polysaccharide-protein complexes make up the cell walls of various
fungi. Their principal bioactive substances are believed to be the B-p-glucans.* The properties of
the various myco-f-p-glucans depend upon a range of chemical characteristics, such as molecu-
lar weight, branching patterns, solubility in water, and tertiary structure.

Edible Fungi Rich in B-glucans

Medicinal Fungi Rich in B-glucans

The mycopolysaccharides may have anticarcinogenic, immune-modulating, antimicrobial,
anti-inflammatory, cardioprotective, hepatoprotective, nephroprotective, hypoglycemic, and an-
ticaries effects.> An important example discussed elsewhere is lentinan, from Lentinus edodes.

Schizophyllum commune and

Sclerotina sclerotiorum (button mushrooms)
Tremella fuciformis (tremella)

Ustilago maydis (huitlacoche)

Wolfporia cocos (poria)

Ganoderma lucidum (reishi)

|

----- PAGE 53 -----
The chains interact in parallel bundles of about 2,000
chains. Each bundle constitutes a single microfibril. Many
microfibrils arranged in parallel bundles constitute a
macrofibril, which can be seen under the light microscope.
In higher plants, cellulose occurs in association with other
polysaccharides, with proteins, and also with lignin.

B-D-glucans

B-D-glucans, usually called B-glucans, comprise a class
of indigestible polysaccharides located primarily in the
cell walls. They are widely distributed in such sources as
oats, barley, yeast, bacteria, algae, and mushrooms. Oat B-
glucan is a soluble, viscous polysaccharide made up of
mixed-linkage units of the sugar D-glucose. The different
linkages break up the uniform structure of the B-glucan
molecule, increasing its solubility and flexibility.

Oat bran contains more than 5.5% B-glucan, and
rolled oats and whole oat flour about 4%. Oat B-glucan
has cholesterol-lowering effects.! It has demonstrated
some immune-enhancing effects and may be helpful for
some people with diabetes.’ Please refer to chapter 9 for
more information on B-glucans.

Dextrans

Dextrans are extracellular polysaccharides formed from
sucrose by certain species of bacteria. They consist of lin-
ear chains of D-glucopyranose units with occasional
branchings. Dextran-forming bacteria occur primarily in
the mouth and are the causative agents of plaque.

Fructans

Fructans are polymers of fructose stored in some plants as
reserve material instead of starch. They have a much
lower molecular weight than starch and are water-soluble.
‘The branched fructans are found mainly in grasses, while
linear fructans (for example, inulin) are particular com-
mon in Asteraceae plants.

Inulins

Inulins are composed mainly of fructose units and typi-
cally have a terminal glucose. The bond between fructose
units in inulins is a B-(2,1) glycosidic linkage. Plant in-
ulins contain 2 to 150 fructose units.

CaRBOHYDRATES .@ 45

OH
“OH

CHOH

CH,OH

Fig. 4.5. Inulin

Inulins are present in onions, leeks, garlic, bananas, as-
paragus, and artichokes, among other vegetables and
fruits. Because of their sweet taste and texture, inulins are
added to various foods in the form of powders produced
by the food chemical industry. They are only slightly di-
gested in the small intestine and fermented by a limited
number of colonic bacteria. The sources of inulins mar-
keted as nutritional supplements and functional foods are
the roots of chicory (Cichorium intybus) and Jerusalem ar-
tichoke (Helianthus tuberosus).

Inulins may have antitumor, antimicrobial, hypolipi-
demic, and hypoglycemic properties. They may also have
antiosteoporotic activity, as they appear te help improve
mineral absorption and balance.®

Herbs Containing Inulins
Arctium lappa (burdock)

Cichorium intybus (chicory)

Cynara scolymus (globe artichoke)
Echinacea spp. (echinacea)

Inula belenium (elecampane)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion root)

Heteropolysaccharides

Heteropolysaccharides are composed of building blocks
of two or three different types of monosaccharides, For
the most part, heteropolysaccharides are branched-chain
molecules linked to a protein framework by covalent
bonds.

Branched-chain polysaccharides linked to proteins
give the proteins unique molecular signatures that guide
them to their final destinations and facilitate specific in-
teractions among free proteins or proteins attached to

----- PAGE 54 -----
46 — INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

cells. Cell-wall polysaccharides act as recognition signals,
so the sugar sequence of these heteropolysaccharides is
informational, not unlike that of the nucleic acids in
DNA. Heteropolysaccharides have become the focus of
much scientific interest, as researchers have discovered
that they have immunomodulatory properties.

The myriad plant heteropolysaccharides are classified
according to the structure of the main chain, to which
side chains with one or more carbohydrate units are at-
tached. While the energy-storage polysaccharides and
cellulose are homopolymers composed exclusively of
glucose, a range of monosaccharides are used to build
heteropolysaccharides:

D-mannose

D- and L-galactose
D-xylose

L-arabinose

D-glucuronic acid
L-iduronic acid
N-acetyl-D-glucosamine
N-acetyl-D-galactosamine
N-acetylneuraminic acid

Glycosaminoglycans

In terms of structure, the simplest and best known of the
heteropolysaccharides are the glycosaminoglycans. These
are long, unbranched polysaccharides composed of repeat-
ing disaccharide subunits in which one of the two sugars is
either N-acetylglucosamine or N-acetylgalactosamine.
Glycosaminoglycans are negatively charged. This causes
the polymeric chains to adopt a stretched or extended con-
formation, which increases their spheres of influence and
generates a high viscosity in the surrounding region.

Glycosaminoglycans are usually found in extracellu-
lar spaces, where they produce a viscous matrix that re-
sists compression. This matrix confers many benefits: It
can allow a passageway for cell migration, create lubrica-
tion between joints, and provide rigidity to structures
such as cartilage and the eyeball.

Hyaluronic acid is a heteropolymer of D-glucuronic
acid and N-acetyl-p-glucosamine. It is considerably
larger than most glycosaminoglycans, reaching molecular
weights greater than one million. Hyaluronic acid is
formed by the successive addition of glucuronic acid and
N-acetylglucosamine residues to the ends of a growing
chain. Hyaluronic acid is usually found in a complex with
protein.

Fig. 4.6. Hyaluronic acid

Hyaluronic acid is a universal component of the ex-
tracellular fluid that fills the spaces between the cells of
body tissues. Extracellular fluid is packed with proteins
(collagen) and glycosaminoglycans. This forms a gel-like
matrix in which proteins are embedded and through
which water, oxygen, and solutes have to pass to get to the
cells. Hyaluronic acid is the main component of this ex-
tracellular matrix. Hyaluronic acid solutions have re-
markable viscosity and tensile properties. When no pres-
sure is applied to the solution, it is highly viscous and
rigid. If pressure is applied, the water is squeezed out and
the strands move past one another. Thus, hyaluronic acid
solutions behave as biological shock absorbers in connec-
tive tissue. Hyaluronic acid plays an important role in tis-
sue hydration, lubrication, and cellular function, and is
able to hold more water than any other natural substance.

Arabinogalactans

Arabinogalactans are water-soluble polysaccharides
widely found in plants, fungi, and bacteria. They are com-
posed of D-galactose and L-arabinose residues in the form
of a B-D-(1-3)-galactan main chain with side chains made
up of galactose and arabinose units of various lengths. In
plants, arabinogalactans occur as arabinogalactan pro-
teins. These proteins are proteoglycans involved in plant
growth and development; they may also be involved in
signal transduction in plants.

Dietary arabinogalactans come primarily from car-
rots, radishes, tomatoes, pears, and wheat, among other
plant foods. Gum arabic, a common food additive, is
composed of highly branched arabinogalactan. Arabino-
galactans are also found in medicinal plants, such as
Echinacea spp., and in the medicinal mushroom Gano-
derma lucidum. Arabinogalactans are thought to con-
tribute to the immune-enhancing activities of such herbs.

Larch arabinogalactan is a mixture of several different
arabinogalactans mainly derived from the wood of the
western larch (Larix occidentalis) but also present in other
species of larch. Research suggests that larch arabinogalac-

----- PAGE 55 -----
tan may have immune-enhancing activity; in vitro studies
revealed that it stimulated the activity of human natural
killer cells and enhanced the function of certain other im-
mune-system components. In other laboratory studies, it
inhibited the metastasis of tumor cells to the liver.78

Glucomannans

A glucomannan is a hydrocolloidal polysaccharide com-
posed of D-glucose and D-mannose residues bonded to-
gether in B-1,4 linkages. Approximately 60% of the poly-
saccharide is D-mannose and approximately 40% is
D-glucose.

Dietary glucomannan is a soluble fiber derived from
konjac flour. Konjac flour itself comes from the tubers of
various Amorphophallus species, relatives of the philoden-
dron houseplant. When ingested, glucomannan swells
and causes an increase in stool bulk, making it useful as a
laxative. It may also help control serum glucose and lipid
levels.

Pectins

Pectins are linear polysaccharides containing about 300 to
1,000 monosaccharides, principally D-galacturonic acid.
The D-galacturonic acid residues are linked together by
a-1,4 glycosidic linkages.

Pectins are found in the cell walls of many fruits but
are most concentrated in citrus and apples. As fruit ripens,
an insoluble precursor is converted to soluble pectin and
becomes gelatinous.

Pectin is widely employed in the food industry as a
gelling agent. It is also combined with the clay kaolin for
use in the management of diarrhea. Research suggests
that pectin has cholesterol-lowering and antithrombotic
properties and may help protect against colorectal cancer.

GLYCOPROTEINS

A rapidly advancing area in biochemistry is that con-
cerned with the structure and metabolism of saccharides
that are covalently attached to proteins (as in glycopro-
teins) and lipids (as in glycolipids). The carbohydrates in
these complexes vary in composition, in the way they are
linked, in their branching patterns, and in the type of sug-
ars that terminate each branch.

Glycoproteins are proteins to which carbohydrates
are linked by glycosidic bonds. The carbohydrates vary in
size, from mono- or disaccharides to polysaccharides, and
may be located at various positions on the polypeptide
chain. There is good reason to believe that most proteins
are, in fact, glycoproteins. In other words, there are more

CARBOHYDRATES «> 47

proteins that contain covalently bound carbohydrates
than proteins that are devoid of carbohydrates.

The molecular size of glycoproteins ranges from
15,000 to greater than one million. They differ not only
in the types and relative proportions of sugars they con-
tain, but also in the number of side chains present. Some
glycoproteins are of small molecular size and contain only
one carbohydrate chain per molecule. At the other ex-
treme, we have proteins that contain some 800 saccharide
chains in each molecule, such as sheep submaxillary
mucin. Attachment of sugars to proteins increases the sol-
ubility of proteins.

Glycoproteins cover the linings of the respiratory
and intestinal tracts, are responsible for the viscosity of
saliva and cervical mucus, and lubricate the eyeball in the
eye socket.

Mucopolysaccharides (Proteoglycans)

A group of compounds often classified as glycoproteins
are the mucopolysaccharides, or proteoglycans, of con-
nective tissue, including the chondroitin sulfates, heparin,
and keratan sulfate. To distinguish them from other gly-
coproteins, they are called proteoglycans and their carbo-
hydrate chains glycosaminoglycans.

Mucopolysaccharides differ from typical glycopro-
teins in that they contain long polysaccharide chains
made up of about 100 monosaccharide units. Mucopoly-
saccharides typically consist of a protein core to which
many long-chain linear heteropolysaccharides are cova-
lently linked. These are made up largely of repeating dis-
accharide units. In these disaccharides, one sugar is always
an amino sugar, either glucosamine or galactosamine.

Another constituent common to most mucopolysac-
charides is sulfate groups, linked by ester bonds to the hy-
droxyl groups of their monosaccharide constituents, and
in some cases also by amide linkages to the amino groups
of glucosamine. By virtue of their carboxyl and sulfate
groups, mucopolysaccharides are highly charged anions.

Mucopolysaccharides occur in many animal tissues
and fluids, including connective tissue, which is a partic-
ularly rich source. In skin, bone, cartilage, and ligaments,
mucopolysaccharides join with collagen or elastin fibers
to form the matrix or “ground substance” in which the
connective tissue cells (or fibroblasts) are embedded.

Postulated Functions of Protein-Bound
Carbohydrates
1. Physicochemical properties of glycoproteins
(viscosity)

¢ Activity of cells and tissues

----- PAGE 56 -----
48 << INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

2. Molecule-membrane interactions
¢ Secretion
* Clearance of glycoproteins from plasma
¢ Reaction of cell surface with viruses, blood group
antisera, and lectins
3. Membrane-membrane interactions
¢ Secretion
¢ Differentiation and growth
* Contact inhibition
¢ Adhesion and aggregation of cells
* Segregation of cells within the organism—
for example, the homing of lymphocytes
¢ Gamete recognition

GLYCOSIDES

The multitude of glycosides found in plants are all com-
pounds that contain a sugar unit attached to a noncarbo-
hydrate molecule, which is called the aglycone.

Sugar + Aglycone = Glycoside

On first consideration, this seems straightforward
enough, until one considers the variety of both sugars and
aglycones found in nature. From a biochemical perspec-
tive, saponins, flavones, and cardiac glycosides might all
be grouped together in a single category—a situation
guaranteed to confuse the nonspecialist. The important
point for the practitioner to remember is that glycosides,
because of their sugar component, are more easily ab-
sorbable, and thus the aglycone is more readily bioavail-
able. This increased bioavailability appears to be the rea-
son that so many diverse molecules naturally occur as
glycosides.

A number of ways have been developed to categorize
glycosides, each of which reflects different interests.

Classification of Glycosides

By sugar unit. A glycoside based on glucose is called a
glucoside; rhamnose will produce a rhamnoside, and
so on. In nature, most glycosides are formed from 5-
carbon pentose sugars or 6-carbon hexose sugars. The
sugar may be a mono-, di-, or oligosaccharide.

According to the nature of the aglycone-sugar linkage.
Different chemical bondings are possible in the
aglycone-sugar linkage, each having potentially differ-
ent chemical and physiological effects. The most com-
mon are the O-glycosides, in which an oxygen atom
acts as the link. C-glycosides, with carbon links, play an
important role as anthraquinone laxatives, such as
aloin in aloe. Other linkages include sulfur-based

S-glycosides and nitrogen-based N-glycosides. As with
other carbohydrate-based molecules, the bond might
be either an a- or a B-glycoside; B-glycosides are more
common.

By specific aglycone. This categorization is often the most
useful for the purposes of phytotherapy, as seen in the
following examples.

Simple Phenolic Glycosides: Arbutin and Salicin

Glucose
CH,OH
Glucose,
SS
OH a
Fig. 4.7. Arbutin Fig. 4.8. Salicin

Flavonoid Glycoside: Rutin

O—Glucose-O-Rhamnose

Fig. 4.9. Rutin

Anthraquinone Glycoside: Sennoside A

HO
Oo.

HO 9 OH

Oo
OH
HO
a l
we OH
Le)
fa

HO: re) fe)

HO
Fig. 4.10. Sennoside A

----- PAGE 57 -----
Steroid and Saponin Glycoside: Ginsenosides

CH,OH
HO
OH °
oH 9

Hj

CH3

oH
OH
H3C CH, 9~9°Za5 OH
CH,OH
Hye-FO
oH“
OH

OH
Fig. 4.11. Ginsenoside Re

Many pharmacologically important constituents
occur in plants as glycosides. While modification by the
sugar component is possible, the effect of a glycoside is
mainly determined by the nature of its aglycone. Thus, in
this book, we will consider glycosides in the context of
their aglycones, not as a separate group. However, I will
discuss two unique groups here, namely the cyanogenic
and the isothiocyanate glycosides.

Cyanogenic Glycosides

Bitter almonds (Prunus dulcis var. amara) produce a poi-
son, hydrogen cyanide (HCN), a fact that has been
known since antiquity. Cyanide occurs in the intact nut in
a bound form as a cyanogenic glycoside. The plant re-
leases its characteristic smell of bitter almonds only when
the tissue is damaged, which causes either enzymatic or
nonenzymatic hydrolysis of the glycoside. The immediate
hydrolytic product is a cyanohydrin, which spontaneously
decomposes to HCN and an aldehyde or ketone.

O-Glue

R 8 OH 7
\,7 Giycosidase \ // — Hystoxynittle

lyase ~

- oC as Seon + Ho=n
/ \ _ JN __. spontaneous q Hydrogen
R CaN R c=N Ketone cyanide

Cyanogenic

Cyanohydrin
Glyooside

Fig, 4.12. Cyanogenic glycoside hydrolysis

At least 1,000 species representing 100 families and
500 genera have cyanogenic properties, but the aglycone
has only occasionally been characterized.? Thus, only
about 40 cyanogenic glycosides have been identified.
Cyanogens (substances that can release cyanide) also occur
in the defense secretions of centipedes, millipedes, and
moths.

CARBOHYDRATES 2 49

Amygdalin
Amygdalin was first isolated from bitter almonds, the
seeds of the tree Prunus dulcis var. amara. The sugar moi-
ety in this compound is gentiobiose, typical for many
members of Rosaceae, and trace amounts may be present
in the fleshy parts of fruits, in bark, and in leaves.
Amygdalin is responsible for the bitterness and toxi-
city of the seeds of bitter almond and of apricots. An
amygdalin-containing drug called laetrile has been used
as an anticancer medicine, though its use is now re-
stricted.!°

Prunasin

This compound occurs in the leaves and bark of Prunus
species, as well as some other vascular plants and some
ferns, such as bracken fern (Pteridium aquilinum). In
small quantities, prunasin exhibits expectorant, sedative,
and digestive properties. Prunasin is the main active prin-
ciple of wild cherry bark (Prunus serotina), used as an ex-
pectorant, antitussive, and flavoring agent in cough
syrups.

» N,
Se Sy
Sel Lo sucu Se .o—Glu
N
Aniygdalase Prunase Bonzaldehyas
~ ~
water water + Glucose
+ HON

Fig. 4.13. Prunasin metabolism

Glucosinolates

The glucosinolates, also called isothiocyanates, are glyco-
sides that are not toxic per se but release the volatile oils
commonly known as mustard oils upon enzymatic hy-
drolysis. Release occurs when plant tissue is crushed,
through the reaction of the glucosinolate with the enzyme
thioglucosidase, which is always present in plants that
contain glucosinolates. Glucosinolates are B-thioglucoside
N-hydroxysulfates, which are primarily found in crucifer-
ous vegetables, such as cabbage, broccoli, brussels
sprouts, cauliflower, bok choy, and kale.

Chemically, glucosinolates are nitrogen-sulfur com-
pounds with the same basic formula; one sulfur atom is
bonded to glucose as the S-glucoside and the other sulfur
is present as the oxygen-linked sulfate anion. About 80
glucosinolates are known. The majority of glucosinolates
are aliphatic, and the remainder are benzyl or indole
derivatives. The best-known aliphatic derivatives are

----- PAGE 58 -----
5( @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

sinigrin and glucocapparin. A typical benzyl derivative is
sinalbin, and an indole derivative is glucobrassicin.'?

Glucose— S$

Fig. 4.14. Basic structure of a glucosinolate

Glucosinolates are characteristic constituents of the
mustard family, Brassicaceae. They occur, for example, in
cabbage, cauliflower, cress, mustard, rape, and turnip.
These glycosides are also uniformly present in other fam-
ilies in the same order, Capparales, to which Brassicaceae
belongs: Capparidaceae, Moringaceae, Resedaceae, Steg-
nospermataceae, and Tovariaceae. There are several un-
related occurrences, notably in the genera Carica (Cari-
caceae), Limnanthes (Limnanthaceae), and Tropaeolum
(Tropaeolaceae). The seeds of these plants are often a rich
source of glucosinolates, although the compounds are
normally distributed throughout the plant.

The major function of glucosinolates in plants is to
deter predators. However, specialist insects, such as the
white cabbage butterfly, Pieris rapae, become adapted to
their toxic effects and use the presence of inustard oils in
host plants as feeding cues and oviposition guides. Regular
dietary intake of quantities of glucosinolates causes toxic
effects in farm animals, especially damage to the thyroid,
liver, and kidneys. The same effects may occur in humans,
although this has rarely been observed in practice.

Actions of Glucosinolates

When applied topically, mustard oils act as rubefacients,
causing local vasodilation. Thus, mustard poultices are
applied to break up congestion in the lungs and bronchi-
oles, although care must be taken not to irritate the skin.
Taken internally, the compounds serve as effective decon-
gestants for sinus conditions and also stimulate digestion.
Large doses may induce emesis.

As with all sulfur compounds, mustard oils exhibit
some antibiotic effects. Glucosinolates depress thyroid
function in animals; therefore, all plants in the genus
Brassica are potentially goitrogenic. This action may be har-
nessed therapeutically in cases of hyperthyroidism.

Dietary intake of glucosinolates (in the form of broc-
coli, cabbage, cauliflower, or brussels sprouts) may have a
protective effect against colon cancer. Experimental
tumor production is greatly inhibited by pretreatment
with isothiocyanates. The isothiocyanates interfere with
the metabolism of carcinogens by enhancing the activity.
of several cytochrome P45, enzymes involved in the

detoxification processes. They inhibit procarcinogen acti-
vation and induce phase IT enzymes, such as NAD(P)H
quinone reductase and glutathione-S-transferase, which
detoxify the electrophilic metabolites capable of altering
the structure of nucleic acids.

Sinigrin

Sinigrin is common in the Brassicaceae—for example, in
horseradish (Armoracia rusticana), mustard plants (Brassica
nigra, B. hirta, and B. juncea), and cabbage (B. oleracea var.
capitata). Sinigrin and its breakdown product, allyl iso-
thiocyanate, which is formed during hydrolysis, are
volatile, intensely pungent, and responsible for the biting
taste of mustard.!*

o—s—ot poet
Nw fo UN e —

\ ¢. —ou
aN Shine” ~~ "\ A

Glucose—S

Fig. 4.15. Sinigrin and sinalbin

Indole-3-Carbinol

Indole-3-carbinol is a breakdown product of the glucosino-
late glucobrassicin, also known as indole-3-glucosinolate.

°
Roy

o—s—o
i

‘\

N’

\ 4

Glucose-S

f

No
H

Fig. 4.16. Glucobrassicin

While glucosinolates themselves have minimal anti-
cancer activity, indole-3-carbinol may have chemopre-
ventive properties.!> Indole-3-carbinol is produced from
indole-3-glucosinolate via the action of the enzyme my-
rosinase (thioglucoside glucohydrolase). This enzyme is
present in cruciferous vegetables and activated upon the
breakup of the vegetables during cooking or the grinding
action of teeth. Indole-3-carbinol may modulate estrogen
metabolism.'® It may also have antioxidant and anti-
atherogenic activities.

GUMS AND MUCILAGES

Gums, like acacia and tragacanth, and mucilages, such as
those from flaxseed, psyllium seed, and marshmallow
root, are found in many plants. They are usually formed
from the cell wall or deposited on it in layers. They con-
sist of monosaccharides and uronic acid units.

----- PAGE 59 -----
The term mucilage is loosely used, often interchange-
ably with gum. Chemically, mucilage is closely allied with
gums and pectins, but differs in certain physical proper-
ties. While gums swell in water to form sticky, colloidal
dispersions and pectins gelatinize in water, mucilages
form slippery, aqueous colloidal dispersions that are opti-
cally active and can be hydrolyzed and fermented.

Mucilages are not pathological plant products, but
are formed within the plant during normal growth by
mucilage-secreting hairs, sacs, and canals. Gums, on the
other hand, are deposited on the surface of plants as exu-
dates, which are formed as a result of bacterial or fungal
action after mechanical injury.

Mucilage is a naturally occurring organic plant con-
stituent with a molecular weight of 200,000 or greater,
the detailed structure of which is unknown. Mucilages

occur in nearly all classes of plants in various plant parts,
usually in relatively small percentages. They are often as-
sociated with other constituents, such as tannins. The
most common sources are the root, bark, and seed, but
they are also found in the flower, leaf, and cell wall.

Plants Containing Mucilage

Acacia senegal (acacia or gum arabic)
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow root and leaf)
Astragalus gummifer (tragacanth)

Chondrus crispus (carrageen)

Cyamopsis tetragonolobus (guar)

Cydonia oblonga (quince seed)

Plantago ovata, P. arenaria (psyllium seeds)
Sterculia urens (sterculia)

Symphytum officinale (comfrey root and leaf)
Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot leaves)

Ulmus rubra (slippery elm bark)

Any biological functions of mucilage within the plant
are unknown, but it is thought that they may aid in water
storage, decrease diffusion in aquatic plants, help in seed
dispersal and germination, and act as membrane thicken-
ers and food reserves.

The chief industrial sources of mucilages are Icelandic
and Irish moss, flax or linseed, locust bean, slippery elm
bark, and quince seed. They are usually extracted with
water or a dilute sodium carbonate solution, purified by
precipitation with alcohol or salt solutions from the aque-
ous solution, and marketed as powders. Mucilages are used
in cosmetics, in medicine as laxatives and diuretics, as
pharmaceutical emulsifying agents, and as materials that
prevent precipitation of colloidal suspension,

Most mucilages are considered to be polysaccharides

CARBOHYDRATES «> 51

that contain the same group of sugars as gums and
pectins; they commonly occur as salts. The cations are
chiefly of calcium, magnesium, potassium, and sodium.
The most common acids are uronic acids, such as man-
nuronic acid. Hydrolysis of mucilages yields pentoses and
hexoses, the most common being arabinose, galactose,
glucose, mannose, rhamnose, and xylose.

COOH

H OQ. OH
H
OH OH

OH H
H H

Fig. 4.17. d-mannuronic acid

The physical properties of mucilages are more im-
portant than their chemical properties. They are quite in-
digestible; however, even if polysaccharides were broken
down in the digestive tract, the breakdown products, sug-
ars and uronic acids, have little pharmacological effect
and are generally regarded as inert. Whether or not this
is the case in practice is not known.

Mucilage retains a large amount of water and hence
maintains an elevated temperature, which progressively
penetrates tissues. This makes mucilage useful in hot
compresses—for example, linseed compresses. Mucilage
also checks fermentation and bacterial growth, absorbs
toxins, and assists the body in eliminating wastes. Like
other water-soluble fibers, mucilage helps lower choles-
terol, and its hydrophilic properties produce a sensation
of fullness in the stomach without adding calories, mak-
ing it useful for appetite suppression. In addition, a blood
sugar-lowering effect has been observed in both diabetics
and normal subjects.

Mucilage acts primarily as a local demulcent or emol-
lient when it comes in direct contact with mucous mem-
brane surfaces or skin. Here they produce a coating of
“slime” that soothes and protects exposed or irritated sur-
faces of the gastrointestinal tract. They are used exten-
sively in the management of inflammatory digestive dis-
orders, especially when there is ulceration. Their relative
indigestibility and hydrophilic properties have important
influences on bowel behavior.

Laxative: The bulking effect of mucilage stimulates
peristalsis.

Antidiarrheal: Small quantities of mucilage absorb excess
water in the colon.

Gum Arabic
Gum arabic, or acacia gum, is the gum obtained from
Acacia senegal and closely related species. A. senegal is a

----- PAGE 60 -----
52 -& INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

spiny tree up to 6 meters high that grows in the Sudan
and Senegal. Harvesting starts with an incision through
the bark to the cambium layer of the tree. The bark above
and below the cut is removed so that an area of the cam-
bium is laid bare. This injury stimulates the formation of
gum as droplets in the cut, which dry to opaque balls with
a crackled surface. The gum is collected 20 to 30 days
after the incision is made.

Arabic acid, made up of calcium, potassium, and
magnesium salts, is a major constituent of acacia gum.
This acid is a branched-chain polysaccharide, the build-
ing blocks of which are D-galactose, L-arabinose, L-rham-
nose, and D-glucuronic acid.!”

A—G A—G A—G
| | | |
G—S— SF be
Sp p e
fo 4 4
| | |
A A A A

Fig. 4.18. General structure of arabic acid
(A =L-arabinose, R = L-rhamnose, G = p-galactose,
U = p-glucuronic acid)

Gum acacia also contains oxidizing enzymes, such as
peroxidases. For this reason, it should not be mixed with
easily oxidized compounds. In pharmaceutical manufac-
turing, gum acacia is used as an emulsifier, as a con-
stituent of suspensions, and in tablet production.

Tragacanth USP

Tragacanth is the gummy exudate from Astragalus gum-
mifer and other Asiatic species of Astragalus.'® When in-
troduced into water, tragacanth absorbs a certain propor-
tion of that liquid, swells greatly, and forms a soft
adhesive paste, but does not dissolve. If agitated with
water, this paste forms a uniform mixture, but in the
course of one or two days most of the tragacanth sepa-
rates out and is deposited, leaving a portion dissolved in
the supernatant fluid. Several days should be allowed in
order to obtain a uniform mucilage of the maximum gel
strength. Tragacanth is wholly insoluble in alcohol.

Tragacanth powder is often used to stiffen a pill mass
and render it adhesive. In glycerite form, it affords an ex-
cellent pill excipient. Tragacanth is also used as a sus-
pending agent in lotions, mixtures, and various other
preparations and prescriptions. It is used with emulsifying
agents largely to increase consistency and retard cream-
ing. The jellylike product formed when the gum is al-
lowed to swell in water serves as the basis for pharmaceu-
tical jellies, such as ephedrine sulfate jelly.

The constituent tragacanthin yields glucuronic acid
and arabinose when hydrolyzed.

Guar Gum .
Guar gum is obtained from the endosperm of the seed of
Cyamopsis tetragonolobus, a plant cultivated in India,
Pakistan, and the United States. Guar flour, milled from
the seeds, contains about 86% water-soluble mucilage,
which can be extracted by precipitation with ethanol. The
main constituent is a galactomannan (with a molecular
weight of about 220,000), a B-1,4-linked D-mannose lin-
ear polysaccharide with an a-1,6-linked D-galactose
residue attached to every other D-mannose unit.

‘CHjOH CHsOH
oH OL OH OH
on fh,
4 9 4 4
H OH | H |
et pen om cii,0H

Fig. 4.19. Guar gum (partial structure)

Guar gum is used in pharmacy as a disintegrator in
tablets, an emulsifier, and a thickener. It is also employed
as a laxative. Taking guar gum before meals may lower
blood glucose levels for diabetics. It also reduces the
cholesterol level in blood serum, both in healthy people
and in diabetics.'°

Psyllium Seed and Husk
Psyllium seed is the ripe seed obtained from several
Plantago species. The seeds are elliptical and 2 to 3 mm
long, odorless, bland-tasting, and mucilaginous when
chewed. The mucilages and hemicelluloses are located in
the seed coat, or husk, making the husks about five times
more active than the seeds. The mucilaginous husk of
P. ovata separates fairly easily from the rest of the seed, so
this is the species from which psyllium husk is derived.
To prepare psyllium for consumption, the whole
seeds or husks are soaked in water for several hours; they
are then taken with a large amount of liquid. The mu-
cilage retains the moisture during gastrointestinal transit,
promoting the passage of a soft stool after a transit time
of 6 to 12 hours.

Agar

Agar (or agar agar) is a dried, hydrophilic, colloidal sub-
stance obtained from various species of red algae, including
Gelidium amansii, G. cartilagineum, and G. divaricatum. The
main constituents of the product are two polysaccharides:
agarose, a long-chain compound in which about 10% of

----- PAGE 61 -----
CARBOHYDRATES 2 53

the chains are esterified with sulfuric acid; and agaropectin, 9. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
which differs from agarose in that significantly more A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
chains are esterified with sulfuric acid. Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Agar is sold commercially in the form of pale yellow 10. Ibid.
strips or pieces or as a yellowish powder. Agar is indi- 11. Ibid.

gestible and passes through the gastrointestinal tract al-
most unchanged. [t undergoes little if any breakdown by
intestinal microorganisms, which may account for its rel-
atively low activity in the bowel. It acts solely through its
ability to absorb water and swell within the intestine.

12. Ibid.

13. Tihornalley PJ. Isothiocyanates: mechanism of cancer
chemopreventive action. Anticancer Drugs 2002;
13(4):331-8.

14. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

References, A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London,
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

15. Bradlow HL, Sepkovic DW, Telang NT, et al.
Multifunctional aspects of the action of

1. Behall KM, Scholfield DJ, Hallfrisch J. Effect of
beta-glucan level in oat fiber extracts on blood lipids in

men and women. Journal of the American College of
Nutrition 1997; 16:46-S 1. indole-3-carbinol as an anti-tumor agent. Annals of the

New York Academy of Sciences 1999; 889:204-13.

16. Zeligs MA. Diet and estrogen status: the cruciferous
connection. Journal of Medicinal Food 1998; 1:67-82.

2. Estrada A, Yuri CH, Van Kessel A, et al.
Immunomodulatory activities of oat beta-glucan in vitro
and in vivo, Microbiology and Immunology 1997, 41:99 1-8.

3. Hallfrisch J, Scholfield DJ, Behall KM. Diets containing 17. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;

Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

soluble oat extracts improve glucose and insulin re-
sponses of moderately hypercholesterolemic men and

women. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 1995; 18. Thid.
61:379-84. 19. Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
4, Manzi P, Pizzoferrato L. Beta-glucans in edible mush- London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.
rooms. Food Chemustry 2000; 68:315-18. 20. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
5. Borchers AT, Stem JS, Hackman RM, et al. Mushrooms, A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
tumors, and immunity. Proceedings af the Society for Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.
Experimental Biology and Medicine 1999; 221:281-93.
6. Roberfroid MB, Delzenne NM. Dietary fructans. Suggested Reading
Annual Review of Nutrition 1998; 18:117-43. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants.
7. Hauer J, Anderer FA. Mechanism of stimulation of Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.
human natural killer cytotoxicity by arabinogalactan Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition,
from Larix occidentalis. Cancer Immunology, London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.
Immunotherapy 1993; 36:237-4. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary: A Handbook of
8. Kelly GS. Larch arabinogalactan: clinical relevance of a Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London; Washington,
novel immune-enhancing polysaccharide. Alternative DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Medicine Review: A Journal of Clinical Therapeutic. 1999,
4:96-103.

----- PAGE 62 -----
LIPIDS

molecules found in living systems. Most are insol-

uble in water but soluble in nonpolar solvents, such
as alcohol. (This definition excludes the mineral oils and
other petroleum products obtained from fossil material.)
In a physiological sense, lipids are fundamentally impor-
tant for both humans and plants.

Major classes of lipids include fatty acids, glycerol-
derived lipids (including fats, oils, and phospholipids), the
sphingosine-derived lipids (including ceramides, cereb-
rosides, gangliosides, and sphingomyelins), steroids and
their derivatives, terpenes and their derivatives, certain
aromatic compounds, and long-chain alcohols and waxes.
Often lipids are found conjugated with proteins or carbo-
hydrates, and the resulting substances are known as
Lipoproteins and lipopolysaccharides. The fat-soluble vitamins
can also be classified as lipids. The material in this chap-
ter focuses on representative lipids found in medicinal
plants.

| ipids are a large and diverse class of organic

Important Functions of Lipids
Among many other functions, lipids serve as the basis of
cell membranes and as a form of fuel storage.

Major structural components of all biological membranes
Energy reserves and fuel for cellular activities
Vitamins and hormones (lipids and lipid derivatives)
Protective coatings with important immunological
functions for cells

Waterproof protective coverings in plants and some
animals

Blood-based carriers of fat-soluble vitamins such as A,
D, E, and K

CLASSIFICATION OF LIPIDS

Any classification of lipids, whether by physical proper-
ties, chemistry, biological function, or occurrence, is arbi-
trary. The classification of lipids can be based on their
physical properties, chemical structure, biological func-

54

tion, or occurrence. This makes the choice of classifica~
tion arbitrary; ideally, it can be based on the interests of
the classifier. Structural variations within each class are
due to the different fatty acid residues that may be present.

Simple aliphatic (straight-chained) hydrocarbons act
as structural backbones to which functional groups can be
added to create various types of lipids. Those most often
encountered within the creative cornucopia of plant cells
include:

¢ Halogenated hydrocarbons
* Alcohols

* Sulfides

¢ Esters

° Fatty acids

Large, unsaturated hydrocarbons are common in
plant waxes. As chain Jength and number of unsaturated
bonds increase, the molecule becomes increasingly waxy
and then solid at room temperature. In their functional-
ized forms, these are the lipids we know as fatty acids.

FATTY ACIDS

Fatty acids are Cyg to Coo straight-chain compounds that
have a single carboxyl radical. They play a profound nu-
tritional role, supplying not only lipids to the diet but also
vitamin F, the essential fatty acids used by the body to
build and maintain membrane structures, among other
functions.

The numbering of carbons in fatty acids begins with
the carbon of the carboxyl group. Fatty acids that contain
no carbon-carbon double bonds are termed saturated fatty
acids; those that contain double bonds are unsaturated fatty
acids. The numbers used for fatty acids come from the
number of carbon atoms, followed by the number of sites
of unsaturation. For example, palmitic acid is a 16-carbon
fatty acid with no unsaturation and is designated by 16:0.
The site of unsaturation in a fatty acid is indicated by the
symbol A and the number of the first carbon of the dou-
ble bond. Thus, palmitoleic acid is a 16-carbon fatty acid

----- PAGE 63 -----
Structural Classification of Lipids

Fatty acids
¢ Saturated fatty acids
¢ Unsaturated fatty acids
¢ Branched-chain fatty acids
¢ Hydroxy fatty acids, including
prostaglandins

Lipids containing glycerol

¢ Mono-, di-, and triacylglycerols
(acylglycerols)

¢ Glyceryl ethers (alkoxydiglycerides)

* Glycosylmono- and glycosydiacyl-
glycerols

¢ Phospholipids (phosphatides)

« Plasmalogens (acetal phosphatides)

Lipids containing sphingosine
¢ Sphingomyelins
* Ceramides
¢ Neutral glycosphingolipids
(cerebrosides)
¢ Sialoglycosphingolipids (gangliosides)
« Sulfoglycosphingolipids (sulfatides)

Complex lipids
¢ Lipoproteins and proteolipids
¢ Lipopolysaccharides

Long-chain aliphatic alcohols and waxes

Hydrocarbons such as squalene and
carotene

Sterols and related compounds such as
vitamin D

with one site of unsaturation between carbons 9 and 10,
and is designated by 16:1A9. Saturated fatty acids that
contain fewer than eight carbon atoms are liquid at body
temperature, whereas those containing more than 10 are
solid. The presence of double bonds in fatty acids signif-
icantly lowers the melting point relative to that of satu-
rated fatty acids.

wae
a a

Fig. 5.1. Palmitoleic acid

Lips .2 $5

Most fatty acids come from the diet. However, the
body can make all the various fatty acid structures needed,
with two key exceptions. These are the highly unsatu-
rated fatty acids linoleic acid and linolenic acid, which
contain unsaturation sites beyond carbons 9 and 10.
Because these two fatty acids cannot be synthesized from
precursors in the body, they are known as essential fatty
acids, as they must be provided in the diet. Since plants are
capable of synthesizing linoleic and linolenic acid, hu-
mans can acquire these fats either by consuming a variety
of plants or by eating the meat of animals that have con-
sumed these plant fats.

Classification of Fatty Acids

In saturated fatty acids, all the bonds are filled.
Unsaturated fatty acids contain double bonds, making
such molecules more biochemically active. Cyclic
monobasic fatty acids are less common, but include such
clinically important molecules as chaulmoogric and hyd-
nocarpic acids, which are discussed later in this chapter.

Table 5.1. Saturated Straight-Chain Acids

COMMON NAME SYSTEMIC NAME = STRUCTURAL FORMULA
Butyric n-tetranoic CH3[CH,],COOH
Isovaleric 3-methy-butanoic — [CH,],CHCH,COOH
Caproic n-hexanoic CH,[CH)],COOH
Caprylic n-hexanoic CH,[CH)],COOH
Capric n-octanoic CH,[CH)],COOH
Lauric n-decanoic CH3[CH,];p COOH
Myristic n-tetradecandic CH3[CH,]},COOH
Palmitic n-hexadecanoic CH,[CH}4COOH
Stearic n-octadecanoic CH3[CH,])¢COOH
Arachidic n-eicosanoic CH3[CH)])gCOOH

Occurrence and Distribution

In plants, fatty acids occur mainly in bound form, esteri-
fied to glycerol, as fats or lipids. These lipids comprise up
to 7% of the dry weight of leaves in higher plants, and are
important as membrane constituents in chloroplasts and
mitochondria. Considerable quantities of lipids also occur
in the seeds or fruits of many plants, providing a stored
form of energy to use during germination. Seed oils from

----- PAGE 64 -----
56 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Table 5.2. Unsaturated Straight-Chain Acids

COMMON NAME NUMBER OF LINSATURATED BONDS STRUCTURAL FORMULA

Palmitoleic 1 CH,[CH;],CH=CH[CH,],COOH

Oleic 1 CH,[CH,],CH=CH[CH,], COOH

Linoleic 2 CHy[CH,],CH=CHCH,CH=CH-[CH,},COOH

Linolenic 3 CH,CH,=CHCH,CH=CHCH,-CH=CH[CH,],COOH

Arachidonic 4 CHy[CH,],CH=CHCH,CH=CHCH,-CH=CHCH,CH=CH[CH,};COOH

plants such as olive, palm, coconut, soy, sunflower, rape,
and peanut are exploited commercially as food fats, for
soap manufacture, and in the paint industry. Plant fats,
unlike animal fats, are rich in unsaturated fatty acids, and
there is now abundant evidence that some of these are es-
sential human dietary requirements.

Certain polyunsaturated fatty acids cannot be synthe-
sized by humans and therefore must be supplied in food.
These are the essential fatty acids, distinguished by dou-
ble bonds beyond the one in the C-9 position (counted
from the carboxyl end). Examples include omega-3 fatty
acids (linoleic acid, linolenic acid, gamolenic acid, and cis-
6, cis-9, and cis-12-octadecatrienoic acids) and the omega-
6 fatty acid gamma linolenic acid.

Gamma-Linolenic Acid

Gamma-linolenic acid (GLA) is an unusual constituent of
living matter that is found in very few plants. These in-
clude borage (Borago officinalis), evening primrose
(Oenothera biennis), black currant (Ribes nigrum), and
hemp (Cannabis sativa).!

GLA is an omega-6 (Q-6) polyunsaturated fatty acid
made up of 18 carbon atoms and three double bonds. It is
a precursor in the synthesis of the beneficial series-1
prostaglandins. Through the synthesis of these prosta-
glandins, GLA can play a role in lowering blood pressure,
making platelets less sticky, decreasing inflammation, and
enhancing immune function. It may also help lower
blood cholesterol and triglyceride levels.

CH3—— [CHa]27— CH,

ONO Ott pg gl

Fig. 5.2. Gamma-linolenic acid

Black Currant Seed Oil

Black currant seed oil, from the seeds of: Ribes nigrum,
contains about 15% to 20% GLA, making it a rich source
of omega-6 fatty acids. Black currant seed oil also con-
tains up to 20% of the omega-3 (Q-3) polyunsaturated
fatty acids alpha-linolenic (ALA) and linoleic acids.
Research suggests that black currant oil has antithrom-
botic and anti-inflammatory actions. 73

Borage Oil

Borage oil, from the seeds of Borago officinalis, is a rich
source of GLA. The amount of GLA in borage oil, mea-
sured as the percentage of total fatty acid content, ranges
from about 20% to 27%. Borage oil also contains ap-
proximately 10% alpha-linolenic acid (ALA).*

Evening Primrose Oil

Evening primrose oil, from the seeds of Oenothera biennis,
contains approximately 7% to 14% GLA and about 10%
linolenic acid.’ According to research, evening primrose
oil has demonstrated anti-inflammatory actions in some
cases of rheumatoid arthritis. It may also be indicated in
other inflammatory disorders, such as Sjogren’s syndrome
and ulcerative colitis.° It is approved in the United
Kingdom as a pharmaceutical treaunent for mastalgia and
for atopic dermatitis, particularly to help with itching.’

Alpha-Linolenic Acid

Alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) is an omega-3 (Q-3) polyun-
saturated fatty acid containing 18 carbon atoms and three
double bonds. ALA is metabolized to eicosapentaenoic
acid (EPA), a precursor of the series-3 prostaglandins, the
series-5 leukotrienes, and the series-3 thromboxanes.
These eicosanoids have anti-inflammatory and an-
tiatherogenic properties. ALA metabolites may also in-
hibit the production of the pro-inflammatory eicosanoids,
prostaglandin E, and leukotriene By, as well as the pro-

----- PAGE 65 -----
inflammatory cytokines, tumor necrosis factor-a. and
interleukin B1.

The incorporation of ALA and its metabolites into
cell membranes can affect membrane fluidity, which may
play a role in the anti-inflammatory and antiplatelet ac-
tions of ALA. The Mediterranean diet, high in ALA, ap-
pears to lower the risk of coronary artery disease and cer-
tain types of cancer.®

Flaxseed Oil

Flaxseed oil, also known as flax or linseed oil, is made
from the seeds of Linum usitatissimum. Flax is a very rich
source of ALA, containing approximately 40% to 60% of
this essential fatty acid. Linoleic acid and oleic acid are
also present, but in smaller amounts (about 15% each). In
addition, flaxseed oil contains secoisolariciresinol diglyco-
side, a type of phytoestrogen known as a lignan, in varying
amounts. Flaxseed oil may have anti-inflammatory, an-
tithrombotic, and antiproliferative activities.?

Chaulmoogric acid

Chaulmoogric acid, or (S)-13-(cyclopent-2-enyl) tride-
canoic acid, is present in amounts of about 27% as the
glyceride ester in chaulmoogra oil, extracted from seeds
of Hydnocarpus wightiana. The ethyl ester has been used
in the treatment of leprosy.'°

Fig. 5.3. Chaulmoogric acid

Prostaglandins

Prostaglandins can be regarded as derivatives of prosta-
noic acid. Prostanoic acid is not found in living tissue, so
this is simply a chemical distinction. (Refer to chapter 9
for a detailed discussion on prostaglandin synthesis.)

All naturally occurring prostaglandins have a double
bond in the trans configuration between C-13 and C-14.
Additional double bonds in the cis configuration can occur
between C-5 and C-6, as well as between C-17 and C-18.
Depending on the substituents in the ring, prostaglandins
are assigned to series E, F, D, and so on. According to the
number of double bonds in the side chain, they are further
divided into subgroups, such as E,, E,, F;, F,, and so on.

Prostaglandins occur in practically all tissues.
However, they are not stored, but synthesized from the
corresponding polyunsaturated Cy fatty acids only when
needed. Depending on the organ, they show a variety of

LIPIDS 2 57

physiological effects, discussed in detail in chapter 9. For
example, PGE, is a vasodilator and bronchodilator, and
PGF, is a vasoconstrictor and bronchoconstrictor.

Fig. 5.4. Prostaglandin E,

Thromboxanes and prostacyclins are related to the
prostaglandins. Thromboxane B, is the metabolic product
of the unstable thromboxane A), which induces platelet
aggregation. The prostacyclin (also known as prosta-
glandin PGI,) formed in the blood vessel wall, on the
other hand, prevents platelet aggregation.

Hoos.

OH

Fig. 5.5. Prostacyclin

Fig. 5.6. Thromboxane B,

In addition to prostaglandins, the monohydroxy-(e)-
icosatetraenoic acids (HETE) and the leukotrienes are
also derived from arachidonic acid. 5-HETE and
leukotriene B, (LTB,) play a part in the regulation of neu-
trophil and eosinophil function, while the sulfidopeptide
leukotrienes (LTC,, LTD,, LTE, and LTT,) are impor-
tant smooth muscle antispasmodics.

OH
— COOH

Se

Fig. 5.7. 5-hydroxy-(e)-icosatetraenoic acid

----- PAGE 66 -----
58 <- INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

LIPIDS CONTAINING GLYCEROL

These lipids are composed of a glycerol backbone to
which three fatty acids are esterified.

The fats occurring in nature consist almost exclu-
sively of triacylglycerols (neutral fats), along with traces of
mono- and diacylglycerols. The latter two esters, how-
ever, are formed in the intestine during digestion and ab-
sorption of triacylglycerols, and therefore may also be
found among circulating lipids in plasma.

Natural fats may be solid or liquid at room tempera-
ture. At least 5 and up to 12 or more different fatty acids
occur in these fats, which are a mixture of extremely di-
verse triacylglycerols. The fatty acids of most natural fats
consist of mixtures of saturated and unsaturated acids. In
general, the melting point of a fat increases with the pro-
portion of saturated fatty acids it contains.

LONG-CHAIN ALIPHATIC
ALCOHOLS

Aliphatic alcohols occur widely. Several alcohols belong
to aroma compounds that play a role in environmental
and food systems. They are found with normal, branched
(mono- or isoprenoid), saturated or unsaturated chains of
various length and sometimes with secondary or even ter-
tiary alcohol functions.

Waxes

Waxes, strictly speaking, are esters of fatty acids with
aliphatic straight-chain monohydric alcohols, usually
cetyl alcohol and octadecyl alcohol, but frequently also
with higher alcohols, up to C-30. Among the saturated
fatty acids, cerotinic acid occurs most frequently; occa-
sionally, hydroxy acids are also found. In many natural

waxes, the fatty acid and alcohol components have the
same chain length.

The epidermis of animals and plants excretes waxes
as protective films against water loss or wetting. For ex-
ample, the surface waxes of plants in very dry climates
help the plants conserve water. In humid climates, the
surface waxes of fruits and the lanolin found on the skin
and in the hair of most furry animals repel excess mois-
ture. In many zooplankton and other species of marine
animals, waxes serve as energy reserve materials.

Urushiols (Alkylcatechols)

Urushiols have a side chain containing 15 or 17 carbon
atoms; they may be saturated or unsaturated, with one to
three double bonds.!! These compounds, found in the oil
of poison ivy and poison oak, produce contact dermatitis
and are discussed in more detail in chapter 10.

| —
Fig. 5.8. Urushiol III
HYDROCARBONS

Straight-chained, or aliphatic, hydrocarbons resulting
from decarboxylation of fatty acids are present in some
plants. That is, they are thought to be metabolic break-
down products of fatty acids. They may be saturated or
unsaturated, but unlike their fatty acid counterparts, they
usually have an odd number of carbon atoms.
Turpentine is a rich source of saturated hydrocarbons

Acylglycerols

Acylglycerols are formed by esterification of glycerol with one, two, or three fatty acids, yielding a mono-, di-,

or triacylglycerol, respectively.

CH,OCOR CH,OH CH,OCOR' CH,OCOR! CH,OCOR!
| | | lo |
CHOH CHOCOR CHOCOR? CHOH CHOCOR?
| | | | |
CH,OH CH,OH CH,OH CH,OCOR? CH,OCOR?

2-acylglycerol
(B-monoacylglycerol)

T-acylglycerol
{a-monoacylglycerol)

1,2-diacylgycerol
(a, B-diacylglycerol)

1,2,3-triacylglycerol
(triacylglycerol)

1,3-diacylglycerol
(a, a-diacylglycerol)

----- PAGE 67 -----
such as heptane. Turpentine is the volatile fraction distilled
from the oleoresins of various pines, which is then further
processed. Sources include Pinus pinaster and P betero-
phyla. See chapter 6 for a detailed discussion on these
compounds.

ON
Fig. 5.9. Heptane

The primary source of saturated hydrocarbons in liv-
ing plants is the waxy coating on some leaves and fruits. A
common leaf wax constituent is nonacosone, found in the
leaves of brussels sprouts (Brassica oleracea var. gemmifera).

Unsaturated hydrocarbons play a pivotal role in plant
metabolism. Ethylene is an important plant growth hor-
mone, and isoprene is the building block of the whole
gamut of terpenes, discussed in chapter 6.

CH» —=CH, Pe

Fig. 5.10. Ethylene and isoprene

Polyacetylenes
These molecules contain a highly reactive triple bond, as
found in the gas acetylene. They often contain additional
functional groups, but can be conveniently classified here.
Many polyacetylenes are extremely toxic, such as the
compound cicutoxin found in cowbane and water hem-
lock (Cicuta virosa). Others, such as the antifungal com-
pound wyerone found in broad beans (Vicia faba), act as
phytoalexins that protect the plant against fungal
pathogens.

CH===:CH

Fig. 5.11. Acetylene

Sy
LE CHs

AZ

Fig. 5.12.
Cicutoxin

Lipps .2 59

CHa

Fig. 5.13. Wyerone

Alkamides

There are more than 140 closely related alkamides, all of
which have a more or less unsaturated aliphatic acid
residue linked with different amine parts. Apart from a
very few saturated derivatives from Piper amalago, the
alkamides fall into two groups.

Compounds with purely alkene patterns. Purely alkene
alkamides have been isolated from four plant families:
Piperaceae, Aristolochiaceae, Rutaceae, and Asteraceae.

Compounds with alkene and alkyne linkages. Alkyne
alkamides are restricted to the Asteraceae, and most
are found in the Anthemideae and Heliantheae tribes.
Eighty different acetylenic alkamides have been iso-
lated from these tribes. This structural diversity stems
from various combinations of 14 amine and 85 acid
moieties. Such diversity provides valuable chemotaxo-
nomic criteria.

Several alkamides, especially alkene isobutyl amides,
are known for their insecticidal activity as well as for their
pungent taste. They also produce local anesthesia of the
mucous membranes, accompanied by profuse salivation.
Plants that yield these substances have been used medic-
inally since ancient times, especially in cases of
toothache. The position of double bonds and isomerism
both play important roles in the physiological and insec-
ticidal activities of the alkamides. A representative alka-
mide is affinin, which is found in the roots of the Mexican
silagogue Heliopsis /ongipes.'3

Most of the alkamides have been isolated from the
Anthemideae and Heliantheae tribes of the family
Asteraceae. Within these taxa, distribution is mainly con-
fined to a few closely related genera.

ae

Fig. 5.14. Affinin.

----- PAGE 68 -----
60 «2 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Halogenated Hydrocarbons

Marine organisms that produce secondary metabolites are
attracting increasing attention as sources of unique
molecules of pharmacological value. One such group is
the halogenated hydrocarbons, which are almost unknown
in land plants. An example is the bromine-containing
spirolaurenone from Laurencia, a genus of red algae.

Br

Fig. 5.15. Spirolaurenone

Alcohol Hydrocarbons

These are hydrocarbons that contain a hydroxyl group as
part of the molecule. If biosynthetically derived from iso-
prene, alcohol hydrocarbons may be considered acyclic
terpenes (for example, geraniol), which are discussed in
chapter 6. A nonterpenoid example is octanol (caprylic al-
cohol). This volatile substance is a component of many
orchid flower scents and is used in perfumery.

Fig. 5.16. Geraniol

Hydrocarbon Sulfides

Hydrocarbon sulfides are relatively uncommon in plants
but of great importance in human diet and health care.
These are odoriferous molecules (perhaps better termed
odious, if one is English!) such as those found in garlic
(Allium sativum) and skunk cabbage (Symplocarpus foetidus).

Allicin

The major odor principle of garlic, allicin is produced from
the amino acid alliin by the enzyme alliinase when exposed
to air. In both laboratory and clinical studies, allicin has
demonstrated antidiabetic, antihypertensive, antibiotic,
and hypolipidemie activities. It also enhances fibrinolytic
activity in the blood and inhibits platelet aggregation."

f COOH |

| oe allinase
Ss. CC $.
awa NH, Yan. $ “ NUS,
alin icin
(odorless)

Fig. 5.17. Allicin

Hydrocarbon Esters

These condensation products of hydrocarbon alcohols
and acids tend to have pleasant aromas. This reaction is
fundamental to biochemistry, so a wide variety of esters
exist. See chapter 6 for more information.

References

1. Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

2. Deferne JL, Leeds AR. Resting blood pressure and car-
diovascular reactivity to mental arithmetic in mild hy-
pertensive males supplemented with blackcurrant seed
oil. Journal of Human Hypertension 1996, 10:531-7.

3. Watson J, Byars ML, McGill P, Kelman AW. Cytokine
and prostaglandin production by monocytes of volun-
teers and rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with di-
etary supplements of blackcurrant seed oil. British
Journal of Rheumatology 1993; 32:1055~58.

4. Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

5. Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1999.

6. Belch JJF, Hill A. Evening primrose oil and borage oil in
rheumatologic conditions, The American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 2000; 71(suppl):352S—5S.

7. Huang Y-S, Mills DE, eds. Gasma-linolenic Acid:
Metabolism and Its Roles in Nutrition. Champaign, IL:
AOCS Press, 1996.

8. James MJ, Gibson RA, Cleland LG. Dietary polyunsatu-
rated fatty acids and inflammatory mediator production.
The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 2000;

71 (suppl):343 S488.

9. Prasad K. Dietary flaxseed in prevention of hypercholes-

terolemic atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis 1997; 132:69-76.

10. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

11. Ibid.

12. Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

13, Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

14. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

----- PAGE 69 -----
Suggested Reading

Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants.

Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

Lies © 61

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary: A Handbook of
Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London; Washington,
DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

----- PAGE 70 -----
TERPENES

he terpenes, also known as isoprenoids, are the
largest group of secondary plant metabolites.
More than 20,000 structures have been de-
scribed.' The name terpene comes from turpentine, which
in turn comes from the old French ter(e)binth, meaning
“resin.” They are all derived chemically from 5-carbon
isoprene units assembled in different ways.

Terpenes of different sizes and composition are found
throughout all classes of organisms. Larger terpenoid
molecules are essential components of human meta-
bolism and include the adrenal hormones, the membrane
component cholesterol, and the lipid soluble vitamins A,
E, and K. An even greater variety of terpenoid molecules
exist as secondary metabolites in plants and fungi, as well
as some bacteria and insects.

While not essential for viability, terpenes enable
plants to prosper in their specific environments. They
have a variety of natural functions. They may be flavors
or scents or act as growth regulators, defense secretions,
or pollinator attractants. Terpenes appear to have evolved
quite separately within small groups of organisms, and
therefore comprise a great diversity of structures capable
of specific interactions with a range of biological receptors.

Plants with distinctive terpenes provide many of the
compounds used as research leads for pharmaceutical,
agricultural, and other commercial applications.

¢ Paclitaxel (taxol) from yew trees inhibits mammalian
cell division and is used clinically in cancer treatment.

* a-santonin is one of the anthelmintic components of
Artemisia spp.

¢ Artemisinin, from Artemisia annua, is active against
malaria, including strains that have developed resis-
tance to quinine derivatives.

¢ Pyrethrins from Tenacetum cinerariifolium provide
biodegradable insecticides.

* Stevioside, a compound that is hundreds of times
sweeter than sucrose, is a valuable sweetener.

CLASSIFICATION OF TERPENES

The molecules in this diverse group are all biosynthesized
from the 5-carbon precursor isoprene, and so are also
known as isoprenoids. The isoprene units can be assem-
bled and modified in thousands of different ways, allow-
ing plants to produce a seemingly endless number of
chemical variations based on the simple unit. Most are
multicyclic structures that differ from one another not
only in functional groups, but also in their basic carbon
skeletons. This group includes essential oils and resins,
steroids, carotenoids, and rubber.”

Major Groups of Terpenoids

Bee

Fig. 6.1. Isoprene
NAME NUMBER OF CARBONS EXAMPLE
Monoterpenes 10 (2.x 5} Volatile oils
Sesquiterpenes 15 (3x5) Volatile oils
Diterpenes 20 (4x5) Resins
Triterpenes 30 (6x 5} Saponins, sterols, steroids
Tetraterpenoids 40 (8 x 5) Carotenoid pigments
Polyprenes (Nx 5) Rubbers
MONOTERPENES

Monoterpenes, the Cj) representatives of the terpenoid
family, are derived from the union of two isoprene pre-

----- PAGE 71 -----
cursors joined head to tail. Monoterpenes and the related
sesquiterpenes are important components of plant essen-
tial oils, or volatile oils. Monoterpenes tend to occur in
members of certain plant families, such as Lamiaceae,
Pinaceae, Rutaceae, and Apiaceae, from which many eés-
sential oils are commercially produced.’ Some of these
compounds, such as geraniol, are almost ubiquitous and
can be found in small amounts in the volatile secretions of
most plants.

Volatile oils occur in plants that have specialized se-
cretory structures, such as oil cells, glandular hairs, and
resin ducts. In plants, they are believed to help attract pol-
linators to flowers, defend green tissues from predation by
herbivores, and protect against microbial infection.

Monoterpenes are volatile, aromatic, colorless, oily
substances, although a few (such as camphor) are crys-
talline. They are not soluble in water, but some contain
polar groups that facilitate the formation of emulsions in
which the oil disperses in droplets.

Classification of Monoterpenes
Monoterpenes may be classified either by their structures
or according to their functional groups.

Table 6.1. Functional Classification

FUNCTIONAL GROUP EXAMPLE
Unsaturated hydrocarbons Limonene
Alcohols Linalool

Alcohol esters Linalyl acetate

Aldehydes Citronellal

Ketones Carvone

TERPENES .@ 63

Optical isomerism is a common feature of monoter-
penes, and some compounds, such as carvone, can occur
in more than one optically active form. Although any
given plant rich in essential oils may have only a few
major constituents, it may contain up to 50 other
monoterpenes in smaller amounts.

In some plants, there may be considerable chemical
variation within the species; different plant populations
contain different mixtures of monoterpenes. Plants dis-
playing these chemical variations are called chemotypes.
For example, 13 different chemotypes of thyme have been
recognized among populations growing in France.

Hydrocarbons
These are monoterpenes with a purely hydrocarbon-
based functional group.

Limonene

(+)-Limonene is the main constituent of volatile oils from
the fresh peel of Citrus fruits, such as lemon, tangerine,
bitter orange, and sweet orange. It also occurs in neroli
oil (orange flower oil, from Citrus aurantium var. amara)
and in oils of caraway (Carum carvi) and dill (Anethum
graveolens). {-)-Limonene is present in oil of fir, made
from the needles and young twigs of ‘Abies alba, and in
mint oils, from Mentha species.

Limonene has expectorant and sedative activities.
Various essential oils containing limonene are used to fla-
vor foods and beverages. In addition, this molecule has
attracted much research attention as a representative mono-
terpene.* It has demonstrated potential cancer-preventive
properties, antineoplastic activity in both pancreatic and
breast cancer, and clinical application as a solvent of gall-
stones. *%? Pure limonene may be irritating to the skin.®

Structural Classification of Monoterpenes

ACYCLIC MONOCYCLIC

CH, OH,

ieee et
HC ‘OH

Fig. 6.2. Geraniol Fig. 6.3. Limonene

BICYCLIC

CHa
HO, te, P
7 —~/
ro
ae 0
Hye* yc Os

Fig. 6.4. Borneol

IRREGULAR

Fig. 6.5. Pyrethrin

----- PAGE 72 -----
64 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

CH,
HC.
aaa
CH,
> CHy CHs

Fig. 6.8.
a-pinene

Fig. 6.6.
Limonene

Fig. 67.
6-phellandrine

B-phellandrene

6-phellandrene is a very common constituent of essential
oils. One isomeric form occurs in the volatile oils of sev-
eral fir (Abies), spruce (Picea), and pine (Pinus) species,
while another is the main constituent of the essential oil
from the seeds of the water fennel (Oenanthe aquatica).? It
has expectorant properties and is abundant in pharma-
ceutical pine needle oil.

a-pinene

This is an important constituent of many essential oils,
especially oil of turpentine, which is distilled from the
oleoresin of Pinus palustris and other Pinus species. Other
examples include many oils from Pinaceae, Cupressaceae,
Myrtaceae, and Lamiaceae and oils made from the peel of
Citrus species.

Pinene is an irritant that can cause skin eruption,
delirium, ataxia, and kidney damage.! It is used in the
manufacture of camphor, insecticides, perfume bases, and
synthetic pine oil.1!

Alcohols

These are monoterpenes with a hydroxyl group attached.

Borneol

The (+) form of borneol is the main constituent of
Borneo camphor, distilled from Dryobalanops aromatica,
and is also present in oils of spike lavender (Lavandula
latifolia), rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis), and nutmeg
(Myristica fragrans).

Borneol is used mainly for the manufacture of its es-
ters, which are widely used in cosmetics. However, some
free borneol is used in perfumery. It has toxic effects in
the central nervous system of mammals.”

CHs

CHg Sy ~

>

‘OH

Hye CH,

Fig. 6.9. Borneol Fig, 6.10. Geraniol

Geraniol
Geraniol is the main constituent of a number of essential
oils, including palmarosa oil (Cymbopogon martini) and
oils from allied species, such as lemongrass (C. citratus)
and citronella (C. nardus). It is also found in oil or attar of
rose from Rosa centifolia, R. damascena, and other roses.
Geraniol has strong antiseptic activity, which is seven
times stronger than that of phenol. It has a sweet rose
odor, and is used in perfumery and as an insect attractant
in traps.3

Linalool
This is the main constituent of oil of coriander
(Coriandrum sativum). It also occurs in lavender oils (from
the flowering tops of Lavandula spp.), in oil of bergamot
(Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia), orange flowers (C. auran-
tium var. amara), and many other essential oils.

Linalool is antiseptic and fungistatic; it also has seda-
tive properties.'* It is used in perfumery as a substitute for

bergamot and French lavender oils.!°
CHy

CHa HO. CHy OH

CH

Se 2
eA

Fig. 6.11. Linalool

cH; “cH,

Fig. 6.12. Menthol

Menthol

Menthol occurs in both free and ester forms as the main
constituent of peppermint oil, the steam-distilled volatile
oil from Mentha piperita and other Mentha species.

Used as an inhalant, menthol helps to relieve symp-
toms of bronchial and nasal congestion, and acts as a
carminative and gastric sedative when used internally.
Applied topically, it has antipruritic, analgesic, and anti-
septic effects.!° However, it can give rise to rare hyper-
sensitivity reactions, such as contact dermatitis.

Esters

Monoterpene esters have a general formula of R-C-O-R1.
Rand Ri may be the same or different, and may be either
aliphatic (straight-chained) or aromatic (cyclic).

Bornyl Acetate (borneol acetate)
Borny]l acetate occurs in volatile oils from the needles of
many pine and fir species, including Pinus pinaster, P
sylvestris, Abies alba, and A. sibirica, and also certain Lamia-
ceae plants, such as rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) and
thyme (Thymus vulgaris).

Borny! acetate smells like pine needles. Bornyl esters

----- PAGE 73 -----
of acetic, formic, and isovaleric acids occur in the
volatile oil from the rhizome and root of valerian
(Valeriana officinalis).

Pine needle oil has expectorant properties and is used
as a bronchial and nasal inhalant. (+)-Borny] isovalerate is
sedative.!”

CHy
CH

Fig. 6.13. Bornyl acetate

Aldehydes

Aldehydes are compounds that contain the carbonyl
group CO, and in which the carbonyl group is bonded to
at least one hydrogen. The general formula for an alde-
hyde is RCHO, in which R is hydrogen or an alky] or aryl
group. Low-molecular-weight aldehydes, such as form-
aldehyde and acetaldehyde, have sharp, unpleasant odors.
Higher-molecular-weight aldehydes, such as benzalde-
hyde and furfural, have pleasant, often flowery odors and
are found in essential oils.

Cis cH

ow we

Fig. 6.14. Citronellal

°

Citronellal

Citronellal is the main constituent of citronella oil, made

from the fresh leaves of Cymbopogon nardus. It also occurs in

the volatile oils of Excalyptus species, lemon balm (Melissa

officinalis), lemon (Citrus limon), and various other plants.
Oil of lemon balm has antiseptic and sedative proper-

ties. It is used in soap, perfumes, and as an insect repellent. !®

Ketones

Monoterpene ketones are compounds that contain the
carbonyl group CO, and in which this carbonyl group is
bonded only to carbon atoms. The general formula for a
ketone is RCOR’.

Camphor

The (+) form of camphor is found in rectified or Japanese
oil of camphor, made from the camphor tree
(Cinnamomum camphora). The (-) form occurs in feverfew
(Tanacetum parthenium) and various species of Artemisia
and Lavandula.

Camphor is irritating to the skin and has been used as

TERPENES 2 65

a rubefacient. It is initially cooling to the skin and has
mild anesthetic and antipruritic actions. It is used as a
moth repellent and as a preservative in pharmaceuticals

and cosmetics.!9
CHs

cHy CH,

Fig. 6.15. Camphor Fig, 6.16. Carvone
Carvone

Carvone is the main constituent in oil of spearmint
(Mentha spicata), and (+)-carvone is the major constituent
of oils of caraway and dill, from the dried ripe fruits of
Carum carvi and Anethum graveolens, respectively.
Carvone has carminative and antiseptic actions.?° It is
used in the manufacture of liqueurs, for flavoring confec-
tioneries, and in perfumes and soaps.

Phenols

The isoprene units in monoterpene phenols are assem-
bled so that there is a benzene ring in the molecule to
which a hydroxyl group is attached.

CHa CH

‘OH

Hye CH Hac CHy

Fig. 6.17. Carvacrol Fig. 6.18. Thymol

CHs

Hs CH.
BON 5

CH HC CHy

Fig. 6.19. 1,8-cineole Fig. 6.20. Thujone

Carvacrol
This constituent is found in a number of oils from
Lamiaceae plants, including oregano oil, distilled from
the flowering tops of Origanum vulgare, and thyme oil,
from the leaves and tops of Thymus vulgaris.

Carvacrol is strongly antiseptic, demonstrating one and
a half times the activity of phenol. It also shows antifungal

----- PAGE 74 -----
66 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

and anthelmintic properties. It is used commercially in
mouthwashes.?!

Thymol

The best sources of thymol are the essential oils of some
Lamiaceae plants, such as Thymus vulgaris and Monarda
‘punctata. Thymol is antiseptic and antifungal. It is used
to destroy mold, for preserving botanical and biological
specimens, and also in dentistry as an antiseptic.”” It may
irritate gastric mucosa.

1,8-cineole (eucalyptol, cajeputol)

This is the main constituent in oil of eucalyptus
(Eucalyptus globulus and some other Eucalyptus spp.), oil
of cajeput (Melaleuca leucadendron and other Melaleuca
spp.), and many other essential oils. It has anthelmintic,
expectorant, and antiseptic activities, and also shows
cockroach-repellent activity.2%

Thujone (thujan-3-one)

Thujone occurs as a mixture of two stereoisomers that
differ in the stereochemistry of the 4-methyl group. It is
found in many essential oils, such as white cedar oil from
the leaves of Thuja occidentalis, tansy oil from the leaves
and tops of Tznacetum vulgare, and, together with thujyl
alcohol and acetate, in wormwood oil from the aerial
parts of Artemisia absinthium.

Thujone is highly toxic; ingestion may cause convul-
sions.”4 (Please see chapter 10 for more information.)
Wormwood oil has been used as an anthelmintic agent
and cedar leaf oil as a rubefacient.

Tridoids
Tridoids are bitter-tasting monoterpenoid lactones de-
rived from monoterpene precursors. They are found in
about 70 families of flowering plants distributed in 13 or-
ders.’> They are characterized by a cyclopentanodihy-
dropyran ring, shown below with the numbering system
used in iridoid nomenclature.”6

The term iridoid comes from iridodial, a compound
first found in the defense secretions of the fire ant, Irido
myrmex. Similar structures occur in the defense secre-
tions of other ants, stick insects, and beetles.

CHy
CL>
ce)
Hy ‘OH
Fig. 6.21. Fig. 6.22.
Cyclopentanodihydropyran Iridodial

ring

There is no consensus on the classification of iri-
doids, of which more than 1,000 have been identified. In
The Dictionary of Natural Products, three subcategories are
described.?”

Iridoid Glycosides

Iridoid glycosides, or iridoids proper, are lactones, often
with glucose attachment to the hydroxyl group of the
lactone ring. The aglycones are usually highly unstable,
and herbarium specimens containing iridoid glucosides
also often turn dark as they dry.?* A good example of this
group is aucubin (below).

Simple Iridoids

Simple iridoids are volatile aglycones. An example is
nepetalactone, the psychoactive constituent of catnip
(Nepeta cataria), the plant so loved by members of the
cat family.® The valepotriates, such as valtrate from
Valeriana officinalis, also possess this action. These mainly
nonglucosidic iridoids are sedatives.?°

oH cHy

“Sy

fo)

CH,OH 6

CHs 5

glucose

Fig. 6.23. Aucubin Fig. 6.24. Nepetalactone

CH,OAc

SS

isovalerianyl-O
is)

a

O-isovalerianyl

Fig. 6.25. Valtrate

Secoiridoids

Secoiridoids are distinguished by an open $-membered
ring. They are biosynthetic precursors of terpene alka~
loids, and often occur with their related alkaloids.
Gentiopicrin is a good example.?!

HOH HjCay #
° acl
OH

OH
OH

Fig. 6.26. Gentiopicrin

----- PAGE 75 -----
Pharmacological Activity of Iridoids

Plants containing iridoids play a central role in herbalism,
as they are often the basis of what is known as the bitter
‘principle.*? Tridoids are the bitterest of plant compounds,
with a taste perceptible at a dilution as high as 1:50,000.
Bitters are known to stimulate the release of gastrin in the
gastrointestinal tract, leading to an increase in digestive
secretions, including bile. Many are used as bitter tonics,
such as bogbean (Menyanthes trifoliata), and others as
anti-inflammatory agents, including eyebright (Euphrasia
officinalis).

Tridoids that are found as glycosides, such as fulvo-
plumierin and allamandin, have demonstrated antimicro-
bial or antileukemic activities in laboratory studies.**
Aucubin and various other iridoid glucosides show laxa-
tive and diuretic properties, while the valepotriates are
sedative. In large concentrations and in the presence of
acids, iridoid glycosides are toxic.

Asperuloside

This compound is found in many species of the Rubiaceae
family-—for example, sweet woodruff (Galium odorata) and
cleavers (G. aparine). It has a laxative action.**#

OH

Fig. 6.27. Asperuloside

Aucubin

Common in many families of dicotyledons, aucubin has
laxative and diuretic properties. The aglycone, aucubi-
genin, shows antimicrobial and antitumor activities, but is
toxic to mammals."

Gentiopicrin (gentiopicroside)

This is found in the roots of Gentiana lutea and in other
plants of the Gentianaceae family. It has demonstrated
antimalarial activity.*°

Harpagoside

Found in the roots of devil’s claw (Harpagophytum procum-
bens), in the rhizomes of Chinese figwort (Scrophularia
buergeriana), and in some Lamium species, harpagoside
demonstrates analgesic activity.’ It is also extremely bitter.

TERPENES .@ 67

Fig. 6.28. Harpagoside

ea

OK

Fig. 6.29. Valerenic acid

Valerenic Acid

This compound is well known because of its occurrence
in Valeriana officinalis, in which it contributes to the herb’s
antispasmodic activity.’

9. OCH;

Fig. 6.30. Verbenalin

Verbenalin

Verbenalin is found in Verbena officinalis. Its activity
weakly resembles that of ergot in promoting uterine con-
tractions. It is also a mild parasympathomimetic agent,
gently relaxing the autonomic nervous system.??

SESQUITERPENES

The sesquiterpenes are derived from three isoprene units.
Based on biogenetic origin, there are more than 200 dif-
ferent structural types of sesquiterpenes, and several
thousand such compounds are known.”

Classification of Sesquiterpenoids
These compounds can be conveniently classified into
three main groups according to structure: acyclic (e.g.,

----- PAGE 76 -----
68 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

farnesol), monocyclic (e.g., bisabolol), and bicyclic (e.g.,
caryophylene).

CH CHs CH;

we Se Sy orn

HyC’
Fig. 6.31. Farnesol

Cs
OH CHy

CHy

CHy
Fig. 6.32. Bisabolol

One large group of sesquiterpenes, made up of those with
an additional lactone function, is discussed later in this
chapter under the heading Sesquiterpene Lactones.

In addition to higher plants, sesquiterpenes are well
represented in bryophytes, fungi, microorganisms, and
some marine animals and insects. It appears that this class
of molecules fulfills a number of ecological roles.

* A number of sesquiterpenes are involved in allelopathic
plant-plant interactions. This is a chemical process by
which plants attempt to keep other plants from com-
peting for growing space and resources. Plants that
employ allelopathy include black walnut, Artemisia
species (wormwood and various sagebrushes), sun-
flower, and tree of heaven.

* Sesquiterpenes can act as fungal pheromones, or chemi-
cal attractants. For example, sirenin is involved in the
attraction of gametes in fungi of the genus Al/omyces. In
addition, a number of sesquiterpenes have roles as
pheromones in insects.

¢ Several sesquiterpenoid phytoalexins have been found,
mostly in the Solanaceae family. Phytoalexins are
formed as chemical responses to infection or infesta-
tion in plants.

* Many sesquiterpenes play a defensive role as allomones
in plant-insect and plant-fungal interactions. A/omones
are chemicals produced by one species that act on an-
other species.

B-caryophylene

B-caryophylene occurs as a mixture of a-caryophylene
and isocaryophylene in many essential oils, such as oil of
clove, prepared from the dried flower buds of Syzygium
aromaticum, and oil of copaiba, the oleoresin from species

of Copaifera. a-caryophylene is synonymous with humu-
lene. B-caryophylene is widely used in perfumery.*!

me “4 ( yn

H,C—CH

Hc H;c

Fig. 6.33. Caryophylene Fig. 6.34. Chamazulene

Chamazulene

Chamazulene is a component of the blue oil produced by
steam distillation of chamomile (Matricaria recutita),
wormwood (Artemisia absinthium), and yarrow (Achillea
millefolium). In addition, sesquiterpene lactones found in
these plants are converted to matricin and achillin during
distillation. Chamazulene has anti-inflammatory and anti-
pyretic activities.”

Gossypol

Gossypol occurs in a racemic form in the seeds of cotton
(Gossypium spp.), meaning that it is a mixture of dextroro-
tatory and levorotatory isomers in such proportions that
the mixture has no optical activity.

Gossypol has demonstrated antifungal and antitumor
activities. However, it is toxic to nonruminant mammals,
birds, insect larvae, nematodes, and other animals. In
mammals, it causes loss of body weight, diarrhea, cardiac
irregularity, hemorrhage, edema, and other ill effects.
Because it can block sperm formation, it may act as a male
contraceptive.

Hy

Fig. 6.36. Guaiazulene

Fig. 6.35. Gossypol

Guaiazulene

Guaiazulene is a component of the blue oil produced dur-
ing the steam distillation of chamomile (Matricaria recu-
tita) and guaiac wood (Guaiacum officinale or G. sanctum),
formed from structurally related substances present in
these plants. It has anti-inflammatory activity.

Humulene
This is a constituent of many essential oils, including hops
(Humulus lupulus). Humulene is used in perfumery.**

----- PAGE 77 -----
ee £ -
~\

ad

Fig. 6.37. Humulene

Fig. 6.38. Zingiberene

Zingiberene

Zingiberene occurs in the rhizomes of ginger (Zingiber of-
ficinale) and in the related Curcuma species. Oil of ginger
has a carminative activity. It is used as a flavoring agent.**

SESQUITERPENE LACTONES

Sesquiterpene lactones are a class of natural sesquiter-
penes, distinct from other members of the group because
of the presence of an a-lactone system.

f Sy

Fig. 6.39. Sesquiterpene lactone skeleton

Sesquiterpene lactones are biologically very active.
Some are highly toxic to mammals, and others can cause
allergic contact dermatitis in humans handling the plants
in which they occur. Many have antitumor activity, but
their considerable cytotoxicity has prevented any specific
medicinal application.

At least 3,000 lactones have now been described. The
great majority of these have been obtained from a single
plant family, Asteraceae, in which they are characteristic
constituents. Lactone constituents have been reported
occasionally in plants from 16 other angiosperm families,
most notably Apiaceae.*”

In Asteraceae plants, sesquiterpene lactones are
found mainly in the aerial parts of the plant (the leaves
and flowering heads) in concentrations of about 5% of
the dry weight. Certain species store large amounts of
sesquiterpene lactones in glandular hairs called trichomes.
‘When touched, the glands release the sesquiterpene lac-
tones, which then elicit their various biological or phar-
macological effects.

Sesquiterpene lactones are frequently present in mix-
tures of up to 15 components per plant species. Infra-
specific variations can occur, notably in some Artemisia
and Ambrosia species.

TERPENES .& 69

Classification of Sesquiterpene Lactones

Sesquiterpene lactones are classified into four major
groups.

* Germacranolides, with a 10-membered ring (e.g., ala-
tolide, the largest class)

* Eudesmolides, with two fused 6-membered rings (e.g.,
alantolactone)

© Guaianolides, with a 5-membered ring fused to a 7 and
a methyl substituent at C-4

* Pseudoguaianolides, which have the same characteris-
tics as guaianolides, but with a methyl! substituent at
C-5 (e.g., ambrosin)

fe) °o

Fig. 6.40. Germacranolide Fig. 6.41. Eudesmanolide

°.
» °
3
Fig. 6.42. Guaianolide

Pharmacology and Uses
The antineoplastic activity of sesquiterpene lactones in
the Asteraceae has led to the identification of structure-
activity relationships that show that all cytotoxic, anti-
leukemic, tumor-inhibiting, and immunostimulating
sesquiterpene lactones have an a,B-unsaturated exocyclic
lactone.*#®

Various sesquiterpene lactones exhibit antibacterial,
antifungal, anthelmintic, antihyperlipidemic, and cardio-
vascular properties, and some show anti-inflammatory ac-
tivity.*? Judaicin, found in Artemisia judaica, has demon-
strated potential as a digitalis-like cardioactive agent.

The migraine-preventive activity of feverfew has
been attributed to its content of sesquiterpene lactones, of
which parthenolide is the major component. Parthenolide
comprises 85% of the total sesquiterpenes in feverfew. All
of the feverfew sesquiterpenes that demonstrate anti-
migraine activity are classified as germacranolide-type
sesquiterpenes.

----- PAGE 78 -----
70 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Toxicity

The sesquiterpene lactones are highly irritating to the
nose, eyes, and gastrointestinal tract of sheep and goats.
Plants that contain sesquiterpene lactones kill thousands
of sheep each year in the United States. Among the toxic
sesquiterpene lactones identified are tenulin in Helenium
amarum (bitter sneezeweed) and hymenoxon in
Hymenoxys odorata (bitter ruabberweed). Mammalian toxi-
city has also been attributed to alantolactone from ele-
campane (Inula helenium).°° For more information on the
toxicity of sesquiterpene lactones, see chapter 10.

Ranunculosides

Ranunculosides are sesquiterpene lactone glycosides that,
upon hydrolysis, split up into ranunculin and glucose.
Ranunculin is then converted into an unsaturated lactone,
protoanemonin. Protoanemonin is very unstable, but on
drying it is converted into anemonin, which is further
converted into anemonic acid. Protoanemonin is toxic; its
derivatives are not.*! Ranunculin, protoanemonin, and
anemonin have medicinal properties; anemonic acid does
not. Please refer to chapter 10 for a discussion about the
toxicity of ranunculosides.

Plants Containing Ranunculosides
Christmas rose (Helleborus niger)
Field buttercup (Ranunculus acris)
Globe flower (Trollius europaeus)
Marsh marigold (Caltha palustris)
Pasqueflower (Pulsatilla vulgaris)
Wood anemone (Anemone nemorosa)

Absinthin (absinthiin)
This is the main bitter principle in wormwood, Artemisia
absinthium.

Wormwood is used as an anthelmintic, as a bitter
tonic, and for flavoring vermouth.”

Hye OW
OH chs

Ok, chs

i)

Fig. 6.43. Absinthin

Fig. 6.44. Achillin

Achillin (santolin)
Achillin is found in yarrow (Achillea millefolium and other
Achillea spp.) and in several Artemisia species. It functions

as a plant growth inhibitor. During steam distillation,

achillin is converted into chamazulene, which has anti-

inflammatory properties.**

Hy
Q
Vac
CHs, “CH,

Fig. 6.45. Alantolactone Fig. 6.46. Artemisinin
Alantolactone

Alantolactone occurs in oil of elecampane (Inula helenium)
and other Inula species. Helenin (a mixture of alantolac-
tone and isoalantolactone) has antibacterial and antifun-
gal activities. Although alantolactone causes allergic con-
tact dermatitis in humans, it has been employed as an
expectorant, a cholagogue, and a urinary tract antiseptic.
It has also been used to stimulate intestinal secretion and
as a vermifuge against the liver fluke (Fasciola bepatica).**

Artemisinin (qing hau sau, quinghaosu)

Artemisinin, an antimalarial agent, occurs in Artemisia
annua (ging bau or sweet Annie). It has demonstrated tox-
icity against chloroquine-resistant strains of various
species of mosquito (Plasmodium falciparum, P vivax, and
P ovale) in in vitro and in vivo tests. Artemisinin is used
clinically in China for the treatment of malaria.> It also
has potential as an anticancer agent.

Eupacunin

Eupacunin is found in the stems, leaves, and flowers of
Uncasia cuneifolia and Eupatorium lancifolium. It has
demonstrated cytotoxic and antitumor activities.**

Fig. 6.47. Eupacunin

Tnulicin

Occurring in Inula japonica (Japanese elecampane), in-
ulicin has antiulcer actions as well as capillary-strength-
ening and diuretic properties. Inulicin also stimulates the
activity of the central nervous system and the smooth
muscles of the intestine.5”

----- PAGE 79 -----
Ha

Hac
° CH,

rye —k

°

Fig. 6.48. Inulicin Fig. 6.49. Lactucin
Lactucin

Lactucin occurs in various wild lettuce species, including
Lactuca serriola and L. virosa, and in chicory (Cichorium in-
tybus). It demonstrates cytotoxic and antitumor activi-
ties.°® Lactucin has a sedative action and is a bitter tonic.

Matricin

Matricin is found in chamomile (Matricaria recutita) and
in several Achillea species. It is a precursor of chamazu-
lene, an anti-inflammatory compound formed from ma-
tricin and achillin during steam distillation of the plant
material. ch.

CHs

é chy

a
Fig. 6.50. Matricin Fig. 6.51. Parthenolide
Parthenolide
This compound is found in glands on the leaf surface of
feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium), in several Ambrosia and
Arctotis species, and in other members of the Asteraceae
family.°?

Parthenolide has demonstrated cytotoxic, antitumor,
antibacterial, and antifungal activities. It is a primary ac-
tive principle of feverfew, which is used in the treatment
of migraine.

DITERPENOIDS

The diterpenoids are Cy) molecules derived from four iso-
prene units, but modifications during the later stages of
synthesis produce a wealth of different structures. Diter-
penes share many chemical properties with sesquiterpenes,
but are usually crystalline solids rather than liquids.

Classification of Diterpenes
Diterpenes are classified according to the number of ring
systems present.® In addition, they form either acyclic or

TERPENES -«@ 71
macrocyclic substances. Many diterpenes have additional
ring systems, which occur in side chains, in ester substi-
tutions, or as epoxides. Some have 6-membered rings that
have undergone aromatization, while others have fused 5-

and 7-membered rings.

Acyclic Diterpene

AWA

Fig. 6.52. Phytane

Bicyclic Diterpenes

or et

Fig. 6.53. Labdane Fig. 6.54. Clerodane

Tricyclic Diterpenes

are

Fig. 6.55. Primarane Fig. 6.56. Abiatane

Tetracyclic Diterpenes

Fig. 6.57. Kaurane Fig. 6.58. Gibberellane

Macrocyclic Diterpenes

Fig. 6.59, Cembrane Fig. 6.60. Lathyrane

----- PAGE 80 -----
72. <= INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Fig. 6.61. Tigliane Fig. 6.62. Taxane
Occurrence and Distribution

Diterpenes are principally found either in higher plants
or in fungi. Phytol is universal in higher plants, where it
is associated with chlorophyll. Practically all other diter-
penes, however, are of very restricted distribution. They
are rarely found as glycosides, so the triglucoside stevio-
side, from Stevia rebaudiana, is exceptional. This remark-
ably sweet-tasting compound is marketed in Japan as a
sweetening agent.

General Properties of Diterpenes

Like all groups of terpenes, diterpenes have demonstrated
a range of pharmacological properties:°!

¢ Analgesic

* Antibacterial

¢ Antifungal

¢ Anti-inflammatory
¢ Antineoplastic

¢ Antiprotozoal (active against Leishmania)
* Cardiotonic

© Cytotoxic

¢ Enzyme inhibitor
¢ Insecticidal

¢ Skin irritant

¢ Sweetening agents

While few diterpenes are currently used in orthodox
medicine, they may be pivotal to the efficacy of a number
of medicinal plants.

¢ The expectorant properties of Grindelia spp. and hore-
hound (Marrubium vulgare) may be attributed to their
diterpene content.

* A range of cardiovascular activities has been demon-
strated for forskolin from Coleus forskohlii, as discussed
in detail in chapter 9. Diterpenoid quinones from
Salvia miltiorrhiza have also demonstrated cardiovas-
cular activities.

¢ A unique and very active hallucinogen found in the
leaves of Salvia divinorum is a nonnitrogenous diter-
pene, salvinorin A. Since all other molecules that have
this property contain nitrogen, this finding is very
intriguing.

Fig. 6.63. Salvinorin A

A number of diterpenoids are very toxic, especially
the tigliane-type phorbol esters of croton oil and
Euphorbia \atex, which are notable for their irritant and
cocarcinogenic properties. The phorbol esters are being
actively studied for insights that might be gained into the
cancer process.*

Cafestol

This is the main constituent of the nonsaponifiable por-
tion of coffee bean oil, from Coffea spp. Cafestol has anti-
inflammatory properties and induces the activity of the
detoxifying enzyme glutathione-S-transferase.©

OH ck,
OH. LL
Cr,Or ae Chis
CH ° |

‘oH |
—
©.

or
\= Hse” No,

Fig. 6.64. Cafestol Fig. 6.65. Carnosol
Carnosol

Carnosol is found in sage (Salvia officinalis) and in rose-
mary (Rosmarinus officinalis). It was traditionally used as an
aromatic bitter.

Coleonol
Coleonol, from the leaves of Coleus forskoblii, has demon-
strated hypotensive activity.” (See chapter 9 for a detailed

discussion of the cardiovascular properties of Coleus
forskoblii.)

----- PAGE 81 -----
CHy

°,
por
OH
CH. CH.
5 bg
O.
yo
HyC CH; OH ey Rad OH

Fig. 6.66. Coleonol Fig. 6.67. Columbin

HC CH, OH 3
Fig. 6.68. Forskolin

Columbin

This very bitter substance is found in columba root
(Jateorbiza palmata). The roots of 7. palmata are used for
the preparation of a bitter tonic, called Radix Columba in
various European pharmacopoeias.

Forskolin
Found in the roots of Coleus forskoblii, forskolin demon-
strates cardiovascular activity.

Geranylgeraniol
Found in flax or linseed oil (Linum usttatissimum), the
diphosphate of geranylgeraniol is the biogenetic precur-
sor of diterpenes.

cH, Cs CHy Cry

|
ow Sy Ss Sy CH,OF

Fig. 6.69. Geranylgeraniol

Ginkgolide A

Found in the root bark and leaves of Ginkgo biloba,
ginkgolide A and related ginkgolides are bitter substances
with bronchodilating and antiasthmatic properties.”

TERPENES © 73

Fig. 6.70. Ginkgolide A

Grindelic Acid
This labdane skeleton-based diterpene found in Grindelia
spp. may be implicated in the herb’s respiratory properties.

©O,H

Fig. 6.71. Grindelic acid

Fig. 6.72. Marrubiin

Marrubiin

A bitter principle found in horehound (Marrubium vul-
gare), marrubiin is generated from premarrubiin as an ar-
tifact of the extraction process. M. vulgare is used as an
expectorant.’?

Phytol

Phytol occurs in all chlorophyll-containing plants as an
ester of the propionic side chain of chlorophyll. Phytol is
used in the preparation of vitamins E and K.?!

CH, CHy cH Cy

cH AAA, AE Le creoH

‘3

Fig. 6.73. Phytol

Premarrubiin

Premarrubiin, which occurs in horehound (Marrubium
vulgare), is converted into marrubiin during the extrac-
tion process.

CH

Fig. 6.74. Premarrubiin

----- PAGE 82 -----
74 «3. INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Stevioside

Found in the leaves of Stevia rebaudiana, stevioside is a
glycoside that is about 300 times sweeter than sucrose.
The aglycone steviol shows a gibberellin-like growth hor-
mone activity.”

Fig, 6.75. Stevioside

Zoapatanol

Zoapatanol is found in the leaves of the Mexican zoapatle
tree (Montanoa tomentosa). The compound possesses anti-
fertility activity, and has been used in Mexico to prepare a
tea to induce menses and labor.”

CHy-OH
CHs Ce
CH

Fig. 6.76. Zoapatanol

SAPONINS

The saponins are a group of plant glycosides in which
water-soluble sugars are attached to either a lipophilic
steroid (Cp) or triterpenoid (C3,).”* This hydrophobic-
hydrophilic asymmetry means that these compounds have
the ability to lower surface tension, and are soaplike.
They form foam in aqueous solutions and cause hemoly-
sis of blood erythrocytes in vitro. The aglycone portion of
the saponin molecule is called the genin or sapogenin.

Classification of Saponins

Depending on the type of genin present, the saponins fall
into three major classes.’

¢ Triterpene glycosides
* Steroid glycosides
* Steroid alkaloid glycosides

The aglycones normally have a hydroxy] group at C-3,
and certain methyl groups are frequently oxidized to

hydroxymethyl, aldehyde, or carboxyl groups. The sugar
component may be linear or branched, and the largest
number of monosaccharides found in any saponin is 11
(in clematoside C, from Clematis manshurica). However,
most saponins have relatively short, unbranched sugar
chains containing two to five monosaccharides. Common
monosaccharides found include D-glucose, D-galactose,
D-glucuronic acid, D-galacturonic acid, L-rhamnose,
L-arabinose, D-xylose, and D-fructose.

The types of saponin glycosides are further classified
as follows.

© Monodesmosidic saponins have a single sugar chain, nor-
mally attached at C-3.

Bidesmosidic saponins have two sugar chains, often with
one attached through an ether linkage at C-3 and an
ester linkage at C-28 (triterpene saponins) or an ether
linkage at C-26 (furostanol saponins).

° Tridesmosidic saponins have three sugar chains and are

seldom found.

A striking feature of saponins is the great difference in
the type of properties displayed by mono- and bidesmo-
sidie saponins. The bidesmosides either lack or show
much less activity than the corresponding mono-
desmosides. However, the surface activities of the saponins
(their ability to lower surface tension) remain unchanged
whether they are bidesmosides or monodesmosides.

Biosynthesis of Saponins
Saponins are built up of six isoprene units and have a
common origin in that they are all derived from squalene.
Other important classes of secondary metabolites, such as
phytosterols, cardenolides, cucurbitacins, quassinoids,
and limonoids, are also derived from squalene.’6
cx cH om
ne Oe ee ae a aie sp

ay, on i

Fig. 6.77. Squalene

Herbs Containing Saponins

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Aralia nudicaulis (wild sarsaparilla) ~

A, racemosa (spikenard)

Arctium lappa (burdock)

Astragalus membranaceus (astragalus)

Calendula officinalis (calendula or pot marigold)
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree)

Codonopsis spp. (codonopsis)

----- PAGE 83 -----
Digitalis purpurea (foxglove)
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)
Eleutherococcus senticosus (Siberian ginseng)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)
Glycyrrhiza spp. (licorice)

Panax ginseng (Korean ginseng)

P quinquefolius (American ginseng)
Phytolacca americana (poke)
Polygala senega (Seneca snakeroot)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Salvia officinalis (sage)

Smilax spp. (sarsaparilla)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Verbascum thapsis (mullein)

Occurrence and Distribution

Saponins are extremely widely distributed in flowering
plants and have been identified in more than 100 fami-
lies.” They are found in many plants that are used as
human food, including soybeans, chickpeas, peanuts,
mung beans, broad beans, kidney beans, lentils, garden
peas, spinach, oats, eggplant, asparagus, fenugreek, garlic,
sugar beets, potatoes, green peppers, tomatoes, onions,
tea, cassava, and yams. They also occur in leguminous
forage species, such as alfalfa.

The actual saponin content of a plant depends on
many factors, including the cultivar, age, physiological
state, and geographical location of the plant. There can
be considerable variation in the composition and quantity
of saponins in plants growing in different places. Saponin
distribution among the organs of a particular plant also
varies considerably, The flowers of Calendula officinalis
contain 3.57% saponins, and the roots 2.55% (dry
weight). Ginsenoside levels in Panax ginseng are lowest in
the leafstalks and stem (0.77%), higher in the main root
(1.3%) and lateral roots (3.5%), and highest in the leaves
(5.2%) and root hairs (6.1%).78

The fact that saponins are localized in organelles that
have a high metabolic turnover rate implies that they are
not simply ballast material, but may be physiologically
significant constituents that play important regulatory
roles in the metabolism and development of the organism.

There is not always a clear explanation for the high
saponin content of some plants, which may consist of up
to 30% saponins. One theory is that they serve as protec-
tion for the plant against fungal attack, as there is often an
increase in saponin content in the part of the plant under
microbial attack.

Researchers have proposed that bidesmosidic sapo-

TERPENES <@ 75

nins, which are soluble in water but frequently lack some
of the other typical properties of saponins, serve a trans-
port function between the organs not at risk (e.g., leaves)
and those parts of the plant (e.g., roots, bark, seeds) under
attack by microorganisms. When plant tissue is damaged,
the enzymes released act on the bidesmosidic saponins.
Once transformed into their monodesmosidic derivatives,
the saponins can provide a defense against microbial in-
vasion at the threatened area. :

General Properties of Saponins

The material that follows on general and more specific
properties of this large group of secondary plant con-
stituents was derived from two primary references:
Saponins, by Hostettmann and Marston, and an extensive
review of saponin research by Lacaille-Dubois and
Wagner.’ Refer to these works for more details.

Saponins have three common properties: bitter taste,
hemolytic activity, and an ability to form stable foams
when shaken in water. This latter surface-acting or “de-
tergent” effect may be a key to their physiological prop-
erties. They are typical glycosides, with the aglycone (the
sapogenin) occurring as a polycyclic ring.

Saponins have demonstrated numerous pharmaco-
logical properties. However, it is important to remember
that the specific actions enumerated below do not occur
in a vacuum, but rather are interrelated at the metabolic
level in both the plant and the person. The list of biolog-
ical activities associated with saponins is also very long.
Some of these characteristics, such as fungicidal and pis-
cicidal effects, have been known for many years, and new
activities are continually being discovered. However, cau-
tion is needed when extrapolating from in vitro or in vivo
studies to human applications.

Pharmacological and Biological Properties
of Saponins

¢ Adaptogenic

¢ Alterative/tonic

¢ Anthelmintic

¢ Antifungal

¢ Anti-inflammatory
Antimicrobial
Antiulcerogenic
Capillary-strengthening
Cholesterol-lowering
Diuretic

Expectorant
Hemolytic
Hepatoprotective

----- PAGE 84 -----
76 @& INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

¢ Hormone-modulating

* Immunomodulating

* Molluscicidal

© Piscicidal

¢ Spermicidal and contraceptive

Pharmacological Properties

Local Effects

The detergent effect is important in understanding the ac-
tions of saponins upon skin and membranes. Many wound-
healing herbs are rich in saponins, including Calendula
officinalis. The expectorant and diuretic properties of
saponin-rich herbs such as Polygala senega and Primula spp.
may be related to the saponins’ irritant effects on mucous
membranes of the respiratory and urinary tracts.

Hemolytic Effects

Saponin aglycones can increase the permeability of mem-
branes. They bring about hemolysis by destroying the
membranes of red blood cells, thus releasing the
hemoglobin. When saponins are taken orally, this effect is
nullified in the stomach before the aglycones enter the
bloodstream. Low concentrations of saponins are capable
of destroying (lysing) erythrocyte membranes, causing a
release of hemoglobin. This phenomenon occurs through
a reduction of surface tension between the aqueous and
lipid phases of the erythrocyte membrane, which causes
emulsion of the lipids and their subsequent departure
from the membrane. Na” and water are able to enter the
cell through the holes in the membranes, while K” exits
the cell. This flux occurs until the membrane ruptures
and hemoglobin is shed into the plasma.

Cholesterol. Metabolism

Saponins reach the human body in relatively large
amounts as a result of the intake of foods rich in these gly-
cosides. The cholesterol-lowering effects of saponins are
well documented but poorly understood. One theory is
that they form insoluble complexes with cholesterol in
the gut, thus limiting assimilation. New research suggests
that they may have an effect (or effects) upon systemic
cholesterol metabolism.

Triterpene glycosides given to hens in their feed ap-
pear to decrease the amount of cholesterol in both blood
and tissues. One possible explanation for this effect is that
the triterpene glycosides form an insoluble complex with
cholesterol in the digestive tract; this complex is subse-
quently eliminated from the body. It is also possible that
the glycosides exert a direct effect on cholesterol
metabolism.

Cardiovascular Activities

Saponins are able both to increase the permeability of cell
plasma membranes and to cause positive inotropic effects
in isolated cardiac muscles. Panaxatriol saponins from
Panax notoginseng have demonstrated antiarrhythmic ac-
tions in rats and rabbits. The antihypertensive activity of
some ginseng saponins is attributed to a vascular relaxant
effect; they appear to block Ca?” channels without affect-
ing voltage-operated Ca?* channels or Ca?” release from
the intracellular store. Crude saponins from Panax noto-
ginseng have also shown vasodilatory effects.

Effects on the Adrenocorticotropic System

Many saponins can induce the release of adrenocorti-
cotropic hormone (ACTH), but this is not considered to
be a general property of triterpene saponins. The gin-
senoside Rbi both induces corticosterone release and
stimulates ACTH secretion in cultures of pituitary cells.

Anti-Inflammatory Activities

Substances with anti-exudative and anti-edematous prop-
erties form a subgroup of anti-inflammatory agents in
that they influence the earlier stages of inflammation. In
some cases, the anti-inflammatory action of these sub-
stances seems to be independent of the pituitary-adrenal
axis, while in other cases, the drugs appear to exert a di-
rect action on the adrenal cortex (for example, gly-
cyrrhetinic acid).

When given parenterally, the saponin mixture aescin,
from horse chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum), has been
shown to be 600 times more effective than rutin in re-
ducing rat paw edema. No effect was observed, however,
after oral application.

Effects on Capillary Fragility and Venous
Insufficiency

Saponins that decrease capillary fragility also have a ben-
eficial effect on capillary permeability. Weakness of the
blood vessels (especially veins) can lead to several compli-
cations. Enlarged veins can contribute to the develop-
ment of hypertension. Increased blood vessel permeabil-
ity can result in edema or reduced blood flow, increasing
the risk of thrombosis. Related disorders include hemor-
rhoids and varicose veins.

Certain saponin-containing plants, such as horse
chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum), have capillary-protective
properties that reduce capillary fragility.

Substances that affect the veins can be divided into
three major categories of activity.

----- PAGE 85 -----
1, Substances that strengthen the veins by either re-
ducing or increasing venous cross-sectional area

2. Diuretic agents

3. Agents that protect against edema, thus decreasing
capillary permeability

Antiulcer Activity

Pharmacologically, the best known saponin-containing
antiulcerogenic herbs is licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra), al-
though we now know that active constituents other than
glycyrrhizin also contribute to its antiulcer effects. These
are flavonoids, such as licoflavonol, licoricone, and ku-
matekenin, Flavonoids do not inhibit gastric acid secretion,
but are instead believed to exert their antiulcerogenic ef-
fects by promoting mucus formation, directly activating
gastric membrane protective factors, or stimulating in-
herent protective mechanisms via irritation of the gastric
mucosa.

Immunomodulation

Saponins belong to the classes of substances that have an
effect on the human immune system. (Other important
immunomodulators are lipids, lectins, polysaccharides,
and fungal polysaccharides.) Immunomodulating saponins
enhance both humoral and cellular immune responses; the
immunostimulant effects of saponins used as adjuvant
therapies do not depend solely on an increased uptake of
antigen.

Saponins can form ordered, particulate structures
around 35 mm in diameter (about the size of a virus par-
ticle) with the surface protein from enveloped viruses.
These have been named immunostimulating complexes
(ISCOMs). ISCOM vaccines have been developed against
a number of viruses, including influenza, measles,
Epstein-Barr, and HIV-1.*!

‘TERPENES <. 77

Some of the nonspecific effects of immunostimulant
saponins may occur as a result of their irritant properties.
This so-called induction of paramunity can be provoked
via the oral route or through the mucous membranes of
the respiratory, digestive, and urogenital systems.

Since saponins taken by mouth have low bioavailability,
it is unclear how they work to stimulate the immune system,
whether through enhanced cell proliferation, induction of
helper T cell activity, or B cell activation. One theory sug-
gests that an initial impact on mucosal immune system
components leads to secretion of immune system media-
tors, which then initiate a multitude of cellular events.

Fig. 6.78. Triterpene class

Expectorant and Antitussive Activities
Saponins possess a general and nonspecific ability to pro-
duce local irritation, especially of mucous membranes.
This can take place in the nasal cavity, the throat, the
bronchi, the lungs, and in kidney epithelia.

‘The expectorant activity of saponin-containing herbs
such as Polygala senega, Primula spp., and Glycyrrhiza
glabra is attributed at least in part to local irritation of
mucous membranes, although their mechanism of action
is not clear. The irritation of the throat and respiratory
tract caused by these saponins may increase respiratory
fluid volume by drawing more water into the bronchial

Immunomodulators

The category of agents known as immunomodulators includes immunostimulants, which boost the ac-
tivity of an organism's immune system, and immunosuppressive factors, which block the activity of the
immune system. Immunostimulants are employed during chemotherapy, in the treatment of infec-
tious diseases, and to stimulate the immune response after vaccination. Immunosuppressive agents are
used in the treatment of autoimmune diseases and allergies and to help prevent transplant rejections.

Immunomodulators can be further divided into two categories, specific and nonspecific. Specific
immunomodulators are generally used as adjuvant therapy, while nonspecific immunostimulants are
administered on their own in order to elicit a generalized state of resistance to pathogens or tumors.

Immunostimulants work by increasing phagocytosis by granulocytes and macrophages, activating
helper T cells, and stimulating cell division and transformation in lymphocytes. Immunosuppressive
agents activate suppressor cells and have cytotoxic effects on other cells.

----- PAGE 86 -----
78 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

secretions, thus diluting the mucus and reducing its vis-
cosity. Alternatively, the surface activity of the saponins
may render the sputum less viscid, making it more mobile
and easier to eject. Another possibility is that the am-
phiphilic nature of saponins causes them to spread out as
a monomolecular film at the back of the throat and sub-
sequently aid elimination of mucus. Saponins are consid-
ered amphiphilic because one end of the molecule is hy-
drophilic (water foving, or polar) and the other is
hydrophobic (water hating, or nonpolar).

Diuretic Activity

The diuretic action of many saponins can be traced back
to local irritation of kidney epithelia. Plants with diuretic
activity due at least in part to their content of saponins
include Astragalus membranaceus, Herniara glabra, H. bir-
suta, Solidago virgaurea, S. gigantea, S. canadensis, Elymus
repens, Betula pendula, B. pubescens, Equisetum arvense, and
Viola tricolor.

The diuresis caused by some saponin-containing
plants, such as Ononis, Herniara, Betula, and Solidago
species, is relatively mild. In these plants, the effect may
originate from the combined influence of saponins,
flavonoids, and essential oils.

Anthelmintic Activity

Some saponin preparations have a practical use as an-
thelmintics in traditional medicine systems. In fact, a
large number of saponins exhibit anthelmintic activities,
but many find no practical application because of the par-
allel irritation of mucous membranes.

Spermicidal and. Contraceptive Activities

In the ongoing effort to find new sources of contraceptive
agents, numerous medicinal plants have been investigated
for antifertility effects. Saponins have a variety of impor-
tant activities in this area, including spermicidal effects.
The mechanism of action here probably involves a dis-
ruption of the spermatozoid plasma cell membrane, sim-
ilar to the action of the commercially available spermicide
nonoxynol-9.

Other Effects

Saponins may help protect the liver through some impact
upon the Kupffer’s cells, immune system cells found in
the liver. Saponins from Panax ginseng, Bupleurum falcatum,
licorice (Glycyrrbiza spp.), alfalfa (Medicago sativa), and soy
(Glycine max) have all demonstrated this property.”
Saponins appear to have a profound yet little under-
stood stimulating effect upon the reticuloendothelial

system and the white cell macrophages of the mononu-
clear phagocyte system (MPS). In biochemical terms, the
MPS removes a great deal of waste matter from the
blood—in other words, it “cleanses” the blood. This
sounds a bit like classic alterative activity! Some saponin-
containing herbs have also been shown to stimulate the
production of interferon in the body. In addition, exam-
ples of saponins with adaptogenic properties are found in
Eleutherococcus senticosus and Panax species.

Saponins have a reputation for bitterness. For exam-
ple, the seed coat of quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa) contains
bitter saponins that must be removed before cooking.
Similarly, partially acetylated soyasaponins are responsi-
ble for the bitter and astringent taste of soybeans (Glycine
max). Saponins also impart a bitter taste to asparagus
(Asparagus officinalis) so that the bottom cut must be dis-
carded during processing. However, there are exceptions.
For example, glycyrrhizin, the principal saponin in
licorice, is about 50 times sweeter than sucrose.

Biological Effects
Molluscicidal Activity

Saponins have a pronounced action against mollusks. The
mechanism of this toxicity is thought to involve the bind-
ing of the saponin to the gill membranes, which causes an
increase in their permeability and a subsequent loss of im-
portant electrolytes. Saponins are also toxic to insects.

The toxicity of saponins to snails has stimulated great
interest in their potential for controlling schistosomiasis,
a tropical parasitic disease affecting approximately 250
million people worldwide. Snails are directly implicated
in the transmission of this disease, as they act as interme-
diate hosts during the life cycle of the parasite.

Plants that contain saponins are among the most
promising for large-scale application against the schisto-
somiasis parasite for a number of reasons.

* High molluscicidal activity

* Low oral toxicity

© Water soluble

Widely distributed in the plant kingdom
Frequently occur in large amounts in plants

Piscicidal Activity

The ability of some plants to act as fish poisons has been
exploited for many hundreds of years. Death of fish re-
sults from damage to the gill capillaries. The gills not
only are respiratory organs, but also play a crucial role in
the regulation of ion balance and osmotic pressure.

----- PAGE 87 -----
Fungicidal Activity

The strongest fungicidal activities have been found in
monodesmosidic saponins, Those with four or more sug-
ars in the chain show the greatest degree of activity;
shorter carbohydrate chains lead to lower water solubility
and weaker antifungal activity. One mechanism proposed
to explain the antifungal activity of saponins suggests that
the saponins form complexes with sterols in the plasma
membrane of the fungi, thus destroying the cellular
semipermeability and leading to death of the cell.
Another theory holds that the saponins themselves are in-
active and comprise only water-soluble transport forms.
The aglycone, or active membranolytic component,
forms only in the presence of cell membrane glycosidases.

Triterpenoid Saponins

Triterpenoid sapogenins have 5-ring structures. Sugars
are commonly attached at the 3-hydroxyl position. They
are frequently present in plants as a complex mixture of
closely related glycosides based on one or more triter-
penoid sapogenins. They are usually found in all parts of
the plant, with some concentration in root, foliage, or
seed. Recently, triterpene saponins have been isolated
from marine organisms.

Table 6.2. Pentacyclic Triterpenoid Saponin Herbs
and Actions

HERB ACTIONS

Aesculus hippocastanum Vascular tonic, anti-inflammatory

(horse chestnut)
Bupleurum falcatum (bupleurum) —_—_Anti-inflammatory, antihepatotoxic

Vulnerary, lymphatic, anti-
inflammatory

Calendula officinalis (calendula)

Glycyrrhiza glabra {licorice) Anti-inflammatory, demulcent,

expectorant, antiulcerogenic
Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)} Anti-inflammatory, diaphoretic
Polygala senega (Seneca snakeroot) Expectorant
Primula spp. (primrose) Vary among species

Quillaja saponaria (quillaja) Emulsifying agent

TERPENES -2 79

General Properties of Triterpenoid
Saponins

Triterpenoid saponins share the general properties of
saponins, with the addition of an ability to form com-
plexes with cholesterol.

° Bitterness

¢ Hemolytic activity

¢ Decrease surface tension (i.e., form stable foams)
¢ Formation of complexes with cholesterol

Triterpene saponins (especially bidesmosides) have
the ability to increase the solubility of water-insoluble
compounds. In addition, the saponins of Bupleurum falca-
tum can be solubilized by ginseng saponins. Saikosaponin A
is normally soluble at 0. 1 mg/ml in water, but when gin-
senoside Ro is added, this increases to 3.4 mg/ml.

Biological and Pharmacological Properties
of Triterpenoid Saponins

Antibacterial Activity
Although strongly antifungal, triterpene saponins have
virtually no antibacterial activity.

Antiviral Activity

Some antiviral activity has been reported in in vitro stud-
ies. However, the therapeutic index is unfortunately low,
limiting the usefulness of triterpene saponins as isolated
constituents in humans.

Cytotoxic. and. Antitumor. Activity

Cytotoxic activity has been documented in vitro for many
triterpenoid saponins, but their high toxicity has inhibited
their use in therapy. It must be remembered that there is a
big difference between whole plant activity and research on
isolated constituents. Please see chapter 9 for a discussion
on the effects of plant constituents on cancer processes.

Aescin

Found in the seed of the horse chestnut (Aesculus hippocas-
tanum), aescin is also the collective name for the complex
mixture of more than 30 different saponins present in
horse chestnut. The main component (shown on page
80) makes up about 20% of the saponin content of the
complex.

Aescin has strong hemolytic activity and shows anti-
inflammatory and anti-exudative actions. It also inhibits
fungal growth and has demonstrated anticancer cancero-
static properties.®

----- PAGE 88 -----
80 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

HO Pea

‘OCOCHy

HO,

Fig. 6.81. Curcurbitacin E

Fig. 6.79. Aescin

Glycyrrhetic Acid

A sapogenin from the dried roots and rhizomes of
licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra), glycyrrhetic acid has anti-
inflammatory and antiulcerogenic properties. It pos-
sesses mineralocorticoid action, which can result in in-
creased renal sodium resorption, leading to an increase
in blood pressure, hypokalemia, and water retention.®5

OH
om City
Hye bon
Fig. 6.80. Avenacin Hs
Avenacin A-] Hy
Avenacin A-l is found in oats (Avena sativa). It demon- CHs
strates hemolytic activity in animals and strongly inhibits on
pathogenic fungi in plants. ny ‘on,

Fig. 6.82. Glycyrrhetic acid
Cucurbitacin E

The cucurbitacins are triterpenoid saponins predomi- Glycyrrhizin
nantly found in the Curcubitaceae family, but also present
in the Begoniaceae, Brassicaceae, Scrophulariaceae, and
others. They are a group of extremely bitter-tasting, oxy-
genated saponins derived from the cucurbitane skeleton.
They cannot be considered steroidal, since the methyl
from C-10 has moved to C-9. Pharmacological effects of
the cucurbitacins and the plants containing them are very
varied:54

This saponin from the roots and rhizomes of Glyeyrrbiza
glabra induces the activity of interferons. It is intensely
sweet, with a taste about 50 times sweeter than sucrose. It
also has antiulcerogenic and expectorant properties.

¢ Antifertility (in female mice)
¢ Anti-inflammatory

¢ Bitter stimulant

* Cytotoxic, antitumor

¢ Hepatoprotective

¢ Purgative

¢ Stomachic

They may also play other biological roles as plant ol
growth regulators and insect feedants or antifeedants.

Fig. 6.83. Glycyrrhizin

----- PAGE 89 -----
Saikosaponin A
Saikosaponin A occurs in the roots of Bupleurum falcatum
and B. chinense.

The saponin fractions of these herbs demonstrate
anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory activities.°”

Senegin IT

This compound is found in the roots of Polygala senega. A
mixture of senegin JI and related saponins from P. senega
shows anticancer and expectorant activities.*

Steroid Saponins

These saponins are similar to the triterpenoid saponins in
structure, biogenesis, and biological activity, but have
four rings. They also bear structural similarities to the
cardiac glycosides. The first natural source of steroid
saponins was foxglove (Digitalis purpurea), in which digi-
togenin co-occurs with the cardiac glycosides digitalin
and digitoxin.

Fig. 6.84. Steroid structure
and numbering system

Occurrence and. Distribution

Steroid saponins are present in the Agavaceae,
Dioscoreaceae, Liliaceae, and Scrophulariaceae plant
families. They resemble the triterpenoid saponins in the
number and location of their sugar components. The gly-
cosides can be difficult to purify, so sapogenins such as
diosgenin and yamogenin are better known than the cor-
responding saponins. Diosgenin, isolated from Dioscorea
roots, is a starting material for the partial synthesis of sex
hormones used in contraceptive pills, but does not act as a
precursor of “natural progesterone” in the human body—
an important distinction.

Steroid saponins are used as detergents, as foaming
agents in fire extinguishers, and as fish poisons. Their lack
of human toxicity is apparent in the fact that such saponins
occur in a number of food plants, such as asparagus.

TERPENES «> 81

Table 6.3. Industrial Sources of Steroidal Saponins

HERB SOURCE MATERIAL FOR

Agave sisalana (sisal) Saponins for pharmaceuticals

Dioscorea spp. (wild yam) Saponins for pharmaceuticals

Glycine max (soy) Phytosterols

Ruscus aculeatus (butcher's broom) Cardiovascular, anti-inflammatory,

vasoconstrictor drugs
Smilax spp. {sarsaparilla) Saponins for pharmaceuticals

Trigonella foenum-graecum
(fenugreek)

Anti-inflammatory, hypotensive

drugs
Trillium erectum (beth root) Saponins for pharmaceuticals*

Yucca spp. (yucca) Saponins for pharmaceuticals

*Trillium erectum js unfortunately now an endangered species and should not be used.

Table 6.4. Sources of Cardioactive Saponins

HERB ACTIONS

Convallaria majalis (lily of the valley) Cardioactive, diuretic

Digitalis spp. (Foxglove) Cardioactive, diuretic

Helleborus niger (hellebore) Cardioactive, diuretic

Nerium oleander {oleander) Cardioactive, diuretic

Strophanthus kombe {strophanthus) — Cardioactive, diuretic

Urginea maritima (squill) Expectorant, cardioactive,

diuretic

General Properties of Steroidal Saponins
Many steroidal saponins share the core properties of the
larger class of saponins:

* Antifertility

* Antihepatotoxic

¢ Ant-inflammatory

* Antimicrobial (fungicidal, antibacterial, antiviral)
* Capillary-strengthening

* Cytotoxic, antitumor

¢ Insecticidal and antifeedant

¢ Molluscicidal

* Piscicidal

© Plant growth inhibitors

----- PAGE 90 -----
82 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Astragaloside III

This compound from the roots of Astragalus mem-
branaceus has been shown to inhibit the formation of lipid
peroxidase induced by intraperitoneal administration of
adriamycin in rats. This suggests antioxidant activity.®

Fig. 6.85. Astragaloside III

Cimicifugoside

Found in some Cimicifuga spp., this has been found to be
a potent and selective inhibitor of nucleoside transport at
the plasma membrane site of mammalian cells in vitro.”

SS
OM
OH ‘OH Aye CHy

Fig. 6.86. Cimicifugoside

Diosgenin

Diosgenin is obtained through acid hydrolysis of many
different saponins (for example, dioscin, deltonin, and
gracillin), from Dioscorea, Costus, Trillium, and Trigonella
species. It is used in the partial synthesis of hormones
having a steroid structure, such as pregnenolone and
progesterone.®!

HO

Fig. 6.87. Diosgenin

chy

G4 og

-2.

OH

Hock on oH

OH

wer? oH

Fig. 6.88. Dioscin

Ginsenoside Re

Ginsenoside Re is found in Panax pseudoginseng and P. gin-
seng. Ginsenoside Re causes analgesic effects in mice at
doses of 10 mg /kg.”

HyS CH)

‘CHZOH
Hy O
OH!

oH ‘OH

Fig. 6.89. Ginsenoside Re

Ginsenoside Rf
This is found in the roots of Korean ginseng (Panax
ginseng).

OH

OH
‘OH

PLEL;
Oy o On CH,OH

H,COH. OH

oH
Ha

Fig. 6.90. Ginsenoside Rf

----- PAGE 91 -----
Ginsenoside Rg
This is another ginsenoside found in the roots of Korean
ginseng (Panax ginseng).

on CHOH

oH,

OH
cH,0H

Fig. 6.91. Ginsenoside Rg

hye Now 0.

Ruscogenin

This compound, found in the rhizomes of butcher’s
broom (Ruscus aculeatus), is used in the treatment of hem-
orrhoids. Ruscosides A and B, partly identified glycosides
of ruscogenin, decrease the cholesterol content of blood,
reduce lipid deposition in the aorta, and lower liver arte-
rial tension. They also show antiarteriosclerotic and hy-
potensive actions.”

CARDENOLIDES AND
BUFADIENOLIDES

The cardenolides and bufadienolides are two related
groups of C,, and C), steroids of triterpenoid origin. The
cardenolides are heart poisons that, when used in small
doses, are extremely valuable clinically for controlling
congestive heart failure.

Cardiac glycosides occur principally in the closely re-
lated families of the Apocynaceae and Asclepiadaceae.™
In the milkweed genus, Asclepias, the compounds are se-
creted in the latex, and virtually every species that has
been examined contains them. Cardiac glycosides are also
found in a number of other dicotyledon families, such as
Brassicaceae, Moraceae, and Scrophulariaceae (notably
Digitalis), and in monocotyledon groups, especially
Liliaceae. Cardenolides are remarkably nontoxic to lepi-
doptera. Some species of danaid butterflies store them in
their bodies and wings to protect themselves from birds,
as the cardenolides have an emetic effect on birds that
prey on these butterflies.

Bufadienolides can be distinguished from cardeno-
lides by the fact that the lactone ring substituting at C-17
in the steroid nucleus is 6-membered, rather than 5-
membered. Bufadienolides were first identified in toad
venom.

‘TERPENES & 83

Convallatoxin

This is the major cardiac glycoside from the flowers and
leaves of lily of the valley (Convallaria majalis). While it is
very toxic to vertebrates, it has been used in minute doses
as a cardiotonic.”§

Digoxin

Digoxin is found in Digitalis lanata and D. orientalis.
While toxic to vertebrates, derivatives of digoxin are used
as cardiotonic agents.

OH

oR’

Fig, 6.92. Digitalin

PHYTOSTEROLS

Phytosterols are characterized by the presence of a hy-
droxyl group attached at C-3 and an extra methyl or ethyl
substituent in the side chain, which is not present in ani-
mal sterols. At one time, all sterols were believed to be
animal products, but an increasing number of such com-
pounds have been detected in plant tissues.

Three phytosterols are ubiquitous in higher plants, as
they are all essential components of plant membranes:
sitosterol, stigmasterol, and campesterol. These occur
both in free form and as 3-glucosides.”” A less common
phytosterol is a-spinasterol, an isomer of stigmasterol
found in spinach.

Occurrence and Distribution

In spite of the structural differences between plant and
animal sterols, certain animal sterols have been found in
plants. Estrone, for example, has been found in trace
amounts in date palm seed (Phoenix dactylifera), while
testosterone is present in the pollen of Scotch pine (Pinus
sylvestris).* A large number of insect molting hormones
have also been found in plants. These are known as ‘phy-
toecdysones, and some 100 structures have been described.
Ecdysone, the molting hormone of many insects, itself
occurs in plants, but many of the other structures, such as
prodecdysone B, are recorded only in the plant kingdom.

----- PAGE 92 -----
84 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Commiphora mukul

Known as guggul in India, the resin contains steroids
(called guggulsterones) that lower blood cholesterol and
triglycerides via stimulation of thyroid function.”

CHy

Cry f

Fig. 6.93. Guggulsterone Z

Androstenedione (androtex)
This phytosterol is found in the pollen of Scotch pine, Pinus
sylvestris. It has demonstrated androgenic activity.!°

Cholesterol

Cholesterol occurs in the pollen of the date palm (Phoenix
dactylifera) and in many marine red algae. It is a common
sterol of animal tissues.

Fig. 6.94. Cholesterol

B-sitosterol

B-sitosterol has a widespread occurrence in higher plants.
Among many others, it is found in wheat germ (Triticum
spp.) and in corn (Zea mays). It is an essential component of
plant cell membranes. B-sitosterol has shown anti-
hyperlipoproteinemic activity.!%!

Hy

Fig. 6.95. B-sitosterol

Stigmasterol

Found in many higher plants, including soybeans (Giycine
max), stigmasterol plays a vital structural role in plant cell
membranes.

Fig. 6.96. Stigmasterol

Fig. 6.97. Withanolide

Withanolide D
Found in the leaves of ashwagandha (Withania som-
nifera), withanolide D has shown antibiotic and antitu-
mor activities!

NORTRITERPENOIDS

Nortriterpenoids are formed from triterpene precursors
through oxidation and degradation, so they contain fewer
than the 30 carbon atoms typically present in triter-
penoids. There are two main groups: the limonoids (C),)
and the quassinoids (Cy) and Cy triterpenoids).

More than 75 quassinoids have been described, all
from the same plant family, Simaroubaceae, to which the
genus Quassia belongs. Limonoids are also found in
Simaroubaceae, but are more abundant in three related
families: Rutaceae, Meliaceae, and Cneoraceae.!%

Limonoids and quassinoids are notable for having
very bitter tastes. Quassinoids have demonstrated antitu-
mor activities in vitro, but none has yet been developed as
an anticancer drug because of the toxicity. Some quassi-
noids show antiamoebic properties, and glaucarubin is
used as a medicinal preparation for this purpose in France.
Limonoids are of interest chiefly because of the need to
counteract the bitter taste they impart to citrus drinks.
However, they also hold commercial promise as the first
members of a new generation of natural insecticides.

Limonin

Limonin is found in navel and Valencia oranges (Citrus
spp.) during ripening. It is used to delay the development
of bitterness in certain citrus fruit juices.!%

cHy ‘CHy

Fig. 6.98. Limonin

Fig. 6.99. Neoquassin

----- PAGE 93 -----
Neoquassin.

This very bitter compound occurs in the wood of Quassia
amara and in various Picrasma species. It may have poten-
tial as a natural insecticide.!% :

TETRATERPENOIDS

This class of molecules with 40 carbon atoms includes
carotenes, xanthophylls, and retinoids. Here we will dis-
cuss the carotenoids.

Carotenoids

Carotenoids, Cyy tetraterpenoids, are lipid-soluble pig-
ments found in all plants. In animals, several carotenoids
(especially B-carotene) are metabolized to vitamin A.
Carotenoids appear to have two principal functions in
plants: They supply accessory pigments during the pro-
cess of photosynthesis and serve as coloring matter for
flowers and fruits. In flowers, they mostly appear as yel-
low colors, as in daffodils, pansies, and marigolds. In
fruits, they may be orange or red (for example, rose hips,
tomatoes, and peppers). Dietary carotenoids also provide
many brilliant animal colors, seen in flamingos, starfish,
lobsters, and sea urchins.

Only a few carotenoids are common in higher
plants.’ Well-known carotenoids are either simple un-
saturated hydrocarbons based on lycopene or oxygenated
derivatives of unsaturated hydrocarbons known as xan-
thophylls. The chemical structure of lycopene consists of
a long chain of eight isoprene units joined head to tail.
This completely conjugated system of alternate double
bonds becomes the chromophore that gives the compound
its color, or the part of the molecule responsible for a
given spectral band. The term arose in the dye industry
and referred originally to the groups in the molecule that
are responsible for a dye’s color.

Capsanthin
Capsanthin occurs in the ripe fruits of sweet red pepper
or paprika (Capsicum annuum) and in some barberries
(Berberis spp.), and in the petals of orange lilies (for exam-
ple, Lilium pumilum) and the anthers of other lilies, such
as the tiger lily (Lilium lancifolium).

Capsanthin is used commercially to provide orange-
red food colorings and as flavoring in sauces, salad dress-
ings, sausages, and other foods.!°”

Carotene
B-carotene occurs in almost all green leaves of higher
plants and in many lower plants, including ferns, mosses,

TERPENES .& 85

and algae, as well as in fungi and some bacteria. It is
widely found in roots, such as carrot (Daucus carota) and
sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), and in the yellow and or-
ange flowers of many plants, including gorse (Ulex spp.).
It also occurs in seeds, such as oats (4vena sativa) and
fruits, including sweet red pepper (Capsicum annuum),
yams (Dioscorea spp.), and rose hips (Rosa spp.).

B-carotene is the most important of the carotenoid
vitamin A precursors. It is used commercially as a yellow
food coloring for fats (for example, margarine) and as a
sunscreen agent to prevent the photosensitivity reaction
of erythropoietic protoporphyria.

CH3 CHs

CHg
CH3._-CH
s AW A A AS ey ee Ve
( oH by, Cha “CH:
CHs % 3

Fig. 6.100. 6-carotene

Lycopene

Lycopene occurs in the ripe fruits of tomatoes (Lyco-
persicon esculentum), Citrus species, persimmon (Diospyros
kaki), dog rose (Rosa canina), and numerous other fruits
and berries. It also occurs in the petals of many orange
flowers (for example, Calendula officinalis), in very large
amounts in the ripe seeds of bitter melon (Momordica cha-
rantia), in rutabagas (Brassica napus), and in red varieties
of carrot (Daucus carota).'%

Dietary intakes of tomatoes and products containing
lycopene are associated with decreased risk of chronic ill-
nesses such as cancer and cardiovascular diseases.!°?
Serum and tissue lycopene levels have also been shown to
be inversely related to the risk of lung and prostate can-
cers. Lycopene is a potent antioxidant, which is clearly
one of its major mechanisms of action. As an antioxidant,
lycopene traps singlet oxygen and reduces mutagenesis in
the Ames test.

PLANT EXUDATES

Plant exudates are chemically complex, solid or semisolid
mixtures of vegetable origin, such as balsams, gums, ole-
oresins, and resins. The proportions of their constituents
vary with climate, season of the year, and other factors.

Resins

A resin is a natural or synthetic organic compound con-
sisting of a noncrystalline or viscous liquid substance.
Most natural resins are exuded from trees, especially pines
and firs. Resin forms in response to injury to the bark
from wind, fire, lightning, or other cause. ‘The secretion

----- PAGE 94 -----
86 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

usually loses some of its volatile components through
evaporation, leaving a soft, initially soluble residue that
becomes insoluble as it ages.

Resins are characteristically insoluble in water and
mostly soluble in alcohol; because of their chemical com-
plexity, they often will not crystallize, but instead soften or
melt at moderate heat. They are usually the oxidized ter-
penes of volatile oils, and, because they are insoluble in
water, have little taste. When pure, resins are generally
transparent, but when water is added they become opaque
and lose their hard or brittle qualities. They do not conduct
electricity, but when rubbed do become negatively charged.

As complex mixtures that may include lignans, resin
acids, resin alcohols, resinotannols, esters, and resenes,
resins have an amorphous nature that makes them diffi-
cult to classify. They may occur in mixtures with other
plant constituents, as in gum resins, oleogum resins, and
glycoresins.

One way in which to classify natural resins is to de-
termine whether they are alcohol- or oil-soluble. Among
the alcohol-soluble resins are balsams, long popular as
healing agents; turpentines, used as solvents, and mastic,
dragon’s blood, damar, sandarac, and lac, all used as com-
ponents of'varnishes. The oil-soluble resins include rosin,
derived along with turpentine from the long-leaf pine;
copal, used in varnishes; amber, the hardest natural resin,
which is fabricated into jewelry; and cashew nutshell oil.

In addition, a distinction must be made among natu-
ral resins, prepared resins, and synthetic resins.

A natural resin is one that occurs as a plant exudate.
Mastic, formerly an official medicine in The United
States Pharmacopoeia, is a good example.

A prepared resin can be made by exhausting a drug that
owes its activity to resinous constituents with alcohol—
in other words, by pouring the concentrated alcoholic
percolate into water and collecting, washing, and dry-
ing the precipitate. The resin made from Podophyllum
is an example of this class. A prepared resin may also be
derived from a natural oleoresin by driving off the
volatile oil with heat, as in Rosin NF.

Synthetic resins are polymeric substances that are formed
either by condensation or by the addition of readily
available common chemicals. Phenol and formalde-
hyde serve as examples. These compounds interact
initially to produce hydroxybenzyl alcohols, which
then condense to yield a large series of phenol-
formaldehyde (Bakelite) resins. These and many other
synthetic resins constitute the foundation of the mod-
ern plastics industry.

Table 6.5. Herbs Containing Resins

HERB COMMON USES

Boswellia serrata (frankincense) Perfumery

Ginnamomum camphora (camphor) — Rubefacient

Antimicrobial, vulnerary,
tubefacient

Commiphora motmol (myrrh)

Daemonorops draco {dragon's blood) Antimicrobial

Eriodictyon californicum (yerba santa) Expectorant

Grindelia spp. (grindelia) Relaxing expectorant,

anti-inflammatory

Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum) Anti-inflammatory,

diaphoretic
(pomoea purga {jalap) Powerful cathartic
Turnera diffusa var. aphrodisiaca Nervine
(damiana)
Rosin

Rosin, also called colophony, is a type of resin used for
varnish and in manufacturing many products. It becomes
sticky when warm and has a faint pinelike odor. Gum
rosin is the residue produced through distillation of the
oleoresin from pine trees, the volatile component of
which is spirit of turpentine. Wood rosin, obtained by sol-
vent extraction of'stumps, is usually a darker color. Rosin
and its chemical derivatives are used chiefly in the manu-
facture of soaps, varnishes, sealing wax, printing inks,
dryers, size for paper, adhesives, binders, soldering fluxes,
gloss oils for paints, and pitch for casks.

Guaiac

This resin from the wood of Guaiacum officinale or G. sanc-
tum is reported to contain about 70% a- and B-guaiaconic
acids; 11% guaiacic acid, related compounds, and gua-
iaretic acid; and 15% vanillin, guaiac yellow, and guaiac
saponin. It is insoluble in water but freely soluble in alco-
hol, chloroform, ether, creosote, and alkali.

In medicine, it is used as a reagent in tests for occult
(hidden) blood. It is also employed to test for the presence
of oxidizing enzymes or cyanogenetic glycosides in vari-
ous materials.

Oleoresins
Oleoresins are liquid preparations that consist of natural
volatile oils and resins extracted from plants by percola-

----- PAGE 95 -----
tion with a menstruum of acetone, alcohol, or ether. As
with resins, a distinction must be made between natural
and prepared oleoresins.

Natural oleoresins are mixtures of volatile oils and resin,
generally obtained by incising the trunks of trees in
which they occur. Turpentine and copaiba are natural
oleoresins formerly recognized as official preparations
in the National Formulary of the United States.

Prepared oleoresins are concentrated liquid preparations
made by percolating drugs that contain both volatile
oils and resin with an appropriate solvent (acetone,
ether, or alcohol), and concentrating the percolate
until the solvent dissipates.

Balsams

Balsams are aromatic resinous plant exudates that consist
of a resin dispersed in benzoic or cinnamic acid esters.
Balsams are difficult to distinguish from oleoresins, which
are resins dissolved in essential oils, but in general, oleo-
resins are slightly more fluid. Examples include Peru bal-
sam, a true balsam from a tropical tree (Myroxylon balsa-
mum. var. pereirae), which provides a fragrant, thick, deep
brown or black fluid used in perfumery; and Tolu balsam,
an even thicker brown balsam used in cough syrups and
lozenges. The latter, made from Myroxylon balsamum var.
balsamum, becomes solid over time.

Gum Resins

These are natural mixtures of gum and resin, usually ob-
tained as exudations from plants, such as myrrh.

Myrrh

Myrrh is the air-dried oleo-gum resin obtained from
Commiphora molmol and closely related species, trees na-
tive to northeast Africa and Arabia. Myrrh contains 2% to
10% essential oil, 25% to 45% alcohol-soluble resins, and
30% to 60% a water-soluble gum. The essential oil is
thick, with a yellow- to reddish brown color. Myrrh resin
collects in canals in the inner bark of the tree. It is se-
creted through fissures, wounds, or incisions made in the
bark. Ground myrrh quickly loses its essential oil and
cakes easily due to moisture absorption, so it should be
stored in a sealed container.

References
1. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

2. Ibid.

10.
ll.

12.

13.

14.

1s.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

23.

TERPENES 87

. Ibid.
. [No authors listed] d-limonene. [ARC monographs on the

evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans 1999; 73:307-27.

. Crowell PL, Gould MN. Chemoprevention and therapy

of cancer by d-limonene. Critical Reviews in Oncogenesis
1994; 5(L):1-22.

. Crowell PL, Siar Ayoubi A, Burke YD. Antitumorigenic

effects of limonene and perillyl alcohol against pancre-
atic and breast cancer. Advances in Experimental Medicine
and Biology 1996; 401:131-6.

. Igimi H, Tamura R, Toraishi K, et al. Medical dissolu-

tion of gallstones. Clinical experience of d-limonene as a
simple, safe, and effective solvent. Digestive Diseases and
Sciences 1991 Feb; 36(2):200-8.

Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

bid.

Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

bid.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

Eccles R. Menthol and related cooling compounds. The

Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 1994 Aug;
46(8):618-30.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

Goodman LS, Gilman A. The Pharmacological Basis of
Therapeutics, 7th edition. New York: Macmillan, 1985.
Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

Tbid.

Matthijs S, Adriaens PA. Chlorhexidine varnishes: a re-
view. Journal of Clinical Peridontology 2002 Jan; 29(1):1-8.
Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

----- PAGE 96 -----
88

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.
35.

36.

37.

38.

39,

40.

41.

42.
43.

44.

45,

<@ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Ibid.

Ibid.

Bianco A, ‘The chemistry of iridoids. In: Atta-Ur
Rahman HEY, ed. Studies in Natural Products Chemistry,
vol. 7. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1990.

Buckingham J. Dictionary of Natural Products. London,
New York: Chapman & Hall, 1994.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Robles M, Aregullin M, West J, et al. Recent studies on
the zoopharmacognosy, pharmacology and neurotoxicol-
ogy of sesquiterpene lactones. Planta Medica 1995 Jun;
61(3):199-203.

Houghton PJ. Valerian. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic
Publishers, 1997. .
Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London,
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Tbid.

Mackenzie MA, et al. The influence of glycyrrhetinic
acid on plasmol cortisol and cortisone levels in healthy
young volunteers. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology
and Metabolism 1990; 70:1637-43.

Budavari S, ed. The Merck Index, 12th edition.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck, 1996.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Houghton PJ. Valerian. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic
Publishers, 1997.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC; Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Coutinho EM. Gossypol: a contraceptive for men.
Contraception 2002 Apr; 65(4):259-63.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

46.
47.

48.

49.

52.

53.
94,
55.

56.

57,
58.
59.
60.

61.

63.

64.

65.

66.
67.

Ibid.

Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal
Plants. Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Robles M, Aregullin M, West J, et al. Recent studies on
the zoopharmacognosy, pharmacology and neurotoxicol-
ogy of sesquiterpene lactones. Planta Medica 1995 Jun,
61(3):199-203.

Hausen BM. Sesquiterpene lactones. In: DeSmet, ed.
Adverse Effects on Herbal Drugs, vol 1. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag, 1992.

. Ibid.
SL.

Lovell CR. Plants and the Skin. Oxford, Boston:
Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1993.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Frederich M, Dogneacute JM, Angenot L, et al. New
trends in anti-malarial agents. Current Medicinal
Chemistry 2002 Aug; 9(15):1435-56.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal
Plants. Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Hanson JR. Diterpenoids. Natural Product Reports 1998;
1:93-106.

Alcarez MJ, Rios JL. Pharmacology of diterpenoids. In:
Harborne JB, Toma-Barberan FA, eds. Ecological
Chemistry and Biochemistry of Plant Terpenoids. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1991.

. Singh M, Pal M, Sharma RP. Biological activity of the

labdane diterpenes. Planta Medica 1999 Feb; 65(1):2-8.
de Souza NJ, Dohadwalla AN, Reden J. Forskolin:

a labdane diterpenoid with antihypertensive, positive
inotropic, platelet aggregation inhibitory, and adenylate
cyclase activating properties. Medicinal Research Reviews
1983 Apr-Jun; 3(2):201-19.

Evans FJ. Naturally Occurring Phorbol Esters. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press, 1986.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Ibid.

----- PAGE 97 -----
68.

69.

70.
71.
72.
73.
74.

75.

76.
77.
78.
79.
80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.
87.
88.
89.

de Souza NJ, Dohadwalla AN, Reden J. Forskolin:

a labdane diterpenoid with antihypertensive, positive
inotropic, platelet aggregation inhibitory, and adenylate
cyclase activating properties. Medicinal Research Reviews
1983 Apr-Jun; 3(2):201-19.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Tbid.

Ibid.

Tid.

Lacaille-Dubois MA, Wagner H. A review of the biolog-
ical and pharmacological activitities of saponins.
Phytomedicine: International Journal of Phytotherapy and
Phytopharmacology 1996; 2(4):363-86.

Hostettmann K, Marston A. Saponins, Cambridge, New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Tbid.

Lacaille-Dubois MA, Wagner H. A review of the biolog-
ical and pharmacological activitities of saponins.
Phytomedicine: International Journal of Phytotherapy and
Phytopharmacology 1996; 2(4):363-86.

Watanabe, et al. Solubilizing of saponins of Bupleuri
radix with ginseng saponins: cooperative effect of
dammarane saponins. Planta Medica 1988; 54:405-9,
Sjolander A, Cox JC, Barr IG. ISCOMs: an adjuvant
with multiple functions. Journal of Leukocyte Biology 1998
Dec; 64(6):7 13-23.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemsical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC; Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Miro M. Cucurbitacins and Their Pharmacological
Effects. Phytotherapy Research 1995; 9:159-68.
Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993,

Tid.

Tid.

Ibid.

He K, Wang HK. Recent development of chemical
studies on some medicinal plants of Astragalus spp. Yzo
Xue Xue Bao 1988 Nov; 23(11):873-80.

90.

91.

92.

93.
94.
95.
. Ibid.
97.
98.
99.

100.

101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.

108.

109.

TERPENES 89

Lacaille-Dubois MA, Wagner H. A review of the biolog-
ical and pharmacological activitities of saponins.
Phytomedicine: International Journal of Phytotherapy and
Phytopharmacology 1996; 2(4):363-86.

Hostettmann K, Marston A. Saponins. Cambridge, New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: ‘Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Tbid.
Ibid.
Tbid.

Tbid.

Tid.

Satyavati G. Guggulipid: a promising hypolipidaemic
agent from gum guggul (Commiphora wightit). In:
Wagner H, Farnsworth NR, Economic and Medicinal Plant
Research, vol.5. San Diego: Academic Press, 1991.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Tbid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Duke JA. Promising phytomedicinals. In: Janick J,

Simon JE, eds. Advances in New Crops. Portland, OR:
Timber Press, 1990.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants, London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Heber D, Lu QY Overview of mechanisms of action of
lycopene. Experimental Biology and Medicine (Maywood)
2002 Nov; 227(10):920-3.

Suggested Reading
Bruneton, J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants.

Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.

London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary: A Handbook of

Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London; Washington,
DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

----- PAGE 98 -----
POLYPHENOLS

bout 8,000 naturally occurring plant phenolics
A have been identified, and about half of these are

flavonoids. There are many structurally simple
phenols, such as phenolic acids, phenylpropanoids, and
phenolic quinones. Several important groups of plant
polymeric materials are phenolic: the lignins, melanins,
and tannins. Finally, phenolic groups are occasionally
found in alkaloids and terpenoids.!

Phenolics contribute significantly to the color, taste,
and flavor of many herbs, foods, and drinks. Some flavonoids
are valued pharmacologically for their anti-inflammatory
activities (such as quercetin) or antihepatotoxic properties
(for example, silybin).? Certain isoflavonoids, such as
genistein and daidzein, are phytoestrogens, while others
are insecticidal or piscicidal. The anthocyanins have a
clearly defined function in flowers and fruits in attract-
ing pollinators and as seed dispersal agents. Many of
these phenolic molecules are also effective antioxidants
and free radical scavengers, especially the flavonoids.
As discussed later, they are also the basis of most flower
colors.

Table 7.1. Major Classes of Phenolics in Plants

Major Functions of Polyphenols
Polyphenols have in common an aromatic benzene ring

bearing one or more hydroxyl groups.
OH

Fig. 7.1, Phenol

The majority of polyphenols are water-soluble; they
usually occur naturally as glycosides, located within the
plant cell in the central vacuole. Other phenolics are
lipophilic and are present in the cell cytoplasm or at the
surface of plants in waxes and bud exudates.

CLASSIFICATION OF PHENOLICS

Phenolics are classified according to their structure or
biosynthetic origin, but no ideal system is available. Their
great diversity makes simple classification extremely

NUMBER OF BASIC SKELETON CLASS EXAMPLE
C ATOMS

Sy
6 Cs Simple phenolics Arbutin |

Pe

ow

OH

7 CG Phenolic acids Salicylic acid Cl CO
8 Ce, Benzofurans Usnic acid

90

----- PAGE 99 -----
POLYPHENOLS 2 91

NUMBER OF BASIC SKELETON CLASS EXAMPLE
C ATOMS
9 CoG Cinnamic acids Caffeic acid \
ath
Phenylpropenoids Myristicin <

Ory

SS
Coumarins Umbelliferone
HO" o” mre)
10 Ca Naphthoquinones Juglone C1)

ob
Ho. we on
B CoO, Xanthones Mangiferin Pa
ow oH

4 Ce Oty Stilbenoids Resveratrol
Anthraquinones Emodin
15 Co GC Flavonoids Kaempferol
8 (C..G) Lignans Dihydroguaiaretic¢ acid
30 (Co-G-Celo Biflavonoids Ginketin a , :
n (CoG) Lignins

(CCC) Flavolans (condensed tannins)

----- PAGE 100 -----
92 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

problematic. What follows is a system that proves most
relevant to the needs of the herbalist.

SIMPLE PHENOLS AND
PHENOLIC ACIDS

Phenolic acids (Cs-C,) are ubiquitous among plants, but
free phenols (C,) are rare. The pharmacological proper-
ties of these widely found constituents are probably best
demonstrated by the urinary tract antimicrobial arbutin
and the anti-inflammatory salicylates. A property shared
by all phenols is antimicrobial activity. In fact, phenol it-
self was the first antiseptic used in surgery.
Hydroquinone is probably the most widely dis-
tributed of the simple phenols, occurring in a number of
plants as the glucoside arbutin. Simple phenols with side
chains are often skin irritants, such as urushiol IIT from
the poison ivy plant. Urushiol ITT may be classified as a
phenol or a terpene, depending upon the focus of interest.

Table 7.2. Herbal Activities Related to Content of
Simple Phenolics

HERB ACTIVITY

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi(bearberry) Antimicrobial, diuretic

Food, circulatory stimulant,
rubefacient, analgesic

Capsicum spp. (cayenne)

Gynara scolymus (artichoke) Digestive bitter, cholagogue

Dryopteris filix-mas (male fern) Anthelmintic
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet) —_Anti-inflammatory, analgesic
Gaultheria procumbens (wintergreen) _Anti-inflammatory, analgesic
Salix spp. (willow) Anti-inflammatory, analgesic
Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod) Anticatarrhal, diuretic
Vanilla planifolia (vanilla) Food, perfumery

Viburnum prunifolium (black haw) Antispasmodic

Arbutin

Found in the leaves of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry),
Vaccinium myrtillus (bilberry), and Origanum majorana
(marjoram), arbutin demonstrates diuretic, antitussive,
and urinary antimicrobial properties. It is easily hy-
drolyzed into hydroquinone and glucose; however, the
gallotannins in simple plant extracts prevent hydrolysis,
preserving the effectiveness of such extracts.

Glucose OH
HO.
Ss
OH
Pe
o
CH OH

Fig. 7.2. Arbutin Fig, 7.3. Gallic acid

Gallic Acid

This phenolic acid is the parent compound of the gal-
lotannins and is relatively widespread. Gallic acid is well
known for astringent properties, but has demonstrated
many other activities in vitro, including antibacterial, an-
tiviral, antifungal, anti-inflammatory, antitumor, anti-
anaphylactic, antimutagenic, choleretic, and bronchodila-
tory actions. It also inhibits insulin degradation and
promotes smooth muscle relaxation.*

Guaiacol

Guaiacol occurs in creosote made from beechwood tar, in
guaiac resin, and in various plant oils and saps—for ex-
ample, celery seed oil (Apium graveolens). Guaiacol is used
as an expectorant in veterinary practice, mostly in the
form of esters. In huinans, it has been applied externally
to treat eczema and other skin diseases.°

Salicin and Salicylates

This widely distributed group of simple phenolics ap-
pear to play a defensive role in plant ecology.® The
type example of the class, salicin, was first identified
in the bark of willow (Salix spp.). This class of simple
phenolics is widely distributed in flowering plant
families, including Salicaceae (Populus spp. and Salix
spp.),, Rosaceae (Filipendula ulmaria), and Capri-
foliaceae (Viburnum prunifolium). Salicin and salicy-
lates have a long history of use in folk medicine for
relief of headaches and musculoskeletal pain.

Properties of Salicin and Salicylates
¢ Analgesic

¢ Antipyretic

¢ Anti-inflammatory

Salicin does not demonstrate the anticlotting
effect. that is seen with aspirin. On the other hand,
aspirin has a well-known tendency to cause gastric
ulceration and hemorrhage, and there is no evidence
that salicin-containing herbs have the same adverse
effects.

----- PAGE 101 -----
Hydroquinone

Upon hydrolysis in the body, arbutin releases a diphenol,
which is immediately oxidized to hydroquinone. For this
release of antiseptic properties, an alkaline environment
in the urine is neecled. It has antibacterial, antitumor, an-
timitotic, and hypertensive actions.’

Salicin

Salicin occurs in the bark of poplar (Populus spp.) and wil-
low (Salix spp.), and in the female flowers of Salix
species. It is also found in the root bark of black haw
(Viburnum prunifolium) and the aerial parts of meadow-
sweet (Filipendula ulmaria). Salicin is used as an analgesic,
anti-inflammatory, and antirheumatic agent.®

OH
CH,OH
C | Glucose.
—
OH
Fig. 7.4. Hydroquinone Fig. 7.5. Salicin

A°-tetrahydrocannabinol

This compound occurs in the resin and the tips of shoots
of Cannabis sativa. This, the active principle of marijuana,
demonstrates anti-inflammatory, antiemetic, and hallu-
cinogenic properties.°

Vanillin

Vanillin is widespread in plants, but is generally found in
small amounts. It is commercially important and is pre-
sent in the pods of the tropical orchid Vanilla planifolia,
where it occurs with its glucoside, vanilloside. Vanillin
also occurs in the sprouts of Asparagus spp. and in the es-
"sential oils of Ruta and Spirea species. It is antifungal.!°

cH,

Ss oH

Hc SENN,
°

Hye! oro

Fig, 7.6. A°-tetrahydrocannabinol Fig. 77. Vanillin

Benzofurans

The benzofuran nucleus (C.-C,), in which a benzene ring
and a furan ring are fused, is present in many secondary
plant metabolites, some of which are classified as
coumarins and flavonoids.

POLYPHENOLS @ 93

Ss

Bi

ro
Fig. 7.8. Benzofuran nucleus

The simple benzofurans, such as usnic acid, have two
benzene rings fused on either side of a central furan ring.
They are characteristically present in lichens. A biologi-
cal property many benzofurans share is antifungal activ-
ity. Antifungal substances may either occur naturally in
the plant or as phytoalexins formed after plants have suf-
fered microbial infection, Other benzofurans are toxic to
insects, fish, cattle, and humans.

Lithospermic Acid

Lithospermic acid is found in the roots of various plants
in the Boraginaceae family, including Lycopus europaeus, L.
virginicus, Lithospermum ruderale, L. officinale, and Sym-
phytum officinale. There have been unconfirmed reports of
contraceptive properties in humans.!!

HO.

HO

oH
Fig. 7.9. Lithospermic acid

Usnic Acid

Usnic acid is found in a number of lichens—for example,
Usnea, Ramatina, Evernia, Parmelia, Lecanora, and Cladonia
species. Usnic acid demonstrates antibacterial activity,
especially against the tuberculosis bacterium, Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis.\?

Fig. 7.10. Usnic acid

----- PAGE 102 -----
94 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

PHENYLPROPANOIDS AND
CINNAMIC ACIDS

Phenylpropanoids (C,-C;) are phenolic compounds that
have an aromatic ring to which a 3-carbon side chain is at-
tached. The most widespread are the hydroxycinnamic
acids, such as p-coumaric acid and caffeic acid. Another
group in this class is made up of the phenylpropenes,
which contribute to the volatile flavors and odors of
plants (for example, anethole). Glycosides of some
phenylpropanoids have been shown to inhibit the en-
zymes cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase, aldose reduc-
tase, and 5-lipoxygenase. The lignins, random polymers
that contribute universally to the structure and rigidity of
plant cell walls, are also phenylpropanoid in origin.

Anethole

Anethole is found in essential oils of plants such as anise
(Pimpinella anisum) and fennel (Foeniculum vulgare).
Anethole demonstrates spasmolytic activity and has been
shown to stimulate hepatic regeneration in rats.¥

CHO: \

Fig. 7.11. Anethole

CHy

f-asarone

Occuring in the essential oil of calamus root (Acorus cala-
mus) and in Piper angustifolium, B-asarone has spasmolytic
properties. However, the compound is carcinogenic in an-
imals, and calamus oil has been banned in the United
States.!4

CHO.
“Ss fi
CH, \__ \
CH;O OCH;

Fig. 7.12. B-asarone Fig. 7.13. Caffeic acid

Caffeic Acid

Caffeic acid has a widespread occurrence in plants and is
found in coffee beans (Coffea arabica) and in the root
bark of Cinchona cuprea, as well as in Conium maculatum,
Digitalis purpurea, Papaver somniferum, Taraxacum offici-
nale, Chamaemelum nobile, ‘Achillea millefolium, and the
resin of various conifers. Caffeic acid has analgesic, anti-
inflammatory, antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, and an-
tioxidant properties. It also demonstrates antihepatotoxic
and antiulcerogenic activities.!°

p-coumaric Acid
p-coumaric acid has a very widespread occurrence in the
plant world. It shows antifungal and antihepatotoxic ac-
tivities, and some cytotoxicity in vitro.!®

OH

HO
Fig. 7.14. p-coumaric acid

Curcumin

Curcumin is found in the roots of certain tropical spice
plants in the Zingiberaceae family, including turmeric
(Curcuma longa) and the related C. aromatica and C. xan-
thorrbiza, Curcumin and the other curcuminoids have
been found to have antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
activities and have been entered into Phase I clinical tri-
als by the National Cancer Institute to investigate their
cancer-preventive activities.!”

le OH

H3CO. ee A Pe OCH,

HO’ ‘OH

Fig. 7.15. Curcumin

Myristicin

Myristicin is found in essential oils made from the seeds
of nutmeg (Myristica fragrans), celery (Apium graveolens),
parsley (Petroselinum crispum), and carrot (Daucus carota)
and the bark of cinnamon (Cinnamomum glanduliferum).
In vitro studies have shown that myristicin inhibits
monoamine oxidase and platelet aggregation in rabbit
blood.'® It has psychotropic properties.

5 ZA ene
Ch

OCH;

Fig. 7.16, Myristicin

----- PAGE 103 -----
Coumarins

The 700 or more plant coumarins (C,-C;) are derived
from the parent compound coumarin, which has a charac-
teristic odor of freshly mown hay. The compound occurs
widely in plants, usually in bound form. Coumarin has
been found in 150 plant species in more than 30 families.
The richest sources of coumarin itself are sweet clover or
melilot (Melilotus spp.), tonka bean (Dipteryx odorata), and
sweet woodruff (Galium odoratum).

The name coumarin is derived from the French ver-
nacular name for tonka bean. The word tonka comes from
the language spoken by the indigenous peoples of the for-
mer French West Africa colony, now the independent
Republic of Guinea. Another language of the same region,
Tupi, gave rise to the old genus name, Coumarouna, from
their name for the tonka tree, kumari. This led to the
derivation of the name of tonka’s main constituent,
coumarin,

In almost all cases, with coumarin itself serving as an
exception, coumarins have a hydroxyl group in position 7,
according to the structural substitution system delineated
here.

Fig. 7.17. Coumarin structure

Based upon structural substitutions, there are three
major classes of coumarins:

¢ Simple Aydroxycowmarins, such as umbelliferone and es-
culetin

© Furanocoumarins, typified by angelicin

¢ Pyranocoumarins, such as psoralen

Simple hydroxycoumarins and their glucosides,
prevalent in higher plants, have been identified in about
100 families. The furano- and pyranocoumarins, which
usually occur in a free state in fruits and roots, are mainly
restricted to the Apiaceae and Rutaceae families.

Most simple coumarins are substituted with OH or
OCH; at positions C-6 and C-7. They often occur in gly-
cosidic form; for example, aesculin is the glycoside of aes-
culetin. Furanocoumarins, also called furocoumarins,
have a furan ring at C-6 and C-7 (psoralen) or C-7 and
C-8 (angelicin) of the coumarin ring system; however,
these are not phenolic in structure.

POLYPHENOLS @ 95

Fig. 7.18. Psoralen

Fig. 7.19. Angelicin

The furanocoumarins psoralen and bergapten have
photosensitizing properties that are exploited in treat-
ments for vitiligo and psoriasis in which the patient is
concurrently exposed to solar radiation. This is discussed
in more detail in chapter 10. Such coumarins are found in
Ammi majus, Angelica archangelica, Ruta graveolens, and
Citrus species.

The furanochromone khellin is the active constituent
of khella (Asmi visnaga), an herb used for its antispas-
modic and antiasthmatic properties in North African tra-
ditional medicine. Pyranocoumarins, which contain a
pyran ring fused at C-7 and C-8, are also present in Azmi
visnaga.

The International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC), part of the World Health Organization, found
coumarin itself to be noncarcinogenic in humans. For hu-
mans, the most dangerous coumarins are the hepatotoxic
aflatoxins and the substance dicoumarol, a potent antico-
agulant. Please refer to chapter 10 for more information.

Table 7.3. Herb Activities Related to Coumarin
Content

HERB ACTIVITY

Aesculus hippocastanum
{horse chestnut)

Anti-inflarmatory, vascular tonic

Ammi visnaga (khella) Antispasmodic, coronary

vasodilator

Angelica archangelica (angelica) Antispasmodic

Melilotus officinalis (sweet clover) Anti-inflammatory,

anti-edematous, vascular tonic

Bergapten

Bergapten is widespread among plants in the Rutaceae
family, such as bergamot (Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia).
It is also common in Apiaceae plants, including Ligusticum,
Angelica, Ammi, Levisticum, Pimpinella, and Petroselinum.
While less effective than psoralen, bergapten is also used
in the treatment of:vitiligo and psoriasis,

----- PAGE 104 -----
96 << INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

In combination with ultraviolet radiation, bergapten
may cause impairment of DNA synthesis. It is also toxic
to fish, toads, and the snails that carry the Schistosoma par-
asite responsible for the tropical disease schistosomiasis.|°

OCH; og

o CH,OH

Fig. 7.20. Bergapten Fig. 7.21. Cimicifugin
Cimicifugin

Cimicifugin occurs in the roots and rhizomes of
Cimicifuga species, such as C. racemosa, and as a glucoside
in Angelica japonica. The compound demonstrates hypo-
tensive activity in animals; it has been shown to increase
coronary blood flow in isolated guinea pig hearts.2°

Coumarin

One of the most widespread of all coumarins, coumarin is
present in most families of angiosperms. In gymnosperms,
it is found in Pinaceae, and, among ferns, in Polypodi-
aceae. It often occurs in glucosidic form; free coumarin is
released during tissue damage. Coumarin has hemor-
rhagic effects and for this reason is used as a rat poison; it
also causes liver damage in rats and dogs. In addition, it
has piscicidal, antifungal, and antitumor properties.”!

OCH, oO
a
o o CHy
Fig. 7.22. Coumarin Fig. 7.23. Khellin

Khellin

This coumarin, found in the seeds of khella (Ammmi vis-
naga), exhibits antiviral phototoxicity. This is an intrigu-
ing property by which the molecule kills viruses when ac-
tuvated by certain wavelengths of ultraviolet light. Khellin
is a vasodilator and’ phosphodiesterase inhibitor; it has
also demonstrated anthelmintic, antispasmodic, antiarte-
riosclerotic, antiasthmatic, bronchodilatory, antidiabetic,
and antiulcerogenic properties.”

Psoralen

Psoralen, which occurs in the seeds of Psoralea species,
possesses photosensitizing activity. This constituent is an
essential component of PUVA treatment of psoriasis and
vitiligo. In PUVA, a combination treatment used in der-
matology, the patient takes psoralen (P) and then exposes
the skin to long-wave ultraviolet radiation (UVA).
Psoralen is also active against Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
the pathogen that causes tuberculosis. In the presence of
ultraviolet light, psoralen impairs DNA synthesis.”3

SHs

a~ ‘CH,
SS
o of Sy HO oo 0
Fig. 7.24. Psoralen Fig. 7.25. Umbelliferone

Umbelliferone
Umbelliferone is widespread in the resin of various
Apiaceae plants, including Ferula, Apium, Pimpinella, and
Heracleum species. It has antifungal and antibacterial

properties, It is used in sunscreen lotions and creams be-
cause of its UV-adsorbing properties.”*

QUINONES

Quinones, of which at least 1,200 have been identified,
provide pigments that range in color from yellow to al-
most black, but most are yellow, orange, or red.
Although many quinone-containing plants have been
used as dyes, they actually contribute little to plant color.
They are usually hidden in bark, heartwood, or roots, or
else occur in tissues where their colors are masked by
other pigments.

Among quinones that have been used as dyes, madder
root (Rubia tinctorum) contains anthraquinones that are
the source of the orange-red pigment alizarin, and alka-
net (Alkanna tinctoria) contains the naphthoquinone red
dye alkannin.

Quninones are classified into three groups according
to increasing molecular size: benzoquinones, naphtho-
quinones, and anthraquinones. Many are substituted by
isoprenyl groups and hence are lipophilic. Others are hy-
droxylated, with phenolic properties, and may occur both
in free form and as glycosides. Here are representative
structures with the numbering system used for each type.

----- PAGE 105 -----
CO
t
o
Fig. 7.26. Quinone
structure

Fig. 7.27. Naphthoquinone
structure

9
|

\ f
\ 4

Fig. 7.28. Anthraquinone
structure

Fig. 7.29. Naphthodianthone
structure

Naphthoquinones
Naphthoquinones (C,-C,) are dark yellow pigments with
a range of pharmacological properties. The dye henna is
derived from the plant Lawsonia inermis, which contains
the naphthoquinone lawsone as a glycoside. Other naph-
thoquinones have antimicrobial and antifungal properties,
including juglone from walnut Guglans regia) and butter-
nut (7. cineraria). Juglone is a laxative and vermifuge.
Other naphthoquinones with antimicrobial proper-
ties are plumbagin from sundew (Drosera rotundifolia) and
lapachol from pau d’arco (Tabebuia spp.).

Table 7.4. Herb Activities Related to
Naphthoquinone Content

HERB ACTIVITY

Drosera rotundifolia (sundew) Antispasmodic, antitussive
Juglans regia (walnut) Antiparasitic, astringent

Lawsonia inermis (henna) Dye plant

Juglone

Juglone, found in the stem bark of Fuglans nigra, is the al-
lelopathic agent of the walnut tree, meaning that the tree
releases the chemical into the soil to prevent other plants
from growing too close. Juglone demonstrates activity

POLYPHENOLS ¢. 97

against fungi, mollusks, and herpes simplex virus type 1.”°
It also has sedative properties in fish and mammals.

Fig. 7.30. Juglone Fig. 7.31. Lawsone

Lawsone (henna)
Lawsone occurs in the leaves of Lawsonia inermis, the
henna plant. It is used as a cosmetic and hair dye, and

also as a sunscreen agent because of its UV-adsorption
properties.”¢

Plumbagin

Found in the roots of Plumbago europaea and in various
species of carnivorous plants, including sundew (Drosera
rotundifolia), plumbagin enhances the phagocytotic activ-
ity of human granulocytes in vitro. It is cytotoxic at high
doses and immunostimulating at low doses.’ In addition,
it has molluscicidal properties.

OH io)

Fig. 7.32. Plumbagin

Anthraquinones

Anthraquinones (C,-C,-C,) constitute the largest group
of naphthoquinones, and are often red or purple, rather
than yellow. They are widely distributed in plants, espe-
cially in the families Fabaceae (Senna), Liliaceae (Aloe),
Polygonaceae (Rheum), and Rhamnaceae (Rhamnus). The
anthraquinone class contains many important laxative
compounds, including aloe-emodin and emodin, from
‘Aloe species. Dimeric anthraquinones, also known as an-
thrones, include such compounds as cassiamin C, senno-
side A, and the bianthraquinone hypericin, from St. John’s
wort (Hypericum perforatum).

Among anthraquinone-containing laxatives, the
gentlest-acting compounds belong to the buckthorns
(Rhamnus catharticus and R. frangula) and Chinese
rhubarb (Rheum palmatum). These herbs are aged for at
least one year, during which the more irritant an-
thraquinones are converted to milder compounds. The

----- PAGE 106 -----
98 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

presence of tannins in these plants also tends to moderate
the laxative effect. Aloe and Senna species are the other
commonly used laxative agents in this class. Their onset of
action occurs around eight hours after ingestion.

Senna syrup is commonly prescribed for children and
may be used during pregnancy and lactation for limited
periods of time. Otherwise, anthraquinone-containing
laxatives are contraindicated during pregnancy. Due to
the stimulant effect of these laxatives, they are also con-
traindicated in spastic colon conditions. A slight overdose
can produce griping, which can be counterbalanced with
carminatives, such as peppermint and coriander oils. All
the anthraquinone-containing laxatives can lead to de-
pendency. These important herbs are discussed in more
depth in chapters 10 and 13.

Herbal Laxatives Containing Anthraquinones
Aloe spp. (aloe)

Rhammnus cathartica (purging buckthorn)

R. frangula (buckthorn)

R. purshiana (cascara sagrada)

Rheum spp. (Chinese rhubarb)

Senna alexandrina (senna)

Aloe-emodin

Aloe-emodin is found in the leaves of Aloe, Senna, and
some Rheum species. In addition to its well-known cathar-
tic action, aloe-emodin has demonstrated antileukemic
activities.?8

OH oO OH
ia i oF ye Say
eA
( Ty ca a ‘CH,OH

Fig. 7.33. Aloe-emodin Fig. 7.34. Barbaloin

Barbaloin

This C-glucoside of aloe-emodin occurs in the leaves of
several Aloe species cultivated as medicines, including A.
vera, A. ferox and A. perryi. It is used commercially as a
purgative.?

Emodin

Emodin occurs in Rumex and Rheum species, in the root
30
a.

bark of Rbamnus frangula, and in some lichen gener:

ca Sy
cH SS a OH

°

Fig. 7.35, Emodin Fig. 7.36, Pseudohypericin

Pseudohypericin
Found in Hypericum species, pseudohypericin demon-
strates antiretroviral activity both in vitro and in vivo.?!

Rhein

Rhein is found in all parts of Scrophularia nodosa and in
the roots of Rumex, Rheum, and Senna species. Rhein dis-
plays moderate antifungal activity against dermatophytes.**

OH fe) OH
SS
oe
° °
Fig. 7.37. Rhein
HO
GO
HO i) 9 OH

HO’
CL OH

Fig. 7.38. Sennoside A

Sennoside A

Sennoside A is found in the leaves of Senna, where it is
formed during drying, as well as in the fruit of S. alexan-
drina and in rhizomes of Rheum palmatum. This cathartic
agent is used for the treatment of chronic constipation,
and is found in many stimulating herbal laxatives.

----- PAGE 107 -----
Hypericin

Found in St. John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum) and other
Hypericum species, hypericin shows activity against retro-
viruses in vitro and in vivo.*4 The compound is photosen-
sitizing and may have antidepressant effects in mammals,
although it is unlikely that hypericin is the constituent re-
sponsible for the herb’s mild antidepressant effects.>>

2

oH 9

Ho—1

Sy
—
“SS
a

a
Sy
no
Se

Fig. 7.40. Hyperforin

Hyperforin

This is a derivative of phloroglucinol found in the flowers
and fruits of St. John’s wort (Hypericum ‘perforatum).
Currently, hyperforin is thought to be pivotal to the mild
antidepressant properties of this herb.

XANTHONES

Xanthones are related to flavonoids, as they share precur-
sors, but xanthones have a single carbon bridge (C,-C,-
Co) instead of the 3-carbon bridge of the flavonoids. A bi-
ologically active yet taxonomically restricted group,
xanthones demonstrate a range of effects in living organ-
isms. Compounds such as bellidifolin inhibit monoamine
oxidase activity, while psorospermin exhibits both cyto-
toxic and antitumor properties. Many other xanthones
are recorded as having antimicrobial, insecticidal, anti-
inflammatory, or tuberculostatic effects. They are found
in herbs such as gentian (Gentiana lutea), swertia (Swertia
spp.), and mango (Mangifera indica).

POLYPHENOLS 2 99

Gentisein

Gentisein is found in the roots of Gentiana lutea, and is
considered antibacterial and antitubercular.3¢

Ho. °.
(> ss S
oH
oH °

Fig. 7.41. Gentisein

STILBENOIDS

This group of compounds is based on a structure of two
benzene rings bridged by a chain of two carbons. Limited
in distribution, they are common in the Orchidaceae fam-
ily and also found in liverworts. They are constituents of
the heartwood of both gymnosperm and angiosperm
trees. Stilbenoids have been found in plants in the free
state, as glycosides, and as oligomers. Many are strongly
antifungal and serve as phytoalexins.*”

HO.

\ a” OH
lo \/

Fig. 7.42. Resveratrol

Resveratrol (trans-3,5,4’-trihydroxystilbene)
Found in many plants as a phytoalexin, resveratrol is
abundant in the skins of red grapes (Vitis vinifera). It has
been suggested that resveratrol underlies the phenomenon
known as the “French paradox,” which is discussed in
more detail later in this chapter. Wine is the most notable
dietary source of this compound; a fluid ounce of red wine
contains an average of 160 yg of resveratrol.?®

Physiological concentrations of resveratrol can mod-
ulate multiple molecular pathways thought to be associ-
ated with the development and progression of cardiovas-
cular disease and cancer, including Phase II drug
metabolism, cyclooxygenase, lipid metabolism, nitric
oxide, DNA synthesis, inflammation, cell survival, cell
death, and cell division cycle pathways.”

Research highlights a number of resveratrol effects
relevant to the cardiovascular system:

¢ Antioxidant”

¢ Inhibits peroxidation of low-density lipoprotein
(LDL)

© Reduces platelet aggregation”

----- PAGE 108 -----
100 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Resveratrol has also been shown to function as a can-
cer chemopreventive agent. Such agents reduce the inci-
dence of tumorigenesis by intervening at one or more of
the stages of carcinogenesis.”> In research, resveratrol
demonstrated chemopreventive activity in assays repre-
senting three major stages of carcinogenesis: initiation,
promotion, and progression.**”

Initiation: antioxidant and antimutagenic effects; induced
Phase II drug-metabolism enzymes

Promotion: inhibited cyclooxygenase and hydroperoxidase

Progression: induced human pro-myelocytic leukemia cell
differentiation; inhibited the growth of leukemia cells
in vitro

FLAVONOIDS

The term flavonoid describes all the polyphenolic plant
pigments that have a C,-C,-C, skeleton analogous to that
of the flavones—that is, two substituted benzene rings
connected by a 3-carbon chain. All of the approximately
4,000 flavonoids that have been identified possess this
same basic structural makeup.

Fig. 7.43. Flavonoid core Fig, 7.44. Flavonoid
structure structure

However, as an example of the many subtleties that
can prove so confusing in phytochemistry, flavone, the
parent substance of the flavonoids, occurs naturally but is
not itself a phenolic compound, as it lacks a hydroxyl

group.

Taxonomic Distribution

Molecules in this group are very widely distributed in
higher plants as components of leaves and pigments in
flowers. No flavonoids have been found in algae, but
some are common in Bryophytes. In Pteridophytes, the
Psilotales and Selaginellales are characterized by the pres-
ence of biflavonoids, and Equisetales by proanthocyanins.

Anatomical Distribution of Flavonoids

Flavonoid glycosides are water-soluble and accumulate in
plant cell vacuoles. Depending on the species, they either
concentrate in the leaf epidermis or are dispersed in both
the epidermis and the mesophyll. In flowers, they are

concentrated in epidermal cells. Whenever flavonoids are
present in the leaf cuticle, they are almost always free
aglycones, made even more lipophilic by the partial or
total methylation of their hydroxyl groups.

Plant Pigmentation

Flavonoids are plant pigments, responsible for the color
of flowers, fruits, and sometimes leaves. When not di-
rectly visible, they often act as co-pigments. For example,
colorless flavone and flavonol co-pigments protect plant
tissues and compounds such as anthocyanins against dam-
age from ultraviolet (UV) radiation. In some cases, the
molecule absorbs near-UV radiation, and this color is
perceived only by insects.

Names of many categories of flavonoids have their
roots in Greek or Latin color terms; the word flavone it-
self comes from flavus, the Latin word for “yellow.”
Anthocyanin comes from the Greek anthos (flower) and
kyanos (blue). The word is used broadly, as in “antho-
cyanin pigments,” without regard for whether they are
glycosides (anthocyanins) or aglycones (anthocyanidins).

Anthocyanins generate petal colors; red flower colors
are usually based on cyanidin and blue on delphinidin.
The yellow anthochlor pigments, chalcones and aurones,
are so named because the color of yellow flowers that
contain these pigments changes to red when the flowers
are fumed with ammonia. (Yellow flowers containing only
carotenoids are unchanged after this treatment.)

Chalcones are readily oxidized both in vivo and in
vitro to aurones, and both classes of pigment are often
found together in yellow flowers. The word chalcone is de-
rived from the Greek words chalcos, meaning copper, and
aurone, from the Latin aurum, meaning gold. The obso-
lete name /eucoantbocyanin was once used to denote all
substances that could be converted into anthocyanins
when heated with mineral acid.

While flavonoids are responsible for most plant pig-
ments, pigments may also be provided by members of
some, but not all, families of the Caryophyllidae, in which
betalain alkaloids contribute color. These families include
the Phytolaccaceae, Cactaceae, Chenopodiaceae, and

Amaranthaceae.
0.
I ie
CH.
om Nou

Fig. 7.45. Betadinin

----- PAGE 109 -----
Variations in the structure of anthocyanins generate
the wonderful diversity of hue and tone in the colors of
flowers and fruits. A number of factors are believed to
contribute to this kaleidoscopic abundance of color:

¢ Differences in electron charge

© Number of methoxyl and hydroxyl groups

© Number and type of sugars attached to the aglycone
* Presence of metal ions

* Presence of other pigments

Acertaining the specific effects of anthocyanin struc-
ture on plant color is not straightforward. For example,
when anthocyanins are heated, they may become either
paler in color or riore stable in structure, as heating may
cause them to polymerize. Anthocyanins are generally
colorless in neutralized pH, redder in an acid medium,
and bluer in an alkaline medium and in certain other
circumstances—for example, when they form complexes
with metals.

Classification of Flavonoids

Numerous variations on the basic C,-C,-C, structure
occur in flavonoids, which has led to the development of
various systems for classifying this diverse and abundant
group of secondary metabolites. Unfortunately, these sys-
tems do not always correlate with one another, and unless
this fact is recognized, much confusion may result. Of the
systems described here, that based on degree of oxidation
is the one used throughout this discussion.

The sugar most likely to be present is D-glucose, but
L-rhamnose, D-galactose, L-arabinose, and D-xylose are
also found. This means that for every aglycone, there may
be many different glycosidic combinations. Structural
variability expands further in glycosides formed with a
disaccharide or a trisaccharide, in which a linear or
branched structure may be seen.

Each class of flavonoids contains molecules with dif-
ferent substituents on the structural skeleton that they
have in common. In addition, each flavonoid may be pre-
sent as a glycoside or as a simple aglycone. To facilitate
nomenclature, a numbering system that describes variants
in each class has been developed.

REPRESENTATIVE CLASSES OF
FLAVONOID AGLYCONES

Flavones and Flavonols

In these molecules, which represent about 80% of known
flavonoids, ring A is substituted by two hydroxyl groups
at C-5 and C-7, These groups may be free, etherified, or

POLYPHENOLS 101

inked glycosidally. However, other substitutions are also
possible.

Flavones and flavonols are universally distributed in
plants, but some of the substitution patterns are restricted
to certain families or groups of families—hence their in-
terest to chemotaxonomists. They often occur as pig-
ments associated with anthocyanins in petals and leaves of
higher plants. They are found most frequently in the
form of glycosides, but they may also be present as

Flavonoid Classification Systems

Degree of Saturation

Two major categories encompass flavonoids in
which the central heterocyclic ring is either sat-
urated or unsaturated. Hf saturated, as in fla-
vanols, the molecule will be planar, and thus
non-optically active. Flavonoids with unsatu-
rated rings, such as flavones, are defined by
stereoisomerism.

Biosynthetic Origin

In this classification scheme, one group of
flavonoids includes those that are both inter-
mediate steps in biosynthesis and end products,
such as chalcones and flavanones. The other
flavonoids constitute a second group in that
they are known only as end products. These in-
clude anthocyanins and flavonols.

Molecular Size
This scheme differentiates among monomeric,
dimeric, trimeric, and polmeric flavonoid
structures.

Conjugates

Flavonoids normally exist in conjugate or com-
bined forms, also known as glycosylflavonoids.
These conjugates are commonly glycosides, in
which a bond (-C-O-C-) is formed between a hy-
droxyl of the flavonoid and a sugar. The bond
may be established with any of the hydroxyl
groups on the aglycone, but the groups involved
are generally the hydroxyls in the 7-position of
the flavones and in the 3-position of the
flavonols. The sugar may be a mono-, di-, or
trisaccharide.

----- PAGE 110 -----
102 «3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Table 7.5. Flavonoid Categories

CLASS STRUCTURE OF CENTRAL C-3 UNIT EXAMPLE
Catechins (flavan-3-ols a Catechin NP ON Oe
( ) Ne — ot oe
| a Z oa
Dihydrochalcones at Phloretin CL ~
Y
° OW °
we i on
7
Chalcones No an Butein ae ies
| ad
NON ou
Flavanones (dihydroflavones) te Naringenin os oe
ji AN
° I
he 8
oN oe a
Flavones al Apigenin im in| “
ws
— Se Ps ae
Isoflavones aw Genistein Ss os
I & 8 Non
4 aa
ae © ok
Anthocyanidins BE | Pelargonidin os ~
Son s Aon
K
A =
| Nee --
Aurones JL x Sulfuretin a aie
i Ul
i “er ae
Flavanols sn, Taxifolin “ Sy Se
‘c ‘OH A
I “oH
oN pa a
Flavonols | _,, Quercetin .

----- PAGE 111 -----
aglycones on leaf surfaces, in fruits, and in bud exu-
dates. Flavones differ from flavonols in that they lack a
3-hydroxyl substitution, which changes their spectro-
scopic properties. Apigenin and luteolin are the only
common flavones.

Several hundred flavone and flavonol aglycones are
known, but only three are common: kaempferol, quercetin,
and myricetin. Quercetin has the widest distribution in na-
ture of all phenolic compounds, and 135 different glyco-
sides of quercetin have been described. The most common
is quercetin-3-rutinoside, commonly known as rutin,
which is used in the treatment of capillary fragility.

Many different saccharides may serve as the sugars in
flavone and flavonol glycosides. Ten monosaccharides are
known: D-apiose, L-arabinose, L-rhamnose, D-xylose, D-
allose, D-galactose, D-glucose, D-mannose, and D-galac-
turonic and D-glucuronic acids. Disaccharides are associ-
ated with flavones; rutinose is particularly widespread.
Trisaccharides, linear or branched, are also known, and
one branched tetrasaccharide has been identified.

In addition, there are a number of flavones with var-
ious other substituents. Among the flavones with isoprene
substitution, the linkage is generally observed at the C-6
and/or C-8 position of the flavone. About 100 flavone and
flavonol sulfates and some flavone alkaloids have also
been reported.

Oxidation or Substitution

Here the various classes of flavonoids are distin-
guished by the degree of oxidation of the C-3
chain. This is the system used throughout the dis-
cussion of flavonoids in this chapter. The follow-
ing illustrates the hierarchy of flavonoids accord-
ing to increasing degree of oxidation.
catechins—>
dihydrochalcones—>
proanthocyanidins—>
flavanones—>
flavanols—>»
flavones—>
anthocyanidins—»
flavonols

POLYPHENOLS 2 103

Kaempferol (3,5,7,4’-tetrahydroxyflavone)
Kaempferol is very widespread, both free and in glycosides.

OH

Ho. fo)
~

;
[
ia on
16) o

Fig. 7.46. Kaempferol

Consider table 7.6, which lists commonly used plants
that are sources of kaempferol.

Table 7.6. Plant Sources of Kaempferol

PLANT PLANT PART
Allium cepa (onion) Bulb
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow) Leaf
Anethum graveolens (dill) Seed
Calendula officinalis (calendula) Whole plant
Camellia sinensis (tea) Whole plant
Centella asiatica (gotu kola) Whole plant
Equisetum arvense (horsetail) Whole plant
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset) Whole plant
Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo) Leaf

Harpagophytum procumbens {devil's claw) Root

Lactuca sativa (lettuce) Whole plant
Matricaria recutita (chamomile) Whole plant
Ocimum basilicum (basil) Leaf
Passiflora incarnata (passionflower) Whole plant
Sambucus nigra (black or European elder) Flower
Silybum marianum (milk thistle) Seed
Thymus vulgaris (thyme) Whole plant

Viola odorata (sweet violet) Whole plant

----- PAGE 112 -----
104 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Table 7.7. Plant Sources of Quercetin

om PLANT PLANT PART AMOUNT
on!
|
ne wy Oenothera biennis (evening primrose) Leaf 91,000-
\ | 207,000 ppm
— a
. | Podophyllum peltatum (mayapple) esin, sap 50,000 ppm
Fig. 7.47, Quercetin Allium cepa (onion ulb 0-48.10 ppm
Quercetin (3,5,7,3’,4’-pentahydroxyflavone) Camellia sinensis (tea) Leaf 10,000 ppm
This is the flavonoid most commonly found in higher Azadirachta indica (neem) Flower 1,000 ppm
plants, usually in one ofi its many glycosidic forms. ;
However, it may also occur in free form in Asteraceae, Helianthus annuus (sunflower) Flower 100-400 ppm
Passifloraceae, Rhamnaceae, and Solanaceae plants.” Malus domestica (apple) ericarp 58-263 ppm
Vaccinium macrocarpon (cranberry) Fruit 100-250 ppm
oe |

The Use and Abuse of Quercetin

Quercetin has gained the attention of the supplement industry, and is now widely promoted as a nat-
ural anti-inflammatory and antioxidant magic bullet. This has the effect of confusing both the public
and practitioners as to the difference between whole plant and active’ingredient herbalism. An ac-
knowledgment of the role of an isolated constituent in health maintenance should emphasize the im-
portance of the many herbal and dietary sources of the compound, rather than focus on “natural
magic bullets” available only in dietary supplement form.

Quercetin affects a whole array of enzyme systems. There appears to be a theme of involvement
in inflammatory processes that partially explains the anti-inflammatory action of many quercetin-con-
taining plants.

Enzyme Systems Modified by Quercetin®

Transport ATPases Lipoxygenase

Protein kinases Aldose reductase
Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases Xanthine oxidase
Catechol-O-methyl-transferase Hyaluronidase
Phospholipase A, Histidine decarboxylase
Cyclooxygenase Estrogen synthetase

There are a number of specific indications typically given for quercetin, but they do not always
take into account the richness of the compound's therapeutic possibilities when it is used in the bio-
evolved complex of its herbal sources. Quercetin finds its main use as a safe systemic anti-inflamma-
tory, indicated in most cases of allergy or inflammation-based pathology.’? This application stems
from the impact of quercetin on the biochemical processes that influence these physiological re-
sponses in the body. Such therapeutically valuable responses will, of course, also occur when the
flavonoid is taken in the form of a whole plant preparation.

Growing evidence indicates that quercetin has antiviral activity, both in vivo and in vitro, most
markedly against herpes simplex type 1, parainfluenza type 3, polio virus type 1, and respiratory syn-
cytial virus. It is interesting to note that boneset (Eupatorium perfoliatum) is both a rich source of
quercetin and a traditional treatment for flu. Quercetin may also play a role in tumor inhibition"
Please see chapter.9 for more details on the anticancer effects of flavonoids.

----- PAGE 113 -----
PLANT PLANT PART AMOUNT
Allium sativum (garlic) Bulb 200 ppm
Brassica oleracea var. capitata Leaf 2-100 ppm
(cabbage)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne) Fruit 63 ppm
Brassica oleracea var. acephala (kale) Leaf 7-50 ppm
Pyrus communis (pear) Pericarp 28 ppm
Brassica oleracea var. gemmifera Axillary 25 ppm
(brussels sprouts) bud

Brassica oleracea var. gongylodes Shoot 20 ppm
(kohtrabi)

Spinacia oleracea (spinach) Leaf 19 ppm
Isorbamnetin

This flavonol has a very widespread occurrence, both free
and in the form of glycosides.

OCH OH
4 ) cH
Ho 9. Se .
I
Son
o ° 10
Fig. 7.48. lsorhamnetin Fig. 7.49. Rutin

Rutin (quercetin-3-rutinoside)

First isolated from rue (Ruta graveolens), rutin is
widespread in higher plants. It demonstrates many of the
general actions of quercetin and other flavones and
flavonols. (Please see chapter 9 for more information.)
Rutin has anti-inflammatory activity because of an ability
to inhibit the action of the enzyme lipoxygenase. It is
specifically recognized as a free radical scavenger and has
been used clinically against capillary fragility and vari-
cosities. In vitro studies show that it also has antiviral and
antibacterial properties.°?

Table 7.8. Herbs Containing Rutin

HERB PLANT PART

Achillea millefolium (yarrow) Whole plant

Agathosma betulina (buchu) Leaf

POLYPHENOLS -e 105

HERB PLANT PART
Allium cepa (onion) Bulb

A, sativum (garlic) Whole plant
Apium graveolens (celer) Whole plant
Artemisia absinthium (wormwood) Whole plant
Asparagus officinalis (asparagus) Root
Azadirachta indica (neem) Leaf
Calendula officinalis (calendula) Flower
Camellia sinensis (tea) Leaf
Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd's purse) Whole plant
Coriandrum sativum (coriander) Fruit
Crataegus laevigata (hawthorn) Leaf
Erythroxylum coca (coca) Leaf
Eschscholzia californica (california poppy) Flower
Eupatorium perfoliatum {boneset) lant
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet) Plant
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel) Fruit
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort) Plant

llex paraguariensis {mate} Leaf
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort) Whole plant
Matricaria recutita (chamomile) Whole plant
Mentha piperita (peppermint) Whole plant
Passiflora incarnata (passionflower) Whole plant
Pimpinella anisum (anise) Seed

Rheum officinale (chinese rhubarb) Root

Ruta graveolens (rue) Whole plant
Salix alba (white willow) Bark
Sambucus nigra (black elder) Flower, leaf
Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod) Leaf
Spinacia oleracea {spinach} Leaf

Viola odorata (sweet violet) Flower

V. tricolor (pansy) Flower

----- PAGE 114 -----
106 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Apigenin

The aglycone of apigenin is occasionally found on leaf
surfaces and on fern fronds. Many glycosides are known.
Research has shown that it has anti-inflammatory, an-
tibacterial, diuretic, and hypotensive properties.

OH

oH

HO. °°.
ms,

c
I
a
OH oO

Fig. 7.51. Luteolin

Fig. 7.50. Apigenin

Luteolin
This aglycone is common, especially in leaf exudates. Lute-
olin often occurs as the 7-glucoside and 7-glucuronide.**

Anthocyanins and Anthochlors

There are two main classes of flavonoid pigments that
provide flower color:

Anthocyanins (red to blue colors)
Anthochlors, including chalcones and aurones (yellow petal
colors)

The most common anthocyanidin (anthocyanin agly-
cone) is cyanidin. The other 15 known anthocyanidins, 6
of which are widely distributed, differ only in the number
and position of methoxyl or hydroxyl groups. The gly-
cosidal anthocyanins are incredibly numerous; cyanidin
alone is found in 76 different glycosidic combinations.**

Anthocyanidin pigments are responsible for the wide
array of pink, scarlet, red, mauve, violet, and blue colors
in flowers, leaves, fruits, fruit juices, and wines. They are
also responsible for the astringent taste of fruit and wines.
Genera that contain yellow anthochlor pigments include
Dianthus, Dahlia, Potentilla, and Antirrhinum.

Cyanidin

Cyanidin is found in glycosidic form in nearly all green
plants. Elderberries and red cabbage, which each contain
many different cyanidin glycosides, are potential sources
of natural red food colorings.*¢

OH

HO,

+
2.
GO Oe on

Sy a

OH
OH

Fig. 7.52. Cyanidin

ISOFLAVONOIDS

The more than 600 isoflavonoids are divided into sub-
classes according to the oxidation level of the central
pyran ring. They differ from other flavonoids in that they
display greater structural diversity and are usually present
in the free state, rather than as glycosides. Isoflavones are
the most abundant subclass; other subclasses include
isoflavanones, pterocarpans, coumestans, isoflavans, rotenoids,
and neoflavonoids.

Isoflavones are isomeric with the more widely occur-
ring flavones. They are more restricted in distribution
than flavones and flavonols, found regularly in only one
subfamily of Fabaceae, the Papilionoideae. Widely occur-
ring isoflavones include daidzein, genistein, formono-
netin, and biochanin A, which are noted for their estro-
genic properties.

OH: 2. HO.
TO
i SS

Fig. 7.53. Daidzein

Fig. 7.54. Genistein

Daidzein

Daidzein is a widely distributed isoflavone that is espe-
cially abundant in the Lamiaceae. As discussed in chapter
9, it is an effective phytoestrogen.

Table 7.9. Plants Containing Daidzein

PLANT PLANT PART
Genista tinctoria {ayers broom) Shoot
Glycine max (soy) Seed
Phaseolus coccineus {scarlet runner bean) Whole plant
Psoralea corylifolia {babchi) Root
Pueraria lobata, P. phaseoloides {kudzu} Root
Trifolium pratense (red clover) Flower

Ulex europaeus (gorse) Aerial parts
Genistein

This isoflavone occurs in clover (Trifolium spp.), soy
(Glycine max), and many other Fabaceae plants, as well as
in the wood of Prunus species.°’

----- PAGE 115 -----
Table 7.10. Herbs Containing Genistein

HERB PLANT PART
Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo) Leaf

Gytisus scoparius (Scotch broom) Flower
Genista tinctoria (dyer’s broom) Flower
Glycine max {soy) Seed
Glycyrthiza glabra (licorice) Shoot
Lupinus albus (white lupine) Hypocotyl
Medicago sativa (alfalfa, lucerne) Leaf
Phaseolus coccineus (scarlet runner bean) Whole plant
P. lunatus (butter bean, lima) Leaf

P. vulgaris (kidney bean) Fruit

Pisum sativum (garden pea) Shoot
Prunus cerasus {sour cherry) Fruit
Pueraria lobata (kudzu) Leaf

P. phaseoloides (kudzu) oot
Stellaria media (chickweed) Whole plant
Trifolium pratense (red clover) Leaf

T. repens (white clover) Leaf

Vigna angularis (adzuki bean) Seed

Pterocarpans

Pterocarpans are significantly antifungal and are found in
the heartwood of many legume trees, but are also induced
as phytoalexins in some plants in response to fungal in-
fection. The rotenoids have a common tetracyclic ring
system, as in rotenone, and are distinguished by their in-
secticidal and piscicidal properties.

Rotenone inhibits the electron transport pathway in
mitochondria and is therefore toxic to all forms of life.
However, it can be used safely as a fish poison because the
oral toxicity in humans is very low. Powdered derris root
contains rotenone and is a well-known insecticidal dust.

Rotenone (tubotoxin)
Major sources of rotenone include derris root (Derris el-
liptica) and Jamaica dogwood (Piscidia erythrina). It is also

POLYPHENOLS @ 107

found in the leaves of mullein (Verbascum thapsus).
Rotenone demonstrates insecticidal and antiprotozoal ac-
tivity. It is toxic, with an intraperitoneal LDsy in mice of
2.8 mg/kg. While the toxicity in humans is low, it is more
toxic when inhaled than when ingested.*8

Minor Flavonoids

Harborne and Baxter use the term minor flavonoid to de-
scribe flavonoids that have a limited distribution (as opposed
to the more widespread anthocyanins, flavones, and flavo-
nols) and a central pyran ring at a higher level of oxidation.

* Flavanones

* Dihydrochalcones

* Dihydrotlavonols (flavan-3-ols)
¢ Flavan-3,4-diols

The best-known minor flavonoids are the flavanones
and the flavanon-3-ols or dibydroflavonols.

Flavanones

Two flavanones, naringenin and eriodictyol, are relatively
common. Flavanone glycosides are often notable for their
taste; naringin and eriocitrin contribute to bitterness in
citrus fruits. However, not all flavanones are bitter. Some
are sweet; for example, neohesperidin dihydrochalcone, a
compound related to neohesperidin, is used in the food in-
dustry as a nonsugar sweetener.

Naringenin

This compound has a widespread occurrence in plants,
especially in the Asteraceae family (for example, Artemisia
spp.). Naringin, the glycoside of naringenin, is widely dis-
tributed in Rutaceae. Naringenin has antibacterial, anti-
fungal, antihepatotoxic, antioxidant, antispasmodic, and

antiulcerogenic properties.°
on

LO
—~woeee
—

Fig. 7.55. Naringenin

Dibydrochalcones

Flavonoids in this group have an open central ring. They
are structurally related to the flavanones, but are not as
widely distributed.

----- PAGE 116 -----
108 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Phloretin
Phloretin occurs as a glycoside, especially in Rosaceae and
Ericaceae. The compound demonstrates antibacterial and

anti-inflammatory actions.©
‘OH

y

ae

WO oH a
—s

OH o

Fig. 7.56. Phloretin

Dibydroflavonols
Here, the molecule has a closed central ring. These rela-
tively common compounds are also known as flavan-3-ols.
Catechin, a dihydroflavonol, and silybin, a flavo-
lignan from milk thistle (Siybum marianum), are used
therapeutically because of their anti-inflammatory and
antihepatotoxic properties. Many of these structures have
antimicrobial activity, and several are phytoalexins.

(+)-Catechin

Catechin is very widespread, especially in woody plants.
Examples of medicinal plants that contain this dihy-
droflavonol are provided in table 7.11.

Table 7.11. Catechin-Rich Herbs and Actions

HERB ACTION

Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony) Bitter, astringent

Crataegus laevigata (hawthorn) Cardiotonic, hypotensive

Humutus lupulus (hops) Bitter, hypnotic, antispasmodic

Leonurus cardiaca(motherwort) Relaxing nervine, antispasmodic

Quercus alba (white oak) Astringent

Salix alba (white willow) Anti-inflammatory, analgesic

Vaccinium myrtillus (bilberry) Antihepatotoxic, antioxidant

OH

OH

HO. 2.

a
Sy,

OH

OH

Fig. 7.57. Catechin

Silybin

Silybin occurs in the seeds of milk thistle (Silybum mar-
ianum) as a component of “silymarin,” a complex of
S. marianum flavanolignans that possess antihepatotoxic
activity. Silybin was formerly called silymarin.”!

2. CH,OH
HO. 0. Cl ” ‘OCHy
C) o
‘On ‘On

OH fs]

Fig. 7.58. Silybin

Biflavonoids

Another variant in the flavone series is the biflavonyl.
These dimeric compounds are formed by carbon-carbon
or carbon-oxygen couplings between two flavone units
(usually apigenin). Methyl ethers are common, for exam-
ple, ginkgetin, which occurs in the autumnal leaves of
Ginkgo biloba. Biflavonyls occur almost exclusively in

gymnosperms.
OH

OH fe)

Fig. 7.59. Ginkgetin

Ginkgetin
This dimethyl ether of amentoflavone occurs in autumnal
leaves of Ginkgo biloba.”

PHARMACOLOGY AND
THERAPEUTIC POTENTIAL OF
FLAVONOIDS

Flavonoids have become the focus of much attention
within the research community. Both in vitro and in vivo
studies attest to their potential in modern medicine.”
However, this potential simply mirrors the therapeutic
strengths of the whole plants, long recognized in tradi-
tional herbal medicine and its modern manifestation,
phytotherapy.

While new research that points to potential applica-
tions for isolated flavonoids is exciting, it should not de-

----- PAGE 117 -----
flect the attention of the practitioner from the therapeu-
tic cornucopia offered by the plants themselves.
Traditional herbal and naturopathic protocols, often the
cues that inspired the research in the first place, have
great inherent value based on generations of observation
and use. This is a time to affirm their value, not to belit-
tle their lack of statistical validity or bemoan the dearth of
double-blind, placebo-controlled studies. After all, where
is the controlled study that validates Vis Medicatrix
Naturae (the healing power of nature)?

Flavonoids have many properties, but to individually
list the physiological effects of isolated chemicals can ob-
scure the fact that they work in complex, synergistic ways.
It is vital to differentiate between effects of whole plants
and research on specific molecules. In the case of herbs
used in phytotherapy, it is generally inappropriate to
speak of “flavonoid-containing herbs,” because while
flavonoids probably contribute to the activity of drugs,
they only rarely act alone. Essential oils, other phenolic
compounds, minerals, and saponins, to name just a few,
are also essential components of their activity.

From a traditional herbal perspective, many links
can be made between research-based reports of flavonoid
activity and the well-known actions of plants in our mate-
ria medica. The following list highlights some of these
correlations.

Actions of Flavonoids

¢ Antioxidant

© Hypoglycemic

* Stabilize capillary permeability
¢ Anti-inflammatory

¢ Immunomodulatory

* Antihepatotoxic

¢ Antineoplastic

© Hypotensive

¢ Regenerate connective tissue
* Sedative

¢ Regulate cardiac function

© Weakly estrogenic

© Antimicrobial

* Antispasmodic

© Diuretic

¢ Cholagogue

Because these ubiquitous phytochemicals have a gen-
tle impact on a whole range of organs, tissues, and physi-
ological processes, they are sometimes described as biolog-
ical response modifiers. The heart, blood vessels, liver,
immune system, connective tissue, adrenal glands, kid-

POLYPHENOLS ~ 109

neys, musculature, and nervous system may all benefit
from herbs containing these constituents.

The following material focuses largely on research on
specific chemicals. It is important to remember that the
specific effects enumerated below do not occur in isola-
tion, but are interrelated at the metabolic level in both
plants and people. Not all flavonoids or plants that con-
tain them demonstrate all of the properties discussed here
and, similarly, this is far from a complete listing of re-
ported effects.

A comprehensive review by Middleton and Kanda-
swami of the impact of flavonoids on immune system
function and the inflammatory response illuminated a
wide range of effects. Please refer to this review for
complete citations.

¢ Flavonoids have profound effects on immune system
and inflammatory cells.

* Certain flavonoids, depending on structure, can affect
(usually inhibit) secretory processes, mitogenesis, and
cell-cell interactions, including effects on adhesion
molecule expression and function.

¢ The effects of flavonoids on secretory processes sug-
gest that they may influence the function of cytoskele-
tal elements, supporting cellular health and activity
through some positive effect on the microfilaments
that make up the elements of the cytoskeleton.

© Certain flavonoids may affect gene expression and the
activity of cytokines and cytokine receptors.

¢ Flavonoids can stimulate or inhibit protein phosphory-
lation and thereby regulate cell function.

¢ Flavonoids are recognized antioxidants and free radical
scavengers.

© Resting cells are not significantly affected by flavo-
noids, but once activated by a physiological stimulus
may generate a flavonoid-sensitive substance. The in-
teraction of flavonoids with that substance dramati-
cally alters the outcome of the activation process.

Possible Biological Response

Modification Mechanisms

Flavonoids appear to modify the body’s reaction to other
substances, such as allergens, viruses, and carcinogens, as
evidenced by their anti-inflammatory, antiallergenic, an-
tiviral, and anticancer properties. As antioxidants, flavo-
noid molecules are unique in that they are active against a
wide variety of oxidants and free radicals. Among their ef-
fects is an ability to increase vitamin C levels within cells,
decreasing breakage and leakage of small blood vessels,
protecting against free radical damage, and supporting

----- PAGE 118 -----
110 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

joint structures. Many flavonoids modulate prostaglandin
synthesis and are powerful enzyme inhibitors. These
properties have profound physiological implications.

Flavonoids as Enzyme Inhibitors

As a general rule, flavonoids are enzyme inhibitors in
vitro. Several flavonoids (such as cirsiliol and hypolaetin)
are potent inhibitors of 5-lipoxygenase; therefore, they
inhibit the production of the leukotrienes that mediate
inflammation and allergic reactions. In addition, several
flavonoids (luteolin, apigenin, and chrysin) inhibit cy-
clooxygenase and platelet aggregation. These properties,
which have been demonstrated in vitro, may in part ex-
plain the anti-inflammatory and antiallergic properties
commonly attributed to various drugs known to contain
flavonoids.

Absorption of Flavonoids in the
Gastrointestinal Tract

The absorption of flavonoid glycosides is poor, although
trace amounts of intact glycosides can sometimes be de-
tected in bile or urine. Usually, the glycosides are initially
broken down to their aglycones and, subsequently, to ring
fission products. Flavonol aglycones, free flavones, and
flavonols, such as quercetin, tend to be poorly absorbed,
but the more saturated flavonoids, such as flavonones and
flavonols like (+)catechin, are more readily absorbed. The
exposure of gastric mucosa to glycosides may raise levels
of cytoprotective prostaglandins, which may help explain
how glycosides exert their protective effects on gastroin-
testinal mucosa. Flavonoids are metabolized by a variety
of cells, especially liver cells, and since the metabolites are
excreted in urine, there is no accumulation of metabolites
in the body.

forms.

Flavonoids and the French Paradox

Red wine is a rich source of flavonoids, and regular red wine consumption is associated with a de-
creased risk of coronary heart disease (CHD). French epidemiological studies show an association be-
tween increased wine consumption and reduction in death from heart disease. This phenomenon has
come to be known as “the French paradox,” as the French diet is characteristically high in animal fats
and other factors associated with heart disease.*”

Investigators have now concluded that wine and fruit consumption both correlate with reduced
mortality from heart disease.** Several mechanisms have been suggested to explain the protective ef-
fect of wine, of which the best known is the ability of alcohol to alter blood lipid levels by lowering
total cholesterol and raising levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL). However, if the findings con-
cerning fruit are taken into account, other mechanisms must be considered.

Wine is rich in flavonoids. Phenolics are well known for the sensory subtleties they impart to
wine, and for this reason, French researchers have been investigating their chemistry for decades.
Since they are antioxidants, these substances are at the foundation of the long aging process under-
gone by some wines. Wines low in flavonoids, such as white wines, rarely age gracefully.

Might phenolic antioxidants influence the development of atherosclerosis in humans? A study at
the University of California, Davis, showed that they inhibit the oxidation of low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) in vitro. If this effect occurs in vivo, it could slow the development of arterial plaque. In addi-
tion, since the aggregation of platelets (thrombosis) is an important factor in precipitating a heart at-
tack, compounds that reduce platelet aggregation could also lower CHD mortality. Wine flavonoids
have been shown to decrease platelet aggregation, apparently by inhibiting oxygenase enzymes.

Wine is not the only dietary source of phenolic compounds. Fresh fruits are a rich source, and fruit
consumption correlates highly with reduced CHD mortality. Tea is another source of phenolics, but
green and black tea have quite different compositions. Green tea contains mainly monomeric cate-
chins—for example, epigallocatechin 3-gallate—while black tea possesses oligomeri¢ and polymeric

The results of a Finnish study on the association between dietary flavonoid intake and subse-
quent CHD mortality suggest that people with very low intakes of flavonoids have higher risks of
heart disease. Taken together, this combination of epidemiological and laboratory research clearly
suggests that flavonoids are beneficial nutrients that can reduce CHD mortality.”

----- PAGE 119 -----
Anti-Inflammatory Actions

Many different mechanisms may contribute to the anti-
inflammatory properties of flavonoids, including effects
on prostaglandin synthesis and arachidonic acid
metabolism, enzyme inhibition, and antioxidant activities.
The effects of flavonoids on collagen and on the function
of immune cells may also play a role.

Effects on Prostaglandin Synthesis

The well-recognized anti-inflammatory actions of many
flavonoids are due in part to their ability to modulate
prostaglandin synthesis. Some flavonoids inhibit prosta-
glandin synthesis, while others stimulate the production
of prostaglandins. Research on flavonoids with the ability
to inhibit prostaglandin synthetase (PGS) has identified
certain common structural features.

However, inhibition of PGS is only a partial answer
as to why flavonoids suppress inflammation. Leuko-
trienes, products of arachidonic acid produced by the 5-
lipoxygenase pathway, are also involved in the inflamma-
tory process, and some flavonoids, such as quercetin, can
inhibit lipoxygenase.

Flavonoids appear to have an important advantage
over nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in
that they are largely free of adverse effects. NSATDs
work in part by inhibiting the synthesis of prosta-
glandins, not only those that cause inflammation, but
also the cytoprotective prostaglandins that help prevent
ulceration of the gastric mucosa. Thus, by inhibiting
prostaglandin formation, NSAIDs also cause gastric
ulceration.

Flavonoids do not cause gastric ulceration and, as a
class, are remarkably free of side effects. Why flavonoids
do not damage gastric tissues is not fully understood, but
it may be because their anti-inflammatory actions are
based on several mechanisms rather than on a single
mechanism, like inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis.

Effects on Arachidonic Acid Metabolism

Flavonoids, particularly quercetin, are inhibitors of aller-
gic, IgE-mediated release of histamine and other chemi-
cals from mast cells and basophils, via inhibition of
ipoxygenase and other enzymes involved in the meta-
bolism of arachidonic acid in cells. Quercetin exhibits
both allergic-mediator release activity and selective inhi-
bition of the biosynthesis of pro-inflammatory arachi-
donic acid metabolites, which may help explain its antial-
lergic and anti-inflammatory actions.’”! Animal studies
have demonstrated that endogenous prostaglandins are
involved in mucosal injury produced by absolute ethanol

POLYPHENOLS @ 111

and that quercetin has antiulcer and cytoprotective prop-
erties in such situations.’

Antioxidant Effects

Active oxygen species, or free radicals, cause considerable
damage in inflammation. These include hydrogen perox-
ide, hypochlorous acid, hydroxyl radicals, and possibly
other species, such as singlet oxygen and hydroperoxy
radicals. These species are derived from superoxide an-
ions liberated from stimulated phagocytic cells. Many
flavonoids are powerful antioxidants and scavengers of
free radicals. In addition to removing free radicals, they
may also suppress their formation, since many flavonoids
have the ability to bind heavy metal ions that are known
to catalyze the production of free radicals.

Inhibition of Enzymes

One enzyme that is strongly inhibited by flavonoids is
phosphodiesterase, which catalyzes the breakdown of
cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Cyclic AMP is
a fundamentally important regulatory molecule in cellular
activity. As discussed in detail in chapter 9, cAMP can
trigger a range of intracellular effects by activating vari-
ous enzymes. High cAMP levels are anti-inflammatory,
since cAMP tends to decrease the secretion from cells of
destructive agents, such as lysosomal enzymes and
prostaglandins. In the presence of inflammation, drugs
that elevate intracellular cAMP levels have some anti-
inflammatory action, which is probably related to the rise
in cAMP. Thus the anti-inflammatory action of flavo-
noids may be due in part to the fact that they inhibit the
breakdown of cAMP.

Effects on Collagen

Many flavonoids have a beneficial effect on collagen,
which is responsible for maintaining the integrity of the
ground substance in connective tissue. Collagen is de-
stroyed during inflammatory processes that occur in
rheumatoid arthritis, gout, and other conditions involv-
ing bones, joints, cartilage, and other connective tissue.
Anthocyanidins and other flavonoids affect collagen
metabolism in many ways:’?

* Cross-link collagen fibers, reinforcing the collagen
matrix of connective tissue (ground substance or
cartilage)

* Prevent free radical damage with potent antioxidant and
free radical scavenging actions

* Inhibit destruction of collagen structures by enzymes
secreted during inflammation

----- PAGE 120 -----
112 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

* Prevent the release and synthesis of compounds that
promote inflammation, such as histamine

Overall Antioxidant Activities

Flavonoids can inhibit formation of superoxide anions and
the generation of hydroxy] radicals. With the new insights
concerning the role of free radicals in aging, autoimmune
diseases, and many other health issues, the antioxidant
potential of flavonoid-containing herbs suggests exciting
therapeutic possibilities. Perhaps more important, this is
simply the affirmation of traditional herbal practice,
which makes extensive use of many flavonoid-rich herbs.

Flavonoids are potent antioxidants, free radical scav-
engers, metal chelators, and inhibitors of lipid peroxida-
tion. The structural requirements for these functions in-
clude a hydroxyl group in carbon position 3, a double
bond between carbon positions 2 and 3, a carbonyl group
in carbon position 4, and polyhydroxylation of the A and
B aromatic rings.

These structural features prevent the formation of
free radicals and the leukotrienes that promote inflamma-
tion. In a general sense, many polyphenols scavenge reac-
tive chemical radicals formed under various circum-
stances (for example, anoxia, inflammation, and lipidic
autoxidation). Normally, the cascade of reactions involved
in the inflammatory response is interrupted by enzymic
systems, such as superoxide dismutases, catalase, and glu-
tathione peroxidase, which reduce peroxides, and, later
on, hydroperoxides.

Many polyphenols and flavonoids react with free rad-
icals to prevent the degradation caused by the intense ac-
tivity of these pro-oxidants on membrane phospholipids.
It has been hypothesized that the capacity of flavonoids
to modify membrane-dependent processes, such as free-
radical-induced membrane lipid peroxidation, is related
not only to their structural characteristics, but also to their
ability to interact with and penetrate the lipid bilayers.”*

Researchers have begun to elucidate the antioxidant
mechanisms underlying the clinical applications of
oligomeric procyanidins (OPCs) as vascular protective
agents. (For more information on OPCs, see the discus-
sion on Tannins later in this chapter.) Studies have shown
that OPCs inhibit xanthine oxidase (a generator of free
radicals) an
This system governs the release of enzymes that can dam-
age the connective tissue surrounding capillary walls.” In
these studies, OPCs demonstrated a wide range of an-
tioxidant abilities, summarized below.

the activity of the lysosomal enzyme system.

Antioxidant Effects of OPCs

© Trap hydroxyl free radicals

¢ Trap lipid peroxides and the free radicals that initiate
their formation

© Markedly delay the onset of lipid peroxidation

¢ Chelate free iron molecules, preventing iron-induced
lipid peroxidation

¢ Inhibit production of free radicals by inhibiting xan-
thine oxidase

¢ Inhibit the damaging effects of enzymes (e.g.,
hyaluronidase, elastase, collagenase) that can degrade
connective tissue structures

Effects on Immunological Processes

No doubt can remain that flavonoids have profound ef-
fects on the function of immune and inflammatory cells,
as confirmed by a large number and variety of observa-
tions from in vitro and some in vivo studies. That these
ubiquitous dietary chemicals may have significant in vivo
effects on homeostasis within the immune system and on
the behavior of secondary cell systems that comprise the
inflammatory response seems highly likely, but more
work is required to strengthen this hypothesis.

Evidence also indicates that certain flavonoids may
affect gene expression and the elaboration and effects of
cytokines and cytokine receptors. How all of these effects
are mediated is not yet clear, but one important mecha-
nism may be the capacity of flavonoids to stimulate or in-
hibit protein phosphorylation and thereby regulate cell
function.”

LIGNANS AND NEOLIGNANS

These are dimeric compounds in which phenylpropane
(C.-C) units are linked to form three-dimensional net-
works.”” Dimers are molecules formed from two similar
constituents, called monomers. They are chemically re-
lated to the polymeric lignins that make up the plant cell
wall and are found mainly in woody tissues.”

CH,OH

Fig. 7.60. Cinnamate monomer

----- PAGE 121 -----
The Five Structural Classes of Lignans”
* Simple lignans

* Lignanolides with lactone substitution

* Monoepoxylignans

* Diepoxylignans

Cyclolignans

Fig. 7.61. Simple lignan
a"
o

¢ ats

Fig. 7.62. Lignanolide

sB° &.

Fig. 7.64. Diepoxylignan

JU

Fig. 7.65. Cyclolignan

There is also a small group of related neolignans
formed by asymmetrical carbon-carbon links in the side
chains.

Lignans occur widely in the wood of gymnosperm
trees, and they have also been recorded in some 50 an-
giosperm families, where they can be found in both the
wood and the bark. The majority of the more than 200
naturally occurring lignans are found in the free state in
the heartwood of trees. Some have been isolated from
other plant parts, where they may be present as glyco-
sides. In plants, lignans have antibacterial, antifungal, and
antifeedant properties.

Lignans have attracted the attention of the research
community because they have shown antitumor and antivi-
ral activities, among many other actions. Some cyclolignans
and lignolides have cytotoxic and antimitotic properties, al-
though toxicity has limited their therapeutic application.

Flavolignans of milk thistle (Silybum marianum) and
the schisandrins from Schisandra chinensis have valuable
hepatoprotective attributes. Schisandrins reverse destruc-
tion of liver cells by inducing cytochrome P45o activity.®°

POLYPHENOLS 2 113

For more information on the hepatoprotective activity of
milk thistle flavolignans, see chapter 9.

RO

\
RO. ~

OCH; —

CHO | A
ory. oH oe

iN\ P~ |
if Se
ond oH

Fig. 7.66. Schisandrin Fig. 7.67. Dihydroguaiaretic acid

Dihydroguaiaretic acid from chaparral (Larrea spp.) is
a potent antioxidant, and other lignans display allergenic,
cathartic, and cardiovascular effects. Lignans such as en-
terolactone, matairesinol, and enterodiol are excreted in
human urine, and are believed to be formed through bac-
terial degradation of dietary plant lignans in the gut.
These lignans are phytoestrogens that appear to exert
weak effects on estrogen receptors, improving female
menstrual function. The overall cancer risk reduction may
also work through this mechanism. A role for lignans has
also been proposed in colon cancer prevention.*!

,o

; x 40. — Ne,

‘0 2 Zi cH
eee on a“

Fig. 7.68. Fig. 7.69. Fig. 7.70.
Enterolactone Matairesinol Enterodiol

Podophyllotoxin
Podophyllotoxin (podofilox) and its derivatives, etoposide
and teniposide, are all antimitotic glucosides.

OH

OCH,

Fig. 7.71. Podophyllotoxin

Podofilox is an extract of mayapple (Podophyllum wpelta-
tum), which generally acts as a poison to cells undergoing
mitosis. Podofilox itself is not used as a chemotherapy
agent; instead, it is applied as an ingredient in creams for the
treatment for genital warts. Genital warts, which are caused
by the human papillomavirus (HPV), have been associated
with squamous cell carcinomas of the genital organs.

The synthetic analogues etoposide and teniposide

----- PAGE 122 -----
114. = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

block the cell cycle in two specific places: between the last
cell division and the start of DNA replication (the Gl-
phase) and at the beginning of DNA replication (the S-
phase). However, researchers do not yet have a clear un-
derstanding of how the compounds exert this effect.

Silymarin

The seeds of milk thistle (Silybum marianum) contain a
mixture of hepatoprotective flavolignans known collec-
tively as silymarin. Silybin is the major component; other
flavolignans in the mixture include silychristin and taxifo-
line. The pharmacology of hepatoprotection is discussed

in chapter 9.
A 0 -OHOH
OC
“TC ) ASS set ioe
IN a on A od
Le |

9.
|
°

Fig. 7.72. Silybin

HO.

OH °

Fig. 7.73. Silychristin

TANNINS

The word tannin has long been used to describe organic
substances present in water-soluble plant extracts that are
capable of converting animal hide to leather. The appli-
cation of the term to specific groups of structurally char-
acterized chemicals is relatively recent. Tannins are
polyphenolic compounds (C-C3-C,)n that precipitate
proteins and form complexes with polysaccharides, and
are composed of a very diverse group of oligomers and
polymers. There is, however, some degree of confusion
about the terminology, because other phenolics, such as
pyrogallol and resorcinol, also bind and precipitate pro-
teins. In addition, not all polyphenols precipitate proteins
or form complexes with polysaccharides.

A technical definition in current use describes a tan-
nin as any phenolic compound that has a sufficiently high
molecular weight and contains enough hydroxyls and
other suitable groups to form strong complexes with pro-
tein and other macromolecules under the particular envi-
ronmental conditions being studied.

Tannins are widely distributed among plants and are
common in both gymnosperms and angiosperms, al-
though they are more frequently found in dicotyledons
than in monocotyledons. They are sequestered in various
plant tissues so that they do not interfere with normal plant
metabolism. Only after cell breakdown and death do they
exert their metabolic effects.

Occurrence and Functions of Tannins in Plants

Buds: Most common in the outer part of the bud, tannins
are probably present to protect against freezing.

Leaves: Tannins are most common in the upper epidermis;
however, in evergreen plants, they are evenly dis-
tributed in all leaf tissues, protecting against predation
by reducing palatability.

Roots: Most commonly found in the hypodermis, tannins
probably act as chemical barriers to penetration and
colonization by plant pathogens.

Seeds: Located mainly in a layer between the outer in-
tegument and the aleurone layer, tannins may help
maintain dormancy and provide allelopathic and bac-
tericidal protection.

Stems: Tannins are often found in the active growth areas
of trees, such as the secondary phloem and xylem and
the layer between epidermis and cortex, where they
may have a role in growth regulation. They are also
found in the heartwood of conifers and may contribute
to the natural durability of wood by inhibiting micro-
bial activity.

There are two main types of tannin, condensed
(proanthocyanidins) and hydrolyzable tannins. These are
unevenly distributed in plants; the condensed tannins
occur almost universally in ferns and gymnosperms and
are widespread among angiosperms, especially trees and
shrubs. By contrast, hydrolyzable tannins are limited to
dicotyledonous plants. Both types of tannin can occur to-
gether in the same plant.

Hydrolyzable Tannins

Hydrolyzable tannins are soluble in water and alcohol.

There are two types, based on either gallic or epigallic

acids, In the presence of acids or enzymes, proantho-

cyanidins (condensed tannins) do not hydrolyze.
Gallotannins hydrolyze to gallic acid and glucose.

Fig. 7.74. Gallic acid

----- PAGE 123 -----
The phenolic groups in gallotannins are sometimes
dimers or higher oligomers of gallic acid; each single
monomer is called a galloyl. Gallotannins are found in
rhubarb (Rheum spp.), cloves (Syzygium aromaticum),
petals of red roses (Rosa spp.), bearberry (Arctostaphylos
uva-ursi), witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana), sweet chest-
nut (Castanea sativa), and maple (Acer spp.).

Ellagitannins ‘hydrolyze to ellagic acid and glucose.

Fig. 7.75. Ellagic acid

The phenolic groups in ellagitannins consist of hex-
ahydroxydiphenic acid, which spontaneously dehydrates
to ellagic acid. They are found in pomegranate (Punica
granatum), eucalyptus leaves (Eucalyptus spp.), kousso
(Brayera anthelmintica), sweet chestnut (Castanea sativa),
oak bark (Quercus spp.), and agrimony (Agrimonia spp.).
An example is agrimoniin from Agrimonia eupatoria.

Ellagic acid is one of the products of ellagitannin hy-
drolysis, which occurs upon storage, drying, extraction, or
digestion of plants containing ellagitannins. Therefore, el-
lagic acid is taken in by everybody who ingests ellagitannin-
containing plants as foods or drugs, although ellagic acid
itself is not usually present in living plants.

Fig. 7.76. Agrimoniin

Condensed Tannins (Proanthocyanidins)
Condensed tannins, or flavolans, are formed biosyntheti-
cally by the condensation of flavan-3-ols, such as catechin
and epicatechin, into dimers and then higher oligomers.
The name proanthocyanidin is used alternatively for con-
densed tannins because, on treatment with hot acid, some
of the carbon-carbon linking bonds are broken, and an-
thocyanidin monomers may be formed.

POLYPHENOLS -@ 115

When two proanthocyanidin molecules are linked to-
gether, the result is called a dimer; a linkage of three forms
is a trimer and four a tetramer. Collectively, mixtures of
proanthocyanidin dimers, trimers, tetramers, and larger
molecules are known as oligomeric procyanidins (OPCs).

Fruit-bearing plants are high in oligomeric procyani-
dins, and heartwood and bark are rich sources of unusual
proanthocyanidins. OPCs, called “pycnogenols” in the
commercial supplement market, are available in extracts
of grape seeds and the bark of the maritime pine.* It
should be noted that the word pycnogenol is a commercial
term and not an accepted chemical descriptor.

”

‘OH

OH
Fig. 7.77. (-)-Epicatechin

Proanthocyanidins are more widely distributed than
are hydrolyzable tannins. The commonest anthocyani-
dins produced are cyanidin (from procyanidin) and del-
phinidin (from prodelphinidin). Proanthocyanidins may
contain 2 to 50 or more flavonoid units; proanthocyani-
din polymers have complex structures because the
flavonoid units can differ for some substituents and be-
cause the sites for interflavan bonds vary.

Interactions with Other Macromolecules
Tannins have a major impact on animal nutrition because
of their ability to form complexes with numerous types
of molecules.83 These molecules include but are not lim-
ited to:

© Carbohydrates

* Proteins

© Polysaccharides

* Bacterial cell membranes

¢ Enzymes involved in protein and carbohydrate digestion

Carbohydrates

Both starch and cellulose are complexed by tannins.
Tannin-carbohydrate interactions are increased in the
presence of carbohydrates with high molecular weight,
low solubility, and conformational flexibility. These inter-
actions are probably based on hydrophobic and hydrogen
linkages.

----- PAGE 124 -----
116 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Starch-tannin interaction: Starch has the ability to form
hydrophobic cavities that allow inclusion complexes
with tannins and many other lipophilic molecules.
The hydrophobic molecules are, in effect, encapsu-
lated in the cavity formed by the complexes.

Cellulose-tannin interaction: Cellulose has a direct sur-
face interaction with tannins.

Cell-wall carbobydrate-tannin interaction: This associa-
tion is less understood. One explanation is that tannins
associate with plant cell walls in a manner similar to
that of lignin. However, it is also possible that this as-
sociation occurs as an artifact when tannins are isolated
from nonliving cells.

Proteins

The capacity of tannins to bind proteins has been recog-
nized for centuries, as this is the basis of leather tanning.
Tannin-protein interactions are specific and depend on
the structure of both the protein and the tannin. Protein
characteristics that favor strong bonding include large
molecular size, open and flexible structures, and a high
content of proline. Tannin characteristics that favor
strong bonding are high molecular weight and high con-
formational mobility.

Properties of Tannins

One of the most important properties attributed to tan-
nins is astringent action. Astringents cause contraction of
tissue, blanching and wrinkling of mucous membranes,
and diminished exudations. When applied to wounds,
they form a thin protective surface, cutting down on the
secretion of exudates. Precipitation of surface proteins
and/or polysaccharides results in hardening of the epider-
mis, which lessens the absorption of toxins and protects
against irritants. Tannins also display antimicrobial prop-
erties. Many are able to constrict blood vessels, thereby
reducing bleeding.

Applications of Tannins

* Protect inflamed mucous membranes

© Exert a drying effect on mucous membranes, reducing
hypersecretion

* Reduce the inflammation and swelling that accompany
infection

* Prevent bleeding from small wounds

* Reduce uterine bleeding (for example, in menorrhagia)

¢ Relieve symptoms of diarrhea or dysentery through
binding effects in the gut

* Used externally for astringent action in douches,
snuffs, and eyewashes

Biological and Other Activities

of Isolated Tannins

Since tannins are polyphenols, and are fairly large
molecules containing several phenolic hydroxyl groups
located mostly on the molecule surface, phenolic groups
have a strong influence on the properties and biological
activities of tannins. Radical scavenging is an important
activity of tannins. This kind of activity is due to the for-
mation of stable free radicals from the tannin molecules
after hydrogen radicals are donated to radicals formed
from a coexisting compound.

Effects Induced by Binding with Protein

and Other Substances

The binding of tannins with, for example, proteins and
other large molecules or basic compounds is thought to
be key to the various biological activities of tannins. Such
binding plays a role in the antidiarrhetic activity of tan-
nins (one of the most widely exploited effects of tannin-
containing medicinal plants) by protecting digestive or-
gans from injurious attack. It also contributes to the
antihemorrhagic effects of tannin-rich drugs.

Effects on Enaymes

At relatively high concentrations, tannins usually inhibit
the activity of enzymes, but at low concentrations they
often stimulate enzyme activity. The extent of inhibition
and stimulation varies, depending on the enzyme and the
structure and concentration of the tannin. Oligomeric hy-
drolyzable tannins inhibit reverse transcriptase isolated
from RNA tumor virus more potently than do other types
of tannins.®

Inhibition of Mutagenicity and Tumor Formation
Ellagic acid has been found to inhibit the mutagenic and
carcinogenic action of 7B-,8a-dihydroxy-9a, | 0a-epoxy-
7,8,9,10-tetrahydrobenzo[a]pyrene, a potent experimental
carcinogen. The fact that tannins inhibit the mutagenic-
ity of several other carcinogens can be partly attributed to
the binding of tannins with these compounds.

Oral administration of epigallocatechin gallate has
been found to inhibit duodenal cancer induced by N-ethyl-
N’-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidin, suggesting that oral admin-
istration may be useful for the treatment of duodenal
tumors.*6

Inhibition of Viruses

Although the inhibitory actions of tannins against bacte-
ria and fungi are not strong, researchers have observed re-
markable inhibition of certain viruses by several tannins

----- PAGE 125 -----
and related polyphenols.®’ In studies, tannins inhibited
the replication of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
and herpes simplex viruses (HSV).

Procyanidin B, (catechin-(40-8)-epicatechin)

Procyanidin B, has a widespread occurrence in plants. It
is found, for example, in the leaves of the raspberry (Rubus
idaeus). An infusion of raspberry leaves containing pro-

cyanidin B, and hydrolyzable tannins is used as a gargle
and for treating wounds and ulcers.**
On ie On
HO Ss a ‘CHs
HO. ra ) ) SQ CH,On
Sy a
OH ° OH

Fig. 7.78. Procyanidin B,

References

1.

13.

14.

row OND

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

. Haslam, et al. Traditional herbal medicines—the role of

polyphenols. Planta Medica 1989; 55:1-8.

Dombrowicz, et al. Phenolic acids in leaves of
Asctostaphylos uva ursi L., Vaccinium vitis-idaea L. and
Vaccinium myrtillus L. Pharmazie 1991; 46(9): 680-1.
Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Tbid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.

Reddy BS. Chemoprevention of colon cancer by minor

dietary constituents and their synthetic analogues.
Preventive Medicine 1996 Jan-Feb; 25(1):48-50.
Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19,

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

25.

26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31,
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38,

39,

40.

POLYPHENOLS © 117

[No authors listed] Caffeic acid LARC. Monographs on the
Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans 1993; 56:115-34.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Kawamori T; Lubet R, Steele VE, et al.
Chemopreventive effect of curcumin, a naturally occur-
ring anti-inflammatory agent, during the promotion/
progression stages of colon cancer. Cancer Research 1999,
59:597-601.

Hallstrom H, Thuvander A. Toxicological evaluation of
myristicin. Nateral Toxins 1997; 5(5):186-92.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Mann J. Secondary Metabolism. Oxford; New York:
Oxford University Press, 1993.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Biouctive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Did.

bid.
bid.

bid.

I
I
I
Ibid.
I
I
I
I

bid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.

Chanvitayapongs S$, Draczynska-Lusiak B, Sun AY
Amelioration of oxidative stress by antioxidants and

resveratrol in PC), cells. Neuroreport 1997;
8:1499-1502.

Roemer K, Mahyar-Roemer M. The basis for the
chemopreventive action of resveratrol. Drags Today 2002
Aug; 38(8):571-80.

Frankel EN, Waterhouse AL, Kinsella JE. Inhibition of
human LDL oxidation by resveratrol. Lancet 1993;
341:1103-4.

----- PAGE 126 -----
118

41.

42.

43.

45.

46.

47.
48.

49.

50.

$1.

52.

53.
34.
55.

56.

97,
58.
59.
60.
61.

<= INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Belguendouz L, Fremont L, Gozzelino MT. Interaction
of transresveratrol with plasma lipoproteins. Biochemical
Pharmacology 1998, 55:811-16.

Rotondo S. Effect of trans-resveratrol, a natural
polyphenolic compound, on human polymorphonuclear
leukocyte function. British Journal of Pharmacology 1998;
123:1691-9.

Bhat KP, Pezzuto JM. Cancer chemopreventive activity
of resveratrol. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
2002 May; 957:210-29.

. Jang M, Cai L, Udeani GO, et al. Cancer chemopreven-

tive activity of resveratrol, a natural product derived
from grapes. Science 1997 Jan 10; 275(5297):218-20.
“Tsan MF, White JE, Maheshwari JG, Chikkappa G.
Anti-leukemia effect of resveratrol. Leukemia &
Lymphoma 2002 May, 43(5):983-7.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Tid.

Formica JV, Regelson W. Review of the biology of
Quercetin and related bioflavonoids. Food and Chemical
Toxicology 1995 Dec; 33(12):1061-80.

Hertog MG, Hollman PC. Potential health effects of
the dietary flavonol quercetin. European Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 1996 Feb; 50(2):63-71.

Chu CK, Cutler HG, Natural Products as Antiviral
Agents. New York: Plenum, 1992.

Boik J. Cancer & Natural Medicine: A Textbook of Basic
Science and Clinical Research. Princeton, MN: Oregon
Medical Press, 1996.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.
Ibid.

Harborne JB, Williams CA. Anthocyanins and other
flavonoids. Natural Product Reports 2001 Jun;
18(3):310-33.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.

62.
63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

Ibid.

Middleton E. The flavonoids as potential therapeutic
agents. In: Kimball SE, ed. Iamunopharmaceuticals. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1995.

Hertog MG. Epidemiological evidence on potential
health properties of flavonoids. The Proceedings of the
Nutrition Society 1996 Mar; 55(1B):385-97.

Middleton E, Kandaswami C. Effects of flavonoids on
immune and inflammatory cell functions. Biochemical
Pharmacology 1992 Mar 17; 43(6):1167-79

Depeint F, Gee JM, Williamson G, Johnson IT.
Evidence for consistent patterns between flavonoid
structures and cellular activities. The Proceedings of the
Nutrition Society 2002 Feb; 61(1):97-103.

Adzet T, Camarasa J. Pharmacokinetics of polyphenolic
compounds. In: Craker LF, Simon JE, eds. Herbs, Spices
and Medicinal Plants, vol 3. Phoenix: Oryx Press, 1988.
Bohm M, Rosenkranz S, Laufs U. The “French
Paradox” —effects of alcohol, wine and wine polyphenols
on the heart. Deutsche medizinische Wochenschrift 2002
Dec; 127.5 1-52, 2748-56.

de Lorgeril M, Salen P, Paillard F, et al. Mediterranean
diet and tne French paradox: two distinct biogeographic
concepts for one consolidated scientific theory on the
role of nutrition in coronary heart disease. Cardiovascular
Research 2002 Jun; 54(3):503-15.

Knekt, et al. Flavonoid intake and coronary mortality in
Finland: a cohort study [see comments]. British Medical
Journal 1996, 312 (7029):478-81.

Hertog MG, Feskens EJ, Hollman PC, et al. Dietary an-
tioxidant flavonoids and risk of coronary heart disease:
the Zutphen Elderly Study. Lancet 1993 Oct 23;
342(8878):1007-11,

Welton AK, Tobias LD, Fiedler-Nagy C, et al. Effect of
flavonoids on arachidonic acid metabolism. Progress in
Clinical and Biological Research 1986, 213:231-42.
Alarcon de la Lastra C, Martin MJ, Motilva V. Antiulcer
and gastroprotective effects of quercetin: a gross and his-
tologic study. Pharmacology 1994, 48:56-62.

Haslam E, Lilley TH. Interactions of natural phenols
with macromolecules. Progress in Clinical and Biological
Research 1986, 213:53-65.

Saija A, Scalese M, Lanza M, et al. Flavonoids as antiox-
idant agents: importance of their interaction with
biomembranes. Free Radical Biology &* Medicine 1995;
19(4):481-6.

Facino RM, et al. Free radicals scavenging action and
anti-enzyme activities of procyanidines from Vitis

----- PAGE 127 -----
77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

vinifera. A mechanism for their capillary protective ac-
tion. Arzneimittel-Forschung 1994; 44:592-601.
Middleton E, Kandaswami C. Effects of flavonoids on
immune and inflammatory cell functions. Biochemical
Pharmacology 1992; 43(6):1167-79.

Ayres DC, Loike JD. Lignans: chemical, biological, and
clinical properties. Cambridge, UK; New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1990.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London,
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ward RS. Lignans, neolignans and related compounds.
Natural Product Reports 1999; 1:75-96.

Ghisalberti EL, Cardiovascular activity of naturally oc-
curring lignans. Phytomedicine: International Journal of
Phytotherapy and Phytopharmacology 1997, 4{2):151-66.
Adlercreutz H, et al. Lignan and isoflavonoid conjugates
in human urine. The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology 1995; 52(1):97-103.

Masquelier J, et al. Flavonoids and pycnogenols.
International Journal for Vitamin and Nutrition Research
1979; 49:307-11.

Haslam E, Lilley TH. Interactions of natural phenols
with macromolecules. Progress in Clinical and Biological
Research 1986; 213:53-65.

85.

86.

87.

88.

POLYPHENOLS © 119

Chung KT, Wong TY, Wei CI, Huang YW, Lin Y.
Tannins and human health: a review. Critical Reviews in
Food Science and Nutrition 1998 Aug; 38(6):42 1-64.
Namba T, Kurokawa M, Kadota S, Shiraki K. Develop-
ment of antiviral therapeutic agents from traditional
medicines. Yakugaku Zasshi 1998 Sept; 118(9):383-400.
Fukuchi K, Sakagami H, Okuda T, et al. Inhibition of
herpes simplex virus infection by tannins and related
compounds. Antiviral Research 1989 Jun-Jul;
11(5-6):285-97,

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Suggested Reading
Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants.

Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Evans WC. Trease & Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.

London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary: A Handbook of

Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London; Washington,
DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

----- PAGE 128 -----
ALKALOIDS

Ikaloids are organic compounds with at least one
A nitrogen atom in a heterocyclic ring. Their defi-
nition is problematic, as they do not represent a

homogeneous group of compounds from any standpoint,
whether chemical, biochemical, or physiological. Except
for the fact that they are all nitrogen-containing com-
pounds, no general definition fits all alkaloids. They dis-
play great structural diversity and physiological activity.
More than 10,000 have been identified, and about one new
alkaloid is described in the scientific literature every day.

Despite the difficulty in defining alkaloids, they do
share some physical and chemical properties. They are
usually insoluble or sparingly soluble in water, and their
salts are sparingly soluble. Most alkaloids are crystalline
solids, although a few are amorphous. A few that lack oxy-
gen in their molecules (coniine, nicotine, and sparteine)
are liquids. Most, but not all, are alkaline, owing to the
presence of an amino nitrogen, and many possess physio-
logical activity.

Much has been written about why alkaloids occur in
plants and what functions they may serve.

Postulated Functions of Alkaloids
* Poisonous agents that protect the plant against insects
and herbivores
¢ End products of detoxification reactions that sequester
compounds that might otherwise harm the plant
* Regulatory growth factors
* Reserves of nitrogen or other elements necessary to
the plant

OCCURRENCE AND DISTRIBUTION

Although found in some animals, such as fire ants and
toads, most alkaloids occur in flowering plants, with 40%
of plant families containing at least one alkaloid-bearing
species. Alkaloids accumulate in 19% to 20% of vascular
plants, mostly dicotyledons, but also in the monocot fam-
ilies Liliaceae, Amaryllidaceae, and Poaceae. Their distri-
bution is uneven: They are universal in some families (for

120

example, Papaveraceae), common in others (Amarylli-
daceae and Rutaceae), and rare in others (Apiaceae). They
occur only rarely in gymnosperms, club mosses, and
horsetails, and although uncommon in fungi, there are
exceptional cases, such as the ergot fungus (Claviceps) and
“magic” mushrooms (Psilocybe spp.).!

In general, annual plants contain larger amounts of
alkaloids than do perennials. Trees tend to have small
amounts of alkaloids, usually of simpler structure. The
compounds may be present throughout the plant or re-
stricted to certain tissues, such as root or bark.
Concentration can vary from a small fraction of 0.01% to
as much as 12% of the dry weight of a plant. Any plant
that accumulates more than 0.05% dry weight of alkaloids
is considered an alkaloid-bearing plant.

Alkaloid content can vary among members of a given
plant species, and also changes depending upon where the
plant is growing. Cultivated varieties of wild plants con-
tain different proportions of alkaloids than their wild
counterparts, but the alkaloids found in the parent plant
are usually present in the cultivar. The alkaloid content of
different parts of an individual plant varies also. For ex-
ample, nicotine is produced in the root of the tobacco
plant but accumulates in the leaves, so more alkaloid will
be found in the leaves,

CLASSIFICATION AND
NOMENCLATURE

Classification of alkaloids is usually based on the type of
ring system present (for example, pyrrolidine or piperi-
dine) and on their biosynthetic origin from one or an-
other of the protein amino acids. Some structures fit into
more than one category, making a rigid hierarchical clas-
sification inappropriate. Some groups are defined by their
chemistry, such as the peptide, pyrrolizidine, quino-
lizidine, and tropane classes. Some groups are partly ter-
penoid in origin, and others are defined by their botani-
cal distribution.

Common names for alkaloids, such as nicotine, usually

----- PAGE 129 -----
terminate in -ine. Many of these names are derived from
the plant genus in which the alkaloid occurs, such as at-
ropine from Atropa, or from the plant species, such as co-
caine from Erythroxylum coca. Other alkaloid names are
derived from the name of a plant drug (for example, er-
gotamine from ergot) or from a physiological activity
(emetine, named for its emetic effects). Occasionally a
name is coined to commemorate the person who discov-
ered the compound, such as lobeline, named after the
French botanist LObel. All alkaloids also have scientific
names derived by the systematic nomenclature rules of
organic chemistry.

Table 8.1. Major Classes of Alkaloids

CLASS OF ALKALOID STRUCTURAL TYPE
Pyrrole l \
Pyrrolidine ( )
N
Piperdine 6
m
ropane M4
yrollizidine crs
u
Sy Sy
soquinoline |
wo oN
Sy
4
ndole | pm
B-carboli a
-carboline
Sy, N27 UN
— is
Quinoline [t
GO
Quinolizidine

PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES

Alkaloids pose major cultural issues because of their prop-
erties. This group of constituents provides humanity with

ALKALOIDS 2 121

challenges such as nicotine, heroin, and cocaine, as well as
the profound gift of visionary entheogens, such as psilo-
cybin and mescaline. Some alkaloids are extremely toxic,
such as coniine and strychnine, while others, including at-
ropine, codeine, morphine, and vincristine, are used as
pharmaceuticals.

While not all alkaloids have a major impact on the
functioning of the body, the diverse array of pharmaco-
logical actions demonstrated by various alkaloids includes
analgesia, local anesthesia, cardiac stimulation, respira-
tory stimulation and relaxation, vasoconstriction, muscle
relaxation, and toxicity, as well as antineoplastic, hyper-
tensive, and hypotensive properties.

Morphine and codeine are analgesics and narcotics,
and cocaine is a central nervous system stimulant.
Atropine has mydriatic effects, while physostigmine is
miotic. Ephedrine causes a rise in blood pressure, but
reserpine decreases blood pressure. Some alkaloids are
entheogens, psychoactive plants or chemical substances
taken to facilitate the religious experience—for example,
peyote cactus as used by the Native American Church.

Without claiming to be comprehensive, the follow-
ing table provides examples of the reported effects of var-
ious alkaloids on enzymes. The scientific literature cites ef-
fects on a range of cellular membrane transport processes,
subcellular structures, and nucleic acids, as well as various
components of protein synthesis. Effects on numerous
neuroreceptors have also been reported, including
cholinergic, adrenergic, opiate, and serotonergic recep-
tors. Inhibition or activation of enzymes is also common,
as illustrated in table 8.2.?

Table 8.2. Reported Effects of Alkaloids on Enzymes

ALKALOID ENZYME

Theophylline Alkaline phosphatase

Protoberberines Liver alcohol dehydrogenase

Colchicine Various phosphatases
Mimosine Pyridoxal phosphate enzymes
Quinidine Several glycolytic enzymes
Isoquinolines Tyrosine hydroxylase

d-Tubocurarine Several dehydrogenases

Indolizidines a-mannosidase

Methylated xanthines Xanthine oxidase

----- PAGE 130 -----
122 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

PYRROLIDINE AND PIPERIDINE
ALKALOIDS

The nitrogen atom of a pyrrolidine alkaloid is in a 5-
membered ring and piperine alkaloids have 6-membered
rings. Indolizidine alkaloids, those with a nitrogen atom
shared between a 5- and a 6-membered ring, are also in-

cluded in this category.
Ch OI
Fig. 8.2. Pyrrolidine

N

Fig. 8.1. Piperidine

Piperidine alkaloids are identified by their saturated
heterocyclic ring (the piperidine nucleus). Pyrrolidine al-
kaloids are similar to piperidine alkaloids except that the
heterocyclic-ringed, nitrogen-containing nucleus is un-
saturated. Perhaps the best-known piperidine alkaloids
are the poisons in Conium maculatum, commonly known
as poison hemlock.

Betonicine

Found in Stachys officinalis, S. sylvatica, Marrubium vul-
gare, and ‘Achillea millefolium, betonicine demonstrates
anti-inflammatory activity?

Coniine

Coniine occurs in the leaves and seeds of poison hemlock
(Conium maculatum), and is produced by the carnivorous
pitcher plant (Sarracenia flava) to paralyze insect prey.
This extremely toxic compound, which causes paralysis of
motor nerve endings, occurs in all parts of the plant as a
colorless oil with a mild pepper odor and a burning taste.
It reportedly causes teratogenic effects.*

euncaaene
ho
|

Fig. 8.3. Coniine Fig. 8.4. Lobeline

Lobeline

The alkaloid lobeline, found in Lobelia inflata, L. nicoti-
naefolia, and L. bassleri, is similar to nicotine.’ The race-
mate, known as lobelidine, is an analeptic. Lobelia inflata
contains 14 alkaloids, of which lobeline is the most im-
portant. Lobeline produces pharmacological effects simi-
lar to but weaker than those of nicotine on peripheral cir-
culation, neuromuscular junctions, and the central
nervous system. It stimulates the respiratory center and
induces coughing.

Lobelia inflata is a relaxant and bronchodilator and is
used in phytotherapy to treat asthmatic conditions.
Because lobeline is similar to nicotine, Lobelia has been
added to commercial preparations intended to help with
tobacco withdrawal.

Nicotine

Found in the tobacco plant (Nicotiana tabacum) and other
Nicotiana species, nicotine has tranquilizing properties
and is the addictive component of tobacco. It is also ex-
tremely toxic, causing respiratory paralysis at high doses.
As the major source is Nicotiana tabacum, nicotine and re-
lated structures are referred to as “tobacco alkaloids.”
Anabasine is a tobacco alkaloid in which a pyridine ring is
linked to a piperidine rather than a pyrrolidine nucleus. ®

Nicotine is a ganglion (nicotinic) cholinergic-receptor
agonist with complex pharmacological actions, including
effects mediated by binding to receptors in the autonomic
ganglia, the adrenal medulla, the neuromuscular junction,
and the brain.

Nicotine is lethal to all animal life; it is commonly used
as a horticultural insecticide. The fatal human dose is about
50 mg.’ A small amount of nicotine stimulates breathing,
but a larger amount depresses respiration. Death from
overdose results from respiratory failure. Addiction to to-
bacco smoking (and to nicotine) can be addressed to some
extent by taking the piperidine derivative lobeline.

N
Fig. 8.5. Nicotine Fig. 8.6. Anabasine

TROPANE ALKALOIDS

These condensed derivatives of pyrrolidine-piperidine al-
kaloids include atropine, hyoscyamine, and scopolamine.
Highly toxic, they are found in Solanaceae plants, such as
thornapple and jimsonweed (Datura stramonium), angel's
trumpets (Brugmansia spp.), henbane (Hyoscyamus niger),
belladonna or deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna), and
European mandrake (Mandragora officinarum). A promi-
nent feature of the tropane alkaloids is their ability to pro-
duce hallucinations and delirium.

N }-—-OR

Fig. 8.7. Tropane

----- PAGE 131 -----
A second family rich in tropanes is Erythroxylaceae,
which includes coca (Erythroxylum coca), the major source
of cocaine. Tropane alkaloids have a limited occurrence in
at least eight other unrelated plant families: Convol-
vulaceae, Brassicaceae, Dioscoreaceae, Elaeocarpaceae,
Euphorbiaceae, Orchidaceae, Proteaceae, and Rhizo-
phoraceae. They occur rarely in algae.®

Atropine and scopolamine compete with acetylcholine
at the postganglionic synapse of the parasympathetic ner-
vous system. Clinically useful properties include antispas-
modic effects, employed principally in the treatment of
spastic colitis, gastroenteritis, and peptic ulcer to relieve
spasms of the bowel. They also have antisecretory effects
and are used to reduce respiratory secretions in patients
undergoing anesthesia, suppress gastric secretions during
peptic ulcer therapy, and decrease nasal and sinus secre-
tions caused by the common cold and allergies. In addition,
their mydriatic (pupil-dilating) effects help prevent adhe-
sions between the iris and lens of the eye in cases of iritis.
Toxicity symptoms that can occur during the therapeutic
use of atropine, scopolamine, or belladonna tincture in-
clude skin rash and flushing, mouth dryness, difficult uri-
nation, eye pain, blurred vision, and light sensitivity.

The name A?ropa alludes to the toxicity of the herb,
it is derived from Atropos, the name of the Greek Fate
who cuts the thread of life. Belladonna comes from the
Tealian bela, meaning beautiful, and donna, meaning lady.
(When placed in the eyes, the juice of the berry causes di-
lation of the pupils, affording a striking appearance.)

/
\
r

Fig. 8.8. Atropine

Atropine
Atropine is a highly toxic compound that occurs in Azropa
belladonna, Datura stramonium, and other Solanaceae plants,
especially in the roots.’ As figure 8.9 shows, atropine is a
structural rearrangement of hyoscyamine.

Atropine demonstrates anticholinergic activity, caus-
ing blurred vision, suppressed salivation, vasodilation, ex-
citement, and delirium. It is used in anesthesia and as an

ALKALOIDS «2 = 123

antidote in cases of poisoning caused by cholinesterase in-
hibitors, such as physostigmine and organophosphate in-
secticides. The lethal dose in humans is 100 mg.

i

OX

OH

i “
Pa
Fig. 8.9. Hyoscyamine Fig. 8.10. Scopalamine
Hyoscyamine
Hyoscyamine is an anticholinergic agent that helps con-
trol gastric secretions, visceral spasms, hypermotility in
spastic colitis, and abdominal cramps. In Parkinson’s dis-
ease, it is used to reduce rigidity and tremors.!°

Scopolamine

Scopolamine, also called hyoscine, occurs along with hyo-
scyamine in members of the Solanaceae family. Scopol-
amine is widely used to help prevent motion sickness.

Cocaine

This alkaloid, obtained from coca (Evythroxylum coca), a
shrub native to the Andean highlands of South America,
exerts a stimulant effect on the central nervous system. Do
not confuse coca with cacao (Theobroma cacao), the plant
from which chocolate is made.

PYRROLIZIDINE ALKALOIDS

The chemical class of pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs) con-
tains about 200 structurally related compounds present in
more than 350 species of the plant families Apocynaceae,
Asteraceae, Boraginaceae, Celastraceae, Euphorbiaceae,
Fabaceae, Orchidaceae, Poaceae, Ranunculaceae, Rhico-
phoraceae, Santalaceae, Sapotaceae, and Scrophulariaceae.
Among these are a variety of plants used for medicinal pur-
poses, including Tussilago farfara, Petasites spp., Senecio spp.,
Alkanna tinctoria, Eupatorium spp., and Symphytum spp.''

Chemically, the pyrrolizidines are readily distin-
guished by the presence of a fused two 5-membered ring
system, with a nitrogen in position 4, a hydroxymethyl
group in position 9, and a hydroxy group in position 7.
This structure is called the necine base.

----- PAGE 132 -----
124 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

\/ p

Fig. 8.11. Necine base

PAs have a reputation for toxicity, but not all PAs are
toxic. All toxic PAs contain a double bond between the |
and 2 position, while PAs with saturated necine bases are
nontoxic. PAs are readily oxidized to pyrrolizidine alka-
loid-N-oxides, which can be formed during storage of
PA-containing plants but are also present in fresh plant
material. The N-oxides are much more water-soluble
than the parent PAs and are better extracted from plant
material during the preparation of herbal teas.

Because PAs are often the toxic but not the biologi-
cally active principles of many herbal medicines, methods
have been developed to eliminate PAs from crude plant
extracts. Removal of PAs is accomplished by treating al-
coholic plant extracts with cation-exchange resins.

Medicinal plants that contain only nontoxic saturated
PAs are Arnica montana and Echinacea species. Toxic PAs,
those with an unsaturated necine base, are hepatic and ge-

netic toxins; some are also respiratory toxins. The toxi-
cology of PAs and the plants that contain them are dis-
cussed in greater detail in chapter 10.

Symphytine
Found in comfrey (Symphytum officinale), Russian com-
frey (S. x uplandicum), S. orientale, and the water forget-
me-not (Myosotis scorpioides), symphytine has hepatotoxic
properties. !?

\/ ,

Fig. 8.12. Symphytine

PURINE ALKALOIDS

Purines, which include nucleic acids, are a group of com-
pounds found in both plants and animals. Xanthine, a
purine that occurs as a breakdown product of nucleic acid
metabolism, is itself oxidized in the body to uric acid."

Three important methylxanthines—caffeine, theo-
bromine, and theophylline—all have stimulating effects
on the central nervous system.

Caffeine

Caffeine occurs in a number of botanically unrelated
species, including coffee (Coffea spp.), tea (Camellia sinen-
sis), mate (Ilex paraguariensis), guarana (Paullinia cupana),
and kola (Cola acuminata).

Caffeine is bound to chlorogenic acid in raw coffee
beans. The roasting process liberates the caffeine and
other compounds that contribute to the aroma of coffee.
Caffeine is a diuretic and has stimulant effects on the res-
piratory, cardiovascular, and central nervous systems. It is
incorporated in many proprietary aspirin and ac-
etaminophen preparations to enhance analgesic activity.

OO
CH CHs

Fig. 8.13. Caffeine Fig. 8.14. Theobromine

9

or A N
N \
“

CHy

Fig. 8.15. Theophylline

Theobromine
This alkaloid is found mainly in the cocoa plant
(Theobroma cacao), but also in tea (Camellia sinensis),
guarana (Paullinia cupana), and kola (Cola acuminata).\* It
is a central nervous system and cardiac stimulant, va-
sodilator, and smooth muscle relaxant, and is used mainly
as a diuretic and bronchial muscle relaxant.
Theobromine is isomeric with theophylline; how-
ever, its central nervous system effects are much less po-
tent than those shown by caffeine and theophylline, the
two other alkaloids in this class.

Theophylline

Theophylline is present in small amounts in tea (Camellia
sinensis) and guarana (Paullinia cupana). It is a short-acting
diuretic and a cardiac stimulant that demonstrates only
slight central nervous system stimulation.!§

----- PAGE 133 -----
Structurally, theophylline resembles caffeine; how-
ever, it lacks a methyl group in the 5-carbon ring.
Although it occurs naturally in the tea plant, it is synthe-
sized from caffeine for use in medicine. The effects of
theophylline on the cardiovascular and central nervous
systems are similar to but milder than those of caffeine,
while the diuretic activity is more pronounced.
Theophylline relaxes involuntary muscles, and is em-
ployed mainly as a bronchial smooth muscle relaxant in
the treatment of asthma, emphysema, and chronic bron-
chitis. It is the basis of the drug aminophylline, used as a
diuretic and asthma medicine.

ISOQUINOLINE ALKALOIDS

This is the largest group of alkaloids, derived from the
amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine. Isoquinoline al-
kaloids characteristically contain a phenylethylamine
structure in an isoquinoline ring system. They are com-
mon in the Magnoliaceae, Ranunculaceae, Papaveraceae,
Fumariaceae, Cactaceae, Fabaceae, and Rutaceae families.
Many isoquinolines are found in Papaveraceae, especially
in the genera Papaver, Chelidonium, and Sanguinaria.'®

Fig. 8.16. Isoquinoline structure

A subgroup of isoquinolines is made up of the mor-
phinan alkaloids, including morphine, codeine, and
heroin, all of which are derived from opium, the dried
latex of the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum). Opium
has two primary narcotic properties: hypnotic (inducing
sleep) and analgesic (blunting pain). Initial stimulation by
opium is followed by dream-filled sleep.

Only about 15 minutes are required for a small dose
of morphine hydrochloride to induce sleep and dull pain,
and the effect lasts about six hours. Heroin, a morphine
derivative, has similar properties but is more addictive.
Codeine, the methyl ether of morphine, is approximately
one tenth as strong a narcotic as morphine. Since its ef-
fect on the respiratory center is less potent than that of
morphine, codeine has been used in cough suppression.
In the body, codeine is demethylated to morphine.

ALKALOIDS -@ = 125

Table 8.3. Pharmacological Properties of

Isoquinoline Alkaloids

ACTION EXAMPLE
Analgesic Morphine
Antibacterial Sanguinarine
Antidepressant Glaziovine
Antifungal Latrorrhizine

Anti-inflammatory
Antimalarial
Antimicrobial
Antioxidant
Antiprotozoal
Antispasmnodic
Antitrypanosomal
Antitubercular
Antitumor
Antitussive
Antiviral, cholagogue, expectorant
Enzyme inhibitor
Hernostatic
Hepatoprotective
Hypertensive
Hypotensive
Insecticidal

Muscle relaxant

lematocidal

Oxytocic

Fetidine
Tliacorine
Oxyacanthine
Oxyacanthine
Emetine
Papaverine
Obaberine
Cepharanthine
Berbamine
Codeine
Emetine
Sanguinarine
Hydrastine
Boldine
Mecambrine
Canadine
Annonaine
Isochondrodendrine
Bocconine

a-allocrytopine

Berberine

Berberine is found in 23 genera spanning seven plant
families. The most important berberine-containing
herbal medications are derived from Berberis vulgaris and
Mahonia aquifolium of the Berberidaceae; Hydrastis cana-
densis, Coptis chinensis, C. trifolia, and C. teeta of the Ranun-
culaceae, Sanguinaria canadensis of the Papaveraceae; and

----- PAGE 134 -----
126 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Phellodendron amurensis of the Rutaceae. In some of these
plants, berberine and co-occurring alkaloids have equally
potent physiological effects. For example, in the well-
known herbs Hydrastis canadensis and Sanguinaria canaden-
sis, the pharmacological effects are not caused by berber-
ine alone.

Berberine is found in highest concentration (about
6.1%) in the root bark of Berberis vulgaris, with smaller
amounts in the aboveground stem bark and just 0.4% in
the woody portion of the root. Only traces of berberine
are present in the leaves, and the alkaloid is absent from
the flowers, fruit pulp, and seeds.!’ It is present, however,
in the seeds of some other species in this genus.

Other alkaloids in B. vulgaris include berbamine,
berberrubine, bervulcine, columbarnine, isotetrandine,
jatrorrhizine, oxycanthine, palmatine, and vulcracine.!8 In
addition to berberine, Mahonia aquifolium is reported to
contain the alkaloids aromoline, berbamine, columbar-
nine, corytuberine, isoboldine, isocorydine, isotentran-
dine, jatrorrhizine, magnoflorine, obanegine, oxyberber-
ine, oxycanthine, and palmatine.'®

Berberine has demonstrated amoebicidal, antibacte-
rial, antifungal, antimalarial, antitumor, cytotoxic, and
hepatoprotective actions. It also acts as a bitter and a
cholagogue and inhibits tyramine and elastase. Berberine
has been shown to have antiarrhythmic actions and a neg-
ative inotropic effect that markedly reduces atrial rate. It
is moderately toxic, with a 27.5 mg/kg LDs9 in humans,
and can cause cardiac damage, dyspnea, and hypotension.

HO.

C~ | ‘sS CHAO Noy
‘° a Me
| oN
2 OCH,
Ho yo
Sy |

OCH, on

Fig. 8.17. Berberine Fig. 8.18. Boldine
Boldine

Boldine occurs in the leaves of Pewmus boldus, Sassafras al-
bidum, and in members of the plant families Annonaceae,
Magnoliaceae, Rhamnaceae, and Atherospermataceae.”°
It is choleretic and diuretic.

Cephaeline

After emetine, this is the most important alkaloid in the
roots of Cephaelis ipecacuanha. It has emetic, expectorant,
and antiamoebic activities.”!

HAO.

CH

OSH,

‘OH

Fig. 8.19. Cephaeline

Codeine

Codeine, from the dried latex of the opium poppy
(Papaver somniferum), has spasmolytic, narcotic analgesic,
and antitussive properties. It is used in the management
of pain and diarrhea and as a cough suppressant.”?

cH. a

CHO"

Fig. 8.20. Emetine

Emetine

Occurring in all ipecacuanhas, including Cephaelis
ipecacuanha, and C. acuminata, emetine has expectorant,
emetic, antiamoebic, and cytotoxic properties. It also
demonstrates antiviral and anticancer activities, probably
due to its inhibition of DNA and other components of the
transcription process.

Emetine is indicated in chronic bronchitis, but at
higher doses acts as an emetic. Ipecac, extract of C.
ipecacuanha in the form of a tincture or syrup, is typically
used as an emetic to induce vomiting when a toxic sub-
stance has been ingested. Emetine is toxic to Entamoeba
bystolytica, the organism that causes amoebic dysentery,
and emetine hydrochloride is used in medicine as an an-
tiprotozoal agent. ??

Hydrastine

Hydrastine is a major alkaloid of goldenseal (Hydrastis
canadensis). It is hemostatic and antiseptic and has been
used to treat uterine hemorrhage. Hydrastine also

----- PAGE 135 -----
demonstrates emetic, expectorant, and antiamoebic
activities.’+

Morphine

Found in the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum), morphine
is a powerful analgesic, antispasmodic, narcotic, sedative,
and antitussive. Prolonged use leads to habituation. The
lethal dose in humans lies between 1 and 10 mg.?°

Fig. 8.21. Sanguinarine

Sanguinarine
This alkaloid is widespread among plants in the families
Papaveraceae (including Papaver somniferum, Sanguinaria
canadensis, and Chelidonium majus) and Fumariaceae (for
example, Fumaria officinalis), Sanguinarine is antibacte-
rial, cytotoxic, and anti-inflammatory. Because it demon-
strates antiplaque activity, it is used in toothpastes and
mouthwashes. It is positively inotropic and inhibits vari-
ous enzymes, including adenosine triphosphate (ATP),
diamine oxidase, and some aminotransferases.
Sanguinarine is toxic, with an LDgo in mice of 19.4
mg/kg. At high doses taken over a prolonged period of

time, it may cause glaucoma.”

INDOLE ALKALOIDS

Indole alkaloids constitute the second largest group of
alkaloids. They are derived from the amino acid trypto-
phan, which has a basic structure containing a pyrrole
ring fused to a benzene ring. There are a small number
of simple indoles, such as harman, but the majority are
derived from tryptophan and a terpenoid precursor, se-
cologanin.’ Indoles all share a common core structure,
but different metabolic pathways result in different
configurations.

\ N NH,

N
H N

Fig. 8.22. Indole Fig, 8.23. Tryptophan

ALKALOIDS «2 127

glucose

Fig. 8.24. Secologanin

Indole alkaloid structures typically involve multiple
ring systems and are often complex in character. They
form the basis of several pharmaceutical drugs, some po-
tent hallucinogens, and a number of poisonous com-
pounds, such as strychnine. The majority of indole alka-
loids used in medicine and pharmacy are found in
members of the family Apocynaceae (including Rauvolfia,
Vinca, Catharanthus, and Alstonia spp.). Indole alkaloids
are also found in fungi, such as ergot (Claviceps spp.) and
Psilocybe species.

Some indole alkaloids are widely distributed; the har-
man alkaloids have been detected in more than 10 fami-
lies. The Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus)
contains more than 60 indole alkaloids, including vinblas-
tine and vincristine. These compounds are used in
chemotherapy as treatments for Hodgkin’s disease, lym-
phosarcoma, and reticulum cell sarcoma. Important
classes of indole alkaloids include the ergot alkaloids and
B-carbolines.

Ergot Alkaloids

The ergot alkaloids are the basis for lysergic acid as well
as other compounds. Indoles of ergot include er-
gometrine, used to relax the uterine muscle during child-
birth, and ergotamine, which relieves symptoms of mi-
graine. Gelsemine and sempervirine, two indole alkaloids
from the roots of the yellow jasmine (Gelsemium semper-
virens), depress the activity of the central nervous system.

Bufotenine

This is a hallucinogenic alkaloid that occurs in the plants
of the genus Piptadenia, in fungi such as Amanita citrina,
and in secretions from the skin of the toad Bufo vulgaris.?®

HO. {

N

Fig. 8.25. Bufotenine

----- PAGE 136 -----
128 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

D-cathine

p-cathine occurs in khat (Catha edulis), and is derived from
Ephedra spp. as a manufacturing by-product of ephedrine
production. It acts as a central nervous system stimulant,
mild euphoriant, and appetite suppressant.

— NHp

\ fF Non

Fig. 8.26. Cathine

N,N-dimethyltryptamine

Found in the leaves of Prestonia amazonica, the flowers of
the reed Arundo donax, the seeds and leaves of Piptadenia
peregrina, and leaves, stems, and seeds of Mucuna pruriens,
N,N-dimethyltryptamine demonstrates entheogenic ac-
tivity. 2° It also causes hypertension and pupillary dilation.

L-ephedrine

L-ephedrine is found in the leaves and stems of ma huang,
or Ephedra species (E. sinica, E. equisetina, E. gerardiana,
and others), where it occurs with the D-isomer pseu-
doephedrine. It possesses sympathomimetic activity, with
direct and indirect effects on both a- and f-adrenergic
receptors, and produces peripheral vasoconstriction and
elevated blood pressure. It is also a central nervous system
stimulant. L-ephedrine is used as a bronchodilator and
respiratory stimulant in asthma and as a vasoconstrictor
of mucous membranes in rhinitis and sinusitis. Pseudo-
ephedrine is broadly similar in activity.

In Western herbal medicine, Ephedra is considered a
reliable treatment for asthma and allergic conditions. As
it is both a bronchodilator and a nasal decongestant, it is
useful also in bronchitis, emphysema, rhinitis, and influ-
enza. It is contraindicated for patients with hypertension,
angina pectoris, and hyperthyroidism; in those taking
monoamine oxidase inhibitor drugs (MAO inhibitors);
and also during pregnancy.

6-carboline Alkaloids

B-carbolines are a widely distributed class of indole alka-
loids found in 23 angiosperm plant families, 3 fungi genera,
and a variety of animal tissues.2° They are structurally sim-
ilar to and biosynthetically derived from the amino acid
L-tryptophan. Trypophan derivatives are very important in
central nervous system function and include the neuro-
transmitter serotonin, the pineal metabolite melatonin,
the potent hallucinogen dimethyl tryptamine (DMT), and
the monoamine oxidase inhibitors known as B-carbolines.

Fig. 8.27, B-carboline structure

Harmaline

Harmaline occurs in the seeds of Peganum harmala, Banis-
teria caapi, and Passiflora incarnata. It has entheogenic prop-
erties. At one time, it was used to treat Parkinson’s disease?!

Fig. 8.29. Harman

rN
\ 4

‘CHy,

Fig. 8.28. Harmaline

CH,0" 4

Fig. 8.30. Harmine

Harman

Harman occurs in passionflower (Passiflora incarnata). At
low doses, it depresses motor function in animals; it
causes convulsions at high doses.?*

Harmine

Found in Peganum harmala, Banisteria caapi, and passion-
flower (Passiflora incarnata), harmine is a central nervous
system stimulant that is entheogenic at high doses.*?

Indole

Indole occurs in the flowers of Sewromatum guttatum,
Arum maculatum, Dracunculus vulgaris, and Jasminum and
Citrus species. It has an unpleasant fecal odor that helps
attract insect pollinators.

CHO.

Ne
HO.

CH,O NH
2

CH,O H3C7 ‘or
Fig. 8.31. Mescaline Fig. 8.32. Muscarine

Mescaline

Found in the flowering heads of peyote (Lophophora
williamsii) and other cacti, including Trichocereus pachanoi,
mescaline is entheogenic.

----- PAGE 137 -----
Muscarine

This alkaloid occurs in the fly agaric mushroom (Amanita
muscaria) and some species of Inocybe and Clitocybe. Mus-
carine is a cholinergic agent that acts at the muscarinic re-
ceptors. Symptoms of poisoning occur within 30 to 120
minutes of ingestion and can include blurred vision; con-
traction of the pupils; and increased perspiration, saliva-
tion, and lacrimation (discharge of tears). Other symp-
toms of poisoning include bradycardia, hypotension, and
dyspnea. The LD5o in mice is 0.23 mg/kg (IV).3*

Psilocin

Psilocin occurs in the sacred mushroom, teonanacatl
(Psilocybe mexicana), and other blue-staining Psilocybe
species. Psilocin is entheogenic, causing sensations of in-
tellectual and physical relaxation and perceptual distor-
tions of time and space. The alkaloid is readily oxidized to
a blue pigment when the mushroom is bruised.**

CH. Z
a Hyo—C a ‘ “| |
UG OH
N.
Nowy —
N W
H

Fig. 8.33. Psilocin Fig. 8.34. Psilocybin
Psilocybin

Psilocybin is found in the same mushrooms as psilocin. Its
properties are similar to those of psilocin, which is con-
verted into psilocybin through phosphorylation.?*

Reserpine

Present in Rauvolfia senpentina, R. vomitoria, and many
other species and genera of the family Apocynaceae, re-
serpine is used clinically as an antihypertensive agent and
tranquilizer. However, about 15% of people treated with
reserpine for hypertension develop depression.

OCH,

° OCH,

OCH,
OCH,

Fig. 8.35. Reserpine

ALKALOIDS -@ 129

Serotonin

Serotonin is found in bananas (Musa spp.), tomatoes
(Lycopersicon esculentum), and the stinging hairs of the net-
tle (Urtica dioica). It acts as a neurotransmitter in the
central nervous system but does not pass the blood-brain
barrier, so a precursor, 5-hydroxytryptophan, is used
clinically to treat depression.

H,c——C———NH, CH,

\

N
Fig. 8.37. Skatole

Fig. 8.36. Serotonin

Skatole

Skatole is found in ‘Arwm species, in which it contributes
to the unique (vile!) odor of these plants, and in beets
(Beta vulgaris). Skatole is also responsible for the charac-
teristic odor of feces.>”

Vinblastine

This is an important compound found in the leaves of the
Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus). Its antitu-
mor activity has led to widespread clinical use in the treat-
ment of leukemia and Hodgkin’s disease.

Vincristine

Found in the Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus
roseus), vincristine is an antitumor agent used especially
for acute childhood lymphocytic leukemia.

Yohimbine

Yohimbine is a major alkaloid in yohimbe bark (Pau-
sinystalia:yohimbe). Two stereoisomers, a- and B-yohimbine,
occur in the same plant. It is an a-adrenergic blocking
agent, a serotonin antagonist, and a mydriatic.*8

is] OH

Fig. 8.38. Yohimbine

----- PAGE 138 -----
130 «a [NTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

QUINOLINE ALKALOIDS

Quinoline alkaloids are based on a bicyclic system in
which a benzene and a pyridine ring are fused together.
Most of them occur in the plant family Rutaceae, espe-
cially rue (Ruta graveolens), from which 30 quinoline alka-
loids have been isolated. Quinoline alkaloids have also
been identified in members of the Acanthaceae, Malva-
ceae, Saxifragaceae, and Zygophyllaceae families.*? Cin-
chonidine and quinine, quinoline alkaloids from the bark
of the cinchona tree (Cinchona officinalis), are well known
for their antimalarial properties.

Camptothecin

Occurring in the fruits, stem wood, and bark of
Camptotheca acuminata, camptothecin is highly toxic to
both animals and humans. It has antitumor and anti-
leukemic activities and is used in China for the treatment
of various forms of cancer.”

SS x
nd
A \

we. \_/

son X
H,

¥]

fo
\
‘ ‘
°
Fig. 8.39. Camptothecin

Quinine

Quinine is found in the bark of Cinchona officinalis and
other Cinchona species, in which it occurs together with
its stereoisomer, quinidine. Both isomers are antimalari-
als used against Plasmodium flaccarpum, which is usually
drug-resistant.*!

Quinine is a weak cardiac depressant and is occasion-
ally used in clinical practice as an antiarrhythmic agent. It
has abortifacient and spermicidal properties and is used as
a bitter, analgesic, and antipyretic in veterinary practice.”

Quinine is one of the most bitter substances known,
detectable at a molar concentration of 1x!©5. It is used in
food as a bittering agent.

QUINOLIZIDINE ALKALOIDS

Quinolizidine alkaloids are chemically defined by the
presence of a structural unit in which a nitrogen atom oc-
cupies a central position in two fused cyclohexane rings,
as in lupinine. These are also referred to as lupine alka-
loids, as they were first discovered in Lupinus species.®
Important quinolizidine alkaloids include sparteine,
found in Scotch broom (Cytisus scoparius) and greater

celandine (Chelidonium majus), and cytisine, from lupine.

Quinolizidine alkaloids occur primarily in Fabaceae.
There are about 170 quinolizidine alkaloids in this family,
and these are readily classified according to the number
of rings present. A typical bicyclic structure is lupinine.
Angustifoline is a good example of a tricyclic structure and
sparteine of a tetracyclic compound.

Structurally related but distinctly different quino-
lizidine alkaloids occur in Lycopodium and are known as ly-
copodium alkaloids.

Although universally present in Lupinus, a genus of
some 200 species, quinolizidine alkaloids are found in
more than 40 related genera of legumes. Consumption of
these plants, particularly their seeds, has been responsible
for much accidental poisoning in sheep, cattle, and hu-
mans. Cytisine and anagyrine are more acutely toxic than
lupinine and sparteine; they harm livestock through ter-
atogenic effects.

(-)-Sparteine

Sparteine is probably the most common alkaloid of this
class, present in many Baptisia, Cytisus, and Lupinus
species. Sparteine is a tetracyclic, oxygen-free alkaloid
that increases or strengthens the heartbeat, causing a
greater flow of blood to the kidneys and resulting in in-
creased urine production. Sparteine has proved valuable
in treating certain cases of cardiac fibrillation. It acts as a
peripheral vasoconstrictor and, because it demonstrates
ergotlike oxytocic effects (inducing contractions of uterine
muscle), it has been used as a substitute for ergot drugs. It
binds strongly to muscarinic receptors and less strongly
to nicotinic receptors.

N.

Fig. 8.40. Sparteine

DITERPENOID ALKALOIDS

These alkaloids, derived from diterpenes, are found
mainly in the Ranunculaceae family, especially in the gen-
era Aconitum and Delphinium. They also occur in other
plants, such as Inula (Asteraceae) and Spiraea (Rosaceae).
Aconitum species are among the most poisonous plants
known, and 2 to $ mg of a pure Aconitum alkaloid extract
can be a fatal dose in humans.

Aconitine
This toxic alkaloid occurs in the roots of Aconitum napel- °
Jus, but all parts of the plant are poisonous due to the

----- PAGE 139 -----
presence of other alkaloids. Aconitine is a potent and
quick-acting poison that slows the heart rate and lowers
blood pressure. Several Aconitum species are used in
China, after processing, for various purposes. Absorption
of aconitine through the skin can be fatal.*°

Ryanodine

Found in Ryania speciosa, ryanodine inhibits the binding of
calcium to muscle protein and retards circulation by vas-
cular constriction.® It is used as an insecticide.

STEROID ALKALOIDS

Steroid alkaloids have been found in approximately 250
species of plants in the Solanaceae and Liliaceae families.
They occur mostly as glycosides that have properties sim-
ilar to those of saponins. Some are very toxic, causing se-
vere, even fatal, gastroenteritis.”

Solanine was the name given to the first alkaloidal gly-
coside found in Solanum. Now solanine is known to con-
sist of six different glycosides; each hydrolyzes to the
sugar peculiar to its particular glycoside and to the agly-
cone solanidine, a steroidal alkaloid.

Steroid alkaloids have a fairly complex nitrogen-
containing nucleus. Two important classes are the
solanum type and the veratrum type.

Solanum-Type Alkaloids
Solanum-type alkaloids are found in plants in the form of
glycosides of steroid alkaloids, known as glycoalkaloids.
They occur primarily in Solanaceae family plants. One
example is solanidine, a steroid alkaloid that is the agly-
cone for two glycoalkaloids, solanine and chaconine,
which can manifest as poisons in potatoes. They have the
same aglycone, solanidine, but the structure of their car-
bohydrate side chains is different. Other plants in the
Solanaceae, including various nightshades and tomatoes,
also contain solanum-type glycoalkaloids.
The production of these alkaloids is favored by the
same conditions that promote the development of
chlorophyll, such as exposure to sunlight. In potatoes,
the concentration of glycoalkaloids is highest in sprouts
and green skins, and in tomatoes, highest in vines and
green fruit. Care should be taken to avoid exposing pota-
toes to sunlight, to prevent the production of the toxic
alkaloids. These alkaloids are not destroyed by cooking
or drying at high temperatures. New potato varieties
may not be introduced unless they contain less than 20
mg/100 g glycoalkaloids.

ALKALOIDS .@ 131

The glycoalkaloids are more poisonous than the agly-
cones. However, glycoalkaloids are poorly absorbed by
the gastrointestinal tract of mammals, and an appreciable
amount of solanum-type glycoalkaloids is hydrolyzed in
the gut of mammals to the less toxic aglycones, which are
then rapidly excreted. In potatoes, solanum-type glycoal-
kaloids cause a bitter taste in concentrations higher than
14 mg/100 g, and a burning sensation in the mouth and
throat in concentrations higher than 20 mg/100 g.

Veratrum-Type Alkaloids

There are more than 50 veratrum alkaloids, such as vera-
tramine, that occur in plants of the Veratrum genus.
These are the alkaloids that make hellebores, such as the
white hellebore Veratrum album), highly toxic.

MISCELLANEOUS ALKALOIDS

These are alkaloids with rare structures that are difficult to
classify elsewhere, including the oxazoles and the
pyrazines (for example, aspergillic acid). In addition, some
14 alkaloids with flavonoid substituents are known—for
example, ficine, found in the wild fig (Ficus pantoniana).*
Some alkaloids in this group are very toxic, such as
taxine A from the yew (Taxus spp.). This is also true of
mycotoxins such as verruculotoxin, which can get into the
human food chain via the peanut. However, several of
these alkaloids have promising anticancer activity, notably
cephalotoxine, cryptopleurine, ermingtonine and taxol.

Fig. 8.41. on

aN

Colchicine

Found in Colchicum autumnale and other Colchicum
species, colchicine is highly toxic, with a lethal dose of
10 mg in humans. It is also irritant, carcinogenic, and ter-
atogenic, but has been used in minute doses to relieve the
pain of acute gout. Plant scientists use it to induce poly-
ploidy in plants. (Plant cells are polyploid if they contain
more than two sets of chromosomes. This is very common
in plants, especially in angiosperms. Between 30% and
70% of today’s angiosperms are thought to be polyploid.

----- PAGE 140 -----
132. «2. INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Species of coffee with 22, 44, 66, and 88 chromosomes are
known.)

Harringtonine

Harringtonine occurs in Cephalotaxus harringtonia, C. for-
tunei, and C. hainensis. This alkaloid shows antitumor ac-
tivity and has been used clinically to treat acute myelo-
cytic leukemia. It inhibits the biosynthesis of DNA and
proteins.”

Fig. 8.42. Harringtonine

Taxol

Found in the stem bark of Taxus brevifolia and T. cuspidata,
taxol is also present in trace amounts in other Taxus
species, including T2 baccata. Following much laboratory
and clinical research, taxol (Paclitaxel) was approved by
the FDA for use in a number of protocols investigating
the treatment of metastatic carcinoma of the ovary,
non-small cell lung cancer, and AIDS-related Kaposi’s
sarcoma, as well as adjuvant treatment of node-positive
breast cancer. Taxol is toxic, with an oral LD«o of 9 mg/kg
in dogs.

References

1. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Tid.
Ibid.
Tbid.
Tbid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
. Smith LW, Culvenor CCJ. Plant sources of hepatotoxic

pyrrolizidine alkaloids. fournal of Natural Products 1981,
44:129-52.

p PN AN Rw

- Oo

20.

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29,

30.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.

38.
39,
40.
41.
42.

nae ey

. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Tbid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Etcu P, Goina T: Neue Methoden zur Extrahierung der

Alkaloide aus Berberis vulgaris. Planta Medica 1970;
18:372-75.

Dopke W. Neue Alkaloide aus Berberis vulgaris L. Die
Naturwissenschaften 1963; 50:595.

Gruenwald J, et al. PDR for Herbal Medicines. Monwale,
NJ: Medical Economics Company, 1998.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:
A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ghosal $, Singh $, Bhattacharya SK. Alkaloids of

Mucuna pruriens, chemistry and pharmacology. Planta

Medica 1971; 19:279.

Schultes RE, Hofmann A. The Botany and Chemistry of
Hallucinogens. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1980.
Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London;
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993,

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Barnes K, Durrheim D, Blumberg L. Quinine as unoffi-

cial contraceptive—concerns about safety and efficacy.
South African Medical Journal 1998; 88(10):1280, 1282.

----- PAGE 141 -----
-
KR

is

AOS
enn m

IN

49,

. Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary:

A Handbook of Bioactive Compounds from Plants, London,
Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

. Ibid.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.

ALKALOIDS <> 133

Suggested Reading

Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants.
Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Evans WC. Trease dr Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th edition.
London: Baillere Tindall, 1989.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary: A Handbook of
Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London; Washington,
DC: Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Schultes RE, Hofmann A. The Botany and Chemistry of
Hallucinogens. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1980.

----- PAGE 142 -----
PHARMACOLOGY

harmacology is the branch of science that studies
P therapeutic agents in all of their aspects. Such

agents are usually called drugs. This can cause
some confusion when discussing herbal medicines, as the
general public tends to differentiate between herbs and
drugs, viewing herbs as natural and drugs as synthetic.
However, both herbs and drugs contain chemical com-
pounds that affect the body in various ways, so an under-
standing of pharmacology is relevant to both.

It is worth noting that the word drug is derived from
the middle English drogge, which in turn is thought to
come from the middle Dutch word droge, meaning “dry.”
Thus, our modern word drug refers to the use of dry plants
in medicine. In other words, drug is an herbal word!

The word pharmacology itself is derived from the
Greek words pharmakon (drug) and logos (word). This
branch of science is very extensive and is divided into nu-
merous subspecialties.

Pharmacodynamics is the study of the physiological or
biochemical mechanisms by which drug actions are
produced, which involves identifying effects produced
and the sites and mechanisms of their actions in the
body.

Pharmacokinetics investigates factors that modity the ef-
fects of a drug, such as routes of administration, rates
of absorption, differential distribution, and mecha-
nisms of excretion and detoxification.

Toxicology is the study of effects that are unfavorable to
health.

Pharmacognosy deals with the identification and analysis
of plant and animal tissues from which drugs may be
extracted.

Pharmacy is concerned with the art and science of the
preparation, compounding, and dispensing of drugs.

134

PHARMACOLOGY AND
PHYTOTHERAPY

Pharmacology addresses important questions about
herbal medicines and their therapeutic indications.
Consider the following, which have been grouped into
pharmacological subject categories.

Absorption and Distribution
¢ How do the physicochemical properties of the herb’s
constituents impact the bioavailability of the herb and
thus patient outcomes?

Are the most medically relevant constituents of the

herb water-soluble?

Site of Action

¢ Which organs are impacted by the actions of the herb,
and how?

¢ What mechanism of activity is involved?

¢ Are there specific receptors that mediate this action?

Metabolism and Excretion

¢ What impact does herbal treatment have on hepato-
cyte activity and biotransformation?

¢ Are metabolites of herbal constituents cleared by the
kidneys or in the gastrointestinal tract?

Toxicity and Adverse Effects

¢ How does the therapeutic dose compare with the po-
tentially toxic dose (i.e., what is the therapeutic index)?

¢ Are there reports of resistance or unusual reactions?

¢ What is the treatment for an overdose?

Drug Interactions

* Does the combination of the herb with another thera-
peutic agent cause any synergism, antagonism, or
changes in the effect of the herb or its metabolism?
Will the herb affect the actions or metabolism of the
other therapeutic agent?

Are certain combinations contraindicated?

----- PAGE 143 -----
PHARMACODYNAMICS

Both the therapeutic and toxic effects of a substance occur
as a result of its interactions with molecules in the body.
An important aspect of pharmacology is determining
whether a drug effect is due to a specific structural com-
ponent of the molecule or is a result of a nonspecific drug
action. In most instances, drugs act by associating with
specific molecules in ways that alter their biochemical or
biophysical activity, in which case they are known as
Specific drugs.

Nonspecific Drugs

The activity of nonspecific compounds is often related to
their solubility in lipids, which determines their ability to
interact with and alter cellular membrane function.
Inhalation anesthetics and some disinfectants are exam-
ples of drugs that work through this type of nonspecific
activity.

Table 9.1. Mechanisms of Action for Specific Drugs

PHARMACOLOGY © 135

Characteristics of Nonspecific Drugs

* Do not specifically bind with a particular biological
structure

* Are active only in relatively high doses

* Have similar activities but vastly different chemical
structures

* Show largely similar activity after chemical modification

Specific Drugs

Specific drugs are usually more potent than nonspecific
drugs; their effects are evident at lower drug concentra-
tions. Activity is highly dependent on chemical structure,
including the shape, size, and stereochemical configura-
tion of the molecule, as well as the position of func-
tional groups and charge distribution. Small structural
changes can result in profound changes in pharmacolog-
ical activity.

MECHANISM EXAMPLES

Receptor interaction

Stimulate receptors

Apigenin fron Matricaria recutita is a ligand for certain benzodiazepine receptors that exerts anxiolytic and slight

sedative effects but no anticonvulsant or myorelaxant actions.!
Chrysin confers anxiolytic actions without inducing sedation or muscle relaxation, it may be a partial agonist of
benzodiazepine receptors.’ Chrysin is found in species of Passiflora and Scutellaria.

Block receptors

The furanocoumarin phellopterin, from the roots of Angelica dahurica, strongly inhibits the binding of diazepam to

central nervous system benzodiazepine receptors in vitro?
Some extracts inhibit contraction of the rabbit aorta induced by histamine and serotonin in vitro. Xanthones from
Garcinia mangostana interact with various receptors. c.-mangostin acts as a histamine H, receptor antagonist, and

‘y-mangostin is a 5-HT,, receptor antagonist.‘

Alter cellular transport processes

Block ion channels

Alkaloids from Oregon grape (Mahonia aquifolium), corytuberine, magnoflorine, isothebaine, and isocorydine,

inhibit the influx of calcium into cells of the rat aorta.>

Alter carrier-mediated transport
Thiazides inhibit Na*,Cl’ cotransport.

Interfere with active transport

Loop diuretics inhibit Na*K*,2Cl’ carrier.

Cardiac glycosides inhibit Na‘ K*,ATPase.

Antidepressants inhibit reuptake of monoamines or serotonin.

Change enzyme functions

Inhibit enzymes

Tannins inhibit the activity of protein kinases (PK).° Some hydrolyzable tannins are selective inhibitors of various

protein kinases, such as cAMP-dependent PK and calcium and phospholipid-dependent PK.
Herbal ACE inhibitors inhibit angiotensin-converting enzyme?

Activate enzymes

Forskolin activates adenylate cyclase.

Metal ions, like Mg, Ca, Zn, Cu, and Mn, also activate enzymes,

----- PAGE 144 -----
136 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Characteristics of Specific Drugs

¢ Interact with specific receptors

¢ Open or block ion channels

* Modify transport systems

¢ Inhibit or activate enzymes

¢ Interfere with particular aspects of biosynthesis in
microorganisms

ENZYMES

A range of clinically relevant effects are mediated via
plant constituent interactions with enzymes. The cell is
the site of tremendous metabolic activity, processes that
go on continually in living organisms. These activities in-
clude the buildup of new tissue, replacement of old tissue,
conversion of food to energy, disposal of waste materials,
and reproduction—in short, all of the activities under-
taken by cells to maintain life.

However, all of this takes place in the face of a para-
dox. Biochemical reactions do not occur spontaneously,
but are facilitated by catalysis. Catalysis is the acceleration
of a chemical reaction by some substance that itself un-
dergoes no permanent chemical change. The catalysts of
biochemical reactions are enzymes, which are responsi-
ble for almost all chemical reactions that occur in living
organisms.

Without enzymes, of which nearly 2,000 are known
in humans, these reactions would take place too slowly
for the needs of life processes. Because of their central
role in cellular processes, deficiency, excess, or improper
regulation of enzymes can result in a variety of diseases.
An important aspect of enzyme function is that it can be
regulated.

The Chemical Nature of Enzymes

All known enzymes are proteins. They are high molecu-
lar weight compounds made up principally of chains of
amino acids linked together by peptide bonds, Their
molecular weights range from 10,000 to 2,000,000 and
control the amount of metabolites and the rate at which
they move through metabolic pathways. As biological cat-
alysts, they speed the rate of attainment of chemical equi-
librium by lowering the energy barrier between substrate
and products. In other words, a catalyst will increase the
rate of a reaction, but will not affect the position of the re-
action equilibrium.

Enzymes are unique in that the enhancements they
cause are on an order of magnitude greater than those of
most other catalysts. A typical enzyme will convert about
1,000 molecules of substrate to product in one second.

Some will convert as many as one million. Unlike most
other catalysts, enzymes work at ambient temperature, at-
mospheric pressure, and usually in a narrow, near-neutral
pH-range. However, there are exceptions, such as pepsin,
which operates in the stomach in a pH range of 2.0 to 5.0.

Specificity of Enzymes
One of the unique properties of enzymes is their speci-
ficity. In general, there are four distinct types of specificity.

Absolute specificity: The enzyme will catalyze only one re-
action.

Group specificity: The enzyme will act only on molecules
that have specific functional groups, such as amino,
phosphate, and methyl groups.

Linkage specificity: The enzyme will act on a particular
type of chemical bond regardless of the rest of the
molecular structure.

Stereochemical specificity: The enzyme will act on a partic-
ular steric or optical isomer.

Many enzymes require the presence of other com-
pounds, called cofactors, before they become active. This
entire active complex is known as the holoenzyme and is
made up of an apoenzyme (protein portion) plus the cofic-
tor (a coenzyme, prosthetic group, or metal ion activator).

Apoenzyme + Cofactor = Holoenzyme

Enzyme Terminology

Except for some of the first-studied enzymes, such as
pepsin, rennin, and trypsin, most enzyme names end in
-ase; however, there are many exceptions to this rule.
The International Union of Biochemistry (IUB) created
a systematic naming scheme for enzymes.’ Enzymes are
classified and named according to the type of reaction
catalyzed. The enzyme is assigned a four-number classifi-
cation and a two-part name, or systematic name. A
shorter version, called the recommended name, is sug-
gested for everyday use. There are six major categories of

enzymes.

Oxidoreductases

Oxidoreductases catalyze oxidation reduction reactions be-
tween two substrates through the transfer of electrons.
They are responsible for the production of heat and en-
ergy. Many of these enzymes are present in mitochondria.

* Dehydrogenases catalyze the removal of hydrogen from
a substrate.

© Oxidases activate oxygen so that it will readily combine
with a substrate.

----- PAGE 145 -----
* Catalases catalyze the decomposition of hydrogen per-
oxide to water and oxygen.

* Peroxidases catalyze the decomposition of organic per-
oxides to hydrogen peroxide and water.

Transferases

Transferases catalyze reactions involving the transfer of
groups from one molecule to another. Trivial names for
the transferases often include the prefix trans.

© Transglycosidases catalyze the transfer of monosaccharides.

© Transpbosphorylases and ‘phosphomutases catalyze the
transfer of phosphate groups.

© Transaminases catalyze the transfer of amino groups.

* Transacetylases catalyze the transfer of acetyl groups.

Hydrolases

Hydrolases catalyze reactions in which the cleavage of
bonds is accomplished by the addition of water. They are
named for the substrate upon which they act.

© Carbohydrases catalyze the hydrolysis of carbohydrates
into simple sugars.

¢ Esterases catalyze the hydrolysis of esters into acids and

alcohols.

Proteinases hydrolyze proteins to peptides.

Peptidases hydrolyze polypeptides to amino acids.

© Nucleases catalyze the hydrolysis of nucleic acids.

Lyases

Lyases catalyze the removal of groups by means other
than hydrolysis, usually involving the formation of carbon-
carbon double bonds.

© Fumarases catalyze the change of fumaric acid to L-malic
acid in the Krebs cycle.

© Decarboxylases catalyze the removal of a molecule of
carbon dioxide from a carboxylic group.

© Deaminases catalyze the removal of amino groups from
compounds.

Isomerases

Isomerases catalyze intramolecular rearrangements; that is,
they catalyze the interconversion of optical, geometric, or
structural isomers.

© Epimerases catalyze the inversion of asymmetric carbon
atoms.

¢ = Mutases catalyze the intramolecular transfer of func-
tional groups.

PHARMACOLOGY © 137

Ligases

Ligases catalyze the formation of bonds between two sub-
strate molecules—specifically, through the hydrolysis of
the pyrophosphate bond in adenoside triphosphate
(ATP) or another triphosphate. The energy is always
supplied by ATP hydrolysis. The names of many ligases
include the term synthetase. Several other ligases are
called carboxylases. One of these is fundamental to life
processes.

Ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (rubisco) is
the plant enzyme that facilitates the formation of or-
ganic carbon from the inorganic carbon dioxide in the
air; rubisco helps generate phosphoglycerates.

ENZYMES AND HERBS

A number of herbal constituents affect metabolic pro-
cesses by modulating the activity of specific enzymes in
various ways, including activating or inhibiting enzyme
functions. Enzyme activation and inhibition both can be
harnessed for specific therapeutic effects.

Forskolin and the Activation of

Adenylate Cyclase

Coleus forskoblii, a plant used in ayurvedic medicine, is the
source of a compound of unique biological importance. A
screening of medicinal plants by the Indian Central Drug
Research Institute revealed the presence of a hypotensive
and spasmolytic component in C. forskoblii, a labdane
diterpene named forskolin.

Forskolin works by activating adenylate cyclase, an
enzyme that raises levels of cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate (cAMP) in cells.? Cyclic AMP is a vital cell-
regulating compound involved in a variety of cellular
functions. Normally, cAMP is formed when a stimulatory
hormone (for example, epinephrine) binds to a receptor
site on the cell membrane and stimulates the activation of
adenylate cyclase. This enzyme is incorporated into all
cellular membranes and only the specificity of receptors
determines which hormone will activate the enzyme in a
particular cell.

Forskolin appears to bypass this need for direct hor-
monal activation of adenylate cyclase via transmembrane
activation. As a result of this transmembrane activation,
intracellular cAMP levels rise.

----- PAGE 146 -----
138 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Physiological and Biochemical Effects of Elevated
Intracellular cAMP

¢ Inhibition of platelet activation and degranulation

* Inhibition of mast cell degranulation and histamine re-
lease

* Increased force of heart muscle contraction

* Relaxation of the arteries and other smooth muscles

* Increased insulin secretion

* Increased thyroid function

* Increased lipolysis

Forskolin possesses additional properties, such as in-
hibition of membrane transport proteins and channel
proteins through a mechanism that does not involve the
production of cAMP. The outcome is again a transmem-
brane signaling that results in activation of other cellular
enzymes. Forskolin also inhibits platelet-activating factor
(PAF) by interfering with PAF binding to receptor sites.
PAF inhibition is discussed later in this chapter.

Thus, the therapeutic potential of C. forskoblii is
great, as there are many conditions in which a decreased
intracellular cAMP level may be a major factor in the de-
velopment of the disease process. These include eczema,
asthma, psoriasis, angina, and hypertension.

Inhibition of Enzymes

Pharmacologically speaking, there are a number of types
of enzyme inhibitors, which are differentiated by the spe-
cific mechanism involved at the molecular level. A com-
plete discussion of different types of enzyme inhibitors,
however, is beyond the scope of this book. Instead, we
shall consider a number of enzyme inhibitory mecha-
nisms that are relevant to modern phytotherapy.

Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors

Agents that inhibit the enzyme cholinesterase have at-
tracted attention as therapeutic agents for the treatment
of Alzheimer’s disease. These agents have effects on the
parasympathetic nervous system, which regulates pro-
cesses responsible for energy assimilation and storage.
They operate when the body is at rest, decreasing heart
activity and relaxing respiratory processes. Among their
many roles, cholinesterase inhibitors facilitate the diges-
tive process, increasing secretory activity and peristalsis
and decreasing sphincter tone.

The most important neurotransmitter in this system
is acetylcholine (ACh). Reduced ACh levels are observed
in various forms of dementia, and therapeutic approaches
have been developed to facilitate cholinergic replace-
ment. ACh is inactive if taken orally as a medicine, so

other methods have been developed to achieve therapeu-
tically meaningful elevations.

Levels of synaptic acetylcholine can be readily in-
creased by using centrally acting inhibitors of acetyl-
cholinesterase (AChE), the enzyme that catabolizes ACh.
Tacrine is currently the only drug approved for
Alzheimer’s disease in the United States. While an effec-
tive AChE inhibitor, it has a number of other sites of ac-
tion and may cause hepatotoxicity.!° Among other AChE
inhibitors under development is the alkaloid huperzine A,
from Huperzia serrata, a club moss used in traditional
Chinese medicine.

Zr
te}

MO

NH,

Fig. 9.1. Huperzine A

The club moss Huperzia serrata is the Chinese folk
medicine ging ceng ta. This herb is found chiefly in south-
ern China, where it grows in moist places in hilly regions.
A decoction of the dried whole plant has been used to
treat trauma, fractures, scalds, hematuria, and infections
of the skin and subcutaneous tissues. The herb is a com-
ponent of a tea administered to elderly patients in China.
Huperzine A and its cogener, huperzine B, were isolated
from the moss, identified, and shown to be potent AChE
inhibitors.!!

5-a-reductase Inhibition

Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is believed to be
caused by accumulation of testosterone in the prostate.
However, once in the prostate, testosterone is converted
to dihydrotestosterone (DHT). DHT, a more potent
hormone than testosterone, acts on the prostate gland
and other sexual organs.

DHT is produced from testosterone by the enzyme
S-a-reductase, and is necessary for the normal growth
and development of the prostate. Its presence is also nec-
essary for the pathologic enlargement of the prostate that
occurs in BPH. Thus, one therapeutic approach to treat-
ing this condition is to reduce the formation of DHT by
blocking the enzyme $-ca-reductase. Serenoa repens (saw
palmetto) has this effect, and may also possess receptor
site-binding effects.

----- PAGE 147 -----
RECEPTORS

One way of explaining the action of herbal constituents
on the body is through their specific interactions with re-
ceptors. Such receptor interactions initiate a chain of bio-
chemical events that lead to the observed effects. Cellular
activity is coordinated by the transmission of signals,
chemical or electrical, between cells.

The ability of a cell to respond to an extracellular sig-
nal depends on the presence of specific receptor proteins
on its surface or in the cytoplasm. The receptors bind the
chemical signal, triggering a mechanism that modifies the
behavior of the cell. Cells contain an array of specific re-
ceptors, allowing them to respond to a variety of chemi-
cal signals. The nature of these intracellular events differs
according to the type of receptor. The same molecular
signal may cause different responses in different types of
cell. :

Thus, receptors have a-dual function. They detect a

ligand signal by forming a ligand-receptor complex and
they conduct and translate the signal, leading to the phar-
macological effect.

The Molecular Nature of Receptors

Most receptors are proteins, presumably because their
structures provide both the diversity and the specificity of
shape and electrical charge. They are present in only
small amounts in cells, ranging from about 0.001% of
total soluble protein in aldosterone receptors to 0.1% in
progesterone receptors. The actual quantities vary in re-
sponse to stimuli, and their properties change with phys-
iologic conditions. When a hormone or neurotransmitter
is present in excess, the number of active receptors gen-
erally decreases (a process known as down regulation),
while a deficiency of the chemical messenger causes an in-
crease in the number of active receptors, or wp regulation.

Antagonism and Agonism

An antagonist is a compound that will bind to the receptor
but not activate it. In contrast, an agonist has both an
affinity for the receptor and the ability to trigger the re-
sponse. Antagonists exert their effects by preventing
agonists from binding to and activating receptors. They
are divided into two classes, depending on whether or
not they reversibly compete with agonists for binding to
receptors.

Antagonism can be competitive (reversible), meaning
that the antagonist competes for the receptor and so re-
quires a higher concentration of the agonist in order to
achieve the same effect as would the agonist alone.

PHARMACOLOGY e139

Alternately, antagonism can be noncompetitive (irre-
versible), a situation in which the antagonist’s affinity for
the receptor is so high that for practical purposes the re-
ceptor is unavailable for binding by the agonist.

Receptors and Hormonal Control of Gene
Expression

Receptor sites are complex assemblages of molecules with
subunits that change shape in response to various mes-
sengers, all in a finely tuned way. From one perspective,
their study is revealing a window into how “fearfully and
wonderfully” made we human beings are (Ps. 139:14).

To explore the concept of receptor interactions, we
will discuss hormones and their receptors. Hormones
transmit information from one cell to another to coordi-
nate a whole range of homeostatic adaptations, growth,
development, and reproduction. Hormone receptors are
found throughout the cell, including the outer mem-
brane. When hormones are released into the blood as a
result of some stimulus, they circulate throughout the
body and bind to these receptors.

Once bound, the receptors and their lipid-soluble lig-
ands traverse the membrane and enter the nucleus, where
they directly exert their effects by binding to special en-
hancers (called hormone-responsive elements) and by stimu-
lating the transcription of certain genes.

The mechanism used by hormones to regulate
gene expression has two therapeutically important
consequences.

¢ All of these hormones produce their effects after a
characteristic lag period of three minutes to several
hours—the time required for the synthesis of new
proteins.

¢ Their effects can persist for hours or days after their
concentration has been reduced to zero.

' The interactions of steroid hormones with receptors
starts as the hormones arrive via the blood. Blood trans-
ports steroids either bound to a blood protein or un-
bound, Binding of the steroid to its receptor molecule re-
sults in conformational change, an alteration of the
three-dimensional structure of the receptor from an inac-
tive to an active form.

This activated receptor-steroid complex has an affin-
ity for specific binding sites on DNA, resulting in activa-
tion or transcription of the gene to produce messenger
RNA (mRNA). The mRNA is translated on cytoplasmic
ribosomes to produce the code for protein. Once the
receptor-hormone complex has interacted with a gene,

----- PAGE 148 -----
140 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

the protein undergoes reactions that result in the reestab-
lishment of unoccupied receptors and elimination of the
steroid from the cell.

Hormone + Receptor -«—» Hormone-Receptor Complex
Inactive Active

The basic structure of receptor proteins comprises
three domains: one for hormone binding, another for
binding to DNA, and one immunologic domain,
Receptor proteins can adopt various conformational
forms, but when bound to a hormone take on the active
shape. While a receptor that is not attached to a hormone
can bind to DNA, it will not activate transcription unless
the hormone is also bound.

Mechanisms exist to facilitate the transmission of the
chemical signal across the barrier posed by the plasma
membrane. Each mechanism has evolved distinctive re-
ceptor families that transduce many different signals.
These receptors are found on the cell surface and within
the cell, as well as in enzymes and other components that
generate, amplify, coordinate, or terminate post-receptor
signaling by chemical second messengers in the cytoplasm.

There are four basic mechanisms by which signals are
transmitted across membranes:

1, A lipid-soluble molecule crosses the membrane pas-
sively and acts on an intracellular receptor.

2, Intracellular activity is regulated by a molecule that
binds to an extracellular site on a receptor protein
whose structure crosses the membrane (examples
include receptors for insulin, low-density lipopro-
tein, growth hormone, and cytokines).

3. A transmembrane ion channel is induced to open or
close by the binding of a molecule (examples in-
clude receptors for nicotine, GABA, and glycine).

4. A transmembrane receptor protein stimulates a
G protein that in turn generates an intracellular
secondary messenger. This intricate process can
facilitate many interactions with exogenous
molecules.

G Proteins and Second Messengers

Guanine nucleotide binding proteins, or G proteins, are
membrane proteins that link the activation of a mem-
brane receptor to the subsequent activation of its cellular
second messenger. Receptors coupled to G proteins are
structurally related to one another, comprising a family of
serpentine receptors, so called because the receptor
polypeptide chain crosses the plasma membrane seven
times.

Receptors for adrenergic amines, serotonin, acetyl-
choline, many peptide hormones, odors, and visual recep-
tors in the retinal rod and cone cells are all serpentine.
The amino and carboxy] terminals of each of these recep-
tors are located on the extracellular and cytoplasmic sides
of the membrane, respectively.

Within the membrane, a G protein binds to an ex-
ogenous molecule, causing a conformational change and
activating a cascade of reactions that produce various sec-
ond messengers. No matter which pathway is activated,
the result is a change in the functioning of the affected
cell in response to the original message-bearing molecule.

Phytoestrogens and Receptors

As an example of the role of receptor interactions in
herbal activity, consider the phytoestrogens. It has been
estimated that more than 300 species of plants have some
degree of demonstrable estrogen activity.'* The concept
of phytoestrogens originally came from toxicology, but it
has since taken on a more positive aspect, as epidemiology
has uncovered many clues about the role of dietary phy-
toestrogens. See chapter 10 for more information on the
toxicity of phytoestrogens.

Health-Protective Effects of Phytoestrogens

¢ Epidemiological studies reveal low mortality from hor-
mone-dependent cancer in both Japanese women and
men consuming a traditional diet, which may be re-
lated to the high intake of phytoestrogens in soybeans
and other foods.!?

* Dietary intake of soy is associated with a decreased risk
of both hormone-dependent and hormone-independent
cancers, and it has been suggested that genistein, the
predominant isoflavone in soy foods, is responsible for
this effect.!*

* The low mortality from prostate cancer in Japanese
men may be associated with their isoflavone-rich tradi-
tional diet.!°

¢ Consumption of a plant-based diet can prevent the
development and progression of chronic diseases that
are associated with extensive neovascularization.!®

¢ Researchers suggest that human cancer mortality rates
could be markedly reduced by supplementing human
diets with certain soybean products shown to suppress
carcinogenesis in animals.!”

¢ Because many Western diseases are hormone-dependent
cancers, it has been postulated that the typical Western
diet, compared with a vegetarian or semi-vegetarian
diet, may alter hormone production, metabolism, or
action at the cellular level.!®

----- PAGE 149 -----
PHARMACOLOGY .@ = 141

Classification of Hormones

Hormones can be grouped into classes based upon the method by which they are transmitted.

Group 1 Hormones

Lipid-soluble steroidal hormones cross the cell membrane and act upon an intracellular recep-
tor. Steroid hormones exert effects at all levels of biological organization, using similar mecha-
nisms to produce the same general effects (the induction of RNA and protein synthesis). The
major classes of steroid hormones, all derived from cholesterol, are progestins, corticosteroids,
estrogens, and androgens. Several signal molecules are lipid-soluble enough to cross the plasma
membrane and act on intracellular receptors. One of these is a gas, nitric oxide (NO), that acts
by stimulating an intracellular enzyme, guanylyl cyclase, which produces cyclic guanosine
monophosphate (cGMP).

Group 2 Hormones

These hormones are water-soluble and thus do not use blood transport proteins. They bind to
cell-surface receptors, which then use secondary messengers to relay their message to the nu-
cleus. This transmembrane signaling system has three components:

¢ The hormone is specifically detected by a cell-surface receptor.

¢ The receptor triggers the activation of a G protein located on the cytoplasmic face of the
plasma membrane, which changes the activity of an effector element, usually an enzyme or
ion channel.

* This element then changes the concentration of the intracellular second messenger.

The type of secondary messenger determines the subclasses of Group 2 hormones.

GROUP 2A HORMONES

The secondary messenger for Group 2A hormones is cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP),
which mediates such hormonal responses as mobilization of stored energy, vasopressin-mediated
conservation of water by the kidneys, Ca?* homeostasis, and rate and contractile force of the
heart muscle. It also regulates the production of adrenal and sex steroids, the relaxation of
smooth muscle, and many other endocrine and neural processes. A stimulator of intracellular
cAMP is forskolin, a diterpene from Coleus forskohlii that acts as an adenylate cyclase activator
to increase intracellular CAMP by stimulating its biosynthesis.”

GROUP 2B HORMONES

The secondary messenger for Group 2B hormones is cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP).
cGMP has signaling roles in only a few types of cells.

GROUP 2C HORMONES

The secondary messengers here are calcium, phosphoinositides, or both, which act through a
transmembrane ion channel that can be induced to open or close by the binding of a ligand.
Some of the hormones, neurotransmitters, and growth factors that trigger this pathway bind to
receptors linked to G proteins, while others bind to tyrosine kinase receptors.

GROUP 2D HORMONES

The secondary messenger for this group of hormones, including insulin, prolactin, and growth
factor, is unknown,

----- PAGE 150 -----
142 «a INFRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

The average sperm count in men has been consis-
tently declining since the Second World War, apparently
because of exposure to xenoestrogenic environmental
pollutants. The environmental science literature actually
talks about the fact that we live in a “sea of estrogens.”
We have to recognize that estrogenic plant effects, even
though they are important and we herbalists have an at-
tachment to them, occur in the context of total exposure
to estrogens.

Type IL Estrogen—Binding Sites and

Estrogen Antagonism

In addition to nuclear-bound estrogen receptor (Type I
sites), a second estrogen-binding site is found in nuclei of
various tissues. These Type II nuclear estradiol—binding
sites are located on the nuclear matrix. One event stimu-

lated by exposure to estrogen is an increase in the num-
ber of Type IT estrogen—binding sites. Nuclear Type I re-
ceptors are occupied by an endogenous ligand that appears
to be an inhibitor of cell proliferation.

PHYTOESTROGENS

A remarkable diversity of naturally occurring and synthetic
compounds mimic the biological effects of B-estradiol,
indicated in the laboratory by their ability to bind to the
nuclear estrogen receptor, activate transcriptional re-
sponse, and promote growth of estrogen-dependent
MCE7 cells in culture.?°

The most important of these appear to be
isoflavones, coumestans, lignans, and phytosterols. In the
diet, the precursors of the biologically active compounds

Estrogen

Phytoestrogens

Xenoestrogens

do plant estrogens.

A Closer Look at “Estrogens”

There is no chemical called “estrogen” Estrogen is a term that describes an effect, nota particular
chemical. We really should talk about estrogens, the spectrum of molecular structures that share
this effect. These are various natural or synthetic substances that possess the biological activity of
estrus-producing hormones. Estrus is the period in a female mammal during which ovulation
occurs and she is receptive to mating. This is an important point, because the periodicity and the
receptive time frame vary from.one mammalian‘species to another. Most of the research on plant
estrogens has utilized rodents, and rats and mice have very different estrous cycles than humans—
starting with the fact that they do not menstruate.

This raises many questions about how to extrapolate data from rat studies to therapeutic ap-
plications in humans. Estrogens are synthesized from androgens, primarily in the ovaries, and, to a
lesser extent, in the adrenal cortex. These hormones can also be produced in the testes of males.
The major estrogen, f-estradiol, is synthesized from testosterone.

A phytoestrogen is a plant constituent that possesses estrogenic activity. However, to say that
something possesses estrogenic activity does not mean that all estrogens have the same degree of
estrogenic activity, nor does it mean they all possess the whole spectrum of effects that human
estrogens have. It is also important to understand that phytoestrogens are not precursors of
human hormones, but instead interact with human estrogen receptors to elicit various responses.

Xenoestrogens are environmental estrogens, usually synthetic pesticides such as DDT and hor-
mones in our diet. One source ts residual hormanes that make their way into dairy products after
having been originally fed to cows. DDT, PCB, and many other synthetic pesticides are estrogens.
In fact, they work in part by disrupting the reproductive cycle of the animal they are designed to
deter. Without making too much of a point of xenoestrogens, it should be noted that quantita-
tively, environmental pollutant estrogens appear to have far more of an effect on humans than

----- PAGE 151 -----
originate in soybean products (which contain mainly
isoflavones but also lignans in smaller amounts) as well as
in whole grain cereals and seeds. The phytoestrogens in
berries and nuts are believed to be mainly lignans.!

Coffee has phytoestrogenic effects, as do beer, bour-
bon, mescaline, and Cannabis. Actually, it is quite amazing
how many substances that cause social issues also have es-
trogenic effects. Coffee extracts, unlike tea and cocoa, ac-
tively compete with estradiol for uterine cytosol binding
sites.”?

Isoflavones

A number of phytoestrogens belong to chemically related
classes of flavonoids, including chalcones, flavanones,
flavones, flavonols, and isoflavones. The most active of
these, the isoflavones, represent a structural variant of the
flavonoid family of plant phenolics and are only found
regularly in one subfamily of the Fabaceae, the
Papilionoideae. They have been recorded occasionally in
a few other families, such as Asteraceae, Iridaceae,
Myristicaceae, and Rosaceae. It is possible that they are
more widespread, but the lack of a satisfactory method of
screening for their presence makes the search difficult.”3

Widely occurring isoflavones include daidzein, genis-
tein, formononetin, and biochanin A. A study of relative
estrogenic activities for some isoflavones identified a
range of potencies. In order of decreasing potency, the
most active was zearalenone, followed by B-zearalenol,
coumestrol, genistein, daidzein, phloretin, formononetin,
and biochanin A. The hormonal activity of these com-
pounds was specific for the estrogen receptor and sensi-
tive to inhibition by 4-hydroxytamoxifen.”*

In laboratory studies, genistein inhibited the prolifer-
ation of human tumor cell lines in vitro, constrained en-
dothelial cell proliferation and angiogenesis, and inhib-
ited the proliferation of various other types of tumor
cells.?* *6 It also inhibited the activity of purified topoiso-
merase II in vitro, and the production of reactive oxygen
ions that can lead to tissue damage and DNA modifica-
tion. Additionally, genistein acts as a weak estrogen,
modifies cellular differentiation, modulates cell cycle
events, and may precipitate apoptosis.’”

Lignans

Lignans are dimers that are chemically related to the
lignins of plant cell walls; they are found mainly in woody
tissues. Some have been isolated from other plant parts,
such as roots, leaves, and flowers, and in such cases they
may be found in glycosidic combinations. The active
molecular forms of lignans are produced only after they

PHARMACOLOGY -2 143

are metabolized by the gut flora, pointing yet again to the
fundamental importance of digestive tract health.

The lignan enterolactone is a moderate inhibitor of
human estrogen synthetase. This lignan binds to or near
the active site of the P4so enzyme.”® Research suggests that
the high concentration of lignans seen in vegetarians may
play a protective role against estrogen-dependent cancers
by serving as antipromotional compounds, inhibiting aro-
matase in peripheral or cancer cells, and lowering estro-
gen levels.”

Phytosterols

At one time, sterols were considered to be mainly animal
products, but an increasing number of such compounds
have been detected in plant tissues. Indeed, three phytos-
terols are ubiquitous in higher plants: B-sitosterol, stig-
masterol, and campesterol. Phytosterols are structurally
distinct from animal sterols in that they have an extra
methyl or ethyl! radical in the side chain. An example is
B-sitosterol, a common constituent in flowering plants.

Interactions of Phytoestrogens with
Receptors

Two important interactions are mediated via sex hormone
binding globulin (SHBG) and Type II estrogen binding
sites in the nucleus. Lignans and isoflavones may affect
the uptake and metabolism of sex hormones by helping to
regulate SHBG levels, although phytoestrogens bind only
weakly to SHBG.*° They also compete with estradiol for
binding to unfilled cytoplasmic estrogen receptors or un-
filled nuclear Type II estrogen receptor sites, which may
be the mechanism by which they inhibit cancer cell
growth.*! Bound nuclear receptors are then processed in
a manner that rapidly decreases the total number of cel-
lular estrogen receptors.

Research Conclusions

Not all phytoestrogens are created equal; they display a
range of actions and different potencies. This variability
points out how important it is to fully characterize each
phytoestrogen in terms of its sites of action, balance of
agonistic and antagonistic properties, natural potency,
and short- and long-term effects.** Thus, a plethora of
variables are encountered when drawing conclusions
about phytoestrogens.

Phytosterols, lignans, and isoflavones have all been
shown to possess both estrogenic and antiestrogenic ac-
tivity.3 This apparent contradiction results from the array
of assays used to identify estrogenicity, each of which
evaluates distinct responses in the spectrum of estrogenic

----- PAGE 152 -----
144 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

activities. The reasons behind the differences in activity
can be grouped into three broad categories:

* Variability in potency and activity among different spe-
cific phytoestrogens*#

¢ Variability in response among different test animals
and humans”?

¢ Variability based on dosage, timing, and route of
administration®®

What it comes down to is that no specific generaliza-
tions can actually be made about phytoestrogenic con-
stituents, because each has a different spectrum of effects.
However, consider the following research conclusions.

¢ It is clear that there is a significant number of struc-
turally diverse secondary plant metabolites that con-
tribute to human estrogen exposure, and these phyto-
estrogens have estrogenic effects at dietary levels.*”

¢ Dietary macro- and micronutrients play an important
role in estrogen metabolism.*®

¢ Lignans and isoflavones have been shown to influence
not only sex hormone metabolism and biological
activity, but also intracellular enzymes, protein syn-
thesis, growth factor action, and malignant cell pro-
liferation, differentiation, and angiogenesis, making
them strong candidates as natural cancer-protective
compounds.??

¢ In two thirds of reviewed studies on the effect of phy-
toestrogen-rich soy materials in animal models of can-
cer, the risk of cancer (incidence, latency, or number of
tumors) was significantly reduced.*”

* Greater dietary incorporation of isoflavone-rich foods
may be a safe and effective means of reducing cancer
risk.4!

¢ It has been suggested that some of the 400 plants used
as galactagogues work via phytoestrogenic stimulation
of prolactin production, which then stimulates breast
milk production.*?

Implications for Phytotherapy
With the wealth of new data flowing from the research
community, it is not easy to come to conclusions relevant
to phytotherapy. However, it can be stated with some de-
gree of confidence that phytoestrogens act predominantly
as weak partial agonists in Type I estrogen receptors and
as weak partial antagonists in Type II estrogen receptors.
From this, some broad clinical guidelines can be
deduced.

During the child-bearing years, the impact of phyto-
estrogens will be minimal. This is because of their
relative lack of potency when compared with endoge-
nous estrogens.

During the menopausal and postmenopausal years,
this potency disparity becomes less important because
of changing levels of endogenous hormones, and as
such, phytoestrogens may have much to offer in the
treatment of menopausal discomforts. This observa-
tion underscores the phytotherapist’s experience of tra-
ditional herbal efficacy in such cases.

Epidemiological studies of Japanese women eating a
traditional diet reveal that they have a lower incidence
of osteoporosis. Western research has not yet con-
firmed a link between consumption of dietary phyto-
estrogens and prevention of bone loss, but a prudent
practitioner would do well to consider them in the de-
velopment of treatment programs for women.

The risk of estrogen-sensitive carcinomas may be re-
duced by intake of dietary phytoestrogens. The main
area in which confusion has arisen concerns therapeu-
tic conclusions about the treatment of breast cancer. In
general, estrogens are all potentially carcinogenic.
This is one of the real problems with synthetic hor-
mone replacement therapy. However, some herb books
caution against the use of phytoestrogen-containing
plants because estrogens can stimulate the develop-
ment of tumors in the breast. To the contrary, human
research has made it clear that phytoestrogens act as
weak estrogen antagonists in Type II estrogen recep-
tors in the breast, and so might actually help reduce
the risk of breast cancer related to estrogens.

PHARMACOKINETICS

Pharmacokinetics is the study of factors that modify the ef-
fects of drugs, including:

Administration

Absorption .
Distribution (biotranslocation)
Biotransformation

Elimination from or storage in the body

To illustrate what happens to a therapeutic substance

after it is administered, the following diagram tracks an
essential oils on its journey through the body.

----- PAGE 153 -----
=) massage oils,
lotions, perfumes,

pessaries, .
suppositories skin care products,
baths

PHARMACOLOGY © = 145

vaporized oils,
perfumes, sprays,
inhalations

foods, gargles

t
| oral intake |

anus, vagina | | Hin

TN liver

\ LA a“ \
\ digestive tract “—

~ \ mucous electrochemical
ms S\ _-7 membrane signal
MD N\A i? }
volatile molecule path ——————~ . A ¢
Circulation limbic region
electrochemical signals ------------ - " oe
1 * amygdala
co tex hypothalamus
all organs, joints, systems ;
{ | hypothalamus.
Geomacn )G ene ss) Clu “

Cory Zbl <>

'

Elimination

a. autonomic
| endocrine system neous
system

Fig. 9.2. Pharmacokinetic pathways of volatile oils in the body

Administration and Absorption

Absorption refers to mechanisms by which molecules pass
from the point of entry into the bloodstream. When ad-
ministering any herbal preparation, one must select:

¢ A route of administration
* A dose
¢ A dosage form (liquid, tablet, capsule, or injection)

A constituent’s site of action is often remote from its
point of entry into the body. The best route of adminis-
tration is usually determined by the physical characteris-
tics of the substance, the speed of absorption, and the oc-
casional need to bypass hepatic metabolism. The right
dosage form will ensure herbal efficacy at the site of ac-
tion by providing a pharmacologically effective concen-
tration, and will also maintain the concentration for an
adequate period of time.

Oral Administration

Herbal medicines are commonly taken by mouth. To be
effective, the remedy must be in a form that is soluble and
stable in stomach fluid, able to enter the intestine and
cross the lining of the intestine, and thus able to enter the
bloodstream. Because they are already in solution, herbs
taken in liquid form tend to be absorbed more rapidly
than those given in tablet or capsule form. The rate of ab-
sorption of herbs taken in solid form is limited by the rate
at which the solid dissolves and by the specific chemistry
of constituents.

Oral administration is a convenient route, but the
constituents are subject to extensive biotransformation in
the gastrointestinal wall and liver. Constituents absorbed
from the gastrointestinal tract enter the bloodstream by
going directly to the liver via the portal vein. Once there,
they may be metabolized rapidly, possibly inactivating
constituents before they can reach the intended site of ac-
tion. This first-pass effect is responsible for the fact that
some drugs, such as morphine, are active when injected
but much less active when taken by mouth. Absorption
after oral administration may be slowed by concurrent in-
gestion of food, mucilage-rich herbs, or antacids. Fast ab-
sorption implies rapid onset of effects.

Other Routes of Administration

Routes of administration other than oral may improve the
pharmacological efficacy of the substance at a particular
site or reduce toxicity.

Inhalation

Inhalation delivers large amounts of drug directly to the
lungs, useful in cases of respiratory disease.

Mucous Membranes

Occasionally, drugs are administered through the mucous
membranes of the mouth or nose, from which sites the
drug can be directly absorbed into the bloodstream.
Administration by buccal (through the mouth), sublingual
(under the tongue), nasal, rectal, or transdermal (through

----- PAGE 154 -----
146 2 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

the skin) routes bypasses the first-pass effect to permit
quick and direct absorption of the drug. Of the routes
just described, sublingual and rectal absorption are the
fastest. Rectal delivery can also allow the administration
of larger quantities of drug. Herbs may be administered
in suppository form; however, absorption is often irregu-
lar, unpredictable, and incomplete.

Topical

Topical administration of drugs is associated with a higher
incidence of hypersensitivity, since the drug is allowed
adequate time to become allergenic either on its own or
in combination with endogenous tissue proteins.
However, this is rarely an issue with herbs, considering
the long and safe use of poultices, fomentations, and
other topical applications.

Drug Distribution

Once absorbed, a drug is distributed throughout the body
by the circulating blood, passing across various barriers to
reach its site of action. At any given time, only a very
small portion of the total amount of a drug in the body is
in contact with its receptors. Most of the administered
drug will be found in areas of the body that are remote
from the site of action.

For example, in the case of a psychoactive drug, most
of the drug circulates outside the brain and therefore does
not contribute directly to its pharmacological effect. This
wide distribution often accounts for drug side effects, or re-
sults that are different from the primary, or therapeutic,
effect for which the drug is taken.

Bioavailability

The percentage of a drug that is absorbed and actually
reaches the systemic circulation is an expression of its
bioavailability. Because drugs are metabolized and elimi-
nated from the body, the level of drug in the body will de-
crease with time after a single dose.

To achieve a more constant serum level, inultiple
doses are given at fixed time intervals. In general, shorter
intervals lead to more constant serum levels. Once in the
bloodstream, the drug must penetrate the cells of the tar-
get organs in order to exert its therapeutic action. Thus
the extent and rate of absorption and penetration depend
on the ability of the drug to pass through lipid-rich cell
membranes—in other words, its lipid solubility.

Transport through a Cell Membrane
Cell and organelle membranes are not passive barriers.
They control the structures and environments of the

compartments they enclose and thus the metabolism of
these compartments. The membrane itself is a metabolic
compartment with unique functions. It is a dynamic
structure that moves, and its components are continually
synthesized and degraded. The plasma membrane consti-
tutes only about 2% to 5% of membranes in the cell; the
rest consist primarily of endoplasmic reticula. The pri-
mary components of membranes are lipids, proteins, and
carbohydrates. Hepatocytes specialized for metabolism
have a higher concentration of membranes. Differences
in composition among membranes reflect differences in
function.

Membrane Lipids

Lipids constitute about half of the weight of membranes;
the other half is primarily proteins. Phospholipids are
abundant, and phosphatidylcholine constitutes roughly
half of the lipids found in membranes. Phosphatidyl-
inositol, important in signal transduction, is present in
smaller amounts. Other membrane lipids include sphin-
gomyelin, glycosphingolipid, and cholesterol.

Membrane Proteins

Proteins associated with membranes are asymmetrical.
They are different on the outside from on the inside, and
are integrated into the membrane in only one orientation
relative to the inside of the cell. These proteins fulfill a
number of vital functions:

* Catalytic enzymes

¢ Receptors for signals such as hormones
¢ Transport systems

¢ Structural components

Membrane Carbohydrates

Carbohydrates are bonded to proteins or lipids as glyco-
proteins or glycolipids. Typical sugars present include
glucose, galactose, mannose, fructose, and nitrogenated
sugars, such as N-acetylglucosamine, N-acetyl galactos-
amine, and N-acetylneuraminic acid (sialic acid). Mem-
brane sugars are pivotal in cell interactions as a means of
identification and recognition.*} They are found only on
the outside of the plasma membrane or on the inside of
vesicles.

Membrane Structure

A membrane can be viewed as a lipid bilayer composed of
phospholipid and cholesterol along with various proteins.
Integral proteins are embedded, while peripheral proteins
may be loosely attached to the surface of the membrane.

----- PAGE 155 -----
Membranes separate and maintain the chemical environ-
ments on both sides of the membrane. Proteins and lipids
diffuse in the membrane, but ions are found at different
concentrations on either side of the cell membrane, cre-
ating an ion gradient. Membranes maintain these gradi-
ents by preventing ion diffusion, necessitating active
transport of ions from one side of the plasma membrane
to the other.

Nonpolar molecules are lipophilic (lipid-loving) and
polar molecules are hydrophilic (water-loving). Lipophilic
molecules pass readily through membranes because they
dissolve in the hydrophobic, nonpolar portion of the lipid
bilayer. Although permeable to water, the nonpolar lipid
bilayer of cell membranes is impermeable to many other
polar molecules, necessitating specific transport systems.

Passive Diffusion

Some substances can cross membranes by a process of
passive diffusion, which involves no energy expenditure.
Water and small lipophilic organic compounds can cross in
this way, but charged compounds and large molecules, such
as proteins, cannot. In passive diffusion, the molecule will
only move down the concentration gradient—that is, from
a higher to a lower concentration.

Protein Channels

Protein channels transport specific ions. For example, ion
channels exist for the movement of Na‘, K', and Ca‘*.
The protein forms a gate that opens and closes under
the control of the inembrane potential. lon movement
through channels is always down the concentration
gradient.

Mediated Transport
Transport of molecules across membranes by molecular
carriers is termed mediated transport. These carriers are
variously called porters, porting systems, translocases, trans-
port systems, and pumps.

Membrane Receptors

Cell-cell communication is achieved by chemical messen-
gers that interact with the cell in one of two ways, either by
entering the cell by diffusion through the cell membrane or
by binding to a receptor on the plasma membrane.

Distribution in the Body

After crossing the transport barrier, a molecule remains in
the interstitial spaces between cells, which are filled with
water and loose connective tissue. The molecule can

PHARMACOLOGY .@ = 147

enter the bloodstream directly via blood capillaries or in-
directly via lymphatic capillaries. The amount of the drug
that may be found in various tissues is affected by many
factors.

Solubility of the Drug

The greater the solubility of the drug in a tissue, the
greater will be its concentration.

Size of the Organ
More drug is required to achieve therapeutic relevant
concentrations in larger organs than in smaller organs.

Lymphatic Drainage

Lymphatic capillaries are minute vessels, located in the
interstitial spaces, in which one end is closed and the
other drains into larger lymphatic vessels. The walls of
these capillaries are composed of endothelial tissue with
loose junctions between cells, and as a result are more
porous than blood capillaries. Plasma proteins and excess
fluid in the interstitial spaces enter the lymphatic capillar-
ies, flowing back to the heart via the lymphatic system.

Blood Flow to an Organ

The rate at which drugs move to the various tissues of the
body depends largely on the rate of blood flow. In the
average-size adult, the heart pumps approximately 5 liters
of blood each minute, an amount roughly equal to the
total volume of blood in the circulatory system. Thus, the
entire blood volume circulates in the body about once
every minute. Therefore, once a drug is absorbed into the
bloodstream, it is rapidly distributed throughout the cir-
culatory system.

Protein Binding

Some molecules reversibly bind to proteins present in the
blood plasma. As proteins are too large to cross the capil-
lary wall, such bound chemicals are confined in the blood-
stream and not readily distributed to the tissues. Molecules
bound to plasma proteins have lower concentrations in tis-
sues than do those not bound to plasma proteins.

Anatomic Barriers

Barriers in certain organs limit the distribution of some
molecules. The blood-brain barrier consists of tight capil-
lary walls around which glial cells are wrapped, a situation
unique to the capillaries in the brain. Molecules must dif-
fuse through these two barriers to get from blood to the
nerve cells of the brain.

----- PAGE 156 -----
148 < INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

The blood-brain barrier blocks the passage of proteins
and most water-soluble chemicals, but water, most lipid-
soluble molecules, oxygen, and carbon dioxide diffuse
through it readily. It is slightly permeable by electrolytes,
but is poorly permeable by large molecules. The blood-
brain barrier is the reason behind the fact that the ions of
some highly water-soluble metals, such as mercury and
lead, are nontoxic to adult brains. However, because the
blood-brain barrier is less well developed in children,
their brains are more sensitive to the toxicity of lead.

Another barrier is the b/ood-testis barrier, which limits
the passage of large molecules like proteins and polysac-
charides, medium-sized molecules like galactose, and
some water-soluble molecules from the blood into the
seminiferous tubules of the testis. However, water and
very small water-soluble molecules, like urea, can pass
through the barrier.

Placenta membranes are unique. They separate two
distinct human beings with different genetic composi-
tions, physiological responses, and sensitivities to drugs.
The fetus obtains essential nutrients and eliminates
metabolic waste products through the placenta without
help from its own organs, many of which are not yet
functional.

This dependence of the fetus upon the mother, how-
ever, places the fetus at the mercy of the placenta when
foreign substances appear in the mother’s blood. The pla-
cental barrier between mother and fetus is the leakiest
barrier of all and is a very poor block to chemicals. The
placenta is composed of several layers of cells that act as a
barrier to the diffusion of substances between the mater-
nal and fetal circulatory systems. Lipid- and water-soluble
molecules can cross readily, while the transfer of large-
molecular-weight molecules is limited.

Biotransformation

The extent of pharmacological activity of a substance de-
pends on the ability of the body to metabolize the chem-
ical involved. This process is called biotransformation, de-
fined as the structural modification of a chemical by
enzymes in the body. Biotransformation occurs in several

organs, including the kidneys, lungs, skin, intestines, pla-
centa, and, most important, the liver. At the subcellular
level, the enzymes responsible for biotransformation are
located in the endoplasmic reticula, mitochondria, cy-
tosol, lysosomes, or even the nuclear envelope or plasma
membrane.

Chemicals absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract must
pass through the liver, where they may be biotransformed
and eliminated before they get distributed to other parts

of the body. However, biotransformation is not synony-
mous with inactivation. Some drugs must be metabolized
before they become active, whereas others produce a
toxic metabolite, an additional active metabolite, or both.
Intestinal microorganisms in the colon (the gut flora) are
capable of many biotransformation reactions. In addition,
molecules may be metabolized by gastric acid, digestive
enzymes, or enzymes in the wall of the intestine.

Primary Objectives of Biotransformation

* To alter a chemical substance in order to change its bi-
ologic effects

* To transform the chemical into a more polar, and
therefore more water-soluble, species that is more eas-
ily eliminated from the body

These reactions occur in the cytoplasm and endo-
plasmic reticula of all cells, although cells near major
entry points for xenobiotic substances contain larger
quantities of biotransformative enzymes. Biotransfor-
mation pathways may be grouped as either Phase J or
Phase II reactions. In Phase I, the molecule is modified by
the addition of a functional group. This modification al-
lows Phase II, the conjugation or joining of the drug
molecule with one found naturally in the body, to take
place. In most cases, the major end product is a more
water-soluble chemical that is easily excreted.

Phase I Reactions

These are reactions in which a functional chemical group
is attached to the molecule, oxidizing or reducing it to an-
other oxidation state. Such mechanisms are necessary to
increase molecular polarity, which facilitates more effi-
cient urinary excretion because the more lipophilic
molecule can be reabsorbed in the renal tubules.

Oxidation

Oxidation is the addition of oxygen and/or the removal of
hydrogen. Most oxidation steps occur in the endoplasmic
reticulum. Common reactions include:

—CH,—CH,—+ —CH—CH,
OH

Fig. 9.3. Alkyl group into an alcohol

----- PAGE 157 -----
oe)

Fig. 9.4. Aromatic ring into a phenol

oO
|
S—-S
7\ /\

Fig. 9.5. Oxidation at S or N

Reduction

Reduction reactions involve the addition of hydrogen
and/or the removal of oxygen. For example, azo (-N = N-)
or nitro groups (-NO;) are converted to amines (-NH,)
through reduction.

Hydrolysis

Hydrolysis describes an addition of water facilitated by
enzymatic action, which causes the breakdown of a
molecule.

R—O—C=0 —+ ROH + CH,—COOH
CHg

Fig. 9.6, Esters into an alcohol and an acid

R-N—C=0 —+R—NH, + CH,—COOH
CH,

Fig, 9.7. Amides to an amine and an acid

Phase I

Phase II reactions, also known as conjugation reactions, in-
crease the size and weight of a molecule by adding a
chemical group. Several enzyme systems catalyze Phase II
reactions, including:

® Glucuronyl transferase

© Glutathione-S-transferase
* N-acetyltransferase

© Sulfotransferase

Conjugation reactions bind the exogenous chemical
with an endogenous molecule, leading to the formation

PHARMACOLOGY -@ 149

of a final product that is usually more water-soluble and
thus more easily excreted. These reactions involve the
addition of molecules naturally present in the body to the
drug molecule, which may first have undergone a Phase
I reaction.

The Cytochrome P59 Enzyme System
Cytochrome P43) enzymes comprise the most important
enzyme system for drug biotransformation and meta-
bolism. Interactions between a drug and the enzymes that
metabolize it largely determine whether that drug will be
active, ineffective, toxic, or carcinogenic.

Cytochrome Py4s) enzymes catalyze most Phase I
metabolism, which transforms lipophilic molecules to
more polar compounds that can be excreted by the kid-
neys.4 The metabolites are usually less active than the
parent compound, although some drugs must undergo
biotransformation in order to become pharmacologi-
cally active agents. In some cases, the metabolites are
toxic.

The cytochrome P49 system is made up of a family of
very versatile enzymes responsible for catalyzing a range
of different reactions. A single hepatocyte can contain a
variety of cytochrome P49 enzymes. An individual en-
zyme may be capable of metabolizing many different
drugs, but one specific enzyme may be required to me-
tabolize a particular drug.

Reactions Catalyzed hy Cytochrome P45) Enzymes
* Oxidative reactions

Hydrolysis of esters and amides

Reduction reactions

© Conjugation reactions

At least twelve cytochrome Pys9 gene families have
been identified in humans, although three particular fam-
ilies are responsible for the majority of drug biotransfor-
mations. These are the cytochrome P4sq 1, 2, and 3 fami-
lies (CYP,, CYP, and CYP,).% These groupings are
based on amino acid sequence similarities, and can be fur-
ther separated into subfamilies.

Variability in the Cytochrome P45 System

This system can be altered by a number of mechanisms,
and the efficiency of the system varies significantly among
individuals, leading to variability in both the efficacy and
the toxicity of drugs. Induction and inhibition of Py59 en-
zymes are the most common causes of variability.
Induction increases the rate of biotransformation, thus de-
creasing drug concentration and pharmacological effect.

----- PAGE 158 -----
150 <=. INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Inhibition of cytochrome P49 enzymes results in an in-
creased concentration of the drug, prolonged pharmaco-
logical effects, and increased incidence of drug-induced
toxicity.

Drugs can bind irreversibly or reversibly with the
heme-binding site of the enzyme and thus inhibit other
drugs from binding. Irreversible (or mechanism-based)
inhibition occurs when drugs are metabolized by the cy-
tochrome P4sp system to active metabolites that bind to
the enzyme and cause irreversible loss of function.’
Activity can be restored only through the synthesis of new
enzymes, which may take several days.

Irreversible inhibitors are bound to enzymes by co-
valent bonds. Reversible inhibitors are bound to enzymes
by weaker, noncovalent forces. Herbs have been shown
to possess both reversible and irreversible enzyme inhi-
bition properties. Extracts of Fraxinus excelsior, Populus
tremula, and Solidago virgaurea in a combination of 1:3:1
(v/v/v) were found to have actions similar to those of a
variety of synthetic nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
because they reversibly inhibit dihydrofolate reductase.’

Genetic Polymorphisms

Genetic polymorphisms commonly cause variations in
biotransformation. A polymorphism is the presence within
a population of at least two groups of people with dis-
tinctly different abilities to metabolize drugs.** Individuals
can be characterized as extensive (rapid) or poor (slow)
metabolizers. Poor metabolizers often have an increased
incidence of adverse effects.

Pathology

A disease state may alter metabolism by modifying ab-
sorption, distribution, and/or excretion; altering nutri-
tional states; or changing the rate of blood and oxygen de-
livery to the liver, among other factors. Impaired liver
function decreases biotransformation. Pathologies that
impair liver function include hepatitis, alcoholic liver dis-
ease, biliary cirrhosis, and hepatocarcinoma. Diabetes has
a mixed effect, either increasing or decreasing metabolism
depending on the individual. Infection may also alter bio-
transformation. Phagocytosis, which occurs during bacte-
rial infections, releases a factor that depresses biotrans-
formation in adjacent hepatocytes.*®

Age

Infants do not develop a competent Paso system for more
than two weeks after birth. The elderly have age-related
decreases in liver mass, hepatic enzyme activity, and hep-

atic blood flow. In addition, the overall metabolic capac-
ity of the liver decreases with age, although the consider-
able individual variability in age- and disease-related
changes in organ function makes it difficult to generalize.

Nutrition

A low-protein diet decreases xenobiotic metabolism,
while fasting enhances or inhibits metabolism, depending
on the chemical to be metabolized. Deficiencies of cal-
cium, zinc, iron, and copper reduce metabolism, as do de-
ficiencies of vitamins C, A, and E. Hormone levels also
have an impact. Adrenocorticotropic and growth hor-
mones increase metabolism. Metabolism is enhanced by
thyroxine and decreased by thyroidectomy. Both gluco-
corticoids and anabolic steroids enhance metabolism.

Excretion and the Termination of

Drug Action

Potential damage from a chemical is minimized by excre-
tion, biotransformation, or both. The main routes
through which drugs leave the body are the kidneys, the
lungs, and the bile. Excretion through the lungs occurs
only with highly volatile or gaseous agents, such as gen-
eral anesthetics, and, in small amounts, alcohol and garlic
oils. Drugs that are passed through the bile and into the
intestine are usually reabsorbed into the bloodstream
from the intestine. Thus, the major route of drug elimi-
nation from the body is via kidney excretion of drug
metabolites following liver biodegradation of the drug.

Elimination by the Kidneys and Liver

Urinary excretion, the most common pathway of elimina-
tion, takes place in the glomerulus and the renal tubules
of the kidneys. Blood is filtered through the holes in the
capillary walls. Molecules with a molecular weight lower
than 60,000 end up in the filtrate, while red blood cells,
large proteins, and chemicals bound to plasma proteins
are not filtered.

Chemical exchange also takes place along the renal
tubule. As the filtrate flows down the renal tubule, essen-
tial molecules, such as amino acids and glucose, are reab-
sorbed by active transport in the first portion of the
tubule (the proximal tubule). Chemicals in the filtrate are
also reabsorbed by active transport if they resemble these
essential molecules. Lipid-soluble chemicals are reab-
sorbed in the renal tubule, and so only water-soluble
chemicals are excreted to a significant extent.

Because drugs are small particles, they are filtered
into the kidneys and then reabsorbed into the blood-

----- PAGE 159 -----
stream. As the drug is concentrated inside the nephrons
(a result of water reabsorption), the drugs are reabsorbed
into plasma. Thus, the kidneys alone cannot eliminate
drugs from the body. Some other mechanism must over-
come this process of drug reabsorption. This occurs
through the process of hepatic biotransformation, in
which fat-soluble molecules are converted into water-
soluble metabolites that are poorly reabsorbed once they
are filtered into the renal tubules,

The second major excretory route is via bile, which is
formed in the liver and flows into the intestinal tract. The
liver does not filter chemicals, but secretes them into bile
for eventual elimination in the feces. However, biliary ex-
cretion of a chemical does not necessarily result in its
elimination from the body. Chemicals in the bile may be
reabsorbed by the intestine and in turn reenter the liver
via the portal vein. This cycling of a chemical (the entero-
hepatic cycle) can continue for a long time, keeping the
chemical in the body.

Other Routes of Elimination

Excretion of drugs into sweat, saliva, and tears is small.
Elimination by these routes is dependent mainly upon
diffusion of the nonionized, lipid-soluble form of drugs
through the epithelial cells of the glands; it is also pH de-
pendent. Reabsorption of nonionized drugs from the pri-
mary secretion probably also occurs in the ducts of the
glands, and active secretion of drugs across these ducts
may also occur.

The composition of sweat is similar to that of plasma,
except that sweat does not contain proteins. Sweat is a fil-
trate of plasma containing electrolytes and metabolic
wastes. After secretion, it moves through the sweat ducts,
where salt and water are reabsorbed. Because sweat re-
sembles plasma, water-soluble chemicals, including some
drugs and metal ions, can be found in sweat. However,
sweat is not a major route of excretion.

Drugs excreted in the saliva enter the mouth, where
they are usually swallowed. The concentration of some
drugs in saliva parallels that in plasma. Saliva may there-
fore be a useful biological fluid with which to determine
drug concentrations when it is difficult or inconvenient to
obtain blood. Excretion of drugs into hair and skin is
minimal.

Breast milk is a potential route of excretion, but,
more important, it is a potential means of chemical expo-
sure for breast-fed infants. Most chemicals enter milk by
diffusion, and so only the nonionized, lipid-soluble forms
of organic chemicals are found to any significant extent.
Chemicals with a molecular weight less than 200 that are

PHARMACOLOGY .@ 151

present in plasma unbound to proteins are likely to be
found in milk. Because of the lipid content, highly lipid-
soluble chemicals may concentrate in milk. Therefore,
milk can be a significant route of excretion for highly
lipid-soluble chemicals in lactating women.

Variability in Responses to Drugs

Even healthy people may show large variations in their
abilities to absorb and metabolize drugs, leading to vari-
able outcomes in different individuals. The way a drug af-
fects an individual may be influenced by age, sex, body
weight, temperament, race, the environment, the pres-
ence of the drug or other drugs, and other (often unpre-
dictable) factors, including diurnal cycles, temperature,
pregnancy, menstruation, and disease.

There may be little relation between an individual’s
sensitivity to the desired effects of a drug and sensitivity
to the toxicity of a drug. A combination of substances may
result in synergy, in which the total effect is greater than
the sum of the combination, or antagonism, in which the
total effect is less than the sum of the combined effects.
Other factors include prior hypersensitivity to this or a
related drug and any tolerance developed through prior
exposure to the drug.

Tachypbylaxis

Tachyphylaxis indicates a rapid development of tolerance
to the action of a drug. For example, tyramine produces
its effect undirectly, by causing the release of stored cate-
cholamines that have biologic activity; as soon as endoge-
nous stores of catecholamines are depleted, however, the
drug no longer has an effect.

Drug Disposition Tolerance

Drug disposition tolerance is a tolerance that develops be-
cause of increased metabolism of the drug. This type of
tolerance is characterized by a faster-than-normal drop in
blood levels of the drug after a given dose, indicating a
decreased half-life for blood levels of the drug.

Desensitization

An additional complication is desensitization, a phe-
nomenon in which an initial application of a high con-
centration of an agonist serves to depress the effect of that
agonist upon subsequent administration. The specific
mechanism involved varies with drug and receptor, but
would suggest that the occurrence of some temporary
chemical or conformational change subsequently blocks
receptor response.

----- PAGE 160 -----
152 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Pharmacodynamic Tolerance

Pharmacodynamic tolerance indicates desensitization to a
drug that causes changes in a particular drug-induced
body function. This type of tolerance is characterized by
decreased action or lowered potency of the drug at any
given serum concentration.

PHARMACOLOGICAL ACTIONS

Pharmacological research into the activity of herbs and
their constituents is taking place all over the world. In
the following sections, we will review research on some
important herbal actions. This is far from a compre-
hensive review of modern herbal research; rather, these
are examples meant to serve as insights into the research
endeavor.

IMMUNOMODULATORS

A wide range of plants and phytochemicals appears to im-
pact the functioning of the immune system. There is still
far too little research in this area to allow broad general-
ization, but this should not be taken to mean that the
herbs themselves lack value as immunomodulatory
agents.

In a comprehensive review, Wagner and Proksch
grouped identified immunostimulant constituents ac-
cording to whether they are high- or low-molecular-
weight compounds.”

Low-Molecular-Weight Compounds

A range of low-molecular-weight plant constituents have
been shown to be immunomodulators. Because of their
diverse chemistry, a similar diversity of mechanisms is
probably involved.

profound effects.

Lack of Evidence or Lack of Research?

All too often, a lack of research is taken to mean that the herb in question lacks activity. This is
self-evidently absurd. The studies undertaken by Asian scientists to investigate the pharmacol-
ogy of their traditional remedies are contributing greatly to the field of immunology. However,
the same attention is rarely given to traditional European or North American herbs. This is be-
cause of a lack of research funding, not because the plants themselves lack inherent value.
Perhaps if nettles (Urtica dioica) were given the same quality of attention garnered by
Astragalus, we might have the immunological “proof” we need to draw conclusions about its

Alkaloids and Other Nitrogen-Containing
Compounds

A number of these compounds demonstrate immuno-
logical activity of some kind. However, the effects de-
scribed by the umbrella term zmunomodulation are gen-
erally subtle, and on the whole, bioactive alkaloids are not
subtle! An example is aristolochic acid from serpentary or
birthwort (Aristolochia clematitis), which shows anti-
inflammatory, antifertilty, and antimicrobial activity, but
can be carcinogenic to mammals.

Terpenes

Important sesquiterpene immunostimulants include hele-
nalin and tenulin, found in species of Helenium, and eupa-
hyssopin from Expatorium hyssopifolium. Many saponins,
especially triterpenes, are considered tmmunoadjuvants
and are used as such in Japan, either in the form of the
plant source or as the extracted chemical.

Phenolics

A number of phenolic molecules demonstrate immuno-
logical effects. The simple phenolic acids are ubiquitous
among flowering plants, fruits, and vegetables. Ferulic
acid, named after asafoetida (Ferula foetida), increases
phagocytosis in mice. Anethol, found in aniseed oil
(Pimpinella anisum), increases the leukocyte count in the
blood; the widely found pseudotannin catechol stimulates
granulocytes. The more complex lignans, with a range of
effects including stimulation of phagocytic activity in
polymorphonuclear granulocytes, cytotoxicity, and induc-
tion of interferon, are also proving to be important.

Flavonoids

The flavonoids, a subgroup of plant phenolics, have been
shown to possess immunomodulatory activity, This may
be due to their antioxidant or free radical-scavenging

----- PAGE 161 -----
properties. In addition, the oligomeric procyanidins pos-
sess immunological activity.

High-Molecular-Weight Compounds
High-molecular-weight lectins (glycoproteins) and poly-
saccharides are important immunomodulators. It has been
suggested that their impact is predicated upon some inter-
action with the membranes of immunocompetent cells.

Lectins

These are sugar-binding, carbohydrate-specific proteins
that agglutinate some cells, such as erythrocytes, and pre-
cipitate some molecules. When originally found in plants,
they were called phytobemagglutinins; however, they have
since been found in bacteria, fungi, invertebrates, and
vertebrates. Some well-known plant toxins are lectins,
such as ricin from castor bean (Ricinus communis).

A range of lectin effects has been demonstrated in the
laboratory, including stimulation of lymphocyte mitosis,
inhibition of protein synthesis in bacteria, and agglutina-
tion of malignant cells by tumor-specific lectins. Lectin-
containing plants familiar to the herbalist are poke
(Phytolacca americana) and mistletoe (Viscum album).
Research shows that the well-known North American an-
timicrobial plant wild indigo (Baptisia tinctoria) contains
active glycoproteins.*!

Polysaccharides

Polysaccharides are often pivotal to the immunomodulat-
ing effects of herbs. Laboratory studies have revealed a
range of impressive results:

¢ General improvement of many immune-response
measures

* T-lymphocyte activation

¢ Antitumor activity

© Increase in certain serum proteins

* Nonspecific activation of the complement system

* Stimulation of interferon production

* Increased phagocytosis

An important group of active polysaccharides is the
mycopolysaccharides found in medicinal fungi. Their
principal bioactive substances are believed to be the B-D-
glucans, usually simply called 6-glucans. These are indi-
gestible polysaccharides found in grains, yeast, bacteria,
algae, and fungi. It is likely that the activities of the my-
copolysaccharides depend on chemical characteristics
such as their molecular weight, branching patterns, solu-
bility in water, and tertiary structure.

Edible mushrooms rich in B-glucans include shiitake

PHARMACOLOGY @ 153

(Lentinus edodes), maitake (Grifola frondosa), himematsu-
take (Agaricus blazei), button mushrooms (Schizophyllum
commune and Sclerotina sclerotiorum), wood ear
(Auricularia auricula), tremella (Iremella fuciformis), poria
(Wolfporia cocos), and enoki (Flammulina velutipes).
Huitlacoche (Ustilago maydis) is another edible fungus
that is also rich in B-glucans. Nonedible mushrooms rich
in B-glucans include reishi (Ganoderma lucidum) and the
coriolus mushroom (Coriolus versicolor).

The most studied mushroom -glucans are lentinan,
from Lentinus edodes; grifolan, from Grifola frondosa;
schizophyllan, from Schizophyllum commune; sclerotan,
from Sclerotinia sclerotiorum; and polysaccharide krestin
and polysaccharide peptide, from Coriolus versicolor‘?
Lentinan and schizophyllan are approved in Japan for the
treatment of cancer.

Based upon in vitro, in vivo, and some human stud-
ies, the mycopolysaccharides appear to have immuno-
modulatory, antitumor, antimicrobial, lipid-lowering, and
glucose-regulating properties. However, after ingestion,
there is virtually no digestion of B-glucans in the small in-
testine, as there are no f-glucosidases among the diges-
tive enzymes. These enzymes are essential for the
metabolism of the B-glucans.

Some digestion of myco-B-glucans may occur in the
small intestine, and some digestion takes place in the
large intestine via the action of bacterial B-glucans.
Some oligosaccharides that are produced via bacterial
6-glucosidases may be absorbed, as may a large percent-
age of the ingested myco-B-glucosidases. However, a
large percentage of ingested myco-f-glucans is excreted
in the feces.

Lentinan is a particularly well-studied 6-glucan that
demonstrates a range of properties, including antitumor
activity. However, lentinan is typically administered par-
enterally and appears to show little antitumor activity
after oral administration. In studies, parenterally admin-
istered lentinan has demonstrated various immuno-
modulatory activities. It stimulated macrophages, mono-
cytes, and neutrophils, as well as natural killer (NK) and
lymphokine-activated killer (LAIS) cells.*? Stimulation of
these cells by lentinan may release a number of different
cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and in-
terleukin 2 a and 6 a UL 2 a and IL 6 a). Lentinan may
also stimulate the production of nitric oxide (NO) in
macrophages. These effects may result in antimicrobial
and antitumor activities. Grifolan, schizophyllan, and
sclerotan have been shown to have similar effects when
used parenterally.

The possible immunomodulatory effects of orally

----- PAGE 162 -----
154 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

administered mushroom f-glucans remain unclear. They
may exert immunological actions by virtue of their interac-
tion with gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT). When
activated by contact with mushroom or other B-glucans in
the gut, immune cells associated with GALT may migrate
to other tissues and exert immunomodulatory effects there.
In addition, substances in mushrooms other than B-glucans
may have immunomodulatory activities.** In any case, the
possible antitumor and antimicrobial activities of the
myco-B-glucans are thought to be accounted for, in large
part, by their immunomodulatory properties.’®

The mycopolysaccharides may have anticarcinogenic,
immune-modulating, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory,
cardioprotective, hepatoprotective, nephroprotective, hy-
poglycemic, and anticaries effects.** For species-specific
findings, please see the references cited above, but for ex-
amples, consider the herbs listed in table 9.2. Sources are
isted in Wagner and Proksch.*”

Table 9.2. Influence of Polysaccharide Fractions on
Phagocytosis

HERB ENHANCEMENT OF PHAGOCYTOSIS
Arnica montana 44%
Echinacea purpurea 45%

Eleutherococcus senticosus 52%

Eupatorium cannabinum 22%
E. perfoliatum 37%
Matricaria recutita 3%
Serenoa repens 36%
INFLAMMATION AND

ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AGENTS

Inflammation is the complex response of living, vascular-
ized tissue to injury. Inflammation is a classic “double-
edged sword” that is essential for life and preservation of
function, but also causes significant tissue damage and
loss of function. The inflammatory response is triggered
whenever tissues are injured. The cardinal signs of acute
inflammation are redness (erythema), swelling (edema),
pain, and heat; the word itself is derived from the root in-
flamm, meaning “to set on fire.” Inflammation prevents
the spread of damaging agents to nearby tissues, disposes
of cell debris and pathogens, and initiates the tissue repair

processes. It is nonspecific, occurring in response to many
different causes.

Inflammation is initiated by the release of chemical
mediators into the extracellular fluid. Sources of these
mediators include injured tissue cells, phagocytes, lym-
phocytes, mast cells, and blood proteins, the most impor-
tant of which are histamine, kinins, prostaglandins, com-
plement, and lymphokines. They are all vasodilators, and
as blood flow to the area increases, local blood congestion
occurs, accounting for the redness and heat.

These mediators also increase capillary permeability,
so that an exudate containing proteins, such as clotting
factors and antibodies, seeps from the bloodstream to the
interstitial fluid. This exudate causes local edema, which
in turn presses on adjacent nerve endings, causing pain.
(Other sources of pain include the release of bacterial tox-
ins, lack of nutrition to injured cells, and hypersensitivity.
caused by the release of prostaglandins and kinins.)

Edema dilutes any harmful substances present, in-
creases oxygenation, supplies nutrients necessary for heal-
ing, and facilitates the entry of clotting proteins. These
form a fibrin mesh in the interstitial spaces that isolates
the injured tissue, prevents the spread of harmful agents,
and also forms a matrix for tissue repair.

After the initiation of the inflammatory response,
phagocytic white blood cells, neutrophils, and macro-
phages migrate to the area. If pathogens are present,
complement is activated and lymphocytes and antibodies
invade the injured site, mounting an immune response.
Leukocytosis is a characteristic sign of inflammation.
Leukocytosis-inducing factors released by injured cells
promote a rapid release of neutrophils from bone mar-
row, and the number of neutrophils in the bloodstream
increases four- to fivefold. Neutrophils usually migrate
randomly, but are attracted to inflammatory chemicals,
termed chemotactic agents, at the site of the injury.

The outpouring of fluid from the blood into the in-
jured area slows blood flow in the region, and neutrophils
begin to cling to the inner walls of the capillaries, a phe-
nomenon known as margination or pavementing. Neutro-
phils squeeze through the capillary walls, moving toward
the site of inflammation, and within an hour of initiation
of the inflammatory response, neutrophils are active at the
injury site. Neutrophils are followed by monocytes enter-
ing from the bloodstream. Monocytes are poor phago-
cytes, but within 8 to 12 hours after entering the tissues,
they swell, develop large numbers of lysosomes, and be-
come macrophages. Macrophages, which predominate at
sites of chronic inflammation, facilitate the final disposal
of cell debris as acute inflammation subsides.

----- PAGE 163 -----
A creamy, yellow pus may accumulate in the wound.
This is a mixture of dead or dying neutrophils, dead tis-
sue cells, and living and dead pathogens. If the inflamma-
tory mechanism fails to clear the area of debris, the sac of
pus may be walled off by collagen fibers to form an ab-
scess, Surgical drainage of the abscess may be necessary
before healing can occur.

Mediators of Inflammation

Many symptoms associated with disease are caused not di-
rectly by a pathogen, but rather by the body’s response to
the pathogen or by the release of chemical mediators. This
class of substances encompasses a wide range of com-
pounds, produced by many different tissues, that have pro-
found pharmacological effects in very small quantities.

Vasoactive Amines

Produced by mast cells, basophils, and platelets, vasoac-
tive amines are stored ready for release and act via his-
tamine receptors. Vascular smooth muscle is particularly
responsive in tissues that are subject to allergic responses.
Histamine possesses immediate but transient effects that
promote vasodilation of arterioles and increased perme-
ability of capillaries, thus permitting the formation of
exudate.

There are three major types of vasoactive amines.

¢ H1 increases vascular permeability, contraction of
smooth muscle, pulmonary vasoconstriction, chemoki-
nesis of leukocytes, and prostaglandin production in
the lungs.

¢ H2 promotes gastric and mucous secretions, elevates
cAMP levels, increases chemokinesis of leukocytes,
and activates suppressor T cells.

¢ H3 inhibits the synthesis and release of histamine.

Procyanidins from Hypericum ‘perforatum antagonize
histamine-induced arterial contractions.** Inhibition of
cellular phosphodiesterase might be involved in the un-
derlying mechanism of action. In addition to its role as a
neurotransmitter, serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) is
present in platelets and is released after platelet aggrega-
tion. It has inflammatory properties similar to those of
histamine.

Complement and Complement Fragments

The complement system is made up of 20 proteins and
their cleavage products, all of which are found in blood
plasma. (These cleavage products are proteins designated
as C1 through C8 and factors B, D, and P.) They lead to
lysis of microbes, but also play a role in inflammation by

PHARMACOLOGY .@ 155

increasing vascular permeability and vasodilation; en-
hancing leukocyte adhesion, chemotaxis, and activation;
and promoting phagocytosis.

The complement pathway can be activated in two
ways, by either classic or alternate pathways. The classic
pathway is initiated by the binding of an antigen-antibody
complex to the C1 fragment, whereas the alternate path-
way is directly activated by bacterial endotoxins, complex
polysaccharides, or agpregated globulins.

Kinins

Kinins are highly bioactive peptides found in the pancreas
and a variety of other body tissues. (The word kinin
comes from the Greek kallikreas, meaning “pancreas.”)
The two primary groups of kinins, kallidin and brady-
kinin, are derived from precursors called kininogens. They
can cause vasodilation of small arteries, but tend to con-
strict large arteries and most veins regardless of size.
They also increase capillary permeability, edema, and
bronchial and intestinal smooth muscle contractions.
Kinins are powerful pain producers; their release may
have a role in the pathophysiology of migraines.

Arachidonic Acid Metabolites (Eicosanoids)

Because they are derived from the polyunsaturated
eicosanoic (C9) fatty acid known as arachidonic acid,
these compounds—thromboxanes, prostaglandins, epoxy-
genases, leukotrienes, and lipoxins—are collectively
known as ezcosanoids.

The eicosanoids are local mediators of receptor-
dependent events in a range of physiologic processes and
in a diverse group of human pathologies, including
bronchial asthma, inflammation, and coronary disease.
Arachidonic acid is derived from animal fats or through
conversion of linoleic acid from plants. It is bound to cell
membrane phospholipids and released by the action of
cellular phospholipases, which are activated by mechani-
cal, chemical, and physical stimuli.

Platelet-Activating Factors

Platelet-activating factors (PAF) have a remarkably broad
range of effects throughout the body. They are produced
in response to specific stimuli by a variety of cell types, in-
cluding neutrophils, basophils, platelets, and endothelial
cells. Several molecular types of PAF have been identi-
fied. They cause platelet aggregation, release of vasoac-
tive amines (histamine and serotonin), vasoconstriction,
bronchoconstriction, vasodilation (at low concentra-
tions), enhanced venule permeability, increased leuko-
cyte adhesion to endothelia, and leukocyte chemotaxis.

----- PAGE 164 -----
156. @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Acyltransferase

cell membrane

Lyso-PAF/
1-0-alkyl-2 acyl-glycero-
phosphocholine
PAF Impacted by |
Acetyhydrolase PAF Phospholipase A,
Inhibitors

PAF Arachidonic acid

Lyso-PAF
PAF |

Acetyltransferase Cyclooxygenase

Prostaglandin |, -«—— Prostacyclin
synthase

a

Thromboxane synthase

“a

6-keto-prostaglandin F,.,

Thromboxane A, Impacted by
| Cyclooxygenase
Y Inhibitors

Thromboxane B,

'

2,3-dinor-thromboxane B,

Prostaglandin H,

fo Phospholipids from -*——— ESSENTIAL FATTY ACIDS IN DIET

15-HPETE ———# 15-HETE

a”

15-lipoxygenase 12-HPETE ———12-HETE

_ T2-lipoxygenase
eo

5S-HPETE ——— 5-HETE

\

5-lipoxygenase

5-lipoxygenase =-———7»

Leukotriene A,

ao

Leukotriene B. Leukotriene C,

Ny

LeukotrieneD,

'

Leukotriene E,

i

Leukotriene F,

Prostaglandin D, Impacted by
Lipoxygenase

Inhibitors
Prostaglandin E,

Prostaglandin F,.,

Fig. 9.8. The inflammation cascade

‘They also stimulate the synthesis of prostaglandins and
leukotrienes.

Oxygen-Derived Free Radicals

Reactive oxygen metabolites are released from neu-
trophils and macrophages after exposure to chemotactic
agents, immune complexes, or a phagocytic challenge.
Their release leads to endothelial cell damage and in-
creased vascular permeability. These reactive oxygen
metabolites are inactivated by serum antioxidants, such as
superoxide dismutase (SOD).

Nitric. Oxide

Nitric oxide (NO) is a soluble free radical gas generated
by nitric oxide synthases. NO relaxes vascular smooth
muscle, leading to vasodilation. Nitric oxide interacts
with superoxide anions to produce potent peroxynitrite
ions that cause oxidative damage. As nitric oxide and per-
oxynitrite are bactericidal, the ability of macrophages to
produce NO is important in their ability to defend against
some infections. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate, a catechin
contained in green tea, reduces NO production.°*?

Cytokines

Inflammatory responses are coordinated by cytokines de-
rived from various leukocytes and tissue cells. These
polypeptides function as “cellular hormones” or locally
acting cell-to-cell mediators that participate in intricate
networks in order to achieve their effects. Some elicit
early permeability changes in microvasculature, but most
are involved in coordinating the activities of cells essential
to inflammation and repair, including chemoattraction,
activation, secretion, phagocytosis, and proliferative ac-
tions. As examples of the significance of cytokines, con-
sider the pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin 1 and
tumor necrosis factor (INF).

Interleukin 1 (0L1)

¢ Activates prostaglandin production in the hypothalamus
* Mediates pain and fever

¢ Potently activates mast cells, I’ cells, and endothelia

¢ Induces hepatic acute phase protein secretion

* Induces endothelial surface adhesion molecules for
leukocytes

Induces chemokines for leukocyte recruitment

----- PAGE 165 -----
PHARMACOLOGY @ 157

* Induces NO generation by macrophages * Stimulates a variety of cells, including endothelial cells
¢ Produces microvascular injury and hypotensive effects | * Induces synthesis of cell adhesion molecules
* Induces creation of gaps between endothelial cells

Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF) * Induces synthesis and release of prostacyclin 1, (PGI,)
¢ Exerts effects similar to those of interleukin | and acts and PAF
synergistically with it * Increases thrombogenesis in endothelia

Pathways of Arachidonic Acid Metabolism

Arachidonic acid is metabolized via two metabolic pathways.

Cyclooxygenase Pathway

Cyclooxygenase converts arachidonic acid into prostaglandin intermediates, which in turn lead
to the formation of prostaglandins, prostacyclin, and thromboxanes. Prostaglandins are lipids
first isolated from prostate secretions in seminal fluid. Prostacyclin and thromboxanes are related
substances derived from the same intermediate compound. These compounds are produced by
most tissues of the body, but are found primarily in the brain, gastrointestinal tract, kidney, lung,
pancreas, uterus, and human menstrual blood. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
inhibit all products of the cyclooxygenase pathway. Prostaglandins are divided into groups des-
ignated D,, D2, E,, E,, and so on, on the basis of their ring structures.

« Thromboxane A,: Produced by platelets, thromboxane A; is essential for platelet aggregation
and functions as a vasoconstrictor.

© Prostaglandin D,: This prostaglandin constricts the pulmonary veins but dilates renal vasculature.

© Prostaglandin E,: This is a potent vasodilator that towers blood pressure. It generates fever,
causes pain by sensitizing nerve endings, and exerts cytoprotective effects in the gastric mu-
cosa. It is also a bronchodilator. Prostaglandin E, increases luteal progesterone secretion; it
constricts the muscles of the pregnant uterus, but relaxes the nonpregnant uterus.

* Prostacyclin: This prostaglandin intermediate is released by vascular endothelial cells and
exerts its influence via cAMP. It inhibits platelet aggregation, elicits vasodilation, and antago-
nizes the effects of thromboxane A>.

lsozymes, or isoenzymes, are chemically distinct forms of an enzyme that perform the same
biochemical function. Two isozymes of cyclooxygenase are known,

e COX-1: Constitutive cyclooxygenase is found in a variety of tissues, including the.stomach
mucosa.

* COX-2: Inducible cyclooxygenase is released from inflammatory cells only during the inflam-
matory response. Glucocorticoids block the induction of this enzyme.

Lipoxygenase Pathway
Lipoxygenase metabolizes arachidonic acid into compounds that are the basis of leukotrienes.
Leukotrienes are mediators derived from arachidonic acid through a different pathway than that
used in prostaglandin synthesis. A number of plant anti-inflammatory agents appear to work this
way. They are released primarily by anaphylactic mechanisms from mast cells and other in-
flammatory cells, especially in the lung. Like prostaglandins, leukotrienes are synthesized’ as
needed.

NSAIDs inhibit the cyclooxygenase but not the lipoxygenase pathway. Their use may, there-
fore, lead to increased or preferential synthesis of leukotrienes, which could be the basis for the
condition known as aspirin-induced asthma.

----- PAGE 166 -----
158 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

* Induces systemic effects of inflammation, such as fever
* Contributes to the hypotension of septic shock

New technology has allowed for detailed studies on
the interactions of herbs with cytokines. In a study inves-
tigating the immunomodulating and antitumor effects of
saponins from Solidago virgaurea, the compounds demon-
strated mitogenic effects on murine spleen and thymus
cells, as well on human mononuclear cells in vitro. Mice
treated with virgaureasaponin E showed phagocytosis of
bone marrow cells and proliferation of spleen and bone
marrow cells. In addition, TNF-a concentration in blood
increased in treated mice, compared with the control
group.

In another in vitro study, levels of IL1 and TNF pro-
duced by cultured rat Kupffer’s cells were increased in the
presence of an extract of Cordyceps sinensis. Poly-
saccharides from Panax notoginseng induced the produc-
tion of a significant amount of TNF-a in cell cultures.
The lectin known as Viscum album agelutinin-I induced
expression of interleukin 1 @, interleukin 1 B, interleukin 6,
TNF-a, interferon-y, granulocyte-monocyte colony
stimulating factor, and interleukin 10 genes.

Cell Adbesion Molecules

A number of membrane glycoproteins promote cell at-
tachment and participate in the inflammatory response.
Lectin cell adhesion molecules, or selectins, are expressed
on the surface of endothelia, leukocytes, and platelets.
They influence leukocyte-endothelial adhesion at sites of
inflammation. Integrins are adhesion molecules involved
in regulation of cell-matrix and cell-cell adhesion. They
are transmembrane in structure, thus linking or “inte-
grating” exterior or surface stimuli to the internal cell cy-
toskeleton. Baicalein, a flavonoid from Scutellaria baicalen-
sis, inhibited interleukin 1 B and TNF-a and induced
endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule-1 (ELAM-1) and
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 ((CAM-1) expressions.®

Interferon

Lacking the cellular machinery to synthesize proteins,
viruses invade cells and take over metabolic processes in
order to reproduce themselves. The infected cells help
protect uninfected cells by secreting small proteins called
interferons. Interferon molecules diffuse to nearby cells,
stimulating synthesis of other proteins that inhibit or in-
terfere with viral replication in those cells. The protec-
tion conferred by interferons is not virus specific, but
rather host specific. Thus, mouse interferons have little
or no antiviral activity in humans.

Interferon is a group of proteins, each of which has
different physiological effects. Lymphocytes secrete in-
terferon-y, but most other leukocytes produce interferon-
a. In addition to being antiviral, all interferons activate
macrophages, and interferon-y mobilizes natural killer
cells.

While macrophages and natural killer cells act di-
rectly against malignant cells, interferons are assumed to
have some anticancer role. In a study, mistletoe extract,
derived from Viscum album grown on pine trees, stimu-
lated peripheral mononuclear cells in blood from healthy
donors. An increase of interferon-y and interleukin 2 was
also observed.

ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AGENTS

As can be seen from the brief discussion above, the term
inflammation covers a complex series of reparative and
protective responses to tissue injury, whether caused by
infection, autoimmune stimuli, or mechanical injury.
Anti-inflammatory substances must address similar mech-
anisms, but compounds differ in their specific mecha-
nisms of activity because their actions focus upon differ-
ent inflammatory mediators.

Currently used anti-inflammatory agents, such as
NSAIDs, inhibit cyclooxygenase and therefore prosta-
glandin synthesis. These also have antipyretic activity,
since prostaglandins are implicated in the mediation of
fever. Free radical-scavenging agents also play a role in
inflammation, because liberation of such radicals damages
tissue during the inflammatory process. Flavonoids and
other phenolics are thought to act by preventing either
the generation or the action of free radicals. Studies have
shown that quercetin inhibits the action of lipoxygenase
on arachidonic acid, the release of histamine from mast
cells and basophils, and the generation of superoxide
anion.

Phospholipid-Derived Inflammatory
Mediators as Biological Targets

The level of free arachidonic acid at the site of inflamma-
tion is regulated by phospholipases, which hydrolyze
phospholipids, but also by re-esterification catalyzed by
acyl-CoA transferases. The released arachidonic acid may
be metabolized oxidatively by several different enzymatic
routes.

Prostaglandin endoperoxide synthases catalyze the
production of prostaglandin endoperoxides, which can be
converted to prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and prosta-
cyclin. These inflammatory mediators are completely or

----- PAGE 167 -----
partially responsible for increased blood vessel permeabil-
ity, dilation of vessels, chemotaxis of granulocytes, degra-
dation of cartilage, and proliferation of B- and T-lym-
phocytes. Arachidonic acid is further metabolized by
monooxygenases to hydroxy acids and epoxides.

The three main groups of lipoxygenases (15-, 12-,
and 5-lipoxygenases) specifically introduce molecular
oxygen into arachidonic acid and form the hydroperoxy
acids. 5-lipoxygenase also converts 5-hydroperoxy acid to
leukotriene Ay, an intermediate in the biosynthesis of
leukotrienes and lipoxins. The leukotrienes are very po-
tent inducers of granulocyte chemotaxis and are involved
in inflammatory conditions such as asthma.

Upon hydrolysis of membrane-bound phospholipids
by phospholipase A2 (PLA2), lysophospholipids are liber-
ated, forming the precursor to yet another inflammatory
mediator, PAF At the cellular level, PAF causes contrac-
tion of smooth muscle and an increase in vascular perme-
ability and platelet aggregation. It also stimulates exocyto-
sis in both platelets and leukocytes, the secretory process
by which substances contained in vesicles are discharged
from cells by a fusion of the vesicle membrane with the
cell membrane.

Nonsteroidal substances with different biosynthetic
origins have been isolated from plants and shown to
demonstrate inhibitory activity against the target enzymes
cyclooxygenase and 5-lipoxygenase. The most potent cy-
clooxygenase inhibitors are found among the flavonoids,
phenolic phenylpropane derivatives, naphthoquinones,
alkylamides, diaryl heptane derivatives, and tannins.

Among several classes of 5-lipoxygenase inhibitors, a
number of substances with antioxidant properties have
been described, the most dominant of which are phenolic
substances with catechol structures. Another group con-
sists of arachidonic acid analogs and substances related to
long-chain unsaturated fatty acids.

Many potent natural products belonging to different
subclasses have been shown to affect PAF, including the
neolignan kadsurenone, the diterpene group of ginkgo-
lides, and the sesquiterpene manoalide.”

CANCER AND PLANT
CONSTITUENTS

Cancer is a term applied to malignant diseases that affect
many different parts of the body. These diseases are char-
acterized by a rapid and uncontrolled formation of ab-
normal cells, which may mass together to form a growth
or tumor, or proliferate throughout the body, initiating
abnormal growth at other sites. If the process is not ar-

PHARMACOLOGY ce 159

Natural Products with Influence on
Phospholipid-Derived Mediators

Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors
« Flavonoids
« Phenolic phenylpropane derivatives
* Naphthoquinones
« Alkyl amides
¢ ‘Tannins

5-lipoxygenase Inhibitors

* Phenolic structures
* Arachidonic acid analogs
* long-chain unsaturated fatty acids

Dual Inhibitors
* Diary] heptanoids, such as falcarindiol®

PAF ‘Antagonists
¢ Ginkgolides

« Lignans and.neolignans

L

rested, it may progress until it causes the death of the or-
ganism. Cancer is encountered in all higher animals, and
plants also develop growths that resemble cancer.

Carcinogenicity, the process that leads to cancer, is a
complex course of abnormal cell growth and differentia-
tion. At least two stages are recognized: initiation and
promotion. In initiation, a normal cell undergoes irre-
versible changes. During promotion, initiated cells are
stimulated to progress to cancer. Chemicals can act as
both initiators and promoters of cancerous changes.

The initial neoplastic transformation results from the
mutation of the cellular genes that control normal cell
functions. The mutation may lead to abnormal cell
growth, and may cause loss of suppressor genes that usu-
ally restrict abnormal cell growth. Many other factors
may also be involved, including growth factors, immune
suppression, and hormones.

Research is revealing the chemical basis for the repu-
tations of many well-known anticancer remedies and sug-
gesting new possibilities for other plants. The phyto-
chemical examination of plants with a history of
traditional use for cancer often results in the isolation of
principles with antitumor activity. An important survey
lists more than 1,400 genera of plants with a history of use
in cancer treatments,”°"!

----- PAGE 168 -----
160 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

One group of important plant materials used clini-
cally are the alkaloids of Madagascar periwinkle (Catbar-
anthus roseus).”* Research was stimulated by its traditional
use in the treatment of diabetes, but the susceptibility of
the treated test animals to bacterial infection led the re-
searchers to look for possible immunosuppressive effects.
Alkaloids with antileukemic activity were found, and vin-
blastine and vincristine are now used, either alone or in
combination with other therapies, for cancer treatment.
Differences exist among the kinds of tumors that respond
to these alkaloids. Vinblastine is mainly useful in the
treatment of Hodgkin’s disease, a cancer affecting the
lymph glands, spleen, and liver, while vincristine is used
for childhood leukemia.

Cytotoxic agents target cells that are dividing rapidly,
and since cancer cells proliferate faster than most normal
cells, such agents can be toxic to the cancer cells. A wide
variety of phytochemicals are cytotoxic. For example,
many cytotoxic alkaloids have been described, including
aconitine, acronycine, bisindole, camptothecine, colchi-
cine, ellipticine, emetine, maytansine, and pyrrolizidines,
as well as alkaloids from Taxus. Other secondary metabo-
lites demonstrating cytotoxicity include cardenolides,
coumarins, coumarolignans, diterpenes, flavonoids, iri-
doids, lignans, monoterpenes, quinones, sesquiterpenes,
sesquiterpene lactones, and saponins.

The Cell Cycle

‘To appreciate phytochemical-cell interactions, the vari-
ous stages in the life cycle of cells must be taken into ac-
count, including proliferation, differentiation, and cell
death. The cell cycle is an ordered set of events, culmi-
nating in cell growth and division into two daughter cells.
The cell cycle has four phases: G1, S, G2, and M. The S-
stage stands for synthesis. This is the stage in which DNA
replication occurs. The M-stage stands for tosis, and is
when nuclear chromosomes separate and cytoplasmic di-
vision (cytokinesis) occurs.

G] is a time period of quiescence that varies in dura-
tion. During this stage, the cell carries out its normal role
in supporting the life of the organism. If there is a com-
mitment to proliferation, then purines and pyrimidines
(building blocks for DNA synthesis) must be produced.

The cell enters the active reproductive phase of the
cell cycle in the later part of Gl, at which time nu-
cleotides and enzymes are synthesized. In the S-phase,
DNA synthesis occurs, replicating DNA for the new cell.
An enzyme of this system that is particularly vulnerable to
plant chemicals is topoisomerase, which separates the
daughter DNA strands. In the next phase, G2, the cell

prepares other structures needed for mitosis. The M phase
is mitosis itself, in which two daughter cells, which will
subsequently enter the cycle themselves, are produced.

M
(mitosis)

G2
(Gap 2)

Cells that
cease division

S-phase
(ONA
synthesis)

Fig. 9.9. The cell cycle

In a given tissue or tumor, the fraction of cells that
are currently proliferating in the M- or S-phase is called
the growth fraction. The higher the growth fraction, the
faster the tissue is growing. Normal proliferative tissues
have growth fractions of 20% to 30%, whereas the
growth fractions of tumors range from 20% to 70%. The
higher the growth fraction, the more susceptible the
tumor is to chemotherapy. Larger tumors have smaller
growth fractions, one of the reasons they are harder to
combat with chemotherapy.

Cytotoxics target cells with a high growth fraction,
and since cancer cells proliferate faster than most normal
cells, they are the ones most affected. Normal cells with a
high proliferation rate (such as hair follicles, the lining of
the gastrointestinal tract, and bone marrow) suffer the
same consequences, accounting for chemotherapy side ef-
fects such as hair loss, nausea, digestive impairment, im-
munosuppression, and hematologic complications.

Most flavonoids induce G1 arrest in human cancer
cells, and the isoflavone genistein specifically inhibits
their cell cycle at the G2- through M-phases. Apigenin (a
flavone) was found to inhibit the proliferation of B104 rat
neuronal cells by arresting their cell cycle at G2- through
M-phases.”?

Cell cycle-specific agents interrupt the cell cycle
during either the synthesis or the mitosis phase. The
tumor must be growing in order for them to be effective,
as they depend on the presence of cell proliferation to
exert their actions. Thus, S-phase drugs affect DNA syn-
thesis. M-phase drugs affect mitosis or the mitotic spin-
dle, and are used primarily against rapidly proliferating
cancers, such as leukemias, since cells from these cancers
enter the S- or M-phases more frequently than do cells of

----- PAGE 169 -----
slow-growing cancers. (The spindle in a cell is a structure
composed of microtubules along which chromosomes
move during cell division.)

Cell cycle-nonspecific agents interrupt the cell cycle
regardless of which phase the cell is in. They directly
damage DNA and so do not depend on cell proliferation
to exert their effects. Although they can kill any cell, they
still have the greatest effect on proliferating cells, and are
used primarily against slow-growing cancers, such as
most solid tumors.

The Stages of Metastasis

Metastasis is the process by which cancer cells spread to
sites distant from the primary tumor. The process re-
quires that the cancer cells enter the vascular system—in
other words, the lymphatic vessels, veins, and arteries.
Once within the system, the cancer cells are transported
passively to distant sites. In the lymph system, they are
trapped in lymph nodes, which may serve as temporary
barriers. They may enter the blood vessels by extension
from lymph nodes or, more rarely, by passing directly
through the connective tissue sheath surrounding the
lymph nodes. The cancer cells are eventually entrapped
in the smallest branches of blood vessels, the capillaries.
Cancer cells thus trapped are the “seeds” from which
larger colonies of tumor cells grow into secondary sites,
called metastases.

Cell Detachment and Intravasation

Once detached from the primary tumor, cancer cells con-
tact a blood vessel and enzymatically digest the basement
membrane. ‘Tumor cells then slip between vascular en-
dothelial cells to enter the vessel. This process, called
intravasation, is expedited by the weak basement mem-
branes and fragile capillaries that develop during neovas-
cularization. “hus, an intact basement membrane is a
barrier to intravasation.

Detachment may be stimulated by decreased expres-
sion on the cell’s surface membrane of adhesion mole-
cules, which mediate cell-cell and cell-matrix interac-
tions. Examples are cell-surface lectins and lectin-binding
polysaccharides. Polysaccharides may inhibit neoplasia by
directly affecting these adhesion molecules.

Cell Arrest

Cancer cells leave the bloodstream by attaching to a capil-
lary wall, a process known as cell arrest. Cell arrest is pro-
moted by the denuding of the basement membrane, tumor
cell aggregation, platelet aggregation, and thrombus for-
mation, processes that might be impacted with herbs.

PHARMACOLOGY e161

Differentiation

Cancer cells can be thought of as cells that regain the
ability to proliferate. Much work has been done to iden-
tify oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes that are
thought to control this abnormal proliferative state. One
approach to therapy has been to try to induce cells to dif
ferentiate into more specialized cells that will therefore
stop proliferating.

CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC AGENTS

A number of underlying mechanisms have been identified
to explain the activity of chemotherapeutic agents,
whether synthetic or of plant origin.

DNaA- Interactive Agents and
‘Topoisomerase II Inhibitors

These alter DNA structure and interfere with its func-
tions in a number of different ways. One mechanism in-
volves inhibition of the enzyme topoisomerase II. Chromo-
somal DNA exists in a dynamic, three-dimensional
arrangement known as its topologic state. The topo-
isomerases regulate this topologic state, facilitating the
unwinding of the coiled DNA molecules and playing a
critical role in the regulation of DNA replication and
transcription.

Topoisomerase I catalyzes the relaxation of super-
coiled DNA by briefly severing one of the two DNA
strands. Topoisomerase II mediates the passage of one
double-strand DNA segment through another by the for-
mation of a temporary “gate” through both strands of one
segment.

Etoposide and teniposide are semisynthetic lignan
derivatives of podophyllotoxin from the mayapples
Podophyllum hexandrum and P. peltatum, Although not
used clinically, podophyllotoxin is an antimitotic agent
that binds to tubulin. Its derivatives, known as
epipodophyllotoxins, do not affect microtubular assem-
bly at pharmacological concentrations, but act as in-
hibitors of topoisomerase II, stabilizing DNA double-
strand breaks. Cells are prevented from progressing
beyond G2. Etoposide is used in the treatment of small-
cell lung cancer and testicular cancer, and teniposide in
pediatric cancers.

The isoflavone genistein decreases the incidence and
number of tumors in animal models of cancer.” Proposed
mechanisms include inhibition of angiogenesis, interac-
tion with steroid hormone receptors, inhibition of tyrosine
kinase, inhibition of radical oxygen species formation, and
interaction with topoisomerase.’*&’7 Research suggests

----- PAGE 170 -----
162 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

that genistein stabilizes the enzyme-DNA complex in such
a way that both strands are nicked and DNA breaks occur.
This leads to altered gene expression and cell differentia-
tion, with an associated decrease in cell proliferation.”

Microtubules and Tubulin-Interactions
Some molecules damage the cellular machinery neces-
sary for cell division. Tubulin is a protein that polymer-
izes to form microtubules, structural components that
are critical to spindle and aster formation during mitosis,
but that also help maintain cell shape, cellular motility,
attachment, and intracellular transport.”? Inhibition of
tubulin polymerization into microtubules leads to the
disappearance of the spindle.

The target site of action for the vinca alkaloids and
the “taxoids” (natural and synthetic analogs of Taxus alka-
loids) is microtubule formation. The vinca alkaloids vin-
blastine and vincristine, from the Madagascar periwinkle
(Catharanthus roseus), promote microtubule disassembly
by binding to tubulin, stopping mitosis at the
metaphase.*? Taxol (Paclitaxel) is extracted from the bark
of the Pacific yew (Taxus brevifolia), as well as the needles
and stems of other yews. The semisynthetic docetaxel is
derived from baccatin III, found in the needles of the
English yew (Iaxus baccata).

Cells treated in vitro with Paclitaxel form disorga-
nized bundles of microtubules in all phases of the cell
cycle. Cells are either arrested in mitosis or in the G- or
S-phase.®! Taxoids are used in ovarian, breast, and non-
small-cell lung cancer, Response rates have varied from
30% to 70%.”

Hormonal Agents

These inhibit the growth of endocrine-responsive neo-
plastic tissues, either directly through specific receptor
interactions or indirectly through modulation of endoge-
nous hormone metabolism. A variety of hormone ago-
nists and antagonists are used to hamper the growth of tu-
mors that have not yet lost their hormone response
mechanisms. Some flavonoids and isoflavonoids re-
versibly inhibit the growth of certain cancer cells that
contain Type II estrogen-binding sites. The affinity of
flavonoids for these binding sites correlates with their
growth-inhibiting activity.

Biological Response Modifiers

Biological response modifiers directly or indirectly utilize
the immune system to counter cancer or minimize the
side effects of many treatments. They represent an at-

tempt to repair, stimulate, or enhance the immune sys-
tem’s natural anticancer function. Theoretically, biologi-
cal response modifiers may offer ways to make cancer
cells more susceptible to destruction by the immune re-
sponse. They may also alter the growth patterns of cancer
cells to promote behavior similar to that of healthy cells,
block or reverse cancer activity, enhance the body’s ability
to repair cells damaged by chemotherapy or radiation, or
prevent metastases.

A variety of biological response modifiers are being
used clinically. Mycopolysaccharides are currently used in
Japan as biological response modifiers in the treatment of
cancer.

Cytokines and Cancer

Cytokines are regulatory proteins that are released by
cells of the immune system to act as intercellular media-
tors of the immune response. They are thus intimately in-
volved in all cancer stages.

Interleukins

Many interleukins, or regulatory cytokines, have been iden-
tified; interleukin 2 has been the most studied in cancer
treatment. It stimulates the growth and activities of im-
mune cells that destroy cancer cells, such as lymphocytes.
In one study, the flavonoid baicalein, from Seutellaria baica-
lensis, inhibited endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule-
and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 ((CAM-1), the
production of which are induced by IL1f and TNF-o.®*

Tumor Necrosis Factor

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) damages tumor cells and
blood vessels within tumors. Although TNF has antitu-
mor activity in laboratory studies, the dose needed for a
clinical effect is extremely toxic. Taraxacum officinale has
been shown to inhibit the production of TNF-o. from rat

astrocytes.®

Colony-Stimulating Factors

Colony-stimulating factors (CSF) promote bone marrow
cell activity. They have the potential to protect or restore
hematopoietic activity in bone marrow after damage
caused by chemotherapy or radiation. This may stimulate
immune system components and enhance the antitumor
activity of other therapies. CSFs are often used in combi-
nation with high-dose chemotherapy. In a study of the
CSF-inducing activity of Amazonian plants, isoflavone
glycosides from Dalbergia monetaria produced significant
effects.%

----- PAGE 171 -----
Interferons

Interferons have an array of immunomodulating, anti-
neoplastic, and antiviral properties. They are small, solu-
ble proteins generated by cells when infected by RNA- or
DNaA-containing viruses. They may act directly on can-
cer cells by inhibiting their growth or by promoting their
development into cells with more normal behavior. It ap-
pears that some interferons also may stimulate B and T
cells, strengthening the immune system’s overall anti-
cancer function.

The medical use of interferons has been limited by
their associated toxicity. However, another approach in-
volves stimulating the natural cellular sources of interfer-
ons. A number of medicinal plants and constituents have
been shown to stimulate the release of interferons. Garlic
is one such plant, but also one with a role in the treatment
and prevention of cancer that goes far beyond this single
mechanism.®?

Agents That Interfere with Cell Arrest

Treatment of endothelial cells with cytokines induces the
expression of specific leukocyte adhesion molecules on
cell surfaces. A number of flavonoids inhibit cytokine-
induced endothelial cell adhesion protein gene expres-
sion. Since interfering with this process of adhesion may
constitute a therapeutic target, flavonoid-rich plants may
hold promise as cancer treatments.*

Natural Agents That Induce

Differentiation

Some flavonoids can promote the differentiation of un-
differentiated malignant cells into mature phenotypes.
For example, the isoflavone genistein stimulates mouse
erythroleukemia cells to synthesize hemoglobin.*®
Isoflavones have been shown to inhibit proliferation, pro-
mote differentiation, and exert chemopreventive effects.”
Genistein and daidzein are differentiation inducers and
tyrosine protein kinase inhibitors.

Some malignancies may progress because of a block in
differentiation activity; induction of differentiation may be
useful in treating such malignancies. Both plant extracts
and constituents can induce differentiation in human
leukemia, melanoma, colon carcinoma, bladder carci-
noma, and brain cancer, as well as in a variety of mouse
cancer cell lines.°! When these cells are exposed to differ-
entiating agents, they may develop into normal cells, los-
ing the ability to proliferate.

PHARMACOLOGY .2 = 163

Necrosis and Apoptosis

It appears that the primary mechanism by which most
chemotherapeutic agents induce cell death is by causing
damage, especially genetic damage. Death of cancer cells
may occur either as a result of necrosis or of apoptosis.

Necrosis is the process of cell death that occurs in re-
sponse to external events, such as hypoxia (oxygen depri-
vation), chemical exposure, and radiation injury. Cells
swell, become vacuolated, and are finally digested either
by their own enzymes or by the enzymes of neutrophils.
Necrosis generally occurs in contiguous cells and is ac-
companied by an inflammatory response. Many cur-
rently available cancer treatments induce necrosis.

In contrast to necrosis, apoptosis is defined as pro-
grammed cell death, a process that triggers rapid DNA
damage, condensation of chromatin, and fragmentation
of DNA. Apoptosis is an orderly method for removing
old, damaged, or otherwise unwanted cells. The word is
derived from the Greek apo, meaning “apart,” and ptosis,
meaning “fallen.”

In apoptosis, the cell fragments and is phagocytized
by macrophages or neutrophils without causing inflam-
mation, and so adjacent cells are not damaged. Several
chemotherapeutic agents that cause DNA damage also
lead to apoptosis, and it is possible that natural agents
may facilitate this process. Defects in apoptosis may be
implicated in both the initiation and the proliferation of
cancer cells, One possible cause of cancer is that apopto-
sis fails to remove cells with damaged DNA, allowing
them to survive long enough to progress from the initia-
tion stage to the promotion and proliferation stages.”

Plants That Induce Apoptosis

The ability of plants to arrest the proliferation of cancer
cells by influencing apoptosis has been the topic of much
research. Agents that have been found to induce apop-
tosis include extracts of plants like mistletoe (Viscum
album) and Semecarpus anacardium. Isolated compounds
like bryonolic acid, crocin (from saffron), and allicin have
also been found to induce apoptosis and thereby arrest
proliferation. The discovery that Panax ginseng prevents
irradiation-induced apoptosis in hair follicles may have
important therapeutic implications. Soy, garlic, ginger,
green tea, and other herbs suggested by epidemiological
research to reduce the incidence of cancer may do so by
inducing apoptosis.

Apoptosis is a highly conserved mechanism of self-
defense that has also been observed to occur in plants. It

----- PAGE 172 -----
164. = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

is natural to assume that they must contain chemicals
that regulate programmed cell death in their own tissues.
Thus, plants are likely to prove to be important sources
of agents able to modulate programmed cell death in
humans.

Mistletoe and Apoptosis

The European mistletoe (Viscum album), used as adjuvant
cancer therapy, has immunostimulant and cytotoxic ef-
fects. While polysaccharides are immunostimulant,
lectins, such as those in mistletoe, are cytotoxic. Lectins
are proteins that cause agglutination of cells. In vitro
studies show that mistletoe lectins inhibit tumor growth
and cause the DNA in the tumor cells to fragment, as
would be expected in apoptosis. There is evidence that
these lectins cause membrane damage that leads to necro-
sis as well as DNA damage indicative of apoptosis.”

Angiogenesis

A growing tumor induces the development of its own
blood supply, a process called angiogenesis. Angiogenesis
facilitates tumor growth by supplying the tumor with
oxygen and nutrients and providing ready access to the
blood circulation, thus assisting metastasis. This process
is not limited to malignant tumors, as it also occurs in be-
nign tumors, some non-neoplastic diseases, and healthy
tissue during wound healing, ovulation, menstruation,
and pregnancy.

Numerous angiogenic compounds are found
throughout the body, which stimulate angiogenesis only
under specific, but poorly understood, circumstances.
Two ginseng saponins have been shown to possess the
ability to inhibit the metastasis of tumor cells to the lungs.
The researchers hypothesized that the mechanism for this
antimetastatic effect involved antiangiogenic activity as
well as inhibition of adhesion and invasion of tumor
cells.%

Anticarcinogens

A review published in 1992 cites more than 200 studies
that correlate fruit and vegetable intake with protective
effects against various cancers.” Although the vitamins
and minerals in these foods are a factor, nonnutritive
constituents are believed to also play a significant anti-
carcinogenic role.

‘Two mechanisms have been suggested by which such
dietary components may inhibit carcinogenesis: by block-
ing the action of carcinogens or tumor promoters and by
suppressing the evolution of initiated cells.°® Blocking
agents act by at least four mechanisms:

1. Inhibit the metabolism of noncarcinogenic com-
pounds into carcinogenic compounds

2. Induce enzyme systems that detoxify carcinogens

Scavenge free radicals

Prevent tumor promoters from reaching or reacting

with their cellular targets

BY

Brassica and Allium species contain a variety of anti-
carcinogenic substances. Regular consumption of crucif-
erous vegetables (such as cabbage and broccoli) is associ-
ated with reduced rates of colon, lung, and other cancers
in humans. This has led to the hypothesis that cancer may
be a disease of maladaptation to diets that lack a rich va-
riety of these compounds.”

ANTIVIRAL AGENTS

The term antiviral is used in many ways, depending on
what endpoint criteria are used. In theory, an antiviral
compound can work in one of several different manners.
Some exert a direct virucidal effect, inhibiting viral repli-
cation in the infected host. This method of action en-
compasses virucidal agents that kill viruses extracellularly,
as well as the so-called true antivirals that interfere with
specific steps in the viral replication process.

An antiviral compound may also work by interfering
with the virus replication cycle directly, at some stage be-
tween viral adsorption and the emergence of progeny
viruses from the infected cell. Finally, some agents pro-
tect cells from subsequent virus infection through an
interferon-like induction of host antiviral mechanisms.

The effects of a given antiviral compound might be
specific to one virus or have more general activities. No
standard assay for evaluating the antiviral properties of
plants has been developed, and most of the methods in
current use come from chemists, these procedures ‘yield
chemical data without taking bioactivity into account.
Any useful antiviral should be noncytotoxic at effective
concentrations, although cell cultures vary tremendously
in their sensitivities to some compounds, making extrap-
olation difficult.

Plant Extracts with Antiviral Activity

Ethnobotany is bringing many potential antiviral plants
to the attention of the research community. For example,
one study reported on the antiviral activity of 40 different
species used by the Australian Aboriginal people. They
were tested at noncytotoxic concentrations for activity
against human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), Ross River
virus (RRV), and poliovirus type 1. The plants most active

----- PAGE 173 -----
against poliovirus were the aerial parts of Pterocaulon
sphacelatum and the roots of Dianella longifolia. Euphorbia
australis and Scaevola spinescens were the most active
against HCMV. Eremophila latrobei and Pittosporum phylli-
raeoides exhibited activity against RRV.!©°

A range of plant constituents that inhibit different
stages in the replication cycle of viruses has been identi-
fied. A recent review of those that impact replication of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) highlighted the

following constituents. !°!

Table 9.3. Plant Constituents That Inhibit HIV

STEP IN VIRAL REPLICATION CONSTITUENT TYPES

Viral adsorption Chromone alkaloids
Isoquinoline alkaloids
Sulfated polysaccharides
Sulfated polyphenolics
Flavonoids

Coumarins
Phenylpropenoids
Tannins and triterpenes
Lectins

Virus cell fusion

Triterpenes

Reverse transcription Alkaloids
Coumarins
Flavonoids
Phloroglucinols
Lactones
Tannins

lridoids

Triterpenes

Integration Coumarins
Depsidones
O-caffeoyl derivatives

Lignans

Phenolics

PHARMACOLOGY -2 165

STEP IN VIRAL REPLICATION CONSTITUENT TYPES
Proteolytic cleavage Saponins
(protease inhibition)
Xanthones
Coumarins
Glycosylation Indolizidine alkaloids
Piperidines
Pyrrolizidines
Assembly/release Naphthodianthrones
Photosensitizers

Phospholipids

ANTIOXIDANTS AND FREE RADICAL
SCAVENGERS

Although oxygen is essential for life, breathing pure oxy-
gen at atmospheric pressure for longer than 48 hours will
lead to respiratory distress and death. This toxicity is not
caused by oxygen per se, but rather by highly reactive ions
produced from oxygen. Under normal conditions, these
reactive molecules are produced by the body (and indeed
are part of normal metabolism), but their rate of produc-
tion does not exceed the capacity of cells to catabolize
them. When their production exceeds the capacity of the
body’s natural defenses, a variety of diseases can occur,
such as cancer, stroke, and neurodegeneration.

Of course, animals are not the only living beings that
utilize antioxidants. The enzyme ascorbate peroxidase,
for example, prevents oxidative damage in plants, espe-
cially in nitrogen-fixing root nodules, by scavenging cel-
lular hydrogen peroxide. The growing root nodules of al-
falfa (Medicago sativa) contain elevated levels of this
antioxidant, as well as its corresponding mRNA transcript
and substrate. High levels of antioxidants found in these
nodules are indicative of their role in plants and ani-
mals.!°

Thus, the fact that antioxidant compounds can be ex-
pected to be present in plants has led to much research
activity. As an example, a 1995 paper reported on the re-
sults of testing for superoxide anion-scavenging effects in
65 plant extracts. Of these, horse chestnut (Aesculus bip-
‘pocastanum) and witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana) were
found to have strong scavenging and protective activities
against cell damage induced by active oxygen, leading the
researchers to propose potential applications for these
plants as antiaging or antiwrinkle treatments for the skin.'

----- PAGE 174 -----
166 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Chemical reactions involving radicals are central to
the maintenance of homeostasis. They play a fundamen-
tal role in physiological processes, such as oxidative trans-
formation reactions mediated by cytochrome P459, enzy-
matic oxidation reactions, oxidative phosphorylation,
smooth muscle tone regulation, and elimination of mi-
croorganisms. However, excessive generation of free rad-
icals can damage tissue, so cells have a range of biochem-
ical defense systems designed to safeguard them against
such damage. When the generation of pro-oxidants over-
whelms the capacity of antioxidant systems, oxidative stress
ensues. This in turn may cause tissue damage and subse-
quent pathophysiological events.

Free Radicals

A free radical is an atom or molecule that contains a sin-
gle unpaired electron. This condition makes the molecule
extremely reactive and causes the formation of molecular
links that normally would not occur.

The term reactive oxygen species (ROS) describes oxy-
gen-centered radicals, such as superoxide (O,) and hy-
droxyl (OH), as well as nonradical species derived from
oxygen, such as hydrogen peroxide (H,0,), singlet oxy-
gen, and hypochlorous acid (HOCI). The concept of
species in chemistry has nothing to do with the biological
use of that term, but refers instead to a chemical entity,
such as a radical, ion, molecule, or atom.

Damage done by free radicals in the body includes
peroxidation of membrane lipids, oxidative damage to nu-
cleic acids and carbohydrates, and oxidation of susceptible
groups in proteins. They also appear to initiate and pro-
mote carcinogenesis. An involvement of ROS in aging
and in many chronic diseases has been proposed.

Causes of Free Radical Production in the Body
* Cellular respiration

* Trace element metabolism

* Radiation

© Pollution

* Cell death and tissue injury

° Toxins

© Xenobiotics (chemical pollutants)
* Immune system activation

¢ Inflammation

© Reperfusion injury

¢ Metabolism

¢ Diet

Lipids

Lipids are hydrophobic compounds, some of which are
integral to the structure of membranes and the regulation
of membrane fluidity. Unsaturated fatty acids are particu-
larly susceptible to attack by hydroxyl free radicals, a pro-
cess that generates the formation of lipid peroxides.
Peroxidation of unsaturated fatty acids alters the structure
of the cell membrane, thereby disturbing normal mem-
brane function.

Protein oxidation enhances the metabolic breakdown
of membranes and has major deleterious effects on nor-
mal function, especially if oxidation occurs at a crucial
area of structure, such as the active site of the enzyme
molecule. Thus, the defense provided by antioxidant sys-
tems is critical to survival.

MECHANISMS OF ANTIOXIDANT
PROTECTION

A number of mechanisms diminish the harmful effects of
oxidants in the cell. These mechanisms are generally suf-
ficient to maintain homeostasis, because free radicals are
fairly easily controlled under normal conditions.
However, when these defense mechanisms are over-
whelmed and the cell enters a state of oxidative stress, a
wide variety of diseases can result. Detoxification of ROS
in the cell is provided by both enzymic and nonenzymic
systems that constitute the antioxidant defense systems. A
third important antioxidant system is the body’s use of
metal chelators to block the formation of free radicals.

Enzymic Systems

Some enzymic systems, such as superoxide dismutase
(SOD) and catalase, act specifically against ROS, while cer-
tain other enzyme systems reduce the sulfur-containing
thiols.

Superoxide dismutase is present in cytosol and mitochondria.

Catalase, a highly reactive enzyme found in peroxisomes,
breaks down hydrogen peroxide to oxygen and water.

Glutathione peroxidase (one of the few enzymes found in
humans that require selenium for its activity) occurs in
the mitochondria and cytosol and reduces organic hy-
droperoxides and hydrogen peroxide.

Sulfhydryl Compounds and Glutathione

Many thiols exist in the body, either in a free state, as free
dimers, or covalently linked to a protein. Thiols, inchud-
ing sulfhydryl compounds and glutathione, are very effi-
cient reducing agents.

----- PAGE 175 -----
Glutathione (g-glutamylcysteinylglycine, or GSH)
is a sulfhydryl antioxidant, antitoxin, and enzyme cofac-
tor found ubiquitously in living systems. Adequate cel-
lular concentrations of glutathione maintain a strong re-
ducing environment. GSH detoxifies hydrogen peroxide
in a reaction catalyzed by glutathione peroxidase and
also participates in the transport of amino acids across
cell membranes.

Nonenzymic Systems

Nonenzymic antioxidants are less specific and may be
water-soluble or lipid-soluble, depending on their sites of
action in the cell membranes. These compounds react
with free radicals without generating further radical pro-
duction, and so scavenge and quench various other radi-
cals in addition to ROS. A variety of such antioxidants
with a range of different structures exist.

Vitamin C

Ascorbic acid, or vitamin C, is an essential compound for
human health and is a universal component of plant cells.
Tt is a reducing agent, involved in hydroxylation reactions
and other redox (oxidation-reduction) reactions, and is
capable of chelating metals. Ascorbic acid protects other
antioxidants, such as vitamin A, vitamin E, and essential
fatty acids, from oxidative damage.

Vitamin C and flavonoids coexist in plants and are
eaten together in the diet. Flavonoids possess antioxidant-
dependent, vitamin C-sparing activities. They are also
known to increase the absorption of vitamin C.

Flavonoids and Polyphenols
Many plant constituents scavenge free radicals.
Polyphenols, especially flavonoids, are very efficient rad-
ical scavengers. As discussed in chapter 7, flavonoids con-
sist of structurally similar compounds that differ only in
the degree of ring substitution, the type of substitution,
and the type and degree of glycosylation.

Phagocytic white blood cells, such as monocytes,
neutrophils, eosinophils, and macrophages, all generate
ROS. Radical production by phagocytes is an important
part of their bactericidal and antitumor functions, as
phagocytosis is accompanied by an increase in oxygen
consumption (called the respiratory burst) with an atten-
dant production of oxygen ions. These highly reactive
oxygen metabolites promote inflammation, causing tissue
damage. In addition to scavenging radicals, flavonoids can
inhibit the formation of these oxygen ions.

Dietary exposure to flavonoids is significant, The av-

PHARMACOLOGY @ 167

erage diet in the United Kingdom and the United States
may contain up to | gram of mixed flavonoids per day, far
exceeding the content of vitamin E, a monophenolic an-
tioxidant, and of 6-carotene. Chemically, they are typical
phenolics that act as potent metal chelators, free radical
scavengers, and powerful antioxidants.

Antioxidant Functions of Flavonoids
Metal chelators and reducing agents

* Scavengers of ROS

Chain-breaking antioxidants

* Quenchers of singlet oxygen formation

Enzyme Systems Modified by Flavonoids!

Aldose reductase

Aromatase

Cyclooxygenase

Cytochrome Pysq

Dependent mixed-function oxidases

Epoxide hydrolase

Glutathione

Lipoxygenases

Myeloperoxidase

Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)
oxidase

Nucleotide phosphodiesterases

Ornithine decarboxylase

Phospholipase A)

Phospholipase C

Protein kinase C

Protein tyrosine kinase

Reverse transcriptase

Several adenosine triphospatases (ATPases)

Sialidase

Transferase

Various other kinases

Xanthine oxidase

Some of these enzyme systems are pivotal to im-
mune function, the cell cycle, tumor growth, and cancer
cell metastasis. The antioxidant function and enzyme-
modifying actions of flavonoids may account for many of
their pharmacological activities.

Coenzyme Qi

Coenzyme Qio (also called ubiquinone because it is ubiqui-
tous in-all biological systems) is an essential part of the cel-
lular respiratory chain, the components of which are phys-
ically located in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion.

----- PAGE 176 -----
168 «> INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Vitamin A and Related Compounds

Vitamin A is formed in the intestine from its precursor,
f-carotene. B-carotene and the carotenoids as a whole are
abundant in green plants, carrots, and other orange and
yellow vegetables. Vitamin A and other carotenoids are
effective radical scavengers. The carotenoids lutein and
lycopene are both found in tomatoes, but lycopene also
occurs in the florets of Calendula officinalis.

Vitamin E

Vitamin E is made up of a group of eight naturally occur-
ring compounds called tocopherols. Tocopherols are
highly active free radical scavengers that protect unsatu-
rated membrane lipids from oxidation.

Metal Chelators

The third approach to protecting against oxidative dam-
age is to try to prevent the formation of free radicals in
the first place. Metals such as iron and copper can cause
the formation of free radicals. However, if these metals
are bound, which effectively removes them from solution,
radical formation can be prevented. In the body, iron is
stored as ferritin and is transferred around the body as
transferrin or lactoferrin. Iron is also associated with other
proteins (hemoglobin, myoglobin, ferredoxin) and is al-
ways tightly bound. Copper is transported around the
body as ceruloplasmin.

Exogenous Antioxidants in Food

Free radical production also occurs outside of the body.
Free radicals in food can destroy vitamins, reducing their
nutritional value; damage pigments, causing bleaching;
and change aromas and flavors. The addition of antioxi-
dants to foods to prevent rancidity and prolong shelf life
has long been common practice. A variety of antioxidants
are used in foods, but tertbutylhydroxyanisole (BHA) and
tertbutylhydroxytoluene (BHT) are two of the most

common.

PLANTS AND THE
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM

The green world furnishes many important cardiovascu-
lar medicines. A 1998 review describes more than 700
secondary plant metabolites known to exhibit some kind
of cardiovascular activity.!®

The cardiac glycosides digoxin and lanatoside C from
Digitalis and ouabain from Strophanthus have a positive in-
otropic effect on the heart and are the drugs of choice for
congestive heart failure. The anticoagulants dicoumarol

and other coumarin derivatives were developed from
plant sources. The alkaloid ergotamine is a vasoconstric-
tor used in the treatment of severe vascular headache;
alkaloids from Veratrum and Rauvolfia species are anti-
hypertensive; and tannins, which occur in many plant
species, are hemostatic. Quinidine, from Cinchona bark,
was the main antifibrillatory agent in clinical practice
until the advent of modern antiarrhythmic drugs and is
still used today.

A substance may effect the activity of the heart in a
variety of different ways. Table 9.4 correlates some of
these actions with the characteristic actions of plant com-
pounds. Some classes of substances, like cardiac glyco-
sides, sympathomimetics, and beta-blockers, appear sev-
eral times, as they exert several different types of activities
on the heart.

Table 9.4. Cardiovascular Activities of Plant
Compounds

ACTIVITY DEFINITION CONSTITUENT

ositive inotropic Increase contractility Cardiac glycosides
legative inotropic Decrease contractility Beta-blockers
ositive chronotropic Increases cardiac frequency Ephedrine
sympathomimetics)

Negative chronotropic Decrease cardiac frequency Cardiac glycosides
ositive dromotropic _ Increases flow rate Caffeine
sympathomimetics)

legative dromotropic Decrease flow rate Cardiac glycosides

Antiarrhythmic Eliminates cardiac arrhythmias Quinidine
Coronary dilating Dilate coronary arteries Flavonoids,
theophylline

Cardiac Glycosides

Cardiac glycosides improve the efficiency of the heart
muscle without increasing its need for oxygen. This en-
ables the heart to pump adequate amounts of blood
around the body and ensures that no fluid builds up in the
lungs or extremities. That sounds wonderful, as indeed it
is, but there is a drawback. Because the solubility and re-
moval rates of cardiac glycosides tend to be low, the pos-
sibility exists for high levels of glycosides to accrue in the
body. This is the main disadvantage with foxglove
(Digitalis spp.) and explains why it is potentially poisonous

----- PAGE 177 -----
unless used with appropriate skill and knowledge con-
cerning monitoring of blood levels.

Cardiac glycosides appear to be confined to an-
giosperms. Cardenolides are the most common and are
particularly abundant in Apocynaceae and Asclepia-
daceae. The bufanolides occur in some Liliaceae plants,
such as squill (Urginea maritima), and in some
Ranunculaceae.

Table 9.5. Plants Containing Cardiac Glycosides

PLANT FAMILY GENERA

Apocynaceae Acocanthera, Adenium, Apocynum, Carissa,

Cerbera, Nerium, Strophanthus, Thevetia, Urechites

Asclepiadaceae Asclepias, Calotropis, Cryptostegia, Menabea,

Pachycarpus, Periploca, Xysmalobium
Liliaceae Bowiea, Convallaria, Ornithogalum, Rhodia, Urginea

Ranunculaceae Adonis, Helleborus

Moraceae Antiaris, Antiaropsis, Castilla
Brassicaceae Cheiranthus, Erysimum
Sterculiaceae Mansonia

Tiliaceae Corchorus

Celastraceae Euonymus

Fabaceae Coronilla

Scrophulariaceae Digitalis

PHARMACOLOGY © 169

The pharmacological effect of cardiac glycosides is
dependent on both the aglycones and the sugar attach-
ments. The inherent activity resides in the aglycones, but
the sugars render the compounds more soluble and in-
crease the power of fixation of the glycosides to the heart
muscle.

The number of different effects produced by the
Digitalis glycosides complicates our understanding of
their overall action, and their exact mode of action on
myocardial muscle is still under investigation. Digitalis
probably competes with potassium ions for specific re-
ceptor enzyme (ATPase) sites in the cell membranes of
cardiac muscle and is particularly successful during the
depolarization phase of the muscle, when there is an in-
flux of Na ions.

The clinical effect of digitalis glycosides in cases of
congestive heart failure is increased force of myocardial
contraction. Because of their vagus effects, the digitalis
glycosides are also used to control atrial arrhythmias. The
diuretic action of Digitalis arises from the improved cir-
culatory effect.

Nonsteroidal Cardioactive Plant
Constituents
Although orthodox medicine makes much use of cardiac
glycosides of plant origin, the search continues for new
active substances that provide either better therapeutic
indices or different types of activity. In addition to plants
such as hawthorn (Crataegus spp.) and garlic (Allium
sativum), in vitro studies suggest other remedies new to
the West.

The isolation of forskolin from Coleus forskohlii shows
that the plant kingdom continues to offer medicine new

Cardiotonic or Cardioactive?

In a strictly technical sense, the pharmacological term cardiotonic is synonymous with “posi-
tive inotropic.” In pharmacology, the word cardiotonic is used not only to describe agents that
increase contractility, but also to indicate an increase in frequency, an increase in the beat vol-
ume, or a general increase in cardiac performance.

In the phytotherapeutic literature, however, slightly different terminology is used. Here,
cardioactive plants are those that owe their effects on the heart to cardiac glycosides or other
very active substances; they thus possess both the strengths and the drawbacks of these con-
stituents. An example is Digitalis (foxglove). Cardiotonic plants, on the other hand, are those
that have an observable beneficial action on the heart and blood vessels but contain no
cardiac glycosides, such as Crataegus (hawthorn). The mechanisms behind their actions are

obscure and constitute a subject of considerable pharmacological debate.

----- PAGE 178 -----
170 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

and potent cardiac agents. Forskolin is a labdane diter-
penoid with antihypertensive, positive inotropic, an-
tiplatelet, and adenylate cyclase-activating properties. As
discussed earlier in this chapter, the activation of adeny-
late cyclase results in increased levels of intracellular
cyclic AMP (cAMP).

Coleus forskoblii and forskolin lower blood pressure
and improve the contractility of the heart muscle, making
this herb relevant in the treatment of hypertension, con-
gestive heart failure, and angina. These actions are related
to an increase in cAMP levels throughout the cardiovas-
cular system, which results in relaxation of the arteries
and increased force of contraction. The net effect is an
improvement in many cardiovascular functions.

Several studies suggest that forskolin may signifi-
cantly lower blood pressure. In one clinical study involv-
ing seven patients with dilated cardiomyopathy, forskolin
improved Jeft ventricular function, primarily by reducing
pre-load, without raising metabolic costs.!° (Pre-load is
the tension in the heart muscle at the end of the diastolic
phase, just before the contraction.) The study also
showed that forskolin increased the contractile force of
heart muscle. These results indicate that forskolin may
best be used in congestive heart failure in combination
with other cardiotonic botanicals, such as Crataegus.

A number of classes of nonsteroidal substances with
cardiovascular effects have been identified, including
phenylalkylamines, indole derivatives, tetrahydroiso-
quinolines, imidazoles and purines, diterpenes, sesquiter-
penes, flavonoids, and other phenolic compounds. Here
we shall focus briefly on those found in the primary car-
diovascular herbal remedies.

Phenalkylamines

This class of alkaloids was the model for the development
of sympathomimetic drugs. The main representative is
L-ephedrine, first found in ma huang (Ephedra sinica).
Since ephedrine has other, more prominent activities, its
action on the heart is often considered a side effect.
Ephedrine and its relatives have been found in plants in
the families Portulacaceae, Rutaceae, Cactaceae,
Amaryllidaceae, Moraceae, Musaceae, and Rosaceae.
These include numerous food plants, such as citrus fruits,
bananas (Musa spp.), and purslane (Portulaca oleracea).
Synephrine occurs in the fruit of the mandarin orange
(Citrus reticulata). Cathinone, from khat (Catha edulis),
shows strong positive inotropic activity, contributing to
the cardiac stimulant activity of khat leaves.
Phenylethylamines, which constitute a subgroup of
phenylalkylamines, are widely distributed in Cactaceae,

Rosaceae, Rutaceae, and Fabaceae. The prototype of this
group is tyramine, which at high concentrations shows
positive inotropic activity. Strong positive inotropic activ-
ity is also displayed by N-methyltyramine, hordenine, and
p-methoxyl-B-phenethylamine, all of which have been
found in hawthorn flowers. This group is also found in
night-blooming cereus (Selenicereus grandiforus), a favorite
remedy of the early American Eclectic and Physio-
medicalist physicians for cardiac insufficiency and angina
pectoris. The cardiovascular action of Viburnum species
may also be related to the presence of tyramine, which has
been found in VY odoratissimum and V. opulus. Tyramine
and p-methoxyl-6-phenethylamine have also been found
in Viscum album.

Other Nitrogen-Containing Compounds
Methylcanadine from prickly ash (Zanthoxylum spp.) and
sanguinarine from bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis) pos-
sess positive inotropic activity. The lupine alkaloid
sparteine possesses specific antiarrhythmic activity and is
found in Scotch broom (Gytisus scoparius).

Cyclic AMP also possesses inotropic properties and is
widely distributed in the plant kingdom. In view of the
low concentrations of cAMP found so far in plants,
pharmacologists exclude a cardiotonie role for cAMP-
containing plant extracts. Such conclusions might stem
from a too narrow interpretation clouded by a “magic
bullet” perception of biochemistry. From a synergistic
perspective, all the constituents in a plant work together
to produce its healing effects.

Flavonoids and Other Phenolics
Comprehensive investigations and reviews have been
published on the cardioactivity of Crataegus. The main
active principles in this plant are thought to be flavonoids
and procyanidin oligomers. The evidence suggests that
the flavonoids impact the heart via inhibition of cellular
phosphodiesterase and elevation of cellular cAMP con-
centration, as well as by affecting the permeability of cell
organelles to calcium ions. Please see chapter 14 for more
information on this remarkable plant.
Phosphodiesterase-inhibitory action is not limited to
flavonoids. Some lignans are potential phosphodiesterase
inhibitors, and the cardiotonic action of mistletoe (Viscum
album) can probably be attributed to lignan content.

Cholesterol- and Lipid-Lowering Activity

High serum levels of cholesterol and triglycerides (a con-
dition known as hyperlipidemia) are important risk factors
in the development of coronary heart disease (CHD).

----- PAGE 179 -----
Cholesterol is an essential component of cell membranes
and a metabolic intermediate in the synthesis of steroid
hormones and bile salts. Some cholesterol is obtained
from the diet (about 25%) and the rest is manufactured by
the liver. However, elevated levels in serum may be a re-
sult ofthigh dietary intake, a condition known as exogenous
hyperlipidemia, or secondary hyperlipidemia.

Endogenous hyperlipidemia, also called primary or fa-
milial hyperlipidemia, is a disorder of cholesterol
metabolism that may be caused by genetic factors. This is
much less common than exogenous hyperlipidemia.
Diseases such as diabetes mellitus, gout, hypothyroidism,
obstructive jaundice, cirrhosis of the liver, and renal fail-
ure can cause secondary hyperlipidemia.

Fat from the diet is absorbed into the bloodstream
and transported in the form of lipoproteins. These are
classified according to their density, for example, low den-
sity lipoprotein (LDL) or high density lipoprotein
(HDL). Triglycerides are saturated fatty acids that are
found in the bloodstream with normal blood levels be-
tween 10 and 150 milligrams per deciliter. Their levels in
serum used to classify primary hyperlipidemias. Elevated
serum cholesterol ‘per se is not the only indicator of
atherosclerosis. In certain disorders, cholesterol levels
may remain fairly normal while triglyceride levels rise. It
is preferable, therefore, to always measure levels of each
lipoprotein fraction, especially LDL, all of which contain
cholesterol.

The mechanisms of action of drugs used to treat pri-
mary and secondary hyperlipidemia may involve inhibi-
tion of cholesterol synthesis in the liver. Some drugs, such
as bezafibrate, suppress endogenous cholesterol and
triglyceride synthesis and stimulate catabolism via systemic
lipoprotein and hepatic lipases. The omega-3 polyunsatu-
rated fatty acids found in fish and flaxseed oils act by in-
creasing lipoprotein lipase activity as well as by inhibiting
the synthesis of very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) in
the liver. VLDL is a lipoprotein that acts as a carrier for
cholesterol and fats in the bloodstream. Elevation of
VLDL in the bloodstream is associated with an increased
risk of atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease.

Food and medicinal plants are both important in the
dietary control of hyperlipidemia. Garlic (Allium sativum)
is one plant that might be described as both food and
medicine. Another herbal food that lowers serum choles-
terol is fenugreek seed (Trigonella foenum-graecum), which
is used as a condiment. Other naturally occurring hy-
polipidemics include khellin, from Ammi visnaga, and
gugpulsterone, from Commiphora mukul.

Several clinical studies have shown that complex car-

PHARMACOLOGY .& = 171

bohydrates, such as oat bran, guar gum, and carob gum,
also lower serum cholesterol levels; however, these con-
clusions are now being questioned, because diets that
contain these substances are also usually low in fat.
Complex carbohydrates may work by inhibiting fat ab-
sorption rather than through a direct pharmacological ef-
fect. Antioxidants with free radical scavenging ability, such
as flavonoids, have demonstrated cholesterol-lowering
activities in models of experimental hyperlipidemia. The
mechanism of action here is due in part to inhibition of
lipid peroxidation, but other factors that affect cholesterol
control mechanisms may also be involved.

Hypertension and Hypotensive Agents

More than 35 million Americans have Aypertension, or
high blood pressure. For unknown reasons, the occur-
rence of the disorder is twice as high in African Americans
as Caucasians. While hypertension is a common problem
in our culture, it is rare in those that remain relatively un-
touched by the western lifestyle. Lifestyle plays a major
role in causing and perpetuating hypertension. Thus, di-
etary, psychological, and social factors must all be ad-
dressed before any real change can occur.

A distinction must be made between elevated blood
pressure with no obvious medical cause, known as primary
or essential hypertension, and hypertension caused by an
underlying pathology, such as kidney, endocrine, or cere-
bral disease, which is called secondary hypertension. For the
purposes of this discussion, we will focus on essential
hypertension.

Hypertension typically causes no symptoms until
complications arise, in which case symptoms can include
dizziness, flushed face and skin, headache, fatigue, epis-
taxis (nosebleed), and nervousness. These symptoms may
all be caused by other conditions as well, making it diffi-
cult to diagnose hypertension by symptoms alone.

Diagnosis must be based on a finding that both sys-
tolic and diastolic blood pressure are usually (but not al-
ways) higher than normal, and other causes of symptoms
must be excluded. In general, hypertension is indicated by
a blood pressure measurement higher than 140/90 mm
Hg. However, “normal” blood pressure varies among in-
dividuals, and thus normal should always be viewed in
terms of a range, as opposed to a specific measurement.
Observable changes in retinal blood vessels are diagnostic
indicators of the degree of damage caused to the body by
the hypertension.

Screening for antihypertensive effects in traditional
medicines has been performed over many years, and sev-
eral animal models have been utilized.!”

----- PAGE 180 -----
172. @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Calcium Channel Blockers

Calcium (Ca) antagonistic drugs are widely used in the
treatment of cardiovascular disorders, such as angina pec-
toris, myocardial infarction, atherosclerosis, and hyper-
tension. Even though currently used calcium channel
blockers have different chemical structures and sites of
action, they all inhibit the transmembrane influx of cal-
cium ions (Ca**) through voltage-dependent Ca channels.
These are transmembrane ion channels whose permeabil-
ity to ions is extremely sensitive to the transmembrane
voltage difference. This action reduces smooth muscle
contractility and vascular resistance, resulting in lowered
blood pressure.

Ca antagonists influence many functions, including
muscle contraction, gland secretion, platelet cell activity,
changes in gene expression, and the release of transmit-
ters. However, their main therapeutic influence is on the
function of the heart and blood circulation. Ca channel
blockers are coronary artery dilators that reduce periph-
eral vascular resistance and hence reduce the cardiac
workload. They inhibit Ca’* influx through voltage-
sensitive Ca?* channels and may therefore slow the early
rise in cytosolic Ca’*. They are energy-sparing drugs that
slow the rate of ATP exhaustion, and may also protect
against lipid peroxidation.

The three main groups of prescription Ca channel
blockers are dihydropyridines, benzodiazepines, and
phenylalkylamines. These include many common com-
pounds used in therapy, such as nifedipine, diltiazem, and
verapamil.

In recent years, various plant constituents have
shown apparent Ca channel-blocking activity in in vitro
screening models.! A recent review of Ca antagonists
isolated from plants suggests that many have activity
comparable to that of compounds currently used in ther-
apy.'°? However, even though ion channel modulators are
important drugs, they appear to constitute a neglected
area as far as natural product screening is concerned.

Table 9.6. Plant Sources of Calcium Channel
Blockers

CONSTITUENT TYPE EXAMPLE
Terpenoids
Monoterpenes Menthol, menthofuran

Sesquiterpene lactones Gossypol, santonin

CONSTITUENT TYPE EXAMPLE
Hydrocarbon derivatives
Garlic compounds Allicin
Phenolic ketones Eugenol, apiol

Coumarins
Hydroxycoumarins Coumarin, umbelliferone

Furanocoumarins Bergapten, psoralen

Pyranocoumarins Visnadin
Chromones Khellin
Naphthoquinones Juglone, plumbagin
Lignans Eudesmin
Alkaloids Sanguinarine
ACE Inhibitors

Inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) is
another important option in the control of hypertension.
ACE is a hydrolase enzyme that cleaves biologically inac-
tive angiotensin I to form active angiotensin IT. Angio-
tensin II causes contraction of vascular smooth muscle
and thus raises blood pressure and stimulates aldosterone
release from the adrenal glands. Drugs that inhibit ACE
are used to treat hypertension and congestive heart fail-
ure. The renin-angiotensin system, which consists of
renin, ACE, and angiotensin II, is pivotal to renal and
cardiovascular homeostasis. Renin is an enzyme produced
in the kidney that acts on angiotensinogen to form an-
giotensin I. ACE is believed to be the rate-limiting step in
angiotensin II formation by the renin-angiotensin system.
Two kinds of renin-angiotensin systems exist.

1. A circulating endocrine renin-angiotensin system is
responsible for short-term cardio-renal homeostasis.

2. Local renin-angiotensin systerns are present in
many tissues and exert influences on local functions.
The tonic control of vascular resistance and local
tissue function (e.g., in the kidney) is influenced by
the intrinsic tissue renin-angiotensin system.

An in vitro assay for the detection of ACE inhibitors
in plant extracts has been developed. Researchers have
identified a number of plants that contain such com-
pounds, including Adium ursinum, Amelanchier. ovalis,
Cistus clusii, and Lespedeza capitata.!!° They have also iso-

----- PAGE 181 -----
lated three classes of compounds with potential ACE-
inhibitory activity: flavonoids, procyanidins, and peptides.!!!
However, the presence of a strong ACE inhibitor
does not necessarily imply that a plant is a potent antihy-
pertensive drug. For example, some flavonoids show ac-
tivity in vitro because they generate chelate complexes
within the active center of ACE.'! It is also important to
remember that a negative screen for ACE-inhibitory ac-
tion does not mean that the plant species will not work as
an antihypertensive drug, as compounds that influence
other hypotensive mechanisms could well be present.

Inhibition of cAMP. Phosphodiesterase

Another approach to finding new antihypertensive agents
looks for substances that inhibit levels of intracellular
cAMP. Such compounds mediate cardiac contractility by
increasing the levels of cAMP or by inhibiting its
metabolism. These include B-adrenergic agonists, adeny-
late cyclase activators (such as forskolin from Coleus
forskobli), and phosphodiesterase inhibitors.

When stimulated, the adenylate cyclase enzyme con-
verts adenosine triphosphate (ATP) into cAMP. This sec-
ond messenger initiates a series of phosphorylation reac-
tions by protein kinases, which mediate the influx of
extracellular Ca2* and the release of stored calcium ions
by the sarcoplasmic reticulum. A phosphodiesterase III
enzyme then inactivates cAMP by converting it into the
inert 5’adenosine monophosphate (5’AMP). It is likely
that increases in intracellular CAMP may be the result of
increases in levels of prostacyclin.

A number of lignans inhibit cAMP phosphodi-
esterase activity. In studies of structure-activity relation-
ships, three classes of lignans have received the most at-
tention: dibenzylbutyrolatones, tetrahydrofurans, and
furanofurans. Furanofuran lignans with this activity have
been isolated from olive (Olea spp.), ash (Fraxinus spp.),
and the traditional Chinese tonic herb Excommia ulmoides.

Platelet Function and Cardiovascular
Disease

Platelets (anuclear cells present in large numbers in the
blood) are involved in a range of cardiovascular diseases.
Inactivated platelets do not adhere to one other or to vas-
cular endothelium. However, they adhere to subendothe-
lial surfaces (adhesion) and to each other (aggregation) at
sites of vascular injury. During the process of activation,
platelets secrete various substances, such as adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) and thromboxane A), which cause
further aggregation and accelerate the coagulation pro-
cess. Unfortunately, adhesion, aggregation, and secretion,

PHARMACOLOGY .» 173

the primary events in the arrest of bleeding, can also lead
to the deposition of platelet thrombi in blood vessels and
on heart valves.

It is now generally accepted that blood platelets are
involved in the genesis of many cardiovascular diseases,
including stroke, myocardial infarction, diabetic vascular
disorders, and atherosclerosis.

Platelet Aggregation

When platelets interact with certain substances, or when
they adhere to a damaged vessel wall, aggregation may
occur. Initially reversible, aggregation may progress to a
second, irreversible aggregation, during which various ac-
tive substances are released. Platelets may be activated
through exposure to a number of substances, including:

¢ Hormones (such as adrenaline and vasopressin)

* Autacoids, including adenosine diphosphate (ADP)

¢ Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine)

* Eicosanoids

¢ Platelet activating factor (PAF)

* Blood coagulation and complement factors (thrombin
and plasmin)

* Vascular proteins (collagen, elastin, and others)

These stimuli interact with receptor sites on the
platelet and activate intracellular metabolic pathways.
Secondary messenger systems involving cyclases, protein
kinase C, and calcium channels result in liberation of
arachidonic acid from membrane phospholipids and ulti-
mately cause platelet aggregation and thrombus forma-
tion. Arachidonic acid metabolism is pivotal in platelet
activation and is an intrinsic part of the inflammatory
response.

Platelet-Activating Factor.

Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is a potent lipid pro-
inflammatory mediator with effects in many body sys-
tems; it is of particular importance in the cellular immune
response. PAF, or !-O-alkyl-2-O-acetyl-sn-glycero-3-
phosphorylcholine, exists endogenously as a mixture of
molecules that have slight structural variations. In addi-
tion to platelet aggregation, PAF also activates basophils,
endothelial cells, eosinophils, lymphocytes, macrophages,
mast cells, monocytes, and neutrophils. These cells not
only respond to PAF, but also produce and release it
themselves.

PAF induces a number of responses, including
phagocytosis, exocytosis, superoxide production, chemo-
taxis, aggregation, proliferation, adhesion, eicosanoid
generation, degranulation, and calcium mobilization, as

----- PAGE 182 -----
174 «a2 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

well as diverse morphological changes in cells. Thus the
activity of PAF extends well beyond platelet activation
and it is thought to be involved in anaphylactic shock, in-
flammation, hypertension, allergic responses, and respira-
tory and cardiovascular disorders. PAF antagonists dis-
place PAF from its receptor binding site, in most cases
without initiating any response of their own.
Physiologically, local levels of certain cytokines are
major controlling factors in blood platelet hemostasis.
Among other activities, prostacyclin has been shown to be
a potent vasodilator and inhibitor of platelet activation. It
is largely produced as an arachidonate metabolite in en-
dothelial cells and excreted into the blood, where it mod-
ulates platelet reactivity and acts as a vasodilatory agent.
The enzymes, receptors, and various other macro-
molecules involved in this arachidonic acid cascade, as well
as those involved in the recognition and reaction of the
platelet to cytokines, provide potentially important sites
of action for antiplatelet compounds, or PAF antagonists.

Natural Products with Antiplatelet Activity
According to their effects on platelet aggregation, release
reaction, and signal transductions, antiplatelet plant con-
stituents have been tentatively classified into eight
groups:!!3

¢ Platelet-activating factor (PAF) antagonists
* Collagen-receptor antagonists

¢ Thromboxane-receptor antagonists

¢ ADP-receptor agonists

Inhibitors of phosphoinositide breakdown
Inhibitors of thromboxane formation

¢ Agents that increase cyclic nucleotides

¢ Protein kinase C activators

New pharmacological agents derived from medicinal
plant sources may provide leads for the development of
effective new cardiovascular drugs. However, from the
herbal perspective, it might be more useful to consider
the chemical groups involved.

Organosulfur Derivatives

A number of sulfur compounds from plants in the genus
Allium, such as garlic and onion, have antiplatelet activity.
These compounds work by a number of mechanisms, in-
cluding direct inhibition of enzymes in the arachidonic
cascade, inhibition of metabolite uptake by platelets, and
direct inhibition of platelet phospholipase activity.

Antiplatelet Compounds in Allium
Ajoene

Alliin

Allicin

Allylmethyltrisulphide
2-Vinyl-1,3-dithiene
i-Propylmethyldisulphide

Flavonoids

The impact of flavonoid constituents on platelet activity
must be seen in the context of the whole gamut of phar-
macological effects discussed earlier in this chapter and in
chapter 7. They have been shown to affect both aggrega-
tion and adhesion. Inhibition of phosphodiesterase has
also been implicated.

Antiplatelet Flavonoids
Apigenin

Chrysin

Hispidulin

Phloretin

Quercetin

Coumarins

Coumarins inhibit aggregation but are relatively weak.
An example of a coumarin with antiplatelet activity is
disenecioyl-cis-khellactone.

Sesquiterpene Lactones

Parthenolides from feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) in-
hibit both platelet aggregation and the release of sero-
tonin from platelets.

Diterpenes
As discussed earlier, forskolin is a diterpene isolated from
the roots of Coleus forskoblii. It stimulates adenylate cy-
clase activity in many tissues, which appears to be the ac-
tion responsible for its antiplatelet activity.

Ginkgolides
PAF is dramatically inhibited by ginkgolides from Ginkgo
biloba.

PAF and the Respiratory System

The most numerically important disorders of the respira-
tory system, excluding infections, are the allergic condi-
tions asthma and hay fever. In both conditions, IgE anti-
bodies attach to mast cells, and renewed exposure to
antigen causes their degranulation. Also, inflammatory

----- PAGE 183 -----
damage to the endothelium of the airways causes the un-
derlying muscle to become supersensitive to external irri-
tants and inflammatory mediators, including histamine,
leukotrienes, thromboxanes, PAF, and chemotactic
agents.!!4 When this process occurs mainly in the nose,
eyes, and throat, the result is hay fever. Bronchospasm,
mucosal edema, and excessive mucus production lead to
the coughing and wheezing that characterize asthma.

Occasionally, massive release of mediators leads to
anaphylaxis, a life-threatening condition triggered by al-
lergens. Anaphylaxis, which involves severe bron-
chospasm, edema in the nose and throat, and cardiovas-
cular collapse, is treated with intravenous adrenaline,
antihistamines, and corticosteroids.

Mast cell stabilizers play an important role in treat-
ments used in orthodox medicine to prevent anaphylaxis;
the main one is sodium cromoglycate. This drug was de-
veloped from khellin, a chromone from Ami visnaga.
Khellin derivatives relax bronchial smooth muscle, but
cromoglycate also protects the tissue from the effects of
bronchoconstrictors, such as histamine and acetylcholine.
Its mechanism of action is unclear, but it appears to re-
duce the influx of calcium into antigen-sensitized mast
cells, preventing the release of histamine.!!5

In the lung, PAF activates the arachidonic acid cas-
cade with a dose-dependent generation of thromboxane.
Formation of PAF in the lungs may also contribute to his-
tamine release in anaphylaxis.!!6 The most relevant PAF
antagonists at present are of natural origin.

Ginkgolides

These Cz) diterpenes suppress PAF-induced broncho-
constriction and airway hyperreactivity in humans and
animals. They exert a protective effect against antigen-
induced bronchial provocation tests in asthmatic patients.
Ginkgolide B is the most potent member of the
ginkgolide family of PAF antagonists; it inhibits PAF-
induced platelet aggregation, chemotaxis, and adhesion.
It is orally effective against PAF-induced bronchospasm.

Lignans

Kadsurenone, a neolignan found in Piper futukadsura, is a
potent PAF inhibitor, and also inhibits degranulation of
neutrophils while antagonizing other PAF-induced
phenomena. Other lignans of interest as PAF antagonists
include burseran, from Bursera microphylla, and the
nectandrins A and B, from Nectandra rigida.

PHARMACOLOGY .«& = 175

Gliotoxins

These are piperazine alkaloids produced by a wide range
of fungi. Gliotoxin itself is a relatively weak PAF in-
hibitor, but various derivatives have been shown to inhibit
PAF-induced bronchoconstriction in rats.

Forskolin

Asthma is characterized by a relative decrease in CAMP in
the bronchial smooth muscle that causes mast cells to de-
granulate and smooth muscle cells to contract. Excessive
levels of PAF are also present in asthma. Current drug
therapy for asthma is largely designed to increase CAMP
levels through the use of substances that either stimulate
adenylate cyclase (for example, corticosteroids) or inhibit
phosphodiesterase, which breaks down cAMP (for exam-
ple, methyxanthines). Coleus forskohlii may be particularly
useful in asthma, as it increases cellular levels of cAMP,
resulting in relaxation of bronchial muscles and relief of
symptoms.

HERBS AND THE LIVER

Conventional medicine does not provide many remedies
for hepatitis, cirrhosis, biliary tract disorders, or liver
damage by toxins. Patients with liver disorders are usually
given supportive treatment, which may include dietary
change and elimination of toxins (for example, paraceta-
mol, alcohol, or other drugs) as opposed to active therapy.
In both Western and Asian medical systems, herbs have
ong been utilized for liver problems, and pharmacologi-
cal and clinical experiments have proved their efficacy.
Silybum marianum (and its complex of flavolignans,
nown as silymarin) is perhaps the best known of these
herbs.

Hepatoprotection and Phytotherapy
‘The main causes of liver disease are viral infection and
hepatotoxic chemicals such as ethyl alcohol, peroxides
(particularly peroxidized edible oils), toxins in food (espe-
cially aflatoxins), pharmaceuticals, and environmental
pollutants. The liver has the ability to regenerate, but this
innate ability is impaired or stops altogether when the
iver is infected or damaged by alcohol or other drugs.
Hepatotoxin-induced liver lesions may be reversed in
the early stages, but they cannot be healed simply by re-
moval of the toxins after critical periods of exposure. This
highlights the need for effective remedies for liver diseases.
In the face of the toxic challenge presented by mod-
ern life, the green world has help to offer.
A number of herbs long used for liver disorders in

----- PAGE 184 -----
176 «3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

traditional medicine have revealed their unique potential
to pharmacological investigation. Research on these
plants has resulted in the isolation of a number of anti-
hepatotoxic (or hepatoprotective) constituents. Anti-
hepatotoxic agents appear to work through a combination
of two main mechanisms:

* Alteration of cell membranes, so that only small
amounts of toxins may penetrate into the cell

* Acceleration of protein synthesis, with a subsequent
stimulation of cell regeneration

A number of plants and secondary metabolites have
been shown to possess antihepatotoxic activity. Of these,
Silybum marianum is the best known and studied, but
many others are coming to light.

° Bidens pilosa and B. chilensis, Taiwanese traditional
medicines, are hepatoprotective against various toxins
and have demonstrated potential as broad-spectrum
antihepatotoxic agents.!!”

° Scutellaria rivularis improved pathological hepatic le-

sions caused by a number of liver toxins, and compared
well to the standard antihepatotoxics glycyrrhizin and
silymarin.!!8

¢ Inan in vitro study of immunological liver injury to rat
hepatocytes, all saponins from the roots of Pueraria
Jobata tested demonstrated hepatoprotective action.!!9

Natural compounds that elevate levels of biotransfor-
mation enzymes or reduce levels of activating enzymes
can be considered good candidates for cancer-protective
actions as well as generally beneficial effects for the liver.
The sulfur-containing constituents characteristic of Allium
species have attracted much attention. In one rat study in-
vestigating modulation of hepatic drug-metabolizing en-
zymes, the Allium compounds induced both Phase I and
Phase II enzyme systems.!”° In addition, the alkyl sulfides
demonstrated a possible inhibitory effect on the first step
of carcinogenesis via modulation of enzymes involved in
carcinogen metabolism. In both in vitro and in vivo stud-
ies, zeaxanthin and zeaxanthin dipalmitate were shown to
be the hepatoprotective components of Lycitem chinense.'2!

Functions of the Liver

The liver, the largest solid organ in the body and one of the most complex, has a wide range of

vital functions:

* Metabolizes protein (amino acid degradation, synthesis of clotting factors, urea and plasma

proteins) .
¢ Metabolizes carbohydrates
¢ Stores glycogen

* Metabolizes lipids, including the synthesis of cholesterol and bile acids

Initiates the formation of bile
° Engages in the transport of bilirubin
* Biotransforms waste, toxins, and drugs

« Produces blood-clotting factors.and other blood proteins (including albumin, certain enzyme in-
hibitors, cholesterol and other lipoproteins, transport proteins, transferrin iron, and vitamin By»)

Glucose is combined with phosphate in the liver cells and is either transported to peripheral
tissues for metabolic purposes or stored in the hepatocyte as glycogen. The liver plays a central
role in metabolizing fat by converting stored fatty acids to their energy-releasing form, acetyl-
coenzyme A, when hepatic glucose and glycogen stores are exhausted or unavailable for
metabolic purposes. The liver also synthesizes the cell membrane component phospholipid and
the lipoproteins that carry lipids in the blood. Hepatocytes can convert certain amino acids and
products of glucose metabolism into glucose through gluconeogenesis. Reticulo-endothelial cells
(the Kupffer’s cells) play a role in immunity.

The liver is able to regenerate itself after injury or disease. However, if a disease progresses
beyond the tissue’s capacity to regenerate new cells, the body's entire metabolism will be severely
affected. Any number of disorders ‘can affect the liver and interfere with the blood supply or the

functioning of bile ducts, Kupffer’s cells, and other hepatic cells.

----- PAGE 185 -----
Silybum marianum and Silymarin.
Milk thistle (Silybum marianum) was historically used in
Europe as a liver tonic, and modern phytotherapy indi-
cates its use in a range of liver and gallbladder conditions,
including hepatitis and cirrhosis. A wealth of European
research has produced data showing that milk thistle
seeds can reverse toxic liver damage as well as protect
against damage from hepatotoxins. As American physi-
cians became interested in phytotherapy, this herbal anti-
hepatotoxic gained a solid clinical reputation in the
United States as well.!??
The extraordinary actions of Silybum on the human
liver are dramatically demonstrated by its hepatoprotec-
tive effects against the life-threatening damage caused by
the death cap mushroom, Amanita phalloides, which con-
tains the toxins phalloidin and a-amanitin. This remark-
able herb also has therapeutic effects in liver disease.
Clinical trials have confirmed its ability to reverse many
liver disorders, from acute viral hepatitis to cirrhosis, by
stimulating hepatocytes to replace diseased tissue.

Laboratory Studies
A number of specific phytochemicals in Silybum seed have
been shown to protect liver cells. They are primarily
flavolignans and are grouped together in a complex
known as silymarin. The silymarin complex makes up be-
tween 1.5% and 3% of milk thistle seeds and includes
silybin, silychristin, silydianin, and isosilybin.

In laboratory studies, silymarin has demonstrated a
range of effects:

© Protected against carbon tetrachloride-induced liver
damage in rats!°3

* Reduced prolongation of hexobarbital-induced sleep-
ing time produced by carbon tetrachloride!”*

¢ Prevented inhibition of hepatic metabolism of p-oxy-
phenylpyruvic acid caused by carbon tetrachloride!”

¢ Diminished increases in serum levels of enzymes (in-
cluding glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase, glutamic-
pyruvic transaminase, and sorbitol dehydrogenase) raised
by experimental treatment with carbon tetrachloride!?6

© Protected against the development of acute hepatitis
(similar to viral hepatitis in humans) in rats treated
with the liver toxin D-galactosamine!””

* Partially counteracts alcohol damage to the liver; al-
most completely prevents mitochondrial changes
caused by ethanol!?8

* Reduced death rate and prolonged life span in mice
challenged by administration of a-amanitin; antago-
nized the toxicity of phalloidin???

PHARMACOLOGY @ 177

¢ Enhanced RNA synthesis as a result of the stimulation
of DNA-dependent RNA-polymerase Al?

* Increased the activity of both superoxide dismutase
and glutathione peroxidase, which may explain the
protective effect of the herb against free radicals!!

In another mouse study, silymarin also demonstrated
protective effects against UVB radiation—-induced non-
melanoma skin cancer. Silymarin treatment reduced
tumor incidence by 20% to 40% and tumor volume per
mouse by 66% after the tumor-initiation phase of the
study. During UVB-induced tumor promotion, silymarin
treatment reduced tumor incidence from 60% to 100%
and tumor volume per mouse by 90%. In experimental
UVB-induced complete carcinogenesis, silymarin re-
duced tumor incidence from 25% to 100% and tumor
volume per mouse by 97%. Application of silymarin also
resulted in a statistically significant inhibition of UVB-
induced sunburn, apoptotic cell formation, skin edema,
depletion of catalase activity, and induction of COX ac-
tivities. The researchers concluded, “Silymarin can pro-
vide substantial protection against different stages of UVB-
induced carcinogenesis, possibly via its strong antioxidant

properties.”!*

Clinical Studies

Numerous human studies confirm that the effects
demonstrated by Si/ybum and the silymarin complex in
the laboratory are borne out in clinical practice.’> The
MedLine database contains references to 627 papers dis-
cussing silymarin and 41 clinical trials. The material that
follows has been abstracted from an excellent review by
Michael Murray, N.D.134

One study involved 129 patients and a control group
of 56 for a period of about one month. Their conditions
included toxic metabolic liver damage, fatty degeneration
of the liver due to various causes, and chronic hepatitis.
Treatment with milk thistle extract markedly improved
both subjective and objective symptoms of liver and di-
gestive disorders and normalized enzyme activities. The
investigators reported a 50% regression in pathological
symptoms in the group receiving milk thistle treatment,
compared with 25% in controls; enlarged livers also di-
minished substantially in volume in the treated group.
No intolerance, side effects, or allergic reactions were
observed.

In another placebo-controlled study, researchers
compared levels of a number of important markers of
liver function in 28 patients treated with silymarin with
29 patients treated with a placebo. After only five days of
treatment, the silymarin-treated subjects showed greater

----- PAGE 186 -----
178 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

improvements in levels of aspartate transaminase (AST),
alanine transaminase (ALT), and serum bilirubin, and after
three weeks, the number of patients who attained normal
values was also higher in the silymarin-treated group.

Long-term treatment with silymarin of chronic hep-
atopathies caused by psychopharmaceuticals resulted in
significant improvements in liver function parameters
such as AST, ALT, and BSP. (The BSP parameter is a
measurement of the retention of the chemical sulfobro-
mophtalein.) This helps investigators assess the efficiency
of drug clearance by the liver.

In two additional studies involving patients with liver
disease, those treated with silymarin demonstrated marked
improvements in various liver parameters. In the first,
106 patients with liver disease (mostly alcohol-induced)
were selected on the basis of elevated serum transaminase
levels and randomly allocated into active and control
groups. Decreases of serum ALT and AST in the treated
group were statistically significantly higher than those of
the controls.

In the second study, which involved patients with
chronic liver disease, silymarin prevented decreases in
seralbumin beginning at three months and continuing to
the end of the study. Histopathological findings related to
focal necrosis and fibrosis were also much improved.
Overall, silymarin proved beneficial in parameters of
parenchymal disorders, intralobular mesenchymal reac-
tions, and fibrosis.

Diabetic patients with cirrhosis require insulin treat-
ment because of insulin resistance. As chronic alcoholi¢
liver damage is partly caused by peroxidation of hepatic cell
membranes, antioxidants may be useful in treating or pre-
venting such damage. A 1997 study investigated the effects
of long-term treatment with silymarin in diabetic patients
with cirrhosis. The results suggested that treatment with
silymarin may reduce both lipid peroxidation of cell mem-
branes and insulin resistance. In the study, silymarin also
significantly decreased endogenous insulin overproduction
and the need for exogenous insulin administration. 15

Cisplatin is an active cytotoxic agent used in the
treatment of testicular cancer. Its use, however, is associ-
ated with significant side effects, including ototoxicity,
neurotoxicity, and nephrotoxicity. A clinical study evalu-
ated the effects of the milk thistle compound silibinin in
ameliorating drug-induced alterations in renal glomeru-
lar and tubular function and tubular morphology. Results
showed that silibinin totally or partly ameliorated all of
these effects. Thus, silibinin appears to also function as a
nephroprotectant agent; the researchers suggested that it
may have beneficial effects on the kidney in clinical set-
tings. This exciting data led to a randomized clinical

trial to investigate the protective effects of silibinin
against cisplatin-associated nephrotoxicity in patients
with testicular cancer.'3”

HYPOGLYCEMIC AGENTS

More than 1,123 plant species have been used tradition-
ally or experimentally to treat symptoms of diabetes mel-
litus.® These represent 725 genera in 183 families of
plants. In addition, more than 200 compounds from
plants have been reported to lower blood glucose.!3?
Table 9.7 provides a summary of the chemical classes in
which these compounds can be found.

The diversity represented here suggests that a variety
of mechanisms must be involved in the glucose-lowering
activities of plant compounds. Some of these compounds
may have therapeutic potential, while others produce hy-
poglycemia as a side effect of their toxicity.

Table 9.7. Natural Products with Hypoglycemic
Activity

CHEMICAL CLASS NUMBER ACTIVE
Alkaloids 38
Carbohydrates 66
Coumarins 4
Cyanogenic glycosides I
Flavonoids 7
Glycopeptides 20
Inorganic salts 3
Iridoids 4
Lipids 6
Peptides and amines iL
Phenolics (simple) 4
Phenylpropanoids |
Steroids 7
Stilbenes 1
Sulfur compounds 2
Terpenoids
Vitamins 2
Xanthenes |

----- PAGE 187 -----
There are many plant extracts with proven hypo-
glycemic activity. No isolated compounds from these
plants have yet been developed for clinical use, but all are
used in traditional or complementary medicine to treat
diabetes mellitus. Many of those that are dietary compo-
nents have been tested in human diabetics and found to
be hypoglycemic.

Plant Extracts with Hypoglycemic Activity
‘Allium cepa (onion)

‘A. sativum (garlic)

Momordica charantia (bitter gourd or melon)
Nelumbo nucifera (sacred lotus)

Opuntia ficus-indica (prickly pear)

Panax ginseng (ginseng)

Psidium gujava (guava)

Syzygium cumini (jambul)

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Vernonia amygdalina (bitter leaf)

Testing of plants for hypoglycemic properties is
based on inducing diabetes in animals with toxins (such as
alloxan) and evaluating the hypoglycemia or glucose tol-
erance produced by a plant extract compared with that of
a standard, such as tolbutamide. Alloxan causes selective
necrosis of the pancreatic islet 6 cells. The experimental
severity of the disease can be increased or decreased by
varying the dose of alloxan.

Glycans from the mushroom Ganoderma lucidum pro-
duce significant hypoglycemia in alloxan-induced dia-
betes in animals. They appear to operate through a
unique mechanism, probably affecting glycogen or glu-
cose metabolism.'*! Ganoderan B, one of these glycans,
has been shown to elevate plasma insulin levels and in-
crease the activities of hepatic glucokinase, phosphofruc-
tokinase, and glucose-6 phosphate dehydrogenase. It also
decreases the activities of hepatic glucose-6 phosphatase
and glycogen synthetase and lowers hepatic glycogen
content.

Momordica charantia, commonly known as bitter
gourd, is a traditional remedy of the Pacific and Indian
Ocean islands for diabetes mellitus. A controlled clinical
trial involving 100 people with moderate noninsulin-
dependent diabetes examined the effects of the herb on
fasting and postprandial serum glucose levels. (Post-
prandial levels were measured two hours after oral intake
of 75 gm of glucose.) Drinking the herb in the form of an
aqueous homogenized suspension of pulp led to signifi-
cant reductions in both fasting and postprandial serum
glucose levels. This hypoglycemic action was observed in
86% of subjects. 1?

PHARMACOLOGY @ 179

In another study, polypeptides from bitter gourd
seeds stimulated lipogenesis and inhibited corticotropin-
induced lipolysis in vivo, activities similar to those of in-
sulin. The researchers suggested that the mechanism of
action behind these effects involved interaction of the
peptides with B-adrenergic or corticotropin receptors.!¥3
Inhibition of glucose uptake by intestinal fragments was
also observed in this study, and was attributed to a glyco-
sidic constituent of the fruit extract. This suggests that
constituents of M. charantia have both pancreatic and
extra-pancreatic effects and offer therapeutic potential for
diabetic patients.

Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) has also
been employed traditionally in the treatment of diabetes.
In modern research, six alkaloids from this plant, includ-
ing catharanthine, have demonstrated mild hypoglycemic
activity. !44

The major hypoglycemic principles of onion (4iium
cepa) and garlic (A. sativum) are the sulfur-containing
compounds, allyl propyl disulfide and allicin. They are
thought to work via competitive interaction with insulin,
which also has a disulfide bond.

Coumarin causes profound hypoglycemia in normal
and alloxan-induced diabetic rats, probably because of its
hepatotoxicity. Coumarin is hepatotoxic in rats and dogs,
in which it is metabolized through 3-hydroxycoumarin to
reactive quinone metabolites that bind to microsomal
proteins. In humans, however, coumarin is metabolized
through 7-hydroxycoumarin to a glucuronide conjugate
that is rapidly excreted, and no hepatotoxicity occurs.!

Seeds of a number of species of Fabaceae plants (for
example, Trigonella foenum-graecum, or fenugreek) are tra-
ditional treatments for diabetes. In addition to direct hy-
poglycemic effects, dietary effects are also important. In
clinical studies, people eating a diet high in legumes
showed improvements in many indices of blood glucose
control. Beans are high in complex carbohydrates, which
are more slowly digested than other types of starch.
Noncellulosic types of dietary fiber (such as carob gum,
guar gum, and high-molecular-weight galactomannans
from Ceratonia siliqua and Cyamopsis tetragonolobus) reduce
intestinal absorption of glucose by slowing gastric empty-
ing and by thickening the water layer adjacent to the in-
testinal villi.'*

A variety of glucans and heteroglycans from plants
used in Asian traditional medicine have shown remark-
able hypoglycemic activity when administered intraperi-
toneally to mice.!*” Panaxans A through E, glycans of Panax
ginseng, demonstrate different mechanisms of action de-
spite their similar structures. Panaxans A and B stimulate

----- PAGE 188 -----
180 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

hepatic glucose utilization by increasing the activity of
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, phosphorylase-a,
and phosphofructokinase.

Panaxan A decreases the activity of glucose-6-phos-
phatase but does not affect hepatic glycogen content.
Panaxan B has no effect on glucose-6-phosphatase, but
decreases glycogen synthetase activity and hepatic glyco-
gen content.'#8 Panaxan A does not affect plasma insulin
levels or insulin sensitivity, but panaxan B elevates the
plasma insulin level by potentiating insulin secretion
from pancreatic islets. It also enhances insulin sensitiv-
ity by increasing insulin binding to receptors.1?

Ginseng also contains other hypoglycemic con-
stituents with different mechanisms of action. Adenosine,
from a water extract of ginseng rhizomes, was shown to
enhance lipogenesis and the accumulation of cAMP in
adipocytes, which possess specific adenosine receptors.
Some of the panaxosides inhibited adrenocorticotropin-
induced lipolysis and, at the same doses, suppressed
insulin-stimulated lipogenesis, while others stimulated
the release of insulin from cultured islets.!5015!

Intracellular CAMP also acts as a secondary messenger
in the B-cells. Increasing intracellular cAMP concentra-
tion potentiates cholecystokinin and glucose-stimulated
insulin release. As mentioned earlier, forskolin from
Coleus forskoblii is an adenylate cyclase activator that in-
creases intracellular cAMP by stimulating its biosynthe-
sis.52 Theophylline and other methylxanthenes from
Camellia sinensis and papaverine from Papaver somniferum
are phosphodiesterase inhibitors that increase levels of in-
tracellular cAMP by preventing its breakdown.

References

1. Viola H, Wasowski C, Levi de Stein M, et al. Apigenin,
a component of Matricaria recutita flowers, is a central
benzodiazepine receptors-ligand with anxiolytic effects.
Planta Medica 1995; 61(3):213-16.

2. Wolfman C, Viola H, Paladini A, et al. Possible anxi-
olytic effects of chrysin, a central benzodiazepine recep-
tor ligand isolated from Passiflora coerulea.
Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior 1994; 47(1):1-4.

3. Bergendorff O, Nielsen M, et al. Furanocoumarins with
affinity to brain benzodiazepine receptors in vitro.
Phytochemistry 1997, 44(6):1121-24.

4, Furukawa K, Chairungsrilerd N, Ohta T, et al. Novel
types of receptor antagonists from the medicinal plant
Garcinia mangostana. Nippon Yakurigaku Zasshi (Japanese
Journal of Pharmacology) 1997; 110(suppl 1):153P-58P.

5. Sotnikova R, Kettmann V, Kostalova D, Taborska E.
Relaxant properties of some aporphine alkaloids from

10.

1k.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

Mahonia aquifolium. Methods and Findings in
Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology 1998;
19(9):589-97.

. Polya GM, Wang BH, Foo LY. Inhibition of signal-

regulated protein kinases by plant-derived hydrolysable
tannins. Phytochemistry 1995; 38:307-14.

. Hansen, et al. In vitro screening of traditional medicines

for anti-hypertensive effect based on inhibition of the
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE). Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 1995; 48(1):43-5 1.

. Webb EC. Enzyme Nomenclature 1992: Recommendations

of the Nomenclature Committee of the International Union of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. San Diego: Academic
Press, 1997.

. Seamon KB, Daly JW. Forskolin: a unique diterpene

activator of cyclic AMP-generating systems. Journal of
Cyclic Nucleotide Research 1981; 7(4):201-24.

Freeman SE, Dawson RM. Tacrine: A pharmacological
review. Progress in Neurobiology 1991; 36:257-77.

Jia Sen, et al. Study of the chemistry of huperzine A and
B. Acta Chimica Sinica 1986; 44:1035~104.

Price KR, Fenwick GR. Naturally occurring oestrogens
in foods—a review. Food Additives and Contaminants
1985; 2:73-106.

Adlercreutz H, Honjo H, Higashi A, et al. Urinary
excretion of lignans & isoflavonoid phytoestrogens in
Japanese men & women consuming a traditional
Japanese diet. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
1991 Dee; $4(6):1093-100.

Barnes S, Peterson TG. Biochemical targets of the
isoflavone genistein in tumor cell lines. Proceedings of the
Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine 1995;
208(1):103-8.

Adlercreutz H, Markkanen H, Watanabe S. Plasma con-
centrations of phyto-oestrogens in Japanese men. Lancet
1993 Nov 13; 342(8881):1209-10.

Fotsis T, Pepper M, Adlercreutz H, et al. Genistein, a
dietary ingested isoflavonoid, inhibits cell proliferation
and in vitro angiogenesis. The Journal of Nutrition 1995
Mar; 125(3 suppl):790S-97S.

Kennedy AR. The evidence for soybean products as can-
cer preventive agents. The Journal of Nutrition 1995 Mar;
125(3 suppl):733S-43S.

Herman C, Adlercreutz T, Goldin BR, et al. Soybean
phytoestrogen intake and cancer risk. The Journal of
Nutrition 1995 Mar, 125(3 suppl):757S-70S.

. Seamon KB, Padgect W, Daly JW: Forskolin: unique

diterpene activator of adenylate cyclase in membranes

----- PAGE 189 -----
20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27

28.

29,

30

31.

32.

33.

34.

and in intact cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 1981, 78(6):3363-7.
Miksicek RJ. Commonly occurring plant flavonoids have
estrogenic activity. Molecular Pharmacology 1993 Jul;
44(1):37-43.

Herman C, Adlercreutz T, Goldin BR, et al. Soybean
phytoestrogen intake and cancer risk. The Journal of
Nutrition 1995 Mar; 125(3 suppl):757S-708S,

Kitts DD. Studies on the estrogenic activity of a coffee
extract. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health
1987; 20(1-2):37-49.

Miksicek RJ. Estrogenic flavonoids: structural require-
ments for biological activity. Proceedings of the Society for
Experimental Biology and Medicine 1995 Jan; 208(1):44-50.
Miksicek RJ. Interaction of naturally occurring non-
steroidal estrogens with expressed recombinant human
estrogen receptor. The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology 1994 Jun; 49(2-3):153-60.

Barnes S. Effect of genistein on in vitro and in vivo
models of cancer. The Journal of Nutrition 1995 Mar;
125(3 Suppl):777S-83S.

Fotsis T, Pepper M, Adlercreutz H, et al. Genistein, a
dietary ingested isoflavonoid, inhibits cell proliferation
and in vitro angiogenesis. The Journal of Nutrition 1995
Mar; 1253 Suppl):790S-97S.

Peterson G. Evaluation of the biochemical targets of
genistein in tumor cells. The Journal of Nutrition 1995
Mar; 125(3 Suppl):784S-89S.

Adlercreutz H, Bannwart C, Wahala K, et al. Inhibition
of human aromatase by mammalian lignans and
isoflavonoid phytoestrogens. The Journal of Steroid
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 1993 Feb; 44(2):147-53.
Ibid.

Adlercreutz H, Mousavi Y, Clark J, et al. Dietary phy-
toestrogens and cancer: in vitro and in vivo studies. The
Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 1992;
413-8):33 1-7.

Martin PM, Horwitz KB, Ryan DS, McGuire WL.
Phytoestrogen interaction with estrogen receptors in
human breast cancer cells. Endocrinology 1978 Nov;
103(5):1860-7.

Whitten PL, Lewis C, Russell E, Naftolin F. Potential
adverse effects of phytoestrogens. The Journal of
Nutrition 1995 Mar; 125(3 Suppl.):771S-76S.

Molteni A, Brizio-Molteni L, Persky V. In vitro hor-
monal effects of soybean isoflavones. The Journal of
Nutrition 1995 Mar; 125(3 Suppl.):751S-56S.

Whitten PL, Russell E, Naftolin F. Influence of phyto-

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42,

43,

44,

45.

46.

47.

PHARMACOLOGY .e 181

estrogen diets on estradiol action in the rat uterus.
Steroids 1994 Jul; 59(7):443-9.

. Whitten PL, Russell E, Naftolin F Effects of a normal,

human-concentration, phytoestrogen diet on rat uterine
growth. Steroids 1992 Mar; 57(3):98-106.

Levy JR, Faber KA, Ayyash L, Hughes CL Jr. The effect
of prenatal exposure to the phytoestrogen genistein on
sexual differentiation in rats. Proceedings of the Society for
Experimental Biology and Medicine 1995 Jan; 208(1):60-6.
Miksicek RJ. Interaction of naturally occurring non-
steroidal estrogens with expressed recombinant human
estrogen receptor. The Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology 1994 Jun; 49(2-3):153-60.

Adlercreutz H, Hockerstedt K, Bannwart C, et al. Effect
of dietary components, including lignans and phyto-
estrogens, on enterohepatic circulation and liver
metabolism of estrogens and on sex hormone binding
globulin (SHBG). Journal of Steroid Biochemistry 1987;
27(4-6):1135—44.

Herman C, Adlercreutz T, Goldin BR, et al. Soybean
phytoestrogen intake and cancer risk. The Journal of
Nutrition 1995 Mar; 125 Suppl):757S-70S.

Barnes S. Effect of genistein on in vitro and in vivo
models of cancer. The Journal of Nutrition 1995 Mar,
125(3 Suppl):777S-835S.

Molteni A, Brizio-Molteni L, Persky V. In vitro hor-
monal effects of soybean isoflavones. The Journal of
Nutrition 1995 Mar; 125(3 Suppl):751S-56S.

Bingel AS, Farnsworth N. Higher plants as potential
sources of Galactagogues. In: Economic and Medicinal
Plant Research, vol. 6. San Diego: Academic Press, 1995.
Elliot T. T Cell recognition of glycosylated peptides.
Science and Medicine 1994; 3(3):44-53.

Spatzenegger M, Jaeger W. Clinical importance of hep-
atic cytochrome P4sq in drug metabolism. Drug
Metabolism Reviews 1995; 27:397-417.

Benet LZ, Kroetz DL, Sheiner LB. Biotransformation
of drugs. In: Hardman JG, Limbird LL, Molinoff PB, et
al., eds. Goodman and Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis
of Therapeutics, 9th edition. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1996.

Murray M. Paso enzymes. Inhibition mechanisms, ge-
netic regulation, and effects of liver disease. Clinical
Pharmacokinetics 1992; 23:132-46,

Strehl E, Schneider W, Elstner EF. Inhibition of dihy-
drofolate reductase activity by alcoholic extracts from
Fraxinus excelsior, Populus tremula and Solidago virgau-
rea, Arzneimittel-Forschung 1995 Feb; 45(2):172-73.

----- PAGE 190 -----
182

48.

49,

50.

51,

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57,

58.

59.

60.

él.

<= INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Poulsen HE, Loft S. The impact of genetic polymor-
phisms in risk assessment of drugs. Archives of Toxicology.
Supplement 1994; 16:211-22.

Peterson TC, Renton KW. Depression of cytochrome
P45 dependent drug biotransformation in hepatocytes
after the activation of the RES by dextran sulphate. The
Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics
1984; 229:299-304.

Wagner H, Proksch A. Immunostimulatory drugs of
fungi and higher plants. In: Economic and Medicinal Plant
Research, vol. 1. San Diego: Academic Press, 1985.
Beuscher N, Kopanski L. Immunologically active glyco-
proteins of Baptisia tinctoria. Planta Medica 1989 Aug;
55(4):3 58-63.

Manzi P, Pizzoferrato L. Beta glucans in edible mush-
rooms. Food Chemistry 2000; 68:3 15-18.

Ladanyi A, Timar J, Lapis K. Effect of lentinan on
macrophage cytotoxicity against metastatic tumor cells.
Cancer Immunology, Immunotherapy 1993; 36:123-26.
Kidd P. The use of mushroom glucans and proteogly-
cans in cancer treatment. Alternative Medicine Review:

A Fournal of Clinical Therapeutic 2000; 5:4-27.

Borchers AT, Stem JS, Hackman RM, et al. Mushrooms,
tumors, and immunity. Proceedings of the Society for
Experimental Biology and Medicine 1999, 221:281-93.
Wasser SP, Weis AL. Therapeutic effects of substances
occurring in higher Basidiomycetes mushrooms: a mod-
ern perspective. Critical Reviews in Immunology 1999,
19:65-96.

Wagner H, Proksch A. Immunostimulatory drugs of
fungi and higher plants. In: Economic and Medicinal Plant
Research, vol.1. San Diego: Academic Press, 1985.
Melzer R, Fricke U, Holzl J. Vasoactive properties of
procyanidins from Hypericum perforatum L. in isolated
porcine coronary arteries. Arznermittel-Forschung 1991
May; 41(5):481-83.

Chan MM, Fong D, Ho CT, Huang HI. Inhibition of
inducible nitric oxide synthase gene expression and en-
zyme activity by epigallocatechin gallate, a natural prod-
uct from green tea. Biochemical Pharmacology 1997 Dec 15;
$4(12):1281-86.

Kumar S, Ziereis K, Wiegrebe W, Muller K. Medicinal
plants from Nepal: evaluation as inhibitors of leuko-
triene biosynthesis. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 2000
Jun; 70(3):191-95.

Plohmann B, Bader G, Hiller K, Franz G, Immuno-
modulatory and antitumoral effects of triterpenoid
saponins. Pharmazie 1997 Dec; $2(12):953-57.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74,

75.

76.

Liu P, Zhu J, Huang Y, Liu C. Influence of Cordyceps
sinensis (Berk.) Sacc. and rat serum containing same
medicine on IL-1, IFN and TNF produced by rat
Kupffer cells. Chung Kuo Chung Yao Tia Chib 1996 Jun;
21(6):367-69.

Gao, et al. Immunostimulating polysaccharides from
Panax notoginseng. Pharmaceutical Research 1996 Aug;
13(8):1196-200.

Hajto T, Hostanska K, Fischer J, Saller R.
Immunomodulatory effects of Viscum album agglutinin-
I on natural immunity. Anticancer. Drugs 1997 Apr; 8
(Suppl 1):S43-S46.

Kimura Y, Matsushita N, Okuda H. Effects of baicalein
isolated from Scutellaria baicalensis on interleukin 1
beta- and tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced adhesion
molecule expression in cultured human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1997 Jun;
57(1):63-7.

Stein GM, Berg PA. Mistletoe extract-induced effects on
immunocompetent cells: in vitro studies. Anticancer
Drugs 1997 Apr; 8 (Suppl. 1):S39-S42.

Rolfsen WNA. PAF antagonists from natural products.
Drugs of the Future 1990; 15:597-603.

Zschocke S, Lehner M, Bauer R. 5-Lipoxygenase and
cyclooxygenase inhibitory active constituents from
Qianghuo (Notopterygium incisum). Planta Medica 1997
Jun; 63(3):203~6.

Cassady Douros. Anticancer Agents Based on Natural
Product Models. New York: Academic Press, 1980.
Hartwell JL. Plants used against cancer. A survey. Lioydia
1967; 30:379-436.

Hartwell JL. Plants used against cancer. A survey. Lloydia
1971; 32:204-55.

Taylor WI, Farnsworth NR. The Catharanthus Alkaloids.
London: Marcel Dekker, 1975.

Sato F, Matsukawa Y, Matsumoto K, et al. Apigenin in-
duces morphological differentiation and G2-M arrest in
rat neuronal cells. Biochemical and Biophysical Research
Communications 1994, 204: 978-84.

Barnes S. Effect of genistein on in vitro and in vivo models
of cancer. The Journal of Nutrition 1995; 125:777S-83S.
Fotis T, Pepper M, et al. Genistein, a dietary ingested
isoflavonoid, inhibits cell proliferation and in vitro angio-
genesis. The Journal of Nutrition 1995; 125:790S-97S.
Peterson G. Evaluation of the biochemical targets of
genistein in tumor cells. The Journal of Nutrition 1995;
125:784S-895S.

----- PAGE 191 -----
77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

Barnes S, Peterson TG. Biochemical targets of the
isoflavone genistein in tumor cell lines. Proceedings of the
Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine 1995;
208:109-15.

Conctantinou A, Huberman E. Genistein as an inducer
of tumor cell differentiation: possible mechanisms of ac-
tion. Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and
Medicine 1995; 208:109-15.

Rowinsky EK, Cazenave LA, Donehower RC. Taxol: A
novel investigational antimicrotubule agent. Fournal of
the National Cancer Institute 1990; 82:1247-59.

Salmon SE, Sartorelli AC. Cancer chemotherapy. In:
Katzung BG, ed. Basic and Clinical Pharmacology.
Norwalk, CT: Appleton and Lange, 1989.

Pazdur R, Kudelka AP, et al. The taxoids: paclitaxel
(Taxol®) and docetaxel (Taxotere®). Cancer Treatment
Reviews 1993; 19:35 1-86.

Runowicz CD, Wiernik PH, et al. Taxol in ovarian can-
cer. Cancer (Suppl.) 1993; 71:1591-96.

Ranelletti FO, et al. Growth-inhibitory effect of
quercetin and presence of type-II estrogen-binding sites
in human colon-cancer cell lines and primary colorectal
tumors. International Journal of Cancer 1992; 50:486.
Kimura Y, Matsushita N, Okuda H. Effects of baicalein
isolated from Scutellaria baicalensis on interleukin |
beta- and tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced adhesion
molecule expression in cultured human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1997 Jun;
57(1):63-67.

Kim, et al. Taraxacum officinale inhibits tumor necrosis
factor-alpha production from rat astrocytes.
Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol 2000 Aug; 22(3):519-30.
Kawaguchi, et al. Colony stimulating factor-inducing ac-
tivity of isoflavone C-glucosides from the bark of Dal-
bergia monetaria. Planta Medica 1998 Oct; 64(7):653-5.
Lamm DL, Riggs DR. Enhanced immunocompetence
by garlic: role in bladder cancer and other malignancies.
The Journal of Nutrition 2001 Mar; 131(3 suppl):1067S—70S.
Gerritsen, et al. Flavonoids inhibit cytokine-induced en-
dothelial cell adhesion protein gene expression. American
Journal of Pathology 1995; 147:278-92.

Watanabe T, et al. Inhibitors for protein-tyrosine kinase,
$1638 and genistein, induce differentiation of mouse
erythroleukemia cells in a synergistic manner.
Experimental Cell Research 1989; 183:335.

Waxman §, Structural requirements for differentiation-

induction and growth-inhibition of mouse erythro-
leukemia cells by isoflavones. Anticancer Research 1995;
15:1147-52.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

PHARMACOLOGY © 183

Breitman TR. The role of prostaglandins and other
arachidonic acid metabolites in the differentiation of
HL-60. Prostaglandins in Cancer Research. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag, 1987.

Schwartzman RA, Cidlowski JA. Apoptosis: The bio-
chemistry and molecular biology of permanent cell
death. Endocrine Reviews 1993; 14(2):133-45.

Thatte U, Bagadey S, Dahanukar S. Modulation of pro-
grammed cell death by medicinal plants. Celular and
Molecular Biology (Noisy-le-Grand, France) 2000 Feb;
46(1):199-2 14.

Janssen O, Scheffler A, Kabelitz D. In vitro effects of
mistletoe extracts and mistletoe lectins. Arzneimittel-
Forschung 1993; 43:1221-27.

Bussing A, Suzart K, et al. Induction of apoptosis in
human lymphocytes treated with Viscum album L. is
mediated by the mistletoe lectins. Cancer Letters 1996;
99;59-72,

Mochizuki, et al. Inhibitory effect of tumor metastasis in
mice by saponins, ginsenoside-Rb2, 20(R)- and 20(S)-
ginsenoside-Rg3, of red ginseng. Biological &
Pharmaceutical Bulletin 1995 Sept, 18(9):1197-202.
Block G, Patterson B, Subar A. Fruit, vegetables and
cancer prevention: a review of the epidemiological evi-
dence. Nutrition and Cancer 1992; 18(1):1-29.
Wattenberg LW. Inhibition of carcinogenesis by minor
dietary constituents. Cancer Research (suppl) 1992;
52:2085-91.

Steinmetz KA, Potter JD. Vegetables, fruit and cancer.
Cancer Causes Control 1991; 2(6):427-42.

Semple, et al. Screening of Australian medicinal plants
for antiviral activity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1998;
60(2):163-72.

Viietinck, et al. Plant-derived leading compounds for
chemotherapy of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection. Planta Medica 1998; 64(2):97-109.

Dalton DA, et al. Antioxidant defenses in the peripheral
cell layers of legume root nodules. Plant Physiology 1998
Jan; 116(1):37-43.

Masaki, et al. Active-oxygen scavenging activity of plant
extracts. Biological & Pharmaceutical Bulletin 1995;
18(1):162-6,

Kandaswami C, Middleton E. Free radical scavenging
and antioxidant activity of plant flavonoids. In:
Armstrong D, ed. Free Radicals in Diagnostic Medicine.
‘New York: Plenum Press, 1994.

Ghisalberti, et al. Survey of secondary plant metabolites
with cardiovascular activity. Pharmaceutical Biology 1998,
36(4):237-79.

----- PAGE 192 -----
184

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

118.

119,

120.

@ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Lindner E, Dohawalla AN, Bhattacharya BK. Positive
inotropic and blood pressure lowering activity of a diter-
pene derivative isolated form coleus forskohli: forskolin.
Arzneimittel-Forschung 1978; 28:284-9.

Villar, et al. Plants with anti-hypertensive action.
Fitoterapia 1986; 57:131-45.

Neuhaus-Carlisle K, Vierling W, Wagner H. Screening
plant extracts and plant constituents for calcium-channel
blocking activity. Phytomedicine: International Journal of
Phytotherapy and Phytopharmacology 1997; 4(1):67-69.
Vuorela, et al. Calcium channel blocking activity:
Screening methods for plant derived compounds.
Phytomed 1997; 4:167-81.

Elbl G, Wagner H. A new method for the in vitro
screening of inhibitors of angiotensin converting
emzyme (ACE), using the chromophore- and
fluorophore-labelled substrate, dansyltriglycine. Planta
Medica 1991; 57:137-41.

. Wagner H. Leading structures of plant origin for drug

development. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1993;
38:105-12.

. Wagner, et al. Evaluation of natural products as in-

hibitors of angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE).
Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Letters 1991, 1:15—18.

. Teng CM, Ko EN. Antiplatelet agents isolated from

medicinal plants. Research Communications in Molecular
Pathology and Pharmacology 1998 Dec; 102(3):211-25.
Barnes PJ, et al. Inflammatory mediators and asthma.
Pharmacological Reviews 1988; 40:49-84.

Gould MK, Raffin TA. Pharmacological management of
acute and chronic bronchial asthma. Advances in Pharma-
cology 1995; 32:169-204,

Summers JB, Albert DH. Platelet activating factor an-
tagonists. Advances in Pharmacology 1995; 32:67-168.
Chin HW, Lin CC, Tang KS. The hepatoprotective ef-
fects of Taiwan folk medicine ham-hong-chho in rats.
The American Journal of Chinese Medicine 1996;
24(3-4):23 1-40.

Lin CC, Shieh DE, Yen MH. Hepatoprotective effect of
the fractions of Ban-zhi-lian on experimental liver in-
juries in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1997 May;
56(3):193-200.

Arao T, Udayama M, Kinjo J, Nohara T. Preventive ef-
fects of saponins from the Pueraria lobata root on in
vitro immunological liver injury of rat primary hepato-
cyte cultures. Planta Medica 1998 Jun; 64(5):413-16.
Siess MH, Le Bon AM, Canivenc-Lavler MC, Suschetet
M. Modification of hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes

121.

122.

123.

131.

132.

133.

134,

135.

136.

24.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

30.

in rats treated with alkyl sulfides. Cancer Letters 1997
Dec 9; 120(2):195-201.

Kim HP, Kim SY, Lee EJ, et al. Zeaxanthin dipalmitate
from Lycium chinense has hepatoprotective activity.
Research Communications in Molecular Pathology and
Pharmacology 1997 Sep; 97(3):301-14.

Flora K, Hahn M, Rosen H, Benner K. Milk thistle (Sily-
bum marianum) for the therapy of liver disease. The
American Journal of Gastroenterology 1998 Feb; 93(2):139-43.
Vogel G, Trost W, Braatz R, et al. Studies on pharmaco-
dynamics, site and mechanism of action of silymarin, the
antihepatotoxic principle from Silyburn marianurn (L.)
Gaert. Arzneimittel-Forschung 1975; 2(5):179-85.
Wagner H. Plant constituents with antihepatotoxic ac-
tivity. In: Beal JL, Reinhard E eds. Natural Products as
Medicinal Agents. Stuttgart: Hippokrates-Verlag, 1981.
Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Valenzuela A, Lagos C, Schmidt K, Videla LA.
Silymarin protection against hepatichpid peroxidation
induced by acute ethanol intoxication in the rat.
Biochemical Pharmacology 1985; 34:2209-12.

Vogel G, Trost W, Braatz R, et al. Studies on pharmaco-
dynamics, site and mechanism of action of silymarin, the
antihepatotoxic principle from Silyburn marianurn (L.)
Gaert. Arzmeimittel-Forschung 1975; 2(5):179-85.
Sonnenbichler J, Goldberg M, Hane L, et al.
Stimulatory effect of silibinin on the DNA synthesis in
partially hepatectornized rat livers: non-response in hep-
atoma and other malignant cell lines. Biochemical
Pharmacology 1986; 35:538-41.

Wellington K, Jarvis B. Silymarin: A review of its clinical
properties in the management of hepatic disorders.
Biodrugs 2001; 15(7):465-89.

Katiyar, et al. Protective effects of silymarin against pho-
tocarcinogenesis in a mouse skin model, Journal of the
National Cancer Institute 1997 Apr 16; 89(8):556-66.
Saller R, Meier R, Brignoli R. The use of silymarin in the
treatment of liver diseases. Drugs 2001; 61(14):2035-63.
Murray Michael. Healing Power of Herbs. Rocklin, CA:
Prima, 1992.

Saller R, Meier R, Brignoli R. The use of silymarin in
the treatment of liver diseases. Drugs 2001;

61(14):203 5-63.

Gaedeke, et al. Cisplatin nephrotoxicity and protection
by silibinin. Nephrology, Dialysis, Transplantation 1996
Jan; 1 1(1):55-62.

----- PAGE 193 -----
137.

138.

139,

140.

141.

142.

143.

144,

145.

146.

Bokemeyer, et al. Silibinin protects against cisplatin-in-
duced nephrotoxicity without compromising cisplatin or
ifosfamide anti-tumour activity. British Journal of Cancer
1996 Dec; 74(12):2036-41.

Neef H, et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of selected
European plants. Phytotherapy Research: PTR 1995;
9(1):45.

Perl M. The biochemical basis of the hypoglycemic ef-
fects of some plant extracts. In: Cracker LE, Simon JE,
eds. Herbs, Spices and Medicinal Plants, vol. 3. Phoenix:
Oryx Press, 1988.

Marles RJ, Farnsworth NR. Antidiabetic plants and their
active constituents. Phytomedicine: International Journal of
Phytotherapy and Phytopharmacology 1995; 2:137-89.
Hikino H, et al. Mechanisms of hypoglycemic activity of
ganoderan B: a glycan of Ganoderma lucidum fruit bod-
ies. Planta Medica 1989; 55:423-28.

Ahmad N, Hassan MR, Halder H, et al. Effect of
Momordica charantia (Karolla) extracts on fasting and
postprandial serum glucose levels in NIDDM patients.
Bangladesh Medical Research Council Bulletin 1999,
25(1):11-3.

Ng T, et al. Insulin-like molecules in Momordica cha-
rantia seeds. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1986 Jan;
15(1):107-17.

Singh S, Vats P, Suri S, et al. Effect of an antidiabetic ex-
tract of Catharanthus roseus on enzymic activities in
streptozotocin induced diabetic rats. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 2001 Aug; 76(3):269-77.

Cohen AJ. Critical review of the toxicology of coumarin
with special reference to interspecies differences in
metabolism and hepatotoxic response and their signifi-
cance to man. Food and Cosmetics Toxicology. 1979 Jun;
17(3):277-89.

Karlstrom B, et al. Effects of leguminous seeds in a mixed
diet in non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients. Diabetes
Research 1987; 5(4):199-205.

150.

151.

152.

47.

48.

49.

PHARMACOLOGY & 185

Perl M, Hikino H. Effect of some hypoglycemic glycans
on glucose uptake and glucose metabolism by inverted
intestinal fragments. Phytotherapy Research: PTR 1989,
3(5):433-35.
Suzuki Y, Hikino H. Mechanisms of hypoglycemic activ-
ity 0)
effects on the key enzymes of glucose metabolism in the
liver of mice. Phytotherapy Research: PTR 1989; 3(1):15-19.
Suzuki Y, Hikino H. Mechanisms of hypoglycemic activ-
ity o
Effects on plasma level, secretion, sensitivity and binding
of insulin in mice. Phytotherapy Research: PTR 1989;
3:20-4.

Waki I, Kyo H, Yasuda M, Kimura M. Effects of a hypo-
glycemic component of Ginseng radix on insulin biosyn-

panaxans A and B, glycans of Panax ginseng roots:

panaxans A and B, glycans of Panax ginseng roots:

thesis in normal and diabetic animals. Journal of
Pharmacobio-dynamics 1982; 5:547-54.

Ng TB, Yeung HW. Hypoglycemic constituents of
Panax ginseng. General Pharmacology 1985; 16:549-52.
Ammon HP, Muller AB. Forskolin: from an ayurvedic
remedy to a modern agent. Planta Medica 1985 Dec;
(6):473-77.

Suggested Reading
Boik J. Cancer & Natural Medicine: A Textbook of Basic Science

and Clinical Research. Princeton, MN: Oregon Medical
Press, 1996.

Hardman JG, Limbird LE, eds. Goodman & Gilnan’s the

Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2001.

Mutschler E. Drug Actions: Basic Principles and Therapeutic

Aspects. Stuttgart: Medpharm Scientific; Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, 1995.

----- PAGE 194 -----
10

NM

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS,
AND SAFETY.

ecent years have seen profound cultural changes
R that are transforming the sociopolitical envi-

ronment within which the practice of herbalism
is flowering. The dominant culture has moved to embrace
herbalism, and it is no longer seen as fringe. Within this
brave new world, the phytotherapy community faces both
wonderful opportunities and profound challenges. One of
the thorniest of these concerns the safety, toxicity, and
contraindications of herbs.

Today, much is being written about herbs and herba
ism that has little to do with plants or patients and every-
thing to do with the belief system and dogma of the
writer. The herbal “true believers” deny any problems
that might exist with herbs because herbs are natural,
while summarily denouncing synthetic drugs. On the
other hand, some supposedly objective scientists can
make even hawthorn sound as dangerous as crack cocaine.
Some critical thinking is needed to traverse this maze of
information and misinformation, evangelism and bigotry.

In general, statements about the toxicity of a plant
may be based on any of a number of factors.

Observation of actual cases. These may be published re-
ports on individual responses to herbs or may come
from published research on therapeutic trials in which
research subjects were either healthy volunteers or un-
dergoing treatment for a health condition.

Extrapolation from chemical effects to whole plant effects.
Knowing the effects of a specific plant constituent pro-
vides little basis for conclusions about effects of the
whole plant. An example here is a contraindication for
salicylate-containing herbs in cases of peptic ulcer
based on the fact that aspirin will aggravate peptic
ulcer. While this may sound appropriate in theory, in
reality the salicylate-rich plant meadowsweet (Fili-
pendula ulmaria) works as an effective anti-inflammatory
and vulnerary in such conditions—and causes none of
the side effects of aspirin.

186

Extrapolation from animal evidence to humans. For ex-
ample, the statement that St. John’s wort (Hypericum
perforatum) causes photosensitivity is based on obser-
vance of phototoxicity reactions in light-colored range
animals that graze on the plant.

Traditional knowledge, or belief based on experience
with extensive use, is another potential source of infor-
mation about risks and contraindications for herbs.
However, this information must also be carefully con-
sidered. For example, feverfew is traditionally used for
the prophylaxis of migraine in the form ofa fresh leaf
chewed daily, which may cause canker sores (aphthous
ulcers). However, this often-repeated risk does not
apply when the leaf is swallowed or when the herb is
taken in tablet and tincture forms, which cause no buc-
cal irritation.

Subjective opinion or belief system. Subjective statements
from those considered experts in the field are often un-
questioningly accepted as insightful, considered opin-
ions. But who are the experts in these situations?

Consider the following quotation from The Honest
Herbal, by Professor Varro Tyler. Charles C. Bennett, vice
president of Public Education for the Arthritis Foun-
dation, has suggested that inquiries concerning yucca be
answered

“... by saying that there is no proper scientific evi-
dence that yucca tablets are helpful in treating
rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis; that they are
probably harmless; and that the real danger would
be in taking yucca tablets instead of following proper
and proven treatment procedures, which could lead
to irreversible joint damage and possible disabili-
ties.” Nothing need be added to this statement.!

I beg to differ. This statement turns the opinion of
Mr. Bennett about treatment advisability into a statement
about a plant. The statement is about patient choice, and

----- PAGE 195 -----
yucca has nothing to do with it. There needs to be a
recognition here of two distinct issues. First, herbs are
medicinal substances. Second, phytotherapy is a valid
therapeutic modality, and the skills and clinical experi-
ence of its practitioners must be recognized.

EVALUATING CAUSALITY IN
ADVERSE EVENTS

Correct identification of the herbs involved in any ad-
verse reaction is critical to the development of reliable
data on herb safety, toxicity, and interactions. Too often,
herbal products have been associated with adverse events
because of mislabeling, which in turn results from either
intentional or accidental substitution of botanical ingredi-
ents. The following quotation from DeSmet and D’Arcy
may prove enlightening.

When such reports of reactions and interactions, as are
available, are carefully analyzed, it becomes obvious that
many of these cases where herbal products have been asso-
ciated with actual human poisoning were not in fact caused
by herbs alleged to be in the product, but resulted from
substitution or contamination of the declared ingredients,
intentionally or by accident, with a more toxic botanical, a
poisonous metal, or a potent non-herbal drug substance.

When evaluating causality of adverse events, a num-
ber of questions must be answered.

* Are the effects consistent with the known pharmacol-
ogy of the substance?

¢ Is there is a reasonable temporal relationship between
the use of the substance and the observed effect?

© Ts there evidence of overdose or misuse of the sub-
stance?

¢ Did the effects disappear when use of the substance
was discontinued?

© Did the effects reappear on rechallenge?

An evaluation of approximately 3,000 adverse drug
reports (ADRs) related to veterinary medicines received
in one year revealed some interesting conclusions:

* Only 1% of reports could definitely be associated with
the product.

* 31% of reports were probably associated with a given
product.

* 45% of reports were possibly associated with a given
product.

© 12% were definitely not related to the product.

* 11% lacked adequate information to evaluate possible
causality.

ToxiciTy, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY < 187

In the material that follows, we shall explore the basis
for assessing toxicity. But first I would like to take this op-
portunity to voice some concerns about the use of poten-
tially toxic herbs by the phytotherapeutic community.
The issues are threefold.

My first concern is pharmacological. When dealing
with plants that contain constituents with a potentially
major impact on the human body, the concerns of the tox-
icologist become relevant. It is a challenge to accurately
assess levels of such constituents in whole plants or ex-
tracts without some form of standardization or batch-by-
batch chromatographic analysis. Levels of secondary plant
metabolites can vary with the phase of the moon, diurnal
changes, soil conditions, atmospheric conditions, and hu-
midity, as well as the drying and extracting processes.

This is of no consequence when we are using plants
for gentle effects, such as Urtica dioica, but with a plant
like Atropa belladonna, knowledge and understanding of
such variations is critical to safe prescribing. Similarly, the
use of drop measurements when dosage levels are critical
borders on malpractice. The quantitative measurement
of a drop varies with the diameter of the hole in the
dropper, the roughness of the edge, the viscosity of the
liquid being dispensed, the force of pressure applied to
the bulb, and, finally, elevation above sea level. In other
words, a drop in Boulder, Colorado, will be different in
size from a drop in Santa Cruz, California (and it’s not
just the surf!).

‘Taken together, all of these factors create a huge
potential for variability—enough that I would not
chance using these herbs for the pharmacological effects
of their constituents, as controlling dosage becomes very
challenging.

The second concern is an educational and ethical one.
Teachers may be trained to a sufficient level of compe-
tence to use these tinctures, but to discuss their use with-
out ensuring that students have a similar broad framework
of knowledge raises some worrying questions. We need to
recognize the current state of knowledge and experience
in the general herbal community in the United States. I
am saying nothing about intelligence, commitment, car-
ing, or innate healing compassion, but simply acknowl-
edging the shortcomings of the educational environment
bequeathed to us by the carnage of the Flexner report.

The Flexner report of 1911 is considered by many to
mark the beginning of modern orthodox medical educa-
tion. However, its legacy also serves as a de facto definition
of medicine as a science-based endeavor. Here is not the
place to debate the pros and cons of this report, but sim-
ply to acknowledge that in its wake, herbal medicine,

----- PAGE 196 -----
188 «3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

among other therapeutic modalities, suffered immensely.
The report led to the closing of the Eclectic medical
schools, and thus the virtual disappearance of academic
centers of herbal excellence.

In short, I fee] that phytotherapists who teach must
recognize the need for comprehensive, basic herbal edu-
cation to provide a framework of understanding within
which herbalists can cope safely with issues like this one.
A little bit of knowledge is a dangerous thing, but it is po-
tentially lethal if the recipient does not know just how lit-
tle it is.

The third concern is more of a philosophical one. We
are blessed with a diversity of therapeutic approaches
within the community of medical herbalists. The practi-
tioner, the educator, and students are all faced with ongo-
ing choices as to the therapeutic context within which
they should use their materia medica. But just because we
have plants with certain effects at our disposal, should we
use them? The application of effectors as strong as Atropa
is very similar in nature and reasoning to an allopathic
approach.

There is nothing wrong with this in itself, but such an
approach must be a conscious choice rather than an intel-
lectual delusion. My reasons for not using herbs that can
be seen simply as drug delivery systems, such as Atropa, is
that we herbalists cannot do it safely, and I see no reason
to use such herbs within the context of a holistic practice.
If powerful chemicals are indicated, then I suggest that
prescription medications are safer. Let me clarify this. I
do not mean that phytotherapists should turn to prescrip-
tion medications. I am simply suggesting we acknowledge
that the unique and wonderful strength of phytotherapy
lies in the use of nurturing, toning, gentle plants.

Is Comfrey Safe?

Herb safety issues are complex, extending far beyond the
realm of the reliable, objective scientific method. The
questions raised and the answers given often need to be
deconstructed in the light, when assessing not only the
toxicological facts, but also the political and sociological
context within which the discussion is occurring.

‘As an example, consider comfrey (Symphytum offici-
nale), an herb with a very long history of traditional use.
Comfrey has been used both internally (as a demulcent)
and externally (as a vulnerary). The herb has become a
topic of considerable debate, as it contains pyrrolizidine
alkaloids (PAs), which have been shown to pose a real risk
of hepatotoxicity.

There can be no question about the concerns posed
by PAs to humans.’ However, it must be remembered that

we cannot demonize a naturally occurring substance sim-
ply because it is inappropriate for human consumption.
PAs play vital roles in the ecology of many butterflies.*
Several species feed on PA-containing plants. The butter-
flies incorporate the PAs into their tissues and thus be-
come unpalatable to predators.’ In the tropical danaid
butterflies, PAs serve as essential precursors to phero-
mones that act as oviposition stimulants for females.®

However, comfrey is not simply a vehicle for the
pharmacological effects of a specific constituent. The
herb’s pharmacological impact is far more complex than
that. The only time an herb can be viewed solely as an
“organic drug delivery system” is when it contains phar-
macologically active levels of potent constituents that over-
ride any potential whole plant effects. The fact that PAs
pose risks cannot be simply used by extension to imply
that comfrey is an unsafe herb. A recent, well-balanced re-
view by Dorena Rode on toxicological findings concern-
ing comfrey sheds considerable light on this subject.’

To address the question of whether or not comfrey is
safe for therapeutic use, a range of issues must be consid-
ered, and not all of these involve toxicology. Webster's
Revised Unabridged Dictionary defines the word safe as
meaning:

Free from harm, injury, or risk; untouched or unthreatened
by danger or injury; unharmed; unhurt; secure; whole; as,
safe from disease; safe from storms; safe from foes.

Unfortunately, there is a common assumption that
might be paraphrased as “Herbs are natural, and there-
fore safe.” This is clearly not the case. Cliffs are natural
and yet people fall off them, water is natural and yet peo-
ple drown, arsenic is natural] and yet it is lethally toxic. To
put this in the crudest terms, we are all going to die, and
that too is natural!

Thus, if “safe” is taken to mean completely risk-free,
then the answer must be no, comfrey is not safe. For ex-
ample, as with all herbs and drugs, there is a small chance
that an allergic response will occur. ‘As is discussed later in
this chapter, it is more meaningful to consider the concepts
of hazard and risk than “safety.” When these concepts are
applied to comfrey, we see that the hazard it poses is its
potential to cause an adverse effect, and the risk it poses
is the statistical probability that the hazard will occur
under specific exposure conditions.

All substances (including herbs) and all activities (in-
cluding taking herbs internally) carry risks. The core
therapeutic issue is whether the benefits outweigh the
dangers. This therapeutic index is discussed in more detail
later in this chapter. However, it should be noted here

----- PAGE 197 -----
that determining a risk-benefit relationship depends on
the informed judgment of the clinician, not an absolute of
pharmacology. Many very risky pharmaceuticals are pre-
scribed because the clinician believes that the benefits
outweigh the risks.®

‘To compound matters, questions of herb safety are
posed in very divergent contexts and lead to similarly di-
vergent answers. The assumptions, expectations, belief
system, knowledge, and experience of both the person
who asks the question and the person who responds will
affect the outcome. A bureaucrat given the responsibility
of regulating the herbal marketplace is not likely to con-
sider the crucial risk-benefit complexities that a phy-
totherapist takes into account when reaching clinical de-
cisions about a unique patient.

When the reports on comfrey toxicity are reviewed,
some interesting points can be made. The following quo-
tation comes from Dorena Rode, author of an insightful
review on comfrey toxicity.

One might expect that new toxicity research or an unac-
ceptable number of adverse reactions prompted these re-

cent actions, but neither is the case.?

The very few specific reports of human toxicity re-
lated to comfrey all come from the period between 1980
and 1990, when a number of cases of veno-occlusive dis-
ease were reported.'° There is no question about the di-
agnoses. However, it is important to note that in these
cases, the connection with comfrey was not considered
in the context of other contributing factors. For exam-
ple, concomitant illness, the use of prescription or over-
the-counter hepatotoxic drugs (like acetaminophen, for
example), and impaired nutritional status clearly in-
crease the likelihood that PA-containing herbs will cause
hepatotoxicity.

With minimal epidemiological data, what insights
can be garnered from the laboratory research into toxic-
ity? As with many statements about herbal toxicity, the
evidence proffered comes primarily from rodent studies
that utilized high levels of purified PAs. No systematic
toxicity testing or clinical trials of comfrey have been per-
formed. Although PA poisoning in humans does occur, it
is most commonly a consequence of consuming plants
other than comfrey.!!

Such reliance on animal experimentation data and
toxicity reports about other plants gives us little insight
into the risks and therapeutic benefits of the human use of
comfrey. Rode enumerates four limitations of the pub-
lished research.

Toxicity, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .@ 189

Not all PAs have similar toxicity. ‘As discussed in chapter
8 and later in this chapter, this group of alkaloids do
not pose a uniform risk. Based on structure-toxicity
studies, it can be concluded that the PAs in comfrey
(such as symphytine, a retronecine monoester) are
less toxic than those present in the plants Senecio,
Crotolaria, and Heliotropium. ‘These have actually
caused human toxicity (for example, senecionine, a
macrocyclic retronecine diester).!?

Not all. animals are susceptible to PA toxicity. As with
most substances, responses to PAs among different
animals vary greatly. Pigs, chickens, and rats are
highly sensitive to poisoning by Senecio, whereas mice
and sheep are resistant. However, and more signifi-
cant, the response of one species to Senecio might not
reflect its susceptibility to other PAs.!3 In addition,
the route of administration can dramatically affect
the toxic response. For example, rabbits are relatively
resistant to chronic feeding of Senecio, but are killed
by a single injection of the purified alkaloids.'*

Although theoretically sensitivity to PAs, pigs
readily accept comfrey as a food and show no ad-
verse effects, even when comfrey represents 40% of
their diet. Rats, however, appear to be very sensitive
to the same PAs. When eating large amounts of
comfrey or injected with comfrey PAs, rats develop
the hepatic lesions indicative of PA poisoning.!5 This
calls into question the validity of using rodent ani-
mal models as indicators of human response to PAs.

Comfrey species vary in PA content. Between 85% and
97% of the PAs in Symphytum officinale, the com-
frey commonly grown in American gardens, are
built around the less toxic retronecine monoester.
However, Russian comfrey (Symphytum x up-
landicum), contains higher levels of the diester,
which is known to have a greater toxicity.!®
Bearing in mind the differences in toxicity among
various PAs, and the variable distribution of PAs in
different comfrey species and varieties, we might
conclude that extrapolations of research results
from one species to another may be unreliable.

Effects of isolated PAs might not be representative of
whole:plant use. As with many herbs, it is problem-
atic to assume that the pharmacology of a specific
constituent can be used to predict the pharmacology
of the whole plant. Veterinary studies have shown that
the formation of toxic PA metabolites is reduced by
concurrent administration of the sulfur-containing
amino acid methionine or cysteine.!’ Similarly,
protein-deficient diets enhance the toxicity of PAs.!8

----- PAGE 198 -----
190 «@ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Most toxicity studies used purified PAs, ignoring
the potential protective effects of co-occurring nu-
trients present in the whole plant. This suggests
that studies using purified PAs probably overstate
the health risks associated with comfrey extracts or
the whole plant.

So what can be concluded about the safe use of com-
frey? Again, the clinical concept of comfrey’s therapeutic
index must be invoked. As discussed later in this chapter
under Toxicology, the therapeutic index compares the
therapeutically effective dose to the toxic dose of a sub-
stance. This gives an indication of the relative safety of a
drug or herb by providing a ratio of the dose that pro-
duces toxicity to the dose needed to bring about the de-
sired therapeutic response. According to The Merck
Manual, the term describes “informed clinical judgment,”
but who are the relevant clinicians in the case of comfrey?

All of this might lead one to the conclusion that tox-
icologists’ statements about the safety of comfrey may be
based on inadequate data. Unless benefits are compared
with risks, we have only conjecture. Consider, for exam-
ple, the case of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs). NSAIDs include such readily available
medicines as aspirin and ibuprofen, as well as stronger
prescription drugs like Celebrex, Indocin, and Vioxx.
Such medications can play an undeniably beneficial role
in the control of arthritic inflammation, for example. But
are they safe?

More than 30 billion NSAIDs are consumed annually
in the United States. The major effect of all NSAIDs is to
decrease the synthesis of prostaglandins by reversibly in-
hibiting cyclooxygenase, an enzyme that catalyzes the for-
mation of prostaglandins from the precursor arachidonic
acid. Prostaglandins enhance the inflammatory response,
but also renal blood flow and cytoprotection of gastroin-
testinal mucosa. The 1998 report from the American
Association of Poison Control Centers (AAPCC) docu-
ments 52,751 toxic exposures to ibuprofen alone, of
which 13,519 were treated in health care facilities. Four
deaths were reported. For the same year, the AAPCC also
reports a high rate of complications arising from thera-
peutic use of NSAIDs, specifically, 100,000 toxic expo-
sures resulting in hospitalization and 10,000 resulting in
fatality.!?

In the face of such toxicological data, it may seem
strange that ibuprofen is considered safe enough for non-
prescription use. However, the benefits are believed to
outweigh the risks. Thus, the toxicity data are seen in the
context of the therapeutic benefits. The phytotherapist

would say that the same process must be applied to com-
frey before conclusive statements can be made. Thus, an
assessment of comfrey’s safety must take into account
more than the real and theoretical risks posed by PAs:

¢ How does the toxicity of a whole plant preparation
compare with that of the actual PAs present?

* How does the toxicity of comfrey PAs compare to that
of the well-studied PAs contained in toxic plants from
the genus Senecio?

¢ How does the hazard posed by comfrey PAs relate to
the risk of using comfrey in herbal teas and tinctures?

¢ What real risks are posed and what therapeutic bene-
fits are offered by the use of comfrey?

* How do the benefits compare with the risks?

Unless the knowledge and experience of clinical phy-
totherapists are taken into account, the lack of main-
stream Clinical experience with comfrey might suggest it
offers no therapeutic benefits. However, in this book, the
reader will discover that comfrey is suggested for inclu-
sion in many treatment protocols. For more details on its
safe use, please refer to the comfrey entry in chapter 26
and to specific body system chapters in part 2 of this
book.

Factors to Consider When Assessing

Herb Safety

In general, a number of broad factors must be taken into
account:

¢ Has traditional use of the plant revealed any knowl-
edge of toxicity?

¢ Does the plant contain constituents with established
toxicity?

¢ Are there inherent risks unique to the form in which
the herb is administered? (For example, does topical
use of comfrey pose a different level of risk than inter-
nal use?)

¢ Does objective data for both toxicity and efficacy exist?
Are the research results valid enough to form some
basis for approximate risk assessment?

* How does the science compare with the perceived risk
expressed by the FDA, practitioners of orthodox
medicine, or herbalists?

Based on the context in which the herb is being
prescribed, selected, or purchased, what might be called
iatrogenic risks arise—in other words, inadvertent risks in-
troduced through mistakes, lack of knowledge, or other
such factors, If use of comfrey was suggested by a clini-
cian, did this clinician understand the parameters for safe

----- PAGE 199 -----
Safety Guidelines for
Phytotherapists

How do we create a bridge between the knowl-
edge and experience of a well-trained phyto-
therapist and the unique perspective and lan-
guage of the scientific method? The plethora of
issues concerning safety and toxicity is an area in
which | am trying to find meaningful corollaries,
and, as a simple-minded herbalist, make sense of
all of this. In this time of rapid change, | want to
sound a plea for traditional protocols. Here are
some provisional guidelines.

Don't jump to unwarranted conclusions
about therapeutic indications and contraindica-
tions from research findings if:

° They are derived from animal experiments.
This is partly a moral position, but there are
also profound doubts about the validity of
extrapolations from animal studies to human
research applications. For example, does a
specific animal model actually test what the
interpretation suggests it tests? Much of the
basic research on phytoestrogens uses a labo-
ratory test that assesses estrogen-induced
thickening of the uterine wall in rodents. This
is all well and good, but to use results of such
tests to arrive at human therapeutic proto-
cols is absurd. The mere fact that rodents do
not menstruate calls into question the valid-
ity of such extrapolation. This alone should
inform us that the actual situation is much
more complex than the one the test is de-
signed to investigate.

© The studies utilized isolated constituents, not
whole plants. Even if we don’t invoke the bio-
chemical synergy that may play a role in the
actions of whole plant preparations, the stu-
pendous number of potential interactions
should make us wary of easy conclusions.

© They disagree with established phytothera-
peutic experience and protocols. As our
modality has inherent value (a statement that
is obviously a reflection of my own belief
system, not statistical data), we should not
reject protocols or plants because of lack of
research on their mechanisms of action.

‘ToxiciTy, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY 2 191

use? At the other end of the spectrum, was the herb self-
selected by a consumer under the influence of commer-
cial hype?

The complex of issues concerning substance interac-
tions must also be assessed. As discussed later in this
chapter, the nature of interactions varies. One must con-
sider the ways in which an herb might interact with pre-
scription or over-the-counter drugs, other herbs, or even
other modalities.

Sociopolitical risks must also be evaluated. From cer-
tain cultural perspectives, the use of herbs by anyone out-
side of a professional elite poses some unique concerns.
The informed use of therapeutic plants empowers people.
However, in this context, any lessening of people’s depen-
dence on the professional elite (or financial indebtedness
to the industrial-medical complex) can be seen as a po-
tential threat to the power structure of the dominant hi-
erarchy. The more people develop their own relationship
with nature, the less power the dominators will have. Just
as attempts are made to discourage people about the
green movement by labeling it “ecoterrorism,” the scare
tactic used against herbs is often the issue of safety.

Of course, determining how to use herbs safely is a
real issue, but it is one that can also be used for political
ends. This does not necessarily imply a conscious politi-
cal effort, but is more often simply the expression of the
belief system in which the person is embedded. “Expert
status” is a mutually supportive addiction that often in-
vokes a reflexive response.

In mainstream culture, herbal expertise is rarely rec-
ognized as existing outside the walls of academia.
However, if becoming an expert involves some form of
culturally recognized academic achievement, how is this
to be obtained in a culture that offers no Ph.D. programs
in herbalism? By this I mean clinical phytotherapy pro-
grams, not ethnobotany. In a cultural milieu in which the
knowledge, skills, and experience of the herbalist are de-
valued or ignored, how can our expertise be recognized?

HERB CONTRAINDICATIONS AND
INTERACTIONS

I have come to the conclusion that is it too soon in the
development of modern phytotherapy to authoritatively
define contraindications. Similarly, the interactions of
herbs and even common foods with the various compo-
nents of orthodox medicine have not been explored in
enough depth or with a large enough patient population
to reach reliable conclusions. Ideas abound, but consen-
sus is rare. Specifics about individual herbs can be found
in chapter 26.

----- PAGE 200 -----
192 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

TYPES OF INTERACTIONS

People are normally exposed to several chemicals at a
time, rather than to one isolated chemical. Medical treat-
ment and environmental factors both generally consist of
multiple exposures at a time. Normally, the toxicity of a
specific drug is determined by the study of animals ex-
posed to only one chemical at a time. Researchers rarely
test mixtures of substances for toxicity, since it is usually
impossible to predict possible combinations of chemicals
hat might be present in multiple-chemical exposures.
All of this makes the process of predicting interac-
tions very challenging. Medicines taken simultaneously
may act independently; however, the presence of one
chemical may drastically affect the body’s response to an-
other chemical. The toxicity of a combination of chemi-
cals may be less or more than might be expected based on
the known effects of individual chemicals.

ar:

It is important to have a conceptual context within
which to place any discussion of herb-drug interactions.
The following categories are based on two sources, the
important work of Brinker and of DeSmet.’??! Inter-
actions may be pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic in
nature, and may not be uniformly negative. However, as
is often the case, the complexities of real life may produce
multiple or mysterious interactions between herbs and
drugs.

Pharmacokinetic Interactions

Pharmacokinetic interactions may take a variety of forms
and cause a range of different effects, some negative and
some, as we shall see, potentially positive.

Interactions Leading to a Decrease in Drug
Bioavailability

An herb may affect drug pharmacokinetics by altering
drug absorption. Examples of herbs that may have such
an effect include those that contain dietary fiber, mu-
cilages, or tannins (for example, marshmallow, psyllium,
and tea). Herbs may also cause changes in the rate of
drug elimination. Examples include all laxative herbs and
caffeine-containing herbs, such as coffee, kola nut, mate,
and guarana.

Interactions Causing an Increase in Drug
Bioavailability

Drug bioavailability may be enhanced by herbs that in-
crease the rate of absorption, such as cayenne and black
pepper, or by those that slow metabolism, such as citrus
and licorice.

Interactions That Protect Against Adverse Effects
Several herbs, such as milk thistle, may afford protection
against the adverse effects of drugs. This is discussed in
greater detail in chapter 9.

Pharmacodynamic Interactions
Pharmacodynamic interactions between herbs and ortho-
dox drugs may occur if they work via similar mechanisms.
As the pharmacology of many herbs is still unclear, it
should be assumed that if an herb predictably produces a
certain outcome, there is a chance that interactions will
occur with drugs that produce similar outcomes.

Enbancement of Drug Effects

Drug effects may be enhanced if an herb works by a
mechanism different from that of the drug. For example,
hawthorn may enhance the activity of digoxin, a medica-
tion used to treat arrhythmias (irregular heart rhythms).

Additive Effects

An agonistic combination of two or more substances may
result in a cumulative effect that reflects the sum of the
expected individual responses. This is the most common
and most potentially toxic type of drug interaction, and
may occur when the herb and drug have similar mecha-
nisms of activity, such as Ginkgo and PAF inhibitors.

Antagonistic, Effects

Here, an exposure to one medicine may diminish the ef-
fect of the other. This might be a physiological antago-
nism: For example, a severe drop in blood pressure result-
ing from a barbiturate overdose can be reversed by
administration of a vasopressor to increase blood pressure.

TOXICOLOGY

Toxicology is the study of adverse effects of chemical or
physical agents on living organisms. The material that
follows provides a brief overview of the issues to consider
when assessing toxicity and its attendant risks. The terms
toxicant, toxin, and poison are often used interchangeably,
however, there are subtle differences in meaning.

* Toxicants are substances that produce adverse biological
effects of any kind; they may be chemical or physical in
nature.

¢ Toxins are specific proteins produced by living organ-
isms (for example, mushroom and tetanus toxins); most
exhibit immediate effects.

* Poisons are toxicants that cause immediate death or ill-
ness upon exposure to very small amounts.

----- PAGE 201 -----
* A toxic agent is anything that produces an adverse bio-
logical effect; it may be chemical, physical, or biologi-
cal in nature.

Systemic Toxic Effects
Toxicity may effect only one site in the body, or a target
organ, or multiple sites, in which case it is called systemic
toxicity. The timing of onset of symptoms can be impor-
tant. Acute toxicity occurs within hours or days of an ex-
posure. An acute exposure is generally a single dose or a
series of doses received within a 24-hour period.
Subchronic toxicity results from repeated exposure over
the course of several weeks or months. This is the usual
exposure pattern when medicinal plants are implicated.
Chronic toxicity results from cumulative damage to
specific organ systems and may take many months or
years to become recognizable, as is the case with
pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Damage due to subclinical expo-
sure may go unnoticed, but with repeated exposure, the
effects slowly build up until they can be detected.

Developmental Toxicity

Toxic effects can impact the fetus, and can result from ex-
posure of either parent before conception or of the
mother and her developing fetus after conception.
Developmental toxicity may manifest in failure to con-
ceive, spontaneous abortion or stillbirth, growth retarda-
tion or delayed growth of specific organs, or teratogenicity
(permanent birth defects).

Genetic Toxicity

Damage to DNA causes altered genetic expression. In this
process, known as mutagenesis, the specific genetic change
constitutes a mutation, and the agent that causes the change
is a mutagen. If the mutation occurs in a germ cell, the ef-
fect may be inherited, in which case it causes no harm to
the exposed person but is passed on to future generations.
If the mutation occurs in a somatic cell, it can cause altered
cell growth or cell death in the exposed person.

Organ-Specific Toxic Effects
The toxicity of a given substance may be confined to a
particular body system or organ.

Blood and Cardiovascular Toxicity

Toxicity to the blood or cardiovascular system is caused by
the direct impact of a toxin on cells in the blood, bone
marrow, or heart. Examples include hypoxia (oxygen defi-
ciency) caused by the binding of carbon monoxide to

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY @ 193

hemoglobin, which prevents the transport of oxygen, and
eukemia caused by benzene damage of bone marrow cells.

Dermal Toxicity

Dermal toxicity may result either from direct contact of a
substance with the skin or from internal distribution of
the substance to the skin. Effects can range from mild ir-
ritation to severe injury or change, such as corrosion, hy-
persensitivity, or skin cancer.

Eye Toxicity

Eye toxicity may be caused by direct contact of a toxin
with the eye or by internal distribution of the toxin to the
eye. Conjunctivitis and corneal erosion may be observed
after exposure to chemicals. Chemicals in the circulatory
system distributed to the eye can result in corneal opacity,
cataracts, and retinal and optic nerve damage.

Hepatotoxicity

The liver is particularly susceptible to toxicity because of
its large blood supply and important role in metabolism,
both of which expose the organ to potentially high doses
of toxic metabolites. Hepatotoxicity can take many forms.

Table 10.1. Types of Hepatotoxicity

EFFECT DEFINITION

Chemical hepatitis Inflammation of the liver

Cirrhosis Chronic fibrosis

Hepatic cancer Cancer of the liver

Hepatic necrosis Death of hepatocytes

Hypersensitivity Immune reaction resulting in hepatic

necrosis
Intrahepatic cholestasis Backup of bile salts into liver cells

Steatosis Lipid accumulation in hepatocytes

Immunotoxicity

Damage to the immune system can take several forms, in-
cluding hypersensitivity, immunodeficiency, and uncon-
trolled cell proliferation.

Nepbrotoxicity

The kidney is highly vulnerable to toxicity, because of
both the great volume of blood that flows through it and
the fact that the kidney filters large quantities of toxins,

----- PAGE 202 -----
194 <3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

which can concentrate in the kidney tubules. Nephro-
toxicity can result in systemic toxicity, leading to de-
creased ability to excrete body wastes, inability to main-
tain body fluids and electrolyte balance, and reduced
synthesis of hormones, such as erythropoietin.

Neurotoxicity
Neurotoxicity involves damage to cells of the central ner-
vous and peripheral nervous systems:

* Neuronopathy (neuron injury)

¢ Axonopathy (axon injury)

* Demyelination (loss of axon insulation)
¢ Interference with neurotransmission

Reproductive Toxicity
Specific reproductive organs and the developing fetus
both represent potential sites of reproductive toxicity:

* Decreased libido or impotence

* Infertility

¢ Interrupted pregnancy (abortion, fetal death, or pre-
mature delivery)

¢ Infant death or childhood morbidity

¢ Altered sex ratio and multiple births

¢ Chromosome abnormalities and birth defects

© Childhood cancer

Respiratory Toxicity

Respiratory toxicity can take the form of pulmonary irri-
tation, asthma, bronchitis, reactive airway disease, em-
physema, allergic alveolitis, fibrotic lung disease, pneu-
moconiosis, or lung cancer.

DOSE

The toxicity of a substance is determined mainly by the
dose at which the effect occurs. Toxicity is therefore not
an independent characteristic of a substance, but a func-
tion of the quantity of the substance absorbed. Whether
or not a toxic effect will appear is determined by the dose.
When evaluating the toxicity of substances, both acute
and chronic data must be taken into account, since short-
term exposure to high concentrations generally causes
symptoms different from those caused by long-term ex-
posure to relatively low concentrations.

A dose is the amount of a substance administered at
one time, but this is not the only parameter that must be
taken into account when characterizing toxicity. Also im-
portant are the number of doses, frequency, and total du-
ration of treatment. The total dose, harmful if received all

at once, may be nontoxic when administered over a pe-
riod of time. For example, 30 mg of strychnine swallowed
all at once could be fatal to an adult, whereas 3 mg of
strychnine swallowed each day for 10 days would not be
fatal. The reason is that the body is often able to repair
damage caused by subtoxic doses if sufficient time passes
before the next dose.

The clinical and toxic effects of a dose are both re-
lated to age and body size, so one way to compare efficacy
and toxicity is to consider the amount of a substance ad-
ministered on the basis of body weight. A common dose
measurement is mg/kg, which stands for milligrams (mg)
of substance per kilogram (kg) of body weight. Some
chemicals are toxic in much smaller amounts, so smaller
fractions of the gram are used, such as a microgram (xg).

Table 10.2. Intensity of Toxic Effects

INTENSITY OF EFFECT ORAL DOSAGE*
Extremely toxic Micrograms

Very toxic Milligrams

Moderately toxic Hundreds of milligrams
Slightly toxic Grams

*Per Kilogram of body weight

Effective dose (ED) is a term used to indicate the effi-
cacy of a substance. Normally, “effective dose” refers to a
beneficial effect, but it can also stand for a harmful effect,
so the specific endpoint must be indicated. Toxic dose (TD)
indicates a dose that can be expected to cause adverse
toxic effects.

Relative effective doses are generally described as
follows.

EDo: _ effective in 0% of the population

ED,y: effective in 10% of the population
EDso: effective in 50% of the population
EDg: effective in 90% of the population

Significance of the LDso

A commonly used dose estimate for acute toxicity is the
LDso, in which LD stands for /ethal dose. This is a statis-
tically derived dose at which 50% of the individuals can
be expected to die after administration of a given sub-
stance. Other dose estimates also may be used, LD rep-
resents the dose at which no individuals are expected to
die. This is just below the threshold for lethality. LDyo

----- PAGE 203 -----
refers to the dose at which 10% of the individuals will
die, and so on.

The LDspo is merely a statistical expression that de-
scribes the lethal effect of a substance on a particular pop-
ulation under certain circumstances, not a fundamental
property of the substance. More specifically, LDso is a
measure of the lethality of a substance under experimen-
tal circumstances. It is used, for example, to compare the
relative toxicity of different substances and to classify sub-
stances according to the potential hazards they pose.

Although determination of the LDs under well-
described circumstances can provide valuable informa-
tion, it concerns only one aspect of overall toxicity,
namely lethality. Of much greater importance are, for ex-
ample, the effects and the rate at which they occur and the
pathological symptoms. Bear in mind also that it is diffi-
cult to extrapolate the LDso of a substance for a particu-
lar population of one animal species to other populations
of that species under slightly different conditions.
Extrapolation to a different species altogether will lead to
extremely uncertain results. In addition, comparison of
LDs9 values determined in various laboratories often
shows that there are large variations in results from differ-
ent laboratories.

Therapeutic Index

The therapeutic index (TI) is used to compare the thera-
peutically effective dose to the toxic dose. The TI is a
statement of the relative safety of a drug, and represents a
ratio of the dose producing toxicity to the dose needed to
bring about the desired therapeutic response.

The usual method of deriving the TI is through the
use of 50% dose-response points. For example, if the
LD5p is 200 mg and the EDsp is 20 mg, the resulting ratio
of 200:20 gives us a TI of 10. A clinician would consider
a drug with a TI of 10 safer than one with a TI of 3. Thus,
the higher the TI, the safer the drug and the larger the
therapeutic window of opportunity. The greatest benefit
of the concept of the TI is that it provides some indica-
tion of the probability that toxic adverse effects will be
encountered.

The use of the EDs, and LDso doses to derive the TI
can be misleading. Another term used to denote the safety
of a drug is the margin of safety (MOS). The MOS is usu-
ally calculated as the ratio of the dose that is just within
the lethal range (LDo,) to the dose that is 99% effective
(EDoo). (MOS = LDo)/EDoo.) A physician must use cau-
tion in prescribing a drug in which the MOS is lower
than |.

To put this important concept into a practical con-

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .@ 195

text, consider this quotation from The Merck Manual,
which uses the phrase “benefit-to-risk ratio” instead of
“therapeutic index.”

In every therapeutic endeavor, risks must be weighed
against benefits for each particular clinical situation and
patient. Drug therapy is justified only if the possible ben-
efits outweigh the possible risks after considering the
qualitative and quantitative impact of the use of a drug
and the likely outcome if drug therapy is withheld. This
decision depends on adequate clinical knowledge of the
patient, knowledge of the disease and its natural history,
and knowledge of the drugs pertinent to the specific situ-
ation. Although the term benefit-to-risk ratio is conve-
nient and often used for individual patients, numerical
predictions of benefit or risk do not exist and the mathe-
matical division (to obtain a ratio) is never performed. The

term is used to describe informed clinical judgment.?*

Dose Response

The dose-response relationship correlates exposures and
the spectrum of induced effects. Generally, the higher the
dose, the more severe the response. Knowledge of the
dose-response relationship is important for a number of
reasons:

* Establishes causality, that the chemical has in fact in-
duced the observed effects

* Establishes the lowest dose at which an induced effect
may occur, or the threshold effect

* Determines the rate at which injury builds up, or the
slope for the dose response

A threshold for toxic effects occurs at the point at
which the body’s ability to detoxify a xenobiotic substance
or repair toxic injury has been exceeded. Most organs
have a reserve capacity, so that some loss of organ func-
tion does not cause a significant decrease in performance.
For example, the development of cirrhosis in the liver
may not result in a clinical effect until more than 50% of
the liver has been replaced by fibrous tissue.

ANIMAL TESTING FOR TOXICITY

I find the degree of animal testing in the world of phar-
macology to be pornographic. However, in the overview
of herbal science that makes up the first part of this book,
it proved essential to refer to animal studies, because at
present, bioscience is largely dependent on this research
method. In any case, here is not the place to enter the
debate about vivisection. The material that follows is

----- PAGE 204 -----
196 «3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

intended to inform the reader, not serve as advocacy for
animal testing.

Animal tests for toxicity are conducted prior to
human clinical investigations. For pesticides and indus-
trial chemicals, human testing is rarely conducted, so an-
imal test results are used to predict toxicity in humans.
Methods to evaluate toxicity exist for a wide variety of
toxic effects. Some procedures for routine safety testing
have been standardized.

To be standardized, a test procedure must have sci-
entific acceptance as the most meaningful assay for the
toxic effect. Toxicity tests can be very specific for a par-
ticular effect, such as dermal irritation, or may be gen-
eral, such as a test for unknown chronic effects. Species
selection varies with the toxicity test to be performed, as
there is no single species that is appropriate for all tests.
In some cases, it may not be possible to use the most de-
sirable animal for testing because of animal welfare con-
cerns or cost considerations. For example, monkeys and
dogs are restricted to special cases, even though their re-
actions to such testing may most closely represent human
reactions.

Testing should duplicate the potential exposure of
humans as closely as possible. Thus, the route of exposure
should simulate that of human exposure. In addition, the
age of test animals should relate to that of humans likely
to be exposed to the substance. For most routine tests,
both genders are used. Gender differences in toxic re-
sponses are minimal, except for toxic substances with
hormonal properties. Dose levels are normally selected
in order to determine the toxic threshold as well as dose-
response relationship.

Problems with Animal Testing

Apart from the overriding moral and ethical concerns
with animal experimentation, there are a number of sci-
entific concerns.

Inter- and Intraspecies Differences in Sensitivity
There may be considerable differences in sensitivity to a
toxic substance among different species and among indi-
viduals. Mice are more sensitive than rats to the carcino-
genic effects of 1,3-butadiene, a chemical used in the pro-
duction of synthetic rubber and other resins that is one of
the 189 hazardous air pollutants identified in the Clean
Air Act amendments.”3

Butadiene causes cancer through its conversion in the
body to more-toxic metabolites, butadiene monoepoxide
and butadiene diepoxide. Studies on the livers of rats,
mice, and humans indicate that humans and rats metabo-

lize butadiene in a similar manner, and rats are relatively
resistant to the cancer-causing effects of this chemical.
Mice produce significantly more butadiene monoepoxide
than rats, as well as large quantities of butadiene diepox-
ide. This is important, as butadiene diepoxide is about
100 times more damaging to DNA than butadiene mo-
noepoxide. The high levels of these epoxides produced
by mice probably explains why they are so sensitive to
the carcinogenic effects of butadiene.’*

Interspecies Variations in Anatomy and Body Size
Small animals have a relatively large body-surface-to-
body-volume ratio, This means that exposure to a sub-
stance via the skin surface can lead to the absorption of a
relatively large quantity. The ratio also indicates that the
animal’s metabolic rate is relatively high, so it will ingest
more food. If the food happens to be contaminated, a rel-
atively high dose of the substance will be ingested.

Selective Toxicity Due to Physiology

An extreme example of this phenomenon is the difference
between animals and plants. The toxicity of many insec-
ucides is dependent on their effects on the nervous sys-
tem. Plants, therefore, are relatively insensitive to the ef-
fects of insecticides. On the other hand, animals are
relatively insensitive to most herbicides, many of which
affect physiological mechanisms characteristic of plants,
such as photosynthesis.

FACTORS AFFECTING TOXICITY
IN HUMANS

Genetic Differences

Sensitivity may depend on genetic variability in enzyme
activity. Individuals with a glucose-6-phosphate dehy-
drogenase deficiency in their red blood cells are hyper-
sensitive to oxidative substances, such as aromatic nitro
substances, chlorates, antimalarial agents, and glycosides
from broad beans.

Age

Babies are more sensitive to the toxic effect of nitrates
than adults. Their sensitivity is ascribed to a transient de-
ficiency in NADH-methemoglobin reductase. Hence, in
this case, babies constitute a high-risk group.

Dietary Habits and Lifestyle
Diet appears to be of great significance in the develop-
ment of cancer. In the body, many carcinogenic sub-

----- PAGE 205 -----
stances are activated to become reactive metabolites
under the influence of biotransformation enzymes.

Internal Absorption versus External
Exposure

Often, the crucial factor is not the amount of a substance
to which an individual is exposed, but its subsequent con-
centration in the body, specifically in the target organ or
organs. This is the concentration to which the individual
is actually exposed internally. If the absorption rate of a
substance exceeds the rate of excretion and biotransfor-
mation, accumulation may take place, and the total
amount of the substance in the body (the body burden)
will increase. Distribution throughout the body will de-
pend on the properties of the substance and tissue. For
example, DDT is found mainly in adipose tissue.

HAZARDS AND RISKS

Hazard refers to the potential toxicity of a substance in an
actual situation; how one deals with the substance in that
particular situation determines the risk. Risk differs from
hazard in that it cannot usually be determined experi-
mentally. It may be inferred from epidemiological data or
it may be predicted from mathematical models, but rarely
can it be measured. Instead, a more qualitative approach
to identifying risk must be adopted. The following terms
are routinely used in risk assessments:

Hazard is the capability of a substance to cause an ad-
verse effect, although the term can also be applied to
physicochemical properties, such as flammability and
explosiveness.

Risk is a statistical term that indicates the probability
that the hazard will occur under specific exposure
conditions.

Risk assessment is the process by which hazard, exposure,
and risk are determined.

Risk management is the process of selecting the most ap-
propriate action based on the results of risk assessment
and social, economic, and political concerns.

There are four basic steps in the risk assessment
process.

Hazard identification: the characterization of the innate
adverse effects or toxicity of an agent

Dose-response assessment: the characterization of the
relationship between doses and incidences of adverse
effects in exposed populations

Exposure assessment: measurement or estimation of the

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY 2+ 197

intensity, frequency, and duration of human exposures
to agents

Risk characterization: an estimation of the incidence of
health effects under the various conditions of human
exposure

Hazard Identification

In order to determine whether a substance is toxic when
present in a large enough amount, several types of infor-
mation are used. The most conclusive information comes
from observation of cases in which humans are exposed to
the substance, in either clinical or epidemiological stud-
ies. In the absence of information from human studies, in-
ferences are drawn from animal studies, from in vitro
studies using living cells, or from comparisons to similar
substances that pose known hazards.

As the source of the information moves farther from
actual human studies, the uncertainty becomes greater.
One or more toxic hazards may be identified, but the pri-
mary hazard of concern will be one that can cause a seri-
ous health consequence at a lower dosage than required
by other substances that cause serious toxic effects.

Risk Factors

What factors determine the risk from exposure to a toxic
substance? Not all individuals are subject to the same
health risk. For this reason, the term high-risk group was
coined. The term situational risk refers to the risk inher-
ent in a particular situation in which there is a high
chance of exposure. Quite often, a distinction will be
made between situational risks and increased individual
sensitivity to a certain substance. People who live in the
vicinity of an industry that pollutes the environment have
a greater chance of coming into contact with the emis-
sions of that industry than do others. If the same people
also work in these industries, their risks are even higher.

Some people are at high risk because they have a
greater sensitivity to one or more substances than do oth-
ers in the population. People with chronic nonspecific
lung disease, who have a comparatively high sensitivity to
substances that irritate the airways, provide a good exam-
ple. Small children constitute a high-risk group, not only
because they have a higher inherent sensitivity to some
potential hazards, but also because of their behavior. For
example, they may be exposed to toxic substances present
in the soil, a means of exposure that is far less likely for
adults.

Certain hobbies can increase the risk of exposure to
toxic substances. Pregnant women and their unborn chil-
dren can be considered to be at higher risk from exposure

----- PAGE 206 -----
198 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

to all kinds of substances. The same is true for elderly
people. As age increases, the functional capacity of vari-
ous organs, such as the liver and kidneys, starts to decline.
Changes in metabolic and eliminative functions can cause
significant changes in the toxicity of various substances. In
addition, the reserve capacity of various organs is often
severely reduced in the elderly, which may mean that seem-
ingly small toxic exposures can have severe consequences.

HERB TOXICITY

An excellent review of the adverse effects of herbs by
DeSmet cites a number of causes.’> All concerned with
these issues should refer to this book and its subsequent
volume.

Eight categories of causes are given; these are dis-
cussed in more depth later:

¢ Poisonous plants

¢ Adulteration of commercial products
* Self-collection of medicinal plants

* Microorganisms and microbial toxins
¢ Pesticides and fumigation agents

¢ Radioactivity

¢ Toxic metals

¢ Environmental pollution

THE NATURE OF POISONOUS
PLANTS

Poisonous plants contain physiologically active or toxic
substances in sufficient amounts to cause harmful effects in
animals and humans. The poisonous nature of a plant may
be due to the presence of any of several kinds of substances:

¢ Substances that are themselves toxic

¢ Substances that are in themselves harmless, but which
may decompose to form toxic products either before
or soon after they are eaten, such as the nontoxic glu-
coside amygdalin, produced in the wild cherry, which
hydrolyzes to form hydrogen cyanide

¢ Substances formed by the action of microorganisms on
plants or plant products; for example, under certain
conditions, fungi produce mold in hay or silage that in
turn forms decomposition products, some of which
may be toxic

¢ Substances absorbed directly from the soil and stored
in harmful quantities in the tissues of certain plants, in-
cluding selenium in certain species of locoweeds and
potassium nitrate in oats and amaranth

PLANT TOXINS

Of course, it is plant chemistry that makes certain plants
toxic. Here, I will discuss the toxicity of certain groups of
secondary plant constituents. More information on phy-
tochemistry can be found in chapters relevant to specific
groups of compounds.

Oxalic Acid

Oxalic acid is a dicarboxylic acid. It may occur as an acid
or as salts of the acid, such as calcium oxalate, potassium
oxalate, and sodium oxalate. The leaves, stems, and roots
of many plants contain oxalates, and plants of some
species can accumulate large amounts. Rhubarb leaves
contain up to 1% soluble sodium and potassium oxalates;
these soluble oxalates are readily absorbed from the gas-
trointestinal tract.”

Systemic formation of calcium oxalate may produce
hypocalcemia, while precipitation of insoluble salts in the
renal system can lead to kidney dysfunction and elec-
trolyte imbalance. Other plants that contain high levels of
insoluble calcium oxalates in their leaves include
Dieffenbachia, Philodendron, and sorrel (Rumex spp.).
Insoluble calcium oxalate crystal needles are contained in
raphides, bundles of needlelike crystals in plant cells.

Ingestion of a small amount of plant material with a
high oxalate concentration usually causes only mild irrita-
tion of the mouth and esophageal mucosa. More pro-
nounced gastrointestinal effects may follow ingestion of
large amounts of soluble oxalate. Ingestion of oxalic acid
can lead to extensive renal damage and even death. The
lethal dose of oxalic acid for adults is 15 g to 30 g.
Chronic consumption of oxalates is a risk factor for the
development of certain types of stones (calculi). An esti-
mated 66% of renal calculi and 75% of bladder calculi are
composed of calcium oxalate. However, such stones may
be caused by pathologies unrelated to the consumption of
plants.

Interestingly, research has revealed that certain con-
stituents, such as the triterpene saponin lupeol, have po-
tential value in the prevention and treatment of oxalate-
based stones.?”

Only a few plants contain sufficient amounts of
sodium and potassium oxalate to be considered toxic.
Moreover, ruminants that consume these plants de-
velop increasing levels of tolerance to oxalate. An oxalate-
degrading anaerobic microorganism has been isolated
from pure culture of rumen bacteria. This organism,
Oxalobacter formigens, uses oxalate as a sole energy source
and produces carbon dioxide and formate as end prod-

----- PAGE 207 -----
ucts. This ability is extremely rare among anaerobic bac-
teria, and therefore this organism occupies a unique
niche in the microflora of the rumen. The ability of the
ruminant to adapt to and tolerate a diet high in oxalates
directly depends on the presence of oxalate-degrading
microorganisms.

Terpenes

The terpenes are an enormous family of chemicals that
are reviewed in chapter 6. Some are therapeutically im-
portant, and many appear to have no activity in humans,
but some are toxic. These are briefly discussed here.

Thujone
Thujone is a terpene of widespread occurrence that is
found in many essential oils. It occurs in some evergreens
of the Cupressaceae family, including Thuja occidentalis,
Chamaecyparis thyoides, Juniperus sabina, and several
species of Cupressus. Thujone also is found in Asteraceae
in Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium, and Tana-
cetum vulgare, and in Lamiaceae in Salvia officinalis.
Wormwood oil, derived from Artemisia absinthium,
was the principal flavoring of absinthe, and the hallucino-
genic compound in absinthe was thujone. A dose of 30 mg
of thujone per kilogram of body weight can produce con-
vulsions and lesions of the cortex of the brain. The toxic-
ity is cumulative.

Ranunculosides

Ranunculosides are lactone glycosides that on hydrolysis
give ranunculin and glucose, Ranunculin is then con-
verted into protoanemonin. Protoanemonin is toxic; its
derivatives are not. (For a more detailed discussion on the
chemistry of ranunculosides, see chapter 6.)

Anyone collecting or handling plants of the
Ranunculaceae family with bare hands should be careful
not to hold them for long periods of time, as the sap irri-
tates the skin and can cause blistering. The sap of any
plant of this family has a burning taste and may produce
reddening and swelling on contact with the skin. If swal-
lowed in large quantities, the sap can cause gastritis, which
may develop into colic followed by extreme gastroenteri-
tis and diarrhea mixed with blood. Large quantities of mu-
cilage are required for treatment of such a reaction.

Plants Containing Ranunculosides
Christmas rose (Helleborus niger)
Field buttercup (Ranunculus acris)
Globe flower (Troflius europaeus)
Marsh marigold (Caltha palustris)

TOxIcITy, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .2 199

Pasqueflower (Pulsatilla vulgaris)
Wood anemone (Anemone nemorosa)

Sesquiterpene Lactones

Sesquiterpene lactones are a class of natural sesquiter-
penoids that are chemically distinct from other members
of the group through the presence of a lactone system.
(For more information on the chemistry of sesquiterpene
lactones, see chapter 6.)

Some lactones formed in plants are very toxic to ani-
mals, while others serve a protective function in removing
harmful breakdown products of metabolism.

Many sesquiterpene lactones have antitumor activity,
but their considerable cytotoxicity has limited their
medicinal application as isolated constituents. They are
biologically active; some are toxic to mammals, while
others are responsible for allergic contact dermatitis in
humans.

Sesquiterpene lactones are highly irritating to the
nose, eyes, and gastrointestinal tract. In addition, the po-
tential for sesquiterpene lactones in species of Asteraceae,
Lauraceae, Magnoliaceae, and Jubulaceae to cause aller-
gic contact dermatitis is well known. More than 80
sesquiterpene lactones possess allergenic properties.

Sensitive people tend to develop cross-reactions to

related molecules when they come in contact with other
species containing sesquiterpene lactones. Anyone who
has acquired a delayed hypersensitivity (for example, con-
tact dermatitis) to sesquiterpene lactone—containing
plants should strictly avoid further contact with any other
species or extracts containing sesquiterpene lactones in
order to avoid new reactions.

Sesquiterpene lactones can induce this delayed type
of hypersensitivity only when applied to the skin. When
taken orally or administered by another route, they usu-
ally produce no allergic effects.

Glycosides

Glycosides hydrolyze to form sugar molecules (glycones)
and various other nonsugar components (aglycones). Any
toxicity caused by glycosides is due to the aglycones, not
the glycones. Toxic glycosides include cyanogenic,
coumarin, cardiac, saponin, protoanemonin, and an-
thraquinone glycosides, as well as glycosinolates, which
produce the volatile oils known as mustard oils.

Gyanogenic Glycosides

Cyanogenic glycosides are found in more than 800 plant
species in 80 families. The hydrolysis of these glycosides
releases the sugar, the aglycone and hydrocyanic acid

----- PAGE 208 -----
200 <= INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

(HCN), also known as prussic acid. The most common
plants containing toxic cyanogenic glycosides are in the
Rosaceae and Fabaceae families and in the genus Sorghum
in Poaceae. An exception is cassava (Manihot esculenta)
from Euphorbiaceae, which is used as a food plant in
tropical regions after the toxic hydrocyanic acid is re-
moved. The formation of cyanogenic glycosides in plants
is often a response to damage from drought. See chapter
4 for a detailed discussion on the distribution and chem-
istry of cyanogenic glycosides, including amygdalin, the
cyanogenic glycoside found in bitter almonds (Prunus dul-
cis var. amara).

Ruminant animals are particularly susceptible to hy-
drocyanic acid poisoning because the enzymes of their
bacterial flora contribute to rapid hydrolysis of cyano-
genic glycosides. HCN is rapidly absorbed through the
walls of the rumen into the blood. HCN inhibits enzymes
active in cellular respiration, primarily the terminal en-
zyme in the electron transport chain of the mitochondria,
thereby halting the generation of adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) and oxygen utilization. The cells die from lack of
oxygen, even though oxygen is plentiful.

Glucosinolates (Goitrogenic Glycosides)
Glucosinolates are characteristic of plants in the
Brassicaceae, including cabbage (Brassica oleracea var. cap-
itata), field mustard (B. campestris), and rape (B. napus).
They are found also in the closely related families
Capparadaceae, Moringaceae, and Resedaceae, as well as
Caricaceae, Limnanthaceae, and Tropaeolaceae.

More than 100 different glucosinolates are known, all
of which contain a common structure with a variable side
chain R (for example, sinigrin). Their major role in the
plant appears to be defensive. When the plant is attacked
by pests, an enzyme called myrosinase is released, which
hydrolyzes the glucosinolate to release B-D-glucose and
the aglycone. For more information on the chemistry of
glucosinolates, see chapter 4.

When glucosinolate-containing plants are bruised,
the compounds released are hydrolyzed by the enzyme
thioglucosidase, which is always found in such plants. In
all cases, the freed aglycone is unstable and is chemically
restructured to an isothiocyanate. Isothiocyanates have a
pungent odor and taste and are irritating to both the skin
and the mucous membranes that line the gastrointestinal
tract. They may also cause liver and kidney damage.

Isothiocyanates inhibit the uptake of iodine in the
thyroid. However, the small amounts of isothiocyanates
consumed in cabbage and related edible plants are not be-
lieved to cause thyroid problems in humans.

Saponin Glycosides

The pharmacology of the large, complex, and therapeuti-
cally important group of compounds known as saponins,
which usually occur in plants as glycosides, presents some
unique toxicity concerns. Because saponins are character-
istically toxic to cold-blooded animals, plants containing
them have been used as fish poisons around the world.
Sap from crushed plants, agitated in a pond or stream,
stuns fish, which float to the surface. The toxin acts on
the respiratory organs of fish without affecting their edi-
bility. Saponins are comparably nontoxic to warm-
blooded animals. For more information on this varied
group of compounds, please see the discussions in chap-
ters 4 and 6.

Cardiac Glycosides

Although of fundamental importance to medicine, the
cardiac glycosides are exceedingly toxic. Cardiac glyco-
sides may be either bufadienolides or the more abundant
cardenolides, two related groups of steroidal saponins of
triterpenoid origin. The assumed mechanism of action
involves inhibition of Na*, K*-ATPase, resulting in in-
creased intracellular sodium and, subsequently, intracel-
lular calcium, leading to enhanced muscle contraction in
cardiac tissue. For a more detailed discussion of this
group of compounds, see chapter 6.

Among the approximately 400 plants that contain
cardiac glycosides, genera used therapeutically include
Digitalis, Urgenia, Convallaria, Nerium, Strophanthus, and
Asclepias. The entire Digitalis plant is toxic. Symptoms of
poisoning include dizziness, vomiting, irregular heart-
beat, and delirium or hallucinations, Digitonin, a carde-
nolide, is derived from Digitalis purpurea.

Polyphenolics

In general, this very large group of secondary plant con-
stituents has minimal toxicity. However, as might be ex-
pected, there are some important exceptions.

Coumarin Glycosides
Coumarins and their glycosides are widely distributed.
Coumarol (a coumarin glycoside) and the enzyme that
causes its hydrolysis are constituents of sweet clover,
Melilotus species. When cut as hay, sweet clover is easily
contaminated with molds, especially when the foliage is
lush or it is cut or cured when conditions are wet.

Molds such as Penicillium nigricans, P jensi, and
Aspergillus metabolize the coumarin into 4-hydroxy-
coumarin, which reacts with formaldehyde in the spoiled

----- PAGE 209 -----
hay to produce dicoumarol. Dicoumarol is similar in
structure to vitamin K, and when unintentionally eaten it
inhibits vitamin K production. Vitamin K is necessary for
the activation of prothrombin. When tissue is damaged,
thromboplastin is released and converts prothrombin to
thrombin. Thrombin alters the solubility of fibrinogen in
the blood and causes it to clot and seal the damage.
Dicoumarol prevents this process.

Warfarin is a synthetic chemical derived from
coumarol. It is used in rodenticides and acts as a vitamin
K inhibitor to block the blood-clotting process and pro-
voke hemorrhage.

Constituents in the plant may undergo chemical
transformation by contaminating microorganisms. For
example, mold in dried sweet clover (Melilotus officinalis)
can result in serious hemorrhagic activity. It contains
coumarin, 3,4-dihydrocoumarin, O-coumaric acid, O-
hydroxycoumaric acid, and the O-glycoside of O-coumaric
acid (melilotoside). Drying leads to the formation of
the enzymatic glycoside hydrolysis, and the resulting
O-coumaric acid is spontaneously transformed to
coumarin, so the dried herb strongly smells of coumarin
(the characteristic aroma of new-mown hay).”®

Coumarin is devoid of anticoagulant effects in hu-
mans because a structurally essential characteristic for the
anticoagulant potential of coumarin derivatives is ab-
sent.2°30 However, the transformation product dicoumarol
has potent anticoagulant effects.*! While poisoning by
molded sweet clover occurs almost exclusively in cattle,
there was a report of abnormal clotting function and mild
clinical bleeding in a woman who had been drinking large
amounts of a herbal tea prepared from sweet clover and
other coumarin-containing ingredients.*? The chemistry
of coumarins is discussed in more detail in chapter 7.

OH

0 —
B-glucosidase
‘O—Glueore ° °
Melilotoside Coumarin
dole growth

Dicoumarol

Fig. 10.1. Formation of coumarin and dicoumarol

Toxicity, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .& 201

Furocoumarin Glycosides
The furocoumarins are discussed under Photosensitivity,
starting on page 210.

Gossypol

Gossypol is a polyphenol found mainly in the pigment
glands of cotton, Gossypium species. Gossypol may exist
free or bound, but free gossypol is considered the toxic
form. The bound form is nontoxic because it is irre-
versibly bonded to proteins.

Gossypol has potential as a male contraceptive.® Its
antifertility activity came to light in a somewhat cir-
cuitous manner. A group of farmers in rural areas of
China developed fatigue and burning sensations on their
faces, hands, and other exposed parts of the body; epi-
demiologists discovered that they had consumed home-
made cottonseed oil containing gossypol. Many couples
from these areas were found to be infertile. The women
had amenorrhea and the men had low levels or complete
absence of living sperm. It has since been determined that
after three months the use of 50 mg of gossypol a week
results in abrupt decreases in sperm counts, which are
sometimes recoverable* Hyperkalemia due to renal
potassium loss has also been seen with clinical use of

gossypol.*

Anthraquinone Glycosides

Anthraquinone aglycones are stimulant laxatives that act
on the large intestine; they are discussed in more detail in
chapters 7 and 13. At high doses, they are gastrointestinal
irritants, causing symptoms that can include nausea, vom-
iting, bloody diarrhea, dizziness, abdominal pain, and, in
severe cases, kidney damage.

Anthraquinones are found in the bark of cascara
sagrada (Rhamnus purshiana) and other species in the
Rhamnaceae family and in the leaves of Aloe vera (not the
mucilaginous gel). They also occur in the root of Chinese
thubarb (Rheum officinale) but not common rhubarb (R.
rbaponticum), and in the seeds and leaves of senna (Cassia
spp.). Cascara bark from Rhamnus pursbiana is stored for
a year before it is processed. This delay allows for oxida-
tion of the anthrones and dianthrones to anthraquinones,
which tempers their potential griping effects.

Tannins

As discussed in chapter 7, tannins are complex polyphe-
nols that form complexes with proteins, thus inhibiting
enzyme activity. The toxicology of tannins has been ex-
tensively studied because of their potential deleterious ef-
fects on livestock. The primary sites of impact are the

----- PAGE 210 -----
202 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

mouth, where proteins and carbohydrates get exposed to
tannins, and the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract. Here,
unbound tannins form complexes with both dietary pro-
teins and metabolic proteins.

The major effect of tannins in the human diet ap-
pears to be a decrease in the efficiency of nutrient assim-
ilation. Certain cancers, such as esophageal cancer, have
been theoretically associated with the consumption of
tannin-rich foods, such as betel nuts and herb teas.
However, other studies, both epidemiological and clini-
cal, indicate that tannin-rich black and green teas have
anticarcinogenic properties. The anticarcinogenic and
antimutagenic potential of tannins may be related to their
antioxidant properties; tannins inhibit the generation of
superoxide radicals. In the laboratory, tannins also inhibit
the growth of many fungi, yeasts, bacteria, and viruses.°°

Alkaloids

The group of compounds known as alkaloids contains
many substances that are potentially toxic to humans, al-
though not all alkaloids are toxic. In general, alkaloids are
not toxic to plant cells, although purified forms can cause
damage when applied to plant tissues, even those of the
plant that produced the alkaloid. Plants may avoid alka-
loid toxicity by accumulating them in certain ways—for
example, in the vacuoles of the cells. Morphine is accu-
mulated in the latex cells that occur throughout the
opium poppy (Papaver somniferum). These latex tubes are
lacking in the parts of the pods where the seeds are
formed, however, and thus do not affect the developing
embryos. For a detailed discussion of the chemistry of al-
kaloids, see chapter 8.

Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs) have become a major con-
cern in the world of herbal medicine. The issues they
raise encompass chemistry, pharmacokinetics, pharmaco-
dynamics, toxicology, and phytotherapeutic clinical prac-
tice. Some of these are discussed here and in chapter 9. In
addition, the interested reader should consult a major
1995 review of the science of PAs by Roder.>”
Pyrrolizidine alkaloids consist of about 200 struc-
turally related compounds contained in more than 350
species of the families Apocynaceae, Asteraceae,
Boraginaceae, Celastraceae, Euphorbiaceae, Fabaceae,
Orchidaceae, Poaceae, Ranunculaceae, Rhicophoraceae,
Santalaceae, Sapotaceae, and Scrophulariaceae. A number
of these plants are used medicinally, including Tussilago
farfara, Petasites species, Senecio species, Alkanna tinctoria,
Eupatorium species, and Symphytum species.®

Their structure is based on two 5-membered rings
with a nitrogen in position 4, a structure called the necine
base. PAs with saturated necine bases are nontoxic. All
toxic PAs, on the other hand, contain a double bond be-
tween the | and 2 positions.

Va ?

CH GH

eo N

Fig. 10.4. A macrolytic retronecine diester

Additional variability in the toxicity of PAs results
from the type of necine structure, which determines the
stability of the pyrrole metabolite and thus the extent of
any damage caused. The least damaging are the
retronecine monoesters (for example, symphytine) and
the most harmful are the macrolytic retronecine diesters
(such as senecionine).

PAs are often the toxic but not the biologically active
principles of many herbal medicines. Methods for the
elimination of PAs from crude plant extracts have been
developed. These methods remove PAs by treating the al-
coholic plant extracts with cation exchange resins.??

Arnica montana and Echinacea species contain non-
toxic PAs with a saturated necine base. Toxic PAs with an
unsaturated necine base, such as those listed below, are
hepatic and genetic toxins, and some are respiratory toxins.

----- PAGE 211 -----
RO H2C—OR

ae
A

Pyrralizidine alkaloid

RO
activation

H,C—OR

ToxiciTy, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .@ 203

Liver tissue H,»C—-OR

==" formation af protein aie

—____»
fp wii DNA adducts N Wi

Pyrrole intermediate

Cellular adduct

No \- ification

RO H,G—OR

ae

N-oxide derivative

Glutathione H,0-OR
a
VA
Ven

Glutathione conjugate

Fig. 10.5. Activation and detoxification of pyrrolizidine alkaloids

Plants Containing Toxic PAs

Alkanna tinctoria (alkanet)

Borago officinalis (borage)

Cynoglossum officinale (hound’s tongue)
Eupatorium cannabinum (hemp agrimony)
Heliotropium spp. (e.g., common heliotrope)
Lithospermum officinale (gromwell)
Petasites spp. (e.g., butterbur)

Pulmonaria spp. (e.g., lungwort)

Senecio spp. (e.g., groundsel, ragwort)
Sympbytum spp. (e.g., comfrey)

Tussilago farfara (coltstoot)

PAs are absorbed from the intestine and reach the
liver via the portal vein, where they are metabolized by
esterase enzymes that release the free necine base. These
reactions occur with both saturated and unsaturated PAs
and are not part of the toxic reactions. On the contrary,
they lead to a detoxification of toxic PAs.

Liver enzymes are also able to transform PAs to less
toxic forms by increasing their water solubility. However,
oxidative reactions catalyzed by oxidases lead to pyrrole-
like intermediates, which are the ultimate toxic metabo-
lites of the PAs (figure 10.5). These derivatives generate
linkages (adducts) to proteins, RNA, and DNA. This
mechanism is the basis for the hepatotoxicity of the PAs.
However, detoxification may occur either via oxidation of
the nitrogen or conjugation with glutathione.

There is no doubt that pyrrolizidine alkaloids are

toxic to humans. Many cases have been reported in which
individuals, hundreds of people, or even thousands of
people have been intoxicated by the intake of PAs in the
form of herbal remedies or foods. (For example, the seeds
of Crotalaria species may contaminate grain foods.) In al-
most all cases of severe or fatal intoxication, the patients
developed liver damage with cirrhosis and ascites (accu-
mulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity). This type of
liver damage, called veno-occlusive disease, is the key
syndrome associated with PA intoxication. When defi-
nitely caused by PAs, the condition may be referred to as
seneciosis. The estimated daily intakes of certain PAs leading
to fatal intoxication range from 0.5 mg/kg to 3.3 mg/kg?

The symptoms of liver damage due to PA poisoning
can be differentiated into three clinical stages.

Acute Veno-Occlusive Syndrome: This stage is typically
characterized by severe abdominal pain accompanied
by vomiting and diarrhea. The liver is enlarged, and
ascites is often present. Generalized edema is ob-
served, and the patient may appear jaundiced. In some
cases, the disease progresses dramatically and the pa-
tient dies a few weeks after the first symptoms occur. If
the patient survives, complete remission may be possi-
ble, but the condition may also progress to subacute
and chronic phases.

Subacute Veno-Occlusive Syndrome: This stage is char-
acterized by an enlargement of the liver and sometimes
the spleen. Other clinical symptoms are often absent.

----- PAGE 212 -----
204 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Liver function may be normal, but mild to severe as-
cites may be present. A progressive fibrotic degenera-
tion of the liver is also typical, and the disease often
passes to a chronic stage.

Chronic Veno-Occlusive Syndrome: The key finding here
is cirrhosis of the liver that is different from other
forms of liver cirrhosis in that portal regions are not
involved. As liver failure progresses, the general condi-
tion of the patient continues to deteriorate. Because of
a decrease in serum protein levels, edema occurs, and
the patient may become anorexic. The mortality rate
is usually higher here than for other forms of cir-
rhotic liver disease.

Although the exposure of humans to toxic PAs has
occurred many times in the past, no epidemiological stud-
ies are available to document a possible carcinogenic risk
from these compounds. However, there are also no stud-
ies to demonstrate the absence of such a risk. Because of
the positive results of animal carcinogenicity studies, to-
gether with the in vitro findings about the genotoxicity of
unsaturated PAs, the possibility that PAs have a carcino-
genic effect in humans must be taken into consideration.

There is no absolutely safe dose for genotoxic car-
cinogens. Extrapolations of dose-response curves from
high to low concentrations are of questionable reliability,
and animal experiments may not be applicable to humans.
Nevertheless, such calculations are made to get crude in-
formation about the carcinogenic risk posed by certain
compounds. The German Federal Ministry of Health
recommends an allowable upper limit of toxic PAs in
herbal remedies of 0.1 to 0.2 ppm. The daily intake
should not exceed 30 g (senecionine) or 700 g (symphy-
tine) per day.

Piperidine Alkaloids

The piperidine alkaloid coniine is the most important al-
kaloid in poison hemlock (Conium maculatum). This col-
orless, strongly basic oil has a mild pepper odor and a
burning taste and occurs in all parts of the plant. Four
other piperidine alkaloids are also found in poison hem-
lock. Coniine is lethal to all forms of animal life.

Tropane Alkaloids

Tropane alkaloids are found in many plants in the
Solanaceae family, and include a number of important
molecules, such as atropine, hyoscyamine, and scopo-
lamine. Plants containing these substances include thorn-
apples (Datura spp.), angel’s trumpets (Brugmansia spp.),
henbane (Hyoscyamus niger), belladonna or deadly night-

shade (Atropa belladonna), and European mandrake
(Mandragora officinarum). All of these plants have long
histories of use as hallucinogens and have been connected
with folk medicine and religious rites dating back to 1500
B.C. and Homer’s Odyssey.

Plants containing tropane alkaloids have been used to
treat asthma, chronic bronchitis, pain, and flu symptoms.
Many cultures worldwide add plants with tropane alka-
loids (particularly Datura species) to alcoholic beverages
to increase intoxication. Tropane alkaloids are found in all
parts of the plants, with highest concentrations in roots
and seeds.

Quinolizidine Alkaloids

These alkaloids are commonly present in the Fabaceae,
but they may be found as well in the Berberidaceae,
Chenopodiaceae, and Papaveraceae families. Sparteine,
from Spanish broom (Spartium junceum), increases or
strengthens the heartbeat, causing a greater flow of
blood to the kidneys and increasing urine production.
Sparteine has been used in treating certain cases of car-
diac fibrillation. Cytisine, found in Scotch broom
(Cytisus scoparius), is known to be toxic, and in Great
Britain, Laburnum is considered the second most toxic
plant for animals after the yew, Taxus. Other sources of
these lupine-type alkaloids are lupines (Lupinus) and
wild indigo (Baptisia).

Pyridine Alkaloids

Nicotine is lethal to all forms of animal life. Small
amounts stimulate breathing, but absorption of larger
amounts depresses the respiratory rate. Death from nico-
tine poisoning results from respiratory failure. Humans
are able to smoke tobacco only because the body is capa-
ble of breaking down and eliminating this alkaloid instead
of accumulating it. Nicotine is used as an insecticide in
agriculture and in home gardens.

Indole Alkaloids

Ergot alkaloids are found in the sclerotial bodies produced
by the ergot fungus (Ciaviceps purpurea) and in the seeds of
the morning glory (Ipomoea tricolor). Two indole alkaloids,
gelsemine and sempervirine, that occur particularly in the
roots of yellow jasmine (Gelsemium sempervirens) depress
the central nervous system. The psychoactive alkaloids of
the mescaline and psilocybin groups are considered toxic
by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration, but this is
very much a matter of opinion.

----- PAGE 213 -----
Isoquinoline Alkaloids

Isoquinoline alkaloids are found in many plant families,
including the Ranunculaceae, Rubiaceae, Berberidaceae,
Fumariaceae, and Papaveraceae. The Chelidonium,
Papaver, and Sanguinaria genera of the Papaveraceae con-
tain a large number of alkaloids. The largest number of
alkaloids obtained from a single species in this family
comes from Papaver somniferum, the opiam poppy, which
contains the morphinan alkaloids morphine and codeine.
Heroin is synthesized from morphine.

Steroid. Alkaloids
Steroid alkaloids, found in approximately 250 species of
plants in the families Solanaceae and Liliaceae, occur
mostly as glycosides with the properties of saponins. They
are found in the tomato (Lycopersicon) as well as in the
potato and other plants in the genus Solanum. Some are
very toxic, causing severe gastroenteritis that may be fatal.
Species of Solanum contain solanine, which occurs in
highest concentrations in areas that have a high metabolic
rate, such as sprouts, green skin, and stems, and in lowest
concentrations in ripe fruit. Solanine consists of six dif-
ferent glycosides; each hydrolyzes to the sugar peculiar to
its particular glycoside and to the aglycone solanidine, a
steroidal alkaloid.

Diterpenoid. Alkaloids

These alkaloids are some of the most toxic chemicals found
in plants. For example, aconitine, found in monkshood
(Aconitum), has an LDso of 0.12 mg/kg in mice. Another
example is delphinine, from larkspur (Delphinium). In hu-
mans, 2 to 5 mg constitutes a lethal dose.

Polypeptides
These compounds are rarely toxic, although some of the
poisons in the freshwater blue-green algae are polypep-
tides. However, the most notable exceptions are the tox-
ins of the mushrooms in the genus Amanita, which are
also polypeptides.

Amanita Toxins

All of the toxins found in the Amanita mushrooms are
peptides. Amatoxins and phallotoxins are found in A. bis-
porigera, A. ocreata, A. phalloides, A. phalloides var. alba,
A. suballiacea, A. tenuifolia, A. virosa, and some other mush-
rooms. Ibotenic acid is found in A. cothurnata, A. muscaria
var. formosa, A. muscaria var. muscaria, and A. pantherina.
The cap is the deadliest part of these mushrooms.

There are nine amatoxins:

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY 205

a-amanitin
f-amanitin
y-amanitin
€-amanitin
Amanin

Amanin amide
Amanullin
Amanullinic acid
Proamanullin

Fig. 10.6. a-amanitin

YA

Amatoxins are responsible for fatal human responses
to Amanita mushrooms. They are taken up by the liver,
where they begin to cause damage. They are then se-
creted by the bile into the blood, where they are taken up
by the liver again in a cycle of damage and excretion. In
the liver, amatoxins inhibit RNA-polymerase IL. The liver
is slowly destroyed and is unable to repair itself due to the
inactivation of the RNA-polymerase. Thus, the liver
slowly dissolves with no hope of repair. However, rapid
treatment with silymarin helps alleviate the toxicity of
amatoxins.

There are seven naturally occurring phallotoxins:

Phallacidin
Phallacin
Phallisacin
Phallisin
Phalloidin
Phalloin
Prophalloin

Phallotoxins destroy liver cells by disturbing the
equilibrium of hepatocyte membrane structure. This ren-
ders the cell susceptible to deformity in the face of
changes in pressure of blood flowing through the liver.
This is followed by loss of potassium ions and cytoplasmic
enzymes, leading in turn to depletion of ATP and glyco-
gen, which causes the final downfall of the liver.

----- PAGE 214 -----
206 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Lectins

Lectins are glycoproteins that cause red blood cells to ag-
glutinate (clump). The terms phytohemagglutinins and
lectins are used interchangeably. Lectin-containing plants
are found in many botanical groups, but most frequently
occur in Fabaceae and Euphorbiaceae.

The interaction of lectins with carbohydrates is very
specific—as specific, in fact, as enzyme-substrate and
antigen-antibody interactions. Lectins may bind with free
sugar or with sugar residues of polysaccharides, glycopro-
teins, or glycolipids, which may be free or bound (as in
cell membranes). The term /ectin refers to the specificity
of this reaction; it is derived from the Latin root /egere,
meaning “to choose.”

Lectins can impair growth, cause diarrhea, and inter-
fere with nutrient absorption. The seeds of precatory
bean (Abrus precatorius) contain the highly toxic glycopro-
tein abrin. Even less toxic lectins can be fatal if ingested
in large amounts, such as concanavalin A from jack bean
(Concanavalia ensiformis).

Ricin, from castor bean (Ricinus communis), is one of
the most toxic natural substances known. It inhibits pro-
tein synthesis by inactivating ribosomes, and is a potent
cytotoxin but a weak hemagglutinin. Castor bean seeds
are poisonous to people, animals, and insects. When
beaded into necklaces, these highly toxic seeds cause skin
irritation at contact points. If the seed is swallowed with-
out chewing, it will most likely pass harmlessly through
the digestive tract if there has been no damage to the seed
coat. However, if it is chewed or broken and then swal-
lowed, the ricin toxin will be absorbed by the intestines.
Children are more sensitive than adults to fluid loss from
vomiting and diarrhea, and can quickly become severely
dehydrated and die.

SKIN REACTIONS CAUSED BY
PLANTS

By far the commonest plant-related problems experi-
enced by people occur through skin contact. Such prob-
lems can take many forms and involve a number of phys-
iological processes, as illustrated in table 10.3.

Contact Urticaria

The term urticaria, also known as hives, describes red-
dening and swelling of the skin. This reaction is short-
lived, causes much itching, and clears without trace. If
urticaria develops within an hour of exposure to an
agent at the site of contact, the condition is called contact
urticaria.

Table 10.3. Types of Skin Reactions to Plants and
Plant Products”

REACTION SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

Contact urticaria Immediate reaction (within minutes of
contact)

Itching, erythema, and/or edema

Irritant contact dermatitis Skin dry and possibly itchy, often with
fissures

Usually restricted to areas of skin contact

Typically follows prolonged or extensive
exposure to irritant

Cactus glochids, in particular, may cause an
extensive pruritic eruption simulating

scabies

Phytophotodermatitis Erythematous, streaky eruption that may be
vesicular or bullous, occurring within
2 days of plant contact

Reaction occurs precisely at sites of contact
in sun-exposed areas

Brown hyperpigmentation, which persists
for several weeks or months, is present at
the same site

Common in children

Allergic contact dermatitis Pruritic, often streaky, erythema, sometimes
vesicular

Starts at areas of contact but may spread
outward

Develops, often progressively, within 3 days
of exposure

Recurrent episodes lasting several days each
are typical and are usually followed by
scaling; each episode may be worse than
the last

Minimal, if any, hyperpigmentation

Airborne contact dermatitis typically
affects face, neck, forearms, and hands,
simulating photosensitivity

Contact urticaria may be caused by pharmacological
mechanisms, such as the eruption induced by Urtica
dioica, the stinging nettle, from which the term urticaria
(literally, “nettle rash”) is derived. In immunological ur-
ticaria, a Type I hypersensitivity to a specific component
of the plant develops. Sensitized people develop a re-
sponse within minutes after contact. Repeated exposure
to such stimuli may lead to a persistent eczema-like
condition.

----- PAGE 215 -----
Urticaria Due to Injection of Toxins
Some plants possess sharp hairs on the surface of leaves
and stems that inject a mix of irritant chemicals into the
skin or mucous membranes upon contact. This is thought
to serve as a defense against browsing animals. Some
caterpillars employ a similar strategy to avoid predation. A
brush against the nettle plant shears off a cap from the
hairs, revealing a sharp, beveled, hollow structure that re-
sembles a hypodermic needle. From this structure, an ir-
ritant liquid enters the skin; this liquid contains inflam-
matory mediators such as histamine, acetylcholine, and
5-hydroxytryptamine. These chemicals cause the immedi-
ate reaction, but stinging can continue for more than 12
hours, even after features of urticaria have disappeared.
This suggests the presence of other substances capable of
inducing a secondary release of inflammatory mediators.
The nettle is less likely to cause stinging if squeezed
firmly than if touched gently. Vigorous massage or appli-
cation of cold compresses will often reduce symptoms of
nettle-induced urticaria. However, reactions to some net-
tle plants may be more severe. Urtica gigas has caused
death in horses in New Zealand and U. ferox has caused
death in humans.

Immunological Contact Urticaria

An immediate Type I contact reaction can occur in anyone
who has previously become sensitized to a particular sub-
stance. Molecules of the contact sensitizer penetrate the
epidermis, and then react with specific immunoglobulin E
(IgE) bound to mast cells, leading to release of vasoactive
mediators. Histamine is the major mediator, but prosta-
glandins, kinins, leukotrienes, and others may amplify the
inflammatory response.

Irritant hairs on the surface of some plants enhance
penetration of the antigen. A good example is tumbleweed
(Salsola kali), which possesses sharp bracts that cause an ir-
ritant reaction. Some people become sensitized to the effects
of such plants and subsequently develop contact urticaria.

Irritant Contact Dermatitis
Irritant contact dermatitis describes an inflammatory re-
sponse to physical or chemical injury that is not immuno-
logically mediated. Severity of the response depends on
the barrier function of the skin as well as the potency and
duration of the irritant stimulus. It may be caused by more
than one factor. For example, physical trauma caused by
handling narcissus bulbs may enhance chemical trauma
from oxalate crystals contained in the bulbs.

The severity of such reactions can range from irrita-
tion with erythema and possible fissuring to a severe re-

‘TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .e 207

sponse that renders the individual unable to work. The
eruption affects areas of contact, especially where the
stratum corneum is thinner, such as on the fingertips and
back of the hands, under the free edge of fingernails, and
between the fingers. Skin damage by irritants increases
the individual’s susceptibility to subsequent allergic sen-
sitization.

Mechanical Irritants

Penetration of the skin by hairs, spines, or thorns can
produce a papular irritant eruption. Many plants have
glandular hairs (trichomes) on stems or leaves. Several
members of the Boraginaceae family are covered in such
coarse, stiff hairs, including borage itself (Borago offici-
nalis). Other irritant plants of this family include forget~
me-not (Myosotis spp.), hound’s tongue (Cynoglossum
spp.), comfrey (Symphytum officinale), and lungwort (Pul-
monaria officinalis). American dogwoods (Cornus spp.) have
T-shaped hairs that cause erythema and urtication when
the leaf is rubbed on the skin in the direction of its long
axis. In addition to its obvious spines, the pads and fruit
of the prickly pear (Opuntia ficus-indica), cultivated for its
edible fruit, bear tufts of shorter, hooked hairs called
glochids, which may appear innocuous but can cause me-
chanical injury. These glochids may be transferred to
clothing and to any part of the skin, particularly softer
areas, such as the genitalia and between the fingers.

Table 10.4. Irritant Plants

INJURY EXAMPLE

Mechanical/physical

Blunt trauma Falling branches, nuts
Thorns Rose family (Rosaceae)
Sharp-edged leaves and leaf hooks Holly, Agave, Yucca
Spines and glochids Cacti, especially Opuntia

Stem/leaf hairs Boraginaceae, Asteraceae

Irritant fibers Rose hips, tulip bulbs
Chemical
Stinging hairs Urtica

Irritant sap/latex Euphorbiaceae, Ranunculaceae

Calcium oxalate crystals Bulbs

----- PAGE 216 -----
208 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Chemical Irritants

A number of plants contain chemical irritants that may
exacerbate the mechanical irritation caused by hairs or
spines. A common chemical irritant is crystalline calcium
oxalate, but a wide range of other chemicals dissolved or
suspended in latex or housed in specific organelles may
also cause chemical irritation. Many bulbs and some other
plants, notably Dieffenbachia and rhubarb, contain calcium
oxalate. This water-insoluble salt forms bundles of needle-
like crystals (raphides), which are surrounded by a mu-
cilaginous liquid and held in cells. After contact with
water, the cell ejects the crystals into the skin or mucosa.
These crystals may help the plant maintain ionic equilib-
rium, dispose of waste products, or protect against forag-
ing animals. Some cacti, such as Cephalocereus senilis, con-
tain up to 85% calcium oxalate by dry weight.”

There are many structural types among irritant con-
stituents, including alkaloids, glycosides, proteolytic en-
zymes, saponins, phenolic compounds, and anthra-
quinones. Plants of the Ranunculaceae family, discussed
earlier, contain the chemical irritant protoanemonin.

Allergic Contact Dermatitis

Allergic contact dermatitis is a specific immunological re-
sponse to an external substance. Unlike immunologically
mediated contact urticaria, this is a manifestation of de-
layed immunity. An allergic reaction can occur only in an
individual who is already sensitized to the antigen, and
classically the reaction is restricted to sites of exposure.

Allergic contact dermatitis displays the clinical and
histological features of eczema. The exogenous sub-
stance, or hapten, is typically of low molecular weight,
enabling it to penetrate the epidermis. It binds with
molecules in the skin (for example, keratins) or directly
binds to collagen bundles. The antigenic complex is then
recognized by a specific lymphocyte. These cells migrate
from the skin via lymphatic drainage to lymph nodes,
where they proliferate and differentiate. The resultant
sensitized effector and memory cells are distributed to the
rest of the body through blood vessels.

When next exposed to the allergen, the sensitized in-
dividual develops an eczematous response at the site of
contact. Further stimulation of memory cells occurs,
causing increasingly severe responses on repeated expo-
sure. For some people, frequent reexposure to small doses
of the allergen may induce immunological tolerance, and
it is possible to reduce sensitivity through oral dosing
with the allergen, notably poison ivy.

Poison Ivy and Poison Oak

The Anacardiaceae genus Toxicodendron includes poison
ivy, poison oak, and poison sumac. There are many re-
lated cross-reacting species, as well as several unrelated
genera that cross-react with Toxicodendron species. Such
cross-reactions are due to the presence of similar aller-
genic constituents in the various species of plants.

Table 10.5. Anacardiaceae Family and
Cross-Reacting Plants

GENUS TOXICODENDRON. RELATED AND CROSS-REACTING

CULTIVARS
Poison ivy
T. radicans Cashew (Anacardium occidentale)
T. rydbergaii Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba)
Grevillea robusta
Poison oak

T. diversilobum Indian marking nut (Semecarpus

anacardium)

T. toxicarium Japanese lacquer (Rhus verniciflua)

Poison sumac

T. vernix Mango (Mangifera indica)

Entire Toxicodendron genus —_ African poison ivy (Smodingium

argutum)

Contained in the oil of most members of Ana-
cardiaceae is urushiol, an irritant mixture of pentadecyl-
catechols (PDCs). The base molecule of PDC has a com-
pletely saturated side chain at position 3. Unsaturation of
the side chain leads to greater allergenicity. The name
urushiol is derived from the Japanese word for sap, Riterushi.

CH
OH
Ss
2
NS “R

Fig. 10.7. Pentadecylcatechol skeleton

----- PAGE 217 -----
OH

\_ 4

ee ae ie
Fig. 10.8. Urushiol

Members of the Anacardiaceae family contain PDCs
with mixtures of C-15 and C-17 side chains that have 1,
2, 3, or no double bonds. For example, poison ivy con-
tains mainly C-15 side chains; poison oak, C-17; and poi-
son sumac, C-13.

PHOTOSENSITIVITY

Phytophotodermatitis constitutes a specific pattern of pho-
totoxic skin reaction in which delayed erythema, blister-
ing, and hyperpigmentation are the major features.
However, less obvious phototoxic reactions and photoal-
lergy may also occur.

Photosensitization is a process by which a reaction to
normally innocuous radiation is induced by the introduc-
tion of a specific radiation-absorbing component, known
as the photosensitizer. In biological systems, the term pho-
tosensitization is generally understood to describe a pro-
cess by which harmless doses of UVA or visible radiation
are absorbed by a “foreign” molecule present at non-
damaging concentrations. Reactions result from the in-
volvement of cell and tissue constituents in the dissipation
of the absorbed energy.

Psoralens appear to cause photosensitization via UVA
light-induced binding of the psoralen molecule to nu-
clear DNA. This produces bonds, called photo-adducts,
that cross-link with pyrimidine bases in the DNA.

Clinical Features

The characteristic eruption of a phototoxicity reaction is
composed of linear dusky red lesions, often bullous or
vesicular (blisterlike, containing a clear liquid) and asso-
ciated with brown hyperpigmentation. Most such reac-
tions occur in mid- to late summer, when the level of
psoralens are highest in plants and the skin is unpro-
tected by clothing. The eruption may be misdiagnosed as
poison ivy or poison oak dermatitis; however, the photo-
toxic reaction is confined to the sites of contact and sun
exposure. It is painful, but not pruritic, and may be fol-
lowed by hyperpigmentation. In contrast, allergic con-
tact dermatitis is pruritic; the eruption will often con-
tinue to evolve after presentation, and pigmentary
changes are rare.

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY. 209

Table 10.6. Major Patterns of Phototoxicity
Reactions

SKIN REACTIONS PHOTOSENSITIZERS
OR DISEASES
Type
Prickling or burning during exposure Coal tar
Immediate erythema Pitch

Edema/urticaria with higher doses Anthraquinone-based dyes

Sometimes, delayed
erythema/hyperpigmentation

Benoxaprofen
Chlorpromazine
Erythropoietic protoporphyria

Type 2
Exaggerated sunburn Drugs such as chlorpromazine,
chlorthiazides, quinine
Type 3

Late-onset erythema Psoralens (furocoumarins)

Blisters with slightly Phytophotodermatitis

higher doses

Hyperpigmentation only Berloque dermatitis

with low exposures

Type 4

Increased skin fragility; Nalidixic acid

skin blisters with trauma Frusemide
Tetracycline
Naproxen

In Europe, the most common cause of phototoxic re-
actions is brushing against rue. The typical streaklike pat-
tern of the reaction also occurs when application of rue to
the skin as an insect repellent is followed by sun exposure.
It is also seen among individuals who are working with
parsley, parsnip, or celery plants during the summer.

Many molecules naturally present in biological sys-
tems can act as photosensitizers. Well-known examples
include chlorophyll, iron-free porphyrins, and flavins, like
riboflavin. The list of endogenous sensitizers includes
bilirubin, tryptophan, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate (NADPH), pyridoxine, quinones (present in
respiratory chains), all-trans retinal (the pigment produced
in the retina in response to light), and many proteins

----- PAGE 218 -----
210 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES
containing these compounds, including lipofuscin (the

so-called age pigment) and melanin.

Table 10.7. Plant-Derived Substances Causing
Unintentional Color Change to Skin

REACTION EXAMPLE

Essential oils

Red discoloration by terpenes Juniper
Lemon
Lime

Orange

Perfume ingredients

Benzyl alcohol
Benzyl salicylate
Cananga oil

Post-inflammatory depigmentation

Cinnamic alcohol
Geraniol
Hydroxycitronellal
Jasmine absolute
Lavender oil
Methoxycitronellal
Sandalwood oil

Pigmented cosmetic dermatitis Ylang-ylang oil

‘There are also many naturally occurring exogenous
photosensitizers. Plants make photosensitizers, most
likely in order to protect their surfaces against viruses,
bacteria, fungal spores, yeasts, and small arthropods and
their eggs, and probably also against insects. Photo-
sensitizers found in plants include furanocoumarins, pte-
rocarpans, isoquinolines, lignans, sesquiterpenes, hyper-
icins, and curcumins.

Chemistry of the Furocoumarins

A common furocoumarin (or furanocoumarin) is pso-
ralen; the name is derived from the genus Psoralea.
Furocoumarins cause photosensitization and poisoning in
humans and domestic animals but have been used medic-
inally as well. For more than 3,000 years, practitioners of
Eastern medicine have applied poultices of plant juices
containing furocoumarins to the whitened patches of skin
seen in the disorder known as leukoderma or vitiligo.
This condition is an inherited tendency that occurs in
about 2% of the world’s population. Synthetic furo-

coumarins are now used to tan the skin without sun ex-
posure by inducing formation of the black melanin pig-
ments in the cells of the skin.

Five plant families contain most of the furocoumarins:
Apiaceae, Fabaceae, Moraceae, Orchidaceae, and Ruta-
ceae. These compounds are also found in Asteraceae in
yarrow (Achillea millefolium) and in Convolvulaceae in
field bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis).

Two forms of furocoumarins occur. Linear furo-
coumarins, known as psoralens, are named for Psoralea
corylifolia.

Sy
SS
x
fo) 0” Soa =

Fig. 10.9. Psoralen Fig. 10.10. Angelicin

Angular furocoumarins, known as angelicins, are re-
lated to the angelicin (isopsoralen) obtained from Angelica
archangelica.

Not all furocoumarins are phototoxic. Their photo-
toxic potential varies with the shape of the molecule, and
linear forms are more potent than angular. The degree and
nature of substituent components of the molecule consti-
tute another variable, which in psoralens decrease the pho-
totoxic potential but in angelicins may increase it. Severe,
acute phytophotodermatitis reactions are associated with
psoralen itself and its derivatives, 8-methoxypsoralen
(such as xanthotoxin from celery), 5-methoxypsoralen
(bergapten), and, possibly, the angelicin pimpinellin.

Bergapten, a component of bergamot oil from Citrus

aurantium ssp. bergamia, is the phototoxic component of

lime peel extract and essential oil. The components of

Ammi majus, used in the treatment of vitiligo, include

both 8- and 5-methoxypsoralen along with imperatorin

(8-isopentenyloxypsoralen).
OCH,

VA | Sy Ss
ry oO

‘oO [o}

OCH,

Fig. 10.11. Xanthotoxin

Fig. 10.12. Bergapten

——s

CH

Fig. 10.13, Pimpinellin

Fig. 10.14. Imperatorin

----- PAGE 219 -----
Levels of furocoumarins increase in response to fun-
gal attack. Fresh celery (Apium graveolens) contains 10 to
100 pg/g wet weight of total psoralens. However, levels
of furocoumarins as high as 320 pg/g have been mea-
sured in specimens infected with fungi. The development
of disease-resistant cultivars of celery has led to an in-
creased natural furocoumarin content in these plants.
Similar increased exposure to phototoxic compounds may
occur with other vegetables, such as parsnips.

As little as 1 pg of 8-methoxypsoralen per square cen-
timeter of skin can produce blistering after exposure to
artificial UVA equivalent to approximately 10 minutes of
exposure to summer sunlight in the United Kingdom. In
one unusual case of phytophotodermatitis, a patient who
ingested large quantities of celery soup before using a
UVA sun bed developed classic symptoms.

HERB TOXICITY UNRELATED TO
CONSTITUENTS

There are situations in which toxicity stemming from
herb use has nothing to do with the herb itself. These
may be related to adulteration, spoiling, or pollution,
which is usually unintentional, but, strange as it sounds,
may also be intentional.

Adulteration of Commercial Products

Herb dealers may deviate from pharmacopoeial specifica-
tions for botanical identity for various reasons.
Occasionally, if an officinal plant species is not available,
it may be replaced by an equivalent related species. For
instance, it has become difficult to obtain real goldenrod
(Solidago virgaurea), but this species can be justifiably sub-
stituted with the related S. gigantea or S. canadensis.

In addition, a deliberate substitution of medicinal
herbs by inferior or cheaper species may also be made.
Some years ago, 4 Belgian consumer organization re-
ported that the maiority of locally purchased peppermint
products did not contain Mentha piperita at all, but rather
the much cheaper species M. crispa. Likewise, most sam-
ples of linden flower did not come from Tilia cordata or
T. platyphyllos but instead from T. argentea.

Careless gathering, storage, or distribution of
medicinal plant material may result in accidental substi-
tution or contamination with another botanical. Inexpert
or negligent herb dealers may fail to recognize such
problems in time.

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY. 211

Self-Collection of Medicinal Plants

People who collect their own herbs must be absolutely
certain of the identity of the plants they are harvesting. A
serious Digitalis poisoning due to accidental substitution
of foxglove for comfrey was reported in Great Britain.
The patient was an elderly man, and he needed intensive
care treatment to recover.

Microorganisms and Microbial Toxins
Commercially produced herbs may be contaminated by
pathogenic microorganisms, like Salmonella, or microbial
toxins, such as bacterial endotoxins. Toxic substances may
also be formed through microbial transformation of
botanical constituents. In short, herbal materials pose the
same microbial health risks as other pharmaceuticals:

¢ Infection by pathogenic microorganisms

* Microbial transformation of botanical constituents
into more toxic compounds

© Production of microbial toxins, such as bacterial endo-
toxins and mycotoxins

No official regulatory guidelines on microbial con-
tamination of herbs exist. However, the requirements for
the microbial purity of nonsterile medicines proposed by
the Committee of Official Laboratories and Control
Services of the Federation Internationale Pharmaceutique
provide the following figures for assessing the microbial
status of dried herbal materials:*

An aerobic bacterial count between 102 and 108 colony-
forming units per gram (CFU/g), mostly >104 CFU/g

* A coliform bacterial count between <102 and 104 CFU/g

¢ A yeast and mold count between 102 and 106 CFU/g

Extraction of herbs with an alcohol-based solution
will reduce the number of microorganisms because of di-
rect contact with the alcohol. Extraction with boiling
water will also have a decontaminating effect.

Keeping heat-extracted herbal teas for longer than 24
hours is not advisable, because spore-forming species are
not effectively eliminated by boiling water.** This is even
more essential when an herbal tea has been prepared by
cold infusion, as cold water has no decontaminating ef-
fect. When there are phytochemical considerations or
other reasons to choose cold over hot extraction, each
dose should be freshly prepared at the time of use. As a
rule of thumb, cold infusions that are more than four
hours old should be discarded.

----- PAGE 220 -----
212 = INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Mycotoxins

Mycotoxins are toxic metabolites produced by fungi and
molds. Over 300 mycotoxins have been identified, and it
is thought that many more are yet to be discovered.
Known classes of mycotoxins include:

¢ Aflatoxins

© Ochratoxins

* Rubratoxins

° Trichothecenes
* Zearalenone

Mold growth can occur at any time, from herb har-
vest until consumption. Mold spores are everywhere, and
they lay dormant until conditions are right for them to
sporulate and grow. The type and amount of mycotoxin
produced depends on factors such as temperature, pH,
relative humidity, drought stress, and insect or mechani-
cal damage to the herb in which the mold is growing.
Mold growth depends largely on the moisture content of
the dried herb: the more moisture, the more mold, and
the greater the risk of contamination with mycotoxins.

Fig. 10.15. Aflatoxin B1

Table 10.8. Lead and Cadmium in Wild-Grown Herbs*

There is clear evidence from animal studies that afla-
toxins are carcinogenic, producing tumors primarily of the
liver, colon, and kidneys. The primary route of human ex-
posure is ingestion of contaminated food. Americans may
consume up to an estimated 0.15 to 0.50 pg of aflatoxins
daily. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regu-
lates aflatoxins under the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act, which designates aflatoxins as hazardous
constituents of waste. The EPA's Carcinogen Assessment
Group considers aflatoxins to be potentially carcinogenic.
The Food and Drug Administration has established en-
forcement levels for aflatoxins of 0.5 ppb in milk and 20
ppb in other food products. Aflatoxins can be found in a
wide range of food products due to contamination in the
field, manufacturing process, or storage. Corn, peanuts,
and cottonseed pose the highest risks.

Toxic Metals

There are two major reasons why it has become necessary
to monitor levels of toxic metals in herbs. First, contami-
nation of the general environment with toxic metals has
increased. Second, exotic herbal remedies, particularly
those of Asian origin, have been repeatedly reported to
contain toxic levels of heavy metals or arsenic.

Studies on levels of toxic metals in medicinal herbs
have been conducted in Germany. Considerable variation
was found among levels of pollutants in the same species
collected from different habitats.

The decoction of herbs can affect the metal content.
One study compared lead and cadmium levels in 120 sam-

METAL PLANT HABITAT LEVEL OF CONTAMINATION (MG/KG)
Total Flower Leaf Stem Root
LEAD
Achillea millefolium Median strip 841 4.66 2373 134 4.59
Roadside 237 2.33 8.90 125 416
Hypericum perforatum Median strip 1.97 S77 17.82 2.32 457
Roadside 7 1.85 5.96 1.05 5.06
CADMIUM
Achillea millefolium Median strip 0.34 0B 0.78 0.33 0.44
Roadside 148 0.89 217 1.33 2.57
Hypericum perforatum Median strip 037 0.38 0.54 0.32 0.85
Roadside 5.62 6.97 ~743 374 330

‘Variation in levels of lead and cadmium by plant part and habitat in wild-grown Achillea millefolium and Hypericum perforatum™

----- PAGE 221 -----
ples of 19 herbs and in finished teas prepared from these
samples.” Passage of metals into the tea was higher than
50% in only 12% of the lead assays and 8% of the cad-
mium tests. The majority of the tea samples (67% and
71%, for lead and cadmium, respectively) demonstrated a
relatively low extraction of metals, 25% or less. Individual
extraction values ranged from 0.1% to 87% for lead and
from 1% to 68% for cadmium.

These large variations may well be connected to the
different ways in which the samples were contaminated.
When an herb is contaminated on its surface, it is likely
that a relatively large proportion of the contaminant will
dissolve in the hot water. Little will enter the tea if the
metal ions are bound in the plant cell.

Toxic Metals in Asian Remedies

Reports of unacceptable levels of toxic metals in herbal
remedies regularly appear in the literature. One report
described arsenic poisoning in Singapore, and other re-
ports attribute lead poisoning to the use of an Asian
herbal medicine. Aside from the herbs themselves, poten-
tial sources of contamination include lead-releasing brew-
ing pots, grinding weights, and other metal utensils.*8*9
However, in Asian remedies, the possibility exists that
toxic metals found are not contaminants, as several
Chinese herbal formulas contain arsenic and mercury
salts as intentional ingredients,

Table 10.9. Relative Passage of Heavy Metals into
Medicinal Teas*

CRUDE DRUG RELATIVE PASSAGE
(NUMBER OF SAMPLES) (MEAN VALUES IN %)
LEAD CADMIUM
Aerial parts
Achillea millefolium (5) 15 24
Equisetum arvense {I3) 22 23
Hypericum perforatum (5) 2 9
Thymus vulgaris (6) 9 28
Leaves
Betula alba (9) 16 5
Cassia angustifolia (8) 33 50
Melissa officinalis (1) 15 19
Mentha piperita (8) 20 28

TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY -2 213

LEAD CADMIUM

Leaves and flowers

Crataegus (1) 9 8
Flowers

Crataegus (4) 9 6

Malva (4) B B

Matricaria recutita (16) 36 18

Tilia (1) i 9
Fruits

Carvum carvi (4) B 25

Foeniculum (6) 40 16

Pimpinella anisum (0) 29 9

*Relative passage of heavy metals from crude herbal drugs into medicinal teas prepared
by extraction with boiling water.*°

References

1. ‘Tyler VE. The Honest Herbal: A Sensible Guide to the Use
of Herbs and Related Remedies. Binghamton, NY: The
Haworth Press, 1993,

2. DeSmet PAGM, D’Arcy PF. Drug interactions with
herbal and other non-orthodox remedies. In: D’Arcy PF,
McElnay JC, Welling PG, eds. Mechanisms of Drug
Interactions. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1996.

3. Roder E. Medicinal plants in Europe containing
pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Pharmazie 1995; 50:83-98.

4, MannJ, Davidson RS, Hobbs JB, et al. Natural Products:
Their Chemistry and Biological Significance. Harlow, UK:
Longman Scientific & Technical; New York: Wiley,
1994.

5. Rothschild M, Edgar JA. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids from
Senecio vulgaris sequestered and stored by Danaus plexippus.
Journal of Zoo and Wildlife Medicine 1978; 186:347-9.

6. Schneider D, Boppre M, Schneider H, et al. A pheromone
precursor and its uptake in male Danaus butterflies.
Journal of Comparative Physiology 1975; 97:245-56.

7. Rode D. Comfrey toxicity revisited. Trends in
Pharmalogical. Sciences 2002; 23:497-9.

8. Beers MH, Berkow R, eds. The Merck Manual of
Diagnosis and Therapy. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck
Research Laboratories, 1997.

----- PAGE 222 -----
214

9.

10.

ll.

2;
13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19,

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

@ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Rode D. Comfrey toxicity revisited. Trends in
Pharmalogical Sciences 2002; 23:497-9.

Stickel F, Seitz HK. The efficacy and safety of comfrey.
Public Health Nutrition 2000; 3:501-8.

Cheeke PR. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids. In: Natural Toxicants
in Feeds, Forages, and Poisonous Plants, 2nd edition.
Danville, IL: Interstate Publishers, 1998.

Ibid.

Rode D. Comfrey toxicity revisited. Trends in
Pharmalogical Sciences 2002; 23:497-9.

Pierson ML, et al. Resistance of the rabbit to dietary
pyrrolizidine (Senecio) alkaloid. Research Communications
in Chemical Pathology and Pharmacology 1977; 16:561-4.
Stickel F, Seitz HK. The efficacy and safety of comfrey.
Public Health Nutrition 2000; 3:501-8.

Muetterlein R, Aimold CG. Investigations concerning
the content and the pattern of pyrrolizidine alkaloids in
Symphytum officale L. (comfrey). Pharmazeutische Zeitung
1993; 138:119-25.

Cheeke PR. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids. In: Natural Toxicants
in Feeds, Forages, and Poisonous Plants, 2nd edition.
Danville, IL: Interstate Publishers 1998.

Schoental, R. Toxicology and carcinogenic action of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Cancer Research 1968, 28:2237-46.
1998 TESS Annual Report. American Journal of
Emergency Medicine 1999; 17(5):435-87.

Brinker F. Herb Contraindications and Drug Interactions.
Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Publications, 2001.
DeSmet PAGM, D’Arcy PF. Drug interactions with
herbal and other non-orthodox remedies. In: D'Arcy PF,
McElnay JC, Welling PG, eds. Mechanisms of Drug
Interactions. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1996.

Beers MH, Berkow R, eds. The Merck Manual of
Diagnosis and Therapy. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck
Research Laboratories, 1997.

Himmelstein MW, Turner MJ, Asgharian B, et al.
Comparison of blood concentrations of 1,3-butadiene
and butadiene epoxides in mice and rats exposed to 1,3-
butadiene by inhalation. Carcinogenesis 1994,
15(8):1479-86.

Medinksy MA, et al. In vivo metabolism of butadiene by
mice and rats: A comparison of physiological model pre-
dictions and experimental data. Carcinogenesis 1994;
15¢7):1329-40.

DeSmet P, et al. Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs, vol. 1.
New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992.

Woolf A. Oxalates. Clinical Toxicology 1993; 16:1-2.

27.

28.

29.

30.

Sil.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39,

40.

41.

Anand R, et al. Antioxaluric and anticalciuric activity of
lupeol derivatives. Indian Journal of Pharmacology 1995;
27:265-68.

Vulto AG, DeSmet PAGM. Drugs used in non-orthodox
medicine. In: Dukes MNG, ed. Meylers Side Effects of
Drugs, 11th edition. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1988.
Ritschel WA, Brady ME, Tan HSI, et al.
Pharmacokinetics of coumarin and its 7-hydroxymetabo-
lites upon intravenous and peroral administration of
coumarin in man. European Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology 1977; 12:457-61.

Reilley ©. Anticoagulant, antithrombotic, and throm-
bolytic drugs. In: Goodman LS, Gilman A, eds. The
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 6th edition. New
York: Macmillan 1980.

Cheeke PR, Shull LR. Natural Toxicants in Feeds and
Poisonous Plants. Westport, CT: AVI Pub. Co., 1985.
Hogan RP. Hemorrhagic diathesis caused by drinking an
herbal tea. JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical
Association 1983; 249:2679-80.

Hong CY, Huang JJ, Wu O. The inhibitory effect of
gossypol on human sperm motility: relationship with
time, temperature and concentration. Human Toxicology
1989; 8:49-51.

Coutinho EM. Gossypol: a contraceptive for men.
Contraception 2002 Apr; 65(4):259-63.

Wu D. An overview of the clinical pharmacology and
therapeutic potential of gossypol as a male contraceptive
agent and in gynaecological disease. Drugs 1989,
38:333-41.

Chung KT, et al. Tannins and human health: a review.
Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 1998 Aug;
38(6):42 1-64.

Roder E. Medicinal plants in Europe containing
pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Pharmazie 1995; $0:83-98.
Mauz JC. Vorkommen und Genotoxizitat von
Pyrrolizidinalkaloiden in Petasites hybridus L. und die
Entfernung der Alkaloide aus Arzneipflanzenextrakten.
Dissertation Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule Zurich No.
8246; 1987.

Mattocks AR. Toxicity of pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Nature
1968; 217:723-28.

Datta DV, Khuroo MS, Mattocks AR, et al. Herbal
medicines and veno-occlusive disease in India.
Postgraduate Medical Fournal 1978, 54:511-15.

Lovell CR. Plants and the Skin. Oxford; Boston:
Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1993.

----- PAGE 223 -----
42.

43.

44,

45,

46.

47.

48.

Cheavin WVS. The crystals and crystoliths found in
plant cells: part 1, Crystals. Microscope 1938; 2:155-58.
Downum KR. Light-activated plant defense. The New
Phytologist 1992; 122:401.

Schilcher H. Ruckstande und Veruntreinigungen bei
Drogen und Drogenzubereitungen. 19. Mitteilung: Zur
Wertbestimmung und Qualitatsprufung von Drogen.
Planta Medica 1982; 44:65-77.

Lenoble M, Fourniat I, Bourlioux P, et al. Controle de la
qualité microbiologique dechantillons de Mentha
piperita de diverses origines geographiques. Annales
Pharmaceutiques Frangaises 1980; 38:333-42.

Schilcher H, Peters H, Wank H. (1986) Pestizide und
Schwermetall in Arzneipflanzen und Arzneipflanzen-
Zubereitungen. Drug Development and Industrial
Pharmacy 1987; 49:203-11.

Ali SL. Bestimmungder Pestiziduckstande und toxischen
Schwermetallspuren in Arzneidrogen und deren
Teeaufgussen. Pharmazeutische Zeitung 1985, 132:633-8.
Chia BL, Leng CK, Hsii FP, et al. Lead poisoning from
contaminated opium. British Medical Journal 1973; 1:354.

‘TOXICITY, CONTRAINDICATIONS, AND SAFETY .@ 215

49. Yu ECL, Yeung CY Lead encephalopathy due to herbal
medicine. Chinese Medical Journal 1987; 100:915.

50. Ali SL. Bestimmungder Pestiziduckstande und toxischen
Schwermetallspuren in Arzneidrogen und deren
Teeaufgussen. Pharmazeutische Zeitung 1985; 132:633-8.

Suggested Reading

Brinker F. Herb Contraindications and Drug Interactions. Sandy,
OR: Eclectic Medical Publications, 2001.

DeSmet P, et al. Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs, vols. 1-3. New
York: Springer-Verlag 1992-97.

Harborne JB, et al. Dictionary of Plant Toxins. Chichester; New
York: Wiley, 1996.

McGuffin M, et al., eds. Azzerican Herbal Products Associations’
Botanical Safety Handbook. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press,
1997,

Mitchell, J. Botanical Dermatology: Plants and Plant Products
Ingurious to the Skin. Vancouver, Canada: Greenglass,
1979.

----- PAGE 224 -----
MN

THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION
OF HERBAL MEDICINES

unique aspect of the art of phytotherapy is that
A& practitioner must know how to choose the

dosage form and the preparation technique most
appropriate for achieving optimum therapeutic benefits
with a particular herb for a particular condition. Over the
centuries, herbal practitioners have developed various
preparation methods appropriate for releasing the healing
properties of different plants. Thus, after having chosen
the most appropriate herbs for the patient, the practi-
tioner must select the best way to prepare them. A num-
ber of methods are available that release the biochemical
constituents needed for healing without insulting the in-
tegrity of the remedy by isolating fractions of the whole
plant.

‘Twenty-first-century herbal medicine making, or
phytopharmacy, is a rich blend of the old and the new. On
one hand, there has been a revival of the traditional skills
with which all herbalists should be familiar. On the other,
the herbal community has embraced technologies devel-
oped by the pharmaceutical industry, which has led to the
use of extraction and formulation methods that are indis-
tinguishable from those of that industry.

In fact, there is a rapidly growing phytopharmaceuti-
cal industry that is often driven more strongly by financial
concerns than by the health of consumers. Phytopharma-
ceutical manufacturers may focus, for example, on unique
methods of extract standardization in efforts to secure
patent protection for their products. However, effective
extraction of the medicinal properties of herbs need not
depend on modern technology. There is a place and a
need for both the traditional and the modern in herbal
medicine. Even as attempts are made to improve modern
phytopharmaceutical methods, it is important to remem-
ber the contributions of the long traditions of herbalism
to herbal medicine making.

If one sees herbal medicine as “people’s medicine,” as
I do, there remains an important place in health care for
what might be called the folk method of preparing herbal

216

remedies. These methods are simple, effective, and em-
powering. The work of a number of today’s herbalists
epitomizes the modern expression of the ancient skills of
the herbal medicine maker, including Rosemary Gladstar,
James Green, Christopher Hobbs, Kathi Keville, and
Mindy Green. Refer to Suggested Reading at the end of
this chapter for the titles of their books.

In addition, I cannot overstate the importance of the
work of pharmacists, both eclectic and orthodox, in the
nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries. Much of the
material that follows relies on examples taken from their
writings, published in the standard reference texts of their
day. These are pharmacopoeias and formularies that de-
scribe herbs, drugs, chemicals, and preparation methods
officially recognized for use in medicine.

Pharmacopoeias are issued by officially recognized
authorities to serve as standards for the preparations of
remedies. In many countries of the world, the officially
recognized authority is a governmental body, but the sit-
uation is different in the United States. The United States
Pharmacopoeia (USP) is a nongovernmental organization
that establishes standards for prescription and nonpre-
scription drugs. USP standards are currently published
together with NF standards in a single official reference
volume.

The references J cite most often in the text are indi-
cated by the following acronyms. Please refer to
Suggested Reading for complete publication information
for these volumes.

BHP: The British Herbal Pharmacopoeia

BP: The British Pharmacopoeia

BPC: British Pharmaceutical Codex

NF: The National Formulary (U.S.)

Remington’s: Remington's Pharmaceutical Sciences
USD: The Dispensatory of the United States of America
USP: The United States Pharmacopoeia

----- PAGE 225 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES .@ 217

In the material that follows, many of the remedies
used as examples are described in a strange form of Latin
known as pharmaceutical Latin. This pharmaceutical name
is usually derived from the Latin botanical name of the
herb, and consists of a term indicating the part of the
plant that is used followed by the genus name. For exam-
ple, dandelion leaf would be described as “Taraxacum
Folium.” Refer to appendix 4 for abbreviations and trans-
lations of these Latin pharmacy terms.

UNDERSTANDING THE OPTIONS

In addition to knowing how to select the most appropri-
ate herbs, the skilled herbal practitioner must understand
the relevance of the plethora of medicinal choices avail-
able. Therapeutic specifics are discussed in part 2 of this
book, but here are some important preliminary issues that
must be considered when selecting dosage forms and
methods of preparation for herbal remedies.

Route of administration. As discussed in chapter 9,
medicines ingested are distributed throughout the
body in a variety of ways. The practitioner must be
able to determine what route of administration will
provide the most effective delivery of desired herb
constituents, whether oral, rectal, topical, or some
other route. These considerations affect the choice of
dosage form used.

Dosage form. There are many ways to formulate and pre-
pare herbs for delivery into the body, each of which has
its own benefits and drawbacks. Choice of dosage form
must be based on the needs of the patient. Will a tablet
form be as readily bioavailable as a liquid preparation?
Would a suppository be more efficient than an oral
dosage form in delivering medicinal effects to the de-
sired site of action?

Extraction method. The choice of extraction method is
profoundly affected by the chemistry of herb con-
stituents considered responsible for therapeutic effects.
For example, consider Serenoa repens (saw palmetto), an
herb whose “active ingredients” are believed to be
lipids and triterpene saponins. These groups of chem-
icals are minimally soluble in water but readily soluble
in nonpolar solvents, such as alcohol and oils. They are
also readily soluble in carbon dioxide, the basis of the
technology known as supercritical CO, extraction.
These facts lead one to the conclusion that a tea of saw
palmetto berries is not the ideal form for delivery of
desired constituents (not to mention that it would also
taste foul). Alcohol-based extracts are a better choice
in this case, as are other, newer forms of extraction

based on nonpolar solvents. The ultimate decision may
be based on financial rather than therapeutic concerns.

THE BASICS OF PHYTOPHARMACY

No matter what degree of technological sophistication is
applied, there are two basic stages of preparation that
must be taken into account when making an herbal
medicine from a plant, described here. The actual proce-
dures followed in these stages can vary, and special con-
siderations apply to freshly harvested plants and those in-
tended for topical delivery. In the material that follows, I
will focus on different extraction methods and the ways in
which extracts can be best formulated for desired medic-
inal effects.

Comminution

Before it can be used, the herb must be cut down to a
workable size, a process known as comminution. The tra-
ditional tool for this process is the mortar and pestle.
Today, many other devices are available for cutting or
grinding unprocessed materials, such as mechanical mor-
tars, slicing and cutting machinery, and mills of various
types. For the folk herbalist, a coffee grinder provides a
convenient alternative.

On a commercial scale, herbs are ground into pow-
ders with metal disk mills or hammer mills. To acquire a
powder of a specific size, the processor uses sieves with a
specified number of openings per square inch or centime-
ter, Numbers are used to indicate sizes of powders. For in-
stance, a No, 20 powder has been passed through a sieve
that has 20 parallel wires to each linear inch in either di-
rection; such a sieve will have 400 holes per square inch.

Extraction

Extraction is the process by which soluble herb constituents
are separated from inert, fibrous matter. Pharmaceutical
textbooks list the following reasons for extraction:

* To make palatable, concentrated preparations, elimi-
nating the need to use bulky or distasteful drugs

* To remove inert constituents that in some way may in-
terfere with the action of the desired constituent(s)

* To create a product that contains only pharmacologi-
cally active constituents

* To create a product of known strength and activity that
can be reliably reproduced in subsequent batches

The first step is to select a solvent capable of pene-
trating the tissues of the herb and dissolving the con-
stituents. This liquid is called the menstruwm, and the

----- PAGE 226 -----
218 «3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

inert, fibrous, or other insoluble material that remains
after the menstruum has done its work and been removed
is called the sarc. Water and alcohol are the principle sol-
vents in common use. If the preparation must keep indef-
initely, an alcohol solvent must be used.

The British Pharmacopoeia (BP) recommends four dif-
ferent strengths of alcohol: 45%, 60%, 70%, and 90%.
The strength to be used depends on the chemical nature
of the constituents to be extracted, as well as the physical
density of the plant part being extracted. To ensure steril-
ity, the solvent should contain a minimum of 20% to 25%
alcohol. Other solvents may also be used for extraction,
such as acetic acid, glycerol, ether, and oil.

PRINCIPAL MODES OF EXTRACTION
EMPLOYED IN TRADITIONAL
PHYTOPHARMACY

Well-defined classes of extraction techniques are de-
scribed in the official pharmacopoeias. These may be
used singly or in combination, depending on the desired
outcome.

Maceration and expression
Digestion

Percolation

Infusion

Decoction

mp w re

Maceration

Maceration is the process of softening plant material by
soaking, facilitating the dissolution of the soluble con-
stituents. It plays an important role in many official
preparations, including tinctures, extracts, syrups, wines,
and vinegars. Macerations differ from water-based infu-
sions and decoctions in the following respects:

© The menstruum is usually alcohol.

© The herb remains in contact with the menstruum for a

longer period of time.

¢ The process is conducted at ordinary temperatures.

© After straining, the liquid left in the remaining herbal
material (the marc) is pressed out and mixed with the

strained liquid.

The specified amount of herb, in the specified form
(for example, cut or powdered), is placed with the re-
quired amount of menstruum into a vessel. The vessel is
closed, to prevent the loss of alcohol, and then shaken so
as to turn the contents, preferably on a daily basis. The
shaking disperses the saturated layer of menstruum that
surrounds the herb particles and allows fresh liquid to

come into contact with the herb. Actual maceration time
will depend on the specific herb, but 7 to 14 days is a good
general rule of thumb.

After the prescribed amount of time, the liquid is
drained from the marc. The marc is then pressed to re-
trieve more of the menstruum. The expressed liquid is
mixed with the strained liquid, and the mixture is left to
stand until it is clear, after which it is filtered.

Digestion

Digestion is a form of maceration that involves application
of a gentle heat to the substance being extracted. It is used
in cases in which a moderately elevated temperature will
help increase the solvent powers of the menstruum.
Digestion differs from decoction in that preparations
made through the process of digestion are alcohol based,
rather than water based.

Percolation

Percolation is a process by which a powder contained in a
suitable vessel is deprived of its soluble constituents by
the descent of a solvent through the material. The USP
provides the following directions for percolation.

Percolation, as directed in this Pharmacopoeia, consists in
subjecting a comminuted substance or a mixture of sub-
stances, contained in a vessel called a percolator, to the
solvent action of successive portions of a liquid termed
the menstruum in such a manner that the liquid, as it tra-
verses the powder in its descent to the receiver, shall ex-
tract the soluble constituents, and pass from the percola-
tor free from insoluble matter,

The expression “until the drug is exhausted” and sim-
ilar phrases used in directions for percolations indicate
that the process should be continued to the point at which
the valuable constituents have been as completely ex-
tracted as is possible or practical. The judgment and ex-
perience of the operator determines the point at which
this has occurred.

Infusion

An infusion is a water-based preparation made by steep-
ing leaves, flowers, and other nonwoody plant parts in
either hot or cold water. Obviously, this method of
preparation is appropriate only for herbs with water-
soluble constituents.

Decoction
A decoction is a water-based preparation made by gently
simmering the herb in boiling water. Decoction differs

----- PAGE 227 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES @ 219

from infusion in that it is more appropriate for tougher
plant parts, such as roots, bark, and seeds.

A COMPARISON OF OFFICIAL AND
FOLK METHODS

The official sources mentioned at the beginning of this
chapter provide methods and examples for all of the ex-
traction techniques just discussed. For purposes of com-
parison, here we will look at some examples of officially
sanctioned and modern folk techniques of herb extraction.

WATER-BASED PREPARATIONS

There are two broad ways to prepare water-based ex-
tracts: infusions and decoctions. There are some basic
rules of thumb for choosing which method to use with
what herb, but as with all generalizations, there are many
exceptions.

¢ Infusions are appropriate for nonwoody material such
as leaves, flowers, and some stems, especially herbs
with a high content of volatile oils.

© Decoctions are necessary if the herb contains any hard or
woody material, such as roots, barks, or nuts; the denser
the plant or the individual cell walls, the more energy
is needed to extract the cell content into the water.

Roots rich in volatile oils, such as valerian root, are
an important exception to these general rules. While the
woodiness might suggest that decoction is appropriate,
the therapeutically important volatile oil will evaporate
if the roots are simmered. With roots like this, it is bet-
ter to grind the herb to a fine powder and then make an
infusion.

Water extracts offer the advantage of convenience,
but are limited in that some plant constituents cannot be
extracted in water. Obviously, constituents that are insol-
uble in water will not be present in the resulting tea.

INFUSIONS

Everyone is familiar with infusions. The traditional cup
of herb tea is the archetypal infusion. Of course, herb
tea is not truly tea, as tea is made from the leaves of
Camellia sinensis. However, nobody asks to be served an
herb infusion!

There are many ways to make infusions, and here we
shall compare official and traditional methods. As we shall

see, recipes for infusions given in the USP can differ
greatly from simple herbal infusions made by steeping
herbs in boiling water.

Official Infusions (Infusa)

Remington’s describes infusions in the following way:

These are liquid preparations made by treating herbs with
either hot or cold water. The drug is not subjected to the
boiling process, although it is common to pour boiling
water over it; the mixture is allowed to stand in a closed
vessel until cold. Cold water should be selected as the
menstruum when the drug contains a valuable volatile
principle, when the active agent is injured by heat, or
when the desirable principles are readily soluble in water
of ordinary temperature. The time required to make the
infusion must also be considered, for in warm weather it
is quite possible for an infusion to ferment or decompose
before it is finished. Pure water should be used in making
infusions, and they should not be made in large quantities
unless demanded for immediate use, as, without special
precautions to preserve them, they soon decompose. In
making infusions the drug is usually coarsely commin-
uted, sliced, or bruised.

The USP gives the following general directions for a
macerated infusion:

Infusions must be freshly made from the drugs, and, when
the strength of Infusions is not otherwise directed, they
are to be prepared by the following general formula:

The drug coarsely comminuted, 50 gm
Water, a sufficient quantity to make 1000 ml

Introduce the substance into a suitable vessel provided
with a cover, pour upon it 1000 ml of boiling water, cover
the vessel tightly, and allow it to stand for half an hour.
Then strain with expression, and pass enough water
through the strainer to make the infusion measure 1000
ml. If the activity of the infusion is affected by heat, cold
water only should be used.

In the BP, infusions are defined this way:

Infusions are dilute solutions containing readily soluble
constituents of crude drugs. They are usually prepared by
diluting one volume of a concentrated infusion to ten vol-
umes with water. For dispensing purposes, infusions
should be used within 12 hours of their preparation.

On the following page are some recipes for official infusions.

----- PAGE 228 -----
220 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Infusum Pruni Virginianae BPC 1911
(Infusion of Virginian Prune)
Virginian Prune Bark, in No 20 powder 4g
Glycerin 5 ml
Distilled Water to 100 ml

Moisten the powdered bark with 60 ml of the water, set aside
for 1 hour, pack in a percolator and percolate with more of the
distilled water; collect the percolate in a vessel containing the
glycerin and continue percolation until the product measures
100. Dose: 30-60 ml.

Occasionally, the older official compendia will mix
methods or apply titles that might be misleading. An ex-
ample is the following recipe that first infuses the ingre-
dients in alcohol and then subjects them to a tincturing
process.

Concentrated Compound Gentian Infusion BP 1980

Gentian, cut small and bruised 125 g
Dried Bitter-Orange Peel, cut small 125g
Dried Lemon Peel, cut small 125g
Ethanol (25%} 1200 ml

Macerate the Gentian, the dried bitter Orange peel, and the
dried Lemon peel in a covered vessel for 48 hours with 1000 ml
of the ethanol (25%), press out the liquid. To the pressed marc,
add 200 ml of the ethanol (25%), macerate for 24 hours, press,
and add the liquid to the product of the first pressing, Allow to
stand for not less than 14 days; filter. Dose: 14-4 ml.

Folk Method of Infusion

This is perhaps the simplest method of preparing an herb.
Fresh or dried herbs can be used. However, note that a
larger amount of fresh herb will be needed to compensate
for its higher water content. Therefore, if the instructions
call for 1 part (for example, 1 teaspoon) of dried herb, the
dried herb can be substituted with 3 parts (or 3 teaspoons)
of fresh herb.

A Simple Hot Infusion

Gently warm a china or glass teapot and put in about 1 tea-
spoonful of dried herb or herb mixture for each cup of tea de-
sired. Add 1 cup of boiling water for each teaspoonful of herb in
the pot and put the lid on.

Leave to steep for 10 to 15 minutes. Infusions may be drunk
hot (normally best for a medicinal tea) or cold; they may even
be iced. If desired, sweeten with licorice root, honey, or brown

sugar.

To make larger infusions, use a proportion of 30 g
(1 02) of herb to a half-liter (1 pint) of water. As their shelf
life is not very long, infusions should be prepared when
needed. Herbal tea bags may be made by filling little
muslin bags with herb mixtures, but take care to remem-
ber how many teaspoonfuls you have put into each bag!
These can be used in the same way as ordinary tea bags.

Infusions are appropriate for softer plant tissue such
as leaves, flowers, or green stems, where the desired sub-
stances are easily accessible. If an infusion is to be made
of bark, roots, seeds, or resin, it is best to powder them first
to break down some of the cell walls, which will facilitate
extraction. Seeds—for instance, fennel or aniseed—
should be slightly bruised to release the volatile oils from
the cells. All aromatic herbs should be infused in a pot
with a tight-fitting lid to minimize loss of volatile oils.

Cold Infusions

Some herbs are sensitive to heat, either because they con-
tain highly volatile oils or because their constituents
break down at high temperatures. For these herbs, make
a cold infusion. The proportion of herb to water is the
same, but in this case, the infusion should be left for 6 to
12 hours in a well-sealed earthenware pot. When the liq-
uid is ready, strain and use it.

As an alternative, cold milk can be used as a base for
a cold infusion. Milk contains fats and oils that aid in the
dissolution of oily constituents of plants. Milk infusions
can be used for compresses and poultices, which will add
the soothing action of the milk to that of the herbs. There
is, however, one contraindication for the use of milk in an
infusion. If there is any evidence that an individual might
have a sensitivity or allergy to milk when taken internally,
or if the skin becomes irritated when it is applied exter-
nally, then avoid such infusions.

Medicinal Plants Usually Prepared as Infusions
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut)
Agathosma betulina (buchu)

Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony)
Alchemilla arvensis (lady's mantle)
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Anethum graveolens (dill)

Angelica archangelica (angelica)

Apium graveolens (celery)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)

A. vulgaris (mugwort)

Avena sativa (oats)

----- PAGE 229 -----
Ballota nigra (black horehound)

Calendula officinalis (calendula, pot marigold)

Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse)
Capsicum annuum (cayenne)

Carum carvi (caraway)

Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss)

Chelone glabra (balmony)

Chondrus crispus (carrageen)

Crataegus laevigata (hawthorn)

Cytisus scoparius (Scotch broom)

Daucus carota (carrot)

Drosera rotundifolia (sundew)

Elymus repens (couch grass)

Ephedra sinica (ma huang or ephedra)
Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus, blue gum)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)

E. purpureum (gravel root)

Euphrasia spp. (eyebright)

Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)

Fucus vesiculosus (bladderwrack)

Fumaria officinalis famitory)

Galega officinalis (goat's rue)

Galium aparine (cleavers)

Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)
Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo)

Grindelia camporum (grindelia, gum weed)
Hieracium pilosella (mouse-ear hawkweed)
Humulus lupulus (hops)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Juniperus communis (juniper)

Lactuca virosa (wild lettuce)

Lavandula officinalis (lavender)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)

Linum usitatissimum (flax)

Lobelia inflata (lobelia)

Lycopus europaeus (European bugleweed)
Matlua sylvestris (mallow)

Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)

Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)

Mentha piperita (peppermint)

M. pulegium (pennyroyal)

Mitchella repens (partridgeberry)

Nepeta cataria (catnip)

Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)

THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES .@ 221

Peumus boldus (boldo)

Phytolacca americana (poke)
Pimpinella anisum (anise)

Plantago major (plantain)

Polygala senega (Seneca snakeroot)
Pulsatilla vulgaris (Pasqueflower)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Rubus idaeus (raspberry)

R. villosus (blackberry)

Ruta graveolens (rue)

Salvia officinalis var. rubia (red sage)
Sambucus nigra (black elder)
Scropbularia nodosa (figwort)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Senna spp. (senna)

Serenoa repens (saw palmetto)
Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod)
Stellaria media (chickweed)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Symplocarpus foetidus (skunk cabbage)
Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Thuja occidentalis (white cedar)
Thymus spp. (thyme)

Tilia spp. (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)

Urtica dioica (nettle)

Usnea spp. (usnea)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Verbascum thapsus (mullein)
Verbena officinalis (European vervain)
Vinca major (periwinkle)

Viola odorata (sweet violet)

V. tricolor (heartsease)

Zea mays (cornsilk)

Zingiber officinale (ginger)

DECOCTIONS

Pharmacopoeias once included extensive entries for de-
coctions. They eventually fell out of favor, as they were
considered inconvenient. In fact, one of the most com-
mon mainstream criticisms of herbal medicine is that it is
inconvenient. To the herbalist, however, therapeutic ben-
efit outweighs convenience! From a different perspective,
it might also be argued that the time and attention re-
quired to make a decoction provides a stress-relieving
therapeutic benefit not offered by any pill.

----- PAGE 230 -----
222 <3 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Official Decoctions (Decocta)

Remington’s describes decoctions as liquid preparations
made by boiling vegetable substances with water. A gen-
eral formula for decoctions can be found in the USP.

Decoctions must be freshly made, and when their
strength is not otherwise directed, they are to be prepared
by the following general formula:

The Drug, coarsely comminuted 50g

Water, a sufficient quantity, to make 1000 ml

Place the drug in a suitable vessel provided with a
cover, pour upon it 1000 cc. of cold water, cover and boil
for fifteen minutes. Cool to about 40°C, express, strain
the expressed liquid, and pass enough cold water through
the strainer to make the product measure 1000 cc.

Decoctum Tussilaginis BPC 1911
(Decoction of Coltsfoot)
Coltsfoot Leaves
Distilled Water to

5 parts
100 parts
Add leaves to 120 ml of distilled water, boil for 10 minutes, strain
and make up to required volume, if necessary, by passing water
through the strainer. Dose: 60~120 ml or more.

Decoctum Lappae BPC 1911 (Decoction of Burdock)
Lappa 5.00 g
Distilled Water to 100.00 ml

Add the root to 150 of the distilled water and boil until the vol-
ume of the strained liquid is reduced to 100. Dose: 30-120 ml or
more.

Folk Method of Decocting

Whenever the herbal material is hard and woody, making
a decoction increases the likelihood that the soluble con-
tents of the herb will actually be extracted into the water.
Roots, rhizomes, wood, bark, nuts, and some seeds are
hard and have strong cell walls, so to ensure an effective
transfer of active constituents to the water, more heat is
needed than for infusions.

A Simple Decoction

Put 1 teaspoon of dried herb (or 3 teaspoons of fresh material)
for each cup of water used into a pot or saucepan. Add the ap-
propriate amount of water to the herbs.

Bring to a boil and simmer for the time given for the mix-
ture or specific herb, usually 10 to 15 minutes. If the herb con-
tains volatile oils, put a lid on. Strain the tea while it is still hot.

Dried herbs should be powdered or broken into small
pieces; fresh material should be cut into small pieces.
When making a larger quantity of decoction, use 30 g
(1 02) of dried herb for each half-liter (1 pint) of water.
The container should be glass, ceramic, or earthenware.
If the container is metal, it should be enameled.

When preparing a mixture containing both soft and
woody herbs, it is best to prepare an infusion (for the soft
herbs) and a decoction separately, to ensure that the more
delicate herbs are treated appropriately. The two can then
be mixed together. However, for a woody herb rich in
volatile oils, boiling will cause evaporation of important
volatile constituents. For herbs like this, powder the ma-
terial finely and make an infusion.

Medicinal Plants Usually Prepared as Decoctions
Angelica archangelica (angelica)

Arctium lappa (burdock)

Asclepias tuberosa (pleurisy root)
Astragalus membranaceus (astragalus)
Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)

Berberis vulgaris (barberry)

Betula spp. (birch)

Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Chamaelirium luteum (false unicorn root)
Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)

Cola vera (kola)

Collinsonia canadensis (collinsonia, stoneroot)
Commiphora molmol. (myrrh)

Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)

Echinacea spp. (echinacea, purple coneflower)
Equisetum arvense (horsetail)

Euonymus atropurpureus (wahoo)
Gentiana spp. (gentian)

Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice)

Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Hamamelis virginiana (witch hazel)
Harpagophytum procumbens (devil’s claw)
Hydrangea arborescens (hydrangea)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)

Inula helenium (elecampane)

Tris versicolor (blue flag)

Juglans cinerea (butternut)

Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Marsdenia condurango (condurango)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)

Myrica cerifera (bayberry, wax myrtle)
Panax spp. (ginseng)

Piper methysticum (kava)

----- PAGE 231 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES @ 223

Piscidia erythrina (Jamaica dogwood)
Populus tremuloides (quaking aspen)
Prunus serotina (wild cherry)

Quercus spp. (oak)

Rheum palmatum (Chinese rhubarb)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Salix spp. (willow)

Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)
Sassafras albidum (sassafras)

Smilax spp. (sarsaparilla)

Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Ulmus rubra (slippery elm)
Veronicastrum virginica (culver’s root)
Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

V. prunifolium (black haw)

Vitex agnus-castus (vitex, chasteberry)
Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

ALCOHOL-WATER PREPARATIONS

There are three primary reasons for the widespread use
of water-alcohol extracts, including tinctures. Such
preparations have several advantages over purely water-
based extracts:

1. Most of the constituents present, both water-soluble
and alcohol-soluble, will dissolve in the extract. The
only constituents that will not dissolve are the in-
soluble cellulose of the cell wall and any con-
stituents bound to it.

2. Alcohol is a preservative. Infusions and decoctions
are wonderful growth media for bacteria and molds
and thus have a very short or nonexistent shelf life.
An alcohol content of at least 20% will greatly ex-
tend the shelf life of an extract. :

3. The process used to make tinctures or fluid extracts
will concentrate the medicinal properties in a
smaller volume of liquid.

When tinctures are prepared professionally, accord-
ing to descriptions in a pharmacopoeia, specific water-to-
alcohol proportions are used for each herb. Some recom-
mendations from The British Herbal Pharmacopoeia can be
found in chapter 26. For general use, such attention to de-
tail is not always necessary.

Official Tincture Preparations (Tincturae)
Pharmaceutical tinctures are alcoholic solutions prepared
by maceration, digestion, or percolation. The term tinc-
ture is also occasionally used for preparations based on
glycerin or vinegar. Ethanol offers the advantage of dis-
solving constituents that are insoluble or sparingly solu-
ble in water while helping to preserve them in solution. A
water-alcoho] menstruum can extract a larger proportion
of active principles of most plants than can water alone,
but at the same time contains sufficient alcohol to prevent
decomposition.

The USP describes the following general procedure
for the preparation of tinctures:

The proportion of drugs represented in the different
kinds of tinctures is not uniform but varies according to
the established standards for each. Tinctures of potent
drugs represent the activity of 10 gm. of a drug of mini-
mum U.S.P. strength, in each 100 cc. of tincture. When
drugs having a higher potency than the ininimum are
used in preparing tinctures the finished product is assayed
and adjusted to the uniform U.S.P. strength. This con-
forms in principle to the recommendation of the
International Protocol as adopted at Brussels, and with
international standards. In this group are most of the tinc-
tures which are assayed and adjusted to standards. Most of
the other tinctures represent 20 gm. of the respective
drugs in each 100 cc. of tincture. Compound tinctures are
made according to long established formulas, and the two
official tinctures of fresh drugs are made to represent 50
gm. of the respective drugs in each 100 ce. of tincture.

There are two important variables in tinctures: the
concentration of the herb and the strength of the alcohol.

Concentration of Herb

The amount of herb in a given amount of menstruum de-
fines the concentration of the extract. Most tinctures are
in concentrations of 1:4 or 1:5, but the BP also uses 1:3,
1:8, and 1:10. In the examples just given, the first number
represents the weight of the herb and the second repre-
sents the volume of menstruum, so they express a ratio of
weight to volume (w:v).

There are a number of ways to express concentra-
tions. The expression percent may be used, according to
circumstances, with one of four different meanings. In
order that the meaning attached to the expression in each
instance is clear, the following notations are used.

* Percent w/w (weight to weight): number of grams of
active substance in 100 g of product

----- PAGE 232 -----
224 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

© Percent w/v (weight to volume): number of grams of
active substance in 100 ml of product

¢ Percent v/v (volume to volume): number of milliliters
of active substance in 100 ml of product

* Percent v/w (volume to weight): number of milliliters
of active substance in 100 g of product

Strength of Alcohol

According to the BP, alcohol can be used in concentra-
tions of 45%, 60%, 70%, and 90%. In pharmacy, the ex-
pression “70% ethanol” describes a solution made up of
70 parts of 96.4% ethanol and 30 parts of water. As an ex-
ample, “Tinctura calami 1:5-70% BPC” means that this
tincture of Acorus calamus root was made by macerating
1 part of root (in weight) in 5 parts (by volume) of a 70%
ethanol solution.

The so-called mother tinctures used in homeopathy
as the starting point for potentiation are usually prepared
by bruising the fresh herb, expressing the juice, and
adding 96% alcohol to the juice in an amount equal to
one-third or one-half the volume of the fresh juice.

Folk Method of Tincturing

Alcohol is a better solvent than water for most plant con-
stituents. A mixture of alcohol and water will dissolve
nearly all of the relevant ingredients of an herb and at the
same time act as a preservative. The method given here
for the preparation of tinctures describes a simple and
general approach. For home use, an alcohol of at least
30% concentration (60 proof) will suffice, as this is about
the weakest alcohol-water mixture that still provides a
long-term preservative action. Vodka is usually a good
choice, although other types of alcohol can also be used.

A Simple Tincture

Put 4 ounces of finely chopped or ground dried herb into a con-
tainer that can be tightly closed. (If the herb is fresh, use twice
this amount.) Pour 7 pint of 30% (60 proof) vodka on the herbs
and close the container tightly.

Keep the container in a warm place for two weeks and
shake it well twice daily. After decanting the bulk of the liquid,
pour the residue into a muslin cloth suspended in a strainer over
a bowl. Wring out all the liquid. The residue (the marc) makes
excellent compost. Pour the finished tincture into a dark-colored,
tightly capped bottle.

Tinctures are stronger than infusions or decoctions,
and thus a much smaller dosage is taken. Tinctures may be
used in a variety of ways. They can be taken as is, mixed
with water, or added to a cup of hot water. If added to hot
water, the alcohol will largely evaporate, leaving most of
the extract in the water. However, this may make the
water cloudy, as resins and other constituents not soluble
in water will precipitate.

Drops of tincture can be added to a bath or footbath,
applied in a compress, or mixed with oil or fat to make an
ointment. Suppositories and lozenges can also be made
this way. Because there is no way that quantitative accu-
racy can be maintained when making tinctures by the folk
method, it should be used only for mild herbs for which
dosage is not critical.

FLUID EXTRACTS (FLUID
EXTRACTA)

Another form of alcohol-based medicine is the fluid ex-
tract, also known as a liquid extract. In fluid extracts, which
are more concentrated than tinctures, | part by volume of
the fluid extract is equivalent to 1 part by weight of the
herb. The techniques used to make these preparations are
complex and involve specific skills and equipment.

The USP defines fluid extracts in the following way:

Fluid extracts are liquid preparations of vegetable drugs,
containing alcohol as a solvent or as a preservative, or
both, and so made that each 1 ce. contains the therapeu-
tic constituents of 1 gm. of the standard drug which it
represents.

Fluid extracts are made by percolation, and the men-
struum to be used is specified in official monographs.
They may be standardized if they contain constituents
that can be assayed by modern methods.

Fluid extracts possess a number of advantages.

Stability is ensured by the use of an ethanol menstruum.
Glycerin, which tends to retard precipitation, is used as
part or all of the menstruum of some fluid extracts.

Concentration reduces the volume needed per dose.

Uniformity of dose is made possible by the precise nature
of the concentration; if 1 ml of extract represents 1 g
of crude herb, the dose of the fluid extract is practically
the same as that of the drug.

Here are some official examples of fluid extracts.

----- PAGE 233 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES @ 225

Extractum Anthemidis Liquidum BPC 1934
(Liquid Extract of Chamomile)
Chamomile, in moderately coarse powder
Alcohol (70%) to

1000 g
1000 ml
Exhaust the Chamomile with the alcohol by percolation, reserv-
ing the first 850 ml of percolate. Evaporate the subsequent per-
colate to a soft extract, dissolve it in the reserved portion and
add sufficient of the alcohol to produce the required volume.
Dose: 2-4 ml.

Senna Liquid Extract BP 1980

Senna fruit

Alexandrian or Tinnevelly, crushed 1000 g

Coriander oil é6ml

Ethanol (90%) 250 ml

Purified water, freshly boiled and cooled, a sufficient quantity
Macerate the crushed Senna fruit in 5000 ml of purified water
using 2 further quantities each of 2000 ml of purified water for
each maceration. Lightly press the marc, strain the expressed liq-
uid, mix the strained liquid with the previously decanted liquid,
heat the combined liquids at 80 degrees for 3 minutes in a cov-
ered vessel. Allow to stand for not less than 24 hours, filter.
Evaporate the filtrate to 750 ml under reduced pressure at a
temperature not exceeding 60 degrees. Separately, dissolve the
Coriander oil in the ethanol (90%), add to the evaporated fil-
trate, and add sufficient purified water to produce 1000 ml.
Allow to stand for not less than 24 hours; filter Usual dose
range: 0.5-2 ml.

SYRUPS AND ELIXIRS

Fluid medicines—whether infusions, decoctions, or tinc-
tures—often have an unpleasant taste. Thus, it is some-
times helpful to mask the taste by adding a sweetener.
One method is to use a syrup, which is the traditional way
to make cough mixtures more palatable for children or to
make any herbal preparation more “toothsome,” as
Culpeper would say.

A Simple Syrup Base

Pour 1 pint of boiling water over 2'4 pounds of sugar. Place over
heat and stir until the sugar dissolves and the liquid begins to
boil. Remove from heat immediately.

To give this simple syrup medicinal properties, mix 1 part of
tincture with 3 parts of syrup and store for future use.
To sweeten an infusion or decoction, it is simpler to add the
sugar directly to the liquid. For every 1 pint of liquid, add ¥%
pound of sugar. Heat gently until the sugar is dissolved. This

mixture can be stored for future use in a refrigerator. Since is
not advisable to consume too much sugar, syrups are best used
when making gargles and cough medicines, in which the herbs
tend to be rather unpalatable.

Syrupus Althaeae BPC 1911 (Syrup of Althaea)

Althaea, sliced 4.00 g
Refined sugar 90.00 g
Distilled water 56.00 ml

Macerate the Althaea in the water for 12 hours, then strain, press
and filter. The filtrate should measure 45. To this add the sugar,
dissolve and heat the syrup to boiling. Cool and strain through
flannel. The finished product should measure about 100. Dose:
2-8 ml.

Elixirs (Elixiria)

Elixirs are another type of sweet formulation. They are
defined as clear, flavored, liquid preparation containing
one or more medicaments, and usually a high proportion

of alcohol or sucrose. Here is one example of the 18
elixirs in the BP 1980.

Compound Fig Elixir BP 1980

Fig, cut small 320g
Cascara Elixir 50 ml
Compound Rhubarb tincture 50 ml
Senna Liquid Extract 100 ml
Sucrose 540 g

Water a sufficient quantity

Add the fig to 800 ml of boiling water, heat gently for one hour,
strain, express, wash the pulp with sufficient warm water to pro-
duce 800 ml; evaporate the liquid to half its volume, dissolve the
sucrose in the concentrated liquid, add the compound Rhubarb
tincture, the Senna liquid extract, the Cascara elixir, and sufficient
water to produce 1000 ml; mix.

EMULSIONS (EMULSIONES)

Emulsions are still official for both internal and external
use. They are defined as dispersions of an oily liquid in an
aqueous liquid, either of which may contain dissolved or
suspended solids.

Emulsio Olei Amygdalae BPC 1911
(Almond Oil Emulsion)

12.50 ml

3.208

1000 ml

Almond Oil
Gum Acacia, in powder
Distilled Water to

----- PAGE 234 -----
226 <2 INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Make a mucilage by triturating the gum acacia in a mortar with
an equal quantity of distilled water, add the Almond oil in a slow
stream, stirring lightly until the mixture appears uniform; then
add gradually the remainder of the water. An alternative method
of making this preparation is to triturate the Almond oil with
gum acacia, add all at once twice as much distilled water as gum
acacia, make a primary emulsion, and add distilled water in small
quantities up to the required volume. Dose: 8-30 ml.

JUICES (SUCCD

Juices are an excellent way of taking medicinal herbs. The
effects can be dramatic and swift. The first green herbs of
spring, such as cleavers (Galium aparine), are most useful
in this form. Juices may be made at home using either a
juicer or a blender.

Succus Taraxaci BPC 1911 (Juice of Dandelion)

Taraxacum juice is prepared by subjecting the bruised fresh root
to pressure, adding to the expressed juice '/3 of its volume of al-
cohol, allowing the mixture to stand for 7 days, and filtering.
This juice is considered by many practitioners to be more effec-
tive than the liquid extract prepared from the dried root. Note:
Liquor Taraxaci is prepared by adding the alcohol to the bruised
fresh root before expression. Dose: 4-8 ml.

LINCTUSES (LINCT]

The BPC 1934 defines this type of liquid preparation as
follows:

Linctuses are liquid preparations of a mucilaginous,
syrupy, or viscous nature containing substances which
possess demulcent, expectorant, or sedative properties.
They are usually administered in small doses and should
be directed to be sipped and swallowed slowly without the
addition of water, so that they may form a temporary pro-
tective or remedial film over the membranes of the throat.

Linctus Ipecacuanhae BPC 1923
(Linctus of Ipecacuanha)

Vinegar of lpecacuanha 25.00 ml
Syrup of Balsam of Tolu 25.00 ml
Glycerin 25.00 ml
Mucilage of Tragacanth to 100.00 ml

Mix the liquids. Dose: 2-4 ml.

MUCILAGES

Mucilages are an interesting type of formulation that can
prove quite tricky to make! The BPC 1911 has this to say
about mucilages:

Mucilages are viscous preparations usually employed as
emulsifying or suspending agents, or as demulcents.
Mucilages which are not in constant demand should be
freshly prepared as required. They deteriorate when kept,
especially in warm weather, unless preservatives are
added, such as solution of formaldehyde or benzoic acid.
Mucilages which have been at 100 degrees for 10 minutes
in small bottles and securely sealed, keep for longer peri-
ods. Such precautions are unnecessary in the case of mu-
cilage of gum acacia or mucilage of Tragacanth if quanti-
ties limited to about a week's supply are stored in bottles
of small size, as completely filled as possible. Mucilage of
gum acacia, when required at short notice, can be rapidly
prepared with hot water; the keeping properties of the
product are inferior to mucilage prepared with cold

water.

Mucilago Acaciae BPC 1911 (Mucilage of Acacia)

Gum acacia, in small pieces or coarse powder 35g
Benzoic acid (to preserve) 02g
Water to 100.00 ml

Wash the acacia quickly in distilled water, macerate with warm
water (plus benzoic acid) until dissolved and make up to volume,
Acacia mucilage can be sterilized by heating at 80°C for one
hour.

OXYMELS

These are formulations containing acetic acid, clear
honey, and enough water to give a solution with a specific
gravity of 1.32, measured with a hydrometer. Usually the
amount of water comes to I part.

Oxymel Marrubii BPC 1911 (Oxymel of Horehound)

Horehound, dried 42.50 g

Acetic acid 6.75 ml
Distilled water, boiling, a sufficient quantity
Clarified honey to 100.00 ml

Digest the horehound with sufficient boiling water to cover it,
in a water bath for one hour; then strain and press, evaporate on
the water bath to 50, cool, when cold add the acetic acid and
filter, make up to the required volume with the honey. Dose:
2-4 ml.

----- PAGE 235 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES 2 227

WATERS (AQUA)

‘Waters are traditional preparations that are still widely
used as cosmetics in the form of flower waters. Aromatic
waters are still official, and five are mentioned in the BP

1980.

Aqua Cinnamomi conc. BPC 1911
(Concentrated Cinnamon Water)

Oil of cinnamon 475 ml
Alcohol (90%) 80.00 ml
Distilled water to 100.00 ml

Dissolve the oil in the alcohol. Add the water in small amounts,
shaking after each addition. One part of this solution corre-
sponds to about 40 parts of cinnamon water.

DRY PREPARATIONS

Sometimes it is appropriate to take herbs in a dry form,
and dry preparations offer certain advantages. First, they
enable the patient to take the herb while avoiding the
possibly unpleasant taste. Second, the patient takes the
whole herb, including the fibrous material.

On the other hand, there are a number of drawbacks
to dry preparations. Dry herbs are unprocessed, and thus
the plant constituents are not always readily available for
easy absorption. During infusion, heat and water help to
break down the walls of the plant cells and dissolve the
constituents, which is not always guaranteed during the
digestive process in the stomach and the small intestine.
When the constituents are already dissolved in liquid
form, they are available to exert their actions sooner.

A more subtle drawback lies in the very fact that
when herbs are taken in dry form, the patient does not
taste the herb. For reasons discussed in chapter 13 and
elsewhere, bitter herbs work best when tasted, as their ef-
fectiveness depends on a complex neurological reflex.
When bitters are put into a capsule or a pill, their action
may well be lost or diminished.

After all of these considerations have been taken into
account, there are still a number of ways to use herbs in
dry form. The main concern is ensuring that the herbs are
powdered as finely as possible. This guarantees that the
cell walls are largely broken down, and helps in the diges-
tion and absorption of the herbs. However, the need to
break down the herbs presents yet another drawback, as
techniques used to grind the herbs finely will also gener-
ate much heat through friction, possibly leading to a
change in chemistry.

Capsules

The easiest way to take dry powdered herbs internally is
to use gelatin capsules. (Capsules not made of animal
products are also available.) The size needed depends on
the amount of herb prescribed per dose, the density of the
plant, and the volume of the material. A size 00 capsule
holds about 0.5 gram (!/s ounce) of finely powdered herb.

Filling Capsules
Place the powdered herb ina flat dish and take the halves of the
capsule apart. Move the halves of the capsules through the pow-
der, filling them in the process. Push the halves together.

Pills

There are a number of ways to make pills, depending on
the degree of technical skill you possess. The simplest
way to take an unpleasant remedy is to roll the powder
into a small pill with fresh bread, which works quite ef-
fectively with herbs such as goldenseal and cayenne.

‘Tablets

The tablet is the most commonly used oral dosage form,
but is also often the most complex to make. The process
of making tablets involves compressing the herb, which
results in a reduction in effective surface area. The herb
starts out as a very fine powder, but then is compressed
into a single dosage unit. Certain tablet ingredients are
included to add various physical properties to the thera-
peutic properties of the herb.

Common Tablet. Ingredients

Drug may be poorly soluble, hydrophobic

Lubricant is usually quite hydrophobic

Granulating agents tend to help the ingredients adhere to
one another

Filler may interact with the drug; it should be water-
soluble

Wetting agents help water penetrate into the tablet

Disintegration agents help to break the tablet apart after
ingestion

Coated tablets are used to help mask unpleasant
tastes, protect tablet ingredients during storage, or simply
improve the appearance of the tablet. This barrier must
break down quickly, or it may hinder the drug’s bioavail-
ability. Some tablets are treated with enteric coatings,
meaning that they are coated with a material that will

----- PAGE 236 -----
228 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

dissolve in the intestine but remain intact in the stomach.
Polymeric acid compounds have been used for this pur-
pose with some success.

Lozenges (Trochisci) and Pastilles (Pastilli)
A number of formulations have been developed to pleas-
antly and slowly release medicinal properties in the
mouth. These aromatic, medicinal forms are named after
their shapes. Thus, /ozenge is derived from the French
losange, meaning “rhombic.” Troche, the singular form of
trochisti, from the Greek trochos, means “round.” Pastille is
from one of the French words for “food.”

Trochisci Altheae BPC 1911 (Althaea Lozenges)

Althaea, in powder 6.48 g
Refined sugar, in powder 99.22 g
Gum Acacia, in powder 64.80 g

White of one egg

Orange-flower water a sufficient quantity

Macerate the Althaea in a sufficient quantity of orange-flower
water for 12 hours, strain, add the gurn acacia and sugar, Dissolve
and evaporate to the consistency of honey with constant stirring:
gradually add the white of an egg beaten up with more orange-
flower water. Evaporate with stirring until the paste will not
adhere to the hand, and divide into 100 lozenges.

EXTERNAL REMEDIES

As the body can absorb some components of herbal for-
mulations through the skin, a wide range of methods and
formulations have been developed to take advantage of
this fact. Douches and suppositories, though they might
appear to be internal remedies, have traditionally been
categorized as external remedies.

Here are two time-honored official remedies for ex-
ternal application.

Peruvian Balsam NF-

This balsam is made up of 60% to 64% of a volatile oil
called cinnamein and 20% to 28% of resin. The higher
the volatile oil content, the greater the market price of the
drug. Cinnamein is a mixture of numerous compounds, of
which the following have been identified: the esters ben-
zyl benzoate, benzyl cinnamate, and cinnamyl cinnamate;
the alcohol peruviol as ester; free cinnamic acid; about
0.05% of vanillin; and a trace of coumarin. It may also
contain dihydrobenzoic acid, farnesol, styrol, and a phy-
tosterol. The resin consists of the benzoic and cinnamic

acid esters of the alcohol peruresinotannol, along with
some free cinnamic acid.

Peruvian Balsam is a local irritant. It serves as a valu-
able dressing that promotes the growth of epithelial cells
in the treatment of indolent ulcers, wounds, and certain
skin conditions, including scabies. Ointments that con-
tain both Peruvian Balsam and sulfur present a problem
in compounding, since the resinous part of the balsam
tends to separate. This difficulty may be overcome by
mixing the balsam with an equal amount of castor oil be-
fore incorporating it into the base, or by mixing it with
solid petroxolin.

Friar’s Balsam

Friar’s Balsam has been a classic herbal remedy for more
than 500 years. It is an antiseptic, vulnerary, and stimu-
lating expectorant made from the following blend of
components:

Siam benzoin resin (Styrax tonkinensis): 47%

Storax (Liquidambar orientalis): 17%

Balsam of Tolu (Myroxylon balsamum var. balsamum): 17%
Balsam of Peru (Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae): 9%
Aloe leaf latex (Aloe vera): 4%

Myrrh tears (Commiphora molmol): 4%

Angelica root (Angelica archangelica): 2%

The preparation is used topically as an antiseptic and
to treat minor cuts and abrasions, chapped skin and lips,
cracked nipples, small fissures of the skin and anus, bed-
sores, indolent ulcers, herpes simplex, and gingivitis. It
may also be taken internally or inhaled with steam vapor
as a stimulating expectorant for stubborn coughs and
catarrhs, laryngitis, early stages of acute bronchitis, and
chronic bronchitis. Occasionally, topical use can cause
contact dermatitis.

Baths (Balneotherapy)

The use of hot water for therapeutic purposes is as ancient
as humanity itself. In Europe, it has been called ba/neo-
therapy. The term balneology refers to the study of bathing,
and so balneotherapy is the use of balneology in the treat-
ment of disease. In North America, this is a field of ther-
apeutics utilized by naturopathic physicians, and an excel-
lent modern guide can be found in The Textbook of Natural
Medicine. This technique has many benefits, especially
when a careful selection of herbal additives is made.

Official. Baths

Baths, officially known as balnea, are mentioned in the
pharmacopoeias.

----- PAGE 237 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES 229

Balneum Sinapis BPC 1911 (Mustard Bath)
Mustard 0.25 g
Water to 100.00 ml

Rub the mustard to a smooth paste with cold water before
adding it to the remainder of the water previously warmed.

Folk Method
A pleasant way of absorbing herbal compounds through
the skin is by bathing in a full body bath with 1 pint of in-
fusion or decoction added to the water. Alternatively, you
can also take a foot- or hand bath, in which case the
preparation would be used in undiluted form. Any herb
that can be taken internally can also be used in a bath.

Another way to use herbs in baths is to simply place
a handful of herbs in a muslin bag and then suspend it
from the hot-water tap so that the water flows through
the bag. This creates a very fresh infusion.

Bath herbs not only foster relaxation, but also can be
used to give the bath an exquisite fragrance.

Fragrant, Relaxing Bath Herbs
Lavandula officinalis (lavender)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Sambucus nigra (elder)

Tilia spp. (linden)

For a bath that will bring about a restful and healing
sleep, select an infusion of one of the following to add to
the bathwater. Bear in mind that although valerian is very
effective, it has a strong aroma!

Sedative Bath Herbs
Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Tilia spp. (linden)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

For children with sleep problems or babies who are
teething, the gentle herbs listed here might be more ap-
propriate than some of the strong ones mentioned
above.

Bath Herbs for Children and Babies
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)

Tilia spp. (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

For feverish conditions, or to help improve circula-
tion, stimulating and diaphoretic herbs can be used. Care
should be taken to use very small amounts of the strong
rubefacients, such as cayenne.

Stimulating and Diaphoretic Bath Herbs
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)

Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

Zingiber officinale (ginger)

These are just some of the possibilities, Ideas can be
found in books on aromatherapy, a healing system based
on the external application of herbs in the form of essen-
tial oils, Essential oils can also be used in baths; simply
put a few drops of oil into the bathwater. Care must be
taken when using these wonderful oils, as they are very
concentrated, and too much of certain oils may be irritat-
ing to the skin or even toxic. For more information, refer
to Aromatherapy: A Complete Guide to the Healing Art, by
Kathi Keville and Mindy Green, one of the best books on
this therapeutic modality.

Douches

Another way to use herbs externally is in a douche (the
application of herbs to the vagina). This is particularly in-
dicated for local infections.

Preparing a Douche

Prepare an infusion or decoction to be used for douching. (Be
sure to prepare a fresh tea for each douche.) Allow the tea to
cool to a temperature that will be comfortable for internal
application. Pour the liquid into the container of a douche bag
and insert applicator. Allow the liquid to rinse the inside of the
vagina.

Note that because the liquid will run out of the vagina, it is
easiest to douche while sitting on the toilet. It is not necessary
to actively hold in the liquid. In most conditions for which
douching is indicated, it is advisable to use the tea undiluted,
three times daily, for a number of days, using appropriate herbal
remedies internally at the same time.

If, however, a three- to seven-day course of douching (along
with internal remedies) does not noticeably improve symptoms
of vaginal infection, see a qualified practitioner for a diagnosis.

Enemas

Enemas and douches have both been used as official
preparations. Here is an official formulation for an enema.

----- PAGE 238 -----
230 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Enema Ulmi Fulvae BPC 1911 (Enema of Slippery Elm)

Slippery Elm in fine powder 58

Boiling water to 100 ml
Pour the water onto the powder, mixing thoroughly. 500 ml is
about enough for one enema, The Ulmus fulva powder will al-
most certainly go cloudy. Just prior to the addition of the boil-
ing water, either wet it to a thin paste with cold water or use
a minimum quantity of alcohol as a wetting agent. Allow the
alcohol to evaporate after the boiling water has been added.

Ointments

Ointments, or salves, are semisolid preparations that can
be applied to the skin. Depending on the purpose for which
they are designed, there are innumerable ways to make
ointments. They can vary in texture from very greasy to a
thick paste, depending on what base is used and what
compounds have been mixed together. Any herb can be
used for making ointments, but some that are particularly
valuable in external healing mixtures are listed here.

Herbs for External Use
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Arnica montana (arnica)
Calendula officinalis (calendula, pot marigold)
Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Plantago spp. (plantain)
Sambucus flowers (elder)
Stellaria media (chickweed)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Ulmus rubra (slippery elm)

Modern North American herbalism shows one of its
strengths where the preparation of ointments is con-
cerned. A cornucopia of methods and ingredients exists,
and many herbalists have developed their own unique ap-
proaches. A range of materials can be used to make up the
ointment base, allowing for different consistencies and
different types of extraction. The reader is directed again
to the books written by Rosemary Gladstar, James Green,
and Christopher Hobbs, listed in Suggested Reading.

Suppositories
Suppositories are designed to enable the insertion of
remedies into the orifices of the body. While they can be

shaped for insertion into the nose or ears, they are most
commonly used for rectal or vaginal problems. They act
as carriers for any herb that is appropriate to use in this
context, and there are three general categories of these:

1. Herbs that soothe mucous membranes, reduce in-
flammation, and aid in the healing process, such as
root and leaf of Symphytum officinale, roots of
Althaea officinalis and Hydrastis canadensis, and bark
of Ulmus rubra

2. Astringent herbs that reduce discharge or aid in the
treatment of hemorrhoids, such as Vinca species,
Plantago species, Hamamelis virginiana, and Rumex
crispus

3. Remedies that stimulate intestinal peristalsis and
help overcome chronic constipation—in other
words, laxatives

When using herbs in any of these three categories, it
will often be appropriate to include an antimicrobial herb.
A number of different bases may be used, but keep in
mind that the base must be firm enough to be inserted
into the orifice but must also melt at body temperature
once inserted, to liberate the herbs it contains. The herbs
should be distributed uniformly in the base; this is partic-
ularly important when using a powdered herb.

Official Suppositories
Formulas for suppositories appear in various pharma-
copoeias, including the following example.

Suppositorum Ranunculus Ficaria BPC 1911
(Suppository of Lesser Celandine)
Spermaceti wax lg
Ranunculus ficaria ointment 3g

Made from fresh Ranunculus digested in lard for 24 hours.

Folk Method

A simple method of making suppositories is to mix finely
powdered herbs with a base, preferably cocoa butter.
Mold this mixture into the desired shape, following the
instructions given below. To avoid the introduction of
powdered plant material into the body, however, another
method must be employed: Use gelatin and vegetable
glycerin as a base and add an infusion, a decoction, or a
tincture in the following proportions.

----- PAGE 239 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES 2 231

Suppository
Gelatin 10 parts
Water (or infusion, decoction, tincture) 40 parts
Glycerin 15 parts

Soak the gelatin in the liquid and dissolve with the aid of gentle
heating. Add glycerin and heat the whole mixture over a water
bath to evaporate the water. The final consistency will depend
on how much water is removed. If removed completely, a very
firm consistency will be achieved.

Preparing a Mold

Shape a piece of aluminum foil to the desired dimensions. The
best shape is a one-inch-long torpedo. Pour the molten base
into the mold and allow to cool. Store the suppositories in their
molds in the refrigerator.

Liniments

Liniments are preparations specifically formulated for
easy absorption through the skin, as they are intended for
use in massages that stimulate muscles and ligaments.
They must be used only externally, never internally, be-
cause they usually are made with rubbing alcohol. To
carry the herbal components to the muscles and liga-
ments, liniments are usually made of a mixture of the herb
with alcohol or, occasionally, apple cider vinegar. An
herb-infused or essential oil may also be added. Cayenne
is a common liniment ingredient.

Linimentum Arnicae BPC 1911 (Liniment of Arnica)

Hard Soap 20.00 g

Tincture of Arnica 25.00 ml
Camphor 5.00 ml
Alcohol to 100.00 ml

Dissolve the soap in the alcohol and tincture of arnica, on a
water-bath, add the camphor, dissolve, pour into suitable bot-
tles and cool.

Jethro Kloss describes the following liniment in Back
to Eden. It is not an official formulation, but rather an ex-
pression of the folk tradition at its best.

A Jethro Kloss Liniment

Combine:
2 ounces powdered myrrh
J ounce powdered goldenseal
V2 ounce cayenne pepper
1 quart rubbing alcohol (70%)

Mix together and let stand seven days; shake well every day, de-
cant off, and bottle in corked bottles.

Another excellent liniment that simultaneously
warms and relaxes muscles is made with equal parts
Lobelia inflata and Viburnum opulus plus a pinch of
Capsicum annuum. This can be made into a tincture or a
liniment. For more examples, please refer to chapter 19.

Gargles (Gargarisma) and Mouthwashes
Mouthwashes are still official, although only one has sur-
vived to be listed in the current BP. The BP 1980 provides
the following definition:

Mouthwashes are aqueous solution of one or more
medicaments. They are intended, usually after dilution
with warm water, for use in contact with the mucous
membranes of the oral cavity. They may contain suitable
antimicrobial preservatives.

Gargarisma Myrrhea BPC 1911 (Myrrh Gargle)

Tincture of Myrrh 5.00 ml
Clarified Honey 5.00 ml
Acid Infusion of Roses to 100.00 ml

Mix the tincture of Myrrh with the clarified honey and gradually
add the acid infusion of roses.

Inhalants (Vapors) and Spray Solutions
(Nebulae)

These pharmacy forms represented an official use of the
essential oils that have been rediscovered in the practice
of aromatherapy. They facilitate the therapeutic applica-
tion of the oils to the sinuses or pharynx.

Vapor Eucalapti et Mentholis Compositus BPC 1911
(Compound Eucalyptus and Menthol Inhalation)

Oil of Eucalyptus 10.00 ml
Oil of Pine 5.00 ml
Oil of Cassia 5.00 ml
Menthol 5.00 ml
Thymol 1.00 ml
Camphor 2.00 g

Tincture of Benzoin to 100.00 ml

Dissolve the oils and other ingredients in the tincture. This in-
halation is an excellent basis for special medicaments. Thus,
2% of balsam of Peru may be added; 1-2% of phenol; 1-5% of
cocaine; 2% of creosote; 5% of oil of tar; 1% of iodine: 5% of
terebene.

----- PAGE 240 -----
232 @ INTRODUCTION TO PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES

Nebula Benzoini Composita BPC 191]
(Composition Benzoin Inhalation)

Oil of Pine 1.50 ml
Oil of Eucalyptus 3.00 ml
Oil of Cassia 1.50 ml
Menthol 1.00 ml
Glycerin 50.00 ml
Tincture of Benzoin to 100.00 ml

Dissolve the menthol and oils on 40 of the tincture, add the
glycerin and make up to the required volume with tincture of
benzoin. This preparation is suitable for use with a nebulizer.

The traditional herbal equivalents of these vapors
and nebulae can be found in the medicine-making and
aromatherapy books listed in Suggested Reading at the
end of this chapter.

Oils
Many herbs are rich in essential oils. These include aro-
matic herbs like Mentha ‘piperita, in which the oils are
volatile. Other plants contain oils that are not particularly
aromatic, such as Hypericum perforatum. Herbal oils can be
used in two forms, depending on the mode of extraction.

1. Pure essential oils are extracted from the herb
through a complex and careful process of distilla-
tion. These oils are best obtained from specialist
suppliers who distill them for use in aromatherapy,
and thus take care that they are as pure as possible.

2. Herb-infused oils are made through a much simpler
method that resembles the technique used to make
cold infusions. Instead of infusing the herb in water,
put it in oil to obtain a solution of the plant’s essen-
tial oils in the oil base. The best oils to use are veg-
etable oils, such as olive, sunflower, and almond.

A Simple Herbal Oil

Cut the herb finely, place in a clear glass container, and cover it
with oil. Put the container in the sun or leave it ina warm place
for 2 to 3 weeks, shaking the container daily. After that time, fil-
ter the liquid into a dark glass container for storage.

St. John’s Wort Oil

Pick the flowers when they have just opened and crush them in
a teaspoonful of olive oil. Place the flowers in a glass container,
cover them with more oil, mix well, and put the container in the
sun or a warm place for 3 to 6 weeks, at the end of which time
the oil will be bright red.

Press the mixture through a cloth to filter out all the oil and
leave the oil to stand. There will be some water in the liquid,
which will settle on the bottom, so decant the oil from the top.
Store the oil in a well-sealed, dark container.

Compresses
Compresses provide an excellent means of applying a
remedy to the skin.

A Simple Compress

Soak a clean linen or cotton cloth in a hot herbal tea and apply
it to the affected part of the body. Use as hot as can be toler-
ated, Cover the compress with a towel to hold in the heat.

When cool, replace with a fresh compress. For a cold com-
press, use the same method, but simply let the tea cool before
application.

Poultices

This more active method of applying herbs to the outside
of the body uses fresh or dried plant material, rather than
a liquid.

Making a Poultice

Mash or crush fresh plant material and either heat over boiling
water or mix with a small amount of boiling water to make a
paste. If using dried herbs, powder them and mix with hot water
to create a paste. Apply directly to the skin as hot as possible,
holding the compress in place with gauze.

If using stimulating or irritating herbs such as mustard,
apply them between two layers of cloth.

INCOMPATIBILITY

A problem that faces all formulators of medicines is the
possibility that incompatibilities will be encountered.
These fall into three broad categories.

A therapeutic incompatibility is defined as an undesirable
pharmacological interaction between two or more in-
gredients that may potentiate the therapeutic effects of
the ingredients, reduce the effectiveness of one or more
of the ingredients, or cause toxicity in the patient.

Physical incompatibility refers to a physical or chemical in-
teraction between two or more ingredients that leads
to a visibly recognizable change. The latter may occur
in the form of a precipitate, haze, or color change.

----- PAGE 241 -----
THE FORMULATION AND PREPARATION OF HERBAL MEDICINES -e 233

Chemical incompatibility is classified as a reaction in which
an undesirable change occurs but is not visible. Since
there is no visible evidence of deterioration, recogniz-
ing this type of incompatibility requires some skill.

Physical incompatibilities can often be altered or
avoided. A common problem is the generation of insolu-
ble precipitates. For example, alcohol extracts precipitate
dissolved constituents when mixed with water. Such prob-
lems can often be avoided by manipulating the solvent or
by adding a suspending or protective agent. The specific
remedies for such problems will vary according to the
substances involved.

General Methods for Overcoming Physical
Incompatibilities

There are a number of simple methods that can be used
to minimize or prevent physical incompatibilities.

Change the order of mixing. Combining resin-rich tinc-
tures and water commonly causes the resin to precipi-
tate. One possible solution is to add the tincture slowly
to cold water when mixing. However, with very resin-
rich tinctures, such as tincture of myrrh, it is impossi-
ble to avoid some precipitation of resin out of solution.

Change the total volume of the mixture. By simply
adding more solvent, whether water or ethanol, the in-
creased volume will provide more bulk for material to
start in solution, in effect diluting the problematic con-
stituent. The percentage of water or ethanol may be
crucial, but the final outcome depends on the chem-
istry of the constituents in the extract.

Alter the solvents or add protective agents. Water dis-
solves gums, mucilage, and starch, but these are not
miscible in alcohol. Alcohol dissolves most con-
stituents. Often, the presence of alkaloids, glycosides,
volatile oils, resins, or balsams in an herb necessitates
the use of a higher percentage of alcohol in the extract
to ensure that the constituents are extracted and will
not precipitate when water is added. Glycerin can be
added to replace part of the water component to de-
crease the chance of precipitation.

Make an emulsification or suspension with gums or
syrup. For example, with acacia, do not add strong al-
cohol directly or the solution will “congeal.” Instead,
make a dilute mucilage and add alcohol slowly. This
method may be used for resinous tinctures. With tra-
gacanth, add tincture or liquid extract directly to pow-
dered gum. Shake to mix. Water should be added in a
proportion of 1 part of gum to 20 parts of water.

Chemical incompatibilities are more difficult to over-
come, but rarely are an issue in phytotherapy. Chemical
interactions can produce precipitation of insoluble com-
pounds. Alkaloids form salts with metallic ions, and thus,
in theory, many potential incompatibilities are possible.
However, all of these can be overcome by using a solution
made up of 15% to 30% alcohol.

Suggested Reading

Boyle W. Official Herbs: Botanical Substances in the United States
Pharmacopoeia, 1820-1990. East Palestine: Buckeye
Naturopathic Press, 1991.

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia. Bournemouth, UK: British
Herbal Medicine Association, 1983.

British Pharmaceutical Codex 1911, London: Pharmaceutical
Press, 1912.

British Pharmacopoeia. London: Constable & Co. Ltd., 1932.

Ellingwood F. American Materia Medica, Therapentics &
Pharmacognosy, 1898, Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic
Medical Publications, 1983.

Felter and Lloyd. King’s American Dispensatory, vol. 1 & 2,
Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Publications, 1983.

Felter HW. The Eclectic Materia Medica, Pharmacology &
Therapeutics, 1922. Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical
Publications, 1983.

Gladstar R. Family Herbal: A Guide to Living Life with Energy,
Health, and Vitality. Pownal, VT: Storey Books, 2001.

Green J. The Herbal Medicine Maker's Handbook: A Home
Manual. Freedom, CA: Crossing Press, 2000.

Hobbs C. Handmade Herbal Medicines: Recipes for Potions, Elixirs,
and Salves. Loveland, CO: Interweave Press, 1998.

Keville K, Green M. Aromatherapy: A Complete Guide to the
Healing Art. Freedom, CA: Crossing Press, 1995.

Rloss J. Back to Eden, mass market revised edition. Twin Lakes,
WI: Lotus Press, 1989.

List PH, Schmidt PC. Phytopharmaceutical Technology. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1989.

Osol A, ed. Remington's Pharmaceutical Sciences, 15th edition.
Easton, PA: Mack, 1975.

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. The Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

The National Formulary VI, 6th edition, Easton, PA: American
Pharmaceutical Assoc., 1935.

United States Pharmacopeia, 11th edition. Easton, PA: The
United States Pharmacopoeial Convention, 1936.

Wood HG, Osol A. The Dispensatory of the United States of
America, 23rd edition. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott Co.,
1943,

----- PAGE 242 -----


----- PAGE 243 -----
Part Two

MN

TREATMENT APPROACHES
BY BODY SYSTEM

----- PAGE 244 -----
12

rae) 8)

A MODEL OF HOLISTIC HERBAL MEDICINE

he phytotherapist must have some model to follow
| in formulating a prescription that addresses the
needs of the whole person. The herbal component
of treatment must be used in a context that also takes into
account non-herbal factors, such as diet, lifestyle, and
emotional, mental, and spiritual issues. In addition, all of
this must take place within the framework of a particular
socioeconomic situation and philosophical context. Such
a model enables the practitioner to identify and address a
whole range of factors, from symptoms and pathology to
constitutional differences and whole body toning.

The model we will discuss here is not new, but rather
is a representation of well-established and proven ap-
proaches described in holistic terms. There is little that
can truly be seen as new in a field as ancient as herbalism!
To choose the specific remedies that an individual needs
from the vast range of possibilities nature offers can be a
daunting task. However, it can be simplified if one uses a
set of guidelines.

The material that follows is provided under the as-
sumption that the prescriber has a basic grasp of human
physiology and pathology. The model is based upon a
five-stage process:

. Herbal actions

. System affinity

. Specific remedies for the illness
. Herbal biochemistry

. Intuition

wm Bw hee

Herbal Actions

Herbal actions reflect the ways in which remedies affect
human physiology. Plants have a direct impact on physi-
ological activity, and knowing what body processes are in-
volved in both disease and wellness facilitates selection of
an appropriate action. Obviously, selection of actions
suitable for a specific person will also depend on accurate
diagnosis.

236

System Affinity

Some herbs show an affinity for certain organs, body sys-
tems, or even specific types of tissue. These work as ton-
ics or nutrients for the areas involved. Many herbs can be
used freely and safely as part of one’s lifestyle and need
not be thought of as medicines. They are at their best
when used to nurture health and vitality and thus prevent
the development of health problems. During illness,
herbs with system affinities will enhance the general
health of the particular organ or body system when com-
bined with remedies selected for specific actions. They
are especially useful when a tendency toward a certain ill-
ness has been recognized but no overt pathology is pre-
sent. By using herbs in this way, one may be able to over-
come a weakness that could lead to disease later in life.

Specific Remedies for Ilness

The wealth of herbal knowledge that has been garnered
through the generations includes the use of many plants
that are traditionally specific for the treatment of certain
diseases or symptoms. While holistic healing aims to go
beyond symptomatic therapy, this knowledge deserves
great respect. An understanding of specific remedies for
illness can add much to a prescription based on appropri-
ate actions and system support. However, specifics do not
always exist.

Herbal Biochemistry

As discussed at length earlier in this book, increasing at-
tention is being paid to the biochemistry of active herb
constituents. Research has led to the development of
many lifesaving drugs, but this is a very limited approach
when it comes to using whole plants. In the hands of an
experienced herbalist, knowledge of plant pharmacology
can add to the healing possibilities, but not as much as is
often believed.

----- PAGE 245 -----
Intuition

An intuitive rapport flowers between the experienced
herbalist and the plants in their materia medica. Intuition
has a special role to play in healing, and the unique rela-
tionship between plants and people augments it well.
Such insightful intuition does not always flow freely, but
it should be embraced when it does. Intuitive knowledge
should always be checked against reference materials, if at
all possible. For example, if a practitioner is not clear on
the differences among bearberry, barberry, and bilberry,
unfortunate misunderstandings can result!

PHYTOTHERAPEUTIC SELECTION
CRITERIA

There is nothing inherent in a plant that defines the way
it should be used, and considering the herbal abundance
of our world, some coherent selection criteria are essen-
tial to guide phytotherapists in their healing work.

More than one-half million plants of various types
present themselves as possible healing remedies. The
British medical herbalist routinely uses approximately
250, while in China, the herbal practitioner can choose
from about 2,000 remedies that are readily available in
community pharmacies. These herbalists are obviously
applying some set of guidelines in order to whittle down
500,000 possible plant remedies to a more manageable
figure, but what are they? There are a number of useful
ways to group the relevant criteria, but three categories
are most helpful in Western herbalism:

1. Assessing the impact of herbs upon the body and
mind

2. Applying nontherapeutic criteria, such as aesthetics,
economics, and ecology

3. Using herbs within the context of some kind of
system

Applying these three sets of criteria facilitates the for-
mulation of treatments that are specific to the unique
needs of the individual and at the same time takes into ac-
count environmental and economic considerations.

ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF HERBS
ON THE INDIVIDUAL

The herbal remedies of the world vary greatly in strength,
from gentle tonic or food remedies to those that are po-
tentially lethal if taken at the wrong dosage. The holistic
phytotherapist works with the underlying idea that the

A Moor. OF HOLISTIC HERBAL MEDICINE v@ 237

body is self-healing and the therapist simply supports this
innate healing process. Thus, the tonic herbs are of
paramount importance, as this is exactly what they do.

A characteristic of tonics is that they are all gentle
remedies that have a mild yet profound effect upon the
body. Of course, not all herbal remedies are tonics, as
many have a powerful and immediate impact upon human
physiology. These must be used with the greatest respect,
and their use is best reserved for illnesses that call for
strong medicine. Identifying the intensity of an herb’s im-
pact upon the body provides a useful selection criterion.
Herbal remedies may be conveniently categorized as ei-
ther normalizers or effectors, but bear in mind that these
groupings are not absolute.

Normalizers

These are remedies that nurture and nourish the body in
a way that supports its own natural processes of growth,
healing, and renewal. These are the tonics, and are often
used in the form of herbal foods. Nettle, cleavers, and
chickweed are excellent examples of these gentle herbs.

Effectors

These are remedies that have an observable impact upon
the body. They provide humanity with herbs to use for
the treatment of the whole range of specific human ill-
nesses. Effectors can in turn be divided into two groups,
depending upon how they work:

Herbs with whole-plant actions. The effects of these herbs
come from the impact of the whole plant on the
human body. As examples, consider the immune sys-
tern booster echinacea and the anti-inflammatory herb
meadowsweet. It might be argued that meadowsweet
works because it contains salicylates. However, as dis-
cussed in chapter 7, other actions are also at play, and
the characteristic gastric inflammation caused by sali-
cylates can even be treated with meadowsweet. This
surely implies that something much broader than sim-
ple drug delivery is going on.

Herbs with specific active chemicals. These herbs exert their
effects because they contain a chemical (or chemicals)
with an impact so strong that whole plant effects are
not usually perceived. Due to the presence of these in-
tense chemicals, such herbs are potentially poisonous
if taken at the wrong dose or in the wrong way. The
cardioactive herb foxglove and the opium poppy serve
as good examples.

----- PAGE 246 -----
238 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Using Tonic Herbs

The value of tonic herbs lies in their normalizing, nur-
turing effects. These invaluable remedies will usually have
some associated action that further indicates how they are
best used. The cardiovascular tonic hawthorn is an excel-
lent example. Hawthorn tones the whole cardiovascular
system, while at the same time specifically dilates blood
vessels and lowers blood pressure.

Whenever possible, the herbalist will focus on the use
of such remedies, and will use stronger effectors only if
absolutely necessary. In fact, chemically based effectors
are used very sparingly in holistic herbalism. They are,
however, the foundation of pharmacological medicine.

Tonics can play a valuable role in keeping individuals
at their personal peak of health and vitality. Tonics may
also be used to ward off specific known health problems
or family weaknesses. There are plant remedies particu-
larly suited for each system of the body, some of which are
tonics. Selecting remedies that act as tonics for specific
body systems allows the herbalist to do some impressive
preventive work. When choosing, be sure to take into ac-
count the broader picture of the herb’s range of actions,
as this breadth of vision is needed to enable coherent
choices.

For the digestive system, no one herb serves as an all-
around tonic, as the system is so varied in form and func-
tion. However, bitters serve as preventive tonics. In ad-
dition, Matricaria recutita and Filipendula ulmaria are so

Table 12.1. Tonics for Specific Body Systems

helpful to the digestive process that they might almost be
considered general tonics here.

NONTHERAPEUTIC SELECTION
CRITERIA

To help further in the process of selecting among herbs
with similar actions, there are a number of nontherapeu-
tic factors to take into account. These are aesthetic, eco-
nomic, and environmental.

Aesthetic Criteria

There is no reason that herbal medicines should always
taste unpleasant. When possible, consider taste, aroma,
and visual appeal. These factors are a matter of personal
taste, but it is fine to select from a list of herbs compiled
by applying both therapeutic criteria and personal aes-
thetic preferences. Bitter herbs constitute the only gen-
eral exception. If bitterness is indicated, then the herbs
must be tasted, or much of their therapeutic potential will
be lost.

An example of a remedy that both works well and
tastes pleasant is a cough preparation, widely used in
France, that is composed of herb flowers that ease the
cough reflex and help remove phlegm from the lungs.
Making an herbal cough mixture that works well is
straightforward enough, but effective combinations are
often composed of acrid- or unpleasant-tasting plants.

BODY SYSTEM HERBS

Cardiovascular Crataegus laevigata, Allium sativum; flavone-rich herbs, such as Ginkgo biloba and Tilia platyphyllos,
help strengthen blood vessels

Respiratory Verbascum thapsus, Inula helenium

Digestive Bitter tonics, such as Gentiana lutea, Agrimonia eupatoria, and Taraxacum officinale root; Matricaria recutita and Filipendula
ulmaria are generally helpful to the digestive process

Liver Bitters, hepatics, and especially Silybum marianum

Urinary Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Zea mays

Reproductive Women: Rubus idaeus, Mitchella repens, and other uterine tonics
Men: Serenoa repens

Nervous Avena sativa, Scutellaria lateriflora, Hypericum perforatum, Verbena officinalis, Artemisia vulgaris; Eleutherococcus senticosus

and Panax ginseng are appropriate for those under stress

Musculoskeletal

Apium graveolens, Menyanthes trifoliata, Urtica dioica

Skin Galium aparine, Trifolium repens, Urtica dioica, and most of the alterative remedies

----- PAGE 247 -----
The same therapeutic results are achieved with the
French flower mixture, but in addition, it has a wonderful
aroma, a delicate taste, and a beautiful color.

Economic Criteria

My opinions are happily out of tune with the globally ra-
pacious capitalism of the dominant culture, but I believe
that herbs (and health care) should be free of charge.
Nature does not impose a financial levy on herbs, as they
grow wild and free. Of course, there are environmental
costs to take into account, but that is another matter.
When the choice arises, use common and inexpensive
herbs. Expensive does not usually equate with quality, but
instead with rarity. Expensive, rare, or imported plants
may not work any more effectively than common and not
very glamorous nettle or cleavers. The fast-developing
herb industry has a financial stake in the promotion of ex-
pensive new “wonder herbs” from exotic parts of the
world.

Environmental Criteria
Understanding that ecological relationships have a bear-
ing on the healing arts can lead to some important broad
implications. While the choice of the most relevant ther-
apy should be based on the needs of the individual,
Donne’s insight that “no man is an island” becomes cru-
cial here. In a world where human impact on the envi-
ronment is becoming life threatening, the broader impli-
cations of health practices must be taken into account.

Consider the Brazilian plant suma (Pfaffia paniculata).
In recent years, it has become popular as an immune sys-
tem stimulant. Quite apart from whether or not it works,
one must consider the basic fact that this vine is collected
from gullies in the Brazilian rain forest that are very sen-
sitive to erosion and disturbance. Isn’t it ironic that
through our attempts to help people live longer and
healthier lives, herbalists may be contributing to rain for-
est destruction, the greenhouse effect, and a potentially
dramatic reduction in the life spans of our children and
grandchildren? When alternatives abound, why use a
remedy that carries such environmental costs?

From a green perspective, talking of chemical drugs

s “unnatural” and herbal remedies as “natural” is prob-

lematic. The interactions that occur among plants and
humanity on the biochemical level show us that chemistry
is also natural. If a chemical exists in the body of the plant,
it must be natural. If it was not natural, it could not exist
without causing major trauma to life on earth. This is, of
course, also the case with technological aberrations such

A MODEL OF HOLISTIC HERBAL MEDICINE <. 239

as plutonium, but in general, how can we differentiate be-
tween what is and is not natural based simply on how it is
presented to us? The real challenge is learning how to
harness the chemistry of nature safely.

When the ecological effects of drug therapy and
herbal therapy are compared, another vital aspect of the
selection criteria is revealed. An example will clarify this
point. In the treatment of gastric ulceration, a whole
spectrum of options is available. A holistic approach will
not only focus on treating the stomach itself, but also
examine diet, lifestyle, general health, and so on. Treat-
ment may combine dietary changes, relaxation, exercise,
counseling, and other factors with the specific medicines
indicated.

How should these medicines be chosen? Herbal
remedies have much to offer in the treatment of digestive
problems in general and ulceration in particular, and are
arguably more clinically effective than drug therapy.
When we compare the antiulcer drug Tagamet (cimeti-
dine) with the herb A/thaea officinalis (marshmallow root),
we have two medications that produce equivalent symp-
tomatic relief for the patient, but have very different en-
vironmental impacts. (See The Impact of Herbs and
Drugs on the Environment: A Comparison, page 240.)

Chemical drugs used to treat gastric and duodenal ul-
cers lower the production of stomach acid and thereby re-
duce irritation of the stomach’s mucosal lining. Tagamet
is commonly used to inhibit gastric acid and pepsin pro-
duction in the stomach by blocking histamine receptors.
In the 1980s, it was one of the most widely prescribed
drugs in North America.

Herbal remedies may also be selected to soothe the
gastric mucosa, reduce the impact of stomach acid, and
promote the healing of ulceration. Plants that are
demulcent, vulnerary, and antacid are the most relevant
here, and the herbalist might also include nervine herbs
to reduce excessive vagal stimulation. Symphytum offici-
nale (comfrey), Althaea officinalis (marshmallow root),
Ubnus rubra (slippery elm), Filipendula ulmaria (mead-
owsweet), Matricaria recutita (chamomile), and Calendula
officinalis (calendula) may all have a part in the treat-
ment. When used in the context of the whole picture,
herbal treatments for gastric and duodenal ulcers are ex-
tremely effective.

However, in this case we are concerned more with
environmental impact than with therapeutic factors.
Regardless of the relative therapeutic merits of drugs and
herbs, a clear picture emerges when one compares their
respective ecological costs.

----- PAGE 248 -----
The Impact of Herbs and Drugs on the Environment: A Comparison

Tagamet and the Environment

The drug Tagamet is manufactured in a process that is no-
toriously dirty and produces much waste. This waste must
be disposed of. Even with the best intentions in the world,
there will be an impact on the environment, but with less
than perfect management, there will be a severe impact
that causes both water and air pollution. Pollution of local
rivers can lead to destruction of insect and fish populations
and then, through food webs, birds. If used for irrigation, the
water may have an adverse effect on the soil. The pollutants
dispersed into the air not only will contribute to acid rain,
but will also have a direct impact related to the specific
chemicals present.

In the process of developing the drug and fulfilling gov-
ernment safety standards, many laboratory animals were
slaughtered. The morality of this fundamental part of mod-
ern health care is dubious in the extreme. However, it is cur-
rently a necessary evil when dealing with chemical medicine,
and so must be taken into account when considering the im-
pact of chemical drugs on the environment and living beings.

Industrial production and distribution of the drug is
energy intensive in a way that the resources of the planet
cannot support for much longer. (The profligate use of
nonrenewable energy is, of course, rampant throughout
the whole industrial system, and not specifically the fault
of the manufacturers of Tagamet.) The potential for polit-
ical manipulation also exists, as the need for energy to
manufacture drugs is cited as a justification for the devel-
opment of nuclear power. The contradictions in that juxta-
position would be funny if they were not so frightening.

When using proprietary drugs, the patient and pre-
scriber are at the same time supporting and depending on
the multinational drug companies. The very existence of
these vast international corporations raises political, eco-
nomic, and ethical questions that go beyond the confines of
this brief review. However, the patient becomes an unwitting
financial supporter of these questionable organizations.
Disempowerment becomes a key concept as the individual's
health care needs are relegated to the experts, the physician
to prescribe and the pharmacist to dispense. This is not
meant as a comment on the skill or dedication of these-pro-
fessionals, but as a recognition that patients have relin-
quished personal responsibility by handing it over to experts.

Added together, these issues create a cycle of death,
destruction, and exploitation perpetrated in the name of
personal health. It is worth looking closer to see the hid-
den costs of the little tablet, as the overall cost of treat-
ment goes far beyond the price of the pills. The cost and
impact of this “simple” ulcer treatment includes environ-
mental damage and the support of a system that may well
be at the center of much planetary dis-ease.

Marshmallow and the Environment

The dilemma over therapeutic choice raised by these eco-
logical, economic, and political considerations might seem
daunting. However, if herbal remedies are viewed in a sim-
ilar framework, a very different picture emerges.

Althaea officinalis (marshmallow}, like many other
herbal remedies, is produced by small-scale growers and
distributed through channels that support a diversified
economic system. This system provides a perfect example
of how small can be beautiful. Not only does it provide the
benefits of small-scale economics and ecological viability,
but this also works to produce a medicine that carries the
multiple advantages inherent in herb remedies.

If organic techniques were used to produce the herb,
the soil was nurtured, which Welsh farmers describe as
putting “heart” back into the soil. Soil structure and stabil-
ity are becoming major ecological problems in much of the
world, and organic farming represents a step toward reme-
dying this situation.

In addition, a basic principle in ecology is that the
more diverse a system is, the more stable it will be in the
face of environmental perturbation, and organic tech-
niques increase the diversity of soil populations.
Wildcrafting plants, the practice of collecting wild plants
from their natural environment, highlights the need to pre-
serve habitats as a source of plant and seed. However, it is
even more important to protect the land for the sake of
Earth itself. Herbalism is part of a dawning awareness in hu-
manity that Earth and its inhabitants do not existence
solely for our use.

It is no wonder that the production of herbal
medicines, and in our example marshmallow, involves no
abuse of laboratory animals. The traditional use of marsh-
mallow is ancient, and we can accept the great knowledge
of its healing properties without needing to take the lives
of animals. Little energy is consumed in the production of
this herb, so it is an ideal medicine for a self-sufficient, low-
impact economy. Even if our society does not yet function
this way, we can contribute in the right way by using a sus-
tainably produced remedy to heal any ulcers the current sys-
tem generates.

The comparison between these two therapeutically
equivalent medicines shows that environmental and polit-
ical criteria have much to contribute when it comes to
making choices. Put starkly, the choice is between being
part of a cycle of death and destruction justified by per-
sonal health and being part of a life-affirming cycle that
uses healing herbs for personal health. The very process of
considering these perspectives is part of the healing of
humanity's alienation from our world. As we think, so we
become. What is it to be?

----- PAGE 249 -----
USING HERBS IN THE CONTEXT OF
A THERAPEUTIC SYSTEM

Since the early history of medicine, people have been
striving to make sense of the human body, the ills that as-
sail it, and the healing remedies used to treat it. Many
models or systems of medicine have been developed,
most of which are found now only in texts on the history
of medicine. Ways of using herbs have been repeatedly
organized and reorganized into various systems that re-
flect the prevailing worldview held by people of different
cultures and eras.

Today is no exception, as the herbal renaissance is in
full bloom and the transformation of society still in mid-
process. A number of systems are in current use. Some
depend upon traditional knowledge, while others work
within the framework of an existing philosophical system.
Systems based on the folk traditions of the world vary ac-
cording to the tradition used. Those that work within the
framework of an existing system differ depending on the
philosophy at their core.

Philosophical contexts include the profoundly holis-
tic systems of Asia as well as the Western medical ap-
proach, which is based on what has been called the
biomedical model. This Western model requires that herbs
be used within the framework of a disease-centered ap-
proach to medicine, but nonetheless applies them in a
holistic context.

Traditional Healing Systems

The traditional or folk use of herbal remedies is familiar to
everyone in some form or another. This is the way in which
information about herbs has been passed from generation
to generation, but an unquestioning reliance on empirical
evidence also gives herbalism a bad name among members
of the scientific community. Their loss! Folk wisdom is of
inestimable value and relevance. Generations of accrued
experience and insight are not to be taken lightly.

As an example, consider the fact that these same
folk remedies from around the world often point the
way for pharmacologists searching for new and powerful
medicines. The use of Dioscorea spp. (wild yam) as a source
of hormone precursors and the application of
Catharanthus roseus (Madagascar periwinkle) in anti-
leukemia drugs are two good examples.

The bulk of the world’s health care is still based on the
traditional use of local herbal remedies. The relevance of
this worldwide folk use is recognized by the World Health
Organization and promoted through its Traditional
Medicine Program. Every culture of the world has its own

A MODEL OF HOLisTic HERBAL MEDICINE © 241

herbal tradition, which may be either a thriving aspect of
modern life or a more or less moribund historical memory.

By the early 1970s, the traditional use of plant
medicines appeared to be almost over in Great Britain.
However, with the renewal of interest in herbs that oc-
curred as part of a wider reawakening to the natural
world, it soon became apparent that much of the tradition
was alive and well. Remedies and recipes for herbal teas
had been handed down from generation to generation
and were still remembered. The change in social atmo-
sphere apparently gave people “permission” to recollect
these gems of knowledge.

Wales has a strong modern herbal tradition with
clearly recognizable roots in the flowering of Welsh cul-
ture in the days of the old Princes of Wales (c. 1100). In
rural areas are many people who know one or two herbal
combinations specific for certain conditions. Often en-
countered are various ointments for eczema. These oint-
ments are usually very effective, but the people using
them rarely know why, and they often have no other
herbal information. The recipes can usually be traced
back to the medieval Physicians of Myddfai, doctors at
the court of the Princes, These physicians possessed a
deep and profound knowledge of herbs and the healing
process, well in advance of what was available in England
and the rest of non-Islamic Europe at the time.

The continuity of the tradition is paradoxically re-
ated to attempts to destroy the culture that supported the
physicians. When the English invaded and conquered
Wales, the royal court was destroyed. The knowledge and
wisdom of the Physicians of Myddfai was in part dis-
persed among the people, in what would prove to be a
successful attempt to preserve the traditions. It appears
that certain families were given specific remedies to keep
safe and pass on to future generations. These recipes and
information were never shared with anyone outside the
family, but the medicine was given freely to anyone who
needed it. This wisdom can still be found in the hills and
valleys of Wales.

However, as fundamentally valuable as traditional
folk knowledge is, it has limited application within mod-
ern holistic herbal practice. An application of herbal
remedies that relates specific plants to specific diseases or
symptoms is little more than what we might call “organic
drug therapy.” Simply using remedies for symptomatic
relief ignores all the insights of holistic medicine. Thus,
the ancient folk traditions of the world provide a wonder-
ful foundation upon which today’s medical herbalist may
build the holistic herbalism of the future.

----- PAGE 250 -----
242 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Philosophical Systems

Phytotherapy offers the most value to holistic medicine
when used within the context of a coherent philosophical
system. Such systems work with intellectual, conceptual
models for understanding what a human being is and
what a disease process is. Each system’s concept of health
and human wholeness must be seen as a subset of the
paradigm held by that culture as to the nature of the
world itself. These paradigms are reflected in the holistic
medical systems of China and India as well as in the
reductionist approach taken in the biomedical model of
Western medicine.

Traditional Chinese medicine, ayurveda from the
Vedic tradition of Hindu India, and unani from the world
of Islam represent perhaps the best-known examples of
philosophical systems that are still thriving in the face of
the intellectual imperialism of Western medicine. Other
systems are found in such diverse cultures as Japan and
Ghana and wherever herbal medicine is integrated into
spirituality and transformation, as in anthroposophical
medicine.

The techniques of any medical system are an expres-
sion of its ideas and theories. These, in turn, arise as spe-
cific developments in the philosophy of the culture con-
cerned. Thus, traditional Chinese medicine (TCM)
represents an application to medicine of a Confucian or
Taoist worldview. Similarly, ayurveda is an expression of
the profound perspectives that come from Hindu experi-
ence and spirituality.

It is important that the context within which any
medical practitioner is working be clearly acknowledged
and expressed. It will color all that occurs, and may either
limit or facilitate the healing work undertaken. Health
care does not happen in a philosophical vacuum, but in-
stead within the context of a worldview and belief system.
If this fact is not articulated overtly, it will be implied by
default. The problem of cultural chauvinism often arises
when comparisons are made between different health
care systems of the world. In the discussion that follows,
I have intended to make no value judgments. This is sim-
ply an exploration of practical considerations for both
practitioners and patients in the Western world.

sorbed through the skin?

Western Folk Traditions and Modern Herbalism

In general, folk traditions of the Western world are vestigial or have only recently been revived by well-
meaning advocates. This makes changing or developing herbal treatments problematic. Unless the herbal-
ist Is part of an active, living tradition, it is unwise to question or change information that was handed
down, as the source of that knowledge no longer exists. An example may clarify this.

When in practice in West Wales, | came across a hill farmer who made an ointment for the treatment
of shingles, a painful and intransigent viral infection of nerve ganglia. On two occasions, | observed that
this ointment cleared trigeminal shingles in three to five days, a feat that allopathic medicine or modern
herbalism would be hard pressed to duplicate. However, the farmer died childless. He never imparted the
secret recipe, especially not to an upstart English herbalist from the town!

All of my attempts to identify the many herbs in the ointment failed, except for one herb out of the
whole combination. This was biting stonecrop (Sedum acre), an herb that is not used therapeutically today
and which the seventeenth-century herbalist Culpeper insisted must not be put in any ointment.
Formulation of the ointment also involved using pig urine as an extraction vehicle.

Apart from practical questions about using pig urine {such as how to collect the urine!), modern
sensibilities and hygienic considerations would probably suggest using water instead. However, from a
therapeutic perspective, the use of pig urine should:not be discarded for hygienic reasons alone. While
studying Siberian shamans in the early 20th century, researchers discovered something interesting. During
visionary rituals involving the psychoactive fly agaric mushroom (Amanita muscaria), the shamans would
drink their own urine. This lengthened and deepened the visionary experience, because the urine con- | -
tained metabolites of the alkaloid muscimole that are also psychoactive. Is it not possible that some
complex interaction between herbs and pig urine produced an antiviral metabolite that could be ab-

While this might sound far-fetched, my observation was that the ointment worked. Unless one knows
why an ingredient is included in a mixture, can it really be taken out without risking loss of the desired
effect? If the recipe is changed in some way, is the formulation still the traditional one?

----- PAGE 251 -----
The ancient medical systems of the world are pro-
foundly holistic in both diagnostic and therapeutic ap-
proaches, a direct result of the expression of their spiritu-
ally whole and integrated cultural worldviews. This is
often what attracts Western herbalists to these systems
but, paradoxically, it also presents the primary stumbling
block. The holistic strengths of such non-reductionist
systems appear to fulfill the deep need felt by Western
practitioners for a meaningful, practical, and relevant
holistic approach.

This confronts the Westerner with some immediate
challenges. In order to harvest the therapeutic benefits in-
herent in these systems, the practitioner should ideally be
at home with the underlying worldview of the culture that
gave birth to the healing system. In TCM, the names of
organs, meridians, and elements may be translated into
English words, but their meaning remains different. This
is due not to mistranslation, but to the fact that they rep-
resent an understanding of the human body that is very
different from the Western concept. In TCM, for exam-
ple, the brain is not perceived as an organ, and the focus
of therapeutic work is on balancing the flow of chi (vital
energy) within the body. Disease is seen as an indicator of
underlying processes, rather than the focus of treatment.
The Western practitioner drawn to TCM or ayurveda
must embrace the implications for personal change and
transformation inherent in that system.

When this occurs, the therapeutic relationship between
patient and practitioner can be truly holistic, because the
therapist is acting from a place of personal integration
and harmony. TCM expresses ways of seeing and experi-
encing the world that are very different from the Western
stance. When TCM techniques and protocols are used
out of context, the transformative possibilities of healing
are severely limited. Such attempts can become the anti-
thesis of holistic medicine.

Recognizing the fundamental role played by cultural
perspectives highlights the need for a Western context for
holistic medicine. On the other hand, acceptance of the
biomedical model as a useful map of the human body does
not mean one must also adopt the analytical and reduc-
tionist approach that characterizes modern Western
medicine. There is a dawning recognition of the possibil-
ities that might arise if the biomedical model is used as the
basis for treating the whole person, not simply the disease.

All of these issues may help to explain the frustration
that plagues Western health care professionals upon ini-
tial exploration of holistic medicine. The definitive text
on Western holistic medicine—a guide for the practi-
tioner that clearly illuminates these new and exciting per-

A MODEL OF HOLISTIC HERBAL MEDICINE @ 243

spectives—has yet to be written. There is a maelstrom of
activity among holistic practitioners who are exploring and
applying the new ideas, but we are stil] in the early stages.

For some, this is just too confusing; they either aban-
don the endeavor or turn to one of the Asian healing sys-
tems. For others, this is a very exciting time to be in-
volved in medicine. The lack of clarity in the situation is
simply one aspect of the flowering of new ideas. There is
no textbook, because the ideas have not yet reached the
stage at which they can be written in stone. Instead, this
is a time of flux. Many new insights are occurring, and
many old ideas are being reassessed and either discarded
or embraced anew. While no clear holistic context has yet
been defined for Western medicine, many different ap-
proaches have made great strides in that direction.

Herbal medicine has a unique contribution to make
in this time of change. As a healing modality, it is inher-
ently holistic in that its very nature is ecological. The use
of plants links both patient and practitioner to their envi-
ronment in profound ways, facilitating a healing process
that could be seen as therapeutic ecology. The contribu-
tion of herbs is but one part of the mosaic that will be-
come Western holistic healing.

THE ACTIONS OF HERBS

A great deal of pharmaceutical research has gone into an-
alyzing the active constituents of herbs to find out how
and why they work. A much older approach, and one that
is much more immediately useful, is to categorize herbs
through an understanding of what kinds of problems they
can treat.

In some cases, an herb’s action may be due to a spe-
cific chemical present (for example, the antiasthma effects
of ma huang). In others, actions may arise from complex,
synergistic interactions among various plant constituents
(the sedative valerian provides an example). However, it is
best to view actions as attributes of the whole herb; any
understanding of the chemistry should serve simply as an
aid to prescribing. A detailed discussion of herbal actions
can be found in chapter 25.

Adaptogens

Adaptogenic herbs help increase the body’s resistance to
stress. They improve the body’s resilience by enabling it
to physiologically adapt to problems before it reaches the
point of collapse. An inability to cope with external pres-
sures can have many health repercussions. Adaptogens
appear to work by supporting the function of the adrenal
glands.

----- PAGE 252 -----
244 © TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Alteratives

Alteratives are herbs that gradually restore proper func-
tion to the body, increasing health and vitality. Some al-
teratives support waste elimination processes via the
kidneys, liver, lungs, or skin. Others stimulate digestive
function or provide antimicrobial actions, while others
simply work!

Anticatarrbal Herbs
Anticatarrhal herbs help the body eliminate excess mucus,
whether in the sinuses or from other parts of the body.

Anti-Inflammatory Herbs

Herbs with anti-inflammatory properties soothe inflam-
mations or directly reduce the inflammatory response.
For a detailed discussion of the many ways in which herbs
may work as anti-inflammatory agents, see chapter 9.

Antimicrobial Herbs

Antimicrobials help the body destroy or resist pathogenic
microorganisms. They help the body strengthen its own
resistance to infective organisms and throw off the illness.

Antispasmodic Herbs

Antispasmodics ease muscle cramps. They alleviate
muscular tension and, as many are also nervines, can ease
psychological tension as well. Some antispasmodic herbs
reduce muscle spasms throughout the body, and some
work on specific organs, systems, or types of tissue.

Astringents

Astringent herbs have a binding action on mucous mem-
branes, skin, and other tissue, which translates to an abil-
ity to shrink tissues and reduce secretions. Astringent
actions are related to the presence of chemicals called tan-
nins, so named because they are used in tanning leather.
They precipitate protein molecules, reducing irritation
and inflammation and creating a barrier against infection
that is helpful in wounds and burns.

Bitters

Bitter-tasting herbs play a special role in preventive
medicine. The bitter taste triggers a sensory response in
the central nervous system, which sends a message to
the gut. The gut in turn releases digestive hormones
that lead to a range of effects, including stimulation of
appetite and a general stimulation of the flow of diges-
tive juices. Bitters also aid the liver in its detoxification

work, increase bile flow, and stimulate gut self-repair
mechanisms.

Cardiac Remedies

This is a general term for herbs that have beneficial ac-
tions on the heart and circulatory system. Some of the
remedies in this group are powerful cardioactive agents,
such as foxglove, while others are gentler, safer car-
diotonic herbs, such as hawthorn and motherwort.

Carminatives

Plants rich in aromatic volatile oils, or carminatives, pro-
mote appropriate digestive system function, soothing the
gut wall, reducing inflammation, easing griping pains,
and helping the body eliminate gas from the digestive
tract.

Demulcents

Herbs high in mucilage, known as demulcents, soothe
and protect irritated or inflamed tissue. They reduce irri-
tation throughout the length of the bowel, reduce sensi-
tivity to potentially corrosive gastric acids, help prevent
diarrhea, and alleviate the muscle spasms that cause colic.
They also ease coughing by soothing bronchial tension
and relax painful spasms of the bladder.

Diapboretics

Diaphoretics promote perspiration, helping the body to
eliminate wastes through the skin. Some produce ob-
servable sweating, while others enhance normal back-
ground perspiration. They often promote dilation of
surface capillaries, thus helping to improve poor circula-
tion. This action is especially relevant in the treatment
of fever.

Diuretics

Diuretics increase the production and elimination of
urine. In herbal medicine, with its ancient traditions, the
term is often applied in a general way to herbs that have
a beneficial action on the urinary system. They help the
body eliminate waste and support the whole process of
inner cleansing.

Emmenagogues

Emmenagogues stimulate menstrual flow and function.
In most herbals, however, the term is used in a wider
sense to indicate a remedy that normalizes and tones the
female reproductive system.

----- PAGE 253 -----
Expectorants

Strictly speaking, expectorants are herbs that stimulate
the removal of mucus from the lungs, but the term is also
often used to refer to respiratory system tonics. There are
two basic categories of expectorant herbs.

Stimulating expectorants irritate the bronchioles, causing
expulsion of material.

Relaxing expectorants soothe bronchial spasms and loosen
mucous secretions, helping with dry, irritating coughs.

Hepatics

Hepatics support the liver, improving function; in some
cases, they also increase the flow of bile. In a broad holis-
tic sense, hepatic herbs are of great importance because of
the liver’s fundamental role in health.

Hypotensives
These are plant remedies that lower abnormally elevated
blood pressure.

Immunomodulators

These herbs assist with or are capable of modifying or
regulating immune functions.

Laxatives
Laxatives stimulate bowel movements.

Nervines
Nervines act on the nervous system and can be subdivided
into three groups.

Nervine tonics strengthen and restore nervous system
function.
Nervine relaxants ease anxiety and tension by soothing

both body and mind.
Nervine stimulants directly stimulate nerve activity.

Rubefacients

When applied to the skin, rubefacient herbs generate a
localized increase in blood flow. They are often used to
ease the pain and swelling of arthritic joints.

Tonics

Tonics nurture and enliven. Truly gifts of nature to a suf-
fering humanity, these are whole plants that enliven
whole human bodies. To ask how they work is to ask how
life works!

A MopeL oF Houistic HERBAL MEDICINE .@ 245

Vulnerary Herbs
These remedies promote wound healing. While the term
vulnerary is used mainly to describe herbs that heal skin
lesions, the action is just as relevant for internal wounds,
like stomach ulcers.

APPLYING THE MODEL

When selecting herbs for a given patient, many remedies
present themselves as possible candidates. The problem
remains: Which herbs will best address all the needs of a
particular patient? The selection process can be summa-
rized thus:

1. Through some competent diagnostic procedure,
identify what physiological processes to address and
in what way.

2. Select actions appropriate to address the physiolog-
ical and pathophysiological processes identified
through diagnosis.

3. Select relevant herbs based on their range of pri-
mary and secondary actions, thus ensuring the best
fit for the needs of the patient.

The best way to approach the selection process is to
follow a number of steps. This may seem a long and po-
tentially tedious process when first starting out, but it
becomes straightforward with practice.

1. List the signs and symptoms for each problem.

2. Interpret the processes behind the symptoms and
the underlying pathology, and identify appropriate
herbal actions to address them.

3. Using the reference lists in chapter 25, find herbs
that may be helpful, based on their primary and sec-
ondary actions.

4. Identify body systems that would benefit from the
use of tonic herbs and choose relevant tonics.

5. Are there any biochemical considerations? These
might be positive indications for certain plants or
clear contraindications.

6. Integrate the conclusions drawn in the previous
steps and develop a prescription(s).

7. Identify other healing modalities and lifestyle issues
that might support the actions of the herbs.

Identifying Primary and Secondary Actions

Secondary actions are additional actions that accompany
the primary physiological effect of a plant. Problems may
arise, however, when one tries to analyze the whole picture

----- PAGE 254 -----
246 @ TREATWEN! APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

in a purely logical, reductionist manner. Exactly what is
the primary action of a medicinal plant? In some cases
this is obvious (for example, with an herb like senna), but
in other cases, the choice is more a matter of degree. One
individual may say that chamomile is primarily a relaxing
nervine, while another might describe it as a carminative,
anti-inflammatory herb.

When focusing on secondary actions, such decisions
become even more subjective. Certain secondary effects
may hover on a threshold of sorts, in that some people ex-
perience these effects fully and others not at all. This is
largely why phytotherapy is as much an art as a science.
We can learn the details, but it takes years of experience
to become a real herbalist! (The only such people I’ve
ever met were well into their 70s and wouldn’t know a
saponin from a satellite dish, but they were the most in-
credible herbal healers you can imagine.)

Identifying Relevant Tonics for Body
Systems

This is where we can take advantage of the fact that some
herbs show an affinity for certain organs, body systems, or
even specific types of tissue. They work as tonics or nu-
trients for the areas involved and can be used freely.

Identifying Biochemical Considerations
Based on biochemical considerations, one might identify
specific positive indications for certain plants or clear
contraindications for other plants for a particular patient.
This involves some degree of familiarity with phyto-
chemistry and pharmacology. There are limits to how
useful this is, as the effects of most of the herbal materia
medica are not understood—either because biochemical
research is lacking or because the known biochemistry
does not immediately illuminate the mechanism at play.

Identifying Lifestyle Factors to Address
Human health and wholeness can rarely be adequately
addressed by any one therapeutic modality, whether
herbs, prescription drugs, acupuncture, or any other type
of therapy. This book focuses on the herbal contribution
to the therapeutic endeavor, but herbs cannot take the
place of appropriate attention to a wide array of lifestyle
issues.

Nutrition is often pivotal to health, but this does not
mean that the individual should resort to taking dietary
supplements. Instead, examine the person’s normal diet to
determine whether or not changes might be beneficial to
healing. For example, the individual may need to alter the

kinds of foods eaten, how they are cooked, or how they
are eaten, among other factors.

Structural issues must also be recognized and ad-
dressed with an appropriate modality, such as osteopathy
or chiropractic. Herbs cannot replace the therapeutic
value of manipulation if it is indicated. On a less technical
level, an assessment of exercise and movement in general
is always indicated. However, this need not lead to a gym!
A walk in the woods or a jog along a beach will provide
not only exercise, but also the opportunity to be in nature,
which is always healing.

Similarly, psychological issues should be recognized
and addressed. The current vogue for pharmacological
panaceas to address the emotional pain of life is very
shortsighted. In my opinion, such problems require con-
scious and compassionate processing, not magic bullets—
herbal or otherwise.

SELECTING RELEVANT HERBS

To illustrate the process to be followed in applying the
model, we will look at two hypothetical case studies.

Example 1: Cystitis and Irritable Bowel
Syndrome

The first step in applying the model to create a prescrip-
tion for this hypothetical patient is to make a comparison
of primary actions indicated for each component of the
patient’s condition. In this case, we will compare the pri-
mary actions indicated for cystitis with those indicated for
irritable bowel syndrome. As this is a theoretical exercise,
we have no other specific details on this individual's
symptom picture.

Primary Actions Indicated for Cystitis

Antimicrobials appropriate for the urinary tract will help
the immune system control and clear bacterial infec-
tion. Essential oil-rich diuretic plants are indicated be-
cause the oil is excreted via the kidney, thus directing it
to the site of infection in the bladder

Anti-inflammatories soothe the symptom picture of pain
and discomfort.

Astringents will help if there is any hematuria (blood in the
urine).

Diuretics flush the urinary tract. Ideally, antimicrobial di-
uretics will be selected for this patient.

Antispasmodics may be necessary if there is much pain.

----- PAGE 255 -----
A Monel or HOLisTic HERBAL MEDICINE @ 247

Primary Actions Indicated for Irritable Bowel Actions that came up in both lists are especially relevant
Syndrome for this patient, and are anti-inflammatory, astringent, and
Astringents will stop the diarrhea. antispasmodic. Other important actions are antimicrobial, bit-
Bitters often normalize bowel function in such cases. ter, diuretic, carminative, and nervine. This process of com-
Anti-inflammatories reduce localized mucosal reactions. parison gives us a basis for identifying herbs that will effec-
Carminatives help with flatulence or colic. tively deliver the desired primary and secondary actions.
Antispasmodics other than carminatives may be indicated if In the herbal actions tables below, herbs that appear
cramping is severe. in more than one table are underlined to highlight the
Nervines will help ease background stress involvement. correlation. These tables summarize information pro-

vided in greater detail in chapter 25.

Table 12.2. Anti-Inflammatory Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTION

HERBS

Antimicrobial

Antispasmodic

Astringent

Bitter

Carminative

Diuretic

Nervine

Achillea millefolium, Calendula officinalis, Hydrastis canadensis, Hypericum perforatum, Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,
Populus tremuloides, Salvia officinalis, Solidago virgaurea

Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Asclepias tuberosa, Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,
Foeniculum vulgare, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula officinalis, Matricaria
recutita, Mentha piperita, Populus tremuloides, Sambucus nigra, Tilia platyphyllos, Trigonella foenum-graecum, Verbascum
thapsus, Viburnum oputus, V. prunifolium

Achillea millefolium, Aesculus hippocastanum, Agrimonia eupatoria, Calendula officinalis, Capsella bursa-pastoris,
Geranium maculatum, Hydrastis canadensis, Plantago major, Populus tremuloides, Ranunculus ficaria, Salvia officinalis,
Solidago virgaurea, Symphytum officinale, Tilia platyphyllos, Verbascum thapsus

Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita, Menyanthes trifoliata

Achillea millefolium, Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Foeniculum vulgare, Glycyrthiza glabra,
Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula officinalis, Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis, Solidago virgaurea,
Tilia platyphyllos, Trigonella foenum-graecum

Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Apium graveolens, Galium aparine, Menyanthes trifoliata, Plantago major,
Sambucus nigra, Solidago virgaurea, Tilia platyphyllos, Zea mays

Apium graveolens, Cimicifuga racemosa, Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula officinalis, Matricaria
recutita, Mentha piperita, Tilia platyphyllos, Viburnum prunifolium

Table 12.3. Antimicrobial Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTION

HERBS

Anti-inflammatory

Antispasmodic

Astringent

Bitter

Artemisia absinthium, Calendula officinalis, Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita, Plantago major

Allium sativum, Carum carvi, Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita, Pimpinella anisum, Rosmarinus officinalis, Ruta
graveolens, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Carum carvi, Plantago major, Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis,
Thymus vulgaris

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Ruta graveolens

----- PAGE 256 -----
248 <2 TREATWIN1I APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

SECONDARY ACTION —_- HERBS

Carminative Artemisia absinthium, Capsicum annuum, Carum carvi, Juniperus communis, Mentha piperita, Pimpinella anisum,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Juniperus communis, Plantago major

Nervine Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita, Rosmarinus officinalis

Table 12.4. Antispasmodic Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTION

HERBS

Anti-inflammatory

Antimicrobial

Astringent

Bitter

Carminative

Diuretic

Nervine

Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Dioscorea villosa, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula officinalis, Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis, Sambucus nigra,
Tilia platyphyllos

Carum carvi, Drosera rotundifolia, Humulus lypulus, Hypericum perforatum, Lavandula officinalis, Matricaria recutita,
Mentha piperita, Pimpinella anisum, Pulsatilla vulgaris, Rosmarinus officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Humulus lupulus, Hypericum perforatum, Lycopus spp., Prunus serotina, Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis, Tilia
platyphyllos, Viburnum opulus, V, prunifolium

Artemisia vulgaris, Humutlus luputus, Matricaria recutita

Angelica archangelica, Anethum graveolens, Artemisia vulgaris, Carum carvi, Daucus carota, Foeniculum vulgare, Humulus
lupulus, Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula officinalis, Leonurus cardiaca, Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha
piperita, M. pulegium, Petroselinum crispum, Pimpinella anisum, Rosmarinus officinalis, Thymus vulgaris, Trigonella
foenum-graecum, Valeriana officinalis, Verbena officinalis, Zingiber officinale

Angelica archangelica, Daucus carota, Lycopus spp., Petroselinum crispum, Sambucus nigra, Tilia platyphyllos

Cimicifuga racemosa, Eschscholzia californica, Humulus lupulus, Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis, Lactuca virosa,
Lavandula officinalis, Leonurus cardiaca, Lobelia inflata, Lycopus spp., Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha

piperita, Passiflora incarnata, Piscidia erythrina, Pulsatilla vulgaris, Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia platyphyllos, Valeriana
officinalis, Viburnum opulus, V, prunifolium

Table 12.5. Astringent Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTIONS

HERBS

Anti-inflammatory

Antimicrobial

Antispasmodic
Bitter

Diuretic

Nervine

Agrimonia eupatoria, Euphrasia officinalis, Filipendula ulmaria, Geranium maculatum, Plantago major, Polygonum bistortum,
Quercus robur, Solidago virgaurea

Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Inula helenium, Quercus robur, Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis,
Solidago virgaurea

Lycopus spp., Prunus serotina, Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis
Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Prunus serotina

Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Lycopus spp., Plantago major, Solidago virgaurea,
Verbascum thapsus

Prunus serotina, Rosmarinus officinalis

----- PAGE 257 -----
A MODEL OF HOListTIC HERBAL MEDICINE @ 249

Table 12.6. Bitter Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTION HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Artemisia absinthium, Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita
Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium, A. vulgaris, Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita
Antispasmodic Marrubium vulgare, Matricaria recutita, Ruta graveolens

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Hydrastis canadensis

Carminative Artemisia absinthium, Matricaria recutita

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria

Nervine Artemisia vulgaris, Matricaria recutita

Table 12.7. Carminative Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTION —- HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Artemisia absinthium, Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha piperita

Antimicrobial Allium sativum, Artemisia absinthium, Humulus lupulus, Juniperus communis, Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,
Pimpinella anisum, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Antispasmodic Allium sativum, Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica, Artemisia absinthium, Carum carvi, Leonurus cardiaca,
Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha piperita, Pimpinella anisum, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris,
Valeriana officinalis

Astringent Carum carvi, Humutus lupulus, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Bitter Artemisia absinthium, Humulus lupulus, Matricaria recutita

Diuretic Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Juniperus communis, Petroselinum crispum

Nervine Apium graveolens, Humulus lupulus, Leonurus cardiaca, Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha piperita,

Valeriana officinalis

Table 12.8. Diuretic Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY ACTION HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Agrimonia eupatoria, Apium graveolens, Eupatorium purpureum, Galium aparine, Iris versicolor

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Agathosma betulina, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Juniperus communis

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Cytisus scoparius, Galium aparine, Lycopus spp.
Bitter Agrimonia eupatoria, Arctium lappa

Nervine Apium graveolens, Lycopus spp., Tilia platyphyllos

----- PAGE 258 -----
250 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

It becomes immediately apparent that there are many
remedies with potential in this case. The final remedy se-
lection for an actual patient will involve some research in
primary-source herbals to clarify traditional uses of the
remedies identified in this purely logical manner. Nature
does not always follow human concepts of logic, so the
experience of generations of herbal practitioners must be
taken into account.

In the following example, I am suggesting a prescrip-
tion that is designed for a person experiencing only a
moderate severity of both problems.

Herbs Relevant to Cystitis and Irritable Bowel
Syndrome

Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony)

Angelica archangelica (angelica)

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)

Humulus lupulus (hops)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)

Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

We have the choice of adjusting the prescription to
emphasize different actions, depending on individual
needs, by increasing the proportions of the most relevant
herbs. This process is discussed in greater detail in the next
section of this chapter, Dosage and Formulation Criteria.

Stronger urinary tract effects can be obtained by in-
creasing the proportion of diuretic antimicrobials in the
We can either
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry) or add another herb,
such as Agathosma betulina (buchu). We may also consider
adding a urinary tract demulcent, such as Zea mays (corn-
silk) or Althaea officinalis (marshmallow leaf).

More focus on the irritable bowel problem will result
from a greater emphasis in the prescription on bitters, as-
tringents, or carminatives. For bitter carminatives, con-
sider Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort), A. absinthium (worm-
wood), or Achillea millefolium (yarrow). For astringents,
consider Geranium maculatum (cranesbill) or Filipendula
ulmaria (meadowsweet).

More attention to anxiety issues may be needed. While
herbs cannot replace relaxation or appropriate lifestyle
changes, stronger nervines will help. Specifics will depend
upon the individual concerned, but Valeriana officinalis (va-
lerian) might be helpful for this hypothetical patient.

Thus, we arrive at a possible prescription for our the-
oretical patient.

mixture. increase the amount of

Prescription for Cystitis and Irritable Bowel Syndrome

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 2 parts
Viburnum opulus 2 parts
Agrimonia eupatoria 2 parts
Angelica archangelica 1 part
Humulus tupulus 1 part
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

We will also recommend that the patient drink an in-
fusion of Matricaria recutita (chamomile) or Melissa offici-
nalis (lemon balm) often throughout the day. Table 12.9
illustrates the actions supplied by the specific herbs in this
combination.

Table 12.9. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Cystitis and Irritable Bowel Syndrome

ACTION HERBS

Diuretic Agrimonia eupatoria, Angelica archangelica,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi

Antimicrobial Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Humutus lupulus,
Hydrastis canadensis

Astringent Agrimonia eupatoria, Hydrastis canadensis,
Viburnum opulus

Bitter Agrimonia eupatoria, Humulus lupulus,

Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita

Anti-inflammatory Agrimonia eupatoria, Angelica archangelica,
Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis

Carminative Angelica archangelica, Humulus lupulus,
Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis

Antispasmodic Angelica archangelica, Humulus lupulus,
Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,
Viburnum opulus

Nervine Humulus lupulus, Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis, Viburnum opulus

Example 2: A Complex of Conditions

Now we will apply a similar process to a hypothetical pa-
tient with a much more complicated pathological picture.
This patient has uterine fibroids, premenstrual syndrome
(PMS), hypertension, and constipation. The following
table illustrates the primary actions needed in order to ad-
dress each part of the complex.

----- PAGE 259 -----
A MODEL OF HOLISTIC HERBAL MEDICINE ¢. 251

Table 12.10. Herbal Actions Needed for Specific Conditions

CONDITION SIGN/SYMPTOM

ACTIONS NEEDED

Uterine fibroids Dysmenorrhea
Menorrhagia (and, possibly, anemia)

Abdominal congestion

Anti-spasmodic, uterine tonic, hormonal normalizer
Astringent, uterine tonic, hormonal normalizer

Diuretic, uterine tonic, hormonal normalizer, lymphatic, circulatory
stimulant, peripheral vasodilator

Premenstrual tension Psychological symptoms (irritability, agitation,

fatigue, depression, anxiety, palpitations)

Neurological symptoms (headache, vertigo)

Nervine relaxant, hormonal normalizer

Nervine relaxant, hormonal normalizer

Edema Diuretic, hormonal normalizer

Skin problems Alterative, hormonal normalizer
Hypertension Often Hypotensive asymptomatic
Constipation Difficult or infrequent passage of feces Laxative

All of the actions mentioned above can be categorized
into two groups, as illustrated in table 12.11. The choice
of herbs from the first group (for symptom relief) depends
upon the individual’s symptom picture, which will also af-
fect the strength of remedies chosen and their proportions
in the final prescription. The herbs in the second group
are, of course, more pivotal to the healing process.

Table 12.11. Actions Indicated for Complex of
Conditions

PRIMARILY SYMPTOMATIC
RELIEF

MORE FUNDAMENTAL HEALING
ACTIONS

Antispasmodic Uterine tonic

Astringent Hormonal normalizer
Nervine relaxant Alterative
Diuretic Lymphatic
Hypotensive Circulatory stimulant
Laxative Peripheral vasodilator

Table 12.12. Possible Herb Choices for Hypothetical
Patient

ACTION HERBS

Antispasmodic Dioscorea villosa, Cimicifuga racemosa,

Viburnum prunifolium

Astringent Vinca major, Geranium maculatum,

Achillea millefolium

Nervine relaxant Scutellaria spp., Tilia platyphyllos,

Leonurus cardiaca

Diuretic Taraxacum officinale, Galium aparine,
Achillea millefolium

Hypotensive Crataegus spp., Tilia spp., Achillea millefolium

Laxative Rumex crispus

Uterine tonic Mitchella repens, Caulophylium thalictroides

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Alterative Cimicifuga racemosa, Galium aparine,
Rumex crispus
Lymphatic Galium aparine

Circulatory stimulant Zanthoxylum americanum

----- PAGE 260 -----
252 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SySTEM

The most important contraindication in this case
would be for anthraquinone-containing laxatives, such as
senna. These are too stimulating to the musculature of
the abdomen and would worsen pain related to uterine
cramping. From a review of the conditions present in this
hypothetical person, it should be apparent that tonic sup-
port is needed for the following body systems:

© Reproductive
* Nervous

* Cardiovascular
* Digestive

Thus, by incorporating tonics and effectors, we can
develop two specific formulas for this patient, one to ad-
dress the symptoms and underlying pathologies of uterine
fibroids, hypertension, and constipation and one for
PMS. These prescriptions can be altered in a number of
ways, depending upon the therapeutic interpretation
made by the practitioner.

Hypothetical Prescription for Fibroids,
Hypertension, and Constipation

Vinca major 2 parts
Dioscorea villosa 2 parts
Caulophyllum thalictroides 1 part
Vitex agnus-castus 1 part
Rumex crispus 1 part
Crataegus spp. 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Tilia spp. 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Hypothetical Prescription for PMS
2 parts
1 part

Scutellaria lateriflora
Cimicifuga racemosa

Dosage: 5 to 15 ml of tincture as needed for PMS symptoms

Table 12.13. Actions Supplied by Hypothetical
Prescriptions

ACTION HERBS

Uterine tonic Caulophyllum thalictroides,

Cimicifuga racemosa

Uterine astringent Vinca major.

Alterative Galium aparine, Cimicifuga racemosa,

Caulophyllum thalictroides

ACTION HERBS

Cimicifuga racemosa, Scutellaria lateriflora,
Tilia spp., Viburnum opulus

Antispasmodic

Lymphatic Galium aparine

Nervine Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia spp.,
Cimicifuga racemosa

Antispasmodic Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis,
Cimicifuga racemosa

Diuretic Galium aparine, Crataegus spp., Tilia spp.

Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa, Vitex agnus-castus

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Hypotensive Crataegus spp., Tilia spp., Viburnum opulus

The final step in addressing the myriad issues pre-
sented by this patient is to identify other healing modali-
ties and lifestyle changes that will support the healing ac-
tions of the herbs.

DOSAGE AND FORMULATION
CRITERIA

An aspect of phytotherapy that often seems cloaked in
mystery is the process of formulating prescriptions and de-
termining dosages. What guidelines does the practitioner
use in deciding upon dosages or proportions to use when
combining the selected remedies? Here I shall attempt to
give this process some structure. For readers who disagree,
or apply a different sequence of considerations, please re-
member that this is only one phytotherapist’s opinion.

Phytotherapy does not provide the same clear, quan-
titative, and logical criteria for dosage and prescribing
that clinical pharmacology provides. Depending upon the
perspective of the practitioner, this can be viewed either
as a benefit or as a failing, For the student, it is undoubt-
edly problematic, but for the practitioner with some ex-
perience, it becomes evident that this relative looseness
provides valuable flexibility.

As with the selection criteria we use to choose the herbs
in the first place, we must integrate considerations about
the plants themselves with the patient’s therapeutic issues.

Physiological impact of the herb. The strongest effector
herbs should usually be prescribed in smaller amounts,
while gentle normalizers can be prescribed at higher
dosages.

----- PAGE 261 -----
Desired therapeutic effects. This issue is theoretically dif-
ficult to quantify, as desired effects will vary with each
individual and, potentially, even with each consultation.
However, the following points offer a few guidelines.
¢ The dosage of herbs intended to have the greatest
effect can often be increased.

* Tonics and mild normalizing herbs should generally
be used in higher proportions.

© Additive effects, such as the cumulative effect of all
astringent herbs in a prescription, must be taken
into account.

Age or constitution of the patient. The younger or frailer
a patient is, the lower the dosage that should be used.
As discussed in more detail later, this may not be im-
portant if only normalizers are prescribed.

Convenience and simplicity. This can be important for
patients who may have trouble complying with the
prescribed regimen.

As long as potentially toxic herbs are avoided, it is
safe to say that exact dosage is usually not too critical. The
problem is often that too little is prescribed, rather than
too much. From my British perspective, the dosages used
in North America are absurdly low, the reason probably
being (in most cases) expense rather than any therapeutic
criteria. To clarify what I mean here, we can generalize
about dosage by using three roughly defined categories.

Normalizers. These are herbs that can also be considered
foods (such as Urtica dioica and Galium aparine), are
usually used in dosages of 2 to 4 g of herb or 2 to 4 ml
of tincture three times a day, so it is not critical to be
exact.

Stronger herbs. These effectors are given in a dosage
range of 1 to 2 g of herb or 1 to 2 ml of tincture, which
means that one should take some care, but there is no
need to get paranoid. An overdose may confer too
much of the desired action, but no toxicity. Examples
include Chelone glabra and Drosera rotundifolia.

Extremely strong berbs. These are effector herbs that are
used in dosages of less than 1 ml of tincture. This dosage
range must be taken very seriously) This category in-
cludes herbs such as Lobelia inflata and Convallaria ma-
jatis, for which accuracy is essential or the patient will
suffer the consequences. Most of the medicinal plants
that fall into this category are rarely used in modern
phytotherapy, and most are not discussed in a thera-
peutic context in this book.

One of the most common arguments put forth by
pharmacologists against the use of herbal medicines be-
comes relevant here. Pointing to the variable amounts of

A MObEL OF HouisTic HERBAL MEDICINE @ 253

active constituents that occur naturally in plants, the
pharmacologist will say that it is impossible to accurately
prescribe or ensure a standardized dosage protocol. As
phytotherapy is founded upon the use of normalizers or,
at most, effectors that do not contain potent constituents,
this issue is irrelevant. However, it becomes very perti-
nent when discussing potentially toxic plants. The inher-
ent variability in plant constituent levels makes establish-
ing appropriate dosage extremely problematic when using
such strong plants.

The “Part” as a Unit of Measurement
European herbalists use the metric system of measure-
ment, and so milliliters (ml) and grams (g) are the units
used in dispensing herbs. The North American use of
drops or dropperfuls is both confusing and quantitatively
inaccurate. The size of a drop is variable, as it depends on
the size of the hole in the dropper and other factors.

The prescriptions presented in this book have been
developed using the concept of measurement known as
the part. Using parts allows for great flexibility in creating
formulations. One part can represent 1 ml of tincture or
1 g of dried herb. The main drawback to this easy method
is that when mixing different kinds of preparations, one
must still keep specific dosage considerations in mind.
For example, a fluid extract is much more concentrated
than a tincture, so combining tinctures with fluid extracts
will necessitate some math to ensure that appropriate lev-
els of each herb are used. In other words, if the fluid ex-
tract is twice as strong as the tincture, only half as much
should be used.

Two related issues to consider are convenience for the
dispensary and ease of use for the patient. It does not mat-
ter how good a prescription is; it will not work if the pa-
tient does not take it. The following points provide some
guidelines on simplifying the measurement of doses.

A dosage of 5 ml is roughly equivalent to 1 teaspoonful. This
makes a single dose easy to take, and can contribute
greatly to patient compliance.

A dosage of 5 ml taken three times a day amounts to 105 ml a
week. This can usually be rounded down to 100 ml a
week, making calculating and dispensing a simple matter.

There is no need for a 5 ml single dose to consist purely of tinc-
ture. For children, or when using stronger effectors,
the 5 ml dose can be made up partly with water, thus
maintaining the ease of use while still lowering dosage.
The prescription writer or dispenser must perform the
calculation and physical measurements, as the whole
point is to make the patient’s experience as straightfor-
ward as possible.

----- PAGE 262 -----
254 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

In the examples that follow, we will assume that the
herbs are in equivalent forms.

A Prescription for Irritable Bowel Syndrome

Myrica cerifera 2 parts
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part
Mentha piperita 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

In this particular case, the prescription assumes that
diarrhea is a dominant component of the symptom pic-
ture and thus includes a larger proportion of Myrica cer-
ifera, an effective astringent. If colic pain was a major
issue, then the proportion of antispasmodic and nervine
remedies might be increased.

A Prescription for Osteoarthritis

Menyanthes trifoliata 2 parts
Filipendula ulmaria 1¥2 parts
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Zanthoxylum americanum 1 part
Apium graveolens 1 part
Angelica archangelica 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

This combination includes antirheumatic herbs with
a range of relevant actions, but the emphasis is on the
Menyanthes because it has such a good effect in osteo-
arthritis. Fiipendula serves as a source of salicylates that
does not irritate the stomach, and so is included in a
larger proportion.

A Prescription for Psoriasis

Arctium lappa 1 part
Rumex crispus 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

The herbs are included in equal proportions here, as
none of the limiting criteria comes into play. There are no
strong effectors and no overriding therapeutic concerns.

A Prescription for Psoriasis with Anxiety and Tension

Arctium lappa 1 part
Rumex crispus 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Verbena officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

In this case, the nervine component has been in-
creased by replacing the ScuteMaria with Valeriana and
Verbena. The inclusion of Verbena is based upon its com-
bination of relaxing nervine and hepatic actions. On the
other hand, the percentage of Sewtellaria could have been
increased to 2 or 3 parts to achieve a similar increased
nervine effect without the hepatic action.

A Prescription for Unresponsive Psoriasis

Arctium lappa 2 parts
Rumex crispus 2 parts
Smilax spp. 2 parts
Verbena officinalis 2 parts
Phytolacca americana 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Because a stronger alterative combination was
needed, the prescription includes the effector Phytolacca
americana. The best way to work out the parts when using
strong effectors is to assign a 1-part proportion to the
strongest herb and increase the proportions of the other
herbs. This prescription, for example, includes | part of
Phytolacca and 2 parts each of the other herbs.

A Prescription for Premenstrual Syndrome

Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Taraxacum officinale leaf 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture as needed to alleviate symptoms

Prescription Il for Premenstrual Syndrome
Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture once a day throughout menstrual cycle

Notice that the dosage instructions for the first for-
mula include the term “as needed.” This is a recognition
of the cyclical nature of the stress response; each person
will find different times of the day more challenging than
others. As this is largely symptomatic medication, the
dosage may be increased until the patient experiences

----- PAGE 263 -----
relief. The dosage regimen may be altered as necessary,
changing the size of the dose and varying the time of day at
which it is taken to suit individual needs. For example, the
patient may take a large dose first thing in the morning or
smaller amounts at frequent intervals throughout the day.

The patient’s experience is the guiding principle
here. Always treat the human being, not the theory be-
hind the disease!

Dosage Considerations for the Elderly

As the body ages, a number of factors alter the way it uti-
lizes substances. This can have a significant impact on de-
termining appropriate dosages for elderly people. In the
context of the selection criteria used throughout this
book, such considerations are rarely an issue. The focus
on tonics and gentle effector herbs allows the phytother-
apist largely to avoid potential toxicity.

In the context of orthodox medicine, however, these
considerations are very important when prescribing drugs
with a narrow therapeutic index. They become even more
significant for people who are frail or malnourished. The
main concern is pharmacokinetic changes that affect how
drugs are excreted from the body. The three primary factors
involved here are normal physiological processes related to
aging, pathophysiological changes, and iatrogenic causes.!

Normal Physiological Changes Related to Aging

Older people are smaller, have a higher percentage of body
fat, and have less body water content.

The rate of absorption in the elderly is reduced, but not the
amount of absorption. The elderly have decreased
stomach acidity and intestinal blood flow. The amount
of time it takes to empty the stomach also slows as a
person ages. These changes decrease the rate, but not
the amount, of absorption. This may delay the onset of
action and peak effect of medications.

Gastric acid secretion is reduced at a rate of about 5% per
decade after age 50.

Renal function declines, This is the most important age-
related pharmacokinetic change. The efficiency of this
vital function declines by approximately 10% per
decade after age 40. A number of factors influence this:
¢ Reduction in glomerular filtration rate in the

nephrons
© Reduction in renal blood flow
© Decrease in active tubular secretion in the nephrons

Hepatic metabolism and clearance of many drugs decline at ap-
proximately 1% per year after age 40. There is a rela-
tive reduction in Phase I metabolism, as compared
with Phase II (see chapter 9 for more information).

A MopEL OF HoLuistic HERBAL MEDICINE «2 255

Pathopbysiological Changes

A number of disease processes can produce changes in
normal functioning that have a direct impact on a whole
range of pharmacokinetic factors. The specifics are com-
plex and vary from disease to disease and drug to drug. In
general, however, the most important are kidney diseases,
liver and gallbladder diseases, and heart disease.

Iatrogenic Causes

Iatrogenic problems are those induced inadvertently by a
physician, surgeon, medical] treatment, or diagnostic pro-
cedure. Many common problems are caused by drug in-
teractions. Other obvious examples are surgery and dial-
ysis. Keep in mind that herbs and herbalists can also be
the cause of such problems. However, if the phytothera-
pist follows the approach presented in this book, the risk
of causing iatrogenic problems is minimal.

Dosage Adjustments for Children

Children have special needs, and special plants address
these needs. As with the elderly, the herbal focus should
be on tonics and gentle effectors. The healing capacity of
children can be quite incredible, but attention must be
paid to proper dosage. Obviously, a lower dosage will be
required for children.

Appropriate dosage for children varies according to
age, and a number of mathematical formulae have been
developed to facilitate this. For our purposes, however, it
will not be necessary to get out the calculator. Dosage
proportionate to age can be adequately approximated
using a method developed many years ago by Dr. Young;
this is illustrated in table 12.14. There are some excep-
tions to this general rule, but they involve medicinal
plants that the FDA has restricted.

Table 12.14. Dosage Adjustments for Children?

AGE PROPORTION OF — EXAMPLES
ADULT DOSE
Adult 1 10g, 2.0 g, 10.0, 1.0 ml
12 years old " 0.5 2,102, 5.08,0.5 ml
8 years old 2s 04g, 0.82, 4.02, 04ml
4 years old A 0.25 g, 0.5, 2.52, 0.25 ml
2 years old Ve 0.125 g, 0.25 g, 1.25 g, 0.125 ml
lyear old Ve 0.0625 g, 0.125 g, 0.625 g, 0.0625 ml

----- PAGE 264 -----
256 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

With the advent of potent modern pharmaceuticals,
dosage measurements became much more critical. A
number of methods have been developed to cope with the
need for such accuracy. The British National Formulary
provides three ways of arriving at an appropriate dosage
for children.

Age-Related Adjustment

This is a more refined version of Dr. Young’s method.

Table 12.15. Dosage Adjustment by Age

AGE IDEAL HEIGHT BODY — PERCENTAGE
BODY (mm/in) — SURFACE OF ADULT
WEIGHT (m’)* — DOSE
{kg/Ib)

Newborn 34/775 500720 0.8 2S

1 month 42/9 550 / 22 0.26 14.5

3 months 56/12 590 / 2B 0.32 18

6 months 77/17 ~~ 610/26 0.40 22

lyear 10/22 760/30 047 25

3 years 4731 940 / 37 0.62 33

7 years B/S 1200 / 47 0.88 50

12 years 37/81 1480 / 58 125 1S

Adult female 56/123 1626 / 64 16 100

Adult male 68/150 1727 7 68 18 100

¥m? (meters squared) is a measurement of body surface area.

Calculation by Body Weight

This method is another way to calculate an appropriate
dose, but bear in mind that young children may require a
higher dose per kilogram of body weight than adults be-
cause of their higher metabolic rates.

Basic Conversion Formula
Patients weight in kg [x] adult dose
70
or
Patient's weight in Ib [x] adult dose

150

Body Surface Measurements

These are a challenge to calculate, but it is amazing what
you can do with a calculator. For the sake of complete-
ness, here is the formula. I am not necessarily recom-

mending that you try to measure the surface area of any
young child of your acquaintance!

Basic Conversion Formula
Surface area of patient (m?) [x] adult dose

1.8

OUTLINE OF TREATMENT
CHAPTERS

The second half of this book delves into herbal ap-
proaches to the plethora of pathologies that practitioners
are called upon to treat. Each of these body system treat-
ment chapters follows the same basic format, which is ex-
plained here. This basic format, along with the information
provided in chapters 25 and 26, gives the practitioner a
structure upon which to build throughout a lifelong ex-
ploration of medical herbalism.
The treatment discussions are organized as follows.

Name of the Pathology or Condition
This will reflect the terminology most commonly used in
Western medicine.

Definition
The medical definitions are taken from either The Merck
Manual or The Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary.

Condition Overview

Here I provide a brief description of the condition, in-
cluding relevant information for the herbalist about eti-
ology, signs and symptoms, and prognosis. These brief
introductions in no way intended to replace a comprehen-
sive text on Western medicine that describes the pathol-
ogy and its treatment in Western orthodox medicine.

Treatment of the Condition

This is a discussion of herbal selection issues to consider
in developing a prescription for the condition, with an
emphasis on tonic needs. Harnessing the toning and nur-
turing potential of herbs can be best facilitated by identi-
fying which body systems, organs, or tissues will benefit
most. This ability to tone and nurture is unique and one
of the most important contributions that herbal remedies
make to wellness and healing.

Actions Indicated

This provides a discussion of relevant herbal actions indi-
cated for the processes underlying the disease entity,
along with a rationale for their inclusion.

----- PAGE 265 -----
Specific Remedies

This section identifies plants that have an established tra-
dition of use for the particular condition. I have based
their selection on British usage, but as far as possible, I
have included insights from the American tradition as
well.

Traditional use implies demonstrable efficacy. The
research scientist may consider this “mere” empirical ob-
servation and thus not scientifically valid. To the medical
herbalist, on the other hand, information about tradi-
tional use provides evidence that the herb has valuable ef-
fects. These observations are based upon clinical tests
performed by generations of people in the most challeng-
ing of environments: the sickroom. If certain herbs were
ineffective, these practitioners would have tried some-
thing else, as they had no vested interest in proving a be-
lief system.

However, traditional knowledge does not explain the
effects produced, nor does it indicate the processes that
underlie the plant’s effects or any wider impact upon
human physiology. This is where modern, investigative
science has so much to offer—much more than can be
achieved through scientific attempts to either justify or
debunk the clinical use of herbs.

A Prescription for the Condition

Here I offer a suggested herbal combination that incor-
porates the ideas developed earlier. This is not intended
as a formulaic treatment for the pathology, but rather as
an example of how to build on ideas about relevant ac-
tions, tonics, biochemistry, and specific remedies to arrive
at an appropriate treatment.

It is important to remember that a given prescription
is in no way the “correct” or only solution. In all cases,
many possible herbal choices exist. Part of the skill of the
phytotherapist is the ability to engage in a therapeutic
dance with the complex of variables at play. A useful exer-
cise is to compare treatment approaches suggested by a

A MODEL or HoListic HERBAL MEDICINE <> 257

number of herbal clinicians. When the works of herbalists
within the Western tradition are compared and con-
trasted, it often becomes clear that the differences in
herbs used are only apparent disagreements. Usually, you
will find that the practitioners employed similar thera-
peutic criteria and that the differences simply reflect the
richness of the herbal materia medica. Students (includ-
ing all of us herbalists) should embrace such differences as
an opportunity for developing comprehension and insight.

Actions Supplied by the Prescription

The prescription suggestion is followed by an analysis of
the herbal remedies in terms of their actions. This is in-
tended to clarify why these particular herbs were in-
cluded, and, I hope, to illuminate ways in which the com-
bination may be adjusted or altered. Except for the
specifics discussed above, the herbs selected for inclusion
in the prescriptions are open to challenge. However, the
actions supplied are pivotal to success. By knowing which
herbs supply the necessary actions, the practitioner is able
to select alternative plants that still ensure the appropri-
ate blend of herbal actions for the condition.

Broader Context of Treatment

Phytotherapy cannot be holistic unless it is used within a
relevant broader context appropriate for both the individ-
ual and the condition involved. In this section, I offer sug-
gestions concerning other therapeutic modalities, nutri-
tion, and lifestyle issues to augment the herbal treatment.

References
1. Bennett JC, Plum F, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine, 20th
edition. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1996.
2. Osol A, ed. Remington’s Pharmaceutical Sciences, 15th ed.
Easton, PA: Mack, 1975.
3. British National Formulary. London: Pharmaceutical
Society of Great Britain, 1966.

----- PAGE 266 -----
13

rei 8)

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM

erbal medicine is uniquely suited for the treat-
H ment of digestive system illnesses. Throughout

human evolution, our food has been our
medicine, ensuring that the healing properties of the
herbs we consume have a direct effect on the lining of the
alimentary canal. Herbs affect digestive system function
not only through absorption and metabolism of the whole
range of plant chemicals, but also through direct actions
upon the tissue of the gut.

Much of the digestive system illness in our society is
due simply to abuse. Today’s average diet contains a pre-
ponderance of overly processed foods and has a high con-
tent of chemical additives. The gastrointestinal tract is
subject to direct chemical irritation from alcohol, carbon-
ated drinks, and tobacco. In this context, it is easy to see
why herbal remedies can be so helpful in treating the var-
ious inflammations and reactions that plague abusers.
The direct soothing action of demulcents, healing prop-
erties of astringents, and general toning of bitters have
much to offer in reversing such damage.

However, as with all true healing, any potential
“cure” lies beyond the range of medicines, whether herbal
or synthetic. The healing process must incorporate
lifestyle changes to eliminate dietary indiscretions and
chemical abuses as well as reduce stress. Herbal medicine
can bring about dramatic improvements in even profound
digestive system problems, but the potential to maintain
these benefits long term lies in the hands of the person
seeking treatment.

Used within such a broad context, herbal medicine
offers specific remedies for particular pathological syn-
dromes as well as tonics and normalizers that can help
prevent problems from manifesting in the first place. It is
possible to treat these problems within a context of gen-
eral nurturing that speeds improvement and helps
reestablish health and harmony. In the hands of a skilled
phytotherapist, much can be achieved therapeutically.
While the array of factors will be different for each indi-
vidual with, for example, a gastric ulcer, it is possible to
identify some general herbal guidelines.

258

Of all herbal traditions, that of using herbs to aid di-
gestion has remained the most prominent in the mem-
ory of modern Europe. Whether culinary herbs such as
rosemary or medicinal liqueurs like vermouth and
chartreuse, therapeutic remedies are used in large quanti-
ties. The very name vermouth comes from the bitter herb
wormwood. Herbs maintain their foothold in official
pharmacopoeias as major therapeutic agents, in the form
of digestive bitters, carminatives, and laxatives of varying
strengths.

The ideal is to preserve health and maintain wellness,
rather than merely treat illness. Of course, there is much
more to preventive medicine than consuming medicinal
substances, whether medicinal plants or chemical drugs.
We can help put this in perspective by recalling the
World Health Organization (WHO) definition of health:

Health is a state of complete physical, emotional, mental
and social well being and not merely the absence of dis-
ease or infirmity.

This should serve to remind us that any attempt to
promote wellness and prevent the development of disease
must address the whole complex of factors that WHO
identified. While we cannot explore this concept in depth
in this book, it nonetheless can help us to identify a num-
ber of risk factors that can be minimized, as well as posi-
tive factors to be emphasized. As the focus of this book is
on herbs and their safe use, we shall address the non-
herbal issues only in passing. This is not meant to imply
that they are less significant, but is simply a reflection of
space constraints.

HERBS AND GOOD DIET

By far the most important contribution made by plants to
the health of the human digestive system is in the quality
of the foods we eat. Often the only real difference be-
tween a salad vegetable and a medicinal herb is that one
tastes better! The body requires more than 40 nutrients
for energy, growth, and tissue maintenance. All of these

----- PAGE 267 -----
are found in a well-rounded diet, and many of them are
found both in medicinal herbs and in plants eaten as
grains, vegetables, or fruits. Of course, eating a balanced
diet is a major contributing factor to a healthy lifestyle.
Using medicinal herbs does not negate the importance of
eating a high-quality diet.

Water

As the most plentiful component in the body, water is also
crucial to survival. It is the medium for bodily fluids such
as blood and lymph, in which forms it transports nutrients
into cells and carries out waste products and toxins.

Carbohydrates

Carbohydrates, proteins, and fats—a group of dietary
components known as macronutrients—provide fuel in
the form of calories. Carbohydrates, the body’s main en-
ergy source, can be divided into two types. Simple carbo-
hydrates are sugars; complex carbohydrates include starches,
such as those found in potatoes and bread.

Proteins

Proteins support tissue growth and repair and help pro-
duce antibodies, hormones, and enzymes, which are es-
sential for all chemical reactions in the body. Dietary pro-
tein sources include meat, fish, dairy products, poultry,
dried beans, nuts, and eggs.

Fats
Dietary fat protects internal organs, provides energy, in-
sulates against cold, and helps the body absorb certain vi-
tamins. There are three kinds of fats. Saturated fats are
found in meat, dairy products, and coconut oil. Mono-
unsaturated fats occur in olive, peanut, and canola oils;
polyunsaturated fats are found in corn, cottonseed, saf-
flower, soy, and sunflower oils.

A very important group of polyunsaturated fats are
the essential fatty acids (EFAs) known as arachidonic acid,
linoleic acid, and alpha-linolenic acid. Linoleic and
arachidonic acid are the basis of the omega-6 EFAs, and
alpha-linolenic acid is the basis of the omega-3 EFAs.
They are essential to the human diet because they cannot
be synthesized in the body from other nutrients. Essentia
fatty acids are necessary for the formation of healthy
cell membranes, the proper development and function-
ing of the brain and nervous system, and the production
of the eicosanoids (thromboxanes, leukotrienes, and

prostaglandins).
Linoleic acid is found primarily in seeds, nuts, grains,
and legumes. Alpha-linolenic acid is found in green

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM @ 259

leaves, phytoplankton and algae, and selected seeds, nuts,
and legumes. Arachidonic acid is obtained from meat, and
the important omega-3 EFA eicosapentaenoic acid is
found in fish.

Vitamins and. Minerals

The diet also supplies the important micronutrients
known as vitamins and minerals. They are needed only in
trace amounts, but an absence or deficiency of just one vi-
tamin or mineral can cause major illness.

Dietary Fiber
The body also needs a supply of dietary fiber, the indi-
gestible portion of plant foods. A high-fiber diet reduces
the risks of various gastrointestinal problems and pro-
motes cardiovascular health.

The official dietary guidelines, established jointly by
the U.S. Departments of Agriculture and Health and
Human Services, include seven basic recommendations.

1. Eata variety of foods. This will help ensure that you
get enough calories, protein, and fiber, as well as the
vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients you need.

2. Control your weight. Keep within recommended
weight limits for your age, sex, and build. Obesity is
defined as being 20% above normal weight.

3. Eat a low-fat, low-cholesterol dict. Ideally, no more
than 30% of daily calories should come from fat,
and no more than 10% should come from saturated
fat. Choose polyunsaturated fats over saturated fats
when possible.

4. Eat plenty of vegetables, fruits, and grains. They are
rich in nutrients, fiber, and complex carbohydrates
but low in fat. More than half of one’s daily calories
should come from carbohydrates, and 80% of these
calories should come from complex carbohydrates.

5. Eat sugar in moderation. Sugar is high in calories
and promotes tooth decay.

6. Use salt in moderation. Too much salt increases the
risk of developing high blood pressure. Prepared
foods are often high in salt or other forms of
sodium.

7. If you drink alcohol, do so in moderation. Alcohol
provides calories but no nutrients, and too much is
harmful.

When one eats a consistently well-balanced diet of
fresh fruits, vegetables, grains, and some animal protein,
nutritional supplementation is unnecessary. Multinutrient
supplements may be of value when eating well poses a
challenge—and can be indispensable during pregnancy

----- PAGE 268 -----
260 <= TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

and times of disease, injury, and extreme stress or physi-
cal exertion.

FIBER

Dietary fiber is largely composed of the cellulose-like
components of plant cell walls. Its composition varies
from plant to plant, but it always comprises a complex of
constituents. This fiber is the part of fruits, vegetables,
and grains that the body cannot digest. Soluble fiber dis-
solves easily in water and takes on a soft, jellylike texture
in the intestines. Insoluble fiber passes almost unchanged
through the intestines.

Both soluble and insoluble fiber helps make stools soft
and easy to pass. Fiber also prevents constipation. As this
natural complexity is missing from supplements, they can-
not replace a diet rich in high-fiber foods. The importance
of dietary fiber in human health is well established.

An abundance of research confirms the association
between fiber and human health. Table 13.1 highlights a
variety of conditions associated with a low-fiber diet.

Table 13.1. Diseases Associated with a
Low-Fiber Diet

TYPE OF DISORDER SPECIFIC CONDITIONS

Metabolic Obesity, gout, diabetes, kidney stones,

gallstones

Cardiovascular Hypertension, cerebrovascular disease,
ischemic heart disease, varicose veins, deep

vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism

Colon Constipation, appendicitis, diverticulosis,
diverticulitis, hemorrhoids, colon cancer,
irritable bowel syndrome, ulcerative colitis,
Crohn's disease

Other Dental caries, autoimmune disorders,

pernicious anemia, multiple sclerosis,
thyrotoxicosis, dermatological conditions

A high-fiber diet is associated with a decreased inci-
dence of most of the degenerative diseases of Western so-
ciety. This is not related simply to fiber content. A high-
fiber diet is generally high in other important nutrients as
well, most of which are also deficient in the typical
Western diet. The best source of dietary fiber is whole
foods, although specific types of fibers have a role in the
treatment of specific diseases. There is no substitute for a

—

Benefits of Dietary Fiber

Shortens intestinal transit time

Delays gastric emptying, resulting in reduced
after-meal elevations of blood sugar

Increases satiety

Stimulates pancreatic secretions
Increases stool weight

Improves solubility of bile

Elevates numbers of beneficial intestinal
microflora

Raises production of short-chain fatty acids

Lowers serum lipid levels

healthy diet—a diet composed of foods in a form as close
to their original as possible. The American Dietetic
Association recommends that 20 to 35 g of fiber be con-
sumed each day. Table 13.2 illustrates the amount of fiber
in many commonly eaten foods.

Table 13.2. Dietary Fiber Content of Selected Foods

FOOD SERVING GRAMS OF FIBER

Fruits
Apple {with skin) medium 35
Banana medium 24
Cantaloupe melon 1.0
Cherries, sweet 0 12
Grapefruit Vamedium 16
Orange medium 2.6
Peach (with skin) 19
Pear (with skin) VA large 31
Prunes 3 3.0
Raisins Va cup 3]
Raspberries Va cup 31
Strawberries Tcup 3.0

----- PAGE 269 -----
THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM .@ 261

FOOD SERVING GRAMS OF FIBER FOOD SERVING GRAMS OF FIBER
Vegetables, Raw Rice, Breads, Pasta, and Flour

Bean sprouts Ya cup 15 Bran muffins | muffin 25

Celery, diced Ya cup in} Bread, white \slice 04

Cucumber Ya cup 04 Bread, whole wheat \slice 14

Lettuce 1 cup 09 Crisp bread, rye 2 crackers 20

Mushrooms Ya cup 1S Rice, brown, cooked Ya cup 10

Pepper, green Y” cup 05 Rice, white, cooked Ya cup 0.2

Spinach cup 12 Spaghetti, cooked Y cup u

Tomato medium 15 Spaghetti, whole wheat, cooked = '/2 cup 39
Vegetables, Cooked Breakfast Cereals

Asparagus, cut cup 20 All-Bran VY cup 85

Beans, green cup 32 Bran Chex 2/3 cup 46

Broccoli cup 44 Corn Bran 2/3 cup 54

Brussels sprouts cup 46 Cornflakes 1a cup 03

Cabbage, red cup 28 Grape-Nuts Va cup 14

Carrots lcup 46 Oatmeal 3/4 cup 16

Cauliflower cup 22 Raisin bran-type */s cup 4.0

Corn VY cup 29 Shredded wheat "A cup 26

Kale cup 28 Nuts

Parsnip oe 34 Almonds 10 nuts W

Potato (with skin) 1 medium 25 Filberts 1O nuts 08

Potato (without skin} medium 14 Peanuts 10 nuts 4

Spinach cup 42 From Michael Murray, ND, The Encyclopedia of Nutritional Supplements (Roseville,

Sweet potato medium 34 Calf: Pima Publishing 1996)

Zucchini cup 36

TOBACCO

Legumes In addition to the well-known heart and lung diseases

baked bears cup a8 caused by tobacco, it is also responsible for changes in the

digestive system. Smoking has been shown to impact all
Dried peas, cooked a cup 47 parts of the digestive system and to contribute to such
common problems as heartburn and peptic ulcers.

‘ 1
Kidney beans, cooked “cup 2B Increases in the risk of Crohn’s disease and possibly even
Lima beans, cooked Vr cup 45 gallstones have also been observed. While most of these
effects on the digestive system appear to be reversible,
Lentils, cooked Va cup 37

they send a clear message: ‘Tobacco impairs digestive sys-

Navy beans, cooked Y cup 6.0 tem health.

----- PAGE 270 -----
262 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Heartburn

Heartburn occurs when acidic digestive juices splash from
the stomach into the esophagus, a process known as re-
flux. Normally, a muscular valve at the lower end of the
esophagus keeps the acid solution in the stomach and out
of the esophagus. Smoking weakens this valve, allowing
the contents of the stomach to flow backward into the
esophagus. Smoking also may directly injure the esopha-
gus, making it more prone to corrosive damage from re-
fluxed material.

Peptic Ulcer

A peptic ulcer is an open sore in the lining of the stomach
or the duodenum, the first part of the small intestine. The
exact cause of ulcers is not known. A relationship between
smoking cigarettes and ulcers, especially duodenal ulcers,
does exist. The 1989 Surgeon General’s report stated that
ulcers are more likely to occur, less likely to heal, and more
likely to cause death in smokers than in nonsmokers.

Liver Disease

Among a multitude of other vital functions, the liver pro-
cesses drugs, alcohol, and other toxins to remove them
from the body. Smoking impairs the ability of the liver to
handle these substances. Some research also suggests that
smoking can aggravate the course of liver disease caused
by excessive alcohol intake.

Crohn’s Disease

Crohn’s disease causes inflammation deep in the lining of
the intestine. The disease, which is associated with pain
and diarrhea, usually affects the small intestine, but it can
occur anywhere in the digestive tract. Both current and
former smokers have a higher risk of developing Crohn’s
disease than do nonsmokers. Smoking is associated with
higher rates of relapse, repeat surgeries, and immunosup-
pressive treatments.

DIGESTIVE SYSTEM DISORDERS

A number of overall processes, patterns, and symptoms
are seen in conditions affecting the digestive system. By
knowing herbal approaches to take in addressing general
patterns, the herbalist will go a long way toward under-
standing treatments for specific pathologies. However,
the phytotherapist’s role is not merely to alleviate the dis-
comfort caused by specific symptoms. The focus, as in all
holistic approaches to health, must go beyond the treat-
ment of symptoms.

Table 13.3. Primary Actions for the Digestive System

ACTION HERBS

Demulcent Symphytum officinale, Althaea officinalis,
Ulmus rubra, Glycyrrhiza glabra

Bitter Artemisia absinthium, Gentiana lutea,
Hydrastis canadensis

Milder bitter Achillea millefolium, Matricaria recutita

Astringent Agrimonia eupatoria, Geranium maculatum,

Filipendula ulmaria, Myrica cerifera

Carminative (aromatics) Foeniculum vulgare, Zingiber officinale,
Mentha piperita, Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis

Anti-inflammatory Matricaria recutita

Matricaria recutita, Valeriana officinalis,
Viburnum opulus, Dioscorea villosa,
carminatives

Antispasmodic

Aperient and laxative Rumex crispus, Senna alexandrina,

Taraxacum officinale

Hepatic and cholagogue Taraxacum officinale, Chelone glabra,

bitters
Nervine Matricaria recutita, Valeriana officinalis,
Artemisia vulgaris
Anthelmintic Artemisia absinthium, Dryopteris filix-mas
Other Actions As needed to ensure good general health
FLATULENCE

Everyone produces gas and eliminates it by burping or
passing it through the rectum. On average, most people
produce 1 to 3 pints of gas a day and pass gas at least 14
times a day. Most people do not realize that passing gas
14 to 23 times a day is normal. Gas is made up primarily
of odorless vapors: carbon dioxide, oxygen, nitrogen, hy-
drogen, and sometimes methane. The unpleasant odor of
flatulence comes from bacteria in the colon that release
small amounts of sulfur-containing gases.

Intestinal gas comes from two main sources: swal-
lowed air and the breakdown of undigested foods by bac-
teria naturally present in the colon. Air swallowing
(aerophagia) is a common cause of gas in the stomach. We
all swallow some air when eating and drinking. However,
eating or drinking rapidly, chewing gum, smoking, or

----- PAGE 271 -----
wearing loose dentures may lead to the intake of more air.
Burping is the usual way air leaves the stomach, but any
remaining gas moves into the small intestine, where it is
partially absorbed. A small amount travels into the large
intestine for release through the rectum.

Certain carbohydrates are not digested and absorbed
in the small intestine because the body lacks enzymes nec-
essary to break them down. This undigested food passes
into the large intestine, where bacteria may break it
down, producing the gases hydrogen, carbon dioxide,
and, in about one third of all people, methane. Research
has not provided any answers as to why some people pro-
duce methane and others do not. In addition, foods that
produce gas in one person may not cause gas in another.

Which Foods Cause Gas?

Fats and protein cause little gas, but foods containing car-
bohydrates may produce gas.

Sugars
The sugars that cause gas include raffinose, lactose, fruc-
tose, and sorbitol.

Raffinose is present in large amounts in beans. Smaller
amounts are found in cabbage, brussels sprouts, broc-
coli, asparagus, certain other vegetables, and whole
grains.

Lactose, the sugar in milk, is found in all milk products, in-
cluding cheese and ice cream, and processed foods,
such as bread, cereal, and salad dressing. Many people
have low levels of the enzyme lactase, which is needed
to digest lactose. As people age, levels of lactase may
decrease.

Fructose is naturally present in onions, artichokes, pears,
and wheat. It is also used as a sweetener in some soft
drinks.

Sorbitol is a sugar found naturally in fruits, including ap-
ples, pears, peaches, and prunes.

Starches

Most starch sources, such as potatoes, corn, noodles, and
wheat, produce gas as they are broken down in the large
intestine. Rice is the only starch that does not cause gas.

Fiber

Soluble fiber dissolves easily in water and takes on a soft,
gel-like texture in the intestines. Found in oat bran,
beans, peas, and most fruits, soluble fiber is not broken
down until it reaches the large intestine, where digestion
causes gas. Insoluble fiber, on the other hand, passes es-

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM @ 263

sentially unchanged through the intestines and produces
little gas. Wheat bran and some vegetables contain insol-
uble fiber.

CONSTIPATION

Infrequent or hard stools, or difficulty passing stools. May
involve pain during the passage of a bowel movement,
the inability to pass a bowel movement after straining or
pushing for more than 10 minutes, or no bowel move-
ments after more than 3 days. (The Merriam-Webster
Medical Dictionary)

Constipation can be defined as difficult or infrequent pas-
sage of feces. It must be seen as a symptom, not a disease
state in its own right. Proper diagnosis is thus vitally im-
portant. Acute constipation constitutes a definite, recog-
nizable change for an individual, and an abrupt change in
bowel habits can indicate the presence of organic disease.
In chronic constipation, however, there is an ongoing
problem with normal bowel movements. In such cases,
the ideal is to normalize and regularize bowel movements
through dietary change.

The most common cause of constipation in Western
cultures is lack of dietary fiber. However, there are some
important but less common causes that the practitioner
should bear in mind. Examples range from irritable bowel
syndrome, diverticular disease, and serious infections (for
example, appendicitis) to painful anal conditions that
make people afraid to open their bowels. The condition
may be congenital, or may be caused by endocrine disor-
ders, nervous system conditions, or diseases of the large
intestine. Other possible causes of chronic constipation
include drugs or toxins that affect bowel motility, long pe-
riods of immobility, stress, and depression. Whenever a
specific cause can be determined, it should be treated.

There are many herbs that can help alleviate the dis-
comfort of constipation. Rather than discuss all of the in-
dividual plant species, we instead can generalize about
appropriate herbal actions. Laxative remedies are obvi-
ously relevant, but others must be considered. For exam-
ple, bitters may be very helpful because they cause a gen-
eral stimulation of the digestive process. When stress or
depression is a factor, consider relaxing nervine, antispas-
modic, and antidepressant herbs.

A number of different types of laxative herbs may be
used. Bulk laxatives are fiber-rich foods and herbs that
offer the only truly safe, long-term treatment possibili-
ties. They act slowly and gently and are best used by grad-
ually increasing the dose taken every morning and

----- PAGE 272 -----
264 2. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

evening until a softer, bulkier stool is achieved. Secretory
laxatives promote bowel movement through stimulation
of bile production in the liver. (Hepatic herbs act as se-
cretory laxatives.) Stimulant laxatives are anthraquinone-
containing herbs that stimulate peristaltic movement di-
rectly via an impact on the nerve ganglia of the gut.
Carminatives may be helpful in easing the pain and dis-
comfort that is often associated with constipation.

Laxatives

Laxatives promote defecation, relieving constipation. As
noted, constipation itself is not a disease, but rather a
symptom that may result from any of a broad range of un-
derlying causes. In addition to the possible causes dis-
cussed earlier, constipation may be related to a variety of
subjective factors, such as stress and diet, or from a pa-
tient’s impression of what constitutes “normal” bowel
habits.

Normal size, frequency, and consistency of fecal out-
put are difficult to quantify and are subject both to per-
sonal variation and to sociological patterning, of which
the makers of laxatives take full advantage. There is no
distinct advantage to having frequent bowel movements.
While having a bowel movement once daily may be con-
sidered average, having one several times a day to once
every several days may also be seen as normal. If hepatic
function is normal, fear of “autointoxication” due to re-
tention of colon contents is unfounded.

However, increased hardness of feces and reduced
colonic motility, frequency, and bulk do occur, mainly due
to dehydration of material that remains too long in the
colon before expulsion. Bulk, softness, and hydration of
feces are very dependent on the fiber and water content
of the diet. Thus, sufficient intake of dietary fiber and
water is a mainstay in any regimen for the treatment of
constipation.

Types of Laxatives

The precise mechanisms by which laxatives work remain
uncertain because of the complex factors that affect
colonic function. However, there are three main ways in
which laxatives work.

1. Cause retention of fluid in the contents of the
colon, thereby increasing bulk and softness and fa-
cilitating transit due to their hydrophilic or osmotic
properties.

2. Reduce net absorption of water and salt through both
direct and indirect actions on the colonic mucosa.

3. Increase intestinal motility, decreasing the absorp-
tion of salt and water because of decreased transit

time. Indeed, abnormal colonic motility may be a
contributing factor in constipation.

Bulk-Forming Agents

Bulking and swelling agents are gentle laxatives that sim-
ulate the physiologic effects of a high-fiber diet. Bulk-
forming agents are widely recognized for their value in
the long-term management of irritable bowel disease and
chronic diverticulitis. These agents, which can be utilized
as supplements to dietary fiber, are polysaccharides and
celluloses derived from grains, seed husks, or kelp and in-
clude bran, psyllium, methylcellulose, and carboxy-
methylcellulose.

Bulking agents are normal components of food.
Indigestible carbohydrates, which undergo complete or
partial breakdown by the intestinal flora, physically stim-
ulate activity through their bulking action, speeding the
transit of material through the intestinal tract. Swelling
agents are distinguished by their capacity to form mu-
cilage or gels. Mucilaginous swelling agents are generally
taken in some medicinal form (for example, psyllium
husks) rather than as foods per se. Like bulking agents,
they are composed of indigestible carbohydrates, but they
undergo little or no degradation by intestinal flora. Bulk-
forming laxatives have little effect on transit time through
the small intestine, but they do affect colonic transit time.
The heavier the stool weight, the shorter the colonic
transit time.

These agents also stimulate bowel motility by modi-
fying the intestinal flora. The colon is inhabited by more
than 400 species of bacteria. The precise makeup of this
intestinal flora is determined by the nature of the avail-
able substrate. Fecal bulk provides the bacteria with a
substrate for proliferation, which causes an increase in
bacterial mass and stool weight. Because the bacteria are
specific to particular substrates, a latency period of four to
six weeks is needed in order to establish a more suitable
intestinal flora.

Human digestive enzymes do not affect the cellu-
loses, hemicelluloses, lignins, and pectins contained in
bulk-forming agents, so these pass unchanged through
the small intestine into the colon. There, bacteria break
down all or part of the bulk materials, releasing short-
chain fatty acids, along with methane, carbon dioxide, and
molecular hydrogen. The short-chain fatty acids promote
the absorption of salts and water and provide osmotic
stimuli that encourage motility. Swelling agents also
soften the stool, facilitating passage through the bowel.

Gases generated in the lower bowel may cause bloat-
ing and flatulence, and constipation may initially worsen

----- PAGE 273 -----
when bulking agents are introduced. Generally, this issue
is resolved once a new intestinal flora is established.
Starting treatment with half the normal dosage may be
helpful. It is imperative that bulk-forming agents always
be taken with sufficient quantities of liquid, as esophageal
and intestinal obstruction can occur when fluid intake is
inadequate.

A few other cautions are in order. Intestinal obstruc-
tion and impaction may occur after the administration of
bulk-forming agents, especially for patients with preexist-
ing gastrointestinal disease. People with gastrointestinal
stenosis (narrowing of passages or sphincters), ulcera-
tions, or adhesions should also avoid these agents.

Dietary Fiber

Sources of dietary fiber include whole grains, bran, veg-
etables, and fruits. Plant cell walls consist of varying
quantities of fibrous polysaccharides (mainly cellulose),
matrix polysaccharides (pectins and hemicelluloses),
lignins, cutin, waxes, and some glycoproteins that are re-
sistant to breakdown in the digestive tract. Dietary fiber
acts as a laxative by several mechanisms.

Dietary fiber binds water and ions in the colonic lumen,
thereby softening the feces and increasing their bulk.
However, the water-binding capacity of fiber is insuf-
ficient to combat secretory diarrhea.

Dietary fiber can support the growth of colonic bacteria,
thereby increasing fecal mass.

Some components nay be digested by colonic bacteria to metabo-
lites that contribute to laxative action by adding to the
osmotic activity of the luminal fluid.

Colonic fermentation of water-soluble, non-cellulose polysaccha-
rides (such as pectins and gums) can decrease stool
water, apparently by producing metabolites (such as
short-chain fatty acids) that directly influence colonic
mechanisms of fluid and electrolyte transport.

Foods differ widely both in fiber content and in the
type of fiber they contain. Grains and cereals contain a
preponderance of insoluble, poorly fermentable fibers;
their ingestion shortens intestinal transit time and in-
creases stool bulk. Fruits and vegetables contain more
water-soluble fibers that result in a moist stool, but have
less effect on transit time. Usually, 20 to 60 g of dietary
fiber is a sufficient daily intake.

Psyllium, lignin, and pectin bind bile acids, which re-
duces the rate of their reabsorption by the intestine and
promotes excretion. The consequent enhancement of
hepatic synthesis of bile acids from cholesterol may re-
duce plasma levels of low-density lipoprotein (LDL)

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM @ 265

cholesterol. Over time, bulk-forming agents can help re-
lieve symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome and divertic-
ular disease.

Osmotic Agents

Osmotic laxatives are chemicals that cause water to be re-
tained in the bowel through osmosis, thus increasing the
water content of the stool. This mechanism underlies the
action of nonabsorbable sugars, such as mannose, and
sugar alcohols, including mannitol and sorbitol.

Anthraquinone Laxatives

Many well-known laxative plants owe their efficacy to the
presence of polyphenolic “anthranoid” compounds.
These anthraquinone laxatives include 1,8-dihydroxyan-
thraquinone and its glycoside derivatives, which are con-
tained in senna, cascara sagrada, and rhubarb, as well as
aloe and other members of the Liliaceae family. Senna is
obtained from the dried leaflets or pods of Senna alexand-
rina and other species. Cascara sagrada (“sacred bark”) is
obtained from the bark of the buckthorn tree, Ramnus
purshiana.

Anthraquinone laxatives exert their effects by damag-
ing epithelial cells, leading to changes in absorption, se-
cretion, and motility. Damaged epithelial cells can be
found as apoptotic bodies in darker pigmented colonic
mucosa, a symptom of the condition called pseudomelanosis
coli, Pseudomelanosis coli is caused by chronic use (in
other words, abuse) of anthraquinone laxatives, and has
recently been associated with an increased risk of col-
orectal carcinoma. In vitro and animal studies show that
anthraquinone laxatives have a potential role in both
initiating and promoting tumorigenesis. Studies in hu-
mans have also suggested that these laxatives have tumor-
promoting properties.!

Although clinical evaluations of the long-term toxic-
ity of anthraquinones have yielded conflicting results,
preparations that contain 1,8-dihydroxyanthraquinone it-
self have been withdrawn from the market, because the
chemical has been associated with hepatic and intestinal
tumors in laboratory animals. Whether the naturally oc-
curring glycosides cause similar problems is not known.

Although the short-term use of these substances is
generally safe, long-term use cannot be recommended.
They may cause an excessive laxative effect, leading to ab-
dominal pain and griping. Chronic use of large doses may
produce nephritis. Anthraquinone-containing herbs are
contraindicated for people with partial or complete bowel
obstruction, as well as for women who are pregnant or
nursing. Interactions with cardiac glycosides and other

----- PAGE 274 -----
266 TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

drugs may occur indirectly as a result of electrolyte im-
balances. Most of the metabolites are excreted in the
stool; however, a fraction is absorbed and appears in the
urine, turning the urine a dark yellow or even red. In
nursing mothers, anthraquinone metabolites can give
breast milk a brownish tinge.

Castor Oil

The bean of the castor plant, Ricinus communis, contains
two well-known noxious ingredients: an extremely toxic
protein, ricin, and an oil known as castor oil. Used exter-
nally, castor oil is a bland emollient, but within the small
intestine, the action of pancreatic enzymes releases rici-
noleic acid. Ricinoleic acid and its salts reduce the ab-
sorption of fluid and electrolytes and stimulate intestinal
peristalsis, and hence the movement of feces. Because cas-
tor oil acts in the small intestine, accumulation of fluid
and evacuation take place rapidly and are relatively com-
plete. The cathartic effect is too strong to warrant use of
this agent for common constipation.

Appropriate Use of Laxatives

In otherwise healthy patients, laxatives are of secondary
importance to a fiber-rich diet, adequate fluid intake, ap-
propriate physical activity, and other non-pharmacologi-
cal means of preventing and treating constipation. If such
measures are inadequate, they may be supplemented with
bulk-forming agents, Stimulant laxatives should be used
only in unresponsive cases.

When laxatives are employed in the treatment of
constipation, they should be administered in the lowest
effective dosage as infrequently as possible, and be dis-
continued promptly and completely when no longer
needed. If constipation is drug-induced, lowered dosage
or use of alternative drugs should be attempted before
using laxative medication.

The use of laxatives is no substitute for treatment of
an underlying disease of which constipation is a symptom.
Valid uses of laxative agents include maintaining soft
feces, preventing straining at the stool (especially in the
elderly and patients with cardiac disease or hernia), and
evacuating the bowel prior to diagnostic or surgical pro-
cedures. Laxatives frequently are indicated both before
and after surgery to maintain soft feces for patients with
hemorrhoids and other anorectal disorders.

For these purposes, dietary fiber or bulk-forming
agents are generally satisfactory and preferable. A fiber-
rich diet and related laxative agents also have an established
role in the management of diverticular disease of the colon
and irritable bowel syndrome. In addition to perpetuating

dependence on drugs, the laxative habit may set the stage
for serious gastrointestinal disturbances. Irritable bowel
syndrome and other functional ills have been associated
with the habitual use of stimulant laxatives.

Treatment of Constipation

As with many other functional problems of the digestive
system, many specific herbs have been used to treat con-
stipation by different herbalists in different cultures. As
constipation is a symptom, there are no true specific treat-
ments. Effective, commonly used herbs include Rumex
crispus (yellow dock) and Plantago ovata (psyllium seed).

A Prescription for Constipation

Rumex crispus 2 parts
Taraxacum officinale root 2 parts
Pimpinella anisum 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

A stronger combination including anthraquinone-
containing herbs, such as senna, may be appropriate in
some cases. However, a dietary approach focusing on the
rational use of fiber is the most effective. I stress the word
rational here, because becoming an oat bran addict is not
far from drug abuse!

DIARRHEA

Frequent, loose, and watery bowel movements. (The
Merck Manual)

As with constipation, diarrhea is an important symptom
that can have many causes. These range from intestinal
infection and food sensitivities to colitis and anxiety,
highlighting again the importance of accurate diagnosis
and the dangers of simply alleviating symptoms without
addressing underlying causes. Diarrhea caused by colitis,
for example, should be treated differently from the trav-
eler’s diarrhea dubbed “Delhi belly” or its New World
relative, “Montezuma’s revenge.”

Technically speaking, the term diarrhea refers to
loose, watery stools that occur more than three times in
one day. This is a common problem that usually lasts a
day or two and goes away on its own without any special
treatment. However, prolonged diarrhea can be a sign of
other problems. It can also cause dehydration, a condition
in which the body lacks adequate fluid to function prop-
erly. Dehydration is particularly dangerous in children
and the elderly, and it must be treated promptly to avoid
serious health problems.

----- PAGE 275 -----
Diarrhea may be a temporary or a chronic problem.
A few of the more common causes of diarrhea are listed
here:

Bacterial infections caused by consumption of contami-
nated food or water; common culprits include Campy-
lobacter, Salmonella, Shigella, and Escherichia coli

Viral infections, including rotavirus, Norwalk virus, cyto-
megalovirus, herpes simplex virus, and viral hepatitis

Food intolerances, such as intolerance of lactose, the sugar
found in milk

Parasites, including Giardia, Entamoeba, and Cryptosporidium

Reactions to medicines, including antibiotics, antihyperten-
sives, and antacids containing magnesium

Intestinal diseases, such as inflammatory bowel disease

Functional bowel disorders, for example, irritable bowel syn-
drome, in which the intestines do not work properly

Diarrhea may be accompanied by cramping pain,
bloating, nausea, or an urgent need to use the bathroom.
Fever or bloody stools may also be present. Acute diar-
rhea lasts less than three weeks and is usually related to an
infection. Chronic diarrhea lasts longer than three weeks
and is often related to functional disorders, like irritable
bowel syndrome, or disease, such as inflammatory bowel
disease.

Diarrhea is potentially dangerous in newborns and
infants, as it can lead to dehydration. General signs of de-
hydration include thirst, less frequent urination, dry skin,
fatigue, and light-headedness. Signs in children are dry
mouth and tongue, absence of tears when crying, dry di-
apers for three hours or more, high fever, listlessness or
irritability, skin that does not flatten when pinched and
released, and sunken abdomen, eyes, or cheeks.

The fluid and electrolytes (especially potassium and
sodium).lost during diarrhea must be replaced, as the
body cannot function properly without them. Water is es-
sential to prevent dehydration, but it does not contain
electrolytes. To maintain electrolyte levels, drink chicken
or beef broth, which contains sodium, and fruit bever-
ages, which contain potassium. For children, use a rehy-
dration solution that contains these necessary nutrients.
Such solutions are available without a prescription.

Treatment of Diarrhea

In most cases, replacing lost fluid to prevent dehydration
is the only treatment necessary for diarrhea. Medicines
that stop diarrhea may be helpful in some cases, but they
are not recommended for people with diarrhea caused by
bacteria or parasites, as stopping the diarrhea will trap the
organism in the intestines and prolong the problem.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM -& 267

Until diarrhea subsides, avoid milk products and
foods that are greasy, high in fiber, or very sweet, as they
tend to aggravate diarrhea. As the condition improves,
add soft, bland foods, such as bananas, plain rice, boiled
potatoes, toast, crackers, cooked carrots, and baked
chicken with no skin or fat. For children, pediatricians
recommend what is called the BRAT diet, which stands
for bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast.

Specific Remedies

Many astringent herbs have a reputation as a specific for
diarrhea. Whether they are specifics or simply good ex-
amples of herbs with general astringent effects is difficult
to say. Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet) may well be the
best gentle overall treatment for diarrhea, as it seems to
tone the lining of the small intestine. It is especially help-
ful for childhood diarrhea. Other excellent remedies are
Agrimonia eupatoria, Alchemilla spp., and Geranium macula-
tum. Stronger astringents, such as Quercus spp. (oak bark),
should be used only as a last resort.

A Prescription for Diarrhea

Agrimonia eupatoria 1 part
Geranium maculatum 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Combine dried herbs and prepare as an infusion; drink regularly
throughout the day until symptoms subside.

APHTHOUS ULCERS

Acute painful ulcers on the movable oral mucosa, occur-
ring singly or in groups. Also called “canker sores.” (The
Merck Manual)

These painful ulcers can appear singly or in clusters al-
most anywhere in the mouth. They are usually between
1 and 15 mm in diameter, have regular borders, and may
be covered in a pseudomembrane. Aphthous ulcers gen-
erally heal within 7 to 21 days, but can be a recurrent
problem for some people, a condition known as recur-
rent aphthous stomatitis, or RAS.

The etiology of this condition is unclear, but it is as-
sociated with lowered immune response, either locally or
as a sign of a systemic problem. Stress is also strongly im-
plicated, as are food sensitivities and nutritional deficien-
cies. A variety of other types of mouth ulcers often occur
in people infected with human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), and may be associated with fungal, bacterial, or
viral infections, or with cancer, such as non-Hodgkin’

----- PAGE 276 -----
268 <- TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

lymphoma. However, the discussion here focuses only on
aphthous ulcers.

Treatment of Aphthous Ulcers

The herbal treatment guidelines given here for aphthous
ulcers are best seen in the context of the general health of
the mouth, stomach, and digestive tract. A stress compo-
nent indicates the important role played by the nervous
system.

Actions Indicated

Anti-inflammatories play a core role by reducing the local-
ized mucosal reaction.

Antimicrobials inhibit the development of infection or
prevent the spread of bacteria to the rest of the body,
which can occur due to impaired buccal immune
response.

Immune system support is necessary if the ulcers suggest a
systemic problem.

Alteratives will help with any metabolic problems that
might be present.

Demulcents help soothe and relieve symptoms.

Nervines and adaptogens assist the individual in coping
with stress; counseling may also be indicated.

Specific Remedies

A number of specific remedies for aphthous ulcers are
well known. A primary specific is Salvia officinalis var.
rubia or var. purpurea (red sage). This is a variety of ordi-
nary sage that contains a stronger volatile oil. While it is
rarely used in cooking, it makes a perfect herb to use as a
mouthwash for aphthous ulcers and other inflammatory
conditions of the mouth.

A Prescription for Aphthous Ulcers

Mouthwash:
Salvia officinalis var. rubia 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Combine dried herbs and prepare as an infusion, to be
gargled often.

Internal use:
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Calendula officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 3 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 13.4. Actions Supplied by Aphthous Ulcer
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Echinacea spp.

Alterative Echinacea spp., Galium aparine, Calendula officinalis
Lymphatic Galium aparine, Calendula officinalis

Vulnerary Calendula officinalis

Broader Context of Treatment

Iron, vitamin C, vitamin B complex, and zinc supple-
ments can be very helpful, in some cases even enough to
clear the problem. Dental attention may be important, as
a tooth abscess or gum disease may be the focus of the un-
derlying problem. Similarly, a history of stomach ulcera-
tion or other gastric problems must be considered. Diet is
critical, as irritants of all kinds must be avoided. These in-
clude physical irritants, such as very hot or coarse foods,
as well as the chemical irritants in acid and very spicy
foods, alcohol, and tobacco.

PERIODONTAL DISEASE

Pyorrhea: Inflammation or degeneration of tissues that
surround and support the teeth. (The Merck Manual)

Gingivitis: Inflammation of the gingivae, characterized by
swelling, redness, change of normal contours, watery ex-
udate, and bleeding. (The Merck Manual)

Pyorrhea, a type of periodontal disease, commonly begins
as gingivitis, but on rare occasions may be the presenting
complaint for more serious systemic diseases, including
diabetes mellitus and leukemia. Ordinarily, the major
causative factor is poor dental hygiene. Gingivitis is com-
mon in puberty and pregnancy, suggesting that hormones
may also play a role.

Treatment of Periodontal Disease

These very localized conditions can have a profound ef-
fect on the health of the whole body. The American
Academy of Periodontology has concluded that peri-
odontal bacteria can enter the bloodstream, travel to
major organs, and begin new infections. Research sug-
gests that this may contribute to the development of heart
disease and stroke, increase a woman’s risk of having a
preterm, low-birth-weight baby, and pose a serious threat

----- PAGE 277 -----
to people whose health is compromised by diabetes, res-
piratory disease, or osteoporosis.’

Thus, tonic support is indicated for the mouth and
gums, as well as the stomach and digestion. Decaying
gum tissue will be swallowed constantly and can lead to
secondary digestive upsets. Pyorrhea must be treated as a
whole body issue that is focused in the mouth.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials are essential to reduce populations of: bac-
teria that contribute to the decay process.

Anti-inflammatories reduce any localized mucosal reaction.

Astringents lessen local bleeding and other exudations.

Circulatory stimulants promote the circulation of blood in
the gums, aiding in detoxification.

Immune system support is necessary if gum disease suggests
a systemic problem.

Alteratives help the body deal with any systemic problems
related to the disease.

Specific Remedies

Remember that any description of specific remedies for a
particular condition reflects the accrued wisdom and ex-
perience gained through generations of herbal history.
However, these remedies will not replace a balanced pre-
scription that takes into account system support in addi-
tion to all of the herbal actions indicated.

With that in mind, Commiphora molmol (myrth) may
be considered a specific remedy here, as it has powerful
antimicrobial effects against the pathogens that cause
gum disease. In addition, Krameria triandra (rhatany), an
astringent herb from Peru, has proved uniquely effective
for gum disease. Some proprietary herbal toothpastes can
help support treatment by supplying the indicated herbs
in that form,

A Prescription for Pyorrhea

Gum application:

Commiphora molmol 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Krameria triandra 1 part

Combine tinctures and apply to the gums three times a day using
a very fine brush. An infusion of buccal anti-inflammatory herbs,
such as Salvia and Matricaria, may be used as a mouthwash. Do
not swallow.

Internal use:
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Zanthoxylum americanum l part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM @ 269

The combination of herbs for internal use supplies
the following actions to support the work of the gum
application.

Table 13.5. Actions Supplied by Internal Pyorrhea
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Echinacea spp.

Alterative Echinacea spp., Galium aparine,
Zanthoxylum americanum

Lymphatic Echinacea spp., Galium aparine,

Zanthoxylum americanum

Circulatory stimulant Zanthoxylum americanum

Broader Context of Treatment
Herbal treatment will not replace necessary dental atten-
tion. Similarly, if pyorrhea suggests deeper systemic prob-
lems, these call for skilled diagnosis. Good personal den-
tal hygiene is essential. Avoid refined carbohydrates in the
diet. Flavonoids, such as quercetin, and procyanidins have
been suggested as supplements.

The following supplements may be relevant adjuncts
for the long-term treatment of periodontal disease.

Vitamin C: 3 to § g/day
Vitamin E: 400 to 800 TU/day
Vitamin A: 20,000 IU/day
Selenium: 400 meg/day

Zinc picolinate: 30 mg/day
Folic acid: 2 mg/day

ESOPHAGITIS AND
GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX

Reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus leading to
localized infection. (The Merck Manual)

This relatively common and unpleasant problem affects
the lower esophageal sphincter (LES), the muscular valve
connecting the esophagus with the stomach. The condi-
tion is technically known as gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD), a term in which gastroesophageal refers to the
stomach and esophagus and reflux means “to flow back.”
Therefore, gastroesophageal reflux indicates a return of
the stomach’s contents back up into the esophagus. The
result is heartburn or acid indigestion.

Normally, the LES valve opens to allow food to pass

----- PAGE 278 -----
270 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

into the stomach and closes to prevent food and acidic
stomach juices from flowing back into the esophagus.
GERD occurs when the valve is weak or relaxes inappro-
priately, allowing the contents of the stomach to flow up
into the esophagus. The severity of GERD depends on
the degree of LES dysfunction, the type and amount of
fluid brought up from the stomach, and the neutralizing
effect of saliva.

Dietary and lifestyle choices contribute to the devel-
opment of GERD. Certain foods and drinks, including
chocolate, peppermint, fried or fatty foods, coffee, and al-
coholic beverages, may weaken the LES, causing reflux
and heartburn. Cigarette smoking also relaxes the valve.
Other causes are obesity, pregnancy, and a structural
weakness of the diaphragm known as hiatus hernia.

Heartburn is the main symptom, which is experi-
enced as a burning pain that begins behind the breastbone
and moves upward to the neck and throat. The patient
may feel as if food is coming back into the mouth, leaving
an acid or bitter taste. This sensation might last as long as
two hours, and is often worse after eating. Lying down or
bending over can also result in heartburn.

Heartburn pain is sometimes mistaken for the pain
associated with heart disease or a heart attack, but there
are differences. Exercise may aggravate pain resulting
from heart disease, while rest may relieve the pain.
Heartburn pain is less likely to be associated with physi-
cal activity.

Treatment of Gastroesophageal Reflux
Disease

Treatment of GERD aims at decreasing the amount of re-
flux or reducing damage to the lining of the esophagus
from refluxed materials. Lifestyle and dietary changes are
effective for most people. First, however, we shall consider
relevant herbs, and then the broader context of treatment.

Actions Indicated

Demulcents soothe and coat the tissue of the esophagus,
insulating the mucosal lining against acidic gastric
contents.

Anti-inflammatories reduce localized mucosal reactions.

Vulneraries aid the natural healing of ulcerations and
other lesions.

Astringents lessen local bleeding and other exudatations.

Alteratives help the body deal with any systemic problems
related to the disease.

Carminatives may be needed if there is general disruption

* of digestive process.

Caution: Bitters are contraindicated in the initial
stages of treatment, as they stimulate the secretion of
stomach acid as well as peristaltic activity.

Specific Remedies

Any specific remedies indicated for this condition will not
replace a balanced prescription that takes into account all
of the herbal actions indicated and system support.
Demulcent vulnerary herbs have most to offer here.
Otherwise, there are no specifics as such.

A Prescription for GERD
Althaea officinalis 2 parts
Calendula officinalis 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, an
infusion of the anti-inflammatory herb Matricaria, sipped
slowly throughout the day, can be helpful. As an alternative, a
cold infusion of Althaea root can be taken whenever needed.

Table 13.6. Actions Supplied by GERD Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Derulcent Althaea officinalis
Lymphatic Calendula officinalis
Vulnerary Calendula officinalis
Astringent Calendula officinalis

Anti-inflammatory — Matricaria recutita, Calendula officinalis

Carminative Matricaria recutita

Broader Context of Treatment

The following simple advice will reduce much of the
symptomatic discomfort associated with GERD while
treating the underlying problem.

Raise the bead of the bed to reduce heartburn; raising the
head of the bed allows gravity to minimize reflux of
stomach contents into the esophagus.

Avoid stooping and constricting pressure on the abdomen
(such as very tight clothes).

Avoid foods and beverages that weaken the LES, including
chocolate, peppermint, fatty foods, coffee, and alco-
holic beverages. Substances that can irritate a damaged
esophageal lining, such as citrus fruits and juices,
tomato products, and pepper, should also be avoided.

----- PAGE 279 -----
Decrease the size of portions at mealtime. In addition, eating
meals at least two hours before bedtime may lessen re-
flux by allowing stomach acid to subside and the stom-
ach to empty partially.

Lose weight. Being overweight often worsens symptoms;
many overweight people find relief when they lose
weight.

Avoid alcohol, as it increases the production of gastric acid,
contributing to general discomfort.

Stop smoking. Cigarette smoking weakens the LES.

Overadl. Deal with stress, anxiety, and any systemic health
problems.

Antacids neutralize acid in the esophagus and stom-
ach and soothe heartburn. Nonprescription antacids pro-
vide temporary relief. However, their long-term use
should be avoided, as it can lead to diarrhea, altered cal-
cium metabolism, and buildup of magnesium in the body.
Too much magnesium can be a serious problem for pa-
tients with kidney disease.

GASTRITIS

Superficial, mucosal lesions of the stomach that occur
very rapidly in relation to a variety of stresses: (The Merck
Manual)

A whole range of pathologies may underlie this common
complaint. Strictly speaking, the term gastritis means in-
flammation of the gastric mucosa, the tissue that lines the
stomach. A number of medical subdivisions are based
upon the various pathological changes that can occur in
the tissue, but from an herbal perspective, these distinc-
tions are not crucial. The approach described here may be
applied in all cases, unless there is another specific prob-
lem that is more pressing than the gastritis.

Treatment of Gastritis

With gastritis, inflammation is the primary focus when
selecting relevant actions and herbs. There are a number
of herbs that can help reduce inflammation, but these do
not replace any dietary or lifestyle changes that might also
be indicated.

Actions Indicated

Demutcents soothe the lining of the stomach, by either coat-
ing the stomach or exerting anti-inflammatory actions.

Antacids have little more to offer than symptomatic relief.

Anti-inflammatories reduce \ocalized mucosal reactions.

Astringents lessen local bleeding.

THe DIGESTIVE SYSTEM .e 271

Vulneraries enhance the stomach’s natural wound-healing
abilities.

Nervines help ease background stress involvement.

Alteratives help the body deal with any systemic problems
related to the disease.

Specific Remedies

Vulnerary and demulcent remedies such as Symphytum
root, Althaea root, and Ubmus rubra speed healing by
soothing the tissue. Matricaria recutita is considered a spe-
cific for gastritis in folk treatments from Europe.
Filipendula ulnaria and Mentha ‘piperita act as antacids.
Remember, however, that specifics never replace a bal-
anced prescription that takes into account all ofthe herbal
actions indicated as well as system support.

A Prescription for Gastritis

Althaea officinalis 3 parts
Filipendula ulmaria 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Dosage: Take tincture in divided doses, to 5 ml in total, three
times a day. An infusion of Matricaria or Melissa sipped slowly
throughout the day will also help.

Table 13.7. Actions Supplied by Gastritis
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Demulcent Althaea officinalis

Anti-inflammatory Filipendula ulmaria, Matricaria recutita

Astringent Filipendula ulmaria
Vulnerary Matricaria recutita
Nervine Matricaria recutita

Broader Context of Treatment

Lifestyle is fundamental to both the cause and the treat-
ment of gastritis. It is essential to eliminate food irritants,
including chemicals, extreme temperatures, and fiber.
Acidic foods, alcohol, tobacco, and any other factor that
elicits symptoms must also be avoided. Stress will aggra-
vate or even bring on gastritis. Work conditions, back-
ground anxiety, and related issues must all be taken into
consideration. These lifestyle factors are discussed in
more depth under Peptic Ulcers.

----- PAGE 280 -----
272 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BOpy SYSTEM

PEPTIC ULCERS

A circumscribed ulceration of the mucous membrane
penetrating through the muscularis mucosa and occurring
in areas exposed to acid and pepsin. (The Merck Manual)

Ulcerative conditions of the stomach, duodenum, and eso-
phagus are very common in our society, and nonprescription
medicines for symptom relief are major moneymakers for
the pharmaceutical industry. Gastric ulcers occur along the
lesser curvature of the stomach, while duodenal ulcers are
found in the first few centimeters of the duodenum, or
the first part of the small intestine.

Drug treatment for ulcers aims primarily to reduce
the corrosive impact of stomach acid on the mucosal lin-
ing. This is accomplished with antacid chemicals or other
agents that reduce acid production in the first place, ei-
ther directly or indirectly. A range of plants can help here.
These appear to work in a variety of ways via a multitude
of mechanisms to facilitate a reversal of the condition.

Peptic ulcers result from a breakdown of the lining of
the stomach and duodenum. A number of possible factors
may be implicated, including increased secretion of stom-
ach acid and pepsin and infection with the bacterium
Helicobacter ‘pylori. Duodenal ulcers are more common
than gastric ulcers, which carry a greater risk of malig-
nancy. Ulcers of either type may cause nausea, vomiting,
loss of appetite, weight loss, and a gnawing, burning pain
in the upper abdomen.

It is now believed that most peptic ulcers are caused
by infection with the bacterium Helicobacter ‘pylori.
However, some peptic ulcers are caused by prolonged use
of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), a
group of pain relievers that includes aspirin, ibuprofen,
and naproxen sodium. NSAIDs cause ulcers by impairing
the stomach’s ability to protect itself from acidic stomach
juices. Normally, the stomach has three defenses against
digestive juices:

1, Mucus coats the stomach lining and shields it from
stomach acid.

2. The chemical bicarbonate, naturally present in the
stomach, neutralizes stomach acid.

3. Blood circulation to the stomach lining aids in cell
renewal and repair.

NSAIDs hinder all of these protective mechanisms.
With the stomach’s defenses down, digestive juices can
damage the sensitive stomach lining and cause ulcers.

Peptic ulcers usually have a chronic, recurrent course
with a variable symptom picture. In fact, only about half

of all ulcer patients present with the characteristic symp-
tom picture. The pain is often described as burning,
gnawing or aching; there may also be a sore, empty feel-
ing or a sensation of hunger. Antacids or milk will relieve
the gastric pain. For duodenal ulcers, the typical pain is
described as hunger pangs; for gastric ulcers, eating may
bring on pain.

Treatment of Ulcers

Through the skilled use of plants with demulcent,
antacid, astringent, and vulnerary actions, it is well within
the bounds of therapeutic possibility to bring about a
rapid and complete healing of any ulceration. Herbs such
as Symphytum officinale (comfrey), Althaea officinalis
(marshmallow), Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet),
Calendula officinalis (calendula), Matricaria recutita
(chamomile), and Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal) are ex-
amples of remedies that may be used.

Actions Indicated

Demulcents soothe the lining of the stomach, either by coat-
ing the stomach or exerting anti-inflammatory actions.

Anti-inflammatories reduce localized mucosal reactions.

Antimicrobials are indicated for dealing with H. pylori.
However, these herbs must be active in the stomach in
order for them to be effective.

Astringents lessen local bleeding.

Vulneraries speed natural wound healing.

Carminatives will reduce any flatulence in the gastroin-
testinal tract.

Nervines help ease background stress involvement.

Bitters aid the healing process in the latter stages of treat-
ment.

Alteratives help the body deal with any systemic problems
related to the disease.

Caution: Emergency hospitalization is essential if the
ulcer perforates or hemorrhages.

Specific Remedies
Symphytum officinale (comfrey), Althaea officinalis (marsh-
mallow), Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet), Calendula of-
ficinalis (calendula), and Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
can all be seen as possible specifics for the treatment of
ulcers, (Please see chapter 10 for a discussion of the con-
troversy surrounding the risks and benefits of Symphytum
officinale.)

Based upon an understanding of their actions, the ra-
tionale for the use of these herbs to treat ulcers is very
predictable. Their content of anti-inflammatory flavo-

----- PAGE 281 -----
noids is thought to be very important to their activity (see
chapter 9). Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice) is an effective rem-
edy now used even in allopathic medicine as a treatment
for ulcers. In addition to these herbs, raw cabbage juice is
an effective traditional treatment. Similarly, demulcent
foods such as plantain banana and even potato can help.

As mentioned, newer research suggests that the bac-
terium Helicobacter pylori is implicated in the development
of many gastric and duodenal ulcers. This may help ex-
plain why Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal) can be so ef-
fective against ulcers, even though digestive bitters are
generally contraindicated in this condition due to the fact
that they stimulate gastric secretions. Hydrastis is an ef-
fective antibacterial and may well be active against
Helicobacter pylori.

The successful use of herbs to treat peptic ulceration
falls into two stages. The first step is to reduce inflamma-
tion and initiate healing, and the second is to tone and
complete healing. The first prescription given here fo-
cuses on reducing inflammation and beginning the heal-
ing process.

Prescription | for Peptic Ulcer

Symphytum officinale root 1 part
Althaea officinalis root 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day. In addi-
tion, a cold infusion of these herbs (fresh or dried) may be drunk
often to ease symptoms. Matricaria infusion drunk on an empty
stomach will reduce inflammation and help reverse the ulcera-
tive process,

The next prescription focuses on the second step in
the healing process.

Prescription Il for Peptic Ulcer

Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Symphytum officinale 2 parts
Matricaria recutita 2 parts

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day

Caution: If symptoms have not subsided within a week,
seek skilled diagnosis.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM = 273

Table 13.8. Actions Supplied by Peptic Ulcer
Prescriptions

ACTION HERBS

Demulcent Symphytum officinale, Althaea officinalis

Anti-inflammatory — Matricaria recutita, Hydrastis canadensis

Astringent Symphytum officinale, Hydrastis canadensis

Vulnerary Symphytum officinale, Hydrastis canadensis,
Matricaria recutita

Nervine Matricaria recutita

Carminative Matricaria recutita

Bitter Hydrastis canadensis

Broader Context of Treatment

Ulcer patients are vulnerable to many consequences of di-
etary abuse, as well as problems related to non-herbal
treatments for peptic ulcer, such as antacids.

Overuse of antacids can lead to impaired absorption of cer-
tain nutrients from the diet.

Overconsumption of milk or antacids can elevate calcium lev-
els in body tissues and urine, which can lead to kidney
stones.

A bland and milky diet may contribute to obesity.

Milk can aggravate dairy sensitivity problems.

Poor appetite associated with ulcers can lead to nutritional
deficiencies.

Dietary factors are fundamentally implicated in both
the cause and the treatment of peptic ulceration. In some
cases, ulceration may be due to a specific food allergy, but
ulcers are always aggravated by sensitivity to irritants. As
with other digestive system conditions, all irritant sub-
stances must be avoided, especially alcohol and tobacco.
Pepper, coffee, and anything that the patient experiences
as a problem should also be eliminated. Avoiding aspirin
and other NSAIDs is essential.

Small meals often are tolerated better than large
meals. Increasing the proportion of fiber in the diet has
been shown to reduce the rate of recurrence of peptic ul-
ceration. However, in the early stages of treatment, the
patient should eat a bland diet to avoid physical irritation.
Rest and reevaluation of lifestyle factors that may be caus-
ing stress are important. The creation of a stress manage-
ment program uniquely suited to the needs of the patient
should be a priority.

----- PAGE 282 -----
274 @ TREATVENI APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

HIATUS HERNIA

Protrusion of the stomach above the diaphragm. (The
Merck Manual)

This unpleasant yet common problem is caused when a
rupture forms in the diaphragm, creating an opening in
which the upper part of the stomach gets pinched (the
herniation). Hiatus hernias can be caused by obesity, preg-
nancy, tight clothing, sudden physical exertion (such as
weight lifting), straining, coughing, or abdominal injury.

Although most hiatus hernias cause no symptoms,
some people experience reflux symptoms. Occasionally,
reflux damages the lining of the esophagus, resulting in
erosions. Postural gastric reflux, which occurs when gravity
forces the stomach into the hernia, is a conumon presenting
sign. This most frequently happens when the patient is
bending over or lying down.

‘Treatment of Hiatus Hernia

The distressing gastric symptoms of this condition may be
treated with herbal remedies, but the herniation itself can
prove to be a therapeutic challenge. In severe cases, surgery.
may be necessary. Proper digestion and elimination are
pivotal to healing, as is nervous system support. Structural
issues are part of the problem, so muscular and skeletal
support must be taken into account. Appropriate manipu-
lative therapy, such as osteopathy, may be indicated.

Actions Indicated
Demutcents soothe the lining of the stomach, by either coat-
ing the mucosa or exerting anti-inflammatory. actions.

Anti-inflammatories reduce localized mucosal reactions.

Vulneraries speed natural wound healing and may help
strengthen the diaphragm.

Astringents lessen local bleeding.

Carminatives will help with any flatulence or colic.

Nervines help ease background stress involvement.

Specific Remedies

Symphytum officinale (comfrey), Althaea officinalis (marsh-
mallow), Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet), Calendula of-
ficinalis (calendula), and Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
can all be seen as possible specifics. Symphytum has an es-
pecially valid role because of its content of allantoin, a
constituent that promotes wound healing. (See chapter 10
for a discussion of the controversy surrounding the bene-
fits and risks of this herb.)

The main treatment goal is to reduce inflammation
and facilitate natural healing through the use of demul-
cent and vulnerary herbs. The focus here is on easing the
symptom picture.

A Prescription for Hiatus Hernia

Symphytum officinale root 1 part
Althaea officinalis root 1 part
Filipendula ulmaria 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day. An infu-
sion of these herbs (fresh or dried) may be drunk often to ease
symptoms. Carminative nervines may be added if stress is a major
component. (Valeriana officinalis is a good example. )

Chamomile and the Digestive System

Chamomile tea, perhaps the best-known herbal tisane, is widely employed as a digestive remedy
throughout Europe, and its therapeutic use is well documented. Matricaria recutita is uniquely
suited for digestive problems, combining as.it does carminative, antispasmodic, anti-inflammatory,
antiseptic, and mild bitter actions. Analysis of its constituents reveals the presence of a volatile oil
that contains, among other compounds, azulene, chamazulene, and a range of sesquiterpenes.
Other constituents in chamomile provide a”bitter principle, flavones, glycosides, salicylic acid,
coumarin derivatives, and much more. These act together as a biologically evolved whole, each
contributing specific. effects to create a wonderfully rounded digestive remedy.

Through its relaxing, antispasmodic effects on smooth muscles, chamomile soothes colic, gen-
tly sedates the central nervous system, and eases the impact of stress. It exerts anti-inflammatory
effects upon the lining of the gut and provides valuable antimicrobial actions. The herb also in-
creases overall blood flow to the digestive system through local vasodilatory activity. All of these
properties work together to give chamomile an invaluable role in the holistic treatment of many
digestive system diseases, especially those associated with colic spasms. Various other indications

for this wonderful herb are highlighted elsewhere in this book.

----- PAGE 283 -----
Table 13.9. Actions Supplied by Hiatus Hernia
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Demulcent Symphytum officinale, Althaea officinalis

Anti-inflammatory — Filipendula ulmaria

Vulnerary Symphytum officinale

Astringent Symphytum officinale, Filipendula ulmaria
Carminative Filipendula ulmaria

Nervine Valeriana officinalis

Broader Context of Treatment
Please refer to discussions of gastroesophageal reflux and
peptic ulceration.

FUNCTIONAL DYSPEPSIA

Symptoms referred to the Gl system in which a patholog-
ical condition is not present, is poorly established, or, if
present, does not entirely explain the clinical state. (The
Merck Manual}

Functional dyspepsia, often referred to as “indigestion,” is
a vague and variable problem that is functional in nature
but usually not caused by underlying structural issues.
Belching, distension, and borboryginus (rumbling sound
made by the movement of gas in the,bowels) often occur,
along with abdominal or gastric pain. There is often an
overt psychological component. While nervine remedies
and addressing lifestyle issues may help, it is too easy to
conclude that all indigestion is psychosomatic.

Treatment of Functional Dyspepsia

While herbal treatment centers on ensuring the health
and proper functioning of the digestive system, any
focus of illness in the body must also be supported with
tonics. Dietary factors are often crucial. However, the
symptom picture may be similar to some of the present-
ing signs of cardiac ischemia, peptic ulcer, or cholecysti-
tis. Thus, differential diagnosis is essential. Any case of
“indigestion” that proves intransigent requires skilled
diagnosis.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM -2 275

Actions Indicated

The key to correcting such functional problems is to
“tune up” both metabolic and physical aspects of diges-
tion and assimilation, while at the same time easing symp-
tomatic discomfort with appropriate remedies.

Bitter stimulation promotes an integrated and adequate se-
cretory response to food or hunger, as well as increased
muscular tone in peristalsis.

Carminatives ease flatulence, reduce localized inflamma-
tion, decrease muscular spasms that lead to colic, and
act as mild antimicrobial agents.

Antispasmodics may be indicated if carminatives do not
ease abdominal cramping.

Nervines help relieve stress, anxiety, and tension; these are
usually also antispasmodic.

Specific Remedies
Every herbalist in every culture has a favorite remedy for
indigestion. These are often bitter carminatives or nervine
carminatives. European specific remedies include Gentiana
lutea (gentian), Mentha piperita (peppermint), Matricaria
recutita (chamomile), Melissa officinalis (lemon balm),
Humulus lupulus (hops), and Valeriana officinalis (valerian).

Often, the traditional simple (tea made from a single
fresh remedy) is the best treatment. This should be an
herb with a taste and aroma that the patient likes. Ideally,
it should also be a plant he or she could easily cultivate,
thus providing a steady supply of fresh leaf. The whole
spectrum of an herb’s actions will provide the clue as to
which is the best choice for the patient. For example, of
the suggested herbs (Mentha piperita, Matricaria recutita,
and Melissa officinalis), Matricaria has nervine and mild
bitter properties, while Melissa is also a diaphoretic. The
patient’s signs and symptoms will highlight the appropri-
ate actions needed.

The simple may be augmented with a combination of
bitter and carminative tinctures that aid and support the
general function of the digestive system.

A Prescription for Indigestion

Matricaria recutita 1 part
Mentha piperita 1 part
Gentiana lutea 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture combination 10 minutes before eating

----- PAGE 284 -----
276 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Table 13.10. Actions Supplied by Indigestion
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Carminative Mentha piperita, Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis

Anti-inflammatory — Mentha piperita, Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis
Bitter Gentiana lutea, Matricaria recutita

Nervine Valeriana officinalis, Matricaria recutita

Broader Context of Treatment

Persistent problems call for skilled medical diagnosis.
Because of the functional nature of this problem, just
about anything that supports physiological activity or
helps the person to feel at ease will be indicated. Diet is
fundamental, but the problem can also be structural or
psychological. Because of structural considerations, ma-
nipulative therapies, from chiropractic to rolfing, have
potential value. Counseling for stress-related or deeper
psychological issues may also help.

Indigestion may be disease-related, but for the most
part, it results from eating too much or too quickly, eat-
ing high-fat foods, or eating during stressful situations.
Smoking, alcohol, medications that irritate the stomach
lining, fatigue, and ongoing stress can also aggravate or
cause indigestion.

Avoiding foods and situations that seem to cause in-
digestion is the most successful treatment. Excess stom-
ach acid does not cause or result from indigestion, so
antacids are not an appropriate treatment, although some
people report that they do help. Smokers can help relieve
indigestion by quitting smoking, or at least not smoking
right before eating. Exercising with a full stomach may
also cause indigestion, so scheduling exercise before
meals or at least an hour afterward might help.

PHYTOTHERAPY AND THE COLON

The colon, which connects the small intestine with the
rectum and anus, is where water and electrolytes are ab-
sorbed from the material that enters from the small intes-
tine. This material remains in the colon until most of the
fluid and salts are absorbed into the body. The stool then
passes through to the left side of the colon, where it is
stored until a bowel movement occurs. The contraction
of intestinal muscles and the movement of its contents are
controlled by nerves, hormones, and electrical activity in

the colon muscle. Movements of the colon propel the
contents slowly back and forth, but mainly toward the
rectum. A few times a day, strong muscle contractions
push fecal material ahead. Some of these strong contrac-
tions result in a bowel movement.

A wide range of plants have a direct impact on both
colon health and pathology. Astringents such as Myrica
cerifera (bayberry), demulcents like Althaea officinalis
(marshmallow) and Plantago major (plantain), and anti-
spasmodics such as Dioscorea villosa (wild yam) can be very
helpful in facilitating the healing of these distressing
problems.

Colitis, or inflammation of the colon, appears to be
caused by a number of different factors. Mucous colitis, also
called irritable or spastic colon, is a functional disturbance

in which the colon secretes an abnormally large amount
of mucus that appears in the stools. The most common
symptom is abdominal cramping accompanied by either
constipation or diarrhea, which sometimes alternate.

Herbs offer exciting therapeutic possibilities in the
treatment of mucous colitis (see Irritable Bowel
Syndrome later in this chapter). Ulcerative colitis is an-
other matter. This is a serious inflammatory disease that
seems to be autoimmune in nature and poses real chal-
lenges to any therapist, whether herbalist or orthodox
practitioner. However, a competent medical herbalist has
much to offer in the treatment of autoimmune condi-
tions. Inflammatory bowel diseases, including ulcerative
colitis and Crohn's disease, are discussed in more detail
later in this chapter.

IRRITABLE BOWEL SYNDROME

Motility disorders involving the small intestine and large
bowel associated with variable degrees of abdominal
pain, constipation or diarrhea, largely as a reaction to
stress in a susceptible individual. (The Merck Manual)

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common disorder
characterized by cramping pain, gassiness, bloating, and
changes in bowel habits. Symptoms can include constipa-
tion or diarrhea, or may alternate between constipation
and diarrhea.

A whole panoply of symptoms can occur in IBS.
These include abdominal distress, erratic frequency of
bowel movements, and variability in stool consistency.
Mucus may be present in stools. Often, unpleasant ab-
dominal sensations associated with a range of generalized
symptoms are present. These may vary from bloating and
flatulence to headaches and anxiety.

----- PAGE 285 -----
IBS has very a diverse and sometimes obscure etiol-
ogy. While stress, anxiety, and other psychological issues
are often pivotal, they are but components in a multifac-
torial matrix. Another factor to consider is intolerance to
such common foods as wheat, corn, dairy products, coffee,
tea, and citrus fruit. Similarly, intolerance to the sugar lac-
tose occurs frequently. Excessive bran consumption due to
overeating of “healthy fiber” is another possible cause!
Occasionally, infectious or parasitic organisms are involved
(for example, Giardia, threadworm, Candida, and others).
Drugs, especially antibiotics, may also be implicated.

IBS symptoms generally occur in response to some
kind of trigger, which is often dietary or stress-related.
While emotional conflict and stress do not cause IBS, they
are common triggers for IBS symptoms. Stress also stim-
ulates colonic spasms, although this process is not com-
pletely understood. Stress-reduction training or counsel-
ing and support can help relieve IBS symptoms.

Other factors are also important. In a person with
IBS, the colon is more sensitive than usual and responds
strongly to stimuli that would not bother most people.
Eating causes contractions of the colon. Normally, this
induces the urge to have a bowel movement within 30 to
60 minutes. For a person with IBS, this urge comes
sooner, and is accompanied by cramps and diarrhea. The
intensity is often related to the number of calories and the
amount of fat in the meal. Fat, whether animal or veg-
etable, is a strong stimulus for colonic contractions. Many
foods contain fat, especially meats of all kinds, poultry
skin, whole milk, cream, cheese, butter, vegetable oil,

margarine, shortening, avocados, and whipped toppings.

In some people, specific foods or medicines may act
as triggers. Examples are chocolate, milk products, and
alcohol. Caffeine is also likely to affect people with IBS.
Even eating and distention of the colon due to gas can
cause the colon to overreact. A spasm may also delay pas-
sage of stools, leading to constipation.

‘Two extreme varieties of IBS are commonly seen,
with a spectrum of shades in between. The “spastic
colon” type of IBS is characterized by alternating consti-
pation and diarrhea, associated with and often triggered
by eating. The other extreme takes the form of a painless
and often uncontrollable diarrhea. This type of IBS,
known as mucous colitis, is a functional disturbance in
which the colon secretes abnormally large amounts of
mucus that appears in the stools.

While normal bowel function varies from person to
person, a normal movement can be described as formed
but not hard, free of blood, and painless to pass. Bleeding,

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM 2 277

fever, weight loss, and persistent severe pain are not
symptoms of IBS, but may indicate other problems.

Treatment of IBS

Herbs offer a wide range of therapeutic possibilities for
the treatment of this condition, and often have more to
offer than other therapeutic modalities. Herbal support of
the digestive system and elimination is pivotal, as is help
for the nervous system. However, any focus of illness in
the body must also be addressed with tonics.

Actions Indicated

Astringents reverse the diarrhea and reduce any patholog-
ical mucus production.

Bitters promote appropriate digestive secretions, and often
will normalize bowel function on their own.

Anti-inflammatories reduce localized mucosal reactions.

Carminatives help with any flatulence or colic.

Antispasmodics other than carminatives may be indicated if
cramping is severe.

Vulneraries are indicated if there is any hint of damage to
the lining of the colon.

Nervines help ease background stress.

Aperients may be indicated temporarily if constipation is
present. Do not use strong herbs, however, as there
may be a rapid swing back to diarrhea.

Specific Remedies

As with indigestion, many remedies can help with this
functional problem, but none is a true specific. Matricaria
recutita (chamomile) and Mentha piperita (peppermint) are
examples of the vast range of plants that have a direct im-
pact on IBS. With astringents such as Myrica cerifera (bay-
berry), wound-healing remedies like Symphytum officinale
(comfrey root) and Plantago major (plantain), and colic-
relieving antispasmodics such as Dioscorea villosa (wild
yam), much can be done to facilitate healing.

Orthodox practitioners in the United Kingdom pre-
scribe enteric-coated peppermint oil capsules to alleviate
the symptoms of IBS. In addition, peppermint oil has been
reviewed and approved by the German Commission E for
safe and effective use in treating IBS. As an example of the
intriguing possibilities that suggest themselves when herbs
are incorporated into orthodox medicine, the instillation
of peppermint oil into the colon during colonoscopy or
barium enema has been reported to reduce spasm, lessen-
ing the need for intravenous spasmolytics.*

----- PAGE 286 -----
278 « ‘TREATMENT APPROACHES By Bopy SYSTEM

A Prescription for IBS

Myrica cerifera 2 parts
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part
Mentha piperita 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day. In addi-
tion, a warm infusion of an appropriate carminative nervine
should be drunk frequently.

Table 13.11. Actions Supplied by IBS Prescription

ACTION HERBS
Astringent Myrica cerifera
Bitter Artemisia vulgaris, Matricaria recutita

Anti-inflammatory — Dioscorea villosa, Matricaria recutita

Carminative Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita

Antispasmodic Dioscorea villosa, Matricaria recutita, Mentha
piperita

Vulnerary Matricaria recutita

“Nervine Matricaria recutita, Valeriana officinalis

cs ESSEC
Herbs and IBS: A Clinical Study

A paper published in 1998 in the Journal of the American Medical Association details a clinical trial of
traditional Chinese treatments of IBS. This is an excellent example of the use of a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial to evaluate a traditional herbal protocol. The study assessed the ef-
fectiveness of individualized treatment (a standard component of all good phytotherapeutic practice)

against a placebo.

Participants underwent routine IBS screening by a gastroenterologist. Chinese herbal practition-
ers treated the patients with confirmed diagnoses in traditional settings. Subjects were randomized
into three groups: One group received individualized herbal formulations, another’a standard herbal
IBS formulation, and the third a placebo. The gastroenterologist evaluated the participants again at
8 weeks and at the conclusion of the 16-week treatment period.

Both groups treated with herbs responded significantly better than the placebo group. Another
assessment 14 weeks after completion of treatment showed that patients who received the individu-
alized treatment maintained improvement, while the improvement weakened somewhat in the stan-
dard formula group. It is possible that this is because the individualized treatments were effective in
correcting underlying imbalances, while the standard formula addressed only symptoms.

Broader Context of Treatment

As with indigestion, because of the functional nature of
IBS, just about anything that supports physiological ac-
tivity or helps the individual feel at ease may be indicated.
Diet is fundamental, but identifying problematic foods
can be a real challenge. Structural considerations should
be taken into account, as should stress and psychological
issues.

Keeping a journal to record foods and situations that
trigger symptoms may be the only way to identify dietary
issues for a given individual. If dairy products cause symp-
toms to flare up, for example, the patient should cut down
on these foods, or try eating yogurt instead. (Yogurt con-
tains organisms that supply lactase, the enzyme needed to
digest lactose, the sugar found in milk products.) Large
meals can cause cramping and diarrhea, so symptoms may
be eased if smaller meals are eaten more frequently.
Similarly, eating smaller postions of foods that are low in
fat and high in carbohydrates, such as pasta, rice, whole-
grain breads and cereals, fruits, and vegetables, may be
helpful.

In many cases, dietary fiber may help ease IBS symp-
toms. Whole-grain breads and cereals, beans, fruits, and
vegetables are good sources of fiber. High-fiber diets keep
the colon mildly distended, which may help to prevent
spasms. Some forms of fiber also retain water in the
stools, thereby preventing the development of hard stools
that are difficult to pass. The patient should eat just
enough fiber that bowel movements are painless and eas-

----- PAGE 287 -----
ily passed. A high-fiber diet may initially cause gas and
bloating, but within a few weeks, the body will adjust and
symptoms will subside.

INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) refers to two chronic
intestinal disorders: Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis.
IBD affects 2% to 6% of Americans, or an estimated
300,000 to 500,000 people.

Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis are serious in-
flammatory diseases that appear to be autoimmune in
nature and pose real challenges for practitioners of all
modalities. They generally present as a series of attacks of
bloody diarrhea that vary in intensity and duration and al-
ternate with symptom-free periods.

The causes of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis
are not known, but a leading theory suggests that some
agent, perhaps a virus or bacterium, alters the body’s im-
mune response, triggering an inflammatory reaction in
the intestinal wall. The onset of both diseases peaks dur-
ing young adulthood. Either disease may cause persistent
abdominal pain, bowel sores, diarrhea, fever, intestinal
bleeding, and weight loss.

The discussion that follows refers specifically to ul-
cerative colitis, but the herbal approach is similar for both
forms of IBD.

ULCERATIVE COLITIS

A chronic, inflammatory, and ulcerative disease that arises
in the colonic mucosa, characterized most often by
bloody diarrhea. (The Merck Manual)

This disorder is a true colitis—in other words, active in-
flammation is a primary aspect of the condition.
Ulcerative colitis usually presents as a series of attacks of
bloody diarrhea varying in intensity and duration. These
will alternate with periods during which the patient expe-
riences no symptoms at all. Ulcerative colitis must be dif-
ferentiated from an infectious cause. A history of recent
travel or extensive antibiotic use may provide a clue.

Caution: Blood in the stools is a sign that must al-
ways be investigated by a skilled diagnostician.

‘Treatment of Ulcerative Colitis

Immune system issues and all they imply are crucial in ul-
cerative colitis (see chapter 21 for more information).
Obviously, the digestive system needs a great deal of sup-
port, as do the other pathways of elimination. Because of

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM @ 279

the toll taken by stress, the nervous system may also need
attention. If liver involvement is suspected, give this vital
organ as much herbal support as possible with hepatic
plants such as Silybum marianum.

Actions Indicated

Astringents may help stem blood loss.

Demuzcents soothe surface irritation.

Vulneraries promote healing of ulcerations in the mucosal
lining.

Anti-inflammatories aid the body in its attempt to control
inappropriate inflammatory reactions.

Carminatives help relieve abdominal discomfort.

Antispasmodics help ease the muscular cramping in the
bowel that causes much of the pain.

Immune system support is essential and must cover the
whole range of issues involved.

Antimicrobials help combat any secondary infection that
might arise.

Elimination support must be given to the other organs of
elimination.

Nervines will help address the psychological components
of the condition.

Specific Remedies

Allium sativum (garlic) has been advanced as a potential
specific here and should be suggested as a dietary supple-
ment. Myrica cerifera (bayberry) is an excellent astringent
for use in this disease, but cannot be considered a specific.
Because of the autoimmune basis of this deep-seated con-
dition, one must be patient when selecting remedies, as
many possible herbs will come to mind.

A Prescription for Ulcerative Colitis

Myrica cerifera 2 parts
Dioscorea villosa 2 parts
Symphytum officinale 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Agrimonia eupatoria 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day. At least
| clove of raw garlic should be eaten every day, and a warm in-
fusion of an appropriate carminative nervine should be drunk
often.

This prescription supplies the range of actions
needed for the colon-based symptoms, but does not di-
rectly address the autoimmune problem, See chapter 21
for treatment suggestions for immune system problems.
Increasing the proportions of Myrica or Agrimonia will

----- PAGE 288 -----
280 @ TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

provide greater astringency. Alternatively, add Geranium
maculatum to the other remedies. Nervine and demulcent
activity may also need to be increased, but this will vary
from patient to patient.

Table 13.12. Actions Supplied by Ulcerative Colitis
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Astringent Myrica cerifera, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Symphytum officinale

Demulcent Symphytum officinale

Vulnerary Symphytum officinale, Matricaria recutita

Anti-inflammatory  Dioscorea villosa, Matricaria recutita

Carminative Valeriana officinalis, Matricaria recutita
Antispasmodic Valeriana officinalis, Matricaria recutita

Nervine Valeriana officinalis, Matricaria recutita

Broader Context of Treatment

Nutrition becomes a crucial issue in this condition, as
some degree of malnutrition is likely to occur. A number
of factors may contribute to nutritional deficits, each of
which calls for a specific therapeutic response.

Decreased food intake may be related to therapeutic dietary
restrictions or to the pain, diarrhea, nausea, and
anorexia caused by the disease itself.

Malabsorption may be related to decreased absorptive sur-
face due to disease or surgery, bile salt deficiency after
surgery, bacterial flora overgrowth, or drugs, such as
corticosteroids, sulfasalazine, and cholestyramine.

Increased secretion and nutrient loss can be caused by diar-
rhea or by the disease itself.

Increased utilization and nutrient requirements may be due
to inflammation, fever, infection, or increased intesti-
nal cell turnover.

A good multivitamin and mineral supplement will
help replace lost nutrients. In Textbook of Natural Medicine,
Drs. Pizzorno and Murray recommend vitamin supple-
mentation at least five times the U.S. recommended daily
allowance.‘ If there is loss of blood via the gut, zinc, mag-
nesium, and iron supplementation is particularly impor-
tant. If diarrhea is severe, electrolytes must be replaced.

In initial stages of treatment, avoid adding fiber to
the diet, in order to minimize irritation of the inflamed

mucosa. However, as symptoms are brought under con-
trol, a gradual buildup to a high-fiber diet is beneficial.
Lactobacillus-rich yogurt can also be very helpful. In ad-
dition, some people respond well to diets that limit the in-
take of salicylate-containing foods.

DIVERTICULITIS

Inflammation of one or more diverticula, potentially
leading to obstruction or perforation and to abscess and
fistula formation. (The Merck Manual)

A diverticulum is a small, saclike pouch or herniation of
the colonic mucosa that bulges outward through a weak
spot in the colon wall; these are collectively known as di-
verticula, About half of all Americans aged 60 to 80 and al-
most everyone over the age of 80 has diverticulosis, or the
condition characterized by the presence of diverticula.

When diverticula become inflamed, the disorder is
called diverticulitis. This happens in 10% to 25% of peo-
ple with diverticulosis. The characteristic signs and symp-
toms include pain and tenderness associated with consti-
pation that alternates with diarrhea. Fever is often
observed. Differential diagnosis is very important to rule
out carcinoma of the colon.

Diverticulitis is common in industrialized countries
where low-fiber diets are the norm, but rare in countries
where people eat high-fiber diets rich in vegetables. Fiber,
discussed in more detail earlier in this chapter, is the part of
fruits, vegetables, and grains that the body cannot digest.
Soluble fiber dissolves easily in water, becoming soft and
jellylike in the intestines. Insoluble fiber passes almost un-
changed through the intestines. Both kinds of fiber help
prevent constipation and make stools soft and easy to pass.

A low-fiber diet is thought to be the primary cause of
diverticulitis. The history of the condition itself provides
evidence for this theory. Diverticulitis first came to the at-
tention of American physicians in the early 1900s, a time
when processed foods were becoming widely accepted
and incorporated into the diet. Many processed foods are
made from refined, low-fiber flour, which, unlike whole-
wheat flour, contains no bran.

Straining due to constipation increases pressure in
the colon, which causes weak spots to bulge out and be~
come diverticula. Diverticulitis occurs when diverticula
become infected or inflamed. An attack can develop sud-
denly and without warning. The most common symptom
is tenderness around the left side of the lower abdomen.
If infection is the cause, fever, nausea, vomiting, chills,
cramping, and constipation may also be present. The

----- PAGE 289 -----
severity of symptoms depends on the extent of the infec-
tion and complications.

Treatment of Diverticulitis

Problems of this nature in the large bowel will affect
elimination in general, so support for the liver and kid-
neys is essential. In addition, the nervous system may
need help. However, the problem is often associated with
aging and can be linked to a whole range of health issues,
from diseases to drug side effects.

Actions Indicated

Antispasmodics help relieve abdominal pain caused by
cramping around diverticula,

Anti-inflammatories reduce the generalized inflammatory
response within the colon.

Antimicrobials help the body deal with any infection that
might be present.

Carminatives lessen discomfort due to flatulence.

Nervines ease stress, which may be either causal or a result
of the condition.

Specific Remedies

Dioscorea villosa (wild yam) is a very useful specific here. It
is a good antispasmodic and anti-inflammatory herb, but
also has a specific impact upon this condition. Care must
be taken not to induce constipation through overuse of
astringent herbs.

A Prescription for Diverticulitis

Dioscorea villosa 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Mentha piperita T part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture combination three times a day. An infu-
sion of Matricaria or Mentha piperita sipped slowly throughout
the day will help. One clove a day of garlic (Allium sativum)
should be eaten raw as part of the diet, or an equivalent amount
taken in supplement form. The supplement should be a 600 mg
oil “perle” containing 6 mg of allicin.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM -@ 281

Table 13.13. Actions Supplied by Diverticulitis
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Antispasmodic Dioscorea villosa, Viburnum opulus,

Mentha piperita

Anti-inflammatory — Dioscorea villosa, Mentha piperita

Antimicrobial Allium sativum
Carminative Valeriana officinalis, Mentha piperita
Nervine Valeriana officinalis, Mentha piperita

Broader Context of Treatment

Diverticular disease appears to be associated with a low-
fiber diet, and there is little doubt that most patients gain
some relief from symptoms when a high-fiber diet is
adopted. The underlying bowel abnormality will remain,
but it will be much less likely to cause the same degree of
dysfunction. However, when symptoms are acute and se-
vere, a low-fiber diet is initially indicated to ensure that
roughage does not cause physical irritation. This is espe-
cially important when the patient is not accustomed to
high fiber content. As soon as the discomfort is brought
under control, the proportion of fiber can be increased
gradually until the patient is eating a high-fiber diet.

PHYTOTHERAPY AND LIVER DISEASE

Liver disease is particularly well suited for treatment with
herbs. In the unique and often confusing language of tra-
ditional herbalism, much attention is paid to “detoxifying
the liver.” Liver chemistry is extraordinarily complex, and
the role of the liver in human physiology is so fundamen-
tal to life that to researchers, the idea that simple plant
remedies have something to offer might be laughable.
This is unfortunate, because plants such as Taraxacum
officinale (dandelion), Silybum marianum (milk thistle),
Chelone glabra (balmony), and a variety of bitter tonic
herbs provide a robust materia medica.

Treatment with herbs is appropriate for a range of
liver conditions, from disorders requiring only gentle
liver stimulation to profound liver disease. As with most
claims made by the medical herbalist, pharmacological
and clinical research is beginning to provide support for
traditional observations and chemical insights into the
mechanisms involved.

Hepatotoxin-induced liver lesions may be reversed in
the early stages, but they cannot be healed simply by

----- PAGE 290 -----
282 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

removing the toxins. This points to a need for effective
remedies for liver diseases. Research into these plants,
reviewed in chapter 9, has resulted in the isolation of a
number of hepatoprotective “active principles.” Well-
researched herbs for the treatment of liver disorders in-
clude Silybum marianum, Schisandra chinensis, and Glycyr-
rhiza glabra.

Orthodox Western medicine does not offer many
treatments for hepatitis, cirrhosis, toxic liver damage, or
biliary tract disorders. In general, patients with liver disease
are given supportive therapy (dietary change and removal
of toxins) rather than active treatment. However, in world-
wide traditional medicine systems, herbs have long been
utilized for the treatment of liver disease, and a growing
body of scientific evidence bears out traditional uses.

Primary Causes of Liver Disease
Viral infection
Hepatotoxic chemicals, such as:
¢ Ethyl alcohol
¢ Peroxides (particularly peroxidized edible oil)
¢ Toxins in food (especially aflatoxins)
¢ Pharmaceuticals (mainly antibiotics, chemothera-
peutic agents, and CNS-active drugs)
¢ Environmental pollutants (xenobiotics)

Functions of the Liver
The liver is the largest solid organ in the body and has a
wide range of functions:

¢ Metabolizes protein

¢ Metabolizes carbohydrates and stores glycogen

* Metabolizes lipids; synthesizes cholesterol and bile acids
* Initiates bile formation

¢ Biotransforms waste, toxins, and drugs

* Produces blood-clotting factors and other blood proteins
¢ Performs important immune functions

The liver can regenerate itself after injury or disease,
but if pathology progresses beyond the capacity of the tis-
sue to generate new cells, the body’s entire metabolism
will be severely impaired.

Hepatoprotection and Phytotherapy
Pharmacological investigation has resulted in the isola-
tion of a number of antihepatotoxic (or hepatoprotective)
constituents in herbs traditionally used to treat liver dis-
ease. (Please see chapter 9 for details.) The antihepato-
toxic actions of herbs appear to be related to a combina-
tion of two main mechanisms:

Alteration of cell membranes, so that only small amounts of
toxins can penetrate into the cell

Therapeutic Indications for Silybum marianum

Silybum marianum (milk thistle) is the primary remedy utilized to protect the liver and treat a wide

range of liver disorders. Indications include:

* Toxic or metabolic liver disease {including alcohol- and drug-induced forms)

¢ Acute viral hepatitis

¢ Chronic-persistent hepatitis

© Chronic-aggressive hepatitis

¢ Cirrhosis of the liver

¢ Fatty degeneration of the liver

The best results are seen in toxic metabolic hepatitis and cirrhosis. Milk thistle arrests the course of
these diseases and stimulates hepatocyte regeneration. It shortens the course of viral hepatitis, minimizes
post-hepatitis complications, and strengthens the livers defenses against trauma caused by liver surgery.

The earlier treatrnent commences, the better the prognosis, but effective treatment is possible at
virtually every stage of these diseases. Over time, milk thistle may bring about complete restoration of
the liver, with a regeneration of liver cells four times the normal rate.

The liver detoxifies many psychopharmacologic drugs and agents, and the cumulative effect of
drug use on the liver can be devastating. Thus, people who want or need to take such drugs should also
take milk thistle, as it has been shown to prevent the liver damage they cause..

All of this suggests that regular use of milk thistle will provide protection to either the sick or the
healthy liver during the course of daily life. By stabilizing cell membranes and encouraging the regenera-
tion of cells destroyed during the normal detoxification process, milk thistle enables the liver and the body
to better cope with the deleterious effects of daily encounters with air-, water-, and food-borne toxins.

as ia Leh a

----- PAGE 291 -----
Acceleration of protein synthesis, which stimulates cell
regeneration

JAUNDICE

A yellow discoloration of the skin, sclerae and other tissues
due to excess circulating bilirubin. (The Merck Manual)

Jaundice is a symptom, not a disease in its own right.
Careful differential diagnosis is required to elucidate the
cause and thus the core treatment. However, a number of
plants (called cholagogues) can have a direct effect upon the
metabolism and buildup of bilirubin in the body. These
can be used to ease discomfort while other remedies focus
on the underlying cause.

The most common cause of jaundice is cholestasis (ar-
rest or impairment of bile flow), which may itself be
caused by a range of processes. This leads to a backup be-
hind the blockage and thus to the development of jaun-
dice. The cause of the blockage must be sought. Possible
causes include swelling of inflamed tissues and blockage
of ducts by gallstones, cancer, or even parasites.

Treatment of Jaundice

Herbal support of the liver, digestion, and circulation is of
primary importance. However, due to the often unclear
etiology of the disorder and the far-reaching effects of
bilirubin, general toning is also often indicated.

Actions Indicated.

Cholagogues have a direct impact on the secretion and re-
lease of bile.

Hepatics support and improve liver function and
metabolism.
Bitters can serve a tonic function and also often supply
actions similar to those of cholagogues and hepatics.
Eliminative support will help the whole body deal with the
buildup of bilirubin and other metabolites. Laxatives,
diuretics, and diaphoretics are the primary actions to
consider.

Alteratives and tonics will support the whole body in its
healing work.

Lymphatics promote tissue drainage.

Antipruritics help ease the often intense itching associated
with jaundice.

Antimicrobials are critical if the jaundice has an infectious
basis, and will help with surface immune support even
if no infection is present.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM - 283

Specific Remedies

In Europe, Taraxacum officinale root (dandelion) and
Verbena officinalis (vervain) have traditionally been consid-
ered specifics. Many of the bitter hepatic and cholagogue
herbs can also be seen as specifics. In addition, because
Silybum marianum (milk thistle) can help regenerate liver
cells, this herb can help ensure that bile buildup does not
cause hepatotoxicity. Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree),
Leptandra virginica (black root), and Chelone glabra (bal-
mony) should also be considered.

A Prescription for Jaundice

Taraxacum officinale root 2 parts
Verbena officinalis 1 part
Silybum marianum 1 part
Chionanthus virginicus J part
Peumus boldus 1 part

Dosage: up to 2.5 ml of tincture combination three times a day,
building up to 5 ml three times a day. An infusion of Stellaria
media or distilled witch hazel may be applied topically to re-
lieve itching.

Table 13.14. Actions Supplied by Jaundice
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Hepatic Taraxacum officinale, Verbena officinalis,
Silybum marianum, Chionanthus virginicus,
Peumus boldus

Bitter Taraxacum officinale, Peumus boldus

Alterative/tonic Taraxacum officinale, Peumus boldus

Antipruritic Stellaria media

Broader Context of Treatment
This will depend on the nature of the diagnosis.

CHRONIC HEPATITIS

An inflammatory process in the liver characterized by dif-
fuse or patchy hepatocellular necrosis affecting all hepa-
tocytes. (The Merck Manual)

The term hepatitis embraces a number of specific syn-
dromes with a range of causes and prognoses. They all
share a core pathology of an inflammatory response in
liver cells (hepatocytes) that can lead to cellular necrosis.

----- PAGE 292 -----
284 .<- TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

An important distinction must be made between
acute and chronic forms of hepatitis. In chronic hepati-
tis, the necrosis and inflammation lasts longer than six
months to a year. Manifestations range from no symp-
toms at all to incapacitation due to liver failure. Such
chronic inflammation may result from a range of causes,
including:

¢ Autoimmune problems

¢ Viral infection

¢ Bacteria or other microorganisms

° Parasitic infestation

* Toxic damage due to alcohol or other drugs (recre-
ational or therapeutic), as well as some plant toxins,
such as pyrrolizidine alkaloids

¢ Preexisting pathology, such as Crohn’s disease

Differential diagnosis is essential in order to distin-
guish among viral hepatitis, chronic nonviral hepatitis,
and alcohol-induced liver disease. However, all forms of
active hepatitis are characterized by malaise, anorexia,
and fatigue. They may all begin with flulike symptoms,
and are often associated with a range of specific signs and
symptoms, from vomiting to jaundice.

Treatment of Hepatitis
The variety of possible etiologies necessitates a range of
herbal responses. All the pathways of elimination will
need support because of the extra load they will be carry-
ing. In addition, the cardiovascular system will benefit
from treatment with tonics, to deal with any complica-
tions related to portal hypertension. Other specifics will
depend on the nature of the cause.

In this section, we shall first look at nonviral forms of
hepatic inflammation, followed by viral hepatitis.

Actions Indicated

Hepatics help support and improve liver function and
metabolism.

Antimicrobial will be critical if the hepatitis has an infec-
tious basis, and will help with surface immune support
even if no infection is present.

Bitters help with whole-system toning.

Cholagogues have a direct impact on the secretion and re-
lease of bile, and thus may be indicated if jaundice is pre-
sent.

Eliminative support will help the whole body deal with the
buildup of bilirubin and other metabolites. Laxatives,
diuretics, and diaphoretics are the primary actions to
consider.

Alteratives and tonics support the whole body in its healing
work.

Lympbatics promote tissue drainage.

Nervines may be needed for symptomatic support.

Specific Remedies

Asa whole constellation of pathologies may have a role in
hepatitis, it is difficult to talk of specific herbs. Because of
its regenerative potential, Silybum marianum (milk thistle)
comes closest to being a textbook specific. The tonic hep-
atics are all relevant, including Taraxacum officinale root
(dandelion), Pesmus boldus (boldo), Chionanthus virginicus
(fringetree), Leptandra virginica (black root), and Chelone
glabra (balmony).

A Prescription for Hepatitis

Taraxacum officinale root 2 parts
Silybum marianum 2 parts
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part
Chionanthus virginicus 1 part

Dosage: up to 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day, building up to
5 ml three times a day. Artemisia vulgaris is included as a bitter
nervine, but this herb could be replaced with Verbena officinalis
or another appropriate nervine.

Table 13.15. Actions Supplied by Hepatitis
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Hepatic Taraxacum officinale, Silybum marianum,
Chionanthus virginicus, Peumus boldus

Antimicrobial Echinacea spp.

Antihepatotoxic Silybum marianum

Bitter Artemisia vulgaris, Taraxacum officinale,
Peumus boldus

Alterative/tonic Taraxacum officinale, Peumus boldus

Broader Context of Treatment
High-dose multivitamin and mineral supplementation is
recommended.’

Magnesium: 200 mg/day
Zinc picolinate: $0 mg/day
Vitamin A: 50,000 TU/day
Vitamin E: 200 TU/day

----- PAGE 293 -----
VIRAL HEPATITIS

Viral hepatitis consists of at least five different diseases
caused by five different viruses: hepatitis A, B, C, D, and
E viruses. All five viruses can lead to acute hepatitis.
Hepatitis B, C, and D may also cause chronic hepatitis.

Hepatitis A

Hepatitis A virus (HAV), also known as infectious hepati-
tis, accounts for 32% of cases of hepatitis in the United
States. HAV is spread by direct contact with an infected
individual’s feces or indirect fecal contamination of food,
water, or food that comes from HAV-infected water
sources. Symptoms of HAV may include fever, malaise,
dark-colored urine, light-colored stool, and jaundice.
Death is rare, but the elderly and people with immune
system problems, such as AIDS, are most at risk of dying
from HAV

Hepatitis B

An estimated 5% of the world’s population is infected
with hepatitis B virus (HBV). In the United States,
300,000 new cases of HBV are reported yearly. Chronic
liver disease develops in 5% to 10% of patients with acute
HBV infection, HBV may be spread by exposure to in-
fected body fluids and blood-clotting products, from a
mother to her infant at birth or soon after, or by unpro-
tected sex with an infected person, HBV may be asymp-
tomatic, but if symptoms occur, they can include abdom-
inal pain, anorexia, jaundice, malaise, nausea, and
vomiting. Fever and joint pain may also develop.

Hepatitis C
Hepatitis C (formerly called non-A, non-B hepatitis) is
the most commonly diagnosed hepatitis. Approximately
3 million people in the United States are chronically in-
fected with hepatitis C virus (HCV). It is primarily spread
by exposure to contaminated blood or needles; however,
the mode of transmission for more than 40% of cases is
unknown. HCV-infected patients rarely clear the virus
from their bodies, and at least 80% of those infected be-
come chronic disease carriers. Symptoms of HCV are
similar to those of other types of hepatitis.

Hepatitis D

Hepatitis D virus (HDV) was first observed in 1977 in pa-
tients infected with chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV).
When HDV occurs in a patient who already has chronic
HBY, it is considered a superinfection; when a patient de-
velops acute cases of both HBV and HDV at the same
time, HDV is considered a co-infection. Among individu-

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM 2. 285

als with HDV superinfection, 90% develop persistent
HDV infection, which eventually leads to chronic liver
disease. HDV may be spread by exposure to contami-
nated blood products or needles and by unprotected sex
with an infected person.

Hepatitis E

The hepatitis E virus (HEV) is a common cause of acute
hepatitis in underdeveloped areas of the world, and trav-
elers to these regions can acquire this form of hepatitis.
Hepatitis E causes acute hepatitis that usually resolves it-
self. Pregnant women are prone to developing severe
hepatitis due to infection with this virus. Apart from strict
hygienic precautions, there are no known means of pre-
venting or curing hepatitis E.

Treatment of Viral Hepatitis

Batchelder and Hudson have proposed the following
treatment principles for viral hepatitis:®

* Boost immune system function

¢ Prevent necrosis

© Support and encourage liver regeneration

© Promote bile flow, waste elimination, and detoxification
¢ Address addictions (e.g., alcohol)

Actions Indicated

Table 13.16 highlights some herbs to consider, grouped
by the actions they contribute.

Table 13.16. Herbs and Actions Useful in the
Treatment of Viral Hepatitis

ACTION HERBS

Adaptogen Eleutherococcus senticosus, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Panax ginseng, Rehmannia glutinosa,
Withania somnifera

Antidepressant Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum,

Verbena officinalis

Anti-inflammatory  Bupleurum falcatum, Matricaria recutita,

Curcuma longa, Glycyrrhiza glabra,

Rehmannia glutinosa

Antioxidant Allium sativum, Curcuma longa, Ginkgo biloba,
Silybum marianum

Antiviral Astragalus membranaceus, Glycyrrhiza glabra,

Hypericum perforatum, Lentinus edodes,
Phyllanthus amarus, Picrorrhiza kurroa,
Thuja occidentalis

----- PAGE 294 -----
286 < TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

ACTION HERBS

Detoxifying Schisandra chinensis, Silybum marianum,
Taraxacum officinale

Antihepatotoxic Curcuma longa, Gynara scolymus,

Glycyrrhiza glabra, Phyllanthus amarus,
Schisandra chinensis, Silybum marianum

Astragalus membranaceus, Echinacea spp.,
Ganoderma lucidum, Picrorrhiza kurroa

Immunostimulant

The use of Hypericum perforatum in this kind of viral
infection is worth exploring. The compounds hypericin
and pseudohypericin are known to disrupt viral replication
by damaging the integrity of the lipid envelope.’ Viruses
consist of nucleic acid enclosed in a protein coat. They
lack metabolic activity and do not possess ribosomes or
most of the enzymes necessary for replication. In addi-
tion, some possess a lipid envelope. Both the lipid and the
protein coats protect the nucleic acid, which may be ei-
ther DNA or RNA, from enzymatic degradation.

The lipid envelope of some virus types is derived
from host cell membranes and modified by insertion of
one or more spikelike glycoproteins. These surface spikes
allow specific interactions with receptors on host cells and
serve ag the major antigens of the virus. Viruses with lipid
envelopes include the herpes simplex viruses, hepatitis B
and C, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV, or the
AIDS virus), influenza A virus, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV),
and others. As all of these viruses have a lipid envelope,
some degree of susceptibility to Hypericum perforatum can
be expected. The disruption caused by hypericin is a light-
mediated process; however; some activity is seen in vivo.

One example of a treatment protocol for acute viral
hepatitis comes from Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy
by Simon Mills and Kerry Bone. Mills and Bone suggest
the following herbal prescription.

Treatment for Acute Hepatitis”

Echinacea angustifolia 35 mt
Hypericum perforatum 25 ml
Silybum marianum 20 ml
Phyllanthus amarus 20 ml
Total 100 ml

Dosage: 5 ml with water four times a day

Mills and Bone also suggest using Picrorrbiza at a
dosage of three 500 mg tablets per day. Note that this
herb can cause gastrointestinal side effects, such as

cramping and diarrhea. In addition, they recommend that
patients drink an infusion made from 4 g Achillea and | g
dried Zingiber three times a day.'!

Additional suggestions from Mills and Bone include
the following:!?

* Diaphoretics are indicated in all acute infections ac-
companied by fever. These include Tilia, Sambucus,
and Achillea, and are best taken as an infusion.

© Diaphoretics are assisted by combination with a diffuse
stimulant, such as Zingiber.

* Antiviral agents, which for hepatitis include Hypericum
‘perforatum, Phyllanthus, and Thuja.

* Immune-enhancing herbs, especially Echinacea and
Picrorrhiza

* Hepatoprotective agents to minimize liver damage
such as Silybum, Bupleurum, Taraxacum, Cynara (globe
artichoke), and Picrorrbiza

CIRRHOSIS

The disorganization of liver architecture by widespread fi-
brosis resulting in nodule formation. (The Merck Manual)

Cirrhosis is the second biggest killer of Americans be-
tween the ages of 45 and 65. Most cirrhosis is secondary
to chronic alcohol abuse. Many Western sufferers are
largely asymptomatic until generalized weakness,
anorexia, weight loss, malaise, and loss of libido set in. In
developing nations, cirrhosis often develops as a compli-
cation of viral hepatitis B.

The condition is characterized by widespread death
of liver cells, accompanied by progressive fibrosis and dis-
tortion of liver architecture. This can be due to many
causes, but in the United States and Europe is most com-
monly related to alcohol abuse.

Treatment of Cirrhosis

Primary herbal treatment is based around antihepatotoxic
agents, especially Silybum marianum (milk thistle).
Although cirrhosis is a progressive disease, the rate of
progression varies and the outlook is related to many fac-
tors. In this context, herbal treatment can make a signifi-
cant, positive contribution.

Actions Indicated
Hepatics support and improve liver function and
metabolism.

Cholagogues have a direct upon the secretion and release of
bile.

----- PAGE 295 -----
Eliminative sapport will help the whole body deal with the
buildup of bilirubin and other metabolites. Laxatives,
diuretics, and diaphoretics are the primary actions to
consider.

Alteratives and tonics sapport the whole body in its healing
work,

Bitters help with whole-system toning.

Lymphatics promote systemic tissue drainage.

Nervines will support any psychological work needed in
alcohol withdrawal.

Antimicrobials will be helpful for surface immune support,
even if no infection is present.

Specific Remedies

Because of its regenerative potential, Silybam marianum
(milk thistle) comes closest to being a textbook specific.
This wonderful remedy is essential to any treatment of
cirrhosis. In addition, the tonic hepatic herbs are all rele-
vant, and include Taraxacum officinale (dandelion), Peumus
boldus (boldo), Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree),
Leptandra virginica (black root), and Chelone glabra (bal-
mony). Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal) may be useful, as
is Cynara scolymus (artichoke leaf).

A Prescription for Cirrhosis

Silybum marianum 2 parts
Verbena officinalis 1 part
Chelone glabra 1 part
Chionanthus virginicus T part

Dosage: up to 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day, building up to
5 ml three times a day

The alcohol base of tinctures may pose a problem. If
these remedies cannot be obtained in an alcohol-free
glycerite form, the medicine can be put into a small
amount of hot water; the alcohol will evaporate and leave
behind the herbal component. Alternatively, the patient
may take Silybum marianum tablets or capsules, preferably
standardized to 80% silymarin.

Broader Context of Treatment

Strict avoidance of any specific tissue irritants, such as al-
cohol, is essential. If alcohol abuse is a causative factor of
the individual’s cirrhosis, it must be addressed. This will
include dietary advice as well as counseling support to
help with alcohol cessation. In Textbook of Natural
Medicine, Drs. Pizzorno and Murray recommend the fol-
lowing supplements:!3

Vitamin A: 25,000 IU/day
Vitamin B complex: 20 times the US RDA

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM .<> 287

Vitamin C: 1 g twice a day

Vitamin E: 400 TU/day

Magnesium: 250 mg twice a day
Selenium: 200 mcg/day

Zinc: 30 mg/day

Carnitine: 500 mg twice a day
Glutamine: 1 g/day

Lactobacillus acidophilus: 1 teaspoon/day

CHOLECYSTITIS

Chronic cholecystitis: A pathologic term for a thick-
walled, fibrotic, contracted gallbladder; clinically, it is
used to describe chronic gallbladder disease character-
ized by symptoms that include recurrent biliary colic. (The
Merck Manual)

Acute cholecystitis: Acute inflammation of the gallblad-
der wall, usually as a response to cystic duct obstruction
by a gallstone. (The Merck Manual)

Cholecystitis, or gallbladder inflammation, is character-
ized by severe pain that becomes localized in the upper
right quadrant of the abdomen, radiating to the right
lower shoulder blade. Nausea and vomiting are common
symptoms. Cholecystitis may be associated with gall-
stones, but the stones constitute a separate condition.

‘Treatment of Cholecystitis
Given time, cholecystitis responds well to herbal treat-
ment, but because of the extreme pain, the patient may
not be willing to wait. Diet is of fundamental importance,
as consumption of any fat will precipitate pain.
Orthodox medicine tends to downplay the role of the
gallbladder and bile in digestion. This may be the reason
the gallbladder is so often surgically removed when gall-
stones are present, and why it is said that such people lead
perfectly normal lives thereafter. However, even though
people can tolerate the absence of the gallbladder, a
healthy gallbladder helps ensure efficient digestion,
which directly decreases the risks of developing arte-
riosclerosis, irritable bowel syndrome, hypertension,
heart disease, stroke, and other major diseases.

Actions Indicated

Hepatic tonics support the work of the liver and so will
have a positive metabolic effect.

Anti-inflammatories may help reduce the severity of
swelling.

Antispasmodics help ease colic in the gallbladder or ducts.

Eliminative support must be provided to help the whole

----- PAGE 296 -----
288 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

body deal with the repercussions of digestive distress
and systemic problems.

Alteratives and tonics support the whole body in its healing
work,

Nervines help ease the strain from pain and general worry.

Antimicrobials will provide surface immune support even
if no infection is present.

Caution: Bitters and strong cholagogues are contraindi-
cated, because they increase the strength of peristaltic
muscular contractions.

Specific Remedies

The usual hepatic tonics and antilithic (stone-dissolving)
herbs will be useful here, but cannot be considered
specifics per se.

A Prescription for Cholecystitis

Dioscorea villosa 2 parts
Chionanthus virginicus 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 2 parts
Taraxacum officinale root 1 part
Leptandra virginica 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. An infusion of
a carminative, antispasmodic nervine, such as Matricaria recu-
tita, should be taken regularly throughout the day. In addition,
the patient should take Silybum marianum tablets or capsules
standardized to 80% silymarin. Recommended dosage is 1 cap-
sule containing 140 mg of silymarin three times daily.

This prescription supplies antispasmodic, hepatic,
nervine, and preventive antilithic actions. Many other
herbs could have been used. Consider Chelone glabra, Verbena
officinalis, and Mahonia aquifolium. Vhe Eclectic physicians
would have suggested that small amounts of Hydrastis
canadensis and Lobelia inflata be added to such a mixture.

Table 13.17. Actions Supplied by Cholecystitis
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Hepatic Taraxacum officinale, Chionanthus virginicus,

Leptandra virginica
Anti-inflammatory — Taraxacum officinale
Antispasmodic Dioscorea villosa, Valeriana officinalis

Alterative/tonic Taraxacum officinale, Leptandra virginica

Broader Context of Treatment
Diet and stress management are critical. Strong chemical
pain relief may be indicated for severe cases.

CHOLELITHIASIS

Presence of calculi in the gallbladder (cholelithiasis) or
the biliary duct (choledocholithiasis), (The Merck Manual)

Gallstones are pieces of solid material that form in the
gallbladder. They form as hard, crystal-like particles
composed of substances in the bile, primarily cholesterol
and bile pigments. Stones vary in size, from as small as a
grain of sand to as large as a golf ball. The gallbladder
may develop a single, often large, stone or many smaller
ones.

Gallstones appear to be caused by a combination of
factors, including inherited body chemistry, body weight,
gallbladder movement, and diet. An estimated 20 million
Americans have gallstones. The following groups of peo-
ple are those most likely to develop them:

¢ Women between 20 and 60 years of age (twice as likely
as men to develop gallstones)

¢ Both men and women over age 60

¢ Pregnant women or women who have used birth con-
trol pills or estrogen replacement therapy

¢ Native Americans, who have the highest prevalence of
gallstones in the United States (a majority of Native
American men have gallstones by age 60)

¢ Overweight men and women

¢ People who go on “crash” diets or lose a lot of weight
quickly

Treatment of Gallstones

Actions Indicated

Antilithies have a long tradition of use in moving or even
dissolving gallstones and easing pain.

Hepatic tonics support the work of the liver and have a pos-
itive metabolic effect.

Antispasmodics relieve colic in the gallbladder or ducts.

Nervines ease the strain from pain and general worry.

Eliminative support must be provided to help the whole
body deal with the repercussions of digestive distress
and systemic problems.

Alteratives and tonics support the whole body in its healing
work,

Antimicrobials will help with surface immune support,
even if no infection is present.

----- PAGE 297 -----
Caution: Bitters and strong cholagogues are contraindi-
cated, because they increase the strength of peristaltic
muscular contractions.

A Prescription for Gallstones

Dioscorea villosa 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 2 parts
Chelone glabra 1 part
Leptandra virginica 1 part
Chionanthus virginicus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. An infusion of
a carminative, antispasmodic, nervine herb should be taken reg-
ularly throughout the day (for example, Matricaria recutita).

Table 13.18. Actions Supplied by Gallstone
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Hepatic Chelone glabra, Chionanthus virginicus,
Leptandra virginica

Antilithic Chelone glabra, Chionanthus virginicus

Antispasmodic Dioscorea villosa, Valeriana officinalis

Broader Context of Treatment

Diet and stress management are crucial. Strong chemical
pain relief may be indicated in severe cases.

HEMORRHOIDS

A mass of dilated veins in swollen tissue at the margin of
the anus or nearby within the rectum; also called piles.
(The Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary)

Symptoms caused by hemorrhoids include bleeding, pro-
trusion of tissue, and pain. Bleeding from the rectum
must never be assumed to be due to hemorrhoids, but re-
quires prompt and correct diagnosis, as it could be a sign
of a serious problem.

Hemorrhoids are caused by increased pressure in the
veins of the anus. The most common cause is straining
during bowel movements. Constipation, prolonged sit-
ting during bowel movements, and anal infection are con-
tributing factors. Internal hemorrhoids occur near the be-
ginning of the anal canal, and external hemorrhoids occur
at the anal opening. Hemorrhoids may protrude outside
the anus. They are very common, especially during preg-
nancy and after childbirth.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM © 289

Treatment of Hemorrhoids

The problem is a combination of both digestive and car-
diovascular system issues. Thus, the treatment should in-
clude both blood vessel tonics and lower bowel support.

Actions Indicated

Vascular tonics will help with the muscular tone and gen-
eral state of well-being of the veins involved.

Astringents will reduce bleeding, if present, and tighten
the tissue locally. However, if they are used internally,
take care to avoid constipation.

Bitters assist digestive and eliminative processes and facil-
itate bowel motions.

Aperients and laxatives ensure easier bowel movements.

Vulneraries speed local healing of inflamed tissues.

Emollients soothe irritated tissue if applied externally.

Anti-inflammatories soothe inflamed tissues.

Specific Remedies

The materia medicas of many cultures contain herbs with
a reputation for effectiveness in the treatment of this
common problem. In Europe, nothing matches the action
of the aptly named pilewort (Ranunculus ficaria)! Apart
from this plant, most astringent or anti-inflammatory
herbs will help if applied topically.

A Prescription for Hemorrhoids

Ginkgo biloba 1 part
Aesculus hippocastanum 1 part
Taraxacum officinale 1 part
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Geranium maculatum 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

A topical application is essential to alleviate symp-
toms and speed healing. A number of approaches may be
used to complement the internal treatment.

External Hemorrhoid Treatment
10 ml
80 ml

Tincture of Aesculus hippocastanum
Distilled witch hazel

Apply this combination after every bowel movement and as
needed. Salves containing any of many possible herbs may also
be used. Useful herbs include Calendula officinalis, Hypericum
perforatum, Matricaria recutita, Plantago spp. and Achillea
millefolium.

----- PAGE 298 -----
290 << TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Table 13.19. Actions Supplied by Hemorrhoid
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Vascular tonic Ginkgo biloba, Aesculus hippocastanum

Astringent Geranium maculatum
Bitter Taraxacum officinale, Hydrastis canadensis
Aperient Taraxacum officinale, Hydrastis canadensis

Broader Context of Treatment
Avoidance or elimination of constipation is often the key
to alleviating hemorrhoids. Thus, in addition to direct
herbal treatment of the hemorrhoids themselves, the fol-
lowing factors must be addressed.

Is the patient taking drugs that effect bowel motility—for ex-
ample, opiates, iron supplements, some antidepres-
sants, antacids, and laxatives?

Are any digestive conditions present, such as irritable bowel
syndrome, diverticular disease, or food sensitivities?
Does the patient have a sedentary lifestyle, or have there been

long periods of immobility?

Is the patient under stress or suffering from depression?

To ease bowel movements, a diet with medium- to
high-fiber content is necessary. This should be intro-
duced gradually if the patient is accustomed to low-fiber
foods. During the active treatment phase, avoid the sand-
paper effect that roughage can cause!

References

1. van Gorkom et al. Anthranoid laxatives and their poten-
tial carcinogenic effects. Alimentary Pharmacology and
Therapeutics 1999 Apr; 13(4):443-52.

2. Periodontal disease as a potential risk factor for systemic
diseases. Journal of Periodontology 1998; 69:841-50.

3. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

4. Kingham JGC. Commentary: Peppermint oil and colon
spasm. The Lancet 1995 Oct 14; 346:986.

5, Bensoussan A, et al. Treatment of irritable bowel syn-
drome with a Chinese herbal medicine. Journal of the
American Medical Association 1998 Nov 11;
280(18):1585-9.

6. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

7. Ibid.

8. Batchelder HJ, Hudson T. Therapeutic approaches to
viral hepatitis. The Protocol Journal of Botanical Medicine
1995; 1(2):131-74.

9. Tang J, Colacino JM, Larsen SH, et al. Virucidal activity
of hypericin against enveloped and non-enveloped DNA
and RNA viruses. Antiviral Research 1990 Jun;
13(6):313-25.

10. Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine, Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1999.

11. Ibid.

12. Ibid.

13. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Suggested Reading

Mills S, Bone K! Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy: Modern
Herbal Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone,
1999.

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

----- PAGE 299 -----
14

amos

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM

he beauty of a spring meadow in bloom, the pro-

found sense of presence in a grove of redwood

trees—the heart takes flight and the spirit is
healed. However, this is not the only way in which the
magnificent flora with which we share our planet brings
healing to our hearts. A wide variety of herbs offer tangi-
ble, physical nourishment and healing for hearts troubled
by the ills of modern society.

Consider the word cordial, app!
ing herbal drink and the human expression of heartfelt
friendliness. The cordial was a medieval drink based on
borage, an herb with a reputation for warming and glad-
dening the heart. The word derives from the Latin cordialis,
meaning “of or for the heart,” which in turn is based on the
Latin cor, meaning “heart.” The original sense of the word
was medicine, food, or drink that stimulates the heart.

Herbs still maintain a central position in orthodox
treatment protocols for various heart problems. Plants con-
taining cardiac glycosides are used throughout the world to
treat heart failure and certain cases of cardiac arrhythmia. In
conditions like these, herbs can increase the strength and
normalize the rate of the heartbeat. The real value of these
herbs lies in their ability to increase the efficiency of the
heart without increasing the heart muscle’s need for oxygen.

However, the materia medica available to the medical
herbalist embraces many more relevant possibilities than
strong cardioactive remedies. Half of the annual mortal-
ity in America results from heart and blood vessel dis-
eases. Modern cardiology is almost miraculously effective
when it comes to acute emergencies, but what about
maintaining good health and preventing the development
of cardiovascular pathology? Can we do more for our-
selves than simply minimizing risk factors, eating prop-
erly, and exercising appropriately? Emphatically, yes!
Herbal tonics can contribute by offering real possibilities
for the practice of preventive medicine.

Although it is resplendent with wonder drugs, the
materia medica of modern medical science is sorely lack-
ing in preventive medicines. There are also profound
concerns about toxicity related to long-term use of pre-

ied to both the warm-

291

scription medications. Tonics are not mentioned in phar-
macology texts, as the concept is considered illusory.
Overlooking the potential of gentle toning therapies in
favor of intensely active ones can be considered one of the
core problems with orthodox health care. However, this
need not be seen as a clash of mutually exclusive ap-
proaches. There is a place in cardiovascular medicine for
gentle toning, just as there is a place for the often dra-
matically successful techniques of modern cardiology. In
fact, used within a holistic framework, these two extremes
can complement and support each other.

As discussed in chapter 9, an increasing amount of re-
search is investigating the cardiovascular effects of plant
constituents. As fascinating as this is, the benefits of such
research accrue to the pharmaceutical industry, as the in-
formation is rarely about the plant from which the con-
stituent has been extracted. It would prove almost impos-
sible to develop herbal approaches to treatment if natural
product research was the sole source of information. In
the material that follows, the focus is on the traditional
practitioner’s approach, with newer findings referenced
when relevant.

HERBS AND CARDIOVASCULAR
HEALTH

The medical herbalist recognizes a broad range of relevant
herbs for the cardiovascular system. As a group, they are
known as cardiac remedies, a general term for herbs that have
an action on the heart. Some of the remedies in this group
are powerful cardioactive agents, such as Digitalis spp. (fox-
glove) and the somewhat milder Convallaria majalis (lily of
the valley), while others are gentler and safer cardiotonics,
such as Crataegus (hawthorn) and Tilia (linden flower).
Cardioactive herbs owe their effects on the heart to
highly active substances, such as cardiac glycosides, and
thus have both the strengths and the drawbacks of these
powerful constituents. Cardiotonics have a beneficial ac-
tion on the heart and blood vessels, but do not contain
cardiac glycosides. While they do not offer the dramatic,

----- PAGE 300 -----
292 «<- TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

rapid, and often life-saving benefits of many of the drugs
used in modern cardiology, cardiotonics confer a definite
advantage in the treatment or prevention of chronic de-
generative conditions. (See chapter 9 for a more detailed
discussion of the differences between cardioactive and
cardiotonic agents, and chapter 10 for information on the
toxicity of cardiac glycosides.)

Blood vessel or vascular. tonics are often rich in con-
stituents called flavonoids. These remarkable herbs in-
clude Crataegus spp., Allium sativum, Tilia platyphyllos, and
Ginkgo biloba.

There are, of course, some limitations to the use of
herbs to treat the heart. Perhaps the most important of
these is not herbal, but human. The problem involves
self-diagnosis, which can be a very hazardous pastime. In
the hands of a competent clinical herbalist, medicinal
plants offer a great deal in the treatment of cardiovascu-
lar conditions, but for the nonprofessional, self-diagnosis
or self-selection of herbs should never replace skilled di-
agnosis or serve as a substitute for appropriate prescrip-
tion medicines. The cardiac glycoside-containing car-
dioactives cannot be used safely without certain requisite
medical skills, and are inappropriate for use in folk
medicine. However, cardiotonic herbs can and should
play a role in holistic programs designed to meet the
unique needs and circumstances of each individual.

Table 14.1. Primary Actions for the Cardiovascular
System

ACTION HERBS

Cardiotonic Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos

Cardioactive Convallaria majalis, Cytisus scoparius,

Lycopus europaeus, Scrophularia nodosa
Circulatory stimulant Capsicum annuum

Peripheral vasodilator Zanthoxylum americanum, Ginkgo biloba

Hypotensive Tilia platyphyllos, Viscum album, Allium sativum
Hypertensive Ostisus scoparius
Diuretic Taraxacum officinale, Achillea millefolium,

cardioactive herbs

Aesculus hippocastanum, Fagopyrum esculentum,
Ginkgo biloba

Vascular tonic

Leonurus cardiaca, Tilia platyphyllos,
Valeriana officinalis

Nervine

Antispasmodic Viburnum opulus, Valeriana officinalis

Tonics for the Cardiovascular System

A number of remarkable cardiovascular tonics are avail-
able to the phytotherapist. Each of the herbal traditions
of the world has its own excellent tonic plants, but here
we will primarily discuss cardiovascular tonics used in
Western therapy.

European Cardiovascular Tonics
Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)

Allium sativum (garlic)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)

To this list of irreplaceable European remedies, we
can add others that have entered our materia medica from
other parts of the world.

Cardiovascular Tonics from Other Traditions
Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo)

Selenicereus grandiflorus (night-blooming cereus)
Coleus forskoblii (coleus)

Commiphora mukul. (guggul)

Crataegus laevigata (hawthorn) is one of the most use-
ful of the cardiotonic herbs. Simply stated, hawthorn will
help keep the heart healthy, preventing the development
of coronary disease. It may be safely used as part of the
treatment protocols for conditions such as heart failure,
angina pectoris, and hypertension. While hawthorn
berries are the most often used part of this shrub, the
flowers and leaves may also play a role. The constituents
of hawthorn highlight the importance of flavones and
flavonoids in the healing impact of herbs on the cardio-
vascular system.

As hawthorn is one of the more aesthetic herbal
remedies, a very pleasant tea may be made by infusing
1 to 2 teaspoons of the dried herb in a cup of hot water.
This should be drunk regularly. Tincture is a convenient
and effective way of gaining the therapeutic benefits of
this special remedy. For best effects, 30 to 40 drops
should be taken three times daily, then morning and
evening as a long-term maintenance dose. Hawthorn may
be taken over long periods of time, as there is no risk of
toxicity.

Hawthorn need not be used as a medicine; it can be
added to the diet as a food. For an example of how this
heart tonic can be incorporated into the daily diet, try
making a hawthorn conserve.

----- PAGE 301 -----
Hawthorn Berry Conserve

Soak a large handful of dried hawthorn berries in apple juice
(enough to cover plus a few inches) with a cinnamon stick. Leave
overnight in the refrigerator. Remove the cinnamon stick and
blend the berries with a little honey. Keep refrigerated.

Ginkgo biloba, another important heart herb, is sup-
ported by an abundance of research that has revealed
many important therapeutic effects. Ginkgo is recom-
mended both for the prevention and treatment of a
number of heart and blood vessel problems, especially
those due to peripheral circulatory and cerebral vascular
insufficiencies. Research shows that it lowers blood
pressure, dilates peripheral blood vessels, and increases
peripheral blood flow. In studies involving patients with
peripheral arterial insufficiency, Ginkgo significantly im-
proved subjects’ ability to walk without pain, Other ex-
citing applications include the treatment of circulatory
disturbances related to aging and diabetes, as well as the
treatment of depression, tinnitus, Alzheimer’s disease,
and tobacco addiction.

Another traditional European heart tonic is Tilia
platypbyllos (linden). This herb is especially indicated
when anxiety and‘tension are part of the spectrum of fac-
tors impacting the patient, as it is an excellent relaxing
nervine. Two herbs from the ayurvedic tradition are prov-
ing to offer much in the way of tonic support of the car-
diovascular system. Coleus forskoblii (coleus) offers a range
of therapeutic possibilities that make it uniquely relevant
in the treatment of cardiovascular diseases such as hyper-
tension, congestive heart failure, and angina. Commiphora
mukul (guggul) can be effective in lowering serum lipids.
Both herbs are discussed later in this chapter.

Allium sativum (garlic) has a range of effects upon
cardiovascular health. It helps reduce serum cholesterol
and triglyceride levels while raising levels of high-density
lipoproteins (HDL). It can also act as an effective in-
hibitor of platelet activating factor (PAF). Taken together,
these properties provide a potential means of preventing
atherosclerosis and thrombosis, hypertension, heart at-
tacks, and stroke. Garlic’s antioxidant properties help pre-
vent the peroxidation of fats, yet another contributing
factor in the development of atherosclerosis.

Other Important Cardiovascular Actions

In addition to the heart tonics, a number of other herbal
actions can be helpful. Especially important are the relax-
ing herbs, such as Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort),
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap), and Valeriana officinalis

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM @ 293

(valerian). Circulatory stimulants, such as Capsicum annuum
(cayenne), Zingiber officinale (ginger), and Zanthoxylum
americanum (prickly ash), increase blood flow, supporting
oxygenation of tissue and the elimination of waste. This
makes them important in circulatory problems, as well as
in conditions such as rheumatism.

There are some herbs with effects on the cardiovas-
cular system that should be avoided even though they do
not contain cardiac glycosides. Examples are Cytisus sco-
parius (Scotch broom) and Ephedra spp. (ma huang), both
of which stimulate heart activity and raise blood pressure.
They are contraindicated in many conditions and should
not be considered tonics.

LIFESTYLE AND RISK FACTORS

A well-rounded program for strengthening the heart and
cardiovascular system must involve more than herbs. A
major influence on the development of heart disease is
risk factors, or habits or traits that make a person more
likely to develop a disease, whose impact can be mini-
mized, Whole forests have been turned into paper for ar-
ticles about these risk factors, and anyone trying to read
them all and follow the debates that rage invites a hyper-
tensive crisis! However, some general points can be made.

The origins of heart disease are complex and can be
confusing. Some of the risk factors involved are well
known and provide us with clear guidelines for preven-
tion, but simplistic statements about saturated fats, jog-
ging, or new research can be misleading. For example,
one study failed to show any association between heavy
coffee consumption and long-term hypertension. How-
ever, heavy coffee drinkers also tend to be heavy smokers,
which in turn may be associated with lower body weight
and thus a lower blood pressure—but with an increased
risk of heart attack!

Some of the risk factors for heart-related problems
cannot be influenced by preventive strategies, such as ge-
netics and age, but many others can be. Similar risk fac-
tors contribute to the development of many major
pathologies that assail the cardiovascular system, so some
overall preventive strategies can be applied. The major
risk factors for cardiovascular disease that caz be altered
are cigarette smoking, high blood pressure, high choles-
terol, obesity, and physical inactivity. Other risk factors,
such as diabetes, are also potentially controllable.

Even just one risk factor raises an individual’s chances
of developing heart-related problems. The more risk fac-
tors a person has, the more likely he or she is to develop
cardiovascular disease. From the wealth of research

----- PAGE 302 -----
294 @ TREATMFN! APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Hawthorn: A Classic Cardiotonic

Hawthorn (Crataegus spp.) is the best known of the car-
diotonic herbs, and is possibly the most valuable tonic
remedy for the cardiovascular system found in the plant
kingdom. There are much stronger herbs, such as fox-
glove, but none that provides the nourishing regeneration
that hawthorn does. In addition, this invaluable heart
remedy contains no cardiac glycosides.

The American Eclectic herbalist Ellingwood said of
hawthorn,

... it is superior to any of the well known and tried remedies at
present in use for the treatment of heart disease, because it
seems to cure while other remedies are only palliative at best.

This was written at a time when hawthorn had just been
introduced into North American medicine. It was the new
wonder herb of the day, much like ginkgo or Siberian gin-
seng today!

Hawthorn can be considered a specific remedy for
many cardiovascular diseases. A tonic in the true sense, its
therapeutic benefits are realized only when a whole plant
preparation is used. When the isolated constituents were
tested separately in the laboratory, their individual ef-
fects were insignificant; the whole plant, however, has
unique and valuable properties that have been confirmed
in clinical studies. Herbal synergy again!

Indications for Hawthorn
In 1994, the German Federal Ministry of Health published a
monograph Officially recognizing hawthorn as a heart rem-
edy. The monograph concluded that the herb is positively
inotropic, chronotropic, and dromotropic, and that it im-
proves coronary and myocardial circulation by dilating the
coronary arteries. Perhaps most significant was the finding
that hawthorn has no side effects or contraindications.
According to the ministry, the main clinical applica-
tions for hawthorn are:

* Long-term treatment of loss of cardiac function

* Any condition in which the patient notes subjective feel-
ings of congestion and oppression in the heart region

¢ Mild cardiac arrhythmias

* Conditions of the aging heart that do not warrant the
use of foxglove

In his book Herbal Medicine, German physician
Rudolf Weiss suggests the following indications.!

* Patients with “degeneration of the cardiac muscle or
coronary artery disease”

« Anginal symptoms of coronary artery disease (long-
term treatment)

¢ Hypertension, primarily to improve cardiac function

« Weakness of the myocardium after infectious disease

« Muscular insufficiency in patients taking digitalis
(hawthorn may optimize the effects of digitalis)

¢ Cardiac arrhythmias, mainly extrasystoles and tachy-
cardia

In short, any degenerative condition of the cardio-
vascular system will benefit from the use of hawthorn.
Some specific examples include myocardial problems
(such as mild congestive heart failure), coronary artery
disease, and associated conditions (such as hypertension).
Hawthorn speeds recovery from heart attacks and lowers
blood pressure in essential hypertension. Used in con-
junction with other hypotensive agents, hawthorn will
help keep the heart healthy and prevent the develop-
ment of serious coronary disease. It will also help guard
against heart weakness after infectious disease, such as
pneumonia or diphtheria.

For arteriosclerosis and its complications, hawthorn is
often combined with Tilia platyphyllos (linden flowers) or
Allium sativum (garlic). Viburnum opulus (cramp bark),
Tilia, and Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap) are good com-
plements in cases of hypertension.

in particular. hawthorn is a specific in cases in which no
disease state exists but the patient is experiencing a grad-
ual, age-related loss of cardiac function. Because of its lack
of toxicity, accumulation, and habituation, it may be used
long term, allowing a gradual and safe attainment of thera-
peutic goals, especially. in the elderly.

A theoretical interaction between Crataegus and the
cardiac glycosides should be mentioned. The theory sug-
gests that Crataegus may enhance the activity of car-
dioactive plants (such as Digitalis and Convallaria majalis)
as well as the cardiac glycoside drugs digitoxin and
digoxin.” This could afford the clinician an opportunity to
reduce the dosage of cardiac glycoside—containing sub-
stances while maintaining the desired effect—thus reduc-
ing the potential for toxicity. However, this interaction has
not been confirmed?

Mechanisms of Action

How does this unique herb achieve such remarkable effects?
Research suggests that many of its observable effects can be
explained by its ability to improve coronary circulation. It

----- PAGE 303 -----
PHF CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM we = 295

dilates the coronary arteries, relieving hypoxemia (lack of
oxygen in the blood). It thus reduces the likelihood of
angina attacks and relieves symptoms of angina when they
occur,

The herb also directly affects the cells of the heart
muscle, enhancing both activity and nutrition. It is posi-
tively inotropic. as it gently increases the force of con-
traction of the heart muscle. However, its activity is quite
different from that of the cardiac glycoside—containing
remedies. They impact the contractile fibers, while
hawthorn improves the availability and utilization of
energy. This facilitates a gentle but long-term, sus-
tained effect on degenerative, age-related changes in the
myocardium. Hawthorn does not produce rapid results,
but the results are persistent once achieved.

Hawthorn’s cardioprotective activity is generally
attributed to its content of flavonoids, including
flavonoglycosyls, hyperoside, rutin, and oligomeric
proanthocyanidins (OPCs). Numerous flavonoid
molecules have positive effects on the cardiovascular sys-
tem, but the particular combination of flavonoid-based

* constituents in hawthorn appears to be pivotal to its ben-
eficial cardiovascular activity.

Research suggests that OPCs in hawthorn leaves and
flowers scavenge free radicals and inhibit an enzyme
called human neutrophil elastase. This enzyme is released
by white blood cells in greater amounts during hypoxia
(lack of oxygen), and, along with free radicals, may be
partly responsible for the damage to the heart that occurs
under such conditions. Hawthorn extracts improve the en-
ergy dynamics of the heart muscle, exerting a protective
effect on the myocardium. The well-known effects of
OPCs as both free radical scavengers and inhibitors of neu-
trophil elastase may be the basis of this activity.

Not only do flavonoids have potent antioxidant ef-
fects, but research shows that they increase collagen cross-
linking in the tissue of vascular walls, strengthening blood
vessels. In addit on, epidemiological studies have demon-
strated an association between dietary flavonoid intake and
reduced risk of heart disease, heart attacks, and stroke,456
See chapter 9 for more information on the pharmacological
effects of this important group of phytochemicals,

A Look at the Evidence

Because of its positive impact on cardiac function,
hawthorn extract has been extensively studied for its ef-
fects in congestive heart failure. A commonly used classi-
fication of heart failure is that formulated by the New
York Heart Association (NYHA).”

Table 14.2, New York Heart Association
Functional Classification of Heart Failure

CLASSIFICATION DEFINITION

Class | No limitation of physical activity

Class Il . Slight limitation of physical activity. Comfortable
at rest, but ordinary physical activity results in

fatigue, palpitations, dyspnea, or anginal pain

Class III Marked limitation of physical activity. Comfortable
at rest, but less than ordinary physical activity
results in fatigue, palpitations, dyspnea, or anginal

pain

Class IV Unable to carry out any physical activity without

discomfort

A number of placebo-controlled, double-blind clini-
cal trials have demonstrated the value of Crataegus in
NYHA class II cardiac insufficiency.® In fact, a recent re-
view of the pharmacology and therapeutics of Crataegus
concluded, “... it may be useful in the treatment of NYHA
functional class I! CHF.”

In one multicenter, double-blind study, 136 patients
with class Il cardiac insufficiency (according to NYHA cri-
teria) were treated with a hawthorn extract or placebo for
eight weeks. A total of 129 patients finished the trial.
Throughout the eight-week trial, a statistically significant
improvement in cardiac function was noted in the-
hawthorn group. The placebo group, however, progres-
sively deteriorated. The patients’ subjective evaluation of
their main complaints (reduced exercise performance,
shortness of breath, ankle edema, and nocturia) was signif-
icantly improved for subjects receiving hawthorn, com-
pared with placebo subjects. The participants’ quality of
life was alsc improved in the hawthorn group, although
not enough to be statistically significant compared with
placebo.'°

A recent study investigated the efficacy of long-term
therapy with a Crataegus extract (WS 1442) as add-on ther-
apy to preexisting diuretic treatment for patients with a
more advanced stage of heart failure (NYHA class III). The
data from this study confirmed that WS 1442 had a dose-
dependent effect on the exercise capacity of patients
with heart failure and on typical heart failure-related clin-
ical signs and symptoms. The drug was shown to be well
tolerated and safe.”

----- PAGE 304 -----
296 «2. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

conducted to date, it can be concluded that the develop-
ment of heart disease is definitely linked with excess di-
etary fat, elevated blood cholesterol levels, high blood
pressure, smoking, obesity, short stature, and physical
inactivity. A number of these major risk factors are dis-
cussed here.

Age and Gender.

The older an individual is, the more likely he or she is to
develop cardiovascular disease. Thus, the risk of heart at-
tack is four times greater for a 50-year-old man than for a
30-year-old man. Cardiovascular problems are unusual in
premenopausal women, but after menopause, the inci-
dence of heart disease in women equals the incidence in
men. Other gender-specific issues are discussed later
under Socioeconomic Factors.

Oral Contraceptives

Oral contraceptives that supply high doses of estrogen in-
crease the risk of vascular and heart disease, especially
among women who smoke. However, the currently pre-
scribed contraceptives are low-dose pills containing 35 meg
or less of estrogen. There is little additional risk of heart
disease for premenopausal women who use such low-dose
formulations. However, taking “the pill” does pose risks.
For women taking any kind of oral contraceptive, certain
guidelines are important.

Stop smoking or consider a different form of birth control.
Smoking boosts the risks of serious cardiovascular
problems related to oral contraceptive use (especially
the risk of blood clots), particularly in women older
than 35.

Use of birth control pills may increase blood pressure. If a pa-
tient is diabetic and taking oral contraceptives, her
blood pressure should be monitored regularly. Oral
contraceptives may not be a safe choice if the woman
has had a heart attack, a stroke, problems with blood
clots, or any other kind of cardiovascular disease.

Heredity

The tendency to develop certain cardiovascular diseases
appears to be partially inherited. A family history of
heart disease should strongly suggest the use of appro-
priate herbal tonics, along with dietary change and stress-
reduction techniques. One inherited problem is known
as familial hyperlipidemia. People with this condition ap-
pear to have a genetic predisposition to elevated blood
lipid levels.

Tobacco

The death rate from heart disease is 300% higher in
smokers than in nonsmokers in North America. Smoking
by women in the United States causes one and one-half
times as many deaths from heart disease as lung cancer. A
smoker is two to six times more likely to suffer a heart at-
tack than a nonsmoker, and the risk increases with the
number of cigarettes smoked each day. Smoking also
heightens the risk of stroke.

Of course, cardiovascular disease is not the only
smoking-related health risk. Cigarette smoking is also
linked with cancers of the mouth, larynx, esophagus, uri-
nary tract, kidney, pancreas, and cervix. Smokers also are

more likely to develop other kinds of lung problems, in-
cluding bronchitis and emphysema. Smoking during
pregnancy is linked to a number of problems, including
bleeding, miscarriage, premature delivery, lower birth
weight, stillbirth, and sudden infant death syndrome, or
“crib death.” Young children who breathe in a parent’s
cigarette smoke have more lung and ear infections. What
more need be said?

Alcohol
Occasional consumption of small amounts of alcohol may
actually benefit the circulatory system, because alcohol
acts as a vasodilator. On the other hand, there is no doubt
that alcohol abuse is a major contributing factor to heart
disease. Several recent studies have reported that moder-
ate drinkers—those who have one or two drinks per day—
are less likely to develop heart disease than people who
don’t drink any alcohol. However, this is mot a recom-
mendation to start using alcohol!
Moderation is the key. More than three drinks a day
can raise blood pressure, and binge drinking can lead to
stroke, People who drink heavily on a regular basis have
higher rates of heart disease than either moderate
drinkers or nondrinkers. The government-produced
“Dietary Guidelines for Americans” recommends that for
overall good health, one should consume no more than
one drink per day. One drink equals 12 ounces of beer, 5
ounces of wine, or 1'/ ounces of 80-proof liquor.

High Blood Pressure

High blood pressure, or hypertension, is a major risk factor
for coronary heart disease (CHD) and the most important
risk factor for stroke and congestive heart failure.
Research indicates that high blood pressure is the cause of
three of every five cases of heart failure in women. High
blood pressure also boosts the likelihood that one will
develop kidney disease or blindness.

----- PAGE 305 -----
Blood pressure is the amount of force exerted by the
blood against the walls of the arteries. Controlling high
blood pressure is especially important for people who
have active heart disease. When blood pressure is low-
ered, the heart does not need to work as hard. For exam-
ple, a person who has experienced a heart attack is less
likely to have another if high blood pressure is controlled.

Diet

The precise role of dietary factors in heart disease is un-
clear, but enough is known to formulate general guide-
lines about a possible preventive diet. These are discussed
later in this chapter under Diet and Nutrition.

Cholesterol Levels

High blood cholesterol is another very important risk fac-
tor for coronary heart disease that may be amenable to
change. Some cholesterol is obtained from the diet (about
25%) and the rest is manufactured by the liver. Elevated
levels in serum may be a result of high dietary intake, a
condition known as exogenous hyperlipidemia, or secondary
hyperlipidemia.

Endogenous hyperlipidemia, also called primary or fa-
milial hyperlipidemia, is a disorder of cholesterol meta-
bolism that may be caused by genetic factors. It is much
less responsive to dietary and lifestyle change than the ex-
ogenous form, and is also much less common. Diseases
such as diabetes mellitus, gout, hypothyroidism, obstruc-
tive jaundice, cirrhosis of the liver, and renal failure can
also cause secondary hyperlipidemia.

Dietary guidelines for lowering cholesterol are pro-
vided later in this chapter under Cholesterol.

Obesity

Obese people are more likely to develop heart-related
problems, even if they have no other risk factors. Excess
body weight is linked with coronary heart disease, stroke,
congestive heart failure, and overall mortality from heart-
related causes. Obesity contributes not only to cardiovas-
cular diseases, but also to the development of other car-
diovascular risk factors, including high blood pressure,
high cholesterol, and diabetes.

Results of the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) of 1999 indicate that an
estimated 61% of American adults are either overweight
or obese, defined as having a body mass index (BMI) of 25
or more.!? BMI, an expression of the ratio of weight to
height, is a mathematical formula that represents weight
levels associated with the lowest overall risk to health. It
is derived by dividing body weight in kilograms by the

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 297

square of the height in meters (wt/(ht)’). Individuals with
a BMI of 25 to 29.9 are considered overweight; individu-
als with a BMI of 30 or more are considered obese.!3

Physical Inactivity

Physical inactivity increases the risk of heart disease. It
both contributes directly to heart-related problems and
increases the chances of developing other risk factors,
such as high blood pressure and diabetes. The Surgeon
General's report and other research conclude that as little
as 30 minutes of moderate activity on most, and prefer-
ably all, days of the week can help protect heart health.
Examples of moderate activity are brisk walking or bicy-
cling, raking leaves, and gardening.

Diabetes

Diabetes is a serious disorder that also raises the risk of
coronary heart disease. The risk of death from heart dis-
ease is about three times higher in people with diabetes.
While there is no cure for diabetes, steps can be taken to
control it. In certain people, being overweight and grow-
ing older are linked with the development of the most
common type of diabetes, non-insulin dependent dia-
betes mellitus (NIDDM). Losing excess weight and
boosting physical activity may help postpone or prevent
the development of this disease. See chapter 22 for more
information on the management of diabetes.

Stress and Personality

Research has revealed an association between a particu-
lar type of personality and the development of heart dis-
ease. According to this model, there are two personality
extremes. Type A behavior. is characterized by a chronic
sense of urgency, possibly repressed aggressiveness, and a
need to strive for achievement. Type A people drive
themselves to meet deadlines, many of which are self-im-
posed, They experience intense feelings of psychological
pressure, related to both time and personal responsibility.
They often try to do two or three things at once, are likely
to react with hostility to obstacles, and seem tempera-
mentally incapable of easing up.

Type B behavior is characterized by the opposite traits.
These people are less preoccupied with achievement, feel
less rushed, and in general are much more easygoing.
They are less prone to anger, impatience, and feelings of
pressure. They are also better at separating work from
play, and they know how to relax.

There is much debate about the value of such per-
sonality typing, but we will not concern ourselves with
these details here. The important thing is the association

----- PAGE 306 -----
298 << TREATMINI APPROACHES BY Bony SYSTEM

of behavior types with disease development. However,
from a holistic standpoint, we also need to bear in mind
that people cannot be simply categorized into two types!
Each person is an individual, and while it may sometimes
be useful to sort people into artificial categories, people
cannot be identified solely in this way.

Socioeconomic Factors

Certain social and economic factors are associated with an
increased risk of heart disease. However, the findings tend
to vary according to the society being studied. Some stud-
ies emphasize high risk in upper socioeconomic groups,
while others emphasize the opposite. Some evidence sug-
gests that class variations disappear when the degree of
physical activity is taken into account. High-risk factors
include social mobility that involves a change of environ-
ment, such as moving or changing jobs.

The relatively low, though increasing, incidence of
heart disease in women appears to be due to psychosocial
as much as biological factors. Men are more likely to
strive for dominance and to use work as a major outlet for
aggression, and so are more exposed to particular stresses
and conflicts. However, such behavior patterns are as
damaging to women as to men.

Life Events

Particularly stressful times in an individual’s life act as
possible danger points for stress-related problems such as
heart disease. When stressful times can be identified, it is
possible to take them into account by planning ahead,
making it possible to manage and lessen the impact of
these stresses on health and well-being. These points of
increased stress, called life events, occur in everyone's life.
They are especially relevant in the development of condi-
tions such as angina and coronary heart disease.

Goals for Decreasing
Cardiovascular Risks
Quit or minimize smoking
Lower and control blood pressure
Reduce total cholesterol
Decrease LDL cholesterol
Increase HDL cholesterol

Lose weight if overweight

Increase aerobic exercise

NUTRITIONAL FACTORS FOR
CARDIOVASCULAR HEALTH

The basic dietary rules for lowering cholesterol and
maintaining heart health are simple: Avoid saturated fats
and dietary cholesterol. Experts recommend a diet that
derives not more than 30% of daily calories from fat;
some say 20%. Saturated fats from animal products and
tropical oils should be kept to a minimum, so avoid deep-
fried foods and pay attention to nutrition labels on pack-
aged foods, Eat more vegetables, fruits, and grains, which
are cholesterol-free, virtually fat-free, and rich in fiber.
Dietary recommendations are discussed in more detail
later on.

Coenzyme Qio

Coenzyme Qio (CoQio or ubiquinone) is found in small
amounts in a wide variety of foods and is synthesized in all
tissues. Coenzymes are molecular cofactors upon which
enzymes depend for their function. Coenzyme Qo is the
coenzyme for a number of mitochondrial enzymes, as
well as enzymes in other parts of the cell.

Mitochondria are small, subcellular particles that
exist within each cell; here is where the cell’s energy pro-
duction process takes place. Through a series of chemical
reactions along the electron transport chains of the mito-
chondria, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) molecules are
produced. Mitochondrial enzymes are essential for the
production of ATP, and all cellular functions depend
upon ATP. More than 95% of the oxygen we breathe is
used solely for the purpose of making energy through this
process of burning organic substances, ATP molecules in
turn supply energy for the various chemical reactions nec-
essary for life.

CoQio plays a unique role in this electron transport
chain, serving as a mobile messenger link between the
various enzymes in the chain. Each pair of electrons pro-
cessed by the chain must first interact with CoQ, and no
other substance will substitute for CoQ. Other familiar
substances involved in this electron transport chain in-
clude vitamin C, riboflavin (vitamin B,), niacinamide (vi-
tamin B;), and vitamin E.

CoQ jo is naturally present in small amounts in a wide
variety of foods, but is particularly high in organ meats,
such as heart, liver, and kidney, and in beef, soy oil, sar-
dines, mackerel, and peanuts. To put dietary CoQjo intake
into perspective, 1 pound of sardines, 2 pounds of beef, or
2'/ pounds of peanuts provide 30 mg of CoQjo. CoQjq is
also synthesized in all tissues, and in healthy individuals,
normal levels are maintained both by CoQq intake and
by synthesis in the body. It has no known toxicity or side

----- PAGE 307 -----
effects. Although present in food, CoQjo is not consid-
ered a vitamin, because the body is able to produce it
from raw materials contained in food. Nevertheless, the
body often cannot make enough for optimal function, and
therefore CoQ» supplements may be very helpful.

CoQyo is highly concentrated in heart muscle cells, ;

due to the high energy requirements of this type of cell.
Congestive heart failure has been associated with low
blood and tissue levels of CoQ. The severity of heart
failure correlates with the severity of CoQio deficiency.
This CoQip deficiency may well be a primary factor in
some types of heart muscle dysfunction; in others, it may
be a secondary phenomenon.

Whether primary, secondary, or both, deficiency of
CoQ jo appears to be a major treatable factor in the other-
wise inexorable progression of heart failure. The clinical
studies that have examined the treatment of heart disease
with CoQj9 concluded that it significantly improved heart
muscle function while producing no adverse effects or drug
interactions. CoQ has been used successfully for high
blood pressure, congestive heart failure, angina pectoris,
and cardiomyopathy, and to protect the heart from the
damaging effects of the chemotherapy drug Adriamycin.

B Vitamins

Homocysteine is an amino acid found naturally in the
body. High blood levels of homocysteine may increase
the chances of developing heart disease, stroke, and cir-

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 2 299

culation problems. Elevated levels are believed to damage
arteries, predispose the blood to easy clotting, and reduce
the flexibility of blood vessels.

Blood homocysteine levels are influenced by the
amount of three vitamins in the diet: folic acid and vita-
mins B, and Bj. Ingesting less than the recommended
daily amounts of these vitamins may lead to higher ho-
mocysteine levels. Daily amounts recommended by the
FDA are 400 meg of folic acid, 2 mg of By, and 6 meg of
By). Good sources of folic acid include citrus fruits, toma-
toes, vegetables, whole grains, beans, and lentils. Foods
high in B, include meat, poultry, fish, fruits, vegetables,
and grains. Major sources of B,) are meat, poultry, fish,
milk, and other dairy products.

Dietary Suggestions to Reduce Cardiovascular

Risks

Eat more fruits and vegetables.

Eat more whole grains.

Reduce fat intake to 25% to 30% of the diet.

Reduce cholesterol intake to less than 300 mg a day.

Reduce consumption of egg yolks to three to five per week.

Minimize the use of whole milk and its products; use low-
fat or nonfat milk products.

Avoid red meats; eliminate all cured meats and lunchmeats.

Eat more cold-water fish, such as sardines and salmon,

Use fresh, cold-pressed oils, such as olive and flaxseed
oils, to provide essential fatty acids.

General Recommendations for Heart Health

Eat foods that you like that are low in cholesterol and saturated fats. A diet free of animal products
can lower cholesterol levels and blood pressure.

Be sure to consume an adequate amount of fiber. Fiber such as that from oat bran and psyllium
seeds lowers the assimilation of dietary cholesterol.

Minimize salt, avoid stimulants, and drink little or no alcohol.
Don't smoke tobacco.
Drink at least 2 pints of water a day.

Get adequate amounts of enjoyable aerobic exercise—for example, a 30-minute walk, swim, or
bicycle ride several times a week, and daily if possible.

Find a relaxation program that you enjoy, and incorporate it into your daily routine.
Maintain health in general, and especially maintain normal blood pressure.
Relax—watch the grass grow!

Also, as Dr. Andrew Weil puts it, “Open your heart.’ That our hearts get “broken” in the emotional
sense is not a coincidental use of the word. Compassion, caring, and loving respect are all heart tonics.

----- PAGE 308 -----
300 o TREATWEN1 APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

Recommended Supplements
In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Murray and Pizzorno
recommend the following supplements:!*

High-potency multiple vitamin and mineral formula

Vitamin C: 500 to 1,000 mg three times a day

Vitamin E: 400 to 800 IU/day

Inositol hexaniacinate: 550 mg three times a day with
meals for two weeks, then increase dosage to 1,000 mg
three times a day with meals

Vitamin By: 10 mg/day

Vitamin Bj): 2 mcg/day

Folic acid: 1,000 mcg/day

Coenzyme Qjo: 50 mg two or three times a day

WHAT IS CARDIOVASCULAR
DISEASE?

Cardiovascular disease is a disorder of the heart and blood
vessels of the body. Blood brings oxygen and nutrients to
the heart. When blood flow to the heart is impaired,
angina results. When the blood flow is critically reduced,
a myocardial infarction (heart attack) may occur. Lack of
blood flow to the brain or, in some cases, bleeding in the
brain can cause a stroke.

Coronary heart disease (CHD) is a general term for
disease of the blood vessels of the heart, known as coro-
nary arteries. CHD causes chest pain (angina) and heart
attacks. Other major cardiovascular diseases include hy-
pertension, atherosclerosis, and various types of vascular
insufficiency. A less serious but nonetheless troubling car-
diovascular condition is varicose veins. In this section, we
shall consider a range of such problems in the process of
exploring the contribution herbs can make when used in
the context of holistic medicine.

ELEVATED CHOLESTEROL

The word cholesterol carries very fearful implications for
many executives and hamburger eaters! While elevated
cholesterol is not a disease in its own right, it has been im-
plicated as a major factor in the development of many car-
diovascular diseases, especially arteriosclerosis, a condition
discussed later in this chapter.

However, though cholesterol may contribute to the
development of heart disease, it also has an important role
to play in human health. Cholesterol is found in all cells
of the body, primarily as a structural component of cell
membranes, but it has other vital functions. Stored in the
adrenal glands, testes, and ovaries, it serves as a precursor
molecule for hormones (such as the sex hormones, an-

drogens and estrogens) and adrenal corticoids (including
cortisol, corticosterone, and aldosterone).

In the liver, cholesterol functions as the precursor of
bile acids, which, when secreted into the intestine, aid in
the digestion of food, especially fats. Cholesterol is the
major sterol in the human body and is found throughout
the animal kingdom. While it seldom occurs in signifi-
cant amounts in higher plants, plants do contain the
therapeutically important phytosterols. (See chapter 5
for more information.)

Cholesterol Levels

Blood cholesterol levels begin to increase around age of
20, but rise sharply beginning at around age 40 and con-
tinue to increase until around age 60. The higher the
blood cholesterol level, the higher the risk of heart disease.

In the bloodstream, cholesterol from the diet binds
with protein molecules to form various types of so-called
lipoproteins. High-density lipoprotein (HDL) is a dense,
compact microparticle that transports excess cholesterol
to the liver, where it is altered and expelled in the bile.
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is a larger, less dense par-
ticle that tends to remain in the body. Very low-density
lipoproteins (VLDLs) are molecules that transport
triglycerides, chemical compounds that store fatty acids, an
essential source of energy for the body.

Normal blood levels of triglycerides range from 10 to
150 milligrams per deciliter. Elevated serum cholesterol
per se is not the only indicator of atherosclerosis; triglyc-
eride levels are used to classify primary hyperlipidemias.
In certain disorders, cholesterol] levels may remain fairly
normal while triglyceride levels rise. It is preferable,
therefore, always to measure levels of each lipoprotein
fraction, especially LDL, all of which contain cholesterol.

LDL is a form of lipid often called “bad” cholesterol,
because too much LDL in the blood can lead to choles-
terol buildup and blockage in the arteries. HDL is a form
of lipid known as “good” cholesterol, because HDL helps
remove cholesterol from the blood, preventing it from
piling up in the arteries.

Diets rich in saturated fats, cholesterol, and calories
appear to be chiefly responsible for high blood choles-
terol, and therefore are believed to promote atherosclero-
sis. However, the tendency of cholesterol to form plaques
is influenced by the type of lipoproteins that transport it in
the blood. LDL is clearly atherogenic, but HDL appears
to prevent accumulation of cholesterol in the tissues.

A desirable total cholesterol level for adults without
heart disease is lower than 200 mg/dl (or 200 milligrams
per deciliter of blood). A level of 240 mg/dl or higher is
considered high blood cholesterol. But even cholesterol

----- PAGE 309 -----
levels in the “borderline high” category (200 to 239 mg/dl)
increase the risk of heart disease. HDL levels are inter-
preted differently from total cholesterol levels. The lower
the HDL level, the higher the heart disease risk. An HDL
level lower than 35 is a major risk factor for heart disease.
A level of 60 or higher is considered protective.

Table 14.3. Classification of Cholesterol Levels*

PARAMETER DESIRABLE BORDERLINE HIGH

HIGH
Total cholesterol Lower than 200 200-239 240 and higher
LDL Optimal 100 30-159 160 and higher
HDL 60 or higher

*Source: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. 2001. National Cholesterol
Education Program. Third report of the expert panel on detection, evaluation, and
treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults (Adult Treatment Panel ill). NIH
Publication No. 01-3670.

coronary heart disease.

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM @ 301

Blood levels of these lipoproteins are partially gov-
erned by dietary factors, especially the type of vegetable
lipids (phytosterols) eaten. Phytosterols are plant com-
pounds, structurally comparable to cholesterol, that effec-
tively block uptake of cholesterol in the liver. This high-
lights the value of plants as both medicine and nutrition for
cardiovascular problems. Plants provide a way to balance
cholesterol absorption in a way that has evolved as our bod-
ies evolved, affecting fat metabolism and blood chemistry
in an inherently integrated manner. Medical research has
revealed a number of common dietary components that ac-
tively lower cholesterol levels in the blood. The processes
involved are complex and not always well understood.

Plants That Lower Blood Cholesterol

Guggulipid, an herbal remedy from southern India, is
gaining a reputation for reducing high blood cholesterol ,
levels. Guggulipid is an extract from the tree Cosmmiphora
mukul, commonly known as guggul. The tree is a close

Garlic: Food and Medicine

The use of garlic is supported by both an ancient history and’a wealth of modern research. More than 3,000 sci-
entific papers cover its chemistry, pharmacology, and clinical uses. The therapeutic uses of garlic are extensive, but
those specific to the cardiovascular system include reducing elevated cholesterol, preventing atherosclerosis and
hypertension, treating poor circulation to the legs, and improving overall blood flow through antiplatelet actions.

One study involved two groups of subjects: one of 20 healthy volunteers and the other of 62 patients with
coronary heart disease and elevated serum cholesterol. Both study groups ate garlic for six months. All involved
experienced beneficial changes, which reached a peak at the end of eight months. The improvement in choles-
terol levels persisted throughout the two months of clinical follow-up. The clinicians concluded that garlic
essential oil possesses a distinct hypolipidemic (fat-reducing) action in both healthy people and patients with

Great attention is being given by Indian research workers to the value of such findings in humans. A number
of clinical comparisons of the influence of garlic have been published. In one example, a group of volunteers con-
sumed a high-fat diet for seven days. On day eight of the study, fasting blood was analyzed for content of choles-
terol and other fats. The subjects then received a high-fat diet supplemented with garlic for seven days; on day
fifteen, fasting blood was analyzed again. Results showed that the fat-rich diet significantly increased cholesterol
levels; compared with a normal diet. However, adding garlic to the high-fat diet significantly reduced serum
cholesterol levels.5 Based on research investigating the effect of raw garlic on normal blood cholesterol levels in
men, indian research scientists advocated its daily use as a means of lowering blood cholesterol.

Garlic also possesses antiplatelet effects, or an ability to inhibit unnecessary clotting within the blood
vessels. It appears to work by reducing the “stickiness” of blood platelets, decreasing platelet aggregation and

lowering actions appear to be unaffected.

inhibiting the release of clotting factors in the bload. The garlic constituent thought to be responsible for
this effect is allicin, a unique thiosulfinate well known for its strong antibiotic and antifungal properties. An
exciting finding indicates that garlic works selectively, inhibiting the synthesis of enzymes involved in plaque
formation while sparing the vascular synthesis of important prostaglandins.'* This finding suggest that garlic
would make a safe and effective antithrombotic agent.

The traditional use of both garlic and onion in the treatment of hypertension is supported by research.”
A recent study revealed that onion oil contains a blood pressure—lowering prostaglandin.” Interestingly,
while garlic's antimicrobial effects are lost during cooking, its blood pressure—normalizing and cholesterol-

----- PAGE 310 -----
302 <=. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

relative of myrrh (Commiphora molmol). Ketonic steroid
compounds present in the extract, known as gugguls-
terones, possess cholesterol- and triglyceride-lowering
actions. Guggul lowers serum triglycerides and choles-
terol as well as LDL and VLDL cholesterols.'? As antiox-
idants, guggulsterones keep LDL cholesterol from oxi-
dizing, an action that protects against atherosclerosis.

Capsicum annuum (cayenne pepper) and other plants
that contain the compound capsaicin may help lower
blood cholesterol levels, as does the widely used spice
fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum). Caraway (Carum
carvi) is another aromatic spice with demonstrable
cholesterol-lowering properties. In addition, a whole
range of Asian herbal remedies new to Western medicine
are proving their value in this area, including Phy/anthus
emblica and Ligustrum lucidum.

Allium sativum (garlic) and A. cepa (onion) have an in-
ternational reputation for lowering blood pressure and
generally improving the health of the cardiovascular sys-
tem (see sidebar Garlic: Food and Medicine on page 301).
Other herbs reputed to have cholesterol-lowering prop-
erties are Medicago sativa (alfalfa), Curcuma longa
(turmeric), and Panax ginseng (Korean ginseng).

General Guidelines for Lowering Cholesterol

and LDL

Decrease total fats in diet.

Decrease saturated fats in diet.

Decrease cholesterol in diet.

Increase essential fatty acids (polyunsaturates) in diet.

Use more monounsaturated oils, such as olive and canola.

Increase fiber (for example, by adding psyllium husks or
oat bran to the diet).

Increase complex carbohydrates.

Decrease caffeine and nicotine.

Add supplemental nutrients: vitamins By, B;, C, chromium,
essential fatty acids.

Include garlic in the diet or take as a supplement.

Guidelines for Increasing HDL Cholesterol

Get regular aerobic exercise.

Do not smoke.

Lose weight.

Add supplemental nutrients: essential fatty acids, niacin,
fiber, garlic, L-carnitine.

Dietary Fats

Cholesterol-Rich Foods

Egg yolks Pate
Milk fat Liver
Other organ meats Fatty meats
Palm oil
Saturated Fats

Butter Poultry
Cheese Coconut oil
Milk Avocado
Red meats Margarine

Monounsaturated Fats
Olive oil Peanuts
Olives Cashews
Almonds Walnuts
Pecans Fish

Polyunsaturated Fats

Vegetable oils (sesame, safflower, sunflower,

corn, soybean)

HYPERTENSION

Elevation of systolic and/or diastolic blood pressure, ei-
ther primary or secondary. (The Merck Manual)

More than 35 million Americans have Aypertension, or
high blood pressure. For unknown reasons, the occur-
rence of the disorder is twice as high in African Americans
as Caucasians. While hypertension is a common problem
in our culture, it is rare in those that remain relatively un-
touched by the Western lifestyle. Lifestyle plays a major
role in causing and perpetuating hypertension. Thus, di-
etary, psychological, and social factors must all be ad-
dressed before any real change can occur.

A distinction must be made between elevated blood
pressure with no obvious medical cause, known as pri-
mary or essential hypertension, and hypertension caused by
an underlying pathology, such as kidney, endocrine, or
cerebral disease, which is called secondary hypertension.
For the purposes of this discussion, we will focus on es-
sential hypertension.

Hypertension typically causes no symptoms until
complications arise, in which case symptoms can include

----- PAGE 311 -----
dizziness, flushed face and skin, headache, fatigue, epis-
taxis (nosebleed), and nervousness. These symptoms may
all be caused by other conditions as well, making it diffi-
cult to diagnose hypertension by symptoms alone.

Diagnosis must be based on a finding that both sys-
tolic and diastolic blood pressure are usually (but not al-
ways) higher than normal, and other causes of symptoms
must be excluded. In general, hypertension is indicated by
a blood pressure measurement higher than 140/90 mm
Hg. However, “normal” blood pressure varies among in-
dividuals, and thus normal should always be viewed in
terms of a range, as opposed to a specific measurement.
Observable changes in retinal blood vessels are diagnostic
indicators of the degree of damage caused to the body by
the hypertension.

Blood pressure is the force of the blood pushing
against the walls of the arteries that carry blood through-
out the body. The heart beats at a rate of 60 to 70 times a
minute when at rest. Each time the heart beats, it pumps
blood into the arteries. Blood pressure is highest when the
heart contracts to pump the blood. This is called systolic
pressure, When the heart is at rest, in between beats, blood
pressure falls. This is the diastolic pressure.

Blood pressure is always expressed with two numbers
that represent the systolic and diastolic pressures. These
numbers are measurements of millimeters (mm) of mercury
(Hg). The measurement is expressed as a fraction, with the
systolic number on the top and the diastolic number on the
bottom. For example, a blood pressure measurement of
120/80 mm Hg is expressed verbally as “120 over 80.”

Blood pressure equal to or lower than 140/90 mm Hg
is considered normal, and blood pressure lower than
120/80 mm Hg is even better. Blood pressure is consid-
ered high when it stays above 140/90 mm Hg over a pe-
riod of time. It was once thought that low blood pressure
(for example, 105/65 mm Hg in an adult) was unhealthy.
Except in rare cases, this is not true. Table 14.4, from in-
formation provided by the National High Blood Pressure
Education Program, demonstrates how blood pressure
levels are categorized in adults.

Blood pressure fluctuates in response to different ac-
tivities. For example, when one is running, blood pressure
goes up. During sleep, blood pressure goes down. Such
temporary, transient changes in blood pressure are a com-
mon and normal response to the ups and downs of life.
Sustained hypertension, however, is caused by greater pe-
ripheral vascular resistance. This is initiated by increased
arteriolar tone and followed by the damaging structural
changes of arteriosclerosis.

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM & 303

Table 14.4. Blood Pressure Levels for Adults?

CATEGORY BLOOD PRESSURE LEVEL (mm Hg)
Systolic Diastolic
Normal 120 80
High normal 330-139 85-89
High blood pressure
Stage | 140-159 90-99
Stage 2 160-179 100-109
Stage 3 180 2110

*People aged 18 and older who are not taking medicine for high blood pressure and not
experiencing a short-term serious illness.

If left untreated, high blood pressure can lead to seri-
ous medical problems, including:

Arteriosclerosis. High blood pressure damages artery
walls, causing them to become thick, stiff, and narrow;
hence, the term “hardening of the arteries.”
Arteriosclerosis speeds the buildup of cholesterol and
fats in the blood vessels, inhibiting blood flow through
the body and increasing risk of heart attack or stroke.

Myocardial infarction. When the arteries that bring
blood to the heart muscle become blocked, the heart
cannot get enough oxygen. Reduced blood flow can
cause chest pain (angina). Eventually, blood flow may
be stopped completely, leading to a myocardial infarc-
tion, or heart attack.

Enlarged heart. High blood pressure makes the heart
work harder. Over time, this causes the heart to
thicken and stretch. Eventually, the heart fails to fune-
tion normally, and fluid backs up into the lungs.

Kidney damage. The kidney acts as a filter that rids the
body of wastes. Over the course of years, high blood
pressure can narrow and thicken the blood vessels of
the kidney so that the kidney is able to filter less fluid,
and waste will build up in the blood. Eventually, the
kidneys may fail altogether.

Stroke. High blood pressure contributes to arteriosclero-
sis, which causes arteries to narrow, so less blood can
get to the brain. If a blood clot blocks one of these nar-
rowed arteries, a stroke may occur. A stroke can also
occur when very high pressure causes a weakened
blood vessel in the brain (called an aneurysm) to break.

----- PAGE 312 -----
304 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Treatment of Hypertension

The cardiovascular system needs herbal tonic support, which
is supplied by the core hypotensive herbs. Other areas that
need attention include the nervous system and, potentially,
the lungs. Beyond this, treatment depends on the individual
case. All treatment for hypertension must take place
within the context of dietary and lifestyle reassessment.

Actions Indicated

Hypotensives are a broad range of remedies with the ob-
served effect of lowering elevated blood pressure. They
appear to work in a variety of ways. (See chapter 9 for
a discussion of possible pharmacological mechanisms.)

Cardiotonics play a fundamental role in strengthening and
toning the whole cardiovascular system when under
such literal pressure. Used correctly, they facilitate
beneficial changes in both the pattern and the volume
of cardiac output.

Peripheral vasodilators lessen resistance within the periph-
eral blood vessels, thus increasing the total volume of
the system and lowering pressure within it.

Diuretics help reduce the buildup of excess fluid in the
body and overcome any decreased renal blood flow
that might accompany the hypertension.

Vascular tonics will help nourish and tone the tissue of the
arteries and veins.

Nervines address the tension and anxiety associated with
any stress component in the patient’s picture.
Hypertension itself causes an increase in tension,
which can also be eased with appropriate nervines.
Most nervines are also antispasmodic.

Antispasmodics help ease peripheral resistance to blood
flow by gently relaxing the muscular coat of the vessels
and the muscles that the vessels pass through.

Circulatory stimulants help increase peripheral circulation.

Specific Remedies
A number of herbs have a reputation as being specific for
hypertension, generally because of their impact on one or
another of the processes involved in the development of
the condition. The most important hypotensive plant
remedy in Western medicine is hawthorn (Crataegus
spp.), probably followed by linden (Tilia spp.). European
mistletoe (Viscum album) and olive leaf (Olea europaea) are
other well-known plants that may be considered specifics.
On the other hand, the multifactorial etiology of hy-
pertension limits the value of the concept of specifics for
this condition. Orthodox medicine has utilized Rawvolfia
serpentina (Indian snakeroot) as a treatment for hyperten-
sion, but there are problematic side effects.

Other plants may come to mind, depending upon the
individual’s specific symptoms. For example, if headaches
are part of the picture, then include Stachys betonica (wood
betony) as part of the prescription. If there are associated
heart palpitations, add Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort). A
stress component would suggest increasing the nervine
content, and possibly adding an adaptogen.

A Prescription for Hypertension

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos T part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

Table 14.5. Actions Supplied by Hypertension
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Hypotensive Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos, Achillea
millefolium, Viburnum oputus, Valeriana officinalis

Cardiotonic Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphylios

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Crataegus spp.,

Tilia platyphyllos

Antispasmodic Tilia platyphyllos, Viburnum opulus,

Valeriana officinalis

Vascular tonic Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphylios,

Achillea millefolium

Nervine relaxant Tilia platyphyllos, Viburnum opulus,

Valeriana officinalis

Starting with a basic prescription, it is possible to
fine-tune the individual’s medications to address his or
her unique situation. The possibilities are as endless as
people are diverse. From debility and digestive problems
to bronchitis and premenstrual syndrome, the phytother-
apist can alter a basic formulation to readily embrace the
needs of the whole patient. Note that the choice and exact
proportions of herbs in the prescription will depend on
the relative severity of the associated symptom picture.

----- PAGE 313 -----
A Prescription for Hypertension with a
Major Stress Component

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Eleutherococcus senticosus 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

A Prescription for Hypertension with
Associated Headache

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Stachys betonica 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

A Prescription for Hypertension with Palpitations

Leonurus cardiaca 2 parts
Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 7
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

A Prescription for Hypertension with Debility

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos T part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM - 305

A Prescription for Hypertension with Indigestion

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Matricaria recutita 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

A Prescription for Hypertension with Bronchitis

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Marrubium vulgare 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Verbascum thapsus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

A Prescription for Hypertension with
Premenstrual Syndrome

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Vitex agnus-castus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

Broader Context of Treatment

A plethora of factors have been identified as important in
the cause and treatment of essential hypertension.
However, it is vital to remember that cause is always mul-
tifactorial, and statements about alcohol or calcium con-
sumption are often too simplistic. While experts disagree
about the connection between tobacco and hypertension,
there is no doubt about the overall impact of smoking
upon the heart, so tobacco should be avoided.

----- PAGE 314 -----
306 «@ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

A well-known link exists between obesity and hyper-
tension, as well as heart attack, diabetes, gallstones, os-
teoarthritis, and kidney disease. Weight reduction is an
essential component of a treatment program for hyper-
tension, and often lowers blood pressure more effectively
than drug treatment.

Drugs represent another factor that must be consid-
ered. A number of medications raise blood pressure as an
unwanted side effect. Check on all prescription drugs that
the patient is using, and note that even over-the-counter
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may cause mild
water retention that can elevate blood pressure. Bear in
mind when taking the case history that oral contracep-
tives have been associated with cardiovascular and pul-
monary adverse effects.

Lifestyle changes are often the key to reversing hy-
pertension. The nature of the individual’s work, relation-
ships, worldview, and self-image may all play a role in the
development of hypertension, creating a challenging job
for the herbalist! Dietary changes, weight reduction, and
tobacco cessation are crucial, but exercise, massage and
other bodywork, relaxation techniques, and meditation
can make important contributions.

Aromatherapy has much to offer when appropriate
essential oils are used in the context of relaxing massage.
Hypotensive oils to consider include lavender, marjoram,
and ylang ylang. If the situation calls for it, relaxing oils
may be also be used; consider chamomile, rose, bergamot,
and neroli.

Key Therapeutic Guidelines for the
Management of Hypertension
Maintain an appropriate body weight, reducing excessive
weight if necessary.
Make healthy lifestyle choices:
Avoid alcohol, caffeine, and tobacco.
Reduce the impact of stress and incorporate stress-
reduction techniques.
Exercise regularly, but in a way that is enjoyable.
Make appropriate dietary changes:
Eat a diet rich in fiber, complex carbohydrates, and
potassium.
Eat garlic and onions.
Reduce or eliminate animal fats and increase intake of
vegetable oils.
Eliminate salt from the diet.
Add appropriate cardiotonic herbs.
Supplement the diet with:
Magnesium: 800 to 1,200 mg/day
Vitamin C: 500 to 1,000 mg three times a day

Vitamin E: 400 to 800 [U/day
Coenzyme Qo: 50 mg two or three times a day
Garlic: the equivalent of 4,000 mg a day of fresh garlic

Specific Dietary Guidelines

Salt. Average Western salt intake is about 15 times that
needed by the body. Blood pressure usually falls when
hypertensives cut back on salt and sodium in general.
Some are more affected by sodium than others, but
there is no practical way to predict this. Thus, hyper-
tensives should eat no more than about 6 g of salt a day
(approximately 1 teaspoon, or about 2,400 mg of
sodium). The patient should keep track of aif salt
eaten, including the amount in processed foods.

Potassium. The relative balance between sodium and
potassium is critical to many cardiovascular risk fac-
tors. Potassium levels in the diet should be raised
through consumption of potassium-rich foods, such as
bananas, orange juice, and potatoes. In addition, cer-
tain cooking methods are less likely to wash away this
essential mineral.

Calcium and magnesium. Supplementation with these min-
erals can have a marked hypotensive effect.

Sugar. In some individuals, heavy sugar intake may raise

blood pressure, possibly by causing sodium retention

or by a direct effect on the hormonal stress response

mediated by the adrenal cortex.

Alcohol. There appears to be a link between alcohol and

hypertension, but not a simple one. Statistics show that

people who drink a little tend to have lower blood

pressure than teetotalers or those who drink a lot.

Alcohol withdrawal causes a temporary increase in

blood pressure, followed by a decrease. All in all, it is
safe to say that individuals with a tendency to hyper-
tension should avoid alcohol.

Caffeine. Tea, coffee, and cola drinks will aggravate hy-
pertension because of the stimulating effect of caffeine
and other alkaloids that they contain. This also goes
for the caffeine-containing herbal stimulant products

on the market.

Saturated fats. Apart from the impact upon blood choles-
terol and other lipids, there appears to be an associa-
tion between excess consumption of saturated fats and
hypertension. As with all cardiovascular conditions, in-
creasing the ratio of polyunsaturated fats to saturated
fats will help in the healing process.

Vegetarian diet. A diet free of animal products lowers
blood pressure and is strongly recommended for hy-

pertensive patients. At the very least, people with
hypertension should avoid red meat.

----- PAGE 315 -----
ARTERIOSCLEROSIS

Arteriosclerosis. A generic term for a number of diseases
in which the arterial wall becomes thickened and loses
elasticity. (The Merck Manual)

Atherosclerosis. A form of arteriosclerosis characterized
by patchy subintimal thickening (atheromas) of medium
and large arteries, which can reduce or obstruct blood
flow. (The Merck Manual)

The term arteriosclerosis refers to several diseases involv-
ing arteries of various sizes and different layers of the ar-
terial walls. From Greek words that mean “hardening of
the arteries,” the term originally signified the tendency of
arteries to become hard and brittle through the deposition
of calcium in their walls. However, this is not an impor-
tant characteristic of the most familiar form of arterio-
sclerosis, atherosclerosis. This disease is characterized by
fatty deposits on the intima, or inner lining, of the arteries.

Half the annual mortality in Western society results
from heart and blood vessel diseases, and atherosclerosis,
the most common lethal disease, is the chief cause. This
is due to the impact of the disease upon the brain, heart,
kidneys, and other organs of the body. Although herbs
with antiarteriosclerotic properties exist, herbalism aims
to prevent the disease by addressing causative factors,
which include not only hypertension, but also diabetes
mellitus, smoking, diet, and obesity.

Atherosclerosis is a disease of the arteries character-
ized by fatty deposits on the inner lining. The presence of
these fatty deposits, called arterial plaques, leads to an im-
portant loss of arterial elasticity and a narrowing of the
artery. The constriction of blood flow that results ulti-
mately deprives vital organs of their blood supply. Clots
may lodge in arteries supplying the heart, causing a heart
attack, or the brain, causing stroke. Atherosclerosis may
be manifested fairly rapidly in diseases in which the con-
centration of blood lipids is raised, such as diabetes.

Atherosclerosis is so prevalent in developed countries
that many Americans assume it is a natural consequence of
aging. However, overwhelming evidence links atheroscle-
rosis closely to diet and lifestyle, suggesting that it can be
prevented, slowed, or in some cases even reversed.

Depending on the location and degree of arterial
damage, atherosclerosis can lead to kidney problems,
high blood pressure, stroke, and other life-threatening
conditions, Atherosclerosis tends to target the aorta—the
body’s largest artery, which leads from the heart—as well
as the arteries that lead to the brain, the lower limbs, and
the kidneys. Damage to the arteries that carry blood to
the legs and feet can cause peripheral arterial occlusive

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM @ 307

disease, which makes walking painful. Severely restricted
circulation to the limbs can also cause skin ulcers and
even gangrene (tissue death),

Blockage in the coronary arteries, which feed oxygen-
rich blood directly to the heart muscles, is known as coro-
nary artery disease or coronary heart disease. Such blockage
causes ischemia, a localized oxygen starvation affecting tis-
sue. This disorder and its complications—angina, cardiac
arrhythmias, and heart attack—are the leading causes of
death in the United States and most of Europe.

Atherosclerotic deposits begin as thin, fatty streaks
on an arterial wall. Such streaks may come and go in a
person with a healthy lifestyle. However, if the arteries
are damaged—typically from high blood pressure, stress,
or smoking—the inner surface of the walls can start to de-
teriorate. To compensate, the artery grows new tissue that
may create tiny bumps or scars. Cholesterol, white blood
cells, and other deposits can begin to accumulate within
these bumps, forming plaques that clog the arteries.
Eventually, calcium deposits and scar tissue surround the
soft plaques, making the arteries hard and inelastic.
Atherosclerosis progresses over many years, which per-
haps contributes to the perception that it is an affliction
of aging. However, it appears that arterial deposits can
begin in childhood, with significant plaque formation by
the time a person is 30 years old.

People with high levels of blood cholesterol, espe-
cially LDL, are at risk for developing atherosclerosis.
LDL cholesterol reacts with unstable chemical com-
pounds called free radicals in a process that degrades both
the transport mechanism for moving cholesterol through
the bloodstream and the tissue lining of arterial walls.
Nonetheless, most people with high cholesterol do not
develop and many people with
atherosclerosis have normal cholesterol levels.

A number of biochemical, physiological, and envi-
ronmental risk factors increase the chance that an indi-
vidual will develop atherosclerosis:

atherosclerosis,

Hypertension. High blood pressure is a critical factor in the
atherosclerotic process, which does not normally occur
in low-pressure pulmonary arteries and veins, despite
the fact that they are bathed by the same blood con-
centration of lipids.

Elevated serum lipid levels. The atherogenicity of choles-
terol is influenced by type of lipoprotein. LDL is
clearly atherogenic, but HDL appears to prevent accu-
mulation of cholesterol in the tissues.

Obesity promotes the development of all risk factors.

Cigarette smoking increases the chances of developing this
and many other diseases.

----- PAGE 316 -----
308 — TREATMENT APPROACHES FY Bopy SYSTEM

Diets rich in saturated fats, cholesterol, and calories appear to
be chiefly responsible for high blood cholesterol, and
such diets are therefore believed to promote
atherosclerosis.

Family history of premature atherosclerotic disease ap-
pears to indicate either a propensity to higher levels of
LDL or an increased susceptibility to atherosclerosis
risk factors. Inborn errors in lipid metabolism also in-
crease susceptibility.

Diabetes mellitus may lead to arteriosclerosis.

Gender Between the ages of 35 and 44, the death rate
from coronary heart disease among white men is 6.1
times that for white women. This is thought to be due
to hormonal and socioeconomic influences. Overt
manifestations of arteriosclerosis are rare in either sex
before the age of 40, because a greater than 75% nar-
rowing of the arteries must occur before blood flow is
seriously impeded.

Aging: brings about degenerative arterial changes such as
dilation, tortuousness, thickening, and loss of elasticity.

Physical inactivity increases the chance that complications
will develop, but the disease affects both active and
sedentary individuals.

Personality type, especially type A, appears to predispose
individuals to a range of cardiovascular problems.

Lifestyle factors, including diet and stress level, can
contribute.

Treatment of Atherosclerosis

The cardiovascular system should be the focus of tonic
attention. If any secondary problems have developed in
other organs of the body because of ischemia, these
must be treated. Common sites for such problems are
the kidneys, eyes, and brain. The herbal guidelines
must be utilized within the context of dietary and
lifestyle reassessment.

Actions Indicated

Cardiotonics and vascular. tonics help support the tissue of
the cardiovascular system, possibly maintaining flexi-
bility and tone in affected vessels.

Circulatory stimulants promote the circulation of blood,
and thus oxygen availability, in the face of the in-
creased vascular resistance characteristic of this
condition.

Peripheral vasodilators have an obvious value, because they
have the potential to lessen the impact of vessel blockage.

Hypotensives are indicated to help lower elevated blood
pressure.

Nervines will be indicated if stress is an issue.

Antispasmodics will help relax the muscular coat of the ar-
teries, as well as the muscles that the peripheral vessels
pass through.

A Prescription for Atherosclerosis

Crataegus spp. 2 parts
Tilia platyphyllos T part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Ginkgo biloba 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

It is no coincidence that this suggested prescription is
similar to those given for hypertension. There is a strong
correlation between the etiologies of the two conditions,
and thus the specific remedies for treatment are similar.

Table 14.6. Actions Supplied by Atherosclerosis
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Cardiotonic and vascular tonic Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos,
Achillea millefolium, Viburnum opulus,

Ginkgo biloba, Allium sativum

Peripheral vasodilator Ginkgo biloba, Achillea millefolium,

Allium sativum

Hypotensive Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphylios,
Achillea millefolium, Viburnum opulus,
Allium sativum

Nervine Tilia platyphyllos, Viburnum opulus

Antispasmodic Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos,

Viburnum opulus, Ginkgo biloba

Broader Context of Treatment
Atherosclerosis develops when known risk factors are
compounded by genetic predisposition, so if one has a
family history of atherosclerosis, the prudent course of
action is to accept what cannot be changed and to change
what can. In addition to the herbal medicines described,
follow the general and nutritional recommendations for
heart health provided earlier in this chapter.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Murray and
Pizzorno recommend the following supplements:

----- PAGE 317 -----
Magnesium: 800 to 1,200 mg/day

Vitamin C: 500 to 1,000 mg three times a day

Vitamin E: 400 to 800 TU/day

Flaxseed oil: 1 tablespoon/day

Coenzyme Qjo: $0 mg two or three times a day

Niacin (in the form of inositol hexaniacinate): 500 mg
three times a day with meals for two weeks, then in-
crease dosage to 1,000 mg three times a day with meals

Garlic: the equivalent of 4,000 mg a day of fresh garlic

CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE

A common syndrome that may be caused by different eti-
ologies whose clinical manifestations reflect a fundamen-
tal abnormality—a decrease in the myocardial contractile
state such that cardiac output is inadequate for the
body's needs. (The Merck Manual)

Congestive heart failure (CHF) is a-severe condition in
which the heart cannot supply the body with enough
blood because it is functioning inadequately as a pump.
Usually, the loss of pumping ability is a symptom of an
underlying heart problem, such as coronary artery dis-
ease. The term heart failure suggests a sudden and com-
plete cessation of heart activity, but in reality, the condi-
tion generally develops slowly, as the heart gradually loses
its ability to pump efficiently.

Some people may experience no symptoms of conges-
tive heart failure until years after the heart begins its decline.
Most symptoms result from congestion that develops in the
lungs or from backed-up blood in the veins. How critical
the condition is depends on how much pumping capacity
the heart has lost. The severity of the condition will deter-
mine its impact on an individual’s life. Milder heart failure
may have little effect, while severe heart failure can inter-
fere with even simple activities and eventually prove fatal.

Nearly everyone’s heart loses some pumping capacity
with age, but a number of other factors can also lead to a
potentially life-threatening loss of pumping activity. As a
symptom of underlying heart disease, heart failure is
closely associated with the major risk factors already dis-
cussed: smoking, high cholesterol levels, hypertension,
diabetes and abnormal blood sugar levels, and obesity.
Eliminating such risk factors lowers the risk of develop-
ing or aggravating heart disease and heart failure. The
presence of coronary heart disease is among the greatest
risks for heart failure. Muscle damage and scarring caused
by a heart attack greatly increase the risk of heart failure,
as does cardiac arrhythmia, or irregular heartbeat. Any
disorder that causes abnormal swelling or thickening of
the heart also sets the stage for heart failure.

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 2 309

A number of symptoms are associated with heart fail-
ure, but none is specific for the condition.

Shortness of breath is often the most prominent symptom.
In heart failure, this may result from a buildup of fluid
in the lungs. Breathing difficulties may occur at rest or
during exercise. In some cases, congestion may be se-
vere enough to prevent or interrupt sleep.

Fatigue or easy tiring is another symptom. As the heart’s
pumping capacity decreases, muscles and other tissues
receive less oxygen and nutrition. Thus, the body can-
not perform as much work, leading to fatigue.

Fluid retention, or edema, may cause swelling of the feet,
ankles, legs, and occasionally the abdomen.

Persistent coughing is another sign, especially coughing that
regularly produces mucus or pink, blood-tinged spu-
tum. Some people develop raspy breathing or wheezing.

Because heart failure generally develops slowly,
these symptoms may not appear until the condition has
progressed over years. The heart hides the underlying
problem by making adjustments that delay the eventual
loss in pumping capacity. The heart compensates in three
ways to cope with the effects of heart failure:

1. Enlargement (dilatation) allows more blood into the
heart.

2, Thickening of muscle fibers (hypertrophy) strength-
ens the heart muscle.

3. More frequent contractions increase circulation.

By making these adjustments, or compensating, the
heart can temporarily make up for losses in pumping abil-
ity, sometimes for years. However, compensation has its
limits. Eventually, the heart cannot offset its lost ability to
pump blood, and the signs of heart failure appear.

Treatment of Congestive Heart Failure
While herbs containing cardiac glycosides are the basis of
a number of important pharmaceutical drugs for conges-
tive heart failure, it would be inappropriate to explore the
use of these cardioactive remedies in a book of this kind.
As dramatically effective as they are, the key to safe and
successful therapeutic application is skilled diagnosis and
interpretation, as well as regular monitoring for levels
of cardiac glycosides in the blood, Without this skill,
these plants are extremely poisonous. However, the non-
cardioactive approach described here will prove effective
for the treatnent of mild heart failure that does not warrant
the use of stronger medications, especially for elderly
patients with chronic CHF.

As mild CHF is usually a result of degenerative

----- PAGE 318 -----
310 a TREATMENI APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

processes, it may be accompanied by any of the plethora
of conditions that manifest in the aging process. Tonic
support of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems is
indicated, but beyond that, specifics will depend on the
individual concerned.

Actions Indicated

Cardioactive drugs will often be the core of treatment for
such problems, but are best prescribed by skilled diag-
nosticians who can follow the changes brought about
in the heart and its functioning. Regular monitoring of
cardiac glycosides in the blood is essential.

Cardiotonics will support the action of cardiac glycosides
prescribed. As they theoretically may potentiate the ac-
tivity of cardioactives, blood monitoring is still needed.

Peripheral. vasodilators may be indicated to help with gen-
eral blood circulation.

Hypotensives are often appropriate because of associated
hypertension.

Diuretics ease water-retention problems. Cardioactive di-
uretics are often used in orthodox medicine. Replace-
ment of flushed-out potassium is essential.

Nervines will ease stress, whether causal or a result of the
heart disease.

Specific Remedies
As primary cardioactives are generally out of the range of
what herbalists can use safely, we shall not use Convallaria
or its equivalents in the prescription suggested here. Our
aim is to either strengthen the heart muscle or support
the work of allopathically prescribed cardiac glycosides.
Crataegus, Tilia, and Allium sativum are essential. In
addition, an herb from the ayurvedic tradition is offering
great hope in the treatment of a range of cardiovascular
conditions. Coleus forskoblit and its diterpene constituent
forskolin can lower blood pressure while improving the
contractility of the heart.”*

A Prescription for Mild Congestive Heart Failure

Crataegus spp. 3 parts
Ginkgo biloba T part
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Taraxacum officinale leat T part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

Broader Context of Treatment
The dietary and lifestyle issues already discussed all apply
for congestive heart failure. Follow the general and nutri-
tional recommendations for heart health provided earlier
in this chapter.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Murray and
Pizzorno recommend the following supplements:”

Magnesium: 200 to 400 mg three times a day
Thiamine: 200 to 250 mg/day

L-carnitine: 300 to 500 mg three times a day
Coenzyme Qi: 150 to 300 mg/day

ANGINA PECTORIS

A clinical syndrome due to myocardial ischemia charac-
terized by precordial discomfort or pressure, typically
precipitated by exertion and relieved by rest or sublingual
nitroglycerin. (The Merck Manual)

Angina pectoris, commonly known as angina, is a recur-
ring pain or discomfort in the chest that indicates that the
heart is not getting enough oxygen. Angina may result
from blockage of the coronary arteries that supply blood
to the heart or occur because the heart is overworked and
thus needs more oxygen than usual.

The main underlying cause of angina is coronary
artery disease, which stems from atherosclerosis of the
coronary arteries. Angina may also be related to other dis-
eases that tax the heart unduly, such as anemia, aortic
valve disease, cardiac arrhythmia, and hyperthyroidism.
Episodes of angina occur when the heart’s need for oxy-
gen exceeds the availability of oxygen from the blood that
nourishes the heart. Physical exertion is the most com-
mon trigger for angina. Other triggers include emotional
stress, extreme cold or heat, heavy meals, alcohol, and
cigarette smoking.

The term angina pectoris literally means “choking sen-
sation in the chest.” It is usually experienced as a crushing
or constricting pain that starts in the center of the chest,
deep behind the breastbone, and may radiate to other
parts of the body. However, the pain of angina may be felt
only in peripheral locations, such as the jaw, abdomen,
and arm. The pain can also be confused with indigestion,
because the tight, burning sensations are similar.

An angina attack is not a heart attack! While the pain
is similar, it does not last as long, usually no more than
five minutes. Angina pain simply indicates that some of
the heart muscle is not getting enough blood temporar-
ily. The pain does not mean that the heart muscle is suf-
fering irreversible, permanent damage. In addition, not

----- PAGE 319 -----
all chest pain comes from the heart, and not all pain re-
lated to the heart is angina. For example, if the pain lasts
for less than 30 seconds, or if it disappears during a deep
breath, after drinking a glass of water, or after changing
position, it almost certainly is not angina and should not
cause concern. However, prolonged pain, unrelieved by
rest or accompanied by other symptoms, may signal a
heart attack.

Treatment of Angina Pectoris

The herbal treatment guidelines given here must be uti-
lized within the broader context of dietary and nutritional
reassessment. The herbal approach to treating angina
pectoris is similar to that for hypertension and arte-
riosclerosis. Please refer to those sections for details.

Specific Remedies

Crataegus can be considered the closest to a specific for
this condition. Crataegus leaves, flowers, and fruits con-
tain a number of biologically active flavonoid substances.
Studies show that Crataegus may inhibit the progression
of atherosclerosis, increase coronary perfusion, and con-
fer mild hypotensive effects. It may also antagonize
atherogenesis and have a positive effect on the contractile
ability of the heart.’*

Salvia miltiorrhiza (dan shen) is used in traditional
Chinese medicine as a circulatory stimulant, sedative, and
cooling agent. It may also be valuable as an antianginal
drug, because it has been shown to dilate coronary arter-
ies in all concentrations. S. miltiorrhiza also appears to
have a protective action against myocardial ischemia.

A Prescription for Angina

Crataegus spp. 3 parts
Leonurus cardiaca 2 parts
Achillea millefolium | part
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part
Ginkgo biloba 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day. In addition, the patient can take 5 ml of
Crataegus tincture at the first sign of an angina attack. This will
not replace the use of prescription medication.

Broader Context of Treatment
Issues similar to those covered earlier must be addressed—
that is, the whole panoply of dietary and lifestyle factors

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM @ 311

that contribute to an individual’s unique life experience.
In addition to the herbal medicines described, follow the
general and nutritional guidelines for heart health pro-
vided earlier in this chapter.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Murray and
Pizzorno recommend the following supplements:??

Magnesium: 200 to 400 mg three times a day
Coenzyme Qjo: 150 to 300 mg/day
Garlic: the equivalent of 4,000 mg a day of fresh garlic

PERIPHERAL ARTERIAL OCCLUSIVE
DISEASE

Occlusion of blood supply to the extremities by
atherosclerotic plaques. (The Merck Manual)

Peripheral arterial occlusive disease, also known as inter-
mittent claudication, is a peripheral vascular disease caused
by narrowing of the arteries in the legs. This restricts the
flow of blood to muscles in the calves, thighs, and but-
tocks. While usually asymptomatic in early stages, the re-
stricted availability of oxygen eventually causes major
problems. The most striking symptoms occur upon exer-
tion, such as walking.

Because of the limited blood supply, the muscles do
not receive the oxygen they need, resulting in the buildup
of lactic acid and other products of enforced anaerobic
metabolism. These metabolites cause pain and cramping
and interfere with the ability to walk. During rest, the
pain and discomfort subside. There is a close association
between the etiology of this condition and that of athero-
sclerosis. Please refer to that discussion for more details.

Treatment of Peripheral Arterial

Occlusive Disease

In addition to the herbal suggestions given here, a com-
plex of lifestyle issues must be addressed. The nutritional
guidelines given throughout this chapter are important.
Some simple behavioral pointers can help encourage
blood flow back into the trunk:

Avoid crossing the legs, but if necessary, cross the legs at the
ankles, not the knees.

Avoid bigh heels, which limit the use of the calf muscles.

Avoid restrictive clothing that limits blood flow in the groin
or calf.

Avoid prolonged sitting or standing.

Take breaks to walk around to help move the blood along.

Rest and elevate the legs.

----- PAGE 320 -----
312 «@ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Actions Indicated

Cardiotonic. The pathology that manifests in the legs sug-
gests that disease processes are almost certainly affect-
ing the whole cardiovascular system.

Peripheral vasodilators facilitate blood flow to the
extremities.

Hypotensives may help, as there is a close connection be-
tween hypertension and the development of this
condition.

Diuretics may be appropriate if edema is present; however,
edema calls for careful examination of the heart. Mild,
positively inotropic remedies, such as Crataegus, may
be adequate.

Vascular tonics are essential to tone and strengthen the
blood vessels.

Nervines may be indicated, depending upon the individ-
ual’s needs.

Antispasmodics may help ease the degree of muscular spasm.

Specific Remedies
Crataegus (hawthorn), Aesculus (horse chestnut), and
Ginkgo may all be considered specifics for this problem.
Aesculus hippocastanum has been the subject of numerous
clinical studies on the treatment of this condition. A
meta-analysis of these studies concluded that the herb was
efficacious and safe.?¢

Ginkgo biloba is useful for treating peripheral vascular
disease, including diabetic retinopathy and intermittent
claudication. Flavonoids in Ginkgo reduce capillary per-
meability and fragility and serve as free radical scav-
engers. Terpene ginkgolides inhibit platelet-activating
factor, decrease vascular resistance, and improve circula-
tory flow without appreciably affecting blood pressure. A
recent meta-analysis of randomized trials of Ginkgo in the
treatment of intermittent claudication demonstrated sig-
nificant positive results.’” Research also supports its use
for treating cerebral insufficiency and secondary effects
on memory and mood, as well as vertigo and tinnitus.

A Prescription for Peripheral Arterial Disease

Crataegus spp. 1 part
Aesculus hippocastanum 1 part
Ginkgo biloba 1 part
Zanthoxylum americanum 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1
clove of fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract
three times a day.

VARICOSE VEINS

Elongated, dilated, tortuous veins whose valves are con-
genitally absent or scant or have become incompetent;
this condition occurs usually in the legs. (The Merck
Manual)

Varicose veins are a common problem that affects be-
tween 10% and 20% of the population. Incidence in-
creases with age, and it is most common in people older
than 50. In addition, varicose veins are four times more
common in women than in men.

The core problem is valve incompetency in the
veins of the legs, which leads to dilation of the veins, loss
of tissue tone, and some degree of reversal of blood flow.
The abnormal swelling of veins in the legs is a symptom
of generally poor blood circulation, accompanied by loss
of elasticity in the walls of the veins and particularly in
their valves. When they are functioning normally, these
valves prevent blood from flowing back away from the
heart. When their efficiency declines, some blood may
stagnate in the veins, which then become swollen and
tortuous (twisted), causing aching and abnormal fatigue
in the legs.

Causative factors for varicose veins fit into two gen-
eral groups.

1, Inadequate support of vein walls.

Heredity. About 40% of cases have a family history
of varicosity.

Obesity. The fatty tissue that builds up in the legs
provides inadequate support and results in loss of
tone.

Aging. The aging process leads to degenerative
changes in supporting connective tissue, which is
compounded by decreased muscular activity.

Posture. Occupations that involve prolonged stand-
ing or sitting increase the chances that this prob-
lem will develop. This is due to a combination of
the pull of gravity and lack of muscular activity in
the thighs.

2. Increased resistance to the free flow of blood back
into the trunk.

Pregnancy. The growing baby may act as an obstacle
to venous return.

Thrombosis. Blockage within the vessels themselves
can cause varicosities.

Tumors. Uterine fibroids or ovarian problems, for
example, can become obstructive.

Fashion. Constriction caused by tight clothing will
weaken tissue.

----- PAGE 321 -----
Treatment of Varicose Veins

The herbal treatment guidelines given here for varicose
veins must be applied in the context of the lifestyle issues
discussed earlier. The focus of tonic support should be the
cardiovascular system, but beyond that, a range of factors
may be addressed, depending upon the individual’s needs.
Consider musculoskeletal and connective tissue tonics if
varicosity is accompanied by rheumatic problems. If the
patient is pregnant, then appropriate uterine tonics are
indicated.

Actions Indicated

Vascular tonics help the tissues regain tone and strength.
Flavonoid-rich herbs are especially useful here, al-
though they do not work quickly.

Circulatory stimulants assist in the process of venous return
to the trunk of the body.

Astringents can support the work of the vascular tonics.
The astringency is best applied externally.

Anti-inflammatories ease localized inflammation and
discomfort.

Emollients and demutcents, used externally, lessen local
discomfort.

Specific Remedies

Flavonoid-rich plants have a major role to play in toning
up the muscle walls of weakened veins. Traditionally, in
Europe, Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut) has been
considered an effective specific. The seeds of this plant
have long been used to treat venous disorders, including
varicose veins. The saponin glycoside aescin inhibits the
activity of lysosomal enzymes thought to contribute to
varicose veins by weakening vessel walls and increasing
permeability.’ The herb has been the subject of numer-
ous clinical studies on the treatment of venous conditions,
and a meta-analysis of some of these studies concluded
that the herb was efficacious and safe.?®

A Prescription for Varicose Veins

Crataegus spp. 1 part
Zanthoxylum americanum 1 part
Ginkgo biloba 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Aesculus hippocastanum 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM 313

Varicose Veins Lotion for External Use
Hamamelis virginiana (distilled witch hazel) 80 ml

Aesculus hippocastanum tincture 10 ml
Symphytum officinale tincture 10 ml
Total volume: 100 ml

Apply liberally as needed to ease irritation and discomfort. Rose
water or another floral water may be added to make the lotion
more cosmetically pleasing

Table 14.7. Actions Supplied by Varicose Vein
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Circulatory stimulant Zanthoxylum americanum, Ginkgo biloba

Crataegus spp., Aesculus hippocastanum,
Achillea millefolium

Vascular tonic

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Hamamelis virginiana
Emollient and demulcent — Symphytum officinale
Vulnerary Symphytum officinale

Anti-inflammatory Aesculus hippocastanum

Broader. Context of Treatment

Lifestyle factors are very important in the long-term
treatment of this sometimes intransigent condition. As in
other cardiovascular conditions, diet is important, and
similar guidelines apply. See the general and nutritional
recommendations for heart health given earlier in this
chapter.

The main specific insight is that the patient should
avoid postures or situations that aggravate resistance to
easy venous return from the legs. In addition, anything
that counteracts the effects of gravity will be helpful.
Resting with the legs higher than the head for at least 10
minutes every day will help in the long term and also
decrease any immediate discomfort. This may be
achieved through the inverted postures of yoga, use of a
slant board, or simply by lying on the floor with the legs
and feet supported by a chair. The foot of the bed can be
elevated 6 to 12 inches, thus facilitating drainage at night.

Gentle exercise, such as walking and stretching, is
helpful. However, jogging, skipping, aerobics, and other
exercises involving repeated impact can do more harm
than good. Such exercise can be so uncomfortable for
people with varicose veins that they are unlikely to keep it
up for more than a very short time.

----- PAGE 322 -----
314 =. TREATMHN't APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Aromatherapy can help improve the general tone of
the veins when used in a broad, holistic context. Cypress
oil, for example, has a reputation for strengthening the
veins in the legs. It may be added to a bath oil or blended
in a carrier oil or cream in a 3% dilution and applied very
gently over the affected area. The area above the affected
veins can be massaged. However, the area below the vari-
cosity must never be massaged, as this will increase pres-
sure in the vein.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Murray and
Pizzorno recommend the following supplements:°°

Vitamin A: 10,000 IU/day

Vitamin B complex: 10 to 100 mg/day
Vitamin C with bioflavonoids: 1 to 3 g/day
Vitamin E: 200 to 600 TU/day
Magnesium: 800 to 1,200 mg/day

Zinc: 15 to 30 mg/day

References

1. Weiss RF, Fintelmann V. Herbal Medicine. Stuttgart,

New York: Thieme, 2000.

2. McGuffin, et al. Botanical Safety Handbook. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press, 1997.
3. Brown D. Common drugs and their potential inter-
actions with herbs or nutrients. Review of Complementary
and Integrative Medicine 1999, 6(2):124-41.
4. Keli SO, Hertog MG, Feskens EJ, Kromhout D.
Dietary flavonoids, antioxidant vitamins, and incidence
of stroke: the Zutphen study. Archives of Internal Medicine
996 Mar 25; 156(6):637-42.
5. Wedworth SM, Lynch S. Dietary flavonoids in
atherosclerosis prevention. Annals of Pharmacotherapy
995 Jun; 29(6):627-8.

6. Hertog MG, Feskens EJ, Hollman PC, et al. Dietary
antioxidant flavonoids and risk of coronary heart disease:
the Zutphen Elderly Study. Lancet 1993 Oct 23;
342(8878):1007-11.

7. Revisions to Classification of Functional Capacity and
Objective Assessment of Patients with Diseases of the Heart.
New York Heart Association (NYHA), 1994.

8. Zapfejun G. Clinical efficacy of crataegus extract WS
1442 in congestive heart failure NYHA class II.
Phytomedicine 2001 Jul; 8(4):262-6.

9. Rigelsky JM, Sweet BV. Hawthorn: pharmacology and
therapeutic uses. American Journal of Health-System
Pharmacy 2002 Mar 1; 59(5):417-22.

10. Weikl A, Assmus KD, Neukum-Schmidt A, et al.
Crataegus Special Extract WS 1442. Assessment of

objective effectiveness in patients with heart failure

LL.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21,

22.

23.

24.

(NYHA ID). Fortschritte der Medizin 1996 Aug 30;
114(24):291-6.

Tauchert M. Efficacy and safety of crataegus extract WS
1442 in comparison with placebo in patients with
chronic stable New York Heart Association class-III
heart failure. American Heart Journal 2002 May,
143(5):910-15.

National Institutes of Health. Clinical Guidelines on the
Identification, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and
Obesity in Adults, Bethesda, MD: Department of Health
and Human Services, National Institutes of Health,
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 1998.
Stunkard AJ, Wadden TA, eds. Obesity: Theory and
Therapy, 2nd edition. New York: Raven Press, 1993.
Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Ernst E, Weihmayr T, Matrai A. Garlic and blood lipids.
British Medical Journal (Clinical Research ed.) 1985 Jul 13;
291(6488):139,

Ali M. Mechanism by which garlic (Allium sativum) in-
hibits cyclooxygenase activity. Effect of raw versus boiled
garlic extract on the synthesis of prostanoids.
Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes, and Essential Fatty Acids 1995
Dec, 53(6):397-400.

Banerjee SK, Maulik SK. Effect of garlic on cardiovascu-
lar disorders: a review. Nutrition Journal 2002 Nov 19;
1(1):4.

Al-Qattan K, Khan I, Alnaqeeb MA, Ali M.
Thromboxane-B2, prostaglandin-E2 and hypertension
in the rat 2-kidney 1-clip model: a possible mechanism
of the garlic-induced hypotension. Prostaglandins,
Leukotrienes, and Essential Fatty Acids 2001 Jan;
64(1):5-10.

Satyavati G. Guggulipid: a promising hypolipidaemic
agent from gum guggul (Commiphora wightii). In:
Wagner H, Farnsworth NR, eds. Economic and Medicinal
Plant Research, vol. 5. San Diego: Academic Press, 1991.
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/about/nhbpep/nhbp_pd.htm.
Pizzorno JE, Murray MT, Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Ammon, HPT and Muller AB. Forskolin: from an
ayurvedic remedy to a modern agent. Planta Medica
(1985); 51:473-7,

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Rigelsky JM, Sweet BV. Hawthorn: pharmacology and
therapeutic uses. American Journal of Health-System
Pharmacy 2002 Mar 1, 59(5):417-22.

----- PAGE 323 -----
25.

26.

27.

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Horse chestnut seed extract for
chronic venous insufficiency. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2002; (1):CD003230.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Ginkgo biloba extract for the
treatment of intermittent claudication: a meta-analysis
of randomized trials. The American Journal of Medicine
2000 Mar; 108(4):276-81.

28.

30.

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM @ 315

Kreysel H, Nissen H, Enghofer E. A possible role of
lyosomal enzymes in the pathogenesis of varicosis and
the reduction in their serum activity by Venostsin®.
VASA. Zeitschrift fur Gefasskrankheiten. Journal for
Vascular Diseases 1983; 12(4):377-82.

Pittler MH, Ernst E. Horse chestnut seed extract for
chronic venous insufficiency. Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews 2002; (1):CD003230.

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

----- PAGE 324 -----
THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

hen we draw in a breath, we share that air
W == all other human beings and all other life

on our planet. Through respiration, our one-
ness with trees becomes a manifest fact, and our commu-
nion with the oceans has immediate impact. The reality
of the planetary whole reveals itself, with implications for
all human life, through the circulation of the gases and
energy of the atmosphere. This vision underlies holistic
healing as much as it does ecology. The anatomy and
physiology of the respiratory system is a complex and
beautiful embodiment of integration and wholeness.

Every minute, usually unconsciously, we breathe in
and out between 10 and 15 times. We take a breath nearly
25,000 times a day, moving enough air to and fro to blow
up several thousand balloons. This is the way in which the
body extracts the oxygen it needs from the air and dis-
charges waste carbon dioxide from the blood. The almost
10,000 liters of air inhaled each day is mostly oxygen and
nitrogen. It also contains small amounts of other gases,
floating bacteria, viruses, tobacco smoke, car exhaust, and
other pollutants from the atmosphere.

The lungs sit within the thoracic cage, where they
stretch from the trachea (commonly called the windpipe)
to below the heart. They are textured like a finely grained
sponge that can be inflated with air. About 10% of the
lung is solid tissue and the rest is filled with air and blood.
This unique structure facilitates gas exchange, yet is
strong enough to maintain shape and function of the
lungs. The lungs’ main function is to rapidly exchange
oxygen from inhaled air with carbon dioxide from the
blood.

When we breathe, we take in air through the nose
and mouth, which passes down the throat into the tra-
chea. The air enters the lungs, where it is passes into the
bronchi. The two main bronchi extend from the trachea
into each lung, where they divide into smaller bronchi,
and then a great number of smaller bronchioles. The bron-
chioles divide into a network of about 3 million alveolar
ducts containing ¢/veoli, commonly called air sacs.

The respiratory muscles of the thorax control the

316

movement of the air into the lungs. These muscles, col-
lectively called the ventilatory apparatus, include the di-
aphragm and the muscles that move the ribs. Specific
nerve sites located in the brain and the neck, called resp:-
ratory centers, coordinate the performance of the ventila-
tory apparatus. The respiratory centers respond to
changes in oxygen, carbon dioxide, and acid levels in the
blood. Normal concentrations of these chemicals in arte-
rial blood are maintained by changes in the breathing
rate.

Gas exchange between inhaled air and blood takes
place in the alveoli. A very thin membrane separates the
blood from the air in the alveoli and allows oxygen and
nitrogen to diffuse into the blood. This barrier is 50 times
thinner than a sheet of tissue paper, but a large surface
area (80 square meters, or about as large as a tennis court)
is available for gas exchange. In the resting state, it takes
just about a minute for the total blood volume of the body
to pass through the lungs. It takes a red cell a fraction of
a second to pass through the capillary network. Gas ex-
change occurs almost instantaneously during this short
time period.

The blood carries fresh oxygen throughout the body.
When the blood returns to the alveoli, carbon dioxide and
other gases pass from the blood into the alveoli. These
gases leave the body in the exhaled air. In a larger sense,
the ebb and flow of the breath also draws life energy into
the body. Thus, if respiratory disturbances inhibit gas ex-
change, they can lead to a lowering of the body’s vitality,
an increase in metabolic disorders, and degeneration of
tissue.

PREVENTION OF RESPIRATORY
DISEASE

We are not only what we eat, but also what we breathe.
Any problem with breathing will not only affect other or-
gans and systems, but may also cause disease in these sys-
tems. However, as the body is a whole, the reverse is also
true. When the lungs need attention, we must also look at

----- PAGE 325 -----
the circulatory system, so much of what was discussed in
chapter 14 is also relevant to the lungs. We must also con-
sider the condition of the digestive system and especially
the organs of elimination, as the lungs share the job of
eliminating waste with the bowels, kidneys, and skin.

If a problem develops in any of these systems, the
body will compensate by increasing the load on the oth-
ers. Many pathological tissue changes can be prevented if
the environmental milieu of the cells is constantly rich in
oxygen. The amount of oxygen supplied to the tissue by
circulation is largely controlled by respiration.

Based on all of these considerations, it becomes ap-
parent that two of the best preventive measures for the
respiratory system are regular exercise and proper breath-
ing. While breathing is often taken for granted, conscious
and proper breathing is regarded, even in orthodox med-
ical circles, as invaluable. The central role of the breath in
many spiritual practices should perhaps provide an addi-
tional clue.

The best prophylactic is right lifestyle. Diet, exercise,
and quality of life all have a profound influence on the
health of the lungs. To ensure the health of the lungs,
both the inner and outer environments must be in har-
mony. If the air we breathe is polluted, it will disrupt the
ecology of the lungs just as it disrupts the ecology of the
forest. We should avoid air contaminated with chemicals,
particles, gases, and smoke, which brings us to the issue of
tobacco.

Smoking puts a wall of tar and ash between the indi-
vidual and the world and disrupts the ecology of the
lungs. This disruption can lead to an impressive host of

problems, from bronchitis to cancer, not to mention all
the effects of diminished oxygen supply to the rest of the
body. If we are to heal ourselves and our world, quitting
smoking is a good place to start. The benefits of eating a
whole food diet and living in the country pale a bit when
combined with 20 cigarettes a day!

Other specific dangers can also be recognized and
prevented. We can do our best to avoid respiratory infec-
tions, but as this is often socially impossible, we need to
maintain the body’s natural defenses against infection. If
given the chance, the body is capable of great feats of self-
defense, as long as we provide it with a balanced, vitamin-
rich diet and a lifestyle that is as healthy in thought and
feeling as it is in action.

In this context, it is vital to curb the misuse of antibi-
otics. While these drugs save lives when used at the right
time and in the right way, they can also reduce the effec-
tiveness of the body's innate defense systems to impo-
tence. In the long run, they also contribute to the evolu-

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 317

tion of highly resistant bacteria, so that infections are be-
coming increasingly difficult to treat. Over the past 30
years, doctors have observed alarming developments in
this direction. With correct lifestyle and the appropriate
use of herbal remedies, antibiotics can often be avoided.

Air Pollutants

Air quality is the key to preventing much of the disease
associated with both the upper and the lower respiratory
systems. If we could avoid particulate air pollution and
chemical irritants such as sulfur dioxide, many disabling
conditions of the lungs would not develop. ‘Thus, smok-
ing (both active and passive), as well as urban and indus-
trial pollution, is an important issue for the practitioner
and the patient. Anyone concerned about lung health
should become active in Friends of the Earth!

Air pollutants affect the lungs in many ways. While
they may simply cause irritation and discomfort, inhaled
materials can sometimes cause illness or death. The lungs
have a series of built-in mechanical and biological barri-
ers that keep harmful materials from entering the body. In
addition, specific defense mechanisms inactivate some
disease-causing materials. However, normal lung defenses
and barriers in the lungs do not always work as well as
they should.

If polluted air contains an excessive amount of dust,
fumes, smoke, gases, vapors, or mists, there is an in-
creased risk for developing a lung disease. Air pollution
can irritate the eyes, throat, and lungs. Burning eyes,
cough, and chest tightness are common with exposure to
high levels of air pollutants. Exercise may intensify symp-
toms of air pollution exposure simply because it requires
faster, deeper breathing. Children probably feel the ef-
fects of pollution at lower levels than adults do. They also
experience more illness, such as bronchitis and earaches,
in areas of high pollution than in areas with cleaner air.

For most healthy people, the symptoms of air pollu-
tion exposure resolve as soon as air quality improves.
However, certain groups of people are more sensitive to
the effects of air pollution than others, and responses vary
greatly. Some people may notice chest tightness or cough,
while others notice no effects. People with heart disease
(such as angina) or lung disease (such as asthma or em-
physema) may be very sensitive to air pollution and may
have symptoms when others do not. During times of
heavy pollution, their condition may worsen to the point
that they must limit their activities or even seek additional
medical care.

Air pollution is caused by the presence of gases,
droplets, and particles that reduce the quality of the air. In

----- PAGE 326 -----
318 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BopY SYSTEM

the city, air pollution may be caused by industry and con-
struction as well as cars, buses, and airplanes. Air pollu-
tion in the country may be caused by dust from tractors
plowing fields, trucks and cars driving on dirt or gravel
roads, and rock quarries, as well as by smoke from wood
and crop fires. All of these particles may also be sources of
airborne pesticides and herbicides.

Ground-level ozone is a major component of air pol-
lution in most cities. Ground-level ozone is created when

engine and fuel gases that have already been released into
the air interact in the presence of sunlight. Ozone levels
increase in cities when the air is still, the sun is bright, and
the temperature is warm. Ozone irritates the respiratory
tract and eyes, and exposure to high levels results in chest
tightness, coughing, and wheezing. People with respira-
tory and heart problems are at a higher risk.

Ozone has been linked to increased hospital admis-
sions and premature death. It also causes noticeable leaf
damage in many crops, garden plants, and trees. The
WHO recommends limiting exposure to 0.08 ppm to
0.1 ppm on average an hour. (Ground-level ozone should
not be confused with the protective ozone that exists
miles up in the atmosphere, filtering radiation.)

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) checks
and reports on air quality in the United States. Because of
its efforts, the nation’s air quality has greatly improved
over the past 20 years. The EPA measures the level of
pollution in the air over many large cities and a number
of rural areas. The Pollution Standards Index (PSI) is a
scale of air quality ranging from 0 to 500 and is used in
many weather reports. A PSI score higher than 100 indi-
cates unhealthy air conditions.

Smoking and the Health Effects of Tobacco!

Cigarette smoking causes a variety of life-threatening dis-
eases, including lung cancer, emphysema, chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease, and heart disease. An estimated
400,000 deaths each year are directly caused by cigarette
smoking, This, the single most preventable cause of death,
is responsible for one in six deaths, or more deaths each
year than fires, automobile crashes, alcohol, cocaine,
heroin, AIDS, murders, and suicides combined. Passive
smoking, commonly called secondhand smoke, kills some
50,000 Americans each year, making it the third leading
cause of preventable death. For every eight smokers, one
nonsmoker dies from the effects of secondhand smoke.

Cardiovascular. Diseases

People who smoke a pack of cigarettes a day have more
than twice the risk of heart attack as nonsmokers. Two or

more packs a day increase the risk three times. Smoking
is the principal cause of coronary heart disease, the most
common cause of death in the United States. It is respon-
sible for 21% of fatal heart disease and is an important
cause of stroke, blood vessel disease, and sudden cardiac
death. It also increases the risk of recurrence in people
who have survived a heart attack. Smoking is also the
most powerful risk factor for atherosclerosis of the arter-
ies in the legs.

Cancers

Smoking is responsible for 32% of deaths due to cancer.
Smoking causes cancer of the lung, oral cavity, pharynx,
larynx, esophagus, pancreas, kidney, urinary bladder, and
cervix. In addition, links may exist between smoking and
cancer of the large intestine and some forms of leukemia.
Smoking causes nearly 90% of all lung and throat can-
cers. For many years, lung cancer was the leading cause of
cancer death in men, but now lung cancer has surpassed
breast cancer as the leading cancer killer among women.
The risk of developing cancer increases with amount and
duration of smoking. Alcohol is also a risk factor for some
cancers, and the combination of alcohol and smoking
greatly increases cancer risk.

Respiratory Diseases

The overwhelming importance of smoking as a cause of
chronic obstructive lung disease is well established.
Smoking is responsible for 88% of deaths due to chronic
lung disease, outweighing all other factors that cause
these conditions. Smoking has an adverse effect on the
body’s immune system and other defense mechanisms, in-
creasing the risk of respiratory infections, such as pneu-
monia and influenza. Cigarettes are a factor in up to 90%
of cases of chronic bronchitis in the United States, and in-
crease the risk of developing acute bacterial bronchitis.
Air pollution also contributes to chronic bronchitis, as
does working around dust or chemical fumes.

Gastrointestinal Effects

Smoking decreases the strength of the sphincter muscle
between the throat and stomach, which allows stomach
contents to reflux, or flow backward, into the esophagus.
Tt may also directly injure the esophagus and impair its
ability to resist further damage from refluxed material.
Smoking seems to affect the liver, too, by changing the
way it handles drugs and alcohol. In some people, this
may influence the dose of medication necessary to treat
an illness. Peptic ulcer disease is more likely to occur in
smokers than in nonsmokers, and ulcers heal less readily

----- PAGE 327 -----
and are more likely to recur in smokers. Current and for-
mer smokers have a higher risk of developing Crohn’s dis-
ease than nonsmokers. Among people with this disease,
smoking is associated with a higher rate of relapse, repeat
surgery, and immunosuppressive treatment. In short,
there seems to be enough evidence of harm to the diges-
tive tract to stop smoking solely on this basis.

Effects on Teeth and Gums

Beyond oral cancer, tobacco affects oral health in a num-
ber of other ways. In a recent study of Canadians 50 years
of age and older, smokers were more likely than non-
smokers to have lost all their natural teeth, to have re-
maining teeth with decayed and filled root surfaces, and
to have significant gum disease.

Effects in Pregnancy
Smoking has a direct effect on the growth of the fetus.
The more the mother smokes during pregnancy, the
lower the weight of the newborn infant. Smoking in-
creases the risk that the baby’s weight at birth will be less
than 2,500 grams (5'/ Ibs). Smoking during pregnancy
may also increase the risk of miscarriage. Sudden infant
death syndrome (SIDS, or crib death) occurs more fre-
quently in infants of mothers who smoked during preg-
nancy. Smoking also appears to decrease the quantity and
quality of breast milk, and may lead to early weaning.
Women who smoke during pregnancy incur extra
risks to their own health, in addition to that of the fetus.
Abnormalities of the placenta and bleeding during preg-
nancy are increased with smoking, and the more a pregnant
woman smokes, the greater the risks.

Additional Smoking Hazards for Women

The contribution of smoking to the development of can-
cer of the cervix is clear. Natural menopause occurs ear-
lier in smokers than in nonsmokers by one to two years.
This may have unfavorable implications for the develop-
ment of other conditions, such as coronary heart disease
and osteoporosis. Smoking is also associated with an in-
creased risk of menstrual disorders. Cigarettes and oral
contraceptives are a dangerous combination that in-
creases the risk of heart attacks, strokes, and other vascu-
lar complications.

Other Effects of Smoking

There also appears to be an association between smoking
and the development of a number of other conditions:

Osteoporosis, which in turn predisposes a person to bone
fractures

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 319

Decreased bone density of the lumbar spine and hip in
both younger and older people

Cataracts

Graves’ disease, a thyroid disorder

Decline in physical fitness

Reduction in the ability of the blood to carry oxygen

Increase in heart rate and basal metabolic rate

A decrease of blood flow in the small vessels of the skin
that may damage skin components, leading to skin
wrinkling and an appearance of premature aging

The Workplace

Many substances found in the workplace can cause
breathing problems. Poor ventilation, closed-in working
areas, and heat increase the risk.

Dusts from wood, cotton, coal, asbestos, silica, and talc, as
well as from cereal grains, coffee, pesticides, drug or
enzyme powders, metals, and fiberglass can all hurt the
lungs.

Fumes from metals that are heated and cooled quickly re-
sult in the presence of fine, solid particles in the air.
Fumes may be produced in welding, smelting, pottery
making, plastics manufacture, and rubber operations.

Smoke from burning organic materials can contain a vari-
ety of dusts, gases, and vapors, depending on what is
burning. Firefighters are at special risk.

Gases, such as formaldehyde, ammonia, chlorine, sulfur
dioxide, ozone, and nitrogen oxides, are harmful. At
greatest risk are those working around chemical reac-
tions and in jobs involving high heat.

Vapors, such as solvents, usually irritate the nose and
throat first before they affect the lungs.

Mists or. sprays from paints, lacquers, hair spray, pesticides,
cleaning products, acids, oils, and solvents constitute
another source of pollutants,

Such substances can irritate the nose and throat, pro-
ducing coldlike symptoms such as runny nose and
scratchy throat. Viral infections and allergies produce
similar symptoms, but a work-related illness should be
suspected if nose and throat problems occur when at
work, Such exposure can cause bronchitis, asthma, and
emphysema.

HERBS AND THE LOWER
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

The respiratory system is the focus of gas exchange be-
tween the body and the air. The organs of the respiratory
system are the nose, the pharynx, the larynx, the trachea,

----- PAGE 328 -----
320 @ TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

the bronchi and their smaller branches, and the lungs,
which contain the terminal air sacs, or alveoli. Function-
ally, the respiratory system consists of respiratory and
conducting zones. The respiratory zone, the actual site of
gas exchange, is composed of the respiratory bronchioles,
alveolar ducts, and alveoli. The conducting zone, sometimes
called the dead air space, includes all other respiratory
passageways, which serve as fairly rigid conduits to allow
air to reach the gas exchange sites. The conducting zone
organs also purify, humidify, and warm the incoming air.
Thus, when it reaches the lungs, the air contains many
fewer irritants (such as dust and bacteria) than it did when
it entered the system, and it resembles the warm, damp
air of the tropics.

It is convenient and therapeutically relevant to differ-
entiate between the upper and lower respiratory systems.
The lower respiratory system consists of the respiratory
zone, the alveoli, and respiratory bronchioles. The air-
conducting bronchi and trachea are anatomically part of
this system. The upper respiratory system consists of the
conducting zone, made up of the nose, sinuses, pharynx,
and larynx. The system as a whole represents a major in-
terface with the outside world and thus is a focus of much
immune system activity.

Plant remedies for the respiratory system abound in
pharmacopoeias, and most of the herbs still listed as offi-
cial in British and American pharmacopoeias are expecto-
rant, antitussive, or decongestant. However, the focus of
orthodox medicine on effectors has led to a de-emphasis
of tonic remedies. Pulmonary tonics provide the phy-
totherapist with the opportunity to strengthen both tissue
and function, in addition to addressing symptoms of res-
piratory disease.

Expectorant Herbs

Phytotherapy has a great deal to offer for the treatment of
respiratory disease. However, a major obstacle to correct
use lies in the language herbalists use to describe respira-
tory herbs,

Expectorants are herbs that facilitate or accelerate the
removal of bronchial secretions from the bronchi and tra-
chea. However, in practice, this is a term that is often used
somewhat loosely to refer in a general way to remedies
that “do something” for the respiratory system. Chapter
25 provides a detailed discussion of the primary and sec-
ondary actions of expectorants. For the purposes of this
discussion, however, we will focus briefly on two general
categories of expectorant herbs: stimulating and relaxing.

Table 15.1. Actions and Herbs for the Lower
Respiratory System

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Tussilago farfara,

Verbascum thapsus

Stimulating expectorant Cephaelis ipecacuanha, Inula helenium,
Marrubium vulgare, Sanguinaria canadensis

Relaxing or demulcent
expectorant

Asclepias tuberosa, Cetraria islandica,
Grindelia camporum, Lobelia inflata,
Plantago spp., Tussilago farfara

Antispasmodic Drosera rotundifolia, Euphorbia pilulifera,

Lactuca virosa, Papaver spp,, Prunus serotina

Antimicrobial Allium sativum, Eucalyptus spp.,

Thymus vulgaris

Immune support Echinacea spp.

Anticatarrhal Hyssopus officinalis, Tussilago farfara

Cardiotonic Crataegus spp., Leonurus cardiaca,
Tilia platyphyllos

Nervine Hyssopus officinalis, Lactuca virosa,
Leonurus cardiaca, Lobelia inflata

Stimulating Expectorants

Stimulating expectorants act in different ways to produce
similar effects, but it is not always clear how a specific
remedy works. For any given stimulating expectorant, ei-
ther or both of the following mechanisms may be at play.

Irritation of the bronchioles stimulates the expulsion of any
material present. This irritation initiates a reflex re-
sponse that causes the body to cough.

Liquefaction of viscid sputum encourages clearing by cough-
ing, Sputum is moved upward from the lungs by the
fine hairs of the ciliated epithelium that lines the bron-
chiole tubes, and reduced sputum viscosity facilitates
this transport.

Most stimulating expectorants contain alkaloids,
saponins, or volatile oils. However, not all chemicals in
these groups or plants containing these constituents have
expectorant properties. The particular form of stimula-
tion offered by this group of expectorants makes them
relevant for productive coughs, in which sputum should
be removed from the airways.

----- PAGE 329 -----
Relaxing Expectorants

Relaxing expectorants may also act by reflex, but here the
herbs work to soothe bronchial spasm and loosen mucous
secretions. This loosening occurs because relaxing expec-
torants facilitate the production of a less viscous mucous
secretion, which helps lift up stickier material from below.
This makes relaxing expectorants useful for dry, irritating
coughs. You will notice that this action is similar in some
respects to that of demulcents, and both actions owe a lot
to their content of mucilage and occasionally volatile oils.

Tonics for the Lower Respiratory System
Herbs known as pulmonaries, or amphoteric expectorants,
have a beneficial effect upon both lung tissue and func-
tion. Traditional remedies in this category include Inula
helenium, Verbascum thapsus, and Tussilago farfara.
Differential indications for each of these plants can be
found in chapter 26, but we can generalize here that Inula
has stimulant expectorant effects and Verbascum is more of
a relaxing expectorant. Tussilago is the best of the three for
children.

Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot) contains potentially liver-
damaging pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs), especially in the
roots. Animal studies that used amounts of coltsfoot hun-
dreds of times higher than those used medicinally showed
that these alkaloids can cause cancer in animals. However,
this is not applicable to the size of the doses of coltsfoot
usually used as medicine.’ There has been a single case re-
port of an infant who developed liver disease and died
after the mother drank tea that supposedly contained
coltsfoot during pregnancy. However, researchers found
that instead of Tussilago, the tea contained the PA-rich
plant Adenostyles alliariae, which has leaves similar in ap-
pearance to those of Tussilago.> To avoid any potential tox-
icity problems, leaf and flower formulations of Tussilago
should not be taken for more than one consecutive
month, and root products should not be used internally.

SYMPTOMS OF DISEASE

Five primary symptoms affect the lower respiratory sys-
tem. While each of these symptoms may be effectively
treated with herbs, they must still be seen as signposts of
underlying pathology.

Dyspnea is breathlessness or shortness of breath, discussed
in more detail under Types of Dyspnea below.
Dyspnea is an important symptom of asthma and many
other conditions.

Cough is defined as a sudden explosive expiratory maneu-
ver that tends to clear material from the airways.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 321

Cough is caused by irritation somewhere within the
respiratory tract, and is discussed in more detail later.

Chest pain is a common presenting symptom and calls for
skilled differential diagnosis. Cardiovascular causes
must be distinguished from the range of pulmonary
problems that might be implicated.

Wheezing describes an awareness of noises associated with
breathing.

Hemoptysis, or coughing up blood, calls for skilled
diagnosis.

Types of Dyspnea
Dyspnea, defined as an unpleasant sensation of difficulty
in breathing, has a range of clinical manifestations.

Physiological Dyspnea

This is the most common type of breathlessness and is as-
sociated with physical exertion and low-oxygen condi-
tions. Ventilation is increased and maintained through an
augmented respiratory stimulus provided by metabolic
and other factors. Dyspnea is common during acute hy-
poxia (lack of oxygen). For example, at high altitudes, in-
creased respiratory stimulus is due in part to the effect of
arterial hypoxia on the carotid bodies. These are receptor
sites in the carotid arteries that monitor the concentration
of gases in the blood.

Pulmonary Dyspnea

The two major causes here are restrictive defects that im-
pair efficient movement of the lungs or chest wall (e.g.,
pulmonary fibrosis) and obstructive defects that increase
resistance of flow in the airways (e.g., asthma).

Cardiac Dyspnea

In the early stages of heart failure, the availability of oxy-
gen to the tissues of the body via the blood fails to keep
pace with increased metabolic needs during exercise.
Respiration is increased because of tissue and cerebral
acidosis, which causes hyperventilation. In later stages,
the lungs become congested and edematous. The capac-
ity of the stiff lungs is reduced and the effort needed to
breathe increased.

Cardiac Asthma

This is a state of acute respiratory insufficiency; it is often
very similar to other types of asthma but originates with
left ventricular failure. Orthopnea, or breathing discom-
fort that occurs while a person is lying flat, is usually
symptomatic of a cardiovascular basis for dyspnea.

----- PAGE 330 -----
322 @ TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Circulatory Dyspnea

This symptom, also known as “air hunger,” is often a
medical emergency that results from a lack of oxygen
after hemorrhage. It may occasionally be associated with
anemia.

Chemical Dyspnea

This is dyspnea related to uremia or diabetic acidosis.

Central Dyspnea

This is a symptom of cerebral lesions that affect lung
function.

Psychogenic Dyspnea
Also known as “hysterical overbreathing,” psychogenic
dyspnea is caused by emotional or psychological factors.

COUGH

A sudden explosive expiratory maneuver that tends to clear
material (sputum) from the airways. (The Merck Manual)

Should one soothe coughs, stimulate coughs, or suppress
coughs? As with all holistic approaches, it is always
preferable to focus on the underlying cause of a cough, as
removing the cause will also alleviate the cough. In the
sections that follow, we will discuss a number of different
approaches and remedies for treating coughs.

Always select the appropriate approach for the indi-
vidual’s unique case. The key to treatment is achieving a
correct balance among the various stimulating, demul-
cent, antimicrobial, and antitussive herbs available. Treat
the person and his or her experience, not just the cough.

Coughing is a reflex response that represents an at-
tempt by the body to clear the airways. Usually, blockages
are caused by mucus secreted by membranes lining the
respiratory tract, These mucous secretions help to protect
the respiratory tract from all kinds of irritants by trapping
and flushing out smoke particles, bacteria, and viruses.
Any cough that lasts more than a few days, does not re-
spond to treatment, or produces blood should be investi-
gated further, as it may be a sign of serious organic disease.

In addition to the considerations just discussed,

cough may be related to gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD). In this condition, acid reflux from the stomach
backs up into the throat, causing either heartburn or
cough. See chapter 13 for more information about the
etiology and treatment of this common condition.

Treatment of Cough
Acute inflammatory conditions of the respiratory system
are primarily treated with mucilage-rich demulcents,
which soothe inflamed tissue, It is difficult to explain the
mechanism at play here, as the mucopolysaccharide
molecules in demulcent herbs do not enter the blood-
stream and thus cannot be directly active in the respira-
tory tissue. Instead, they are catabolized into their various
components by digestive enzymes, and must exert their
effects through mechanisms other than direct contact.
Stimulant, saponin-containing expectorants are best
used for subacute or chronic bronchitis, for which active
expectoration is indicated. However, any irritation in
chronic bronchitis will indicate the need for increased
demulcent action. This facilitates difterentiated stages of
cough therapy that can rapidly ameliorate the symptoms
and shorten the duration of respiratory illness.
Traditional folk wisdom is a rich source of simple yet
effective treatments for coughs. A simple cough remedy
can be made with onion and honey.

A Simple Cough Elixir

Slice a large onion into rings and place them in a deep bowl.
Cover the onion slices with organic honey and let stand
overnight. In the morning, strain off the mixture of honey and
onion juice, which makes a simple cough elixir. (Honey itself,
which is often included in cough mixtures, has antimicrobial and
expectorant properties.) Take a dessert spoon of this mixture
four or five times a day.

A Basic Herbal Cough Tea

Tussilago farfara 2 parts
Althaea officinalis 2 parts
Hyssopus officinalis 2 parts
Glycyrrhiza glabra 1 part
Pimpinella anisum 1 part

Infuse 1 teaspoon of dried herb mixture in 1 cup of freshly boiled
water; drink often until symptoms subside.

BRONCHITIS

Bronchitis is either an acute or a chronic inflammation of
the mucous lining of the bronchial tubes, the main air-
ways that carry air from the trachea to the lungs. This in-
flammation may be caused by viral or bacteria infection,
smoking, or inhalation of chemical pollutants or dust.
Types of bacteria that cause acute bronchitis include
Streptococcus pneumoniae and Hemophilus influenzae.

----- PAGE 331 -----
‘When the cells of the bronchial lining tissue are irri-
tated beyond a certain point, cilia that normally trap and
eliminate pollutants stop functioning. The air passages
become clogged by mucus, and irritation increases. In re-
sponse, a heavy secretion of mucus develops, causing the
characteristic cough of bronchitis.

Bronchitis makes breathing difficult and sometimes
even painful. Pain may be related to the swelling of the
mucous membrane in the trachea. Other common signs
of bronchitis are persistent coughing, aching associated
with fever, and mucus secretions. The patient will feel
very fatigued due to the fact that the body is receiving less
oxygen than it needs.

ACUTE BRONCHITIS

Acute inflammation of the tracheobronchial tree, gener-
ally self-limiting and with eventual complete healing and
return of function. (The Merck Manual)

Acute bronchitis usually originates with a viral infection
of the upper respiratory tract, such as a cold or sore
throat, that can become a secondary bacterial infection
and spread to the lungs. Though usually mild, it may be
serious in debilitated people and those with chronic lung
or heart disease.

Acute bacterial bronchitis usually lasts about a week
and is accompanied by a cough that produces thick green
or yellow mucus. Severe cases may also cause general
malaise and chest pain. At first the cough is very dry, but
as the lungs produce additional mucus in response to the
infection, the cough becomes easier and less painful as the
mucus lubricates the bronchi. Acute bronchitis may be
accompanied by fever that lasts a few days, but persistent
fever suggests the development of a pneumonia compli-
cation.

The cough of acute bronchitis may last for several
weeks or even months, a reflection of the amount of time
it takes for the bronchial lining to heal. However, the
cough can also be a sign of other problems. For example,
acute bronchitis can be confused with asthma, and pneu-
monia can also sometimes cause similar symptoms. Acid
that comes up from the stomach and drips into the lungs
during sleep may also cause bronchitis.

Acute bronchitis most commonly develops as a com-
plication of a cold in a healthy person. It may also mani-
fest as a flare-up in a person with chronic bronchitis. The
best defense against acute bronchitis is not to smoke.
Smoking damages the bronchial tree and makes it easier
for viruses to cause infection. Smoking also slows healing,
so it takes longer to get well.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM - 323

Treatment of Acute Bronchitis

Bed rest, drinking plenty of fluids, and staying indoors in
damp, cold weather are essential elements of treatment.
Congestive mucus should be coughed up, so avoid the use
of cough suppressants. The use of soothing, relaxing ex-
pectorants in combination with antimicrobials is often the
key to successful treatment. Particularly important relax-
ing expectorants are Tussilago, Verbascum, Plantago,
Cetraria, Trigonella, Althaea, and Pulmonaria.

The respiratory system will obviously need tonic and
immune system support, especially if acute bronchitis is
an annual event. As noted, the heart and blood vessels will
benefit from tonics, such as Crataegus and Allium sativum,
as there may be a deleterious impact on the tissue and its
functions.

Actions Indicated

Pulmonary tonics are not crucial if the bronchitis is not a
recurrent problem. However, they are clearly indicated
for immunocompromised people.

Expectorants are indicated; the choice between stimulating
and relaxing expectorants will depend on the individ-
ual’s needs.

Demulcents augment the action of relaxing expectorants, if
necessary.

Antispasmodics can help if coughing is very troublesome.

Antimicrobials are essential to deal with infection and to
help the body defend against the development of sec-
ondary infection.

Anti-inflammatories may be indicated if there is extensive
inflammation, and especially if the larynx or pharynx is
involved.

Anticatarrhals improve the upper respiratory symptom
picture.

Diaphoretics are indicated if the patient has a fever.

Cardiotonic herbs offer support if there is any history or
suspicion of cardiovascular problems.

Specific Remedies

Herbal traditions from around the world offer a wealth of
possible specifics. For example, osha (Ligusticum porteri),
a plant of the American Southwest, is an excellent specific
for cases of tracheobronchitis.

The specifies listed here cover a range of expectorant,
antimicrobial, and antispasmodic actions. Strictly speak-
ing, none of them is guaranteed to work in all cases, as
specifics must be chosen based on the unique needs of an
individual with a particular clinical picture. Please see
chapter 25 for more information on the primary and sec-
ondary actions of these herbs.

----- PAGE 332 -----
324 « TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Specific Remedies from Europe and North America
Allium sativum (garlic)

Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Asclepias tuberosa (pleurisy root)
Cephaelis ipecacuanha (ipecac)

Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss)
Chondrus crispus Irish moss)

Drosera rotundifolia (sundew)
Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Inula helenium (elecampane)
Ligusticum porteri (osha)

Lobelia inflata (lobelia)

Marrubium vulgare (white horehound)
Pimpinella anisum (anise)

Plantago spp. (plantain)

Polygala senega (Seneca snakeroot)
Populus balsamifera var. balsamifera (balm of Gilead) °
Primula veris (cowslip)

Pulmonaria officinalis (langwort)
Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Symplocarpus foetidus (skunk cabbage)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)

Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Viola odorata (sweet violet)

The infusion presented here, provided by Dr. Rudolf
Fritz Weiss in Herbal Medicine, supplies the additional
benefit of increased fluid intake.*

A Demulcent Tea for Acute Dry Cough

Verbascum thapsus 1 part
Tussilago farfara 1 part
Althaea officinalis 1 part
Pimpinella anisum 1 part

Infuse 2 teaspoons of dry herb combination in 1 cup of boiling
water for 20 minutes; drink hot three times a day

Table 15.2. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Acute Dry Cough

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Verbascum thapsus, Tussilago farfara

Verbascum thapsus, Tussilago farfara,
Althaea officinalis, Pimpinella anisum

Relaxing expectorant

Demulcent Verbascum thapsus, Tussilago farfara,
Althaea officinalis

Antispasmodic Pimpinella anisum

Antimicrobial Pimpinella anisum

Anti-inflammatory Verbascum thapsus, Tussilago farfara,

Althaea officinalis, Pimpinella anisum

Anticatarrhal Verbascum thapsus, Tussilago farfara,

Althaea officinalis

Another approach increases the stimulating expecto-
rant component, making it more appropriate for subacute
and chronic bronchitis characterized by excessive sputum
production.

Prescription | to Promote Expectoration

Primula veris 1 part
Thymus vulgaris 1 part
Tussilago farfara 1 part

Infuse 2 teaspoons of dry herb combination in 1 cup of boiling
water for 20 minutes; drink hot three times a day.

Table 15.3. Actions Supplied by Expectorant
Prescription I

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Tussilago farfara

Relaxing expectorant Tussilago farfara

Stimulating expectorant Primula veris

Demulcent Tussilago farfara
Antispasmodic Primula veris, Thymus vulgaris
Antimicrobial Thymus vulgaris

Anti-inflammatory Tussilago farfara

Anticatarrhal Tussilago farfara

----- PAGE 333 -----
An alternative yet equivalent approach for acute dry
cough replaces Thymus vulgaris with Pimpinella anisum.
This combination also boosts the stimulating expectorant
action of the prescription by increasing the proportion of
saponin-rich Primula veris.

Prescription II to Promote Expectoration

Primula veris 2 parts
Pimpinella anisum 1 part
Tussilago farfara 1 part

Infuse 2 teaspoons of dry herb combination in 1 cup of boiling
water for 20 minutes; drink hot three times a day.

A Prescription to Combat Infection in Acute Bronchitis

Inula helenium 1 part
Marrubium vulgare 1 part
Tussilago farfara 1 part
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be eaten raw (one clove a day) or garlic oil taken as a
supplement.

Table 15.4. Actions Supplied by Prescription to
Combat Infection

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Tussilago farfara

Relaxing expectorant Tussilago farfara
Stimulating expectorant _—_/nula helenium, Marrubium vulgare
Demulcent Tussilago farfara
Antimicrobial Inula helenium, Hydrastis canadensis
Immune stimulant Echinacea spp.

Anti-inflammatory Hydrastis canadensis, Tussilago farfara

Anticatarrhal Echinacea spp., Hydrastis canadensis,
Tussilago farfara

Bitter stimulant Marrubium vulgare

Remedies for External Use

It is often possible to abort the development of a cold or
even flu with a steam inhalation made from volatile
oil-rich plants. When the problem is already established,
inhalations help loosen the cough and clear the sinuses.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM & 325

Thymus, Eucalyptus, Matricaria, and Origanum are good
choices for steam inhalations. Pure plant essential oils
may also be used. Volatile oil-rich herbs are effective de-
congestants and support the internal treatment by ad-
dressing some associated symptoms.

Steam Inhalation

Matricaria flowers 1 part
Thymus herb 1 part
Origanum herb 1 part

Add 1 tablespoon of dried herb combination to V% liter {1 pint)
of boiling water. Create a tent by draping a towel over the head
to prevent the escape of vapors; inhale vapors rising from bowl.
Inhale vapors for 5 to 10 minutes.

Aromatherapy for Acute Bronchitis

Aromatherapy treatment aims at combating infection, re-
ducing fever, easing cough, and expelling mucus. In the
first stages of acute bronchitis, when the cough is dry and
painful, steam inhalation with the oils listed here may
provide a great deal of relief.

Bergamot and eucalyptus oils are also effective in
lowering fever, and all of these oils will help to reinforce
the immune response to the infection. Dwarf pine needle
oil (Pinus pumilio) has been the main oil used traditionally,
but with the growing interest in aromatherapy, many
volatile oils are now recognized as valuable remedies for
inhalations. Here are some of the many possibilities.

Essential Oils for Steam Inhalation
Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia (bergamot)
Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus)

Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Mentha arvensis var. piperascens (Asian mint)
M. piperita (peppermint)

Pinus pumilio (dwarf or white pine)
Santalum album (sandalwood)

Styrax benzoin (benzoin)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Mentha arvensis var. piperascens, the source of
“Chinese white flower oil,” is especially rich in menthol.
Menthol is anti-inflammatory, especially for the mucous
membranes of the upper respiratory tract. It stimulates
mucous secretions and exerts antimicrobial and mild
anaesthetic actions. As with many oils, it is best used at
the onset of symptoms.

----- PAGE 334 -----
326 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Essential Oil Inhalation

Place 3 to 5 drops of essential oil in a bowl and add boiling
water. Create a tent by draping a towel over the head to prevent
the escape of vapors; inhale vapors rising from bowl. Inhale for
5 to 10 minutes, keeping the eyes closed to prevent irritation
from vapor.

Massaging or otherwise applying oils to chest, neck,
or back fosters absorption through the skin, technically
called percutaneous absorption. Be sure to dilute the oil first
in an appropriate carrier oil, such as almond oil. Essential
oils absorbed through the skin are often eliminated from
the body via the lungs, allowing the constituents to come
in contact with the site of lung infection or inflammation.
A good technique is to apply the oil and then place a clean
dry cloth over the area to ensure that oils are absorbed
and do not evaporate.

Post-Bronchitis Recovery

A bout of acute bronchitis is commonly followed by a
period of debility. Appropriate herbs will not only speed
recovery, but will also support the body in its attempt to
revivify and recuperate. Emphasis should be given to res-
piratory tonics, bitter tonics, and support for any body
system or functions indicated for the individual.

Toning remedies to consider include Verbascum thap-
sus and Marrubium vulgare. Marrubium is especially use-
ful, for not only is it an excellent lung remedy, but it also
has valuable bitter properties. If antibiotics have been
used, please follow the guidelines for herbal support pro-
vided in chapter 21.

Broader Context of Treatment

Goals of treatment in the latter stages of acute bronchitis
include clearing mucus from the lungs and preventing the
development of complications, and any of the expectorant
essential oils will be indicated. The cough may persist for
some time after the fever has subsided, but applying such
oils in inhalations, baths, and local massage to chest and
throat will shorten the time needed for full recovery.

Expectorant Essential Oils to Aid in Recovery
Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia (bergamot)
Commiphora molmol (myrrh)

Ocimum basilicum (basil)

Origanum majorana (marjoram)

Santalum album (sandalwood)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

The patient should be kept warm and rested, prefer-
ably in bed. It is important to avoid any factors that can
aggravate the cough, such as smoke and very dry air.
Given this care and treatment, most adults will recover
from an attack of bronchitis fairly quickly and without
complications, but the very elderly or frail, babies and
young children, and people with heart conditions or a his-
tory of lung infections are at much greater risk.

CHRONIC BRONCHITIS

A condition associated with prolonged exposure to non-
specific bronchial irritants and accompanied by mucus
hypersecretion and certain structural changes in the
bronchi. (The Merck Manual)

Chronic bronchitis is a long-term condition unaccompa-
nied by fever. It is characterized by a permanent cough
with sputum that results from continual overproduction
of mucus. Healthy lungs normally produce a small
amount of mucus all the time, which is constantly swept
up the bronchi by the cilia. This imperceptible process
goes on continually, and the mucus produced is swallowed
along with the saliva.

However, when infection, air pollution, smoking, or
other external factors irritate the bronchi, the lungs are
provoked to produce abnormally large amounts of mucus,
which literally swamp the minute cilia. A deep layer of
mucus covers the cilia, so they are no longer able to pro-
pel it out of the bronchi. In effect, this impairs the body’s
ability to expel mucus by coughing.

A series of acute bronchitis attacks, heavy smoking,
or prolonged inhalation of contaminated air may result in
chronic bronchitis. This implies that chronic bronchitis is
preventable, as the primary causal factors are pollutants.
Climate and air pollution are serious factors, especially
when the two combine to produce fog, but the two most
important factors are smoking and bad nutrition.

Because chronic bronchitis can be life threatening,
prompt professional attention is necessary, no matter
what the underlying cause. The condition is characterized
by coughing up mucus nearly every day for months or
years. The condition may be classified into three grades
of severity.

1. Simple chronic bronchitis is mild but persistent with
clear sputum,

2. Mucopurulent bronchitis is a condition in which the
sputum is occasionally or always thick and often yel-
lowish, due to the presence of pus caused by bacte-
rial infection.

----- PAGE 335 -----
3. Obstructive bronchitis occurs when structural damage
has been caused by continual infection, inflamma-
tion, and coughing.

In obstructive bronchitis, the bronchi become nar-
rowed due to thickening and scarring of the membrane
that lines them, The lungs lose some of their elasticity
and breathing becomes more difficult, as a greater effort
is needed to get a sufficient volume of air into the lungs.
Damage also reduces the amount of alveolar tissue, the
very thin membrane through which oxygen passes into
the blood and carbon dioxide and other waste materials
are extracted. Eventually, the heart may become strained
in trying to maintain sufficient circulation within the
lungs.

Treatment of Chronic Bronchitis

The treatment guidelines suggested here must be seen in
the context of minimizing exposure to chemical and par-
ticulate air pollution, whether from tobacco smoke or in-
dustrial sources. Tonic support is vital for this chronic and
debilitating condition. An inherent strength of herbal
medicine reveals itself here, as the phytotherapist may se-
lect plants that not only effectively address the symptom
picture, but also serve as appropriate tonics. The respira-
tory, cardiovascular, and immune systems all deserve spe-
cial focus.

Specific Remedies

Please refer to Specific Remedies provided for acute
bronchitis. In addition, the steam inhalation and aro-
matherapy recommendations given for acute bronchitis
are also relevant to chronic bronchitis.

Actions Indicated

Pulmonary tonics are essential for supporting respiratory
function and the health and general tone of the lungs.

Simulating expectorants are especially useful in cases char-
acterized by heavy mucus production.

Relaxing expectorants are as not as important in chronic as
acute bronchitis; however, they often serve as good
supportive remedies.

Demutcents will soothe any associated irritation.

Diapboretics are valuable when fever is an issue, but are not
as vital here as in acute bronchitis.

Antispasmodics can help if coughing or breathlessness is
severe.

Antimicrobials help the body rid itself of any accompany-
ing infection.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 327

Cardiotonics are essential for supporting cardiac function
in the elderly, patients with cardiovascular weakness,
or those with long-term chronic bronchitis.

Nervine and even adaptogen support may be useful in some
cases.

A Prescription for Chronic Bronchitis with Debility

Inula helenium 1 part
Cetraria islandica 1 part
Tussilago farfara 1 part
Verbascum thapsus 1 part

Add 1 teaspoon of dried herb mixture to 1 cup of boiling water
and infuse for 20 minutes. Drink hot three times a day.

This formulation is designed for a patient who is de-
bilitated and weakened by chronic bronchitis. Thus, it
contains a blend of stimulating and relaxing pulmonary
tonics. Cetraria has long been used in the United
Kingdom (the world capital of chronic bronchitis!) as nu-
tritive support in such cases. To this may be added other
herbs appropriate for the individual, such as Crataegus
spp., Eleutherococcus senticosus, and Galium aparine. Please
refer to chapter 26 for more information on these sug-
gested additions.

Table 15.5. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Chronic Bronchitis with Debility

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Tussilago farfara,

Verbascum thapsus

Stimulating expectorant Inula helenium

Relaxing expectorant Cetraria islandica, Tussilago farfara,

Verbascum thapsus

Demulcent Cetraria islandica, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus

Antimicrobial Inula helenium

Anticatarrhal Inula helenium, Cetraria islandica,
Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Diaphoretic Inula helenium

----- PAGE 336 -----
328 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

A Prescription for Chronic Bronchitis with Infection

Inula helenium 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Marrubium vulgare 1 part
Verbascum thapsus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be eaten raw (one clove a day) or garlic oil taken as a
supplement.

Table 15.6. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Chronic Bronchitis with Infection

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Verbascum thapsus

Stimulating expectorant —/nula helenium, Marrubium vulgare

Relaxing expectorant Verbascum thapsus

Bitter Marrubium vulgare

Antispasmodic Allium sativum

Antimicrobial Inula helenium, Allium sativum
Immune stimulant Echinacea spp.

Anticatarrhal Inula helenium, Echinacea spp.,

Verbascum thapsus, Allium sativum

Diaphoretic Inula helenium, Allium sativum
Cardiotonic Allium sativum

A Prescription for Chronic Recurrent
Bronchitis with Dyspnea

Inula helenium T part
Dyspnea Formula (see page 332) 1 part
Marrubium vulgare 1 part
Verbascum thapsus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be eaten raw in the diet (one clove a day) or garlic oil
taken as a supplement.

Table 15.7. Actions Supplied by Prescription for

Chronic Bronchitis with Dyspnea
ACTION HERBS
Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Verbascum thapsus

Stimulating expectorant —_nula helenium, Marrubium vulgare

ACTION HERBS

Relaxing expectorant Verbascum thapsus

Antispasmodic Allium sativum

Antimicrobial Inula helenium, Allium sativum

Anticatarrhal Inula helenium, Verbascum thapsus,
Allium sativum

Diaphoretic Inula helenium, Allium sativum

Cardiotonic Allium sativum

Please see Asthma later in this chapter for more de-
tails about the herbs and actions added to address the
dyspnea component in this prescription.

A Prescription for Chronic Recurrent Bronchitis
with Severe Congestion

Inula helenium 1 part
Sanguinaria canadensis 1 part
Marrubium vulgare T part
Verbascum thapsus 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Allium sativum
should be eaten raw in the diet (one clove a day) or garlic oil
taken as a supplement.

Table 15.8. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Chronic Bronchitis with Severe Congestion

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Verbascum thapsus

Stimulating expectorant Sanguinaria canadensis, Inula helenium,

Marrubium vulgare
Relaxing expectorant Verbascum thapsus
Bitter Marrubium vulgare

Antispasmodic Sanguinaria canadensis, Allium sativum

Antimicrobial Inula helenium, Sanguinaria canadensis,
Allium sativum

Anticatarrhal Inula helenium, Verbascum thapsus,
Allium sativum

Diaphoretic Inula helenium, Allium sativum

Cardiotonic Allium sativum

----- PAGE 337 -----
Broader Context of Treatment

Much of the information provided for acute bronchitis is
relevant to chronic bronchitis as well. Smokers are still
more likely to die from chronic bronchitis than from lung
cancer, and giving up smoking is the first and most im-
portant preventive measure.

The other is improving nutrition, particularly cutting
out or greatly reducing the consumption of foods that en-
courage the production of mucus. For most people, these
are dairy products and refined starches. Dairy products
appear to be the worst culprits, and cutting them right out
of the diet for a time—perhaps for several weeks, or even
several months if the bronchitis is long standing—will
often bring about improvement. After that, dairy may be
cautiously reintroduced, but only in very small amounts.
For some people, it may be necessary to omit them from
the diet permanently. Goat’s milk may prove to promote
less mucus production than cow’s milk.

Starches also provoke: excess mucus production, and
refined starches (including white flour and all products
made from it) are far worse than unrefined grains.
Additives, such as chemical flavorings, colorings, and
preservatives, also often trigger excess mucus production
and should be avoided. The best and simplest rule is to
eat foods in a state as near as possible to that in which
they were grown. Avoid processed, dried, frozen, pack-
aged, and precooked foods, and as often as possible eat
foods raw or very lightly cooked.

Exercise can strengthen the muscles that facilitate
breathing. Patients should exercise at least three times a
week, starting with short sessions of gentle exercise and
gradually building up to longer, more strenuous sessions.
For example, one might begin exercising by walking
slowly for 15 minutes three times a week. Next, increase
the walking speed, at the same time increasing the length
of time spent walking, first to 20 minutes, then to 25, and
then to 30.

A special exercise program, called pulmonary rehabili-
tation, can help improve breathing; this is usually per-
formed with the assistance of a respiratory therapist. A
breathing method called pursed-lip breathing may also
help. Take a deep breath, then breathe out slowly through
the mouth while holding the lips as if about to give a kiss.
Pursed-lip breathing slows the fast breathing that comes
with chronic bronchitis.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 329

PERTUSSIS

An acute, highly communicable bacterial disease, charac-
terized by a paroxysmal or spasmodic cough that usually
ends in a prolonged, high-pitched, crowing inspiration
(the whoop). (The Merck Manual)

Pertussis, commonly known as whooping cough, is caused
by the bacterium Bordetella pertussis. This highly contagious
infection is transmitted when the bacteria are coughed or
sneezed out by an infected person and breathed in by
someone else, especially during the catarrhal and early
paroxysmal stages of the disease. After the third week of
paroxysmal coughing, patients are no longer infectious.
The incubation period averages 7 to 14 days.

B. pertussis invades the respiratory mucosa, causing in-
creased secretion of mucus, which is initially thin. Later,
the mucus becomes viscid and is not easily moved. The
disease lasts about six weeks and has three well-defined
stages.

1. Catarrhal. This stage begins slowly, with sneezing,
free-flowing tears, and other signs typical of the
common cold, Anorexia, listlessness, and a trouble-
some, hacking nocturnal cough develop next; the
cough gradually becomes diurnal.

2. Paroxysmal. Developing after 10 to 14 days, this
stage is characterized by paroxysmal coughing. Five
to 15 rapidly consecutive coughs are followed by the
characteristic whoop, a hurried, deep inspiration.
After a few normal breaths, another paroxysm may
begin. The patient may expel large quantities of
thick, viscid mucus during the paroxysms. Vomiting
after paroxysms is common.

3. Convalescent. This stage usually begins within four
weeks. The frequency of paroxysms decreases, and
the patient begins looking, feeling, and sounding
better.

Treatment of Whooping Cough
Long-term immune system support is essential after such
an infection. In addition, support for the respiratory sys~

_ tem and potentially even the cardiovascular system may

be needed.

Specific Remedies

The European herbal tradition proposes a number of herbs
as possible specifics. However, these are not dramati-
cally effective and do not replace appropriate antibiotic
treatment. Instead, they support antibiotic therapy and the
body’s innate efforts to heal itself. Among these specifics
are many anumicrobial and antispasmodic remedies.

----- PAGE 338 -----
330 a TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

European Specific Remedies for Pertussis
Drosera rotundifolia (sandew)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Pinguicula vulgaris (butterbur)

Prunus serotina (wild cherry bark)

Eryngium planum (sea holly)

A Prescription for Pertussis and Other
Paroxysmal Coughs

Thymus vulgaris 1 part
Drosera rotundifolia 1 part
Prunus serotina 1 part
Pimpinella anisum 1 part

Infuse 1 teaspoon of dried herb mixture in 1 cup of boiling water
for 20 minutes. This should be drunk hot several times a day. Hot
infusions are valuable in that they replace lost fluids and pro-
mote diaphoresis.

ASTHMA

A reversible obstructive lung disorder characterized by in-
creased responsiveness of the airways. (The Merck Manual)

Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways
typified by wheezing, chest tightness, coughing exacerba-
tions, and difficult breathing.’ An estimated 15 million
Americans suffer from asthma, including 4.8 million chil-
dren and adolescents. Asthma can develop at any time, but
is most common in young children. When it starts in child-

hood, asthma usually improves with age. In adult onset
asthma, however, the condition often worsens with age.

A common misconception is that asthma and wheez-
ing are the same thing. Wheezing is a sign of asthma, but
many other conditions can also cause wheezing. This
confusion has led to the replacement of the term asthma
with a more descriptive name, reactive airway disease
(RAD). People with RAD have bronchial passages that
are more sensitive than normal to irritation. This hyper-
sensitivity leads to inflammation in the tiny airways deep
in the lungs. The inflammation in turn fosters the pro-
duction of excess mucus and a tightening of the muscles
that wind around the bronchial tubes. This combination
of swelling, mucus, and tight muscles causes narrowing of
the airways. Wheezing usually results, but a dry cough is
sometimes the only sign.

Most asthma is characterized by one or more of the
following classic symptoms.

Wheezing. This may be either a low or a loud whistie
usually heard on expiration (breathing out).

Coughing. The cough of asthma is either a mild cough or
a persistent hack that often occurs at night. Chest
tightness, experienced as a feeling of bands strapped
around the chest or a burning sensation, is another
characteristic symptom.

Shortness of breath. This may be described as an inability
to catch one’s breath or feeling like trying to breathe
through a straw. Breathing out is especially tough.

Such symptoms generally begin upon exposure to the
individual's special “trigger” that sets off an attack. A se-
quence of events then occurs at the cellular level in the
lungs.

Swelling. The bronchial tubes, often already swollen due
to the chronic nature of asthma, develop the charac-
teristic swelling of inflammation. This inflammation
reduces the amount ofair that can move in and out of
the lungs.

Bronchoconstriction. The muscles around the bronchial
tubes tighten, making breathing difficult.

Clogging. The bronchial tubes begin to produce more
mucus, in turn clogging the airways. However, the
tubes may be swollen and sensitive whether or not the
inflammation is felt.

Asthma Triggers

Asthma attacks can be minimized by avoiding triggering
factors. Several triggers can cause the airways to become
more inflamed, and once exposed to a certain trigger, the
airways may become more sensitive to other triggers.

Allergies

An estimated 75% of childhood asthma is allergy related,
so controlling allergies may be pivotal to reducing the fre-
quency of asthma attacks. If symptoms worsen during
certain seasons, the causative factor is probably an allergy
to plant pollen. When exposed to pollen, the body re-
sponds by creating antibodies that attach themselves to
mast cells in the nose and airways. (Mast cells are immune
system cells that detect foreign substances and initiate
local inflammatory responses against them.) In turn, the
mast cells produce and release a chemical called his-
tamine, which generates the allergic response. While ex-
posure to pollen cannot be avoided entirely, the ravages it
produces in asthmatics can be minimized if some basic
facts are borne in mind.

Not all pollens cause the same symptoms. Tree pollens cause
problems in early spring; grass pollens strike in late
spring and early summer. Weed pollens cause flare-ups
in late summer.

----- PAGE 339 -----
Seasons begin at different times in different bioregions.
Ragweed strikes the hardest during mid-August to late
October on the East Coast and in the Midwest.

Weather and time of day also affect asthma symptoms.

Colds and Other Respiratory Infections

The most common asthma trigger is a simple cold or
other respiratory infection. Colds very quickly cause the
airways to become inflamed in asthmatics, even if cold
symptoms remain mostly in the head.

Ingested Allergens
These may be drugs (e.g., aspirin), foods, food additives,
yeasts, or molds on food.

Gastric Reflux

As much as 30% of all asthma may be caused by gastro-
esophageal reflux, which causes the unpleasant symptom
commonly known as heartburn. Even if other specific
asthma triggers have been identified, try preventing
heartburn for a few weeks to see if this leads to an im-
provement in asthma symptoms. (See chapter 13 for more
information on the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux
disease.)

Exercise

Cold dry air is more aggravating than warm moist air.
Simple measures, such as breathing through a scarf and
taking preventive medicine before exercise, can help to
minimize attacks.

Weather Changes
These include changes in barometric pressure, humidity,
and temperature.

Airborne Irritants

Air pollution, dust, cigarette or wood smoke, chemical va-
pors, irritant gases, and even perfumes can all trigger
asthma attacks.

Physical or Emotional Stress
Minimizing stress, whatever the cause, will help decrease
the chance of triggering an attack.

Hormonal Changes

In some women, hormonal changes can trigger attacks at
certain times in the menstrual cycle.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 331

Childhood-Onset Asthma

Asthma that begins in childhood is closely linked with the
presence of eczema, hay fever, urticaria (hives), and mi-
graine in the patient or in close relatives. People with this
kind of family history are called atopic. If both parents have
a history of atopy, the child has a 50% chance of being af
fected; if only one parent is affected, the chance is 30%;
and if neither parent is affected, the chance is approxi-
mately 12%. The onset of childhood asthma is often pre-
ceded for several months or even years by episodic cough-
ing, which later develops into wheezy bronchitis and then
eventually into asthma. These children often have a his-
tory of slow recovery from upper respiratory tract viral in-
fections as well as a personal or family history of atopy.

Adult-Onset Asthma

Adult-onset asthma is more common in women than in
men. There are two broad types. In the first type, no ob-
vious reasons are apparent for asthma attacks. In the sec-
ond, fairly obvious external trigger factors precipitate at-
tacks. While the sufferer may be able to avoid these
triggers, new allergens will continue to be detected, to be
added to the list of external or environmental causes of
the condition. Thus, a wide range of etiological factors
can be involved in this all too common problem.

The two main types of adult-onset asthma are de-
scribed as follows.

Extrinsic asthma is caused by allergic responses to house
dust, animal fur, or various foods. This type accounts
for 10% to 20% of adult-onset asthma cases.

Intrinsic asthma is caused by genetics, structural problems,
infections, pollutants, and stress—both physiological
and psychological. This accounts for 30% to 50% of
adult-onset asthma.

Symptoms of asthma can differ greatly in frequency
and degree among individuals. Some have occasional,
mild, brief episodes and are otherwise symptom-free.
Others experience mild coughing and wheezing much of
the time, punctuated by severe exacerbations related to
exposure to known allergies, viral infections, exercise, or
nonspecific irritants.

----- PAGE 340 -----
332 o TREATMENI APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Table 15.9. Stages of an Acute Asthma Attack

STAGE SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

Stage 1: Mild Mild dyspnea, diffuse wheezing,

adequate air exchange

Stage 2: Moderate Respiratory distress at rest, use of

accessory muscles, marked wheezing

Stage 3: Severe Marked respiratory distress, cyanosis,
use of accessory muscles, marked

wheezing or absence of breath sounds

Stage 4: Respiratory failure Severe respiratory distress, lethargy,

confusion, use of accessory muscles

Treatment of Acute Asthma

Phytotherapy has much to offer for the treatment, control,
and even cure of asthmatic problems, but will not replace
emergency allopathic support for stages 3 and 4 of an
acute attack.

Tonic support of the systems most affected by asthma
is often the key to successful treatment. The respiratory
system, of course, is of primary importance. In addition,
attention must be paid to the cardiovascular, nervous, and
digestive systems. The digestive system is implicated be-
cause the dietary sensitivities triggering asthma may also
cause problems in the alimentary canal.

Actions Indicated

Pulmonary tonics are important for long-term strengthening
of the lungs, but offer little short-term relief for acute
attacks,

Expectorants help prevent buildup of sputum in the
lungs. However, use only relaxing expectorants, as
stimulant expectorants can potentially aggravate
breathing difficulties.

Demutlcents soothe irritation and support the action of re-
laxing expectorants.

Antispasmodics ease spasm responses in the muscles that
facilitate respiration.

Antimicrobials help reduce the potential for secondary in-
fection, which should be avoided at all costs.

Anticatarrbals aid the body in dealing with overproduc-
tion of sputum in lungs or sinuses.

Cardiotonics support the heart in the face of lung conges-
tion or strain.

Nervine support is always appropriate, both because stress
is a potential trigger and because asthma can cause
stress, which in turn can trigger further attacks.

Specific Remedies

Ephedra sinica (ma huang) and other Asian Ephedra species
prove exceptionally useful as bronchodilators. Although
synthetic ephedrine is available, the whole herb is better
tolerated and causes fewer adverse heart effects.

Epbedra stimulates the sympathetic nervous system
and thus relieves the bronchospasm that underlies asthma
and certain other conditions, including emphysema.
Allergic reactions respond well to Ephedra because of its
action on the sympathetic nervous system.

The ayurvedic herb Coleus forskoblii may be useful in
asthma. The constituent forskolin raises cellular levels of
cAMP, which results in relaxation of bronchial muscles
and relief of asthma symptoms. Forskolin also inhibits the
release of histamine and the synthesis of allergic com-
pounds. See chapter 9 for a more detailed discussion of
the possible mechanisms of action of this herb.

Herbs with Antispasmodic and
Bronchodilating Effects

Ammi visnaga (khella)

Coleus forskoblii (coleus)

Drosera rotundifolia (sundew)

Epbedra spp. (ma huang or ephedra)
Euphorbia pilulifera (pill-bearing spurge)
Grindelia camporum (gumweed or grindelia)
Prunus serotina (wild cherry)

As discussed in chapter 9, the role of platelet activat-
ing factor (PAF) in bronchial asthma is receiving in-
creased attention. Ginkgo biloba is an effective and safe in-
hibitor of PAF, making it a potentially useful herb for the
control and treatment of asthma. Donald Brown, N.D.,
one of America’s foremost naturopathic phytotherapists,
advocates the use of ginkgo in the long-term management
of asthma. He reports success in pediatric cases with a
dosage of 80 mg/day for children 6 to 12 years old and 40
mg/day for children younger than 6 years old.”

Dyspnea Formula for Asthma

Grindelia camporum tincture 24 parts
Euphorbia pilulifera tincture 24 parts
Lobelia inflata tincture 12 parts
Prunus serotina tincture 12 parts
Glycyrrhiza glabra tincture 12 parts
Leonurus ¢cardiaca tincture 12 parts
Ephedra sinica tincture 10 parts
Pimpinella anisum essential oil 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of mixture three times a day. If Euphorbia pilulifera
proves difficult to obtain, double the amount of Grindelia to
make up for it.

----- PAGE 341 -----
Table 15.10. Actions Supplied by Dyspnea Formula

ACTION

HERBS

Pulmonary tonic

Relaxing expectorant

Demulcent

Antispasmodic

Antimicrobial
Anti-inflammatory
Anticatarrhal
Cardiotonic

Nervine

Lobelia inflata

Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia pilulifera,
Lobelia inflata, Glycyrrhiza glabra

Glycyrrhiza glabra

Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia pilulifera,
Lobelia inflata, Prunus serotina,
Glycyrrhiza glabra, Pimpinella anisum,
Ephedra sinica

Pimpinella anisum

Glycyrrhiza glabra, Pimpinella anisum
Pimpinetla anisum, Ephedra sinica
Leonurus cardiaca

Lobelia inflata, Leonurus cardiaca

A Prescription for Childhood Atopic Asthma
Associated with Eczema

Dyspnea Formula (see page 332)

Galium aparine
Trifolium pratense
Urtica dioica

2 parts
1 part
1 part
1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 15.11. Actions Supplied by Prescription for

Atopic Asthma

ACTION

Alterative

Pulmonary tonic

Relaxing expectorant

Demulcent

Antispasmodic

Antimicrobial

Anti-inflammatory

HERBS

Galium aparine, Trifolium pratense,
Urtica dioica

Lobelia inflata

Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia pilulifera,
Lobelia inflata, Glycyrrhiza glabra

Glycyrrhiza glabra

Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia pilulifera,
Lobelia inflata, Prunus serotina,
Glycyrrhiza glabra, Pimpinella anisum,
Ephedra sinica

Pimpinella anisum

Glycyrrhiza glabra, Pimpinella anisum

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM & 333

ACTION HERBS

Anticatarrhal Pimpinella anisum, Ephedra sinica
Cardiotonic Leonurus cardiaca

Nervine Lobelia inflata, Leonurus cardiaca,

Trifolium pratense

Broader Context of Treatment

Our lungs are connected to our emotions in a very obvi-
ous way—just think about what happens when we laugh or
cry. Ifa person with asthma has difficulty expressing feel-
ings, it is worth exploring why. Bach Flower Remedies can
help here. Deep breathing exercises strengthen our con-
nection to our feelings and, if practiced regularly, will help
in the treatment of asthma. Other regular exercise, such as
walking, swimming, yoga, t’ai chi, and relaxation tech-
niques, can also aid in deepening and relaxing breathing.

Food sensitivities must be identified. It may prove
beneficial to temporarily exclude eggs, wheat, dairy prod-
ucts, and even gluten (found in wheat, oats, barley, and
rye). Lack of breast-feeding sometimes triggers early-
onset asthma. Other sources of concern are alcohol (wine
and beer) and preserved fruit, which often contains sulfur
dioxide. Some asthmatics react to as little as 5 parts of sul-
fur dioxide per million.

The whole thoracic area—back and chest—should be
massaged with appropriate essential oils, with particular
emphasis on strokes that open the chest and shoulders.
The choice of essential oils will depend on many factors,
including whether or not infection is present, if the
asthma is known to have an allergic component, and if
emotional factors are involved. During an actual asth-
matic crisis, inhalation of an antispasmodic oil is the only
practical herbal help. Sniffing directly from the bottle or
applying drops to a tissue is safer than using a steam in-
halation, as the heat will increase inflammation of the
mucous membranes and make the congestion even worse.

Essential Oils Useful in Asthma
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Pimpinella anisum (aniseed)

Pinus sylvestris (pine)

Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Pizzorno and Murray
recommend the following nutritional supplements:*

Vitamin Bg: 25 mg twice a day
Vitamin B,,: 1,000 meg a day

----- PAGE 342 -----
334 o TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Vitamin C: 1 to 2g¢/day

Vitamin E: 400 TU/ day

Magnesium: 200 to 300 mg three times a day
Quercetin: 400 mg 20 minutes before meals
Carotene: 25,000 to 50,000 IU/day
Selenium: 250 mcg/day

EMPHYSEMA

Enlargement of the air spaces distal to terminal non-
respiratory bronchioles, accompanied by destructive
changes of the alveolar walls. (The Merck Manual)

Emphysema, which often develops as a long-term com-
plication of chronic bronchitis, is characterized by dam-
age to the elastic walls of the sac-like alveoli in the lungs.
This damage is caused by constant coughing, the body’s
attempt to dislodge the bacteria and mucus blocking the
swollen bronchi. In chronic bronchitis, the constant se-
cretion of viscid mucus paralyzes the cilia that normally
push out particles of dust, soot, and bacteria. Smoking
and, to a lesser degree, alcohol exacerbate this condition.

Treatment of Emphysema
The herbal treatment guidelines given here offer no mir-
acle cures, but if used consistently, they will bring about
an improvement in this condition.

Actions Indicated

Pulmonary tonics are important for long-term strengthen-
ing of the lungs but offer little short-term relief for
acute attacks.

Expectorants are essential to minimize the buildup of spu-
tum in the lungs. Stimulant expectorants are necessary
here because of the lessening of tone that affects the
walls of the alveoli.

Demulcents soothe irritation and support the work of
expectorants.

Antispasmodics ease spasm responses in the muscles that
facilitate respiration.

Antimicrobials help reduce the potential for secondary
infection, which should be avoided at all costs.

Anticatarrhals aid the body in dealing with overproduction
of sputum in lungs or sinuses.

Cardiotonics support the heart in the face of lung conges-
tion or strain.

Nervine support is always appropriate, as stress will exac-
erbate emphysema.

A Prescription for Emphysema

Dyspnea Formula (see page 332) 1 part
Sanguinaria canadensis 1 part
Inula helenium 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 15.12. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Emphysema

ACTION HERBS

Pulmonary tonic Inula helenium, Lobelia inflata

Stimulating expectorant Sanguinaria canadensis, Inula helenium,
Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia pilulifera,
Lobelia inflata, Glycyrrhiza glabra

Demulcent Glycyrrhiza glabra

Antispasmodic Inula helenium, Sanguinaria canadensis,
Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia pilulifera,
Lobelia inflata, Prunus serotina,
Glycyrrhiza glabra, Pimpinella anisum,

Ephedra sinica

Antimicrobial Inula helenium, Sanguinaria canadensis,

Pimpinella anisum

Anti-inflammatory Glycyrrhiza glabra, Pimpinella anisum

Anticatarrhal Inula helenium, Pimpinella anisum,
Ephedra sinica

Cardiotonic Leonurus cardiaca

Nervine Lobelia inflata, Leonurus cardiaca

Broader Context of Treatment

Great care must be taken with general health and well-

being, as any health problem will aggravate emphysema.

Thus, all physical and emotional factors must be addressed.
The nutritional supplements recommended for

asthma are also relevant here.

Vitamin Bg: 25 mg twice a day

Vitamin B,,: 1,000 meg/day

Vitamin C: 1 to 2g/day

Vitamin E: 400 IU/day

Magnesium: 200 to 300 mg three times a day
Quercetin: 400 mg 20 minutes before meals
Carotene: 25,000 to 50,000 [U/day
Selenium: 250 mcg/day

----- PAGE 343 -----
THE UPPER RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

The organs of the upper respiratory system include the
nose, the pharynx, and the larynx.

Table 15.13. Actions and Herbs for the Upper
Respiratory System

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Allium spp., Eucalyptus spp., Thymus vulgaris,
Baptisia tinctoria, Commiphora molmol,

Ligusticum porteri

Immune stimulant — Echinacea spp.

Anticatarrhal Solidago virgaurea, Sambucus nigra,
Hyssopus officinalis, Tussilago farfara,

Hydrastis canadensis, volatile oils
Astringents Salvia officinalis, Euphrasia spp.

Diaphoretic Eupatorium perfoliatum, Tilia platyphyllos

Tonic Support for the

Upper Respiratory System

Nature abounds with herbs that have anticatarrhal effects
in the upper respiratory system, but anticatarrhal herbs
do not substitute for the nurturing action of tonics for
this part of the body. From the European perspective,
here are some appropriate tonics that also possess anti-
catarrhal properties.

Upper Respiratory Tract Tonics
Eupbrasia spp. (eyebright)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Sambucus nigra (elder)

Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Herbs and Upper Respiratory Conditions
As with many modern health problems, prevention of
upper respiratory tract disease is largely a matter of avoid-
ing pollutants and minimizing causative dietary factors.
As with the lower respiratory tract, air pollution and
smoking can aggravate or even cause a whole spectrum of
upper respiratory problems.

Many chronic catarrhal states represent the body’s re-
sponse to a diet too rich in mucus-forming foods. A diet

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM 2 335

designed to minimize mucus production is essential for
patients with such conditions. However, it is not always
appropriate to try to dry up overproduction of normal se-
cretions with herbs. If the body is using the mucous
membranes of the sinuses as a window for removing waste
through the vehicle of the catarrh, then it is best to sup-
port rather than block this activity.

The herbal approach to problems in this system is
both indirect and direct. The indirect approach sees
upper respiratory disease within the context of the whole
person. Sometimes, the overproduction of mucus is an at-
tempt by the body to discharge waste material that is not
being properly eliminated by the bowels, kidneys, and
skin. In such cases, the herbalist may prescribe bitter ton-
ics to encourage regular bowel movements, diuretic herbs
that encourage kidney elimination of retained fluids and
waste materials, or diaphoretic herbs that stimulate elim-
ination through the skin.

Patterns of Upper Respiratory

Tract Disease

Treatment of many diverse pathologies becomes straight-
forward when one understands certain basic patterns of
disease affecting the upper respiratory system.

Allergic response. The allergen must be identified and, if
possible, removed from the individual’s environment.
This may be easy in the case of a food sensitivity, but
much more problematic if the trigger is a ubiquitous
environmental factor, such as pollen or house dust.
(See Hay Fever for more information.)

Congestion. The production of excessive and thick mucus
in the nose and other respiratory passages is a response
to inflammation of the mucous membranes. This can
be caused by infection, autoimmune problems, or irri-
tants. Blockage of the sinus cavities is very common
and relatively easy to treat with herbs.

Infection. Acute infections of the nose, sinuses, and throat
are all too common! Occasional acute infections can be
treated in a straightforward manner with antimicrobial
and anticatarrhal herbs and essential oils. However, if
there is a pattern of frequent, recurrent infection, at-
tention must be focused on immune system support
and other whole body issues.

Physical blockage. Any obstruction calls for skilled diag-
nostic investigation. Some benign problems, such as
nasal polyps, may be treated with herbs, but differen-
tial diagnosis is vital to rule out more serious problems.

----- PAGE 344 -----
336 <@ TREATMENI APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

THE COMMON COLD

An acute, usually afebrile, viral infection of the respiratory
tract, with inflammation in any or all airways, including
the nose, paranasal sinuses, throat, larynx, and often the
trachea and bronchi. (The Merck Manual)

The common cold, also known as acute rhinitis, is a viral
infection of the upper respiratory tract. Many different
strains of virus cause cold symptoms, and these are con-
stantly undergoing mutation. When the mucous mem-
branes of the nose and throat are inflamed by infection,
they are far more vulnerable to attack by bacteria, and this
can easily give rise to secondary infections that are more

. serious than the original cold, such as sinusitis, ear infec-
tions, and bronchitis. Because colds have a viral origin,
antibiotic drugs that destroy bacteria are not helpful in
their treatment.

Treatment of the Common Cold

There is no universally miraculous herbal cold cure.
However, phytotherapy offers more than most modalities
for the treatment and prevention of this all-too-common
problem. With a treatment approach focusing on herbs
that fit the individual’s unique needs and attention to im-
mune support, diet, and lifestyle issues, the common cold
presents no real treatment challenges.

For a short-term, acute infection, there is usually no
need to focus on system support. However, if the individ-
ual has frequent or recurrent colds, the use of tonic reme-
dies will be vital. Immune system support is important,
and attention must often be paid to the impact of stress in
the individual’s life. A tendency for colds to progress to
coughs and bronchitis calls for palmonary tonic support.

As an illustration of how other health issues may be
taken into account when treating the common cold, con-
sider this example. If the patient has a history of heart dis-
ease, cardiotonics may be used as a precautionary mea-
sure. However, Tilia is most appropriate, as it is
diaphoretic in addition to being a heart tonic.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials and immune stimulants help the immune
system combat the viral infection and help prevent sec-
ondary infection.

Anticatarrbals ease the symptomatic discomfort so
characteristic of this problem. However, avoid trying
to dry up mucus overproduction with herbal
decongestants.

Diaphoretics help with feverishness and support the body’s
efforts to cope with elevated body temperature.

Expectorants help combat the development of secondary
problems in the lower respiratory system.

Lympbhatics are indicated if the lymph glands are swollen
or there is a known history of such problems.

Specific Remedies

There are many regional and personal ideas about specific
herbs for the common cold. These are often diaphoretic
herbs.

‘To treat an infection once it has started, address the
specific symptoms while at the same time supporting the
body’s fight against the virus. Aches and pains are com-
mon, and our materia medica offers a number of plants
that will relieve these unpleasant feelings. Perhaps the
best is the diaphoretic Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset),
especially if the patient has a fever. A hot infusion drunk
often can make bearable even the worst cases of flu.
Boneset’s bitter taste is one of its therapeutic assets, but
not one that most people relish! Matricaria, Tilia, and
Mentha piperita tea may have similar effects, and while not
as strong, they do taste much better.

Do not inhibit nasal congestion with anticatarrhal
drugs, as mucus production is part of the body’s normal
response to infection. Herbal anticatarrhals work in a dif-
ferent, safer way than anticatarrhal drugs, Matricaria,
Mentha piperita, or Eupatorium perfoliatum can help relieve
much of the discomfort. Steam inhalations of eucalyptus
and thyme oils will also help reduce the formation of
catarrh.

Specific Remedies for the Common Cold
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Allium spp. (onion and garlic)
Armoracia rusticana (horseradish)
Brassica spp. (mustard)

Capsicum spp. (cayenne)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Sambucus nigra (black elder)
Tilia platyphylbs (linden)

To support the immune system, use antimicrobial
herbs such as echinacea and goldenseal, as well as ton-
ics, such as cleavers and nettles. These may be combined
in capsules or as tinctures. Hydrastis canadensis will speed
recovery from infection, as will raw garlic or garlic oil
capsules.

----- PAGE 345 -----
Antimicrobial Herbs

Allium spp. (onion and garlic)
Echinacea spp. (echinacea)
Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

A Prescription for the Common Cold

Sambucus nigra 1 part
Mentha piperita 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part

Infuse 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb mixture in 1 cup of boiling
water; this should be drunk hot often until symptoms pass.

Herbal Footbath for Colds

Footbaths are a traditional treatment for colds. Dissolve 1 table-
spoon of mustard powder in 4 pints of hot water. Bathe the feet
for 10 minutes, twice a day.

Chamomile Steam Inhalation

Place a handful of Matricaria flowers in a bowl and pour boiling
water over them. Create a tent by draping a towel over the head
to prevent the escape of vapors; inhale vapors rising from bowl
for 5 to 10 minutes,

Thymus, Eucalyptus, and Origanum may also be used
in steam inhalations, as in the following example.

Steam Inhalation Combination

Matricaria flowers 1 part
Thymus herb 1 part
Origanum herb 1 part

Add 1 tablespoon of dried herb mixture to 2 liter (1 pint) of boil-
ing water. Follow inhalation instructions given for Chamomile
Steam Inhalation.

Aromatherapy for the Common Cold

A steam inhalation of appropriate essential oils combines
several beneficial effects. It clears congested nasal pas-
sages and soothes inflamed mucous membranes. At the
same time, the essential oil will kill many bacteria. Some
of the oils, especially Eucalyptus and Melaleuca, have an in-
hibitory effect on the cold virus. Use either of these two
oils for inhalations in the earlier part of the day (possibly
alternating with Rosmarinus and Mentha piperita), as they
are mildly stimulating. At night, use inhalations of
Lavandula or add a few drops of oil to a bath. Diffusing oil

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM © 337

in the bedroom is helpful, especially if the patient has a
cough.

Essential Oils for Steam Inhalation
Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia (bergamot)
Commiphora molmol (myrrh)

Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus)

Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Melaleuca spp. (tea tree)

Mentha arvensis var. piperascens (Asian mint)
M. piperita (peppermint)

Ocimum basilicum (basil)

Origanum majorana (marjoram)

Pinus pumilio (dwarf or white pine)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

Santalum album (sandalwood)

Styrax benzoin (benzoin)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Broader Context of Treatment

Many traditional cold remedies are based on culinary in-
gredients, highlighting the fact that there is no real dif-
ference between medicinal and edible plants. Here is an
example of a treatment that capitalizes on the value of
common medicinal foods. Take this combination at the
first sign of a chill or sore throat.

Kitchen Remedy to Ward Off a Cold
1 ounce fresh ginger, sliced
1 stick of cinnamon, broken
1 teaspoon coriander seeds
3 cloves
1 slice of lemon

Decoct ingredients for 15 minutes in 1 pint of water; strain. Drink
a cupful hot every 2 hours. Sweeten with organic honey to taste.

For both the prevention and treatment of colds, in-
clude garlic, onions, watercress, and cayenne in the diet,
and take 1 to 3 g of vitamin C daily. Diet plays a role in
most cases of catarrh. Dairy products and wheat are
known to promote excessive catarrh production for many
people. For anyone who frequently suffers from catarrh,
these foods should be excluded for a period to see if any
improvement occurs. If so, the individual may need to ex-
clude them permanently or include them in very small
amounts only. Other people are sensitive to different
foods, and may have to experiment to find out which
foods trigger symptoms.

----- PAGE 346 -----
338 se. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

INFLUENZA

A specific acute viral disease characterized by fever,
coryza, cough, headache, malaise, and inflamed respira-
tory mucous membranes. (The Merck Manual)

Influenza, commonly called the flu, is a severe form of
viral respiratory tract infection with generalized bodily
symptoms. New mutations of the virus arise all the time,
and, unfortunately, developing immunity against one
strain through previous exposure or immunization does
not protect against other strains. New strains of influenza
can spread extremely rapidly, and worldwide influenza
epidemics are responsible for much ill health and many
deaths.

Severe colds and various unidentified virus infections
are often loosely referred to as flu. Some authorities
would argue that this terminology is incorrect, and that
true influenza is a much more severe infection that ap-
pears in the form of widespread epidemics, often at inter-
vals of approximately 10 years. Influenza was the cause of
major pandemics in the’ 20th century. A pandemic occurs
over a very wide geographic area and affects an excep-
tionally large proportion of the population, while an epi-
demic is ofa much smaller scale and tends to affect a large
number of individuals within a population, community, or
region at the same time.

Consider the mortality associated with some 20th
century influenza pandemics:

Spanish flu (1918-1919): Caused the highest known in-
fluenza-related mortality, with approximately 500,000
deaths in the United States and 20 million worldwide

Asian flu (1957-1958): 70,000 deaths in the United States

Hong Kong flu (1968-1969): 34,000 deaths in the United
States

Typical clinical features of influenza include fever
(100°F to 103°F in adults and even higher in children),
headache, muscle aches, extreme fatigue, and respiratory
symptoms, such as cough, sore throat, and runny or stuffy
nose. Although nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea can some-
times accompany influenza infection, especially in chil-
dren, gastrointestinal symptoms are rarely prominent. The
term stomach flu is actually a misnomer used to describe
gastrointestinal illnesses caused by other microorganisms.

Most people recover completely in one to two weeks,
but some develop serious and potentially life-threatening
medical complications, such as pneumonia. Secondary
bacterial infections are the greatest risk of influenza, and
were responsible for most deaths in past epidemics. The

use of antibiotics has dramatically reduced such deaths,
although the very young and the elderly are still at risk. A
really severe infection of this type may be one of the situ-
ations in which the use of antibiotics is sensible. However,
if antibiotics are necessary, do not stop the herbal treat-
ment; it can only be beneficial and will not conflict with
orthodox drug treatment.

In an average year, influenza is associated with about
20,000 deaths nationwide and many more hospitaliza-
tions. Flu-related complications can occur at any age;
however, the elderly and people with chronic health
problems are much more likely to develop serious com-
plications than younger, healthier people are.

Treatment of Influenza

The herbal treatment guidelines given here to use against
influenza must be placed in the context of'rest and recuper-
ation, discussed later. Also consider any specific points of
weakness in the individual, especially for elderly patients.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials sapport the immune system in combating
viral infection and help prevent the development of
secondary infection.

Diaphoretics help with symptoms of fever and support the
body’s efforts to cope with elevated temperature.

Anticatarrbals ease the symptomatic discomfort so char-
acteristic ofthis problem. However, avoid trying to dry
up mucus overproduction with herbal decongestants.

Diaphoretics help with feverishness and support the body’s
efforts to cope with elevated body temperature.

Expectorants help combat the development of secondary
problems in the lower respiratory system.

Lymphatics are indicated if the lymph glands are swollen
or there is a known history ofsuch problems.

Bitters sapport the body in dealing with the debility that
often follows severe viral infections.

Nervines assist the body in dealing with high fever and as-
sociated distress.

Specific Remedies

As with the common cold, there are no miracle cures
here. However, certain plants can make life much more
bearable during a bout of flu. These are usually di-
aphoretics, and my favorite is Fupatorium perfoliatum
(boneset). This herb gets its name from its traditional use
to ease the pain of what was called “break-bone fever” by
European settlers in North America.

----- PAGE 347 -----
A Prescription for Influenza
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture every 2 hours. In addition, the patient
should drink a strong hot infusion of Eupatorium perfoliatum
every hour. If the symptom picture calls for it, follow recom-

mendations given earlier for the common cold.

Table 15.14. Actions Supplied by Influenza
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Hydrastis canadensis, Echinacea spp.
Diaphoretic Eupatorium perfoliatum

Anticatarrhal Hydrastis canadensis, Echinacea spp.
Lymphatic Echinacea spp.

Bitter Hydrastis canadensis, Eypatorium perfoliatum

Broader Context of Treatment

Treatment will be most effective if initiated at the very
(first sign of infection. A moderately hot bath containing a
few drops of antiviral essential oil will often induce di-
aphoresis, followed by a deep, restful sleep. This may be
enough to avert a full-blown infection, though it is a good
idea to repeat this bath treatment for the next two or
three days. Tea tree oil is particularly effective for this
purpose. However, some people find it to be a mild skin
irritant, and may not be able to tolerate more than 3 or 4
drops in a full bath.

Recovery from influenza is often slow, and the con-
valescing patient may feel very weak and lacking in vital-
ity. Caffeine-containing stimulant herbs should be
avoided, as the lift they confer is only temporary and will
slow down recovery (see chapter 16 for more informa-
tion). As pointed out above, bitter tonics will speed re-
covery through their metabolism-stimulating effects.

Table 15.15. Bitter Tonics for Convalescence

HERB ACTIONS
Eupatorium perfoliatum —_ Bitter, diaphoretic, anticatarrhal
Gentiana spp. Bitter, other general digestive functions

Hydrastis canadensis Bitter, anticatarrhal, general tonic

Marrubium vulgare Bitter, expectorant, anticatarrhal

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM <> 339

In addition, adaptogens are often helpful, and atten-
tion to diet is essential. It may be helpful to use a multi-
vitamin and mineral formulation until appetite and general
vitality return to normal.

HAY FEVER

A symptom complex including hay fever and perennial al-
lergic rhinitis, characterized by seasonal or perennial
sneezing, rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, pruritus, and often
conjunctivitis and pharyngitis. (The Merck Manual)

Hay fever, or allergic rhinitis, is a form of allergy that af-
fects the lining of the nose and, often, the eyes and throat.
As the name implies, the condition is an allergic response
to the pollen of certain grasses, but the term is also used
to describe similar reactions to a wide range of pollens
and the spores of some fungi.

Treatment of Hay Fever

Hay fever responds well to herbal treatment, but each
person is different, so a number of approaches may have
to be tried until the right one is found. The immune sys-
tem needs support, and stress may also be an issue. Tonic
support should be provided for both the upper and lower
respiratory systems.

Actions Indicated

Anticatarrbals ease the symptomatic discomfort often
characteristic of this problem. Again, avoid trying to
dry up mucus overproduction with herbal deconges-
tants, as this can end up being quite painful.

Expectorants will be needed if wheezing or pulmonary
congestion develops. Relaxing expectorants will usu-
ally be most relevant.

Antispasmodics are essential if there is any marked diffi-
culty with breathing.

Bitters help tone the whole body in the face of the im-
mune systems response.

Anti-inflammatories soothe various symptoms of inflam-
mation as and when they arise.

Astringents often ease the symptom picture, as many anti-
catarrhals are also astringents.

Adaptogens and immune support may help long term. This
overall system support should cover the liver, kidney,
and any other systems that require support. See chap-
ter 21 for more information.

Specific Remedies

Individuals may find that certain herbs suit them well, but
otherwise, there is no particular specific remedy for hay

----- PAGE 348 -----
340 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

fever. The well-known traditional Chinese remedy
Ephedra sinica (ma huang) is a bronchodilator and has
much to offer in the treatment of allergic reactions.
Ayurveda and unani medicine use Ami visnaga, a plant
with a similar biochemical impact that is now being in-
troduced to the Western world.

In addition to these alkaloid-rich plants, certain herbs
might be considered specific for various types and sites of
symptoms that may arise. For example, Euphrasia spp.
ease distress that occurs in the eyes.

A Prescription for Hay Fever

Ephedra sinica 1 part
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Euphrasia spp. 1 part
Urtica dioica 2 parts
Solidago virgaurea 2 parts

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Ideally, this treatment
should be started two months before hay fever season is due to
commence. Start with the following dosage regimen.

Pre—Hay Fever Season Dosage Regimen

Weeks 1-2 2.5 ml once a day

Weeks 3-4 5 ml once a day
Weeks 5-6 5 ml twice a day
Weeks 7-8 5 ml three times a day

If this treatment cannot be initiated before the allergy flares up,
then start with a full dose immediately, possibly increasing the
dose to 5 ml four or five times a day (adults only).

Table 15.16. Actions Supplied by Hay Fever
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Antispasmodic Ephedra sinica

Anticatarrhal Hydrastis canadensis, Solidago virgaurea,

Euphrasia spp., Ephedra sinica

Anti-inflammatory — Hydrastis canadensis, Solidago virgaurea,

Euphrasia spp., Urtica dioica

Antimicrobial Hydrastis canadensis
Astringent Euphrasia spp.
Bitter Hydrastis canadensis

Broader Context of Treatment
Treating the whole person is the trick to successfully ame-
liorating this common problem. In addition to symptoms

of the allergy, focus on general health, stress, and elimina-
tion. Dietary considerations must be based upon avoid-
ance of specific allergens as well as general good nutrition.

Various essential oils can help with symptoms of hay
fever, but the specifics vary from person to person. Oils
recommended by aromatherapists include all of those
listed above for the common cold, with the addition of
blue chamomile, lemon balm, and lavender. If steam in-
halation makes the patient feel even worse, suggest that
the person put some oil on a tissue to sniffi whenever
needed. A massage with any of these oils can also be
helpful.

SINUSITIS

An inflammatory process in the paranasal sinuses due to
viral, bacterial, and fungal infections or allergic reactions.
(The Merck Manual)

The sinuses are four bony cavities positioned behind,
above, and at each side of the nose and open into the nasal
cavity. They act as a sound box to give resonance to the
voice. Sinusitis is an inflammation of these air-containing
cavities.

Like the nasal passages, the sinuses are lined with
mucous membranes that react to infection by producing
mucus. This represents an attempt by the body to inca-
pacitate the infecting bacteria. Because the openings from
the nose into the sinuses are very narrow, they quickly be-
come blocked when the mucous membranes swell during
a cold, hay fever, or catarrh, trapping the infection inside
the sinuses.

Chronic sinusitis may occur if one or more of the
drainage passages from the sinuses to the nose become
blocked. This can cause headaches or a dull pain across
the face and temple and around the eyes. If the maxillary
sinuses above the cheeks are infected, toothache may re-
sult. Once the lining of the sinuses becomes swollen, the
cilia of the nasal cavity no longer operate. The lining of
the sinuses can become permanently thickened, con-
tributing to the retention of phlegm.

Anything that blocks the sinus openings or impedes
the action of the cilia can cause a sinus infection. A
buildup of mucus creates an ideal environment for mi-
croorganisms to thrive.

Common Causes of Sinus Infections
Colds or upper respiratory infections
Hay fever or allergies

Air pollution and cigarette smoke
Nasal or dental procedures

----- PAGE 349 -----
Traveling at high altitudes or swimming under water
Hormone changes that occur with puberty
Pregnancy

Aging

Sinus blockages

Health conditions such as diabetes and AIDS

Treatment of Sinusitis

Success in treating this intransigent condition requires
that herbal protocols be used in the context of dietary
considerations. The mucous membranes, upper and
lower respiratory tracts, immune system, and, possibly,
the digestive system all need attention. Which systems to
focus on will depend on individual indications.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials are pivotal in the treatment of this often
entrenched condition. These herbs will help the body
deal with any infection present, but also support the
immune system in resisting the development of sec-
ondary infection.

Anticatarrhals ease the symptomatic discomfort character-
istic of this problem and assist the body in eliminating
buildup in the sinus cavities.

Astringents, often also anticatarrhals, reduce overproduc-
tion of mucus.

Anti-inflammatories are indicated, but most of the
herbs with actions already listed here are also anti-
inflammatory.

Diaphoretics will be indicated if feverishness is part of the
symptom picture.

Analgesics may be necessary for temporary pain relief.

Lymphatics aid the drainage and immune function of this
vital system.

Digestive support is indicated if overproduction of mucus
causes stomach discomfort.

Adaptogens and immune support may help long term.

A Prescription for Sinusitis

Solidago virgaurea 2 parts
Sambucus nigra 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Baptisia tinctoria 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Steam inhalation is an effective technique for treating
upper respiratory catarrh and sinusitis.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 341

Steam Inhalation for Upper Respiratory Tract
Catarrh and Sinusitis

Compound tincture of benzoin 30 ml
Eucalyptus essential oil 2.5 ml
Peppermint essential oil 6 drops
Lavender essential oil 5 drops
Pine essential oil 5 drops

Combine ingredients in a bottle and shake well, Put a teaspoon
of the mixture in a bowl and pour on '4 liter (1 pint) boiled
water. Cover the head and the bowl with a towel or cloth and
inhale. Caution: Keep the eyes closed.

Broader Context of Treatment
Some cases of chronic mucus production are related to
allergy. Sometimes, however, emotional factors like sup-
pressed grief can result in blocked upper respiratory pas-
sages. In these cases, a good cry can help free this blocked
energy and alleviate the problem.

A diet that reduces mucus production is also essential.
In particular, a fruit fast for two or three days can help
clear a system clogged and overburdened by toxic wastes.
Hot lemon drinks reduce mucus production, as do garlic,
onions, and horseradish. Suggest that the patient grate
fresh horseradish root into cider vinegar or lemon juice
and eat a little each day. Mustard and aromatic herbs like
oregano may be added to food, and extra zinc and vitamin
C can help build the body’s resistance to infection.

Certain foods, especially dairy products and wheat,
seem to predispose people toward sinusitis because they
provoke excessive formation of mucus. During an acute
attack of sinusitis, all dairy and wheat-based foods must
be excluded for several days. People who have chronic or
repeated attacks should be advised to exclude these foods
completely for several months, and then reintroduce
them in very small amounts, if at all. Goat’s and sheep’s
milk products are sometimes better tolerated than cow’s
milk. Acupuncture is a very effective therapy for sinusitis
and can be used alongside phytotherapy.

LARYNGITIS

Acute inflammation of the larynx. (The Merck Manual)

Laryngitis is an acute inflammation of the larynx, or voice
box, usually associated with a common cold or overuse of
the voice. It is characterized by swelling, hoarseness, pain,
dryness in the throat, coughing, and inability to speak
above a whisper, if at all. It is usually caused by a bacterial

----- PAGE 350 -----
342. @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

or viral infection, either restricted to the larynx or part of
a more general infection of the upper respiratory tract.
Where no clear-cut cause is found, such as infection or
overuse, skilled diagnosis is required.

Treatment of Laryngitis

The lymphatic system should be the focus of tonic sup-
port, but if there is a pattern of recurrent infection, at-
tention must also be given to strengthening the immune
system.

Actions Indicated

Demutcents will soothe the mucous lining and ease
discomfort.

Anti-inflammatories will reduce the immediate cause of
distress.

Antimicrobials are indicated if there is a causal microor-
ganism involved. However, they are not indicated if in-
flammation is due to some other cause.

Astringents are often effective as a local gargle, especially
if the problem was precipitated by overuse of the vocal
cords.

Bitters have a toning and stimulating effect on the mu-
cosal lining.

Specific Remedies

The various herbal traditions of the world abound with
herbs effective for conditions of the mouth, larynx, and
pharynx. Osha (Ligusticwm porteri) is an excellent specific.
A small piece of the root can be chewed to ameliorate
symptoms and promote the body’s immune response.

In Europe, gargling with astringent herbs is the tra-
ditional approach. They should not be drunk, as they will
probably also promote constipation—an unnecessary and
unfortunate complication.

Astringent Herbs Relevant to Laryngitis
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)

Polygonum bistortum (bistort root)

Potentilla tormentosa (tormentil)

Quercus spp. (oak bark)

Rubus idaeus (raspberry leaf)

R. villosus (blackberry leaf)

Salvia officinalis var. rubia (red sage)
Sambucus nigra (black elder flower)

A Prescription for Laryngitis

Echinacea spp. 2 parts
Ligusticum porteri 2 parts
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Dosage: up to 1 ml of tincture every hour
A Gargle for Laryngitis
Salvia officinalis var. rubia 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part

Make a strong infusion with dried herbs. Gargle often until
symptoms subside.

Gargle II for Laryngitis
Malva neglecta or Malva sylvestris

Infuse Malva flowers and leaves in lukewarm water overnight to
ensure optimum extraction of mucilage. Gargle as needed.

Broader Context of Treatment

Follow the dietary advice given earlier for sinusitis. In ad-
dition, aromatherapy provides some oils that ease inflam-
mation quite effectively, including cypress and bergamot
oils. To use as a gargle, put 3 drops of essential oil in
¥%2 cup of warm water. Gargle hourly.

TONSILLITIS

Acute inflammation of the palatine tonsils, usually due to
streptococcal or, less commonly, viral infection. (The
Merck Manual)

Tonsillitis is either an acute or a chronic inflammation of
the tonsils, which are located near the back of the tongue.
The adenoids, lymph glands found behind the nose, are
often simultaneously inflamed. Tonsillitis usually devel-
ops suddenly as a result of a streptococcal infection, but
may also be caused by a viral infection.

The condition is characterized by sore throat, fever,
chills, headache, poor appetite, and weakness. The tonsils
become swollen and red, and streaks of pus are often vis-
ible on their surface. Acute tonsillitis usually clears up in
about a week, but antibiotics are commonly prescribed to
prevent complications such as middle ear and sinus infec-
tions, formation of deep abscesses, spread of infection to
other organs, and chronic tonsillitis. Chronic tonsillitis
is characterized by flare-ups of acute infection. Tonsillitis is
more common in children than in adults.

Tonsils are composed of the same type of tissue that
makes up the lymph nodes, and they are part of the body’s

----- PAGE 351 -----
natural defense system. When the tonsils are infected, the
lymph glands in the neck often simultaneously become
enlarged and tender, signifying the body’s proper reaction
to the challenge of infection.

Treatment of Tonsillitis

The lymphatic system should be the focus of tonic support,
but if there is a pattern of recurrent infection, attention
must also be given to strengthening the immune system.

Actions Indicated

Lymphatics are of primary importance, as this is an infec-
tion of lymphatic tissue.

Antimicrobials help the immune system combat the infec-
tion, whatever the causal pathogen might be, and help
prevent the development of secondary infection

Anticatarrhals are indicated if there is associated sinus
congestion or middle ear involvement.

Diaphoretics help the body cope with any associated fever.

Expectorants are indicated if secondary problems develop
in the lower respiratory system.

Specific Remedies

Lymphatic alteratives usually have local reputations as
specifics for tonsillitis. In the United Kingdom, the most
famous is Galium aparine (cleavers).

A Prescription for Tonsillitis

Galium aparine 2 parts
Echinacea spp. 2 parts
Baptisia tinctoria 1 part
Calendula officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Diaphoretics
should be added if fever is an issue.

Broader Context of Treatment

In Herbal Home Health Care, Dr. Christopher recom-
mends the following fomentation.? (A fomentation is the
application of: hot moist substances to the body.)

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM @ 343

Fomentation
Verbascum thapsus
Lobelia inflata

3 parts

1 part

Make a strong infusion of dried herb mixture. Dip a cloth in the
fomentation and wrap around the neck at night, repeating the
procedure each night until the condition clears up.

References

1. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion. www.cde.gow/tobacco/hlthcon.htm

2. Hirono I, Mori H, Culvenor CC. Carcinogenic activity
of coltsfoot, Tussilago farfaral. Gann 1976 Feb;
67(1):125-29.

3. Sper] W, Stuppner H, Gassner I, et al. Reversible hep-
atic veno-occlusive disease in an infant after consump-
tion of pyrrolizidine-containing herbal tea, European
Journal of Pediatrics 1995 Feb; 154(2):112-16.

4. Weiss RE. Herbal Medicine. Stuttgart; New York:
Thieme, 2000.

5. Global Initiative for Asthma: Global Strategy for Asthma
Management and Prevention. NHLBI/WHO Workshop
Report, March 1993. Rev edition. Washington, DC:
National Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung,
and Blood Institute; January 1995. National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute publication NIH 95-3659.

6, Centers for Disease Control]. Asthma mortality and hos-
pitalization among children and young adults—United
States, 1980-1993. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 1996,
45: 350-3.

7. Brown D. Herbal Prescriptions for Better Health. Rocklin,
CA: Prima Publishing, 1996.

8. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

9. Christopher JR. Herbal Home Health Care. Springville,
UT: Christopher Publications, 1976.

----- PAGE 352 -----
16

MN

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

fascinating aspect of herbalism is the way in
A@« plants affect human consciousness. The in-

tegration of all life revealed by the Gaia hypoth-
esis shows us that awareness and expanded consciousness
are part of the greater being we belong to. Words and
names are meaningless when considering such things, but
just as our Earth feeds us, heals our arthritis, and
strengthens the function of our hearts, so it supports and
nurtures our nervous systems.

Herbalism is a cooperative healing venture among
humanity, plants, and the Earth. This experience of whole-
ness is spirit in action, and opens the door for change and
transformation. Nature provides us with herbs that
transform and enlighten as well as plants that heal and
nurture the nerve tissue itself. We will consider the phys-
ical aspect of this healing here, but remember that the
physical action of nervine herbs is but one side of the
whole interface between plant and mind.

From one perspective, herbs are embodiments of en-
ergy and spirit, and from another they are packets of bio-
chemicals. This dichotomy is, in fact, a microcosm of the
relationship between the human brain and the mind! The
complexities of the mind-body interface, so challenging
to doctors concerned with psychosomatic medicine, be-
come an aid to remedy selection for the herbalist.

All of the many her
both somatic symptoms and the mind. A simple example
is Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort), an herb used for treat-
ing anxiety and tension. Motherwort also has a specific
affinity for the heart, easing heart palpitations and the
fear that often accompanies them. This is recognized to
some degree in the species name cardiaca, derived from
the Greek word for heart.

bal nervines have an impact on

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AND HERBAL
REMEDIES

In no other system of the body is the connection between
the physical and psychological aspects of our being as ap-
parent as in the nervous system. Clearly, the tissue of the

344

nervous system is part of the physical makeup of the body.
However, just as clearly, all psychological processes are
anchored in the nervous system. Therefore, if there is dis-
ease on the psychological level, it will be reflected on the
physiological level, and vice versa.

Orthodox medicine tends to reduce psychological
problems to purely biochemical mechanisms, and as-
sumes that appropriate drugs will sort out or at least hide
the problem sufficiently to allow life to continue.
Interestingly enough, some premises of complementary
medicine assume or imply the other extreme: namely, that
psychological factors are the cause of all disease.
According to this point of view, treatment of the psyche is
the only appropriate way to approach healing, and will
take care of any physical problem. By bringing these two
reductionist views together, we come closer to a holistic
approach.

A holistic approach to healing acknowledges the in-
terconnectedness of physiological and psychological fac-
tors, and regards the nervous system and its functions as
a vital part of the treatment of the whole being. To be
truly healthy, we must attend to our physical health
through the right diet and lifestyle, but we are also re-
sponsible for taking care of our emotional, mental, and
spiritual life. We should endeavor to live in a fulfilling,
nurturing environment that supports emotional stability.
Our thoughts should be creative, life enhancing, and open
to the influence of intuition and imagination, rather than
conceptually rigid. And we should stay open to the free
flow of the higher energies of our souls, without which
health is impossible.

Herbal medicine can be an ecologically and spiritu-
ally integrative tool, an ideal physical counterpart to ther-
apeutic techniques applied on the psychological level.
Herbs can benefit the nervous system in a number of
ways, in addition to the rather simplistic effects of stimu-
lation and relaxation.

Today, Western herbalism commonly recognizes
three major categories of herbs that act on the nervous
system, collectively called mervines. These are nervine ton-

----- PAGE 353 -----
ics, nervine relaxants, and nervine stimulants. Other impor-
tant categories of nervines include hypnotics, analgesics,
antispasmodics, antidepressants, and adaptogens. For
more information on these actions and the primary and
secondary actions of specific herbs, please see chapters 25
and 26.

Of many potential remedies that could be mentioned,
table 16.1 provides a listing of the best-known nervines in
European phytotherapy.

Table 16.1. Nervine Herbs Recognized in European
Phytotherapy

TYPE OF
NERVINE

HERBS

Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum,
Scutellaria lateriflora

Tonic

Relaxant Cimicifuga racemosa, Eschscholzia californica,
Humulus lupulus, Hypericum perforatum,

Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp.

Leonurus cardiaca, Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis, Nepeta cataria, Passiflora incarnata,
Piper methysticum, Piscidia erythrina,

Pulsatilla vulgaris, Scutellaria lateriflora,

Tilia platyphyllos, Valeriana officinalis, Viscum album

Stimulant Cola vera, Coffea arabica, Ilex paraguayensis,

Paullinia cupana, Rosmarinus officinalis

Hypnotic Eschscholzia californica, Humulus lupulus,
Lactuca virosa, Passiflora incarnata,
Piper methysticum, Piscidia erythrina,

Valeriana officinalis

Antispasmodic Piper methysticum, Scutellaria lateriflora,
Valeriana officinalis, Viburnum opulus,

V, prunifolium

Adaptogen Eleutherococcus senticosus, Lentinus edodes,
Panax ginseng, P. quinquefolius,

Shisandra chinensis, Withania somnifera

Antidepressant Artemisia vulgaris, Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum,

Lavandula spp., Turnera diffusa

Analgesic Dioscorea villosa, Eschschalzia californica,
Gelsemium sempervirens, Piscidia erythrina,

Stachys betonica, Valeriana officinalis

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 345

Table 16.2. Nervines and Body System Affinities

SYSTEM HERB TYPE OF NERVINE
Circulatory system Melissa officinalis Relaxing
Cimicifuga racemosa _ Relaxing

Viburnum opulus Antispasmodic
Viscum album Relaxing
Lavandula spp. Relaxing
Tilia platyphyllos Relaxing
Leonurus cardiaca Relaxing
Valeriana officinalis Relaxing
Respiratory system Grindelia spp. Antispasmodic
Lobelia inflata Antispasmodic

Prunus serotina Antispasmodic
Lactuca virosa Antispasmodic
Digestive system Matricaria recutita Relaxing
Viburnum opulus Antispasmodic
Foeniculum vulgare Antispasmodic
Humulus lupulus Relaxing
Melissa officinalis Relaxing
Mentha piperita Antispasmodic
Valeriana officinalis Relaxing
Dioscorea villosa Antispasmodic
Reproductive system Viburnum prunifolium — Antispasmodic
Viburnum opulus Antispasmodic
Pulsatilla vulgaris Relaxing
Scutellaria spp. Relaxing
Valeriana officinalis Relaxing

THE ROLE OF STRESS IN HUMAN
HEALTH

An examination of stress and stress management is funda-
mental to any discussion of nervous system health. This
section provides an overview of the physiology and psy-
chology of stress and the general adaptation syndrome,
focusing on how stress relates to health and illness.

----- PAGE 354 -----
346 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

What Is Stress?

There are several ways to define stress. Here is perhaps the
most encompassing definition: “Stress is the response of
the body to any demand.” Just staying alive creates de-
mands on the body for energy to maintain life energy.
Even while we are asleep, our bodies continue to func-
tion. By this definition, stress is a fundamental part of
being alive and should not be avoided! The trick is to en-
sure that the degree of stress we experience is not over-
whelming, so that life is a joy, not a drag.

From this perspective, energy usage is one character-
istic of stress. Another characteristic is the lack of speci-
ficity of the stress response. Any demands made upon us
in daily life bring about certain reactions in the body.
These same reactions occur under a whole range of dif-
ferent conditions, both physical and emotional—from
perceptions of hot and cold to joy and sorrow. As aware,
feeling people, we generally make a big distinction be-
tween the pain caused by the loss of a loved one and the
pain caused by a rapid change in temperature, but the na-
ture of the demand is unimportant at the biological level.
To the body, it is all the same, because the stress response
is the same. Nerve signals travel from the brain to several
glands, and these react by secreting hormones to cope
with the task ahead. In short, stress is not just worry and
strain. It is a keynote of life, with all its ups and downs. A
new and exciting love can cause us as much stress as a
cranky boss.

Stress as a Response

The most relevant way to interpret stress involves view-
ing it as physiological response to an adverse, or “stress-
ful,” situation. This approach is based on the work of the
physiologist Hans Selye. Selye theorized that the stress
response is a built-in mechanism that comes into play
whenever demands are made on the individual, and is
therefore a defense reaction with a protective and adap-
tive function. In other words, the body mounts a general
physiological reaction to all forms of stress, which is usu-
ally in our own best interests. Selye called this reaction
the general adaptation syndrome (GAS). The theory sug-
gests a three-stage process of response:

1. An alarm reaction

2. A resistance stage, which represents a functional re-
covery of the body to a level superior to the pre-
stress state

3. An exhaustion reaction, in which continuation of
stress results in a depletion and breakdown of the
recovery described in stage 2

The limitation of this inflexible, physiological model
of stress is that it ignores the purely emotional or mental
factors that produce wide variations in the way humans
respond to potentially stressful situations.

Physiological Responses

The regulation of physiological responses to threats or
stressful demands is handled mainly by the adrenal gland.
Immediate response is controlled mainly, though not
completely, by the adrenal gland’s central medulla, while
the surrounding cortex handles long-term stress re-
sponses. The initial response, or the body’s preparation
for what has been called the fight-or-flight reaction, in-
volves a number of steps.

The first is an overall increase in nervous system ac-
tivity. Next, the adrenal medulla releases adrenaline
and/or noradrenaline into the bloodstream. These hor-
mones support the nervous system through metabolic ac-
tivities. The body’s response to these chemicals includes
an increase in heart rate and blood pressure and surface
constriction of blood vessels. Surface constriction of
blood vessels directs the blood away from the skin to the
muscles, providing them with more sugar and oxygen.
This is why we are said to “go white with shock.” The re-
lease of these chemicals also mobilizes the liver’s energy
reserves through the release of stored glucose.

If the stressful situation is very intense or continues
over a period of time, the adrenal cortex becomes in-
creasingly involved in the stress reaction. Adreno-
corticotropic hormone (ACTH), released by the anterior
pituitary gland, largely controls the activity of the cortex.
After information about sustained stress is processed by
the central nervous system, a whole range of bodily re-
sponses occurs. These are the reactions that can adversely
affect the quality of life.

Psychological Responses

In general terms, the psychological reaction to stress
takes the following course:

The initial fight-or-flight reaction is accompanied by
emotions such as anxiety and fear.

Individual coping strategies are activated as we attempt to
find ways to deal with the harmful or unpleasant situa-
tion.

If coping strategies are successful, the fight-or-flight re-
action and the anxiety state subside.

If coping strategies fail and the stress continues, a range
of psychological reactions, including depression and
withdrawal, may occur.

----- PAGE 355 -----
The implication is that the consequences of failing to
cope can be serious. It is therefore important that we de-
velop our own ways of adapting to and successfully deal-
ing with stressful situations.

How Stress Causes Illness

There can be no doubt that there is a definite relationship
between stress and illness. Although the exact nature of
that relationship is not yet understood, a number of ideas
have been suggested. Early theories tried to connect dif-
ferent illnesses with specific types of emotional conflict or
personality and body types. According to these theories,
certain body types and temperaments are more likely to
develop one physical disease under stress than are others.
However, there is little agreement among the experts
about what correlates with what.

Selye had more to say on the subject. He maintained
that the biological reactions accompanying the GAS re-
sult in both short- and long-term adverse physical
changes. He called these changes diseases of adaptation,
since they are the outcome of a system of defense re-
sponses to threatening stimuli. Selye theorized that the
disease process arises as a result of a number of factors:

* The physiological effect of certain hormones from the
adrenal and pituitary glands

¢ The impact of the inflammation process

* A general state of lowered resistance

The actual disease that manifests itself depends on a
range of factors, including genetics, physical weakness,
and even specific learned body responses. The GAS helps
explain the effects of life changes or events on health. Life
changes require adjustments that can produce physiolog-
ical reactions, and sustained and unsuccessful attempts at
coping with life can lower bodily resistance and promote
illness. Thus, the more frequent and severe the life changes
we experience, the more likely we are to become ill.

ANXIETY AS A RESPONSE TO STRESS

Stress affects our lives in many ways, and it is impossible
to talk about all of the ramifications here. However, when
the level of stress progresses beyond healthy stimulation
and begins to adversely affect our health, it usually mani-
fests in some form of anxiety.

Anxiety comprises various combinations of mental
and physical symptoms that occur either in a persistent
state or in the form of short-term panic attacks. Anxiety is
often described in the following terms.

THE Nervous SYSTEM @ 347

¢ An emotional state colored by the experienced quality
of fear

* An unpleasant emotion that may be accompanied by a
feeling of impending doom

* A feeling, directed toward the future, that is associated
with a perceived threat of some kind

* An experience of bodily discomfort and actual bodily
disturbance

In anxiety, there may be no recognizable basis for the
fear or perception of threat, and the emotion provoked
may be completely out of proportion to the actual stimu-
lus. Nevertheless, the symptoms of anxiety are very real.
For some people, anxiety takes the form of recurrent at-
tacks that, although they occur unpredictably, may be-
come associated with specific situations. These attacks
begin with a sudden, intense apprehension, often com-
bined with a feeling of impending doom and sometimes
with feelings of unreality. Any of the somatic (physical)
symptoms described below may occur. An anticipatory
fear of loss of control often develops, so that the person
may become afraid, for example, of being left alone in
public places. The anticipatory fear may itself precipitate
other symptoms, which escalate the attack. A whole range
of reactions can be associated with anxiety.

Table 16.3. Symptoms of Anxiety

SYMPTOM MANIFESTATIONS
Anxious mood Worrying
Apprehension

Anticipation of the worst

Irritability

Fears The dark
Being left alone
Traffic
Strangers
Large animals

Crowds

Cognitive symptoms Difficulty concentrating

Poor memory

Depressed mood Loss of interest

----- PAGE 356 -----
348 <= TREATMEN! APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

SYMPTOM MANIFESTATIONS. SYMPTOM MANIFESTATIONS
Depression Diurnal swing Insomnia Difficulty falling asleep

Lack of pleasure in hobbies Unsatisfying sleep

Early awakening Fatigue on waking
General body sensations innitus Night terrors

Hot and cold flushes Broken sleep

Prickling sensations Dreams

lurred vision Nightmares

Feelings of weakness General symptoms Muscular aches and pains
Respiratory symptoms ressure or constriction in chest Muscular twitching

Tightness of breath Muscular stiffness

Feelings of choking Grinding teeth

Sighing Cardiovascular symptoms Tachycardia, palpitations
Genitourinary symptoms Frequent urination Pain in chest

Urinary urgency Feelings of faintness

Suppressed menstrual periods Throbbing of vessels

Excessive menstrual bleeding Skipped heartbeats

Frigidity Gastrointestinal symptoms Difficulty swallowing

Premature ejaculation Indigestion

Impotence Heartburn

Loss of erection Looseness of bowels

Physiological aspects of behavior Tremor of hands Constipation
Strained face Flatulence
Swallowing Belching
Sweating

Sensations of bloating

Furrowed brow Weight loss

Facial pallor Autonomic nervous system symptoms Dry mouth

Eyelid twitching

Pallor
Tension Feelings of tension Giddiness
Inability to relax Flushing
Easily moved to tears Tendency to sweat
Feelings of restlessness Raising of hair
Fatigue Adapted from M. Hamilton, “The Assessment of Anxiety States by Rating,” British

Journal of Medical Psychology 32(1959):50-55.

Startled response

Trembling

----- PAGE 357 -----
MANAGING STRESS: AN OVERVIEW
There is much that can be done to ease the impact of
stress and decrease the weight of the anxiety and tension
we so often carry around with us. However, the very
range of approaches that we have to choose from can it-
self become a source of stress. Where should we turn for
help? Which therapy should we use? These are always
difficult questions, and they are even more difficult to an-
swer when we are not feeling our best.

The different therapies available merely represent
ways to help us find the inherent peace within us. We are
all, in fact, our own healers. The key is an inner attitude
of taking responsibility for the quality of our own lives.
We can seek aid from experts, whether medical doctors,
herbalists, or practitioners of various complementary
modalities, but the responsibility for healing can never be
truly handed to another. Healing comes from within and
is an intrinsic aspect of being alive. While healing is rarely
a conscious act of harnessing inner energy, it is always an
expression of our inner power.

Various tools and techniques can facilitate our heal-
ing; however, these techniques only aid in the healing
process. Each of them embodies a profound truth and a
great gift of healing wisdom, but humanity is very com-
plex, and our ills are a reflection of that complexity. We
need to build bridges between therapies in an effort to
move toward a more holistic approach to health. In this
chapter, the simple model I offer suggests ways in which
we might integrate various approaches to health and
wholeness to make inner peace an active part of our lives.
When people are seen as whole beings, not simply as
bodies with minds on top,” it should comes as no sur-
prise to find a deep association between psychology and
physiology. This association has profound implications
for all health conditions, not just stress and anxiety.

The mere fact that human beings are typically con-
sidered in terms of two separate entities—mind and
body—is a demonstration of the inadequacy of our scien-
tific approach to health. As already discussed, in reality, a

“

human is a single whole being that cannot be separated
into parts like mind and body.

Let us briefly explore the ways in which orthodox
medicine views the relationship between mind and body
in the development of illness. While no all-encompassing
explanation for this relationship has been put forward, the
medical world has considered a number of possible ideas.

Some physical illness may be psychological in origin, That is,
bodily disturbances may be directly caused by psycho-
logical illnesses.

THE Nervous SYSTEM ¢ 349

Physical illness may arise as an indirect consequence of a men-
tal disorder. In other words, the bodily illness results
from behavioral disturbances that are secondary to the
psychological problem.

Physical methods of treating mental illness may cause bodily
disease. Unfortunately, this is all too common with the
wide use of drug therapy today.

The mental disturbance may be a manifestation of a physical
illness, or an adverse effect of its treatment.

A mental or emotional problem may be a purely psychological
response, either to a physical illness or to the psycholog-
ical impact the illness has on the person involved.

This might all sound a bit semantic! These explana-
tions are, however, a way to find patterns of relationship
between mind and body, enabling the orthodox medical
practitioner to decide which drugs to use. They help an-
swer the question of whether the practitioner should
focus on the physical problems or the mental disturbance.

From the point of view of the holistic herbalist, this
is an artificial and unnecessary question. The whole must
be treated as a whole in order to help both body and
mind. Thus, we need not only remedies that are effective
for specific symptoms, but also a management plan to
help the patient cope with stress. This broader view
lessens the impact of stress and creates the space for heal-
ing to take place.

EMOTIONAL AND MENTAL
RESPONSES TO PHYSICAL ILLNESS

Any illness occurs within the context of our whole lives,
and so will affect us psychologically and socially as well as
physically. It may be useful for us to consider ways in
which illness itself produces psychological problems. The
difference between this type of problem and one that
arises in the mind but affects the body is purely a differ-
ence of perspective.

Technically speaking, if orthodox practitioners con-
sider the primary problem to be in the mind, they label it
a psychosomatic problem. If they consider the root of the
problem to be in the body, they label it a somatopsychic
problem. The distinction is subtle, as shown here.

Disease
Psyche

Psyche >
Disease -

(Psychosomatic) ed
(Somatopsychic) ad

Relaxation Techniques

Perhaps the most important and yet the simplest tools
available for lessening the impact of stress are relaxation

----- PAGE 358 -----
350 « TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

exercises. When someone is tense and has been so for a
while, the worst advice that can be given is, “Relax, take it
easy.” That is guaranteed to make feel anyone feel even
edgier while working at trying to relax! The sad fact is
that few people retain the innate skill of relaxation—a
pity, but there it is. Relaxation is a skill that must be re-
learned and practiced.

Many relaxation techniques exist, some based on
breathing, some on muscle control, some on visualiza-
tion, and some on simply listening to music. Picking the
right one is matter of determining which is most suitable
for the individual concerned.

Herbs and Spiritual Peace

In general, herbalists feel at home with spiritual matters.
Plant remedies are potent medicines for human beings,
but the plants from which they are derived are also vital
for a healthy world in a number of ways. Our natural sur-
roundings are important to us. Why do people fill their
offices with indoor plants? They are, of course, aestheti-
cally pleasing, but I suggest that aesthetic sensibilities are
a part of the way in which spirituality helps us maintain
our sanity. To the medieval monks, it was obvious that
through the simple flowers of the field, God had given
humanity a gift of healing and peace. Today, we are at last
relearning this simple truth.

Gardening, Tree-Hugging, and

Stress Management

If we get a bit creative, it is easy to see that the role of
herbs in holistic healing need not be limited to their in-
gestion. This is a perfect excuse to get into the garden,
walk in the woods, and literally “smell the roses”! If one
takes a very broad view of herbalism, seeing it as an ex-
ploration of humanity’s relationship with the plant world,
some unusual healing possibilities present themselves.

In recent years, researchers from several disciplines
have begun investigating the benefits of contact with
plants, especially trees. In studies of the stress-reducing
effects of nature, people recovered more quickly and
completely from stress when exposed to plant-rich natu-
ral settings, as indicated by lowered blood pressure, heart
rate, muscle tension, and skin conductance. (The measur-
able change in skin conductance of very small electrical
charges is considered one of the best physiological mea-
sures of autonomic nervous system activity and the stress
response.) Direct experience of nature also facilitated psy-
chological recovery, as suggested by reductions in mea-
sures of fear and anger and increases in positive feelings.
Physiological findings indicated that nature settings pro-
duced significant recovery from stress in only four to six
minutes. This rapid recovery highlights the importance
for city dwellers of contact with plants, to help facilitate
recuperation from various stressors, including commut-
ing and work pressures.!

form part of the lawn’s charm.

Herbal Stress Relief: Growing a Chamomile Lawn

Before the Victorians developed the grass lawn (itself a major cause of stress for some people!),
lawns were made up of different varieties of herbs that could cope with being trampled. A
chamomile lawn makes a wonderfully soothing place to rest, and lying upon such a lawn and
breathing in its delightful aroma gently yet profoundly relaxes the body.

Growing a chamomile lawn oneself further reduces stress through the benefits of exercise
and a sense of fulfillment. Specific varieties of chamomile are best for this. Matricaria nobile
‘Treneague’ is an apple-scented, nonflowering variety. This is convenient, as it saves having to re-
move spent flower heads, but ordinary Roman chamomile (Chamaemelum nobile) can be grown
from seed, which is less expensive. Prepare the soil and broadcast the seed. Cover with a thin layer
of soil and keep moist but not wet. When seedlings have at least two sets of leaves, thin them to
about 3 inches apart. Don’t walk on them until they have started to bind together. Remove most
flower heads as they appear, to ensure leaf vigor, but allow occasional flowers to remain, as they

Avoid placing a chamomile lawn where it borders on a grass lawn or wild garden area, as
creeping weeds will soon invade the lawn, and uprooting them will disturb the shallow-rooted
chamomile plants. Surrounding the chamomile lawn with stone, brick, or paving slabs is ideal for
preventing the invasion of unwanted plants as well as the spread of the chamomile.

----- PAGE 359 -----
Another study compared hospital records of gallblad-
der surgery patients who had window views of either a
small stand of trees or a brick wall. Results showed that
those with the view of trees had shorter postoperative
hospital stays, required fewer potent pain drugs, and re-
ceived fewer negative staff evaluations about their condi-
tion than did those with the wall view.’

The Role of Adaptogens

Humanity appears to have created a world of stress, pol-
lution, lack of meaning, and lack of purpose. In the face
of such cultural alienation from nature, the plethora of
diseases assailing the “civilized” world should come as no
surprise. To heal the ills, the causes must be addressed.
Such causes are found not only within the individual, but
also within our culture as a whole.

When a health problem is related to lowered resis-
tance to disease, which in turn is caused by the increased
impact of a hostile environment, the healer must also
“heal” the hostile environment. In other words, even if we
have found a remedy that seems to offer an increased re-
sistance to toxic drugs, it is always preferable to remove
the toxic chemical. This makes economic sense, is the
right stance in Hippocratic terms, and is the right action
in spiritual terms.

When attention is given to providing appropriate
support for the body under stressful conditions, nature
comes to our rescue. Technically, this calls for an increase
in the body’s nonspecific resistance to damaging man-
made factors and related illnesses. A range of appropriate
herbal remedies has come to light. Soviet scientists coined
the term adaptogen to describe herbs that produce this
wonderful increase in resistance and vitality. Some of the
characteristics of adaptogens include:

¢ Nonspecific activity—in other words, an ability to in-
crease the power of the body’s resistance to physical,
chemical, or biological stressors

¢ A normalizing influence independent of the nature of
the pathological state

¢ An innocuous nature that does not influence normal
body functions more than necessary

In these ways, adaptogens reinforce the nonspecific
power of the body’s resistance against stressors, increase
its general capacity to withstand stressful situations, and
hence guard against disease caused by overstressing the
organism. The general aims of treatment with adaptogens
include:

* Reduce stress reactions during the alarm phase of the
stress response

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 351

* Prevent or at least delay the state of exhaustion
¢ Afford a certain level of protection against the effects
of long-term stress

Herbs that can be described as adaptogens include
Panax ginseng (Korean ginseng), P. guinquefolins (American
ginseng), Eleutherococcus senticosus (Siberian ginseng),
Withania somnifera (ashwaganda), Lentinus edodes (shiitake
mushroom), and Shisandra chinensis (schizandra).

HERBAL REMEDIES AND STRESS
MANAGEMENT

Herbs can play a fundamental role in any stress manage-
ment program. When used within the context of a pro-
gram that addresses a range of factors, herbs can facilitate
a dramatic change in the quality of life experienced by
anyone under stress. Holistic medicine reminds us to
focus on an individual’s unique situation, not to simply
treat a diagnosed disease syndrome.

In chapter 1, I discussed the concept of therapeutic
ecology as a model that describes the relationship of herbal
medicine to other healing modalities. A well-balanced
stress management program will address all of the various
elements of healing discussed in that model, including
physical medicine, bodywork, emotional and psychologi-
cal factors, and spiritual aspects. Herbal remedies will ful-
fill only some needs, but they remain vital.

In addition, in the context of this therapeutic ecology,
it is important to remember that the patient is ahways
more important than the doctor’s belief system. In other
words, one person diagnosed with a stress-related problem
might recuperate best when treated with dietary advice,
herbs, and massage, while another may respond better to
tranquilizers and psychoanalysis. The patient’s needs and
belief system must always be taken into account in order
for meaningful change to occur.

In the treatment discussions that follow, we will focus
our attention on the herbal aspects of a holistic approach
to conditions affecting the nervous system, but please do
not forget nutrition, relaxation, psychotherapy, spiritual-
ity, and all of the other factors that the competent practi-
tioner must address.

A convenient way to approach stress-related prob-
lems is based on the intensity of the person’s problem
combined with the duration of the stressful situation, as
seen in the following general list.

* Daily mild stress
* Long-standing severe stress
¢ Short-term severe stress

----- PAGE 360 -----
352 = TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Treatment of Mild Daily Stress

Tf periods of stress in a person’s life can be predicted, one
can prepare for them ahead of time and implement
herbal, dietary, and lifestyle measures that will minimize
the impact. Nervine relaxants can be used regularly as
gentle, soothing remedies. For some people, bitter tonics
may also be important because of their metabolic toning
effects.

Specific Remedies
Review the entries for specific relaxing nervines in chap-
ter 25 to clarify their secondary actions and properties.
These remedies can be drunk as teas or cold beverages,

infused in massage oil, or used in relaxing baths or foot-
baths.

Relaxing Nervines

Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)
Avena sativa (oats)

Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Stachys betonica (wood betony)
Tilia platyphyllos (linden)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)

A daily supplement of B-complex vitamins and vita-
min C is indicated. The impact of various stressors should
also be ameliorated. This is sometimes impossible, but do
not automatically support the individual in putting up
with something or someone, whatever the justification.
People can change and change their lives. In addition to
relaxation exercises, an honest reevaluation of both
lifestyle and life goals is invaluable.

Treatment of Ongoing Stress

The line between chronic stress and the daily levels of
stress we all put up with is fuzzy. A gentle soul with a less-
than-strong constitution will cross the line into chronic
stress sooner than a stronger person who copes well.
Neither one of these constitutional extremes is better
than the other; they merely reflect the fact that we live in
a world of human diversity.

Focused attention must be given to general health.
The body will often show that it is weakening through
some somatic symptom. This may manifest as a long-
standing complaint that gets worse, an old problem that
reappears, or just an acceleration of the aging process.

Specific Remedies

The remedies suggested for daily stress relief also apply
for chronic stress, but the addition of adaptogens be-
comes pivotal in cases of chronic stress. Important exam-
ples of adaptogens include Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Siberian ginseng), Panax ginseng (Korean ginseng), and
Withania somnifera (ashwaganda).

Treatment of Short-Term Extreme Stress
In the lives of most people, there are times when life be-
come overwhelming and the pain of existence crescendos.
Immediate herbal relief may be needed for a whole range
of traumatic situations, from being involved in a car acci-
dent to personal emotional crisis. In these cases, herbs will
take the edge off the trauma, but will rarely remove it.

At extremely difficult times, herbs can be seen only as
an aid—one element of an approach taken to deal with
the issues faced by the individual. The individual may also
need to seek help from the various caring professions, go
on vacation or a retreat, or even check into a hospital.
However, a unique property of herbal nervines is their
ability to address various associated somatic symptoms.
This affords us the opportunity to focus herbal medica-
tion on the unique experience of the patient.

Specific Remedies

Many plants capable of easing intense stress are consid-
ered dangerous in our society, and because they are
legally restricted substances, they will not be discussed
here. However, in addition to the nervine relaxant herbs
already mentioned, consider Passiflora incarnata (passion-
flower), Valeriana officinalis (valerian), Piper methysticum
(kava kava) and Lactuca virosa (wild lettuce).

A Prescription for Acute Stress Reactions
1 part
1 part

Scutellaria lateriflora
Valeriana officinalis

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture as needed

Note the dosage of “up to 5 ml of tincture as needed.”
This represents a recognition that the stress response is
cyclical, and different times of the day will be more chal-
lenging for each person. The dosage may be increased
until symptoms are relieved, as this is largely symptomatic
medication. The dosage regimen may also be altered as
necessary, varying time of day and quantity of dose to suit
individual needs. For example, the patient may wish to
take a large dose first thing in the morning, or smaller
amounts at frequent intervals throughout the day.

----- PAGE 361 -----
Table 16.4. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Acute Stress

THe NERVOUS SYSTEM © 353

Table 16.6. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Acute Stress with Muscle Tension

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Scutellaria lateriflora
Nervine relaxant Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis
Carminative Valeriana officinalis

Antispasmodic Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis

A Prescription for Acute Stress Reaction with
Indigestion and Palpitations

Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 2 parts
Leonurus cardiaca 1 part
Matricaria recutita 1 part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture as needed

Table 16.5. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Stress with Indigestion and Palpitations

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Scutellaria lateriflora, Avena sativa

Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis,
Leonurus cardiaca

Nervine relaxant

Antispasmodic Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis

Bitter Artemisia vulgaris, Matricaria recutita
Anti-inflammatory — Matricaria recutita, Valeriana officinalis

Matricaria recutita, Valeriana officinalis,
Artemisia vulgaris

Carminative

Motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca) supports the relaxing
action of the other nervines, but also has a specific calm-
ing impact upon tachycardia.

A Prescription for Acute Stress Reaction with
Associated Muscle Tension
Scutellaria lateriflora
Piper methysticum

1 part
1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture as needed

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Scutellaria lateriflora
Nervine relaxant —Scutellaria lateriflora, Piper methysticum

Antispasmodic Scutellaria lateriflora, Piper methysticum

Muscle-Relaxant Compress

Hot chamomile compresses work well to relax painful, tense
muscles. Prepare a strong infusion, using a full cup of chamomile
flowers and 2 quarts of water. Cover with a lid and allow to
steep for about 10 minutes; strain. Dip a towel into the infusion,
wring it out, and spread it (as hot as is tolerable) on the back,
shoulders, and neck. Soak another towel in the hot infusion,
wring it out, and place it on top of the first towel. Now turn
over both towels so that the fresh, hot compress is again in con-
tact with the patient's skin. Remove the top towel and again
soak it in the infusion. Repeat the procedure 10 to 20 times, until
there is a sense of relaxation and relief of tension.

Broader Context of Treatment

Please refer to chapter 1 for a discussion of the impor-
tance of relaxation and meditation. (For more detailed in-
formation, please see my book Successful Stress Control,
listed as suggested reading in the bibliography.) In addi-
tion, adequate intake of B vitamins is essential.

Nutritional Guidelines

A healthy diet provides optimal amounts of all known nu-
trients and low levels of components that are detrimental
to health. It is rich in whole, unprocessed foods and espe-
cially high in plant foods—fruits, vegetables, grains,
beans, seeds, and nuts. While it is impossible to come up
with a detailed set of guidelines for everyone, consider the
following elements of a healthy diet.

¢ Eat fresh, nutritious foods in season, in a form as close
as possible to the original.

* Enjoy appealing and tasty foods, rotating the foods
eaten for variety.

* Eat moderately and regularly.

* Balance different types of foods to ensure a nutrition-
ally well-rounded diet.

* Eat with your senses, with full attention and with gusto

----- PAGE 362 -----
354 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

* Eat less rather than more.
* Appreciate simple foods.
* Eat vegetables, especially cruciferous vegetables.

DEPRESSION

A disorder marked especially by sadness, inactivity, diffi-
culty with thinking and concentration, a significant in-
crease or decrease in appetite and time spent sleeping,
feelings of dejection and hopelessness, and sometimes
suicidal thoughts or an attempt to commit suicide. (The
Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary)

Depression is a state of mind familiar to almost everyone
in one form or another. In ordinary usage, the word refers
to a mood state that in medicine is called dysthymia, in
contrast with the normal state of ewthymia and the oppo-
site state, elation.

In psychiatric usage, disorders of mood are called
affective disorders. Depression is either a disorder in its
own right or can be a symptom of another disorder, either
mental or physical. Normal human responses to some sit-
uations may include transient depression, but in medicine,
these transient states are distinguished from the condition
known as clinical depression.

Major depression occurs in 10% to 20% of the
world’s population in the course of a lifetime. Women are
more often affected than men are, by a 2:1 ratio, and they
seem to be at particular risk just before menstruation or
immediately after childbirth. Relatives of people with
major depression also seem to be at higher risk of devel-
oping depression, and about 2% of the population may
have a chronic disorder known as depressive personality.
I was once asked to speak at a conference on the topic
Herbal Alternatives to Prozac.” I spent most of the talk
challenging the assumptions underlying the title! By
phrasing the topic in this way, we are forced to respond to
the underlying issue in terms of the efficacy of Prozac for
depression, rather than by highlighting the strengths of
phytotherapy when used in a holistic context.

In short, comparing the efficacy of herbs and Prozac
begs the fundamental question about the underlying cause
of depression. When it comes to the clinical use of herbs
in major depressive illness, I want to make it clear that I
do not believe there is an herbal alternative. For the ma-
jority of people with less severe depression, however,
herbal alternatives will be discussed below.

I would also suggest that depression may be a rational

“

and sahe response to our society’ initial manifestation of
21st century culture! As such, is a chemical “smiley face,”

whether synthetic or botanical, an ethical response? We
don’t suppress the inflammatory response simply because
it occurs, so why suppress the emotions that accompany
depression? Depression can represent an opportunity for
self-exploration for the patient, and many lessons may be
learned. Of course, this will entail a great challenge for
both the patient and the practitioner.

Depression is defined by a standard set of symptoms de-
scribed in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM):

* Poor appetite and significant weight loss, or increased
appetite and significant weight gain

¢ Insomnia or increased sleep

¢ Agitation or retardation of movement and thought

* Loss of interest or pleasure in usual activities; decrease
in sexual drive

¢ Fatigue and loss of energy

¢ Feelings of worthlessness, self-reproach, or excessive
or inappropriate guilt

* Diminished ability to
indecisiveness

* Recurrent thoughts of death or suicide, or suicide
attempts

think or concentrate;

Not all of these characteristics will occur in each in-
dividual who becomes depressed. For purposes of psychi-
atric treatment, a person is considered to have experi-
enced a major depressive episode if he or she exhibits a
loss of interest or pleasure in all or almost all usual activ-
ities and shows at least four of the above symptoms nearly
every day for a period of at least two weeks.

The term depression is often modified by words that
imply either some specific factor or some chemical mech-
anism as the cause of the state. For example, depression
that is considered a reaction to some loss of or separation
from a valued person or object is called reactive or exoge-
nous depression. In contrast, the usually more severe form
of depression without apparent cause is called endogenous
depression. Melancholia, a term once used to describe all de-
pressive states, is now applied only to these most severe
forms of depression.

Treatment of Depression

In terms of the herbal component of treatment protocols
for depression, the nervous system must be the focus for
toning, but associated symptoms may be a clue that more
deep-seated issues have begun to manifest. Attention to
the liver and the digestive system in general is usually a
good idea.

----- PAGE 363 -----
Actions Indicated

Nervine tonics are fundamental to any long-term change in
the individual’s ability to cope and transform what
must be changed.

Nervine relaxants may be indicated in the short term, or if
the depression has an agitated or hyperactive aspect.
These should not be strong herbs, which could trigger
a more entrenched depression.

Nervine stimulants might help, but not predictably. If the
therapist concludes that stimulation is appropriate, it is
better to use bitter metabolic stimulants.

Bitters often bring about dramatic changes in patients’ per-
ceptions of themselves and of their lives. This highlights
the need for a holistic perspective in such conditions.

Antispasmodics will alleviate muscular tension that might
manifest as a bodily expression of psychological depres-
sion. Care should be taken not to use strong relaxants.

Adaptogens support the adrenals in coping with the stress
that the whole body is experiencing.

Hepatics are indicated to support the liver’s detoxification
work, especially if the patient has been using prescrip-
tion psychotropic drugs.

Specific Remedies
As far as this author is concerned, there are no clear-cut
specifics for depression. Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s
wort) has a long tradition of use in Europe, and while it
sometimes achieves remarkable results, it also sometimes
does nothing. This herb requires time to work, and so
must be taken for at least a month. (For more details on
the actions of St. John’s wort, please refer to chapter 26.)
Of numerous clinical trials performed to investigate
the antidepressant effects of St. John’s wort extract, a
double-blind clinical trial conducted in 1993 concluded
that 67% of patients experienced a positive improvement
after four weeks of therapy. The study involved 105 out-
patients with depressions of short duration who received
either 300 mg of St. John’s wort extract three times a day
or placebo three times a day.

A Prescription for Moderate Depression

Hypericum perforatum 2 parts
Avena sativa 1 part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day for at least 1
month

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 355

Table 16.7. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Depression

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Hypericum perforatum, Avena sativa

Nervine relaxant Hypericum perforatum, Avena sativa,

Artemisia vulgaris

Bitter Artemisia vulgaris

Broader Context of Treatment
The whole gamut of issues touched upon in this chapter
must be addressed. From green salads to relaxation, spinal
adjustments to changing the music one listens to—the
list of factors to consider is endless. Exercise is especially
important.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Pizzorno and
Murray suggest the following nutritional supplements:*

B vitamin complex: 50 times the recommended daily dose
each day

Vitamin C: | g three times daily

Folic acid: 400 mg/day

Vitamin By): 250 mcg/day

Magnesium: 500 mg/day

INSOMNIA

Difficulty in sleeping, or disturbed sleep patterns leaving
the perception of insufficient sleep. (The Merck Manual)

The Encyclopaedia Britannica defines sleep as:

... normal, easily reversible, and spontaneous state of de-
creased and less efficient responsiveness to external stim-
ulation, Sleep is a regularly recurring suspension of con-
sciousness that serves recuperative and adaptive functions.
Sleep usually requires the presence of flaccid or relaxed
skeletal muscles and the absence of the overt, goal-directed
behavior often seen in wakeful organisms. An electroen-
cephalogram (EEG) recording the electrical activity of
the human brain shows a distinctive pattern during sleep.

Let me try to translate. Sleep and rest allow the body
to replenish depleted energy reserves and allow us to
maintain normal physical and mental functioning.
Adequate sleep is essential for good physical and mental
health, as it is necessary for the body’s restorative processes.
These processes occur in harmony with the body’s sleep
cycles, which are dictated by the body’s natural rhythms.

----- PAGE 364 -----
356 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

These natural rhythms, known as diurnal rhythms, are
slightly more than 24 hours in length and are reset each
day by light and other time cues. These rhythms dictate
our need for periodic rest, so sleep is as important to our
biological well-being as are food, water, warmth, and
shelter.

Restful sleep in human beings consists of four pat-
terns of brain activity, known as sleep stages. Stages | and
2 are considered stages of light sleep, and they typically
predominate in the early part of the sleep cycle. Stages 3
and 4 are deeper, more restful sleep periods, and they
tend to dominate in the latter half of the sleep cycle. All
four stages come and go many times during the night.
Transient awakenings usually occur during Stage | sleep.
Most dreaming occurs during Stage 4, which is also
known as REM (rapid eye movement) sleep. If this nor-
mal pattern of alternating stages is disturbed, sleep may
not be fully restorative.

While sleeping approximately eight hours a night is
vital to physical and mental health, dreaming is necessary
for psychological health, Most theories of dream function
state that dreams enable people to master their environ-
ments. In dreams, people integrate new experiences and
solve conflicts from their waking lives. Another function
of both sleep and dreaming is to assist in the processing
and storage of memories.

The amount of sleep needed varies tremendously
among individuals. There is no “normal” amount of
sleep. Different people need different amounts of sleep;
however, the amount of sleep that any one person needs
is amazingly constant. Although one may sleep longer
one night than another, depending on circumstances, the
number of hours slept over a week or a month usually av-
erages out to be very much the same. Fight hours of sleep
a night is the usually cited average, although 7 to 7'/
hours is more accurate for most people. Even that num-
ber is only an average, and has nothing to do with what’s
right or wrong. A good night’s sleep can range from less
than three hours to more than ten.

Causes and Consequences of Insomnia

The National Institutes of Health defines insomnia as “a
disturbance or perceived disturbance of the usual sleep pat-
tern of the individual that has troublesome consequences.”
In other words, insomnia is insufficient, disturbed sleep
that does not fill the restorative function. This means that
the individual does not get enough sleep to meet the needs
of the body or to feel refreshed and energetic upon awak-
ening and throughout the day. It is normal to wake up sev-
eral times each night. Although most people don’t recall

these brief episodes of awakening, insomniacs typically
have trouble either getting to sleep in the first place or
falling back to sleep once they have awakened.

Insomnia usually has a cause, and often has multiple
causes. However, the cause that initiated the problem may
no longer be the one that keeps it from resolving. When
trying to pinpoint the cause of insomnia, consider the fol-
lowing categories.

Medical Illness

Insomnia is especially related to conditions that result in
pain, shortness of breath, cough, urination, nausea, diar-
rhea, or other bothersome symptoms that occur at night,
including:

¢ Arthritis

Muscles aches and pains

Lung disease, including asthma

Heart disease

Diabetes

Overactive thyroid

Headaches

Colitis

Gastroesophageal reflux disease; heartburn

Infections

Hot flashes; menstrual pains

Leg cramps

Restless legs syndrome

Psychological Illness

Any psychiatric or psychological illness can interfere with
sleep. Conditions associated with increased anxiety or
worry often keep people from falling asleep, whereas de-
pressive illnesses often result in early-morning awakening
or trouble remaining asleep.

In addition, many prescription medications for treat-
ing psychiatric illness can compromise sleep. Anti-
depressants, such as Prozac, Zoloft, and Paxil, can have
stimulating effects. Tranquilizers such as Valium may at
first help anxious people sleep, but with prolonged use
they can disturb normal sleep activity in the brain. The
same is true for nicotine and alcohol use, which fre-
quently increase during times of psychological stress.

Biological Clock Alterations

All human beings have a biological clock deep within
their brains. They control regular fluctuations in body
functions, such as hormone secretions, temperature regu-
lation, and sleep-wake cycles. The clock controlling
sleep-wake periods typically cycles every 25 hours; inter-

----- PAGE 365 -----
estingly, this cycle is not synchronized with our 24-hour
day. For some people, however, this normal cycle can be-
come abnormally shortened or prolonged. One of the
most common experiences of this kind of disruption is
jet lag.

Medications

Prescription and over-the-counter medicines used to
treat medical or psychiatric problems can also contribute
to insomnia. Examples include:

¢ Alcohol

* Caffeine (found in coffee, tea, cola, NoDoz, and
elsewhere)

¢ Nicotine

¢ Bronchodilators (asthma remedies)

* Beta-blockers (used for high blood pressure, heart dis-
ease, migraines, palpitations)

* Calcium channel blockers (used for high blood pres-
sure, heart disease, migraines, palpitations)

¢ “Non-drowsy” decongestants and cold remedies

¢ Dilantin (diphenylhydantoin)

© Steroids (mainly prednisone and cortisone preparations)

¢ Thyroid hormones

* Psychotropic medications

Many people use caffeine to maintain wakefulness
throughout the day. Excessive use of caffeine on a daily
basis, however, can lead to withdrawal symptoms, includ-
ing headache and sleeplessness at night. If caffeine is in-
gested too close to bedtime, its stimulating properties can
also interfere with sleep. Caffeine is known to cause an
increase in heart palpitations, stomach problems, diar-
rhea, and restless legs syndrome in certain individuals.

Negative Conditioning

Another common cause of insomnia is the way in which
people respond to their inability to sleep. Not sleeping
well can lead to worry, frustration, and depression, which
in turn instigate additional psychological pressure to sleep.
This anxiety further interferes with sleep. A cycle that may
be described as “failure—worry—more failure—more
worry” develops. This pattern becomes self-perpetuating.
Behaviors that maintain the insomnia can aggravate the
problem, as can performance anxiety.

Bad Sleep Habits

Certain behaviors, some of which are conditioned re-
sponses, commonly contribute to long-term insomnia. It
is very important to recognize these causes, since in most
instances they can be reduced or eliminated.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 357

¢ Failing to keep to a regular sleep-wake schedule

* Depriving the body of sleep by staying up late to work
or play on a frequent basis

* ‘Trying to “catch up” on lost sleep during the weekend

© Watching late-night TV

¢ Excessive napping during the day

¢ Thinking of work-related problems while in bed

* Excessive time awareness or frequent clock watching
while in bed

¢ Feeling “too tired” to exercise during the day

¢ Exercising vigorously too close to bedtime

¢ Drinking coffee, tea, or caffeine-containing colas too
close to bedtime

Recent Stressful Events

Another common cause of insomnia, particularly in the
short term, is a stressful event or crisis in a person’s life.
In general, the successful resolution of these problems
usually leads to restoration of normal sleep.

Shift Work
Shift work is a common cause of sleep deprivation.
Working the night shift on a regular basis or working dif-
ferent shifts on a rotating schedule produces challenges
and obstacles to maintaining a normal, healthy sleep-
wake pattern.

Treatment of Insomnia

There are many herbs with a reputation as an effective
sleep remedy, but there are no legal plants that will put a
person out. The key to successful treatment of insomnia
is to find the cause and deal with it. Insomnia can push the
practitioner's diagnostic skills to the limit, making the
free and easy prescribing of benzodiazepine sleep aids at
least understandable!

As discussed, the cause of insomnia may be anything
in the realm of human life, from deep grief to constipa-
tion. Psychological issues often need attention, but so do
health problems that cause pain or discomfort. Dietary
indiscretions must be identified, as must an environmen-
tal factor (for example, freeway noise or a snoring spouse).
In short, treatment should not depend upon substances,
whether herbs or drugs.

Suggestions for Better Sleep

Sleep as much astyou need to feel refreshed and healthy, but no
more. Spending too much time in bed seems to be re-
lated to shallow sleep.

Get up at the same time each day, no matter when you went
to bed. This will help establish a sleep-wake rhythm.

----- PAGE 366 -----
358 +» TREATMEN! APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Do some sort of physical activity each day to get rid of tension
and tire your body, but nothing too strenuous just be-
fore bedtime.

Do the same amount of exercise each day, preferably in late
afternoon or early evening.

Make sure the bedroom is dark, cool, and quiet.

Sleep on a quality mattress and foundation.

Do not lie in bed for hours staring at the walls. If you do not
fall asleep after 15 or 20 minutes, it is best to get up
and do something quiet until you become drowsy.

Do not make your bed a-place to watch TV, do paperwork, or
eat.

Consider earplugs or eye masks if you work night shifts or
live in a noisy area.

A light snack may help, but a heavy meal will not.

Unless prescribed, do not nap during the day. For most peo-
ple, this can throw off the sleep schedule by confusing
the body.

Natural sunlight during the day can be belpful for falling and
staying asleep, so get outdoors, even for a brief walk.

Caffeine in the evening disturbs sleep, even if you don’t think
it does!

Alcobol causes fragmented sleep. Although it can be initially
calming, liquor interferes with sleep quality.

Chronic tobacco use disturbs sleep.

Try not to rehash the day’s problems or worry about tomorrow.

When you go to bed, relax your muscles, beginning with your
feet and working your way up to your head.

Actions Indicated.

Hypnotics are herbs with a reputation for easing a person
into sleep. They are usually strong nervine relaxants,
rather than “plant knockout drops”!

Nervine relaxants ease the tensions that often produce
sleeplessness.

Antispasmodics address any somatic muscular tightness
that might be involved.

Nervine tonics are indicated if there is any suspicion that in-
somnia is related to nervous exhaustion (as it often is).
Adaptogens will help in a way similar to nervine tonics, but
should be used only in the morning to help deal with

stress, as they might be too energizing at night.

System Support

Often the key to successful treatments lies in focusing
upon a weakened or impaired body part or function. The
problem must be identified and the appropriate system
tonic, action, or specific herb applied. Hypnotics and
nervines may be used within the context of such treat-
ment. These should be selected according to the role they

play in the system in question, and not simply upon their
strength as hypnotics.

Circulatory system. Appropriate herbs include Leonurus
cardiaca, Tilia platyphyllos, and Melissa officinalis.

Respiratory system. All of the hypnotics can be of value as
antispasmodics in conditions such as asthma, if used at
the right dose. Lactuca virosa eases irritable coughs.

Digestive system. Relaxing nervines and carminatives are
important, including Matricaria recutita, Verbena offici-
nalis, Melissa officinalis, Humutus lupulus, and Valeriana
officinalis. Antispasmodic herbs, such as Humulus lupu-
lus, Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis, and Piscidia
erythrina will help with intestinal colic.

Urinary tract. Hypnotics are important here when used as
muscle relaxants.

Reproductive system. As in the urinary tract, hypnotics may
help here when used as muscle relaxants. Of particu-
lar relevance here are Pulsatilla vulgaris and Piscidia
erythrina.

Musculoskeletal. All hypnotics will aid in reducing muscle
tension and even the pain associated with problems in
this system. They may be used internally or as lotions.
Especially important are Piscidia erythrina and
Valeriana officinalis.

Nervous system. All of the remedies listed here also act on
the nervous system.

Skin. Matricaria recutita and Primula veris (cowslip) are
hypnotics that also help with skin issues, but otherwise,
the value of hypnotics here is to ensure that the body
has a good recuperative rest each night.

Specific Remedies

Selections among the many herbal sleep aids should be
made on the basis of their secondary actions or system
affinities. By choosing herbs that address the specific
health issues compounding the sleep difficulties, better
results are obtained than if one simply chooses a strong
hypnotic. For example, if a patient with insomnia also has
heart palpitations, Leonurus cardiaca would be a good
choice of nervine. This is explored in chapter 25. They
may also be selected on the basis of their strength, bear-
ing in mind the very subjective nature and individual vari-
ability in human response to these herbs. We can very
roughly identify three groupings of hypnotics.

Mild Hypnotics

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Nepeta cataria (catnip)

----- PAGE 367 -----
Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

Moderate Hypnotics

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Putsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Strong Hypnotics

Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Humutus lupulus (hops)

Lactuca virosa (wild lettuce)

Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)

Piper methysticum (kava kava)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

A Prescription for Insomnia
Passiflora incarnata 1 part

Valeriana officinalis T part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture 30 minutes before bedtime

Table 16.8. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Insomnia

ACTION HERBS

Hypnotic Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis
Nervine relaxant Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis
Antispasmodic Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis

Carminative Valeriana officinalis

A Prescription for Insomnia Associated with
Menopausal Problems

Passiflora incarnata 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Leonurus cardiaca 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture 30 minutes before bedtime, in addition
to appropriate daytime treatments

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 359

Table 16.9. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Insomnia with Menopausal Problems

ACTION HERBS

Hypnotic Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis

Nervine relaxant Leonurus cardiaca, Passiflora incarnata,

Valeriana officinalis

Antispasmodic Leonurus cardiaca, Passiflora incarnata,
Valeriana officinalis

Carminative Valeriana officinalis

Emmenagogue Leonurus cardjaca

A Prescription for Insomnia Associated with Indigestion

Passiflora incarnata 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part
Melissa officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 7.5 ml of tincture 30 minutes before bedtime, in addi-
tion to appropriate daytime treatments. An infusion of
Matricaria, Tilia, or Melissa at night may also be helpful.

Table 16.10. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Insomnia with Indigestion

ACTION HERBS

Hypnotic Matricaria recutita, Passiflora incarnata,

Valeriana officinalis

Nervine relaxant Artemisia vulgaris, Matricaria recutita,
Melissa officinalis, Passiflora incarnata,

Valeriana officinalis

Antispasmodic Artemisia vulgaris, Matricaria recutita,
Melissa officinalis, Passiflora incarnata,
Valeriana officinalis

Carminative Artemisia vulgaris, Matricaria recutita,
Melissa officinalis, Valeriana officinalis

Bitter Artemisia vulgaris

Anti-inflammatory — Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,

Valeriana officinalis

----- PAGE 368 -----
360 <- TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

A Prescription for Insomnia Associated with
Hypertension and Headache

Passiflora incarnata 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Stachys betonica 1 part
Tilia platyphyllos 1 part
Viburnum opulus 1 part

Dosage: 75 ml of tincture 30 minutes before bedtime, in addition
to appropriate daytime treatments. (Refer to chapter 14 for more
information on the treatment of hypertension.) An infusion of
Tilia or Matricaria at night may also be helpful.

Table 16.11. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Insomnia with Hypertension and Headache

ACTION HERBS

Hypnotic Tilia platyphyllos, Passiflora incarnata,

Valeriana officinalis

Nervine relaxant Stachys betonica, Tilia platyphyllos,

Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis,

Viburnum opulus
Antispasmodic Tilia platyphyllos, Passiflora incarnata,
Valeriana officinalis, Viburnum opulus
Analgesic Stachys betonica, Valeriana officinalis
Hypotensive Tilia platyphylios, Valeriana officinalis,

Viburnum opulus

A Prescription for Insomnia Associated with Depression

Passiflora incarnata 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Hypericum perforatum 1 part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part

Dosage: 7.5 ml of tincture 30 minutes before bedtime, in addi-
tion to appropriate daytime treatments. Note: Avoid the use of
Humulus lupulus (hops) in depression.

Table 16.12. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Insomnia with Depression

ACTION HERBS

Hypnotic Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis

Nervine relaxant Artemisia vulgaris, Hypericum perforatum,

Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis

ACTION HERBS

Antispasmodic Artemisia vulgaris, Hypericum perforatum,

Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis
Antidepressant Artemisia vulgaris, Hypericum perforatum

Bitter Artemisia vulgaris

Sleep Pillows

Pillows made with herbs, used either singly or in combination,
are a long-standing remedy to facilitate a good night's sleep.
Traditionally used herbs include Matricaria recutita, Nepeta
cataria, Humulus lupulus, Lavandula spp., Melissa officinalis,
Tilia platyphyllos, Citrus aurantium var. amara blossoms, and
Galium odoratum.

Make a pillowcase lining out of linen or burlap, leaving it
open at one end, Make up the herb stuffing by mixing dried
herbs in the following proportions:

2 to 3 handfuls each of peppermint, sage, and lemon balm
1 to 2 handfuls of lavender, dill, lemon thyme, tarragon,
woodruff, red bergamot and rosemary

1to 2 tablespoons of valerian

Fill the pillow loosely with the herbs, sew closed, and put inside
a soft, pretty pillowcase before use, Many other herbal combi-
nations are possible. This is an appropriate place to experiment
to find the combination and aroma that suits the individual.

Insomnia and Aromatherapy
Aromatherapy, a healing system based on the external ap-
plication of herbs in the form of essential oils, has much
to offer to those in search of restful sleep. A reliable and
comprehensive guide to the safe use of these wonderful
oils is Aromatherapy: A Complete Guide to the Healing Art,
by Kathi Keville and Mindy Green, from which much of
the following is taken.

Aromatherapy is increasingly used in hospitals in the
United Kingdom, especially for sleeping difficulties.
Helping an elderly patient achieve a good-quality, re-
freshing night’s sleep is a bigger problem in hospitals than
at home.’ Lavender is the primary essential oil used to in-
duce sleep. Placing a few drops of the oil on the pillow
helps promote peaceful sleep for many patients.

A number of oils may be of service in easing the rav-
ages of insomnia, of which the most relevant are listed

below. It is very important to use essential oils in the cor-

----- PAGE 369 -----
rect way, as some oils are potentially irritating to the skin
if used undiluted or may be toxic if taken internally. Here
are some suggestions on how to use essential oils to treat
insomnia. The dilutions given are for adults.

Massage Oils

Always dilute oils before applying them to the skin. Use a
carrier oil such as sweet almond oil, grapeseed oil, jojoba
oil, or any other pure, unblended vegetable oil. Do not
use baby oil, as this is a mineral oil that, unlike vegetable
oils, will not be absorbed by the skin. Ten to 12 drops per
ounce of carrier oil (a 2% dilution) is usually appropriate.

Baths

Add up to 5 drops of pure essential oi] to a bath of warm
water. Float the oil on the surface and stir with your hand
before relaxing in the bath for 10 to 15 minutes. For a
hand or foot soak, add 2 or 3 drops of essential oil to a
bowl of warm water.

Inhalation

Add 2 drops of essential oil to a bowl of hot water, cover
the head and bow! with a towel to create a tent, and in-
hale the fragrant steam.

Essential Oils Traditionally Used for Insomnia
Bergamot

Blue chamomile
Chamomile (German or Roman)
Cypress

Frankincense
Geranium

Jasmine

Lavender

Lemon balm (Melissa)
Lemon verbena
Linden

Mandarin orange
Marjoram

Neroli

Nuuneg

Patchouli

Petitgrain

Rose

Sandalwood

Ylang ylang

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 361

Relaxing Antidepressant Essential Oil Formula
3 drops lavender oil
3 drops neroli oil
2 drops clary sage oil
2 drops marjoram oil
2 drops ylang ylang oil
1 drop German chamomile oil
Tounce carrier oil

This can be used as either a massage or a bath oil

Fragrant Insomnia Blend (for diffuser)
25 drops lavender oil
10 drops sweet orange oil
8 drops chamomile oil
8 drops marjoram oil
6 drops ylang ylang oil

WITHDRAWAL FROM
BENZODIAZEPINES

All of the commonly prescribed and abused minor tran-
quilizers, such as Valium and Xanax, can be safely re-
placed by herbal remedies when used in a broadly holistic
context. The ease of replacing the drug with herbs high-
lights the need to avoid the development of dependence
on the new herbal medicine.

Actions Indicated

Nervine tonics are fundamental to any long-term change in
the individual's ability to cope with life and transform
what must be changed.

Nervine relaxants will fulfill the tranquilizing role of the
drug in the short term.

Nervine stimulants may be indicated in some cases, due to
the long-term slowing of mind and body that results
from use of these drugs in some people.

Antispasmodics alleviate muscular tension that develops in
response to withdrawal.

Bitters act as safe metabolic stimulants.

Adaptogens will support the adrenals through the stressful
process the body will undergo.

Hepatics may be appropriate to support the detoxification
process.

System Support

Because of the stress component, both the nervous sys-
tem and the adrenals will need aid. Next, focus on any
body system that needs support. Body system weaknesses

----- PAGE 370 -----
362 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

and ailments should be identified through the patient's
medical history, current health, and observation of any
temporary symptoms that might appear during the
withdrawal process.

A successful transition from drugs to herbs is a grad-
ual process. The following steps offer some guidelines for
the practitioner.

1. First two to four days: Maintain regular dose of
drug while adding appropriate herbs. Initially, the
dosage of the herbal tincture combination described
below should be 2.5 ml.

2. Reduce the dose of drug by one sixth while main-
taining or increasing the dosage of herbs up to 5 ml.
Maintain this regimen for four or five days.

3. Reduce the drug by one sixth every four to five days
until drug use is completely discontinued, altering
dosage, frequency, and strength of herbs as needed.

4. Alleviate specific somatic symptoms as indicated.

Specific Remedies
The herbal traditions of the world do not offer any ready-
made specific remedies for benzodiazepine withdrawal, as
these drugs are a relatively new development. However,
there are an abundance of herbs that can make the with-
drawal process relatively straightforward.

A few clear guidelines will assist the practitioner in
the herb selection process.

Determine the strength of nervines required. One or more of
the stronger relaxing nervines is usually indicated, but
always remember that nature provides an abundance of
nervines for a reason. An herb as mild as Tilia may be
ideal for some individuals.

Use appropriate tonics for the nervous system and other
body systems, as indicated. Nervine tonics must always
be the foundation of formulations in such cases.

Identify other actions appropriate for the particular patient.
For example, the liver will usually need support in its
detoxification work.

Choose specifics to alleviate any symptoms that arise in the
withdrawal process.

Primary Relaxing and Tonic Nervines for Withdrawal
Avena sativa (oats)

Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)

Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

Table 16.13. Nervines with Relevant Secondary
Actions in Withdrawal

HERB ACTIONS

Verbena officinalis Hepatic, tonic

Artemisia vulgaris Bitter, antidepressant

Eleutherococcus senticosus  Adaptogen
Hypericum perforatum Antidepressant
Silybum marianum Antihepatotoxic

Table 16.14. Herbs for Various Somatic
Manifestations of Withdrawal

HERB SOMATIC SYMPTOMS

Leonurus cardiaca Tachycardia (palpitations)

Pulsatilla vulgaris Menstrual problems

Lavandula spp. Depression, digestive problems

A Prescription to Help with Benzodiazepine Withdrawal

Avena sativa 2 parts
Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 2 parts
Leonurus cardiaca T part
Eleutherococcus senticosus 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Broader Context of Treatment

As with all such treatments, many factors must be ad-
dressed when helping a patient with withdrawal. The
specifics will vary according to the preferences of both
practitioner and patient. The same general recommenda-
tions given for managing stress also apply here. In short,
the following considerations will come into play:

¢ General health

¢ Diet and nutrition

* Lifestyle

* Belief systems, assumptions, and expectations
* Relaxation techniques

----- PAGE 371 -----
ANOREXIA NERVOSA

A disorder characterized by a disturbed sense of body
image and marked anxiety about weight gain, manifested
by abnormal patterns of handling food, marked weight
loss, and amenorrhea in women. (The Merck Manual)

Anorexia nervosa is a problem typified by self-starvation.
It occurs most commonly among young women, but is
also observed in older women and men. For unknown
reasons, anorexia nervosa has become more common in
recent years, and the incidence among young women in
the United States may be as high as 1% to 2% (0.1% to
0.2% in males).® The disorder may appear when the indi-
vidual first leaves home, or may develop in connection with
mental depression, peer pressure to lose weight, sexual
temptation, or the discontinuation of oral contraceptives.

At the outset, the patient either stops menstruating or
simply refuses to eat. In the first case, the patient later stops
eating; in the second, her menstrual periods eventually
cease. In either case, she may lose weight to the point of
life-threatening exhaustion. In general, the patient will
sleep poorly but, despite weight loss, will remain physically
active, believing herself to be much fatter than she actually
is. Body temperature may be low. These symptoms suggest
that anorexia nervosa may be associated with a disorder of
the hypothalamus, a region of the brain that regulates men-
struation, eating, body temperature, and sleep.

Treatment of Anorexia Nervosa

The herbal treatment must focus on toning the nervous
system, but in addition, the digestive and reproductive
systems will need aid. Bitters and hepatics are especially
useful in supporting the liver and digestion.

Actions Indicated

Bitters are indicated because they stimulate both appetite
and general metabolism.

Nervine tonics are fundamental to any long-term change in
the individual’s ability to cope with life and transform
what must be changed.

Nervine relaxants will alleviate associated anxiety.

Hepatics will support the detoxification process and gen-
erally benefit the body.

System tonics must be used to support any part of the body
weakened by the condition or history of illness. In
women, anorexia nervosa places the reproductive sys-
tem under much strain.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 363

Digestive support will be indicated if abdominal symptoms
exist. Please refer to the sections on indigestion and irrita-
ble bowel syndrome in chapter 13 for more information.

Immune support may be necessary. Please refer to chapter
21 for more information.

Specific Remedies

Bitters are considered specifics here, but especially
Verbena officinalis (vervain), a relaxing nervine with
marked hepatic properties. Because it is strictly a problem
of modern culture, the herbal traditions provide no infor-
mation about the treatment of anorexia nervosa.

A Prescription for Anorexia Nervosa

Gentiana lutea 1 part
Avena sativa 1 part
Hypericum perforatum 1 part
Verbena officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture 10 to 15 minutes before eating, three
times a day

Table 16.15. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Anorexia Nervosa

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum,

Verbena officinalis
Nervine relaxant Hypericum perforatum, Verbena officinalis
Bitter Gentiana lutea

Hepatic Gentiana lutea, Verbena officinalis

Emmenagogues might be indicated if the menstrual
cycle has been disrupted. If sleep difficulties are part of
the picture, please refer to Treatment of Insomnia earlier
in this chapter.

Broader Context of Treatment

As with depression, the whole gamut of issues touched
upon in this chapter must be addressed. As with depres-
sion, herbal therapy (or drug therapy) does not replace
the fundamental need for competent and appropriate
psychotherapy.

----- PAGE 372 -----
364 «a TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

HEADACHE

Headache (cephalalgia) is a common symptom, often as-
sociated with disability but rarely life threatening.
Headache may be a primary disorder or a secondary
symptom. (The Merck Manual)

Pain occurring over various parts of the head is one of the
most common health problems affecting humanity.
Several areas of the head can be afflicted, including the
network of nerves that extends over the scalp and certain
nerves in the face, mouth, and throat. Also sensitive to
pain, because they contain delicate nerve fibers, are the
muscles of the head and blood vessels found along the
surface and at the base of the brain. However, the bones
of the skull and the tissues of the brain itself never hurt,
because they lack pain-sensitive nerve fibers.

In general, pain is a complex experience consisting of
a physiological response to a painful stimulus followed by
an emotional response. It is a warning mechanism that
helps to protect us and is primarily associated with injury,
or the threat of injury, to bodily tissues. But headache
pain is different. For most headaches, even when the pain
is severe, no underlying disease exists. Obviously,
headache related to the presence of a brain tumor repre-
sents an exception.

The point at which a stimulus begins to cause pain is
the pain perception threshold. Most studies have found that
this point is relatively similar among.disparate groups of
people. However, the pain tolerance threshold, or the point
at which pain becomes unbearable, varies significantly.
Childhood experiences, cultural attitudes, genetic
makeup, and gender are factors that contribute to the de-
velopment of each individual’s perception of and response
to different types of pain. Although some people may be
able to physiologically withstand pain better than others,
cultural factors rather than heredity usually account for
this ability.

Most headaches are caused by fatigue, emotional
disorders, or allergies. Only about 2% of all headaches result
from the presence of an organic disorder. These include:

* Diseases of the eye, ear, nose, throat, and sinuses
¢ Brain tumor

¢ Hypertension

¢ Aneurysm

Brain tissue itself is insensitive to pain, as is the bony
covering of the cranium. Headache pain results from the
stimulation of such pain-sensitive structures as the mem-
branous linings of the brain (the meninges) and the nerves
of the cranium and upper neck. This stimulation can be
produced by inflammation, dilation of normal or abnor-

mal blood vessels in the head, or muscle spasms in the
neck and head.

Headaches brought on by muscle spasms are classi-
fied as tension headaches. Those caused by dilation of blood
vessels are called vascular headaches. A more specialized
classification, created by the International Headache
Society for research purposes, further divides headaches
into 14 categories.

To help the phytotherapist select appropriate reme-
dies, headaches can be subdivided by cause into the fol-
lowing groupings:

Environmental. Pollutants, body posture, lighting, sound,
and other factors

Stress. Physical, emotional, or mental

Dietary. Possible allergy to certain foods or additives—for
example, xanthine-containing foods

Organic. Diseases such as hypertension and brain tumor

Pain may also be referred to the head, or felt in the
head even though the site of disease is elsewhere.
Referred pain may be caused by eye disorders (such as
glaucoma and refractive errors), infections or tumors of
the nasal sinuses, dental infections, and arthritis of the
neck. In addition, headaches are one of the most common
side effects of prescription and over-the-counter drugs,
making it very difficult to list all potentially problematic
medicines. Please refer to an appropriate reference.

Treatment of Headaches

The herbal treatment guidelines for different types of
headaches must take into account a wide range of causes
and issues. An important one is the abundant diversity of
potential herbs that may be indicated.

Specific Remedies

Many plants might be considered specific headache herbs.
Unfortunately, they do not always work for all people. A
representative listing includes the following commonly
available remedies.

Possible Specifics for Headache
Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Origanum marjoram (marjoram)
Piscidia erythrina (Jamaica dogwood)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

----- PAGE 373 -----
Ruta graveolens (rue)
Sambucus nigra (elder)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Stachys betonica (wood betony)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

None of these plants is a painkiller in the strict sense;
that is, they do not block the experience of pain. An ex-
ample of a medicinal plant that does is Papaver somniferum
(opium poppy). The most effective plant painkillers are
controlled by law, as they have the potential to lead to de-
pendency and addiction. Because of this, it is often more
effective in practice to use indirect pathways to pain relief.
The herbs listed here appear to work by addressing the
cause of the pain, rather than the experience of pain.
These are anti-inflammatory and antispasmodic herbs

that alleviate the processes underlying most muscle con-
tractions and tension headaches.

Ifa clear-cut underlying pathology exists, that should
be the focus of treatment. If none has been identified,
herbs that will ensure good elimination, support liver
function, and address any specific health needs the patient
might have should be selected.

Common Headache Triggers

Almost all individuals with chronic headache have some
degree of muscle irritation in the upper body—the upper
back, neck, or face. The irritation is most often associated
with chronic but subtle muscle tension. This applies for
both tension and migraine headaches. The type of pain
triggered reflects a variety of factors, including the type of
headache to which the patient is prone. Over time, this
tension may lead to the development of very tender mus-
cles. It can also cause aching with normal movement,
stiffness from being in one position or lying in bed for a
ong time, or even restrictions in the extent to which the
individual can move his or her neck or jaw.

Primary headache triggers include:

Stress. Stress can be a powerful headache trigger, partic-
ularly for chronic tension headaches or migraine. A
major life event such as a divorce or moving causes
stress, but constant daily hassles can have an even
greater effect.

Emotions. Quite ordinary emotions, such as a sense of let-
down and frustration, can serve as headache triggers.
Muscle tension. Muscle irritation can produce local pain,
pain at the site of muscle irritation, or referred pain in
sites distant from the irritated muscle. For example,
muscle irritation at the back of the neck may be felt as
severe pain at the temple on the same side of the head.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM -@ 365

Chronic muscle tension may arise from a variety of
causes—poor posture, repeated muscle strain or
overuse, tightening up under the effects of stress or
headache itself, teeth grinding, and mannerisms such
as frowning.
Change in the weather or season, altitude, or time zone.
Change in sleep patterns or meal times. Too little or too
much sleep can both act as triggers.
Smoking, polluted air, or stuffy rooms. Chronic headache
is one more good reason to quit smoking, Smoking in
general seems to be a negative factor for people with
chronic pain conditions, including headaches.
Nicotine constricts the blood vessels, and inhaled car-
bon monoxide expands them, thus creating a condition
that can trigger migraines and cluster headaches.
Blood clotting. Another cause of headaches is blood clot-
ting, also known as platelet aggregation. Clotting cre-
ates constriction of the arteries, which results in inad-
equate blood supply to the brain. This is followed by
rebound dilation of the blood vessels, leading to
headaches.
Caffeine. Caffeine can cause headaches by increasing the
body’s expectation for it. When blood levels of caffeine
drop, symptoms of withdrawal, including headache,
may set in. That’s why some heavy coffee drinkers ex-
perience “morning headache” until they have that first
cup of coffee. Caffeine headaches are usually experi-
enced as a dull, throbbing pain on both sides of the
head. Once the body rids itself of caffeine, the
headaches disappear on their own. Such headache suf-
ferers, however, are often unaware that their problem
is due to caffeine and will continue to drink coffee, en-
suring that the problem will recur.
Foods, The following foods are known to commonly trig-
ger headaches in sensitive people:
© Red and white wine
© Other alcohol
¢ Refined sugar products—for example, sodas and
candy

* Dried fruit containing sulfates

Artificial additives, colorings, and preservatives, such
as aspartame (NutraSweet)

° Nuts

* Onions

* Herring

¢ Chocolate

¢ Peanut butter

¢ Chicken livers

¢ Sour cream and yogurt primarily, but potentially all

dairy products
Vinegar (except white vinegar)

----- PAGE 374 -----
366 <= TREATiMEN?T APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

¢ Bananas

¢ Anything fermented, pickled, or marinated

¢ Broad, lima, navy, pinto, and garbanzo beans; peas

¢ Foods containing large amounts of monosodium
glutamate (MSG)

* Caffeine

¢ Citrus fruit and juices

¢ Fermented sausage and processed meats such as
bologna, salami, pepperoni, hot dogs, and ham

¢ Ripened cheeses, such as Cheddar, Emmentaler,
Gruyere, Stilton, Brie, and Camembert

Essential. Oils for Headache

Many essential oils can be used to relieve headache.
Particularly effective oils include Lavandula spp.,
Rosmarinus officinalis, and Mentha piperita, which can be
used either separately or in combination. Lavandula may
be rubbed on the temples or made into a cold compress
and applied to the temples, forehead, or back of the neck.
Equal parts of Lavandula and Mentha piperita may be even
more effective, for Lavandula has the ability to enhance
the action of other oils when used in blends. It is also
worth noting that while Lavandula is a sedative, Mentha
piperita is a stimulant, and that many commercial
headache remedies combine a stimulant (usually caffeine)
with one or more analgesics. This is because many
painkilling drugs have a slightly sedative and sometimes

“Natural Aspirin”

even a depressant effect, and the caffeine counteracts
these effects. By combining Lavandula and Mentha
piperita, a similar effect is achieved without the dangers
inherent in synthetic drugs.

If headache is caused by catarrh or sinus infection, in-
halations with Lavandula, Mentha piperita, Rosmarinus, or
Eucalyptus will usually be very effective in both relieving
the headache and clearing the congestion that caused it.
All of these oils are antiseptic, and will combat the nasal
infection and provide immediate symptom relief.

Treatment of Tension Headaches

Because of its effectiveness in easing anxiety as a compo-
nent of stress management programs, herbal medicine
has most to contribute to the alleviation of tension
headaches. If a period of stress can be predicted, one can
be prepared ahead of time to implement appropriate
herbs, diet, and lifestyle changes to minimize the impact.
Nervine relaxants like those listed here can be used reg-
ularly as gentle soothing remedies, drunk as hot or cold
infusions, infused in massage oil, or included in relaxing
baths or footbaths.

Supportive Nervines for Tension Headaches
Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)

Avena sativa (oats)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)

Numerous plants contain natural aspirin-type chemicals called salicylates, and aspirin itself was orig-
inally isolated from plant sources. In fact, the name aspirin comes from Spiraea, the old botanical
genus name for meadowsweet. The word salicylate derives from Salix, the Latin name for willow.

Herbs with significant quantities of salicylates have a marked anti-inflammatory effect, without
the dangers posed by aspirin itself to the stomach. In fact, meadowsweet, rich in salicylates, can be
used to stanch mild stomach hemorrhage, even though synthetic salicylates cause such problems.
Other plants rich in such constituents include Salix spp. (willow), Gaultheria procumbens (winter-
green), Betula spp. (birch), many poplars (such as Populus tremuloides), and Viburnum prunifolium
(black haw). This group of herbs is most useful for inflammations of muscles, bones, and connective
tissue caused by sports injuries and conditions such as osteoarthritis.

The analgesic and fever-lowering actions of these herbs are believed to be due to the ability of
salicylates to interfere with the transmission of signals to parts of the hypothalamus, leading to an
increase in peripheral blood flow and sweating. Salicylates are also believed to suppress the synthe-
sis of inflammatory prostaglandins, influence arachidonic acid metabolism, increase corticoid levels,
and inhibit hyaluronidase, thereby reducing inflammation.

Unlike aspirin, willow preparations do not inhibit cyclooxygenase in thrombocytes or aggrega-
tion of platelets, suggesting different mechanisms of action than those associated with salicylates,
Because of this, Salix and other salicin-containing herbs cannot be used as substitutes for aspirin in
preventive thrombolytic protocols against strokes and heart attacks. a

----- PAGE 375 -----
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Piper methysticum (kava kava)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Tilia platyphyllos (linden blossom)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)

A daily supplement of B-complex vitamins and vita-
min C is also helpful. Relaxation exercises are invaluable,
and the impact of various stressors should be softened.
Although this may be impossible, the patient should be
encouraged not to simply put up with something or
someone just because it is there! It is possible for people
to change themselves and to change their lives.
Reevaluating choices is always valuable.

A Prescription for Tension-Related Headaches

Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 2 parts
Avena sativa 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture combination three times a day. If using
dried herbs, infuse 2 teaspoons of the mixture in 1 cup of boil-
ing water. This should be drunk three times a day.

A Prescription for Tension Headache with
Indigestion and Palpitations

Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 2 parts
Leonurus cardiaca T part
Matricaria recutita T part
Artemisia vulgaris 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture mixture three times a day. If using dried
herbs, infuse 2 teaspoons of mixture to 1 cup of boiling water.
This should be drunk three times a day.

In their exceptional book Aromatherapy: A Complete
Guide to the Healing Art, highly regarded aromatherapists
Kathi Keville and Mindy Green recommend the follow-
ing essential oil combination.

Essential Oil Formula for Headache Relief
3 drops lavender oil
3 drops neroli oil
2 drops marjoram oil
2 drops ylang ylang oil
1 drop German chamomile oil
1 drop clary sage oil
1 ounce carrier oil

Use as a massage or bath oil to relieve headache.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM ©. 367

Broader Context of Treatment
The guidelines given here apply to the treatment of mi-
graines as well as other types of headaches.

General Dietary Guidelines

¢ Eat smaller and more frequent meals.

* Reduce fat intake.

¢ Reduce caffeine (coffee, tea, cola, chocolate).

* Reduce salt.

¢ Increase consumption of complex carbohydrates, such
as crackers, bread, rice, squash, pasta, corn, potatoes.

¢ Increase potassium intake with foods like milk, pota~
toes, asparagus, celery, apricots, grapes, carrots, broc-
coli, brussels sprouts, cauliflower.

* Increase magnesium intake with foods like dark green
vegetables, legumes, cereal grains, milk.

¢ Limit alcohol intake.

¢ Limit sweets, and don’t feed cravings.

The following supplements may also be helpful.

Magnesium: 200 to 300 mg twice daily
Fish oil: 3 to 4 g/day with meals

MIGRAINE

A paroxysmal disorder characterized by recurrent attacks
of headache, with or without associated visual and gas-
trointestinal disturbances. (The Merck Manual)

Orthodox medicine considers the underlying cause of mi-
graine to be unknown. As with most holistically oriented
therapies, excellent results can be achieved with phy-
totherapy by focusing on factors that suggest causal links,
Specific herbal remedies can prove exceptionally success-
ful if used within a context that addresses the whole body
and environment of the patient.

Common migraine may affect as many as 25% of
Americans, and about 8% of all headaches treated by the
average physician are migraines or some variation on mi-
graines.’ Attacks can occur in early childhood, but most
patients first develop symptoms between the ages of 10
and 30. Many migraine patients have a family history of
the problem.

The immediate cause appears to relate to spasms in
the muscular walls of the blood vessels of the brain and
scalp. In approximately 15% of all cases, migraine attacks
are preceded by warning signs known as auras, such as
scintillating visual effects, blind spots, zigzag flashing
lights, numbness in parts of the body, and distorted visual
images. These signs of an imminent attack are probably

----- PAGE 376 -----
368 <<. TREATMF NI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

related to intracerebral vasoconstriction, and the head
pain to dilation of scalp arteries.

One theory that may explain these changes suggests
that the nervous system responds to a trigger by creating
a spasm in the nerve-rich arteries at the base of the brain.
The spasm closes down or constricts several arteries that
supply blood to the brain, including the scalp artery and
the carotid or neck arteries. As these arteries constrict,
the flow of blood to the brain is reduced. At the same
time, blood platelets clump together—a process believed
to release the neurotransmitter serotonin. Serotonin is a
powerful arterial constrictor and further reduces blood
supply to the brain. Reduced blood flow decreases the
brain’s supply of oxygen. Symptoms signaling a headache,
such as distorted vision and speech, may then result.

Reacting to the reduced oxygen supply, certain arter-
ies within the brain open wider to meet the brain’s energy
needs, and this dilation eventually affects the neck and
scalp arteries. The dilation of arteries triggers the release
of pain-producing prostaglandins from various tissues
and blood cells. Also released are chemicals that cause in-
flammation and swelling and substances that increase sen-
sitivity to pain. The circulation of these chemicals and the
dilation of the scalp arteries stimulate the pain-sensitive
nociceptors. The result, according to this theory, is
throbbing pain in the head.

Migraine attacks commonly take one of two forms.
The most common is called migraine without aura (com-
mon migraine), which affects 85% of migraine sufferers.
These are episodes of severe pain that affect one or both
sides of the head. The pain is usually described as throb-
bing, but again, this is not always the case. The signature
of these headaches is that they are usually, but not always,
associated with feeling sick in the stomach or being sensi-
tive to light, sound, or movement of the body.

Typically, the sufferer wishes to lie down in a dark
and quiet room and wait for the storm to pass. Often,
people close to the patient can predict when headache will
occur because of changes in the patient’s behavior, which
may range from depression to exhilaration. If the
headache is not relieved early by sleeping it off, it may
wax and wane for days, accompanied by anorexia and nau-
sea or vomiting, hallmarks of the so-called sick headache.

The second most common type is migraine with aura
(classical migraine), which accounts for most of the re-
maining 15% of sufferers. The aura is a disturbance in the
nervous system that precedes the headache. Typical dis-
turbances involve the vision (bright flashing lights, black
spots, and partial loss of vision) or the body (sensations of
pins and needles moving over one limb or one side).

These disturbances usually last less than one hour for
most sufferers, and almost invariably pass away, leaving
no long-lasting effects.

All such symptoms may clear just before the onset of
pain or merge into it. The pain may be unilateral or gen-
eralized, but tends to follow the same pattern in a partic-
ular person. Attacks may occur daily or only once every
several months. Untreated attacks may last for hours or
days and are often accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and
photophobia. The extremities are cold and the patient
will seek seclusion.

Migraine Triggers and Contributing
Factors

It is critical to be aware of triggers and early signs of mi-
graine. These signs may represent the actual onset of the
headache or may be physical events that almost invariably
lead to a headache. Catching the very early signs, espe-
cially before pain becomes severe, can provide important
clues to controlling the migraine. These early signs may
be symptoms of aura, aching muscles, cold hands, a gen-
eral sense of tension, or any number of other indications.

Almost anything in one’s lifestyle or environment can
serve as a trigger for migraine pain. Triggers don’t actu-
ally cause the pain; rather, they activate an already exist-
ing chemical mechanism in the brain. For example, if
drinking red wine is usually followed by a headache
within a few hours, we could call red wine a trigger.

Most migraines are triggered not by one factor, but
instead by an interaction among several factors. In gen-
eral, the more triggers present at any given time, the
more likely that a headache will follow. In one study, mi-
graine patients reported an average of five triggers. This
has important ramifications, as it demands that triggers
be observed systematically over time and that all be con-
sidered.

Factors that increase one’s vulnerability to headache
but do not immediately ead to one are called contribut-
ing or contextual factors. Such factors create a context in
which a migraine is more likely to be set off by triggers.
Some people can develop migraine not only during a pe-
riod of stress but also afterward, when their vascular sys-
tems are still reacting. Migraines that wake up people in
the middle of the night are also believed to result from a
delayed reaction to stress.

Certain foods precipitate migraine attacks in many
people. Reactions may be due to allergies or related to
content of compounds known as vasoactive amines. These
compounds can trigger migraines by causing blood ves-
sels to expand. Many migraine sufferers have been found

----- PAGE 377 -----
to have significantly lowered levels of a platelet enzyme
that normally breaks down these natural dietary compo-
nents. As red wine contains substances that potently in-
hibit this enzyme, it often triggers migraines, especially if
consumed along with foods high in vasoactive amines,
like cheese. Red wine and beer are among the alcoholic
beverages most likely to cause problems. Congeners, the
substances that give alcohol its distinguishing characteris-
tics, may also be a culprit.

The naturally occurring amino acid tyramine, found in
foods such as aged cheeses, Chianti wine, and pickled her-
ring, affects several mechanisms known to be implicated in
migraine. Chocolate may be another trigger. However, it is
not clear if chocolate itself causes migraine or if a sudden
craving for chocolate is a sign of an impending migraine.
Food additives, such as sodium nitrite in hot dogs and lun-
cheon meats and monosodium glutamate in many pro-
cessed foods, may also trigger migraines for some people.

Other possible causes of migraine to consider include
the range listed below. However, these will rarely all play
a role for a given individual.

Foods and food sensitivities. As discussed earlier, foods
containing vasoactive amines are particularly problem-
atic. Triggers include:

* Dairy products, especially cheese

* Chocolate

+ Eggs

© Wheat and wheat products

* Peanuts

© Citrus fruits

* ‘Tomatoes

¢ Red meat

© Shellfish

* Alcohol (especially red wine and spirits)

Stress and fatigue. These factors will undoubtedly com-
pound the problem and may be a clear trigger.

General toxicity. Any tendency to constipation, liver
problems, or general congestion can be a marked trig-
ger in some individuals.

Hormone levels. Occasionally, changes in levels of certain
hormones may trigger an attack, This is usually related
in some way to the menstrual cycle. Drugs that contain
estrogen, such as birth control pills, may also serve as
triggers.

Sensory irritants. These may include glaring or flicker-
ing lights and unusual odors.

Smoking, polluted air, or stuffy rooms, Smoking can cause
headaches, as nicotine constricts the blood vessels

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM @ 369

while inhaled carbon monoxide expands them, thus
creating a condition that can trigger migraines and
cluster headaches.

Structural factors. Cranial and spinal misalignments may
be involved, as may posture, even when not associated
with overt skeletal problems.

Treatment of Migraine

This will depend upon the diagnosis of factors involved in
any specific migraine patient. See also Broader Context of
‘Treatment of headaches, as the recommendations given
there also apply to the treatment of migraine.

Specific Remedies

Tt would be claiming far too much to say that herbal
medicine cures migraine. However, when selected with
care, certain plants have much to offer in the manage-
ment of this distressing problem. By far, the most impor-
tant is a European wayside plant called feverfew (Jana-
cetum parthenium). Feverfew is the only herb used in
European phytotherapy known to be specific for the
treatment of migraine. It is also the best example of a
remedy well known to medical herbalists that has recently
been accepted by allopathic medicine. (See sidebar
Feverfew and Migraines on page 370.)

Feverfew is a long-term treatment, not an immediate
cure for a migraine attack. Clinical experience suggests
that four to six weeks of treatment is usually required be-
fore an initial response will be seen. However, average du-
ration of use will vary among migraine patients. Success
should be measured by decreased frequency, severity, and
duration of migraine attacks, Don’t use feverfew for pa-
tients who are pregnant or breast-feeding.

Some find that regular use of feverfew is enough to
control or even prevent migraines. However, it is best to
ensure that herbal support covers more factors than those
addressed by feverfew. Ginkgo offers some very relevant
properties, mainly related to its ability to tone the blood
vessel walls and reduce the tendency for platelet aggrega-
tion. Ginkgo extract (standardized to 24% ginkgo flavone
glycosides and 6% terpene lactones) at a dose of 120
mg/day in two or three divided doses is recommended.

A Prescription for the Prevention of Migraines
Tanacetum parthenium 125 mg of dried herb taken once
daily
Massage essential oil into temples
at first sign of an attack

Lavandula officinalis

----- PAGE 378 -----
Crataegus spp. 1 part
Tilia platyphyllos part
Stachys betonica T part

<2. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Feverfew and Migraines

Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) has been used throughout recorded medical history as a bitter tonic
and remedy for severe headaches. Through wide media coverage, the herb has gained a reputation as a
“cure” for migraine. Clinicians at the London Migraine. Clinic observed that patients reported marked im-
provements in frequency, severity, and duration of migraine when they took the herb. Fortunately, these
doctors had the inquiring and open minds of true scientists and so started their own investigations into
the efficacy of feverfew. Clinical observations were soon being reported in the journals.®

The work of Dr. Peter Hylands and colleagues provides a good example. Seventeen patients who
regularly ate fresh leaves of feverfew daily as prophylaxis against migraine were invited to participate in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of the herb. Of these, eight patients received capsules containing
freeze-dried feverfew powder and nine a placebo. Those taking the placebo had a significant increase in
the frequency and severity of headache, nausea, and vomiting during the early months of treatment. The
group taking feverfew, on the other hand, continued to enjoy a reduced frequency of migraine, providing
clear evidence that feverfew can prevent attacks of migraine. This led the researchers to strongly suggest
the use of feverfew for migraine sufferers who have never before treated themselves with this herb, Long-
term users often report beneficial side effects, such as relief from depression, nausea, and arthritic
pain due to inflammation.

These findings would not at all surprise the venerable English herbalists Gerard and Culpeper! It is a
pity that the patients who took placebo in this study had to experience renewed attacks of migraine to
demonstrate something that the patients and herbalists already knew.

Following the clinical-clues, pharmacologists began seeking the active components of the plant. The
herb appears to work at least in part by inhibiting the secretion of granular contents from blood platelets
and neutrophils. This may be relevant to the therapeutic value of feverfew not only in migraine, but also
in other conditions, such as osteoarthritis. The five main compounds identified'as having this activity were
parthenolide, 3-beta-hydroxy-parthenolide, secotanapartholide A, canin, and artecanin, all of which are
sesquiterpene lactones, The researchers believe it is likely that these and other sesquiterpene lactones in-
hibit the release of prostaglandins and histamine during the inflammatory process, thus preventing the
blood vessel spasms in the head that trigger migraine attacks. :

As with all such impressive research findings, do not lose sight of the importance of whole plant activ-
ity. As the dried or fresh leaf of feverfew itself is an excellent formulation, why not just suggest it to patients?

Considerable differences in parthenolide content have been observed in feverfew plants from differ-
ent geographical locations. Similarly, commercial preparations of dried feverfew usually contain varying
amounts of the active principle. For this reason, standardized preparations are often used. A daily dosage of
125 mg of a dried feverfew leaf preparation containing at least 0.2% parthenolide is considered appropriate
for the treatment and prevention of migraines. This is approximately equivalent to 250 mcg/day of
parthenolide.

A Prescription for Migraine Associated with
Stress and Hypertension

her formula.

Scutellaria lateriflora T part

Viburnum opulus 1 part Motherwort, vervain, dandelion root, centaury, wild

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the
patient should follow instructions given in Prescription for
Prevention of Migraine.

Many British phytotherapists focus upon supporting
the liver during migraine treatment. As an example, con-
sider the following mixture suggested by Mrs. Nalda
Gosling, FNIMH, one of Britain’s foremost herbal clini-
cians. Note the preponderance of hepatics and bitters in

carrot—each of these mixed together im equal parts and
25 g of this mixture simmered for 15 minutes in 0.5 | of
water. A wineglass of this should be drunk 3 times a day.

----- PAGE 379 -----
A Cooling Compress for Migraine
1 quart ice-cold water
2 drops peppermint essential oil
1 drop ginger essential oil
1 drop marjoram essential oil

Pour the water into a 2-quart glass bowl and add the essential
oils. Soak a clean cloth in the water and apply it to the head,
forehead, or neck at the first sign of a migraine. Do not allow the
compress to come into contact with the eyes. An ice pack ap-
plied over the compress will help keep it from getting warm:

Broader Context of Treatment
Please see Broader Context of Treatment for headache.

NEURITIS

A syndrome of sensory, motor, reflex, and vasomotor
symptoms, singly or in any combination, produced by dis-
ease of a single nerve, two or more nerves in separate
areas, or many nerves simultaneously. (The Merck Manual)

Peripheral nerve problems can be caused by a range of
etiological factors, including physical trauma, collagen
disease (such as rheumatoid arthritis), metabolic disease,
microorganisms, toxic agents, nutritional deficiency, and
malignancy. Traumatic neuritis may be induced by injury,
pressure paralysis, exposure to cold, and even radiation.
Appropriate treatment must be based on accurate diagno-
sis, which is unfortunately often problematic in this com-
plex of conditions.

The therapeutic approach suggested here is a very
basic one, ideal for traumatic neuritis, but may also be of
symptomatic value in any of the conditions just mentioned.

Treatment of Neuritis

In the herbal treatment guidelines given here for neuritis,
the nervous system is the focus for toning, but any associ-
ated symptoms that arise may provide a clue to deeper-
seated issues.

Actions Indicated

Nervine tonics are important to nourish the traumatized
nerve tissue.

Nervine relaxants ease associated pain and anxiety.

Anti-inflammatories reduce the inflammatory response.

Antispasmodics help alleviate any muscular tension devel-
oped in response to the discomfort.

Adaptogens support the body’s efforts to cope with the
stress of the pain and any stress-related causes.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM -@ 371

Specific Remedies
Most of the relaxing nervines have been considered as
specifics by various herbalists.

A Prescription for Neuritis

Internal use:
Hypericum perforatum 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part
Avena sativa 1 part
Eleutherococcus senticosus 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day.

External use:

Peppermint essential oil (or any menthol-rich mint oil)

Hypericum infused oil

Colloidal oatmeal
These are three approaches to minimizing the discomfort
caused by touch. Gently applying the menthol-rich oil of pep-
permint to sensitive skin will produce a cooling, locally anes-
thetic effect. Applying infused oil of Hypericum will reduce
neurological inflammation, but must be used over a day or so.
Colloidal oatmeal can act as a dry lubricant between the skin
and clothing, thus minimizing irritation.

If the patient is experiencing a great deal of pain, the
internal prescription may be made stronger by adding
analgesic herbs, such as Piscidia erythrina, Gelsemium sem-
‘pervirens, and possibly even Valeriana officinalis. However,
the major drawback to these analgesics is that they can
caused marked sedation at effective painkilling doses, and
even then they are not necessarily as effective as the pa-
tient would like them to be! It may be appropriate to rec-
ommend prescription analgesics. Bear in mind that most
of these strong drugs are derived from plants—plants that
are now illegal for the herbalist to use.

Table 16.16. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Traumatic Neuritis

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum,

Scutellaria lateriflora
Nervine relaxant Hypericum perforatum, Scutellaria lateriflora
Anti-inflammatory Hypericum perforatum
Antispasmodic Hypericum perforatum, Scutellaria lateriflora

Adaptogen Eleutherococcus senticosus

----- PAGE 380 -----
372 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Although neuralgia, or nerve pain, is best remedied
by treating the cause, essential oils do alleviate the pain,
especially when used in conjunction with massage.

Essential Oils for Pain
5 drops helichrysum
3 drops chamomile
2 drops marjoram
2 drops lavender
1 ounce carrier oil

Combine ingredients and use for massage.

Broader Context of Treatment

Stress management techniques, accompanied by good
quality nutrition, are essential. Vitamin B complex should
be given as a supplement.

TINNITUS

The perception of sound in the absence of an acoustic
stimulus. (The Merck Manual)

One person out of 10 has some type of hearing impairment
or ear problem, and 85% of these have some associated
tinnitus. While tinnitus is more common among older
people, it can occur at any age, and it may not be possible
to determine the cause in every patient. However, the
most common causes of tinnitus are noise-induced dam-
age and age-related hearing loss.

Because tinnitus is not a disease but a symptom, it
often serves as an important marker for other conditions.
Causes include concussions, cranial and cervical fractures,
whiplash, and temporomandibular joint problems. In
hyperthyroidism, an increased heart rate and consequent
increased blood flow through the ear may cause ringing.
Tinnitus is also a symptom of Méniere’s disease.
Transient tinnitus may follow a cold or influenza, but this
generally subsides two to four months after the infection.

Whatever the underlying cause, tinnitus tends to be
exacerbated by muscle spasms, stress, and tension.
Substances that can accentuate tinnitus through vasocon-
striction include nicotine and caffeine. Some people
under stress will begin to notice ringing in their ears,
often because they clench or grind their teeth. Reducing
stress and relieving temporomandibular joint dysfunction
generally improves tinnitus.

Damage to the fine hair cells of the inner ear may
cause them to remain in a constant state of irritation. As
a result, stimulation of the auditory nerve occurs ran-

domly and spontaneously, instead of as a direct conse-
quence of sound waves transmitted to the inner ear.
These random electrical impulses are interpreted as
noise, usually perceived as high-frequency ringing, be-
cause the hair cells that are most frequently damaged re-
spond in the high-frequency range.

Unfortunately, by the time most people realize that
they’ve suffered noise-induced tinnitus or hearing loss,
hair cell damage in the inner ear is irreversible. The dis-
tress can be minimized with herbs and avoidance of ag-
gravating factors, such as nicotine and caffeine.

Treatment of Tinnitus

The herbal treatment guidelines given here require time
to work.

Specific Remedies

My training in Britain suggested the use of Cizmicifuga
racemosa (black cohosh) and Hydrastis canadensis (gold-
enseal) for tinnitus, without providing any clear reasons.
However, as I worked with patients with noise-induced
tinnitus from industrial South Wales, these herbs proved
gratifyingly helpful. Since then, I have become aware of
research investigating Ginkgo biloba for a range of vascu-
lar disturbances of the inner ear.

Ginkgo may help improve problems of the inner ear
that result from a disturbance in blood supply. Such prob-
lems include tinnitus, vertigo, and some forms of hearing
loss, including deafness due to head injury, sonic damage,
and vascular problems of recent origin. Clinical research
showed that many people with vertigo experienced total
recovery after taking Ginkgo daily for several weeks.
Consider the following example from the Gimkgo research.
The objective of a recent study in 60 patients with
chronic tinnitus was to confirm the efficacy of oral treat-
ment with a special extract of Ginkgo, subsequent to a
10-day treatment in which the Gikgo medication was in-
troduced directly into a vein. The primary outcome mea-
sure was the change in tinnitus volume in the more
severely affected ear during treatment. The researchers
concluded that Ginkgo was effective and safe in alleviating
the symptoms associated with tinnitus.?

However, keep in mind that once hair cells are dam-
aged, no medication will eliminate tinnitus completely.

A Prescription for Tinnitus

Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Hydrastis canadensis 1 part
Ginkgo biloba 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

----- PAGE 381 -----
Broader Context of Treatment

A number of other issues should be considered in the at-
tempt to alleviate the tinnitus. If stress is an issue, this
must be addressed. This may be done with herbs, relax-
ation techniques, or a whole range of other approaches
discussed in this chapter.

Most patients find that tinnitus is only a mild annoy-
ance or are not aware of it most of the time. However, the
constant noise can be upsetting, and for some may even
lead to depression. If the depression is treated, these pa-
tients sleep better, feel better, and find the tinnitus less
distracting. Hypericum perforatum is the main herb to con-
sider here.

Ear protection is important, especially around poten-
tially harmful noise. If occupational noise is a problem,
the patient should try to reduce the noise level or change
the working environment to avoid exposure. This is not
always easy! Tinnitus can often be masked with back-
ground noise. Background music or “white noise” maybe
sufficient. Patients may find this more tolerable than the
internally generated tinnitus, especially elderly patients
with high-frequency hearing loss.

MOTION SICKNESS

A disorder caused by repetitive angular and linear accel-
eration characterized primarily by nausea and vomiting.
(The Merck Manual)

Motion sickness is a syndrome that affects some people
when traveling in a vehicle, such as an automobile, air-
plane, or ship. Symptoms include dizziness, nausea, vomit-
ing, drowsiness, pallor, and sweating. Why some people ex-
perience motion sickness while others do not is unknown.

The syndrome appears to arise from a disturbance in
the organs of balance found in the inner ear. Psycho-
logical factors may also be involved. In the course of a
long journey, the problem may disappear on its own, and
in general, symptoms of motion sickness quickly resolve
once travel is ended.

Treatment of Motion Sickness

Zingiber officinale (ginger) can usually be relied upon.
Research published in the British medical journal The
Lancet showed it to be more effective than Dramamine in
preventing symptoms of motion sickness. Ginger may be
drunk as a fresh infusion, eaten as candied ginger, or
taken as capsules of the powder. For people who do not
like the taste of ginger, capsules are ideal. The usual
dosage for capsules is 2 to 4.as needed.

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM «> 373

The herb Ballota nigra (black horehound) will also
reduce this kind of nausea. One of the more effective al-
lopathic treatments involves a dermal patch of sco-
palamine, a constituent of Atropa belladonna.

A Prescription for Motion Sickness
Ballota nigra
Mentha piperita

1 part

1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture 20 minutes before travel. In addition,
the patient should eat a small piece of candied ginger just be-
fore travel and as needed.

SHINGLES

An acute CNS infection involving primarily the dorsal
root ganglia, characterized by vesicular eruption and neu-
ralgic pain in the areas of the skin supplied by peripheral
sensory nerves arising in the affected root ganglia. (The
Merck Manual)

Shingles, or herpes zoster, is a viral infection of sensory
nerve cells caused by the same virus (varicella zoster) that
causes chicken pox. The virus remains latent in the dorsal
root ganglia of the spinal cord after the initial attack of
chicken pox. The disease occurs most frequently in peo-
ple over the age of 50 years. It may be activated through
such factors as trauma to the spinal cord resulting from
surgery and X-ray therapy.

Shingles is characterized by pain along an affected
nerve and its branches and the eruption of blisters over the
skin areas supplied by the nerve. An attack will usually be
preceded by a few days of intense pain in the affected areas.
Next, many extremely painful and itchy blisters develop,
which normal remain for 7 to 14 days. These eventually
form crusty scabs and fall off. After such an outbreak, the
pain may continue even when the blisters have disappeared,
especially in the elderly. This may go on for months and
can be more painful than the original infection.

Treatment of Shingles

The nervous system needs as much help as it can get! As
shingles often occurs in the elderly, almost any system
tonic might be appropriate. Signs and symptoms will
guide the therapist.

Actions Indicated

Nervine tonics will nourish traumatized nerve tissue.

Nervine relaxants may help ease the associated pain and
will definitely lessen associated anxiety or tension.

----- PAGE 382 -----
374. = TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Anti-inflammatories will reduce the inflammatory re-
sponse.

Antispasmodics will alleviate muscular tension developed in
response to pain.

Antimicrobials may help deal with the virus infection, but
it is very intransigent.

Specific Remedies

The European traditions record no specifics for shingles.

A Prescription for Shingles

Avena sativa 1 part
Hypericum perforatum 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture four times a day. Topical applica-
tion of Mentha piperita oil may reduce the pain through a mild,
local numbing effect. However, this should not be attempted if
the skin is extremely sensitive.

Colloidal oatmeal powder may be dusted on affected skin
to act as a dry lubricant, perhaps reducing pain caused by con-
tact with clothes.

If the patient is experiencing a great deal of pain, the
internal prescription may be made stronger by adding
analgesic herbs, such as Piscidia erythrina, Gelsemium sem-
pervirens, and possibly even Valeriana officinalis. However,
a major drawback to these analgesics is that they can cause

marked sedation at effective painkilling doses, and even
then they are not necessarily as effective as the patient
would like them to be! It may be appropriate to recom-
mend prescription analgesics. Bear in mind that most of
these strong drugs are derived from plants—plants that
are now illegal for the herbalist to use.

Table 16.17. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Shingles

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum

Nervine relaxant Hypericum perforatum, Scutellaria lateriflora,

Artemisia vulgaris
Anti-inflammatory — Hypericum perforatum
Antispasmodic Hypericum perforatum, Scutellaria lateriflora
Antimicrobial Hypericum perforatum

Immune support Echinacea spp.

Broader Context of Treatment

Good nutrition and support of general health are crucial.
Pain-relief medication containing acetaminophen (for ex-
ample, Tylenol) may prolong the illness. Pharmacological
research suggests that capsaicin, a constituent of Capsicum
annuum, may be helpful as a pain reliever, and thus cap-
sules oficayenne may be helpful. In addition, the follow-
ing supplements are recommended.

Vitamin B complex: 100 mg three times a day with food
Vitamin C: 2 g twice a day
Lysine: 500 mg twice daily

References
1. Ulrich RS, Simons RE. Recovery from stress during ex-

posure to everyday outdoor environments. In: Wineman
J, Barnes R, Zimring C, eds. The Costs of Not Knowing:
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual Conference of the
Environmental Design Research Association. Washington,
DC: Environmental Design Research Association, 1986.

2. Ulrich RS. View through a window may influence reco-
ery from surgery. Science 1984; 224:420-21.

3. Harrer G, Sommer H. Treatment of mild/moderate de-
pressions with Hypericum. Phytomedicine 1994, 1:3-8.

4. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

5. Price S, et al. Aromatherapy for Health Professionals,
Edinburgh; New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

6. [Information from the] National Library of Medicine
Web site:
wwwnlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000362.htm

7. Bennett JC, Plum F. Cecil Textbook of Medicine.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 1996,

8. Johnson ES, Kadam NP, Hylands DM, et al. Efficacy of
feverfew as prophylactic treatment of migraine. British
Medical Journal (Clinical Research ed.). 1985 Aug 31;
291:569-73.

9. Morgenstern C, Biermann E. The efficacy of Ginkgo
special extract EGb 761 in patients with tinnitus.

International Journal of Clinical Pharmacology and
Therapeutics 2002 May; 40(5):188-97.

Suggested Reading
Hoffmann D. Successful Stress Control: An Herbal Guide to Stress
Relief. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press, 1991.

----- PAGE 383 -----
THE URINARY SYSTEM

a he importance of the urinary system cannot be
overemphasized. The various physiological func-
tions fulfilled by the kidneys and associated
structures show how fundamental to bodily health and
well-being they are. The maintenance of homeostasis is
pivotal to any experience of wellness. With the variety of
diuretics in our materia medica, the phytotherapist is
uniquely endowed by nature with the means to support
the complex physiology that maintains healthy kidneys
and water balance in the body.

The kidneys are major organs of elimination. They
work in conjunction with the liver, the lungs, the skin,
and the bowels to help ensure a clean internal environ-
ment. The body disposes of excess water, toxic waste
products of metabolism, and inorganic salts in the form of
urine. Because of their excretory function, the kidneys are
also largely responsible for maintaining the water balance
of the body and the pH of the blood. The kidneys also
play important roles in other body activities. For example,
the kidneys release the protein erythropoietin, which
stimulates the bone marrow to increase the formation of
red blood cells. Because they have a role in regulating the
volume of fluid in the body, they also help to control
blood pressure. In addition, some drugs or their metabo-
lites are eliminated through the kidney.

URINE PRODUCTION

The production of urine is a complex and quite wonder-
ful process. It is far from a simple removal of water from
the body. Rather, it is a process of selective filtration that
removes waste and potential toxins from the blood while
retaining essential molecules.

The initial site of urine production is the glomerulus
of the nephrons in the kidneys. Arterial blood pressure
drives a filtrate of plasma across the porous capillary walls
of the glomeruli into the open space around the capillary
tuft, called the Bowman’s space, and is collected in the
Bowman’s capsule. The filtered plasma, now called
glomerular filtrate, is mainly water, but also contains salts,

375

glucose, amino acids, nitrogenous wastes such as urea,
and a small amount of ammonia. Proteins, fats, and cellular
elements (red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets)
are filtered out so that they remain in the general blood cir-
culation. In normal kidneys, 100 to 140 ml of filtrate is
formed each minute, a total of about 170 liters per day.

As the glomerular filtrate passes along the proximal
convoluted tubule, the majority of its water content and
some of its dissolved materials are reabsorbed through the
walls of the tubule into the blood of the surrounding cap-
illaries. This reabsorption process is highly selective.
‘Water, sodium, and chloride ions, most of the bicarbon-
ate, and all of the glucose are reabsorbed into the blood-
stream, while other products, such as urea and ammonia,
remain in the tubule.

During the later stage, most of the remaining filtrate
is further selectively reabsorbed through Henle’s loop and
the distal convoluted tubule, so that only about 1% of the
volume of the original filtrate is finally excreted as urine.
The urine is considerably different in composition from
the original filtrate.

The kidneys excrete 400 to 2,000 ml of urine or more
per day. Excretion varies in volume and composition, de-
pending on the needs of the individual. The kidneys
maintain the internal fluid environment within narrow
limits and are capable of adapting to a wide range of en-
vironmental situations. The cells lining the tubules are
under the influence of regulating factors, such as the hor-
mone aldosterone (from the adrenal gland), antidiuretic
hormone, parathyroid hormone, and atrial natriuretic
factor (from the heart).

The distal tubule regulates the overall acidity of the
urine, and ultimately of the blood, by excretion of hydro-
gen ions. Ammonia combines with hydrogen to form
ammonia ions that are secreted into the urine. Acidity is
decreased by the removal of hydrogen ions.

All the blood glucose will be removed from the urine
unless the blood glucose exceeds normal concentrations
by a considerable amount. Other mechanisms remove
most, if not all, of the other solutes, including sodium.

----- PAGE 384 -----
376 <<. TREATMEN1 APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Much of the sodium ion in kidney filtrate is wansported
back to the blood, but 3 to 5 grams pass into the urine
each day. As a result, most animals have strict salt re-
quirements and must consume several grams of sodium
chloride daily in order to live.

The retention of sodium is enhanced by the presence
of aldosterone. This hormone is secreted into the blood-
stream when the body’s supply of sodium falls below nor-
mal. When there is an excess of sodium, aldosterone se-
cretion is reduced and more sodium is excreted.

When excessive amounts of fluid are lost from the
body, or the blood pressure falls below normal, the kid-
neys release the enzyme renin into the blood, where it
promotes the formation of angiotensin. Within minutes,
angiotensin causes vasoconstriction, which increases blood
pressure and stimulates the secretion of aldosterone.

MAINTAINING URINARY SYSTEM
HEALTH

There are not as many all-around tonics for the urinary
system as there are for the cardiovascular and nervous
systems. However, each herbal practitioner has favorite
gentle tonics for the urinary system. These vary from bio-
region to bioregion. Tonic remedies to consider for the uri-
nary system include Gali aparine (cleavers), Elymus repens
(couch grass), and Achillea millefolium (yarrow).

In the urinary system, the emphasis is on nourishing
the tissue and helping to support the normal functioning
of the various organs and tissues involved. Thus, stronger
diuretics are not included in the list of possible tonics
given here. The range of remedies available provides
therapeutic options beyond the simple increase in diure-
sis so dramatically produced by Taraxacum officinale (dan-
delion leaf). The French colloquial name for dandelion,
pussé en hit (“wet the bed”), is well deserved.

Attention to a number of straightforward factors will
help maintain urinary tract health and avoid the develop-
ment of illness in the whole system.

Drink adequate amounts of water, about 6 to 8 glasses a day.

Avoid too much protein in the diet, as it will tend to overload
the kidneys. The kidneys deal with much of the nitro-
gen-rich metabolic waste these molecules produce.
Under normal conditions, this is no problem.
However, anyone with kidney problems should be on a
low-protein diet, obtaining protein primarily from
vegetable sources. Good sources of protein include
peas, beans, lentils, mushrooms, and asparagus.

Practice good personal hygiene.

Avoid dietary irritants, especially foods containing oxalic
acid. Do not consume coffee and tea in excess. Plant
essential oils taken internally can damage the delicate
tissue of the nephrons.

Table 17.1. Primary Actions for the Urinary System

ACTION HERB

Anti-inflammatory Achillea millefolium, Apium graveolens,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Eupatorium purpureum,

Galium aparine, Zea mays

Antilithic Collinsonia canadensis, Eupatorium purpureum

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Agathosma betulina,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Elymus repens,

Juniperus communis

Antispasmodic Matricaria recutita, Valeriana officinalis,

Viburnum opulus, Dioscorea villosa, carminatives

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Equisetum arvense,

Cola vera, Cytisus scoparius

Cardioactive Convallaria majalis, Cytisus scoparius, Lycopus spp.

Demulcent Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Collinsonia canadensis,
Elymus repens, Zea mays

Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Sambucus nigra, Tilia platyphyllos

Diuretic All herbs listed as such in chapter 25

Hypotensive Achillea millefolium, Crataegus spp.,

Tilia platyphyllos

PATTERNS OF ILLNESS IN THE
URINARY SYSTEM

A number of symptoms may accompany problems in this
system. Some of these symptoms are common to many
health problems, but others are unique to the kidney and
bladder.

Common Nonspecific Symptoms

Fever. Fever accompanies many infections and inflamma-
tory conditions of the urinary system, although simple
cystitis often involves no fever at all.

Weight loss. Marked weight loss is always an important
sign, as it may indicate a number of systemic pathologies.

----- PAGE 385 -----
Malaise. A general feeling of ill health is an indicator of
many disease processes.

Symptoms Unique to the Urinary System

Urinary frequency. This symptom describes increased
frequency of urination without an increase in the vol-
ume of urine passed. This indication that the bladder
cannot hold as much fluid as usual may be due to a
range of causes.

Urinary urgency. This, a compelling need to urinate,
often results from the loss of bladder tone that can ac-
company infection and other urinary tract problems.

Urinary tenesmus. Urinary tenesmus is experienced as a
desire to urinate accompanied by an almost constant
painful straining. This can continue until the cause of
the irritation is removed.

Dysuria. Dysuria, or painful urination, commonly indi-
cates possible inflammation in the bladder neck or ure-
thra, often associated with infection. Dysuria with no
infection must be carefully diagnosed.

Nocturia. The need to urinate at night can be produced
by a range of factors, from drinking too much liquid
before going to bed to kidney or liver disease. Such an
array of minor and major causes should highlight the
need for careful diagnosis.

Enuresis. Enuresis is nighttime bed-wetting.

Hesitancy, straining, and dribbling. This group of symp-
toms may indicate that some obstruction is inhibiting
the free flow of urine from the bladder along the ure-
thra. The most common cause is prostate problems in
men.

Incontinence. Voiding of urine with little or no warning
can be due to a range of factors, discussed later in this
chapter.

Changes in appearance of urine. The urine might be
cloudy, change color, or appear milky.

Changes in urine output. Normal urine volumes in adults
range from 700 ml to 2,000 ml a day.

Pain. Pain related to kidney disease is primarily felt in the
side or back, between the ribs and hips. ‘This is caused
by stretching of the capsule that covers the kidney;
there are no sensory nerve endings in the organ itself.
Bladder pain is usually felt above the pubic bones and
referred along the urethra during urination.

Edema. Edema is swelling caused by accumulation of ex-
cess fluid in body tissues and cavities. Also called
dropsy, or, preferably, hydrops, edema is symptomatic
of a wide range of conditions and disorders, including
heart and kidney disease. These disorders must be ad-
dressed, but diuretics can provide relief from edema by

THE URINARY SYSTEM @ 377

stimulating the kidneys to eliminate water from the
body.

Thus, a range of signs and symptoms accompany
health problems in the urinary system. In the discussion
that follows, an herbal approach to these symptoms will
be developed, followed by treatments for a number of
specific pathologies. However, there are some conditions
we shall not discuss. Serious manifestations of kidney dis-
ease, including pyelonephritis and glomerulonephritis, go
beyond the range of this book. Phytotherapy can con-
tribute much to the treatment of these conditions, but
success depends upon skilled diagnosis. It is my opinion
that, in this case, “a little bit of knowledge is a dangerous
thing.”

Thus, the focus of our discussion in this chapter will
be the treatment of the more common symptoms listed
above. The phytotherapist will be able to apply these
treatments in a whole range of situations. I must empha-
size again, however, that the ability to ameliorate a symp-
tom is no alternative to treating underlying causes.

FREQUENCY

Increased frequency of urination without an increase in
the volume urine passed. {The Merck Manual)

This common symptom indicates that the bladder cannot
hold as much fluid as usual. A range of processes can
cause this symptom, and these causes must be identified
and treated, if possible. Infection, foreign bodies, stones,
and tumors can all injure the tissue of the bladder wall
and cause inflammation.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobial will help the body rid itself of any
pathogens present, thus reducing inflammation and its
resulting symptoms.

Anti-inflammatory herbs soothe inflamed tissue and thus
reduce the irritation of local muscle spasm.

Diuretics will often help, simply because they usually will
also have either antimicrobial or anti-inflammatory ef-
fects. Diuretics rich in volatile oils, such as Juniperus
communis (juniper berry), may be contraindicated in se-
vere cases, as it can be irritating to the nephrons.

In addition, a number of demulcent diuretic remedies
work well, It is difficult to say whether they act primarily
as anti-inflammatory agents to reduce inflammation or as
demulcents that soothe the surface of the cells. The best
examples here are Zea mays (cornsilk), followed by Elymus

----- PAGE 386 -----
378 <=- TREATMEN1 APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

repens (couch grass) and Althaea officinalis (marshmallow
leaf).

A Prescription for Urinary Frequency
Associated with Infection
Zea mays 2 parts

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 1 part
Dosage: Infuse 2 teaspoons of dry herb mixture in 1 cup of boil-

ing water; drink 1 cup every hour until symptoms subside.

Barley Water

A traditional approach from Britain for soothing the urinary
tract is barley water. This has been used in much the same way
that cranberry juice has in North America. They work in differ-
ent ways but achieve similar results. Barley water may be used in
all cases where frequency, dysuria, or another distressing symp-
tom occurs.

4 oz (100 g) whole barley
1 pint (500 ml) water
/ 02 (15 g) lemon peel (preferably organic)

Boil the barley in a little water; strain. Pour 1 pint (500 ml) of
water over the cleaned barley and add the lemon peel. Simmer
until the barley is soft. Remove from heat and allow to cool
until lukewarm. Strain, add a little honey, and drink several cups
a day.

DYSURIA
Painful urination, (The Merck Manual)

A wide range of conditions can cause dysuria, so having an
approach to easing this important symptom is very useful.
However, successful alleviation will first depend upon ac-
curate diagnosis, followed by appropriate treatment.

Actions Indicated

Anti-inflammatories will usually help ease the pain by re-
ducing inflammation.

Antispasmodics soothe muscle spasms that often accom-
pany such urinary tract problems.

Antimicrobials help the body rid itself of any pathogens,
further reducing inflammation and associated
symptoms.

A Prescription for Dysuria

Viburnum prunifolium 1 part
Zea mays 1 part
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 1 part

Dosage: Infuse 2 teaspoons of dried herb mixture in 1 cup of
boiling water; drink 1 cup every hour until the symptoms subside.

HEMATURIA
Blood in the urine. (The Merck Manual)

Hematuria can give the urine a red or brown color. If the
amount of blood is small, it might not be visually appar-
ent, but it can be detected by a number of simple tests.
This symptom may be associated with a wide range of
conditions, some minor and others quite severe.
Competent diagnosis is crucial. The bleeding may occur
at a site of physical trauma, such as where a kidney stone
has cut the tissue, or from a focus of infection.

It is often possible to reduce or stop such bleeding
with herbs, but this will zot necessarily mean the trauma
has been healed. The suggestions given here must be ap-
plied within the context of treatments that address the di-
agnosed cause.

Actions Indicated

Astringents will stanch bleeding. They may not always be
powerful enough—for example, in cases of bleeding
caused by large kidney stones.

Anti-inflammatories will soothe inflamed tissue, thus less-
ening bleeding.

Antimicrobials will help the body rid itself of any
pathogens present, thus reducing inflammation and re-
sultant bleeding.

A number of diuretic plants have an astringent effect.
The most useful are Vinca major (periwinkle), Equisetem
arvense (horsetail), Alchemilla arvensis (lady’s mantle), and
Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse).

A Prescription for Hematuria

Vinca major 1 part
Capsella bursa-pastoris 1 part
Zea mays 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part

Dosage: Infuse 2 teaspoons of dried herb mixture to 1 cup of
boiling water; drink 1 cup every 2 hours.

----- PAGE 387 -----
Table 17.2. Actions Supplied by Hematuria
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Capsella bursa-pastoris,
Vinca major

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Zea mays

Demulcent Zea mays

EDEMA

Excessive accumulation of fluid in body tissues and cavi-
ties. (The Merck Manual)

Edema, or fluid retention, is an abnormal accumulation of
fluid in the spaces between the cells of body tissues. This
accumulation may be associated with liver or kidney dis-
turbances, pregnancy, premenstrual syndrome, or heart
failure. Never treat water retention without addressing its
causal factors.

Here we are faced with one of the paradoxical prob-
lems associated with the current use of herbs—that is, that
they work! Too often, herbs are used to address symptoms
while the more fundamental healing work they can facili-
tate is ignored. The value of herbal diuretics in helping rid
the body of excess water is a prime example of this issue. If
the practitioner goes for dandelion leaf whenever edema is
part of a patient’s symptom picture, he or she is probably
missing an opportunity for more profound healing.

Actions Indicated

Diuretics are, of course, the primary herbs to consider.
The broader picture that the patient presents will suggest
the appropriate treatment.

By far the most effective diuretic herb is dandelion
leaf (Taraxacum officinale). The diuretic effect of this herb
is comparable to that of the drug furosemide. In addition
to its efficacy as a diuretic, dandelion leaf provides the
benefit of a rich source of potassium. One of the typical
side effects of increasing diuresis by stimulating kidney
function is a loss of vital potassium from the body. This
can impact a range of body functions, the most critical of
which is electrolyte balance in the heart muscle. If the di-
uretic has been prescribed to treat edema associated with
congestive heart failure, any reduction in the availability
of potassium will aggravate cardiac symptoms.

In dandelion leaf, however, we have one of the best

THE URINARY SYSTEM ec. 379

natural sources of potassium. Dandelion leaf simultane-
ously replaces the potassium that is flushed from the body
via its diuretic action. Thus, this herb provides us with an
ideally balanced diuretic that may be used safely when-
ever this action is needed, including the treatment of
edema related to heart problems.

A Prescription for Edema

Taraxacum officinale leaf

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day or 5 ml of tincture
when needed, but not at night

CYSTITIS

Acute or chronic infection of the urinary bladder. (The
Merck Manual)

Cystitis, or inflammation of the wall and lining of the
urinary bladder, may be due to bacterial infection or to
mechanical abrasion from microcrystals of calcium phos-
phate in urine. Symptoms of cystitis include frequency,
dysuria, cloudy or bloody urine, and pain and tenderness
in the lower abdomen. The urine itself may be cloudy be-
cause it contains pus or blood; it may also have an un-
pleasant smell. These symptoms must be distinguished
from those caused by vaginitis, sexually transmitted dis-
eases, and irritations of the urethra.

Acute urinary tract infections are very common, af-
fecting at least 15% of females at some point in their lives.
Urinary tract infection is about 20 times more common in
women than in men and can occur at any age. Women are
more likely than men to be affected because the urethra is
much shorter in women, allowing infective organisms
easier access to the bladder. Such ascending infections are
usually announced by discomfort at the urethral opening.
As the condition progresses, the irritation travels upward.

These infections are usually caused by the rod-
shaped bacterium called Escherichia coli, commonly known
as E. coli. This is a normal bacterium found in the bowel,
which, after a bowel movement, can be accidentally wiped
onto the urethral opening. Less commonly, infection
from the bloodstream and the kidneys descends into the
bladder. These descending mfections are usually associated
with backache, headache, fatigue, and pain in the abdomen.

Many women have bacteriuria (bacteria in the urine)
and pyuria (pus in the urine) in the absence of symptoms,
while others may have symptoms without clinical signs.
In the past, women who complained of recurrent symp-
toms but had no clinical signs of cystitis were diagnosed

----- PAGE 388 -----
380 <<. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

as having “urethral syndrome.” Urologists now recognize
a general syndrome known as interstitial cystitis, which
comprises a group of urethral/bladder disorders in which
the mucosa of the bladder has become eroded, resulting
in ongoing symptoms in the absence of bacteriuria.

Causes of Cystitis
A variety of factors appear to increase the likelihood that
an individual will develop cystitis.

Female gender. The female urethra is prone to coloniza-
tion by bacteria due to its proximity to the anus, its
short length (about 4 cm), and its termination inside
the labia. Friction during intercourse may cause minor
inflammation of the urethra, predisposing the individ-
ual to infection, or may even move pathogenic organ-
isms into the urethra.

Pregnancy. Pregnant women may be more susceptible to
infection because of hormonal changes that result in
dilation and reduction in tone of the ureters of the kid-
ney. Pressure of the uterus on the bladder and local ve-
nous congestion and pressure may also precipitate cys-
titis in pregnancy.

Diabetes. Diabetics and those who consume large
amounts of sugar are predisposed to cystitis.

Chemical factors. Antibacterial soaps, sprays, douches,
feminine deodorants, and contraceptive jellies and
creams alter the vaginal environment and may cause
irritation that predisposes the tissue to infection.
Barrier contraceptive devices like the diaphragm may
cause mechanical irritation of the urethra. Some
forms of interstitial cystitis may be caused by food
contaminated with pesticides.

Retention of urine. Anatomical deviations that result in
retention of urine, such as a malposition of the uterus,
can potentiate infection.

Oral contraceptives. Oral contraceptives may initiate in-
fection in some individuals.

Antibiotics. Overuse of these potentially lifesaving drugs
will select for resistant bacteria, often leading to cystitis.

Stress. Stress initiates the production of hormones, such
as adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), glucocorti-
coids, and aldosterone, all of which reduce circulating
white blood cell counts and increase susceptibility to
infection. Many who experience recurrent infection
can relate stress (chemical, physical, or emotional) to
the onset of symptoms.

Treatment of Cystitis

Cystitis can respond rapidly to appropriate treatment, the
key being the selection of the appropriate antimicrobials.
However, many well-known antimicrobial remedies (such
as Echinacea) do not fulfill the herbalist’s expectations in
cystitis. It is important to use plants that are specifically
active in the urinary tract. Thus, antimicrobials contain-
ing terpene essential oils are indicated. The essential oil is
excreted from the body via the kidney, directing its action
to the site of infection in the bladder.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials help the body control and then clear bacte-
rial infection.

Anti-inflammatories soothe the pain and discomfort, but
avoid overemphasizing them in the prescription. The
symptomatic relief they produce must be applied in the
context of removing the infection that causes the in-
flammation.

Astringents may be indicated if there is any hematuria.

Diuretics help flush the whole of the tract. Of course, it is
best to select diuretics that possess antimicrobial and
anti-inflammatory actions.

Antispasmodics may be necessary if there is much pain.

Specific Remedies
Many plants have a regional reputation for the treatment
of cystitis. Often, the efficacy of these plants varies ac-
cording to whether the plant is fresh or dried, what time
of year it is picked, and other factors. For example, in
Wales, fresh Achillea millefolium (yarrow), preferably har-
vested from séa cliffs, has a dramatic effect even in intran-
sigent cases of cystitis. Unfortunately, tinctures or infusions
made from the same plants after drying do not replicate
the results achieved with fresh plant material. This is
probably due to changes in the amount or relative com-
position of the volatile oils present.

Plants that contain antimicrobial volatile oils have
most to offer. Primary examples are Arctostaphylos uva-urst
(bearberry) and Agathosma betulina (buchu).

A Prescription for Cystitis

Zea mays 2 parts
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 2 parts
Agathosma betulina ] part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Infusion of Achillea
millefolium (preferably fresh) should be drunk often.

----- PAGE 389 -----
Table 17.3. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Cystitis

ACTION HERBS

Diuretic Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Agathosma betulina, Zea mays
Demulcent Zea mays

Antimicrobial Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Agathosma betulina

A Prescription for Cystitis with Pain and Discomfort

Zea mays 2 parts
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 2 parts
Viburnum prunifolium 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day. An infusion of
Achillea millefolium (preferably fresh) should be drunk often.

Table 17.4. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Cystitis with Pain and Discomfort

ACTION HERBS

Diuretic Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Agathosma betulina, Zea mays
Demulcent Zea mays

Antimicrobial Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Agathosma betulina
Antispasmodic —_Valeriana officinalis, Viburnum prunifolium

Cystitis Infusion

Hot infusions can ease symptoms dramatically. As an example,
here is a combination recommended by British medical herbal-
ist Annie Mcintyre.

Althaea officinalis root 2 parts
Zea mays 2 parts
Elymus repens 2 parts
Equisetum arvensis 2 parts
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 2 parts
Agathosma betulina T part

Dosage: Add 1 teaspoon of this mixture to 1 cup of boiling water
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. Drink hot four to five times a day.

Broader Context of Treatment

Cranberry juice (Vaccinium macrocarpon) has a strong tra-
ditional reputation for soothing symptoms of cystitis.

THE URINARY SYSTEM & 381

Now, research shows that cranberry juice actually helps
prevent the adherence of pathogenic bacteria to the lining
of the urinary tract. Certain pathogenic E. coli bacteria at-
tach themselves to the lining of the urinary tract with
structures called fimbriae. Cranberry has been shown to
inhibit the adherence of these fimbriated E. coli to the
mucosa. It now appears that a group of flavonoids in cran-
berry, called proanthocyanidins, are responsible for these
anti-adhesion effects.! Since sugar consumption is a pre-
disposing factor for cystitis, unsweetened cranberry juice
is recommended.

Here is some general advice that should be followed
both during active infection and to prevent recurrent cys-
titis, especially for those prone to these infections.

Avoid using tampons, as they contain additives that can in-
jure the lining of the vagina.

Discontinue use of contraceptive diaphragms, oral contracep-
tives, and other chemicals used in the vaginal area.

Discontinue use of deodorant soaps. These soaps are irritating
to the skin and kill off normal external bacteria, which
are then replaced by more virulent, less easily killed
pathogens.

Increase intake of water to at least 8 to 12 glasses per day. This
helps to flush out bacteria and will often reduce dysuria.

Acidify the urine. Decrease consumption of alkaline foods,
such as dairy products, citrus juices, and sodas.

Eat a light diet consisting of grains, some vegetables, and
specific acidifying juices.

Eliminate bladder irritants such as coffee, black tea, choco-
late, and alcohol.

Discontinue intake of all high-sugar foods, including sweet
vegetables and fruits, sugar, and honey.

In addition, take the following supplements.

Vitamin A: 25,000 IU/day
Vitamin C: 500 mg every 2 hours
Zinc: 30 mg/day

New studies show that ascorbic acid irritates the
bladder, so vitamin C must be obtained in the form of cal-
cium ascorbate, which is relatively buffered. Avoid vita-
mins containing aspartate, as it is a bladder irritant.

URINARY CALCULUS

Small hard masses somewhere in the urinary tract. (The
Merck Manual)

An estimated 3% of all Americans will suffer from kidney
stones at some time in their life, and half of these people
will suffer recurrences over the next ten or more years.

----- PAGE 390 -----
382 2. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

While extremely painful, kidney stones rarely cause per-
manent loss of kidney function if properly treated, and are
almost never fatal in the absence of complications.

The most important kidney stones are calcium ox-
alate stones, calcium phosphate stones, and uric acid
stones. The vast majority of stones contain calcium in
some form. Uric acid stones, which account for fewer
than 10% of all stones, are an exception. In most normal
people, urine is supersaturated with calcium oxalate, so all
people can potentially form such stones. Normal urine is
not supersaturated with respect to uric acid, cystine, or
struvite. Conditions that elevate calcium oxalate supersat-
uration raise the risk of calcium oxalate stone formation.

Normal urine contains predictable amounts of cal-
cium, magnesium, uric acid, and other by-products of
metabolism. Normally, these substances are in solution and
pass into the bladder. However, under certain conditions of
high saturation, and in a complex chemical environment
that is not yet completely understood, the chemicals may
crystallize and form a stonelike particle in the kidney.
Once formed, the particle stimulates continued crystal-
ization. If the stone remains in the wide open spaces of
the kidney, no symptoms may occur, although there may
be microscopic signs of blood in the urine. However, once
a piece of the stone breaks off and enters the ureter that
eads to the bladder, prompt spasms occur, leading to the
painful symptoms.

Two main clinical examples are hypercalciuria (ex-
cess calcium in the urine) and hyperoxaluria (excess ox-

alic acid in the urine). Hypercalciuria can be caused by
many conditions, including hyperparathyroidism, renal
tubular acidosis, sarcoidosis, vitamin D intoxication, and
idiopathic factors. Hyperoxaluria may be caused by over-
production of oxalic acid and hereditary disorders of
metabolism, or may be acquired through diet or intesti-
nal disease.

Apart from overexcretion of citrates, supersaturation
can be increased by abnormal interactions between urine
ions. Urine citrate forms a soluble salt with calcium that
normally reduces free calcium ion levels appreciably. Low
urine citrate related to bowel disease, renal tubular acido-
sis, and, perhaps, dietary and hereditary causes can raise
calcium oxalate supersaturation and promote stones.
Normal women excrete more citrate and less calcium
than normal men do, which may help explain why men
are more likely to form stones. Low urine pH due to
hereditary causes or bowel disease promotes uric acid
stones. High pH related to alkali drugs or renal tubular
acidosis increases calcium phosphate supersaturation.

An infection of the urinary tract can cause cellular

debris to act as a focus, or “seed,” on which crystals can
form. Bacterial action makes the urine more alkaline, re-
sulting in deposition of phosphates that form calcium
phosphate stones. Excessive uric acid and increased ex-
cretion of calcium by the kidney, combined with an in-
creased insolubility of calcium in the urine, can also pro-
mote stone formation. Long-term confinement to bed or
even chronic lack of exercise may encourage mobilization
of calcium from the bones into the blood and thus in-
crease calcium levels in the urine. Similarly, steroids can
increase blood and urine calcium levels.

Inherited tendencies and obesity can also predispose
an individual to the development of kidney stones, as can
several other physiological abnormalities. However, in
about 20% of patients, no abnormality can be identified to
explain the tendency to form calculi. Some individuals ab-
sorb excessive amounts of calcium from the intestines,
overwhelming the ability of the kidney to dissolve it.
Others absorb normal amounts of calcium, but the kidney
allows too much to leak into the urine from the blood, and
some produce urine that is too acidic, facilitating crystal-
lization. In certain diseases that cause elevated blood cal-
cium levels, such as hyperparathyroidism and some types of
cancer, kidney stones may occur as a secondary phe-
nomenon serving as the first clue to the underlying disease.

The pain of a kidney stone comes on suddenly.
Classically, there is severe, excruciating pain in the flank
on the side of the stone, coming in waves and radiating
around to the lower abdomen and into the groin, scro-
tum, or vagina, and occasionally into the upper thigh
area. The intensity of pain is as severe as most people ever
experience. The patient often suffers nausea, vomiting,
and profuse sweating, and there may or may not be blood
in the urine. Most stones pass into the bladder, in an
amount of time ranging from minutes to days or even
longer, and the pain is gone. The small, usually brown or
black stone may be identified in the urine, and should be
kept for analysis. If fever is present, it may be due to in-
fection that has formed behind the stone in the stagnant
urine.

Indications for Surgical Treatment

In certain cases, some kind of surgery may be needed to
remove a kidney stone. Surgery may be required if the
stone:

* Does not pass after a reasonable period of time and
causes constant pain

® Ts too large to pass on its own

* Blocks the flow of urine

* Causes ongoing urinary tract infection

----- PAGE 391 -----
¢ Damages the kidney tissue or causes constant bleeding
¢ Has grown larger (as seen in follow up X-ray studies)

Treatment of Urinary Calculus

The herbal treatment guidelines given here can be quite
effective, given time. Careful selection of the appropriate
herbs is critical.

Actions Indicated

Antilithic remedies are the core of any treatment of renal
calculus.

Anti-inflammatories are indicated to lessen the inflamma-
tion caused by the passage of hard material along the
delicate tissue of this system. Such remedies will de-
crease the pain and discomfort to some extent.

Antispasmodics are essential to help reduce muscular spasms
along the urinary tract as peristalsis moves the stone.
Unfortunately, legal plant antspasmodics are not strong
enough to deal with acute problems of this nature.

Demutcents will help, as they usually also act as anti-in-
flammatory agents in this system.

Specific Remedies

Anumber of plants have a long tradition of use as specifics
in Europe. Important examples are Hydrangea arborescens
(hydrangea), Aphanes arvensis (parsley piert), Parietaria dif-
fusa (pellitory-of-the-wall), Efymus repens (couch grass),
Urtica dioica (nettle), and Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod).
To these we can add the North American plants Eupa-
torium purpureum (gravel root), Collinsonia canadensis
(stoneroot) and Zea mays (corn silk).

A Prescription for Kidney Stones

Collinsonia canadensis 1 part
Eupatorium purpureum 1 part
Zea mays 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Viburnum prunifolium 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 17.5. Actions Supplied by Kidney Stone
Prescription

ACTION HERBS

Diuretic Collinsonia canadensis, Eupatorium purpureum, Zea mays
Demulcent Zea mays

Antilithic Collinsonia canadensis, Eupatorium purpureum
Antispasmodic — Dioscorea villosa, Viburnum prunifolium, Zea mays

THE URINARY SYSTEM © 383

Broader. Context of Treatment

The treatment approach suggested here is not for the
treatment of acute attacks. Rather, it is intended to help
prevent subsequent attacks. Profuse sweating or low fluid
intake can concentrate the urine, causing urinary salts to
solidity and stones to form. The patient should avoid de-
hydration, especially after exercise but even on routine
days, by ingesting copious amounts of fluid. Recommend
that the patient drink 4 to 6 pints of fluid a day and 1 pint
before going to bed—in other words, enough to ensure
that 24-hour urine output is never less than 3 pints.
Ideally, the patient should’ be drinking enough fluid for
routine nighttime awakening to urinate.

When uric acid stones are the problem, the urine will
be acid. To lessen the impact of these stones, the patient
should eat an alkaline diet, including potatoes, vegetables,
and fruits, but not citrus fruits. In addition, the patient
should decrease protein intake, since protein tends to in-
crease levels of uric acid. In particular, the patient should
avoid liver, kidneys, fish roe, and sardines. Alkalinizing
mineral water is a good beverage choice.

For patients with calcium oxalate stones, avoid foods
that contain oxalates, such as spinach, rhubarb, beets, pars-
ley, sorrel, and chocolate. Those who have a tendency to
form oxalate stones often secrete too much calcium in their
urine, which reacts with oxalic acids to form the stones. For
this reason, these patients should be advised to restrict in-
take of dairy products, which are rich in calcium. Mineral
waters rich in magnesium will increase the solubility of cal-
cium. Both vitamin B, and folic acid are thought to restrict
the amount of calcium formed in the body.

Calcium phosphate stones are usually formed in the
presence of urinary infection. The urine is alkaline, so the
patient should eat foods that acidify the urine, such as meat,
fish, and eggs. However, dairy products should be avoided.

References
1. Howell AB, Vorsa N, Der Marderosian A, Foo LY.
Inhibition of the adherence of P-fimbriated Fsherichia
coli to uroepithelial-cell surfaces by proanthocyanidin
extracts from cranberries. The New England Fournal of
Medicme 1998, 339:10854 [letter].

----- PAGE 392 -----
THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM

t should come as no surprise that nature is rich in
| nes that nurture the reproductive system or in

some way address the process of conception and
birth. However, today the phytotherapist is faced with an
unfortunate 21st century dilemma. Some of the primary
remedies for the female reproductive system, widely used
by the Eclectic, Physiomedicalist, and Thomsonian
herbalists of previous centuries, are now seriously endan-
gered species. Currently, the most problematic of these
plants are:

Chamaelirium luteum (false unicorn root)
Cypripedium spp. (lady’s slipper)
Trillium erectum and T. pendulum (beth root)

The fact that healing plants of this importance have
become endangered to the degree that they have is one of
the signs of the ecological holocaust that humanity has
wrought. Though these plants are still occasionally abun-
dant locally, their ecological range has been dramatically
diminished. I caution against using them unless they are
from cultivated sources, which in the case of Cypripedium
is extremely difficult. Wildcrafting this plant is an ecolog-
ical crime.

REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM HERBS
AND ACTIONS

When considering the reproductive system, it is important
to identify the primary tonic herbs and next determine
other ways in which they impact the system (secondary
actions). From the list of emmenagogues that follows, we
shall select the most valuable tonics and explore their dif-
ferential indications. For more details on the secondary
actions of these herbs, please refer to chapters 25 and 26.

Herbal Emmenagogues

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Artemisia abrotanum (southernwood)
A. absinthium (wormwood)

A, vulgaris (mugwort)

Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Gentiana spp. (gentian)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Marsdenia condurango (condurango)

Emmenagogues Demystified

productive system either directly or indirectly.

The term emmenagogue is commonly applied to plants used to treat a range of female reproduc-
tive conditions. Strictly speaking, however, emmenagogues are remedies that stimulate menstrual
flow and activity. In most modern herbals, the term is used in the wider sense to indicate a remedy
that normalizes and tones the female reproductive system. Such a broad definition is almost mean-
ingless, as it obscures the wealth of diverse actions these herbs offer. The herbs described in most
herbals as emmenagogues actually provide a whole range of distinct actions that benefit the re-

384

----- PAGE 393 -----
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
M. pulegium (pennyroyal)
Mitchella repens (partridgeberry)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)
Rosmarinus officinaiis (rosemary)
Rubus idaeus (raspberry leaf)
Ruta graveolens (rue)

Salvia officinalis (sage)

S. officinalis var. rubia (red sage)
Senecio aureus (life root)
Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)
T, vulgare (tansy)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Tilia platyphyllos (inden)
Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Tropaeolum majus (nasturtium)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)
Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)
V. prunifolium (black haw)

Vitex agnus-castus (chasteberry)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

For further clarification, the following section dis-
cusses some of the more toning emmenagogues, pre-
sented in terms of their primary effect upon the menstrual
process. Remember that all bitters will have an emmena-
gogue effect in the strict sense of the word—that is, they
will help improve menstrual function and flow. If this is
not evident, please review the information about bitters in
chapter 25.

Uterine Tonics

These plants have a toning, strengthening, nourishing ef-
fect on both the tissue and the function of the female re-
productive system. How and why they exert these effects
is usually unknown, but this should not belittle their re-
markable therapeutic contributions. Determining differ-
ential indications for these plants is one of the most con-
fused areas in modern herbalism. Important examples of
uterine tonics are Angelica sinensis (dong quai), Caulo-
phyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh), Cimicifuga racemosa
(black cohosh), and Mitchella repens (partridgeberry).

Emmenagogues

Among the many plants that can stimulate the menstrual
process, some also have a tonic effect on the whole sys-
tem. Of the emmenagogues listed previously, some work

‘THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM .@ 385

through bitter stimulation and others through localized
irritation. Herbs that also nourish the system to some de-
gree include Achillea millefolium (yarrow), Artemisia vul-
garis (mugwort), and Mitchella repens (partridgeberry).

Hormonal Normalizers

A number of plants have a direct impact upon levels of
hormones in the body. Of course, there are many human
hormones, and only a few impact reproductive function.
Many claims can be made about plants that affect hor-
monal balance, but here we will limit our discussion to
plants that have an observable influence. As little en-
docrinological research has been undertaken on these
herbs, it is impossible to be specific in all cases about how
they work. Thus, the herbalist tends to refer to them in
terms of hormonal modulators or normalizers.

The most important of these plants in European phy-
totherapy is Vitex: agnus-castus (chasteberry). It is fair to
describe this plant as a normalizer, as it will tend to move
the body back to normal function, regardless of which fe-
male hormone is involved and whether the problem is an
excess or a deficiency of hormone. However, how it
achieves this effect is a matter of conjecture. Other uter-
ine tonics and bitters may have a similar effect because of
some of their more generalized toning influences, but
they are not as predictable as Vitex.

Uterine Astringents

An abundance of herbs reduce blood loss from the uterus,
whether due to excessively heavy periods (menorrhagia),
bleeding between periods (metrorrhagia), or organic dis-
ease, such as fibroids. The question of how they work re-
mains unanswered, because no astringent tannin reaches
the uterine tissue from the gut. Some, but not all, of these
plants may influence hormonal processes. Of the many
valuable astringents not on the list of emmenagogues
given earlier, consider Alchemilla vulgaris (lady’s mantle),
Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse), Geranium macu-
Jatum (cranesbill), and Vinca major (periwinkle).

Uterine Demulcents

Similar comments can be made about the mechanisms of
action of the important reproductive system demulcent
remedies. There is no way that mucopolysaccharides find
their way to the uterus from the digestive process;
nonetheless, there is no question that these remedies
soothe inflamed tissue. The most toning is Canlophyllum
thalictroides (blue cohosh).

----- PAGE 394 -----
386 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Nervines and Antispasmodics

There are also a number of valuable remedies that impact
the autonomic innervation of this complex system. By
using the appropriate nervine or antispasmodic, much can
be achieved in terms of correcting functional tone. Herbs
in this category include Viburnum opulus (cramp bark),
Ve prunifolium (black haw), Cimicifuga racemosa (black
cohosh), Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort), and Pulsatilla
vulgaris (pasqueflower).

AMENORRHEA

Absence of menstruation, i.e., either lack of menarche or
cessation of menses. (The Merck Manual)

‘To recognize amenorrhea, one must know what constitutes
normal menstruation. The duration of:a menstrual period
is 28 + 3 days for 65% of women, with a range of 18 to 40
days. Once a menstrual pattern has been established, the
variation does not normally exceed five days. The average
duration of flow is 5 + 2 days, with a blood loss averaging
130 ml. Flow is generally heaviest on the second day.
Amenorrhea falls into three broad categories.

Primary Amenorrhea

Women with primary amenorrhea do not begin to men-
struate when expected. Because there is a wide variation
in normal onset of menstruation during puberty, applying
this diagnosis is problematic. In general, however, pri-
mary amenorrhea implies that menstruation has not yet
started by the age of 16 years.

With the safe and effective herbs available to the phy-
totherapist, treatment could begin at the age of 15 if
deemed necessary. However, competent diagnosis is re-
quired, as there are a number of diverse causes to consider,
including imperforate hymen, ovarian dysfunction, and
hormonal imbalance. Obviously, the treatment of primary
amenorrhea will be dictated by the underlying cause.

Secondary Amenorrhea

Secondary amenorrhea indicates cessation of menstrua-
tion after at least one normal period. This is common,
and causes include pregnancy, stress, loss or gain of
weight, menopause, breast-feeding, anemia, excessive ex-
ercise, discontinuation of oral contraceptives, side effects
of some drugs, ovarian cysts, and tumors.

Erratic or Irregular Menstruation
Women with erratic menstruation may have only three or
four periods in a year, or three very close together fol-

lowed by none for a few months. Numerous causes, sim-
ilar to those for secondary amenorrhea, are possible.

Treatment of Amenorrhea

The core herbal treatment guidelines for this condition
must start with tonic support for the reproductive system,
but can take into account many other issues specific to the
woman involved.

Actions Indicated

Emmenagogues are the classic treatment, as they can trig-
ger the menstrual process.

Hormonal normalizers will help the body regulate levels of
various hormones.

Uterine tonics will contribute their nourishing, toning
power.

Other actions will be indicated by the associated symptom
picture or case history. For example, if anxiety and
stress are an issue, consider appropriate nervines. If se-
vere menstrual cramps occur, use antispasmodics.

Specific Remedies

Most of the emmenagogues could be considered specifics.
However, care should be taken with the stronger emme-
nagogues, as they may be too stimulating and cause
cramping. Simple infusions can often solve this problem.
Plants such as Mentha pulegium (pennyroyal), Achillea
millefolium (yarrow), and Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort) can
help initiate flow, but if they are not effective, consider
the following prescription.

A Prescription for Amenorrhea Associated with
Hormonal Imbalance

Caulophyllum thalictroides 2 parts
Artemisia vulgaris 2 parts
Vitex agnus-castus 1 part

Dosage: 2 ml of tincture three times a day until period starts

Table 18.1. Actions Supplied by Prescription for

Amenorrhea with Hormonal Imbalance
ACTION HERBS

Artemisia vulgaris, Caulophyllum thalictroides,
Vitex agnus-castus

Emmenagogue

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Uterine tonic Caulophylium thalictroides

----- PAGE 395 -----
A Prescription for Amenorrhea Associated with Stress

Cimicifuga racemosa 2 parts
Verbena officinalis 2 parts
Vitex agnus-castus 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day until period starts

Table 18.2. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Amenorrhea with Stress

ACTION HERBS

Emmenagogue Cimicifuga racemosa, Verbena officinalis,

Vitex agnus-castus
Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus
Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa

Nervine relaxant Cimicifuga racemosa, Verbena officinalis

Broader Context of Treatment

Considerations will depend upon the underlying cause.
Thus, other therapeutic modalities, such as osteopathy
and acupuncture, may be indicated.

DYSMENORRHEA

Cyclic pain associated with menses. (The Merck Manual)

Dysmenorrhea, or painful menstruation, is the most com-
mon of all gynecologic complaints and the leading cause of
absenteeism of women from work, school, and other activ-
ities. In addition to identifiable pathological causes, a num-
ber of constitutional factors may lower the pain threshold
and thus appear to worsen dysmenorrhea. Common factors
include anemia, increase in obesity, chronic illness, over-
work, stress in general, diabetes, and poor nutrition. Two
main forms of dysmenorrhea can be identified.

Primary Dysmenorrbea

Primary dysmenorrhea is dysmenorrhea unrelated to any
definable pelvic lesion. It usually starts with the first ovu-
latory cycles, beginning in most cases before the age of 20
years. Primary dysmenorrhea is associated with nausea in
50% of patients, vomiting in 25% of patients, and in-
creased stool frequency in 35% of patients. The pain is
low and cramping, recurring in waves that probably cor-
relate with uterine contractions. The pain usually begins
a few hours before bleeding commences, comes to a peak
intensity within a few hours, and dissipates within two

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM . 387

days. It generally occurs over the midline of the abdomen,
and is relieved by the onset of good menstrual flow.

Secondary Dysmenorrhea

Secondary dysmenorrhea is related to the presence of pelvic
lesions associated with organic pelvic disease, such as en-
dometriosis, salpingitis (also known as pelvic inflamma-
tory disease, or PID), and postsurgical adhesions. The
contraceptive intrauterine device ([UD) may cause pain
problems.

Secondary dysmenorrhea begins up to a few days be-
fore menstruation and lasts several days after the onset of
flow. Often it is lateralized to one side of the body, and it
does not characteristically peak and diminish as clearly or
quickly as primary dysmenorrhea. In general, the onset of
secondary dysmenorrhea occurs later in life in women
who have not had primary dysmenorrhea. However, it
may also be superimposed onto a preexisting case of pri-
mary dysmenorrhea.

Treatment of Dysmenorrhea

Actions Indicated

Antispasmodies ease the muscle spasms that are the imme-
diate cause of pain.

Nervines will help associated psychological tension or
anxiety.

Diuretic remedies are indicated if dysmenorrhea is of a con-
gestive nature, accompanied by water retention.

Uterine tonics provide the basis for any healing work in
this body system.

Hormonal normalizers are indicated if the diagnosis sug-
gests that hormonal imbalance is making a pivotal
contribution.

Specific Remedies

As there are a number of possible underlying causes for
this all-too-common problem, a number of remedies have
been called specifics. Remedies of value in dysmenorrhea
related to a whole range of different causes are Cimmicifuga
racemosa (black cohosh), Dioscorea villosa (wild yam),
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap), Viburnum opulus (cramp
bark), and Y prunifolium (black haw).

A Prescription for Dysmenorrhea

Viburnum prunifolium T part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture as needed

----- PAGE 396 -----
388 TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Table 18.3. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Dysmenorrhea

ACTION HERBS

Antispasmodic Viburnum prunifolium, Scutellaria lateriflora,

Cimicifuga racemosa

Nervine Viburnum prunifolium, Scutellaria lateriflora,
Cimicifuga racemosa
Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa

A Prescription for Dysmenorrhea Associated with
Pelvic Lesions

Viburnum prunifolium 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 18.4. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Dysmenorrhea with Pelvic Lesions

ACTION HERBS

Antispasmodic Viburnum prunifolium, Dioscorea villosa,
Cimicifuga racemosa

Nervine Viburnum prunifolium, Cimicifuga racemosa

Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa

The addition of Dioscorea villosa will provide a more
reliable antispasmodic action if a physical problem is pre-
sent. This prescription will support, but xot replace, what-
ever treatment is necessary for the underlying problem.

Broader Context of Treatment

Dietary and supplemental approaches are well known, but
unnecessary if appropriate herbs are used. Psychological
issues can be fundamental here. Low tolerance to the sen-
sation of uterine contraction may be learned behavior.

PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME

A condition characterized by nervousness, irritability,
emotional instability, depression and possibly headaches,
edema and mastalgia; it occurs during the 7 to 10 days be-
fore menstruation and disappears a few hours after onset
of menstrual flow. (The Merck Manual)

The name premenstrual syndrome (PMS) describes a broad
range of symptoms that occur cyclically and are severe
enough to disturb a woman's life or cause her to seek help
from a health practitioner. Most women experience some
cyclical bodily changes during the menstrual years, corre-
sponding to a pattern of cycling hormones. Most of these
changes are normal, and many cultures observe and ritu-
alize these subtle shifts in body response and mental and
emotional focus.

Women often express a positive attitude about the
conscious observance of these patterns within their own
bodies. However, when the hormonal and chemical
changes cause debilitating symptoms, they can disrupt the
function of virtually all body systems as well as the indi-
vidual’s emotional life.

PMS is diagnosed on the basis of when symptoms are
present. There is, by definition, a period of time for PMS
sufferers during which symptoms are absent, usually just
after the onset or end of menses. PMS occurs during the
proliferative or luteal phase of the menstrual cycle, when
evels of estrogen and progesterone are relatively high.
Estrogen is a central nervous system (CNS) stimulant and
progesterone is a CNS depressant. What is important is
the relationship of estrogen to progesterone during the
luteal phase.

A number of etiological factors have been identified
for primary PMS:

Estrogen excess

Progesterone deficiency

Fluid retention

Hypoglycemia

Decreased production of prostaglandin E,
Increased production of other prostaglandins
Magnesium deficiency

Increased prolactin levels

It is believed that many of the symptoms of PMS re-
late to a shift in the fluid in the water compartments of
the body (intracellular, extracellular, and intravascular),
with increased retention of water and water moving into
the extracellular spaces. This is mediated by increased
levels of ACTH and aldosterone. The cells are more re-
ceptive to insulin in the premenstrual part of the cycle,
which causes relative hypoglycemia and subsequent car-
bohydrate cravings. Magnesium deficiency leads to de-
creased levels of dopamine in the brain, which leads in
turn to an increase in levels of CNS stimulators (nor-
epinephrine and serotonin), Increases in prolactin result
in decreases in progesterone.

----- PAGE 397 -----
Table 18.5. The PMS Symptom Picture

SYMPTOM CATEGORY SYMPTOM MANIFESTATIONS

Behavioral Personality alterations may occur, in the
form of nervousness, irritability, agitation,
unreasonable temper, fatigue, depression.
Symptoms that suggest clinical depression,
such as anxiety, palpitations, tightening in
the chest, and hyperventilation, are common.
Violent crimes by women and suicide are

often committed in the premenstrual period.

Neurological Headache, vertigo, syncope, paresthesias of
the hands or feet, and aggravation of

seizure disorders have all been recorded.

Respiratory Asthma may be intensified.

Gastrointestinal Changes that may occur include
constipation, increase or decrease in
appetite, and carbohydrate cravings,

particularly for sugar and chocolate.

Miscellaneous Other symptoms include edema, weight
gain, backache, enuresis, oliguria, capillary
fragility, exacerbations of dermatologic

disease, breast changes, and eye complaints.

Four major symptom patterns of PMS have been identified.

PMS-A. Among women with PMS, 80% have symptoms
characteristic of PMS-A. Symptoms are predomi-
nantly anxiety-related, and are associated with ex-
cess estrogen as well as CNS stimulation that results
in feelings of anxiety. High estrogen levels may be
related to a deficiency in progesterone or, in other
words, a high estrogen-to-progesterone ratio. It
may also be related to the body’s inability to break
down estrogen, which may be due to poor liver
function or vitamin B deficiency.

PMS-H. PMS-H affects about 60% of women with PMS.
Here, signs and symptoms are predominantly hy-
perhydration (bloating and edema), increased levels of
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and _in-
creased water- and salt-saving activities in the kidneys.

PMS-C. For 40% of women with PMS, the symptom
picture is dominated by carbohydrate cravings due
to increased responsiveness to insulin.

PMS-D. About 5% of PMS sufferers are primarily af-
fected by depression related to excess progesterone,
which causes CNS depression.

‘THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 2 389

‘Treatment of PMS

Note that the herbal treatment guidelines given here con-
sist of two components, a daily prescription for working
on hormonal issues and a combination to address acute
PMS symptoms.

Actions Indicated

Nervines usually alleviate symptoms, but rarely clear the
recurrent pattern.

Antispasmodics ease any accompanying dysmenorrhea.

Diuretics are indicated if water retention is part of the
picture.

Hormonal normalizers are indicated if the diagnosis sug-

gests that hormonal imbalance is making a pivotal con-
tribution to PMS.

Specific Remedies

Different remedies may act as specifics for specific
women, so it is difficult to generalize. From my clinical
experience, I suggest that Seutellaria lateriflora, in the
short term, is as close as possible to a specific for symp-
tomatic relief. Longer-term specifics are likely to be hor-
monally focused remedies, such as Vitex agnus-castus.

A Prescription for Acute PMS Symptoms

Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Taraxacum officinale leaf 1 part

Dosage: 5ml of tincture as needed to alleviate symptoms

The dosage of this symptomatic medication may be
increased until the desired relief is experienced. The reg-
imen may be altered as necessary, varying time of day and
quantity of dose to suit the individual’s needs. For exam-
ple, she may take the entire dose first thing in the morn-
ing or smaller amounts at frequent intervals throughout
the day. The woman’s experience is the guiding principle
here. Always treat the human being, not the theory about
the condition.

A Supportive Prescription to Normalize

Hormone Levels

Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part

Dosage: 5ml of tincture once a day throughout cycle. Use this

prescription in combination with prescription for symptomatic

relief given earlier.

----- PAGE 398 -----
390 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Table 18.6. Actions Supplied by Two PMS Formulas

ACTION HERBS

Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis,
Cimicifuga racemosa

Nervine

Scutellaria lateriflora, Valeriana officinalis,
Cimicifuga racemosa

Antispasmodic

Diuretic Taraxacum officinale leaf

Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa, Vitex agnus-castus

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

If water retention is the predominant symptom, then
focus more on diuretics. Palpitations would suggest that
Leonurus cardiaca is relevant. As an example of how this
basic approach can be modified to address specific symp-
toms, consider the following.

A Prescription for PMS Associated with
Transitory Skin Problems

Scutellaria lateriflora 2 parts
Pulsatilla vulgaris 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Taraxacum officinale leaf 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture as needed to alleviate symptoms. Use
in combination with Prescription to Normalize Hormone Levels,
given earlier,

Table 18.7. Actions Supplied by Prescriptions to
Normalize Hormone Levels and for PMS with Skin
Problems

ACTION HERBS

Nervine Scutellaria lateriflora, Pulsatilla vulgaris,

Cimicifuga racemosa

Scutellaria lateriflora, Pulsatilla vulgaris,
Cimicifuga racemosa

Antispasmodic

Diuretic Taraxacum officinale leaf, Galium aparine
Alterative Galium aparine, Pulsatilla vulgaris
Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa, Vitex agnus-castus

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Broader Context of Treatment

The holistic practitioner must focus on a whole gamut of
relevant issues. Herbal treatment can be exceptionally ef-
fective, but the individual will also benefit from appropri-
ate stress management techniques and possibly dietary
support. A number of dietary guidelines are relevant:

Limit refined sugar, as it increases excretion of B vitamins,
magnesium, and chromium and contributes to in-
creased insulin secretion.

Limit salt to less than 3 g/day.

Limit consumption of red meat to 3 ounces a day because of
its high sodium and fat content. Some evidence shows
that residual hormones in red meat contribute to fibro-
cystic breast disease and menstrual cramps.

Limit alcohol to 1 ounce per day. Alcohol destroys B vita-
mins, magnesium, and chromium, and can be a potent
depressant for some people.

Limit caffeine, as it intensifies anxiety and contributes to
fibrocystic breast disease.

Limit dairy products. They are high in fat, interfere with
magnesium absorption, and may cause constipation.

Limit fat intake to 30% of total calories.

Limit the consumption of cold foods.

Limit protein intake to 1 g/kg of body weight.

Avoid licorice. Licorice stimulates the production of
aldosterone.

Minimize the consumption of oxalates, including spinach and
beet greens, as they interfere with mineral absorption.

Increase complex carbohydrates to 40% of diet by adding
more whole grains, leafy green vegetables, and
legumes. These foods are high in fiber and B vitamins
and release sugar slowly.

Increase potassium-rich foods, including sunflower seeds,
dates, figs, peaches, bananas, and tomatoes. These may
help prevent water retention.

Increase intake of natural diuretics, which include arti-
chokes, asparagus, parsley, and watercress.

Researcher David Horrobin advocates the use of
gamma linolenic acid (GLA). GLA is found naturally in
human milk, evening primrose oil, and a few other plant
oils. (See chapter 5 for more information.) Other nutri-
ents that encourage the conversion of fatty acids to
prostaglandin E, are magnesium, vitamin By, zinc, niacin,
and vitamin C.

----- PAGE 399 -----
MENOPAUSE

The physiological cessation of menses as a result of de-
creasing ovarian function. (The Merck Manual)

Menopause is one of the major rites of human passage. In
our society, however, far too many women approach
menopause with dread, fearing that they will no longer be
valued as women. This is a time of change in a woman's
role as mother, lover, wife. However, because people have
the unfortunate tendency to use their socially defined
roles to create their self-images, the changes brought by
menopause may be perceived in terms of loss.

On the other hand, menopause may also be viewed
as a great gift in a woman’ life, a liberation and an initi-
ation. It presents an opportunity to reevaluate one’s pur-
pose in life and to change in positive ways. Women who
celebrate menopause see change not as something to
fear, but as an opportunity to embrace what the next
stage of life will bring, to move on to greater fulfillment.
It might even be said that part of the problem with the
male leaders of our world is that they don’t experience
the gift of menopause!

Climacteric and Menopause

Menopause is the cessation of menstruation and the ter-
mination of fertility, which are not the same thing and
may occur at different times. Climacteric is a transition
phase that lasts for 15 to 20 years, during which time
ovarian function and hormone production decline and
the body readapts. Menopause is simply one event within
this process.

Grasping the difference between these two natural
processes is important, as it is the key to successful treat-
ment of problems that might arise as these events unfold.
Neither menopause nor climacteric is a health problem,
but rather a natural part of the process of human life.
Either may be accompanied by problems, and these
should be addressed, but assumptions about our human-
ness and the role of women are as much a problem here
as the biology of the process.

Advancing age brings with it inexorable changes in
ovarian and menstrual function. The average length of a
woman’s monthly cycle gradually shortens from about 28
days at age 20 to a little longer than 26 days at age 40. At
this point, the ovaries begin to lose their ability to pro-
duce mature eggs, as well as estrogen and progesterone.
Thus, there is a sharp drop in fertility for women over the
age of 40. The regular intervals between periods that typ-
ify menstruation for most women become interspersed
with increasing numbers of cycles of shorter and longer

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM @ 391

duration. Finally, the interval between periods lengthens
and menstruation ceases.

For several years before menopause, the decline in
ovarian hormone production brings changes in physiology
that are expressed as a variety of discomforting signs and
symptoms. The years of progressive ovarian failure that
lead up to menopause, a time of great emotional as well as
physical adjustment, are what are referred to as the climac-
teric, or “change of life.” In the United States, the major-
ity of women experience menopause between the ages of
40 and 55, and the average age of menopause is 51 years.

Table 18.8 presents a comparison of menopause and
climacteric, as well as other factors that affect the whole
process.

Table 18.8. Differences between Menopause and
Climacteric

MENOPAUSE CLIMACTERIC
Counterpart of menarche Counterpart of puberty
One biological event A series of changes

Cessation of periods Transition period in which ovarian
function and hormone production

decline
Termination of fertility
Lasts 1 to 7 years Lasts 15 to 20 years

Occurs between ages 48 and 52 Occurs between ages 40 and 60

Physical Changes after Menopause

Some atrophy of vagina, cervix, uterus, and ovaries occurs.

Vaginal wall shortens, thins, and loses muscle tone.

Labia majora become thinner, paler, less elastic.

Supporting structures lose muscle tone (sphincter mus-
cles, bladder, rectum).

Secretion of cervical mucus is reduced.

Breast size, firmness, and shape change.

Body hair thins in most women, but increases in some.

Wrinkling and loss of skin tone occur.

Body fat is redistributed.

Bone mass is lost.

Metabolic rate slows.

Hot Flashes

The most common symptom caused by the menopausal
decline in estrogen secretion is hot flashes, or flushing,
described as feelings of warmth and sweating. About 85%

----- PAGE 400 -----
392 TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

of women over the age of 50 are affected. The onset is
sudden, and when associated with palpitations, dizziness,
or faintness, they can be a frightening experience.
Emotional stress, exercise, alcohol, and certain foods can
bring them on for some individuals. Typically, hot flashes
occur several times a day and last a few minutes at a time.
Vitex agnus-castus is an effective remedy for this often dis-
tressing symptom.

Insomnia, Fatigue, and Depression

Menopause is often a time of emotional upheaval.
Depression, insomnia, anxiety, and questions about self-
worth and sexual adequacy may develop, as attention is
drawn to physical ailments and declining health. The
problem may be compounded by fears about what to ex-
pect from menopause. Other contributing factors may be
marital discord and changes in family relationships that
occur as the children mature, become more independent,
and leave home.

Although some women note that their desire for sex-
ual activity wanes after menopause, decreased estrogen
secretion has no direct effect on libido. As long as vaginal
symptoms are effectively treated, there is no reason why
postmenopausal women should not be able to enjoy a sat-
isfying sex life. In general, the emotional symptoms asso-
ciated with menopause are caused by situational factors,
not hormone deficiencies.

Genitourinary Symptoms

A variety of genital and urinary symptoms may develop
during the climacteric. Falling hormone levels cause the
vaginal tissues to shrink and atrophy, and there is a loss of
support related to weakening of the pelvic tissues.
Especially in women who have borne multiple children,
the relaxation of the supporting tissues may be severe
enough to allow the uterus to prolapse (drop down) into
the vagina. With decreased production of natural lubri-
cating substances, the vagina becomes dry and irritated.
Itching and dyspareunia (painful sexual intercourse) may
result.

Hypertension ana Atherosclerosis

Heart disease and “hardening of the arteries” are less
prevalent among premenstrual women than they are
among men. However, in the years after menopause,
these differences between the sexes gradually disappear.
Similarly, women who have their ovaries surgically re-
moved prior to natural menopause are known to have a
higher incidence of heart attack and atherosclerosis.

While estrogen deficiency is believed to play a role in the
development of atherosclerotic heart disease, post-
menopausal estrogen replacement therapy has not yet
been proved to be of benefit for this indication.

Osteoporosis
This disorder is characterized by a slow, progressive thin-
ning and loss of calcium content of the bones. Although
the process actually begins in the fourth decade in both
sexes, it is accelerated in women after menopause. Thin,
white, inactive female smokers are predisposed to osteo-
porosis. With time, their bones become brittle and more
susceptible to fractures from seemingly minor injuries.
‘When the disease is advanced, even coughing, sudden
movements, or everyday activities may cause a bone to
break. Wrist and hip fractures and collapse of the spinal
vertebrae are especially common. The latter results in a
loss of height and a forward curvature of the spine.
Estrogen deficiency plays a role in postmenopausal
osteoporosis by diminishing the intestinal absorption of
calcium. In addition, it increases the loss of calcium from
the skeleton. Other hormonal factors are also known to
be important.

Treatment of Menopausal Complaints

As discussed, while menopause and climacteric are not
diseases, a series of specific symptomatic problems may
arise throughout the process. In addition, other health
problems may be compounded. These should be ap-
proached within the context of treating particular symp-
toms while supporting the menopausal changes.

In terms of tonic support, the reproductive, en-
docrine, nervous, and cardiovascular systems should all be
taken into consideration. Of course, there is also a funda-
mental need for uterine tonics.

Actions Indicated

Hormonal normalizers will help the body’s endocrine con-
trol mechanisms balance activity in the face of the
menopausal changes.

Uterine tonics help the various organs and tissues involved
move through the changes with minimal trauma.

Nervine relaxants are indicated for the anxiety and tension
that often accompany menopausal changes. Of course,
the nervines will ideally also be tonics.

Antidepressants will be needed if the woman experiences
depression.

Bitters help in a generalized way as stimulants. These may
be taken as part of the diet.

----- PAGE 401 -----
Specific Remedies

In European herbalism, Vitex agnus-castus and Hypericum
perforatum have a reputation for easing the symptomatic
distress that may accompany this natural process. H. per-
foratum may help lessen any depression that might occur.
Leonurus cardiaca can help with the distressing tachycardia
that often accompanies hot flashes.

In North American herbalism, Cimicifuga racemosa
and Senecio aureus seem to play a similar role as potential
specifics. It is worth noting that Lydia Pinkham’s
Compound Elixir, a women’s tonic popular in the 19th
century, originally contained the following herbs:

Aletris farinosa (unicorn root)

Asclepias tuberosa (pleurisy root)

Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)

Senecio aureus (life root)

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek seed)

Today, there is much emphasis on isoflavone-rich
herbs such as Trifolium pratense (red clover) and Glycine
max (soy). Such phytoestrogen-containing herbs may
have much to offer, but their use is not based on long-
standing herbal experience. At best, it is based on theo-
retical considerations; and at worst, on marketing hype.

A Prescription for Easing Menopause Symptoms

Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Hypericum perforatum 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 18.9. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Menopause Symptoms

ACTION HERBS

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa
Nervine relaxant and tonic Hypericum perforatum

Antidepressant Hypericum perforatum

A Prescription for Menopause Symptoms with
Anxiety and Tachycardia

Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Leonurus cardiaca 2 parts
Hypericum perforatum 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM -@ 393

Table 18.10. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Menopause Symptoms with Anxiety and
Tachycardia

ACTION HERBS

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa
Relaxing nervine Cimicifuga racemosa, Hypericum perforatum

Antidepressant Hypericum perforatum

Broader Context of Treatment

A number of excellent books explore holistic approaches
to menopausal problems. Rather than try to duplicate
such work, I suggest you refer to the bibliography for
books I recommend as further reading.

PREGNANCY

Several herbs have been famous throughout history for
preparing mothers for childbirth. Herbs can shorten
labor and decrease the likelihood that complications will
arise during pregnancy and in childbirth. The most
widely used of these in Europe is raspberry leaf (Rubus
idaeus). In a British medical journal, one doctor said of
raspberry leaf tea,

Somewhat shamefacedly I have encouraged expectant
mothers to drink this infusion. In a great many cases labor
has been free and easy from muscular spasm.!

Rubus idaeus leaf has a mildly soothing astringent and
tonic action. The herb helps to quell nausea and is slightly
sedative. Most important, it has a particular affinity for
the uterus, and acts to strengthen the uterine and pelvic
muscles and prevent miscarriage. In the uterus, the action
of raspberry leaves is both relaxant and astringent. The
relaxant properties tend to predominate and bring about
tonic relaxation of the smooth muscle of the uterus, help-
ing to reduce the pain of uterine contractions at labor. In
addition, raspberry leaf tones the mucous membranes
throughout the body, soothes the kidneys and urinary
tract, and helps prevent hemorrhage.

Raspberry leaf has been principally used before deliv-
ery to encourage safe, easy, and speedy childbirth, and
after delivery to improve milk production and speed re-
covery from birth.

----- PAGE 402 -----
394 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SySrem

Herbs to Avoid during Pregnancy

A literature search for plants traditionally used around the
world for abortifacient or uterine stimulant actions yields
a long list of plants to avoid. According to authors der
Marderosian and Liberti, in Natural Product Medicine, 565
species from 125 families have such effects.’ These other-
wise extremely useful remedies often share chemistry that
in some way irritates the placenta or causes muscular con-
tractions in the uterus. If we limit ourselves to those
plants most often encountered in Western phytotherapy,
we can identify the following groupings of plants to avoid
in pregnancy.

Bitters

Because bitters stimulate metabolism in general, and
some bitters also act as emmenagogues to stimulate
smooth muscle activity, it should be clear that bitters are
contraindicated during pregnancy. All strong bitters
should be excluded, particularly the following:

Aloe vera (aloe)

Artemisia abrotanum (southernwood)
A. absinthium (wormwood)

Berberis vulgaris (barberry)
Chelidonium majus (celandine)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Ruta graveolens (rue)

Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)

T. vulgare (tansy)

Alkaloid-Containing Plants

Alkaloids are a diverse group of secondary plant con-
stituents that have a wide range of pharmacological effects
upon the body. The stronger representatives should be
avoided during pregnancy, including the caffeine-contain-
ing social drugs coffee and tea. Some plants to avoid are:

Berberis vulgaris (barberry)

Cephaelis ipecacuanha (ipecac)
Colchicum autumnale (autumn crocus)
Cytisus scoparius (Scotch broom)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Lobelia inflata (\obelia)

Podophyllum peltatum (mayapple)
Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)

Volatile Oil-Containing Plants

Many essential oils can have a devastating impact on the
placenta and fetus if taken internally during pregnancy.
Pregnant women should avoid taking all volatile oils in-
ternally. However, if used in moderation, the whole plant

from which the oil was distilled will usually be fine.
Important exceptions are:

Funiperus communis (juniper)

Mentha pulegium (pennyroyal)

Myristica officinalis (nutmeg, in large amounts)
Thuja occidentalis (thuja)

Strong Laxatives

The strong herbal laxatives often, but not always, owe
their effects to the presence of anthraquinone con-
stituents that stimulate peristalsis in the bowel. They may
have a similar stimulating impact upon the uterus. Ifa lax-
ative is needed during pregnancy, it should be either a
bulk or a hepatic laxative. However, standardized senna
products designed for use during pregnancy may be safe.
Please refer to chapters 7 and 10 for more information on
anthraquinone-containing laxatives, and 13 for more in-
formation on other types of laxatives.

Aloe vera (aloe)

Fuglans cinerea (butternut)

Rhamnus cathartica (purging buckthorn)
R. frangula (buckthorn)

R. purshiana (cascara sagrada)

Rheum palmatum (Chinese rhubarb)
Senna alexandrina (senna)

Other Herbs to Avoid in Pregnancy

Other plants to be avoided do not fit into convenient cat-
egories; some are listed here, Anthelmintic remedies, for
example, should be avoided because they often stimulate
uterine contractions, as well as containing potentially
toxic constituents. Male fern is an example of an an-
thelmintic remedy for the treatment of worm infestations.

Cinchona spp.(quinine)

Convallaria majalis (lily of the valley)
Dryopteris filix-mas (male fern)
Gossypium herbaceum (cotton)
Phytolacca spp. (poke)

Stillingia sylvatica (queen’s delight)
Vinca spp. (periwinkle)

Viscum album (mistletoe)

Pregnancy Warnings from Botanical Safety
Handbook

The following herbs are listed in the Botanical Safety
Handbook as “not to be used during pregnancy unless oth-
erwise directed by an expert qualified in the appropriate
use of this substance.” Unfortunately, the authors do not

----- PAGE 403 -----
adequately clarify whether inclusion in this safety cate-
gory is based on actual clinical records or on theoretical
extrapolation from in vitro studies on constituents. This
limits the value of an otherwise excellent book.

Achillea milléfolium
Achyranthes bidentata
Acorus calamus

A. gramineus
Adiantum pedatum
Agathosma betulina
A. crenulata

A. serratifolia
Albizia julibrissin
Alkanna tinctoria
Aloe ferox

A, perryi

A. vera
Andrographis paniculata
Angelica archangelica
A. atropurpurea

A, sinensis
Anthriscus ceréfolium
Apium graveolens
Aralia californica

A. nudicaulis

A. racemosa
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
Arisaema japonicum
Aristolochia clematitis
A. contorta

A, debilis

A, serpentaria
Arnica spp.
Artemisia abrotanum
absinthium

annua

capillaris
douglasiana
lactiflora

scoparia

vulgaris

Asarum canadense

AS BS Bk a BS BS Bs

A, europaeum

A, heteropides

A, sieboldii
Asclepias asperula
A, tuberosa
Baptisia tinctoria
Berberis vulgaris

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM @ 395

Borago officinalis
Capsella bursa-pastoris
Carthamus tinctorius
Caulophyllum thalictroides
Cephaelis ipecacuanha
Chamaelirium luteum
Chamaemelum nobile
Changium smyrnoides
Chelidonium majus
Cimicifuga racemosa
Cinchona calisaya

C. ledgeriana

C. officinalis

C. pubescens
Cinnamomum camphora
C. cassia

C. verum

Cnicus benedictus
Coffea arabica

Cola acuminata

C. nitida

Commiphora madagascariensis
C. molmol.

C. mukul.

C. myrrha

Coptis chinensis

C. groenlandica
Corydalis yanhusuo
Crocus sativus

Cullen corylifolia
Cupbea balsamona
Curcuma aromatica

C. domestica

C. longa

C. zedoaria

Cyathula officinalis
Cymbopogon citratus
Daucus carota
Dryopteris filix-mas
Ephedra distachya

E. equisetina

E. gerardiana

E. intermedia

E. sinica

Equisetum hyemale
Eschscholzia californica
Eupatorium purpureum
Ferula assaifoetida

E foetida

F. rubricaulis

----- PAGE 404 -----
396 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Forsythia suspensa
Fouquieria splendens
Fritillavia cirrbosa
EF. thunbergii

Fucus vesiculosus
Genista tinctoria
Glycyrrhiza echinata
G. glabra

G. uralensis
Gossypium herbaceum
G. hirsutum
Hedeoma pulegioides
Hepatica nobilis
Hordeum vulgare
Hydrastis canadensis
Hyssopus officinalis
Inula helenium

Iris versicolor

E. virginica
Juniperus communis
J. monosperma

F. osteosperma

F. oxycedrus

j. virginiana
Leonurus cardiaca
L. heterophyllus

L. sibiricus
Leptandra virginica
Levisticum officinale
Ligusticum chuanxiong
L. porteri

Lobelia inflata

L. siphilitica
Lomatium dissectum
Lycium barbarum
L. chinense

Lycopus americanus
L. europaeus

L. virginicus
Magnolia officinalis
Mabonia aquifolium
M. nervosa

M. repens
Marrubium vulgare
Mentha pulegium
Monarda clinopodia
M. didyma

M. fistulosa

M. pectinata

M. punctata

Myristica fragrans
Nardostachys jatamansi
Nasturtium officinale
Nepeta cataria

Paeonia suffruticosa
Panax notoginseng
Petroselinum crispum
Phellodendron amurense
P. chinense

Picrasma excelsa
Pilocarpus jaborandi

P. microphyllus

P. pennatifolius
Pimpinella anisum
Pinellia ternata
Podophyllum hexandrum
P. peltatum

Polygala senega
Portulaca oleracea
Prunus persica

Quassia amara
Rhamnus cathartica

R. frangula

R. purshiana

Rheum officinale

R. palmatum

R. tanguticum

Ricinus communis
Rosmarinus officinalis
Ruta graveolens

Salvia officinalis
Sanguinaria canadensis
Senna alexandrina

S. obtusifolia

S. tora

Symphytum officinale
Tanacetum parthenium
T. vulgare

Thuja occidentalis
Trichosanthes kirilowii
Trifolium pratense
Trigonella foenum-graecum
Trillium erectum
Tussilago farfara
Verbena hastata

V. officinalis

Vetiveria zizanoides
Vitex agnus-castus
Withania somnifera
Zanthoxylum americanum

----- PAGE 405 -----
Z. bungeanum

Z. clava-herculis
Z. schinifolium

Z. simulans
Zingiber officinale
Ziziphus spinosa

THE FIRST TRIMESTER

Counting from the first day of a woman’s last menstrual
period, pregnancy typically lasts 40 weeks and is often re-
ferred to in three parts, called trimesters. The first
trimester lasts until week 12, the second spans week 13 to
the end of week 27, and the third encompasses weeks 28
to 40. These divisions, however, are arbitrary. The first
trimester is a time of profound changes inside the body,
but the experience is very individual. For example, for one
woman, the first trimester may bring increased energy
and a sense of well-being, but another woman might feel
increasingly tired and emotional. Still others don’t notice
many changes until much later in pregnancy.

Although the physical changes of early pregnancy can
be uncomfortable, they almost never endanger either
mother or baby’s health. A number of common symptoms
occur, but not all women will experience them. They in-
clude fatigue, nausea and vomiting, urinary frequency,
breast tenderness, headaches, dizziness, and weight gain.

Threatened Miscarriage

For those who have suffered miscarriages in the past,
herbs may prove effective in preventing repeated miscar-
riages. Herbs can help as long as the fetus is normal and
the mother’s general physical, emotional, and mental
health is good. On the other hand, no herbal remedy will
block appropriate miscarriage. Most cases of miscarriage
are a natural rejection ofa malformed fetus.

When miscarriage occurs more than once in the
same woman, however, it may be related to a problem in
her body, rather than the baby’s. In a case like this, it is es-
pecially important to build up her general health as well
as that of her partner before they attempt to conceive
again. To ensure fewer complications, women should take
at least 6 to 12 months between pregnancies.

When chronic poor health, inadequate diet, or
trauma and stress of any kind has depleted a woman's gen-
eral strength, herbs can provide extra vitality, especially to
the womb, and so help avoid unnecessary miscarriage. If
cramping abdominal pains or bleeding occur, medical
attention is needed immediately.

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM ~ 397

Specific Remedies

A number of plants have a well-deserved reputation for
preventing miscarriage. It may be significant that two of
them are now endangered species; these will not be dis-
cussed. Other important plants are listed here:

Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)
Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)
V. prunifolium (black haw)

Other plants that have been widely used to prevent
miscarriage are Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary), Rubus
idgeus (raspberry leaf), Crataegus laevigata (hawthorn),
Mitchella repens (partridgeberry), Leonurus cardiaca (mother-
wort), Allium sativum (garlic), and Trigonella foenum-
graecum (fenugreek).

A Prescription to Help Prevent Miscarriage
Viburnum prunifolium 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day, building up to 5 ml

three times a day

Table 18.11. Actions Supplied by Prescription to Help
Prevent Miscarriage

ACTION HERB

Uterine tonic Viburnum prunifolium, Cimicifuga racemosa
Nervine relaxant Viburnum prunifolium, Cimicifuga racemosa

Antispasmodic Viburnum prunifolium, Cimicifuga racemosa

Broader Context of Treatment

The woman should eat plenty of foods containing vita-
mins E and C. Asparagus and celery are said to be
strengthening.

Morning Sickness

Morning sickness refers to the nausea and vomiting some
women experience when they become pregnant. It is
caused by the sudden increase in hormone levels during
pregnancy. Although morning sickness is more common
in the morning, it can last all day for some women. It is
very common early in pregnancy, but tends to go away
later, and is almost always gone by the second trimester
(the fourth month). However, there is no set time for it to
stop, because each woman and each pregnancy is different,
Morning sickness is seen in about 50% of pregnancies,
and tends to worsen with each successive pregnancy.

----- PAGE 406 -----
398 «z- TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

The exact cause of morning sickness is not known,
but various theories have been proposed. One suggests
that the rapid change in hormone levels in early preg-
nancy and the resultant high levels of progesterone may
stimulate the vomit center in the brain. Progesterone re-
laxes smooth muscle throughout the body, including arte-
rial smooth muscle, and this produces a drop in blood
pressure, which may account for the tiredness and
lethargy associated with the nausea and vomiting.

During the first 12 to 14 weeks of pregnancy, when
most women experience sickness, the hormones are pri-
marily produced in the corpus luteum in the ovaries. After
this time, hormone production shifts to the placenta,
which may help explain why morning sickness stops at
around the same time (12 to 14 weeks). Sickness may also
be related to low blood pressure; high progesterone levels
may interfere with adequate circulation of blood to the
brain, especially upon rising. Getting up slowly will help
to relieve this.

Another theory holds that morning sickness is associ-
ated with low blood sugar, which normally occurs in early
pregnancy. Elevating blood sugar levels by eating small,
frequent meals may help. However, low-sugar foods
should be emphasized, as sugar in the stomach can aggra-
vate nausea.

There are no general rules for treating morning sickness,
as the causes vary from one woman to another. Treatment
should aim at what appears to be the underlying cause.
Antiemetics are important, as they will calm the vomit re-
flex, no matter what the cause of morning sickness. Valuable
antiemetics that are safe to use in early pregnancy are:

Ballota nigra (black horehound)
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

In addition, many of the herbs that aid digestion will
help. The carminative, antispasmodic, and relaxing
nervines are especially important:

Cinnamomum aromaticum (cinnamon bark)
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel seed)
Humulus lupulus (hops)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Rubus idaeus (raspberry leaf)
Syzygium aromaticum (clove)
Zingiber officinale (gingerroot)

Mucilage-rich demulcents such as Chondrus crispus
(Iceland moss) and Ulmus rubra (slippery elm) help soothe
the whole of the digestive tract. Both of these herbs are
highly nutritious, containing many minerals and trace el-
ements. They are also easily digested, ideal for conditions
associated with weakness of the stomach.

A Prescription for Morning Sickness

Zingiber officinale 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Ballota nigra 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture at night and in the morning, building
up to 5 ml if needed

A Supplemental Infusion for Morning Sickness
Mentha piperita
Matricaria recutita

1 part

1 part

Dosage: Infuse 1 teaspoon of dried herb mixture in 1 cup of boil-
ing water. Drink often during the day.

Broader Context of Treatment

Eat numerous small meals throughout the day, rather than
three large meals.

Avoid foods and odors that bring on symptoms.

Eat small starchy snacks, such as crackers, in bed before
arising.

Maintain electrolyte balance if vomiting is severe.

Vitamin By: 100 mg to 300mg/day

Constipation

High levels of progesterone relax the intestinal muscles,
and thus reduce their ability to propel the contents of the
bowel toward the rectum and out of the body. In addition,
as pregnancy progresses, the weight of the baby and pla-
centa increases, and the pressure they exert on the lower
bowel aggravates the tendency to constipation. When the
enlarged uterus impedes circulation to the bowel, the ac-
tion of the intestinal muscles is also restricted. Similarly,
tension and anxiety experienced by the pregnant woman
also impair the action of these muscles. Other factors that
can cause or exacerbate constipation during pregnancy
are consumption of iron supplements and starchy meals
consisting of refined flour products.

As already noted, anthraquinone-containing stimu-
lant laxatives are not safe for use during pregnancy. Aim
for gentle therapy, utilizing the following treatment con-
siderations and the guidelines given in chapter 13.

----- PAGE 407 -----
Increase water intake to 8 glasses per day.

Increase exercise. Walking half a mile a day is an appropri-
ate activity.

Increase intake of fresh fruits and certain dried fruits, such as
prunes, raisins, and figs.

Increase fiber intake.

Use bulk laxatives, such as psyllium seeds. Take 1 table-
spoon three times a day in 1/4 cup of juice.

Varicose Veins

To return blood to the heart, the veins in the legs must
work against gravity. This is accomplished by muscle con-
tractions in the lower legs, which act as pumps. These
muscles are toned, elastic vein walls and tiny one-way
valves in the veins. The valves open as blood flows toward
the heart and close to stop blood from flowing backward.
Varicose veins occur when these valves malfunction, caus-
ing the blood that should be moving toward the heart to
flow backward. Blood pools in the veins, and they enlarge
and become varicose.

The developing fetus may become a source of physi-
cal resistance to the easy return of blood to the trunk,
thus promoting the development of varicose veins. These
may occur early in pregnancy but generally worsen as the
pregnancy advances. Symptoms vary from painless, cos-
metically problematic areas to varicosities causing mild or
severe pain. Sometimes, a varicosity may occur in the
labia majora. For more details on the herbal treatment of
varicosities, please see chapter 14.

Fatigue and Somnolence
Some pregnant women require excessive periods of rest
or sleep during the first trimester. It is normal for sleep
requirements to be as great as 18 hours a day. If the
woman is not working or attending school and does not
have young children, she should sleep whenever possible.
Ingestion of protein may help alleviate this symptom.
Some women become depressed at their inability to
continue the normal pace of daily activity established be-
fore pregnancy. They should be counseled that this symp-
tom usually completely resolves by the fourth month of
gestation. Blood studies should be performed to rule out
anemia. Avoid herbal stimulants, neurological or
metabolic.

Anemia

Prevention of anemia is a most important aspect of ante-
natal care. Hemoglobin, the iron and protein compound
contained in erythrocytes (red blood cells), is responsible
for transporting oxygen from the lungs to all parts of the

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM @ 399

body, including the placenta and fetus. If hemoglobin lev-
els fall, the body’s ability to access oxygen falls accordingly.

During pregnancy, the blood volume increases at a
faster rate than the erythrocytes multiply, so the erythro-
cytes are diluted by extra fluid. Hemoglobin carried by
erythrocytes drops from about 11 g to approximately | g.
Hemoglobin levels less than 1 g constitute anemia.
Symptoms of anemia include lethargy, irritability, and
breathlessness on slight exertion. Anemia commonly oc-
curs during the last two months of pregnancy, when the
baby utilizes a high proportion of the mother’s iron. A
history of menorrhagia also suggests that iron reserves
might be low. Building up iron reserves before pregnancy
starts is beneficial and can help the mother meet the in-
creased iron demand without any problems.

The best approach is to increase dietary intake of
iron-containing foods, as iron supplements may aggravate
constipation. All iron-containing foods are better absorbed
in the presence of an animal protein. Vitamin C also en-
hances iron absorption. Watercress, rose hips, blackberries,
black currants, elderberries, parsley, spinach, dandelion
leaves, and many other plant foods contain both iron and
vitamin C, and natural iron never causes constipation.

Liver is a good source of iron; however, it should
come from organically produced meat only. Because the
liver is the detoxifying organ of mammals, it may contain
chemical residues if factory reared.

Good Sources of Iron

Liver

Eggs from free-range chickens
Dairy products
Watercress

Dried apricots
Whole-wheat bread
Cocoa and carob
Cabbage

Alfalfa

Beets

Cherries

Raisins

Brown rice

Kelp

Wheat germ
Sunflower seeds
Parsley

Chicory

Lentils

Black currants, blackberries, strawberries
Spinach

----- PAGE 408 -----
400 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Leafy herbs that can be added to salads, cooked as
vegetables, and added to soups include:

Crataegus spp. (hawthorn flowers and leaves)
Rumex acetosa (sorrel)

Symphytum officinale (comfrey leaf, in moderation)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion leaf)

Urtica dioica (nettle)

Other herbs that contain meaningful levels of iron
when used as an infusion or tincture are:

Arctium lappa (burdock leaf)
Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)
Gentian lutea (gentian)
Humutus lupulus (hops)

Rubus idaeus (raspberry leaf)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Dizziness

Dizziness caused by the ability of progesterone to relax
the blood vessel walls is common in pregnancy. This type
of dizziness, seen most frequently in early pregnancy, is a
form of postural hypotension. However, hypertensive
herbs such as Cytisus scoparius (Scotch broom) are too
strong for both mother and fetus. Instead, follow these
recommendations:

* Change positions slowly,

* Eat small meals throughout the day, rather than three
large meals.

* Maintain blood sugar levels.

Heartburn

Heartburn, caused by reflux of gastric contents into the
esophagus, is one of the most common complaints of
pregnancy. Treatment approaches to this condition are
discussed in chapter 13.

The relaxing effects of progesterone also reach the
cardiac sphincter, the valve that guards the entrance to the
stomach at the bottom of the esophagus. As the enlarging
uterus pushes up against the stomach, small amounts of
the stomach’s contents are passed into the lower esopha-
gus. Hydrochloric acid mixed with stomach contents irri-
tates and burns the esophagus, resulting in an inflamma-
tory process. In more extreme cases, parts of the stomach
itself can be pushed up through the diaphragm or into the
esophagus, causing some degree of hiatus hernia.

Bleeding Gums

Bleeding gums are frequently seen in pregnancy. Gingival
hypertrophy, a temporary softening of the gums, is seen
in 40% of pregnancies. This is a response to elevated pro-
gesterone levels in the blood. Follow the topical advice
given for gingivitis in chapter 13 but zor the internal
treatment. Additional suggestions are:

© Brush gums frequently with a soft brush
¢ Vitamin C and bioflavonoids complex: up to 2,000
mg/day

Headache

Headache sometimes occurs in early pregnancy, but is
worse between three and five months. A few cases may re-
sult from eyestrain, as pregnancy may result in a change
in the amount of refractive error in the eyes. Some cases
may be caused by sinusitis, and frontal headaches are seen
with hypertension. Please refer to the section on
headaches in chapter 16.

Hemorrhoids

Hemorrhoids may be exacerbated by or occur for the first
time during pregnancy. The condition is caused by in-
creased pressure and impairment of return of venous fluid
in the veins by the pressure of the enlarging uterus.
Constipation makes the problem worse. Congestion of
liver function caused by intake of junk foods, refined
flour, and alcohol also encourages the problem, as the
hemorrhoidal veins are part of the portal drainage system.
The treatment approach for this common problem of
pregnancy is discussed in chapter 13.

THE SECOND AND THIRD
TRIMESTERS
The second trimester consists of the period from the be-
ginning of the 13th week until the end of the 27th week.
The third trimester of pregnancy begins at the 28th week
and lasts until birth. During the second trimester, the
woman will usually experience decreased nausea and bet-
ter sleep patterns, and have more stamina and energy than
during the first trimester. The second trimester is not al-
ways trouble-free, however, as a whole new set of symp-
toms and sensations commonly arise. These include back
pain, leg cramps, heartburn, skin changes, and constipation.
Before pregnancy, the uterus weighs about 2 ounces
(56 g) and holds a volume of less than half an ounce
(15 ml). At term, in addition to the weight of the baby, it
weighs about 2!/2 pounds (a little more than | kg) and will
have stretched to hold the baby, the placenta, and about

----- PAGE 409 -----
1 quart (approximately | liter) of amniotic fluid. Many of
the physical symptoms of late pregnancy arise from this
increase in uterine size. These may include shortness of
breath, sleeping problems, varicose veins, skin changes,
and hemorrhoids.

Stretch Marks

Stretch marks occur when the skin is stretched beyond its
normal capacity and elasticity. In pregnancy, they are re-
lated to progesterone’s softening effect on connective tis-
sue combined with rapid weight gain. When new, stretch
marks resemble purple strize (streaks), and after a period
of time they resemble silvery scars. Genetic predisposi-
tion is the predominant factor in the development of
stretch marks, The tendency to develop stretch marks can
be lessened by eating appropriately and using remedies to
address collagen problems in the skin.

Vitamins E, C, and B; (pantothenic acid) can help, as
may zinc. These can all be obtained from the diet. In The
Herbal for. Pregnancy and Childbirth, Anne McIntyre rec-
ommends increasing consumption of the following foods:*

Sunflower seeds and oil
Pumpkin seeds
Wheat germ
Onions

Eggs

Lettuce
Cucumbers
Cabbage
Radishes
Horseradish
Rice bran
Asparagus
Parsnips
Brewer's yeast
Whole grains
Fish

Alfalfa
Molasses

Massaging wheat germ or vitamin E oil into the
breasts, abdomen, and thighs daily will reduce the likeli-
hood that marks will develop. Calendula oil mixed with
wheat germ oil is especially helpful.

Backache

Elevated progesterone levels during pregnancy have a
softening effect upon tendons and ligaments throughout
the body, which allows them to expand as necessary to ac-
commodate the growing baby. The spine is particularly

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM - 401

affected, and the relaxation of the ligaments that support
the spine combined with the weight of the growing ab-
domen often cause backache. The backward-leaning pos-
ture adopted by heavily pregnant mothers places added
strain on the lower joints of the spine. Bad posture aggra-
vates backache. Rapid weight gain in pregnancy increases
strain and may exacerbate symptoms of previous damage
to the back.

Yoga exercises may be helpful, and experts recom-
mend certain asanas for pregnancy. Rest is important in
preventing or relieving backache, especially in the last
three months of pregnancy. Deep breathing and relax-
ation exercises can also help. Baths with lavender and
rosemary essential oils and massage of the whole spine
with a mixture of chamomile and geranium essential oils
can be effective as well.

Hypertension

Gestational hypertension is characterized by a steady rise
in blood pressure after the 28th week of gestation. The
general rule for the upper limit of gestational hyperten-
sion is 140/90 mm Hg. Some factors that contribute to
gestational hypertension are:

¢ Emotional and physical stress

© Obesity

© Lack of exercise

© Drugs and stimulants

* Diet (processed and heavily salted carbohydrates with
inadequate protein intake)

Herbal treatment can do much to mitigate this form
of secondary hypertension, but blood pressure must be
monitored closely, as it can rise dangerously fast in some
situations. Please refer to chapter 14 for more informa-
tion on the treatment of hypertension. Other approaches
that may be helpful include:

Exercise. Exercise forces blood through the vasculature. If
it is healthy and flexible, the vasculature will respond
by stretching and relaxing. Brisk walking or swimming
is recommended. Exercise is most effective when a ten-
dency for hypertension is first noted. It is not appro-
priate for very elevated blood pressure.

Practice deep relaxation or. meditation techniques.

Avoid all. stimulants, including caffeine, nicotine, and co-
caine. All are linked to hypertension, restriction of blood
flow to the placenta, and low-birth-weight babies.

Improve diet. Increase consumption of good-quality pro-
tein, vegetables, and fresh fruits.

Increase water intake.

Rest, particularly by lying on the left side.

----- PAGE 410 -----
402 -» TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

THE POSTPARTUM PERIOD

The first six weeks of the postpartum period, or the time
immediately after birth, is referred to as the puerperium.
The first two to three days are spent bonding with the
baby and waiting for the true milk to come in. True milk
usually comes in at about 72 hours after the birth.

Multiparous women, or those who have had a num-
ber of children already, will have significantly more in-
tense “after pains,” or uterine contractions, to facilitate
involution of the uterus to its pre-pregnant state. Early in
the puerperium, there is loss of blood and later on dis-
charge from the vagina. Fever and foul discharge indicate
uterine infection.

Generally, if a woman does not nurse, she will men-
struate six to eight weeks after birth. Nursing women
begin to menstruate again at any time from six weeks after
birth to two years after birth. However, nursing is not an
adequate method of birth control, as most women ovulate
before they menstruate, and a woman can become preg-
nant before her period returns.

After birth, estrogen and progesterone levels de-
crease. Postpartum depression, discussed later in this
chapter, is one result of this hormonal change. Normal
physiologic signs of the postpartum decrease in estrogen
and progesterone include:

¢ Hair loss

¢ Return of acne

* Slowdown in nail growth

* Decrease in libido

¢ Thinning of the vaginal mucosa
¢ Increased intensity of PMS

Postpartum Depression

If the woman is lactating, she will secrete prolactin, which
is actually stimulated by the sensation caused by the nurs-
ing baby. Prolactin is a mild relaxant and depressant. As
prolactin levels rise, the elevated levels of estrogen and
progesterone maintained throughout the pregnancy drop
abruptly. This may lead to postpartum depression. Other
factors that may contribute to such depression include:

¢ Emotional letdown following the excitement and fear
experienced during pregnancy, labor, and delivery

¢ Discomforts of the puerperium

¢ Fatigue due to loss of sleep

* Anxiety over the ability to care for a dependent
newborn

* Isolation

Postpartum depression can be treated with an ap-
proach similar to that taken for PMS in terms of herbs,
diet, supplementation, and exercise. Greater emphasis
can be placed on Artemisia vulgaris and Hypericum perfora-
tum. In addition, it is important to encourage the new
mother to go out and enjoy the company of other adults.

Perineal Tears or Extensive Episiotomy

The perineum (the area of skin between the vagina and

the anus) may be surgically cut (an episiotomy) or may

tear during birth. Usually, these will heal faster if all sig-

nificant tears are stitched. A number of simple procedures

can help alleviate discomfort and speed healing:

Apply ice immediately after the repair is finished to decrease
swelling.

Take sitz baths with infusions of vulnerary herbs.

Apply Aloe vera gel.

Calendula, Symphytum, Hydrastis, and Achillea are all good
choices of herbs for ointments or sitz baths.

Expose the area to sunlight to speed healing.

Decrease activity; severe tears heal faster with bed rest.

‘After Pains or Recurrent Uterine
Contractions

For women who have had more than one child, after
pains increase in strength with each successive pregnancy.
They are helpful in that the contractions are involuting,
or returning, the enlarged uterus to its previous size.
Nursing will bring on or increase the intensity of these
contractions. If necessary, use antispasmodic herbs and
uterine tonics, such as Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh),
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam), Viburnum prunifolium (black
haw), and Viburnum opulus (cramp bark).

Stimulating Lactation
Herbal remedies called galactogogues encourage milk pro-
duction to begin and increase total milk volume.
Important examples are Galega officinalis (goat's rue),
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel seed), and Cnicus benedictus
(blessed thistle).

In addition to use of galactagogues, here are some
other recommendations for increasing milk production:

¢ Drink plenty of fluid.

* Rest; lack of sleep produces milk shortages.

¢ Stimulate the nipples by allowing the baby to suck
often.

Helpful foods include apricots, asparagus, green beans,
carrots, sweet potatoes, parsley, all leafy greens, and
grains.

----- PAGE 411 -----
Stopping Lactation

A number of herbal approaches have been used to reduce
milk flow, thus forcing the child to stop breast-feeding.
There are no good reasons to stop breast-feeding at a cer-
tain time. Cultural ideas about weaning times do not pro-
vide much ofa rationale, especially in light of the fact that
women were discouraged from breast-feeding altogether
not that long ago. Salvia officinalis does reduce milk flow.

Mastitis
Mastitis is inflammation of the mammary gland, usually
caused by infection. Such breast infections are located in
the tissue of the breast; the bacteria usually enter through
cracks in the nipples. The infection then occurs in the
parenchymal (fatty) tissue and causes it to swell. This
swelling compresses on the milk ducts, resulting in pain
and swelling of the infected breast. Such breast infections
usually occur in women who are breast-feeding. The
causative bacterium, Staphylococcus aureus, is commonly
found on normal skin. Breast infections not related to
breast-feeding must be differentiated from a rare form of
breast cancer.

Mastitis usually occurs when the breasts become very
engorged, often as a result of a missed feeding. If a baby
who usually wakes up two or three times at night to nurse
suddenly sleeps through the night, breast engorgement
will occur. Milk that remains in the sacs becomes a breed-
ing ground for bacteria entering through the nipple, and
infection will occur. This is particularly likely if the breast
has been incompletely emptied and a residual amount of
milk remains over time.

In general, the following suggestions will help in the
prevention and treatment of mastitis:

¢ Apply vulnerary and antimicrobial herbs externally,
such as Calendula.

¢ Nurse ina relaxed, unhurried, thorough manner.

* Be sure the nipple area stays clean.

¢ Drink adequate amounts of fluid to flush the system.

¢ Rest.

¢ Maintain an adequate diet, decreasing intake of fatty
and refined foods.

UTERINE FIBROIDS

Benign uterine tumors of smooth muscle origin. (The
Merck Manual)

Fibroid tumors are benign muscle tumors that cause en-
largement and distortion of the uterus in premenopausal

‘THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM e403

women, They may make menstruation painful and heavy,
possibly leading to anemia. Fibroids are the most common
reason for hysterectomy, but unless the fibroids are causing
significant problems, it is best to avoid such a drastic step.
They rarely become malignant. As they depend on the
presence of estrogen for their growth, they will shrink at
menopause. If surgery is necessary, consider the new laser-
based techniques rather than removal of the whole uterus.

Actions Indicated

Uterine tonics support the general health and vitality of the
uterus.

Uterine astringents reduce blood loss.

Alteratives often help in health problems associated with
benign growths. (I would love to know why!)

Antispasmodics will lessen cramping pains.

Lympbatics support the drainage of fluid from the womb.

Immune support may be appropriate. Please refer to
chapter 21.

A Prescription for Uterine Fibroids

Caulophyllum thalictroides 2 parts
Vinca major 2 parts
Vitex agnus-castus 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day. This formula can
be made stronger by adding more antispasmodic or astringent
remedies.

Table 18.12. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Uterine Fibroids

ACTION HERBS

Uterine tonic Caulophyllum thalictroides, Cimicifuga racemosa

Uterine astringent — Vinca major

Alterative Galium aparine, Cimicifuga racemosa,

Caulophyttum thalictroides
Antispasmodic Cimicifuga racemosa

Lymphatic Galium aparine

Broader Context of Treatment

Attention to general health and well-being is vital. Focus
on a whole range of issues to ensure that the woman can
be as comfortable with her body and life as possible.

----- PAGE 412 -----
404 <<. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Diet. Recommend a well-balanced and nutritious diet rich
in fresh green vegetables.

Bodywork. Suggest approaches that will engender an expe-
rience of bodily ease and relaxation. This may be aro-
matherapy massage, walks by the ocean, dancing, and
so on.

Peace of mind. Relaxation exercises, meditation, or coun-
seling may be appropriate.

Lifestyle. A reevaluation of work and home environments,
relationships, and personal goals will often clarify areas
for positive growth and transformation.

ENDOMETRIOSIS

The presence of endometrial tissue in abnormal loca-
tions. (The Merck Manual)

Endometriosis is the presence of uterine tissue (en-
dometrium) outside its usual location on the inner lining
of the uterus. Approximately 5% to 20% of women of
childbearing age are affected by this troublesome condi-
tion. In addition, it is discovered during as many as 20%
to 50% of all gynecologic operations. Pain, abnormal
menstrual bleeding, infertility, and prolonged disability
may result.

Endometrial tissue may implant itself on the ovaries,
fallopian tubes, pelvic ligaments, abdominal organs, old
scars, and, in rare cases, the chest, lungs, spinal cord, and
extremities. The site of implantation of the endometrial
tissue will largely control the degree or severity of symp-
toms. Over time, the implants may enlarge, bleed, cause
scarring, and form tough fibrous adhesions between
pelvic and abdominal structures.

A number of predisposing factors have been sug-
gested. Hormonal factors are known to be important.
Implants often regress during pregnancy, and first preg-
nancy at a young age seems to protect against the devel-
opment of endometriosis. In addition, the disease is more
common in women who choose to either postpone or re-
ject childbearing. The average age at diagnosis is 37 years,
and the majority of cases occur in women between the
ages of 25 and 40 years. Endometriosis is rare before the
onset of menstruation and after menopause.

Although the underlying cause is still in question,
there are three major theories about the etiology of en-
dometriosis.

1. The transportation theory holds that endometrial
tissue that originates in the uterus passes in a retro-
grade fashion through the fallopian tubes to implant

on the ovaries, pelvis, and abdomen at the time of
menstruation. Bloodstream and lymph vessel trans-
port may also occur.

2. The second hypothesis suggests that endometriosis
occurs at sites outside the uterus in tissues that have
the potential for developing into uterine glands.

3. The induction theory combines the above two ideas
to suggest that transported endometrial tissue induces
the development of endometriosis through direct
contact with sites on adjacent organs and structures.

Endometriosis is a notoriously difficult condition to
diagnose; the conclusion is often reached only after all
other problems have been excluded. Conclusive diagnosis
often necessitates exploratory laparoscopy. An estimated
25% to 50% of infertile women have endometriosis. It
may be largely asymptomatic, but is also often character-
ized by the following symptoms:

* Dysmenorrhea, especially if this begins after several
years of pain-free menses

* Dyspareunia, or painful sexual intercourse

* Lower abdominal or rectal pain

* Metrorrhagia or menorrhagia

In mild or moderate cases of endometriosis, herbal
medication has much to offer, but in severe cases, surgery
may be indicated.

Treatment of Endometriosis

The herbal treatment of this often intransigent condition
can be quite effective. However, careful selection of herbs
is crucial.

Actions Indicated

Hormonal normalizers, such as Vitex, appear to help the
body alter underlying hormonal problems.

Uterine tonics are essential for their tonic actions on en-
dometrial tissue. In theory, this will help wherever
such tissue is.

Antispasmodices ease the muscular, cramping pain that is so
distressing in this condition.

Nervine relaxants help with stress and pain.

Specific Remedies

There are no traditional specifics for endometriosis, but
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam) is almost specific for the pain,
although it is not very strong. Vitex agnus-castus may be
considered the most appropriate remedy for the underly-
ing processes involved.

----- PAGE 413 -----
A Prescription for Endometriosis

Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Dioscorea villosa 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Table 18.13. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Endometriosis

ACTION HERBS

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Uterine tonic Cimicifuga racemosa

Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,
Scutellaria lateriflora

Antispasmodic

Scutellaria lateriflora, Cimicifuga racemosa,
Dioscorea villosa

Nervine relaxant

FIBROCYSTIC BREAST DISEASE

A condition in which breast pain, cysts, and noncancerous
lumpiness occur together. (The Merck Manual)

Fibrocystic breast disease, also known as chronic cystic
mastitis, is the most common nonmalignant breast dis-
ease. It is characterized by growth of fibrous tissue that
most frequently appears when a woman is in her 30s or
40s but disappears with menopause. While uncomfort-
able, the condition is not dangerous, and up to 20% of
women develop some degree of fibrocystic breast disease
during their lives. Accurate diagnosis to differentiate from
breast cancer is, of course, essential and potentially life
saving.

Breast cysts are largely influenced by hormonal fluc-
tuations and become larger and more painful just prior to
the onset of menstrual bleeding. The key to successful
treatment lies in normalizing hormonal fluctuations, es-
pecially as the role of estrogen and progesterone in this
condition is not clear.

Fibrocystic breast disease is aggravated by situations
that increase the hormone shifts. The condition usually
improves during pregnancy and breast-feeding and after
menopause, unless hormone replacement therapy is un-
dertaken. Women more likely to develop the condition
include:

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM -@ 405

¢ Teenagers with slow establishment of regular periods
¢ Women who have children late in life

° Obese women

¢ Women on estrogen replacement therapy

¢ Women under stress

Treatment of Fibrocystic Breast Disease
The herbal treatment guidelines given here must be ap-
plied for a couple of months before results can be expected.

Actions Indicated

Hormonal normalizers help the body balance hormones
and regularize swings, enabling a move toward com-
plete alleviation of the problem.

Lympbatics assist with drainage and the general vitality of
the lymphatic tissue in the breast.

Antispasmodics may help if there are excessive dragging
pains.

Nervine relaxants are indicated if the problem is associated
with PMS.

Diuretics help if there is associated water retention, but
should not be used alone.

Specific Remedies

No true specifics are known for this condition, but Vitex
is undoubtedly strongly indicated. Evening primrose oil
may also be of great value.

A Prescription for Fibrocystic Breast Disease

Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Galium aparine 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the pa-
tient should take evening primrose oil (Oenothera biennis} at a
dosage of five 500 mg capsules a day.

Table 18.14. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Fibrocystic Disease

ACTION HERBS

Hormonal normalizer Vitex agnus-castus

Lymphatic Gatium aparine
Diuretic Galium aparine
Nervine relaxant Scutellaria lateriflora

Antispasmodic Scutellaria lateriflora

----- PAGE 414 -----
406 @ TREATMEN] APPROACHES BY BoDy SysEM

Broader Context of Treatment
It has been shown clearly that methylxanthines aggravate
the problem. The most common dietary sources of such
natural products are coffee, tea, chocolate, and soft drinks.
These should be avoided totally. Other research shows
that vitamin E at dosages of 400 to 800 IU daily may help.
It is important to eat no meat, poultry, eggs, or dairy prod-
ucts from animals given hormones to promote growth.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Pizzorno and
Murray recommend the following supplements:*

B-complex: 10 times the recommended daily dose
Choline: 500 to 1,000 mg/day

Methionine: 500 to 1,000 mg/day

Vitamin Bg: 25 to 50 mg three times a day

Vitamin C: 500 mg three times a day

Vitamin E: 400 to 800 IU/day (d-alpha tocopherol)
Beta-carotene: 50,000 to 300,000 IU/day

Todine: 70 to 90 mcg/kg body weight

Zinc: 15 mg/day

Flaxseed oil: 1 tablespoon/day

Lactobacillus acidophilus: \ teaspoon three times a day

THE MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM

Prostate diseases generally fall into three categories: in-
fectious, malignant, and hypertrophic. Infection and ma-
lignancy are discussed in chapter 21. Our discussion here
will focus on benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH).

BENIGN PROSTATIC HYPERTROPHY

Benign adenomatous hyperplasia of the periurethral pros-
trate gland commonly seen in men over age 50, causing
variable degrees of bladder outlet obstruction. (The
Merck Manual)

The prostate gland is present in all men from birth, and
assumes importance when fertility is achieved. The
prostate produces the fluid that accompanies the sperm
during ejaculation. Located deep within the pelvis, it sits
on top of the urethra, the tube that connects the penis to
the bladder. As it achieves adult size, the prostate wraps
itself around the urethra, into which its secretions empty.
The gland is normally about the size of a chestnut.
Because of its location, if it becomes inflamed or en-
larged, it may exert pressure on the urethra or block the
outlet to the bladder, thus obstructing the flow of urine.
This can cause interrupted or difficult urination (drib-
bling incontinence) as well as urgent or frequent urina-

tion, especially at night (nocturia). Dysuria (painful or dif-
ficult urination) is another possible symptom. Urine
trapped in the bladder may become infected, causing cys-
titis, and backward pressure can lead to kidney infection.

Congestion and overgrowth of the prostate gland is
virtually universal in men older than 60. Why it happens
is not understood, but theories suggest that it may be
caused by the response of glandular cells in the prostate
to age-related hormonal changes. Levels and composition
of androgen and other hormones in the blood vary with
age. This does not cause problems for all older men, but
the ones who are not so lucky take little consolation in
that fact!

Researchers believe that BPH is caused by accumula-
tion of testosterone in the prostate. However, once in the
prostate, testosterone is converted to dihydrotestosterone
(DHT). DHT, a hormone more potent than testosterone,
exerts effects on the prostate gland and other sexual or-
gans. It is produced from testosterone by the enzyme 5-a
reductase.

DHT is necessary for the normal growth and devel-
opment of the prostate, but its presence is also necessary
for the pathologic enlargement of the prostate that occurs
in BPH. Thus, one therapeutic approach to treating the
condition is to reduce the formation of DHT by blocking
the enzyme 5-a reductase. Serenoa repens (saw palmetto)
has this effect.

As prostate swelling progresses, flow of urine
through the urethra is obstructed, and the bladder grows
thicker and stronger to compensate for the increased re-
sistance it must overcome. Eventually, the bladder is no
longer able to completely overcome such forces. As it be-
comes increasingly difficult for the man to completely
empty the bladder, urine stagnates there. If the obstruc-
tion is severe, pressure may back up urine to the kidneys,
causing damage. When it becomes impossible to empty
the bladder of all its contents, the occasional bacteria pre-
sent in the urinary tract are able to multiply, and urinary
tract infection may occur. This, in turn, may worsen the
swelling already present in the prostate.

The earliest symptoms of BPH are usually urinary hes-
itancy, weakening of the urinary stream, and incomplete
emptying of the bladder with urination. Dribbling of urine
may occur. If infection sets in, burning, blood in the urine,
and fever may occur. In the most severe cases, the man may
experience a total inability to urinate, sometimes with mas~
sive enlargement of the bladder. A small number of en-
larged or inflamed prostates may be cancerous. This fact
underscores the need for a proper medical investigation.

----- PAGE 415 -----
Treatment of Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy

A Prescription for Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy

(Internal)
Serenoa repens 2 parts
Hydrangea arborescens 2 parts
Smilax spp. 1 part
Zea mays 1 part
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

An Infusion for Benign Prostatic Hypertrophy

(for Sitz Bath)
Equisetum arvense 1 part
Elymus repens ] part
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 1 part

Dosage: Infuse 2 oz of the mixture to each 1 pint of boiling water.
Add infusion to sitz bath.

Broader Context of Treatment
If the symptoms are not markedly impairing the patient's
lifestyle, and if recurrent, serious, or resistant infections
or kidney damage is not present, conservative therapy
may be adequate for long periods of time.

Conservative therapy consists of:

© Treatment of any infection (see chapter 21)

* Occasional massage of the gland through rectal exam,
to relieve congestion

¢ Frequent ejaculations on the patient’s part, for the
same purpose as prostatic massage

* Avoidance of drugs that reduce bladder tone,
include antidepressants, certain tranquilizers, and
antihistamines

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM > 407

References.

1, Bamford DS. Raspberry leaf tea: a new aspect to an old
problem. British Journal of Pharmacology 1970 Sep;
40(1):161.

2. Der Marderosian AH, Liberti LE. Natural Product
Medicine. Philadelphia: G. F. Stickley, 1988.

3. McGuffin, Hobbs, Upton, Goldberg, eds. American
Herbal Products Association's Botanical Safety Handbook.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1997.

4. McIntyre A. The Herbal for Pregnancy and Childbirth.
Shaftesbury, UK: Element Books, 1992.

5. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. The Textbook of Natural
Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Suggested Reading

Gladstar R. Herbal Healing for Women. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1993.

Green J. Male Herbal: Health Care for Men and Boys. Freedom,
CA: Crossing Press, 1991.

Hudson T. Women’s Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine. Los
Angeles: Lowell House; Chicago: Contemporary Books,
1999.

McQuade Crawford A. The Herbal Menopause Book. Freedom,
CA: The Crossing Press, 1996.

Nissim R. Natural Healing in Gynecology. San Francisco:
HarperCollins, 1996.

Weed S. Menopausal Years. Woodstock, NY: Ash Tree, 1992.

----- PAGE 416 -----
THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM

ur skeleton, connective tissue, muscles, and
joints give us our form and hold us together, en-
abling us to stand and to move. These struc-
tures are extensively used (and misused) and are the focus
of much physical wear and tear. However, the health of
these structures and the tissues that compose them does
not depend only upon the use to which they are put. It
also depends, to a large extent, on our inner environment:
the state of our metabolism, diet, and lifestyle. Of course,
genetically based weaknesses can play a very important
role in the health of this body system, but if these issues
are recognized, much can be done to minimize problems.
Extensive skeletal misalignment can impair the func-
tion of the neurological system and other organs and dis-
rupt the harmony of the whole body. Osteopathic or chi-
ropractic techniques can be of great value in realigning
the body, as can methods of psychophysical adjustment,
such as rolfing, the Alexander technique, and Feldenkrais.
However, the contribution of systemic, whole-body prob-
lems to the development of musculoskeletal ills cannot be
overemphasized. The health and wholeness of this system
can be maintained only as long as the inner environment
and metabolism of the body remain in harmony. If our
biochemical and metabolic processes are out of tune, the
body will be under much strain to remove waste and tox-
ins. If this condition persists unnoticed for years—as it
often does—toxins can build up in the connective tissue
of the joints. This can sow the seeds for the development
of rheumatism and arthritis, particularly if there is a ge-
netic disposition to such conditions.

HERBS AND THE
MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM

Among all of the problems that can affect this important
body system, herbal medicine has most to offer in the
treatment of chronic, degenerative ailments. As discussed
in depth later in this chapter, rheumatism is a very general
term used to describe any of various conditions charac-
terized by inflammation or pain in muscles, joints, or con-

nective tissue. Arthritis, on the other hand, specifically de-
scribes inflammation of joints, which may be due to in-
fectious, metabolic, or constitutional causes.

Table 19.1. Primary Actions for the
Musculoskeletal System

ACTION HERBS

Antirheumatic See Antirheumatic Herbs, page 409

Anti-inflammatory Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens,
Betula spp., Caulophyllum thalictroides,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,
Gaultheria procumbens, Harpagophytum
procumbens, Filipendula ulmaria,
Guaiacum officinale, Menyanthes trifoliata,
Populus tremuloides, Salix spp.,

Tanacetum parthenium

Alteratives Arctium lappa, Cimicifuga racemosa,
Guaiacum officinale, Iris versicolor,
Mahonia aquifolium, Menyanthes trifoliata,

Rumex crispus, Smilax spp.

Cimicifuga racemosa, Valeriana officinalis,
Viburnum opulus

Antispasmodic

Circulatory stimulant Capsicum annuum, Zanthoxylum americanum,

Zingiber officinale

Rubefacient Capsicum annuum, Brassica spp., Mentha piperita,
Urtica dioica, Zanthoxylum americanum

Analgesic Filipendula ulmaria, Piscidia erythrina, Salix spp.,
Valeriana officinalis

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Apium graveolens,
Eupatorium perfoliatum

Nervine Apium graveolens, Piscidia erythrina,
Valeriana officinalis

Other As needed to ensure good elimination and

general health—e.g,, bitters, hepatics,
expectorants, emmenagogues

----- PAGE 417 -----
In most cases, successful herbal treatment of muscu-
loskeletal illness will be based on supporting the whole
body, because systemic factors so often lay the foundation
for degenerative musculoskeletal conditions. ‘Thus, the
primary actions of the truly healing antirheumatic
herbs can usually be identified as alterative, diuretic, or
some other systemically beneficial action. In general,
anti-inflammatory herbs simply improve the symptom
picture. As desirable as this is for the patient, it does not
usually indicate a beneficial alteration in the disease pro-
cess. Conditions in which active inflammation is worsen-
ing pathological change to bone tissue represent an im-
portant exception to this generalization.

Antirheumatic Actions

A vast array of herbs have a reputation for preventing, re-
lieving, or curing rheumatic problems. The an-
tirheumatic herbs presented here have a variety of differ-
ent primary actions. They should be chosen according to
the needs of the whole body, as this group includes alter-
atives, anti-inflammatory agents, rubefacients, diuretics,

stimulants, and digestive remedies.

Antirheumatic herbs are remedies that have been ob-
served to improve the patient’s experience of rheumatic
problems. However, that is not meant to imply that they
have a specific effect upon disease processes or even upon
the musculoskeletal tissue itself. To say that these herbs
have an observable effect on symptoms is a description of
outcome, rather than of process. As such, the concept has
a limited application, unless the actions at play for each
herb are understood (see table 19.2).

Antirheumatic Herbs

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Angelica archangelica (angelica)
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Arctium lappa (burdock)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Armoracia rusticana (horseradish)
Arnica montana (arnica)

Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
A. vulgaris (mugwort)

Betula spp. (birch)

Brassica spp. (mustard)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)
E. purpureum (gravel root)

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM 409

Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Fucus vesiculosus (bladderwrack)
Gaultheria procumbens (wintergreen)
Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Harpagophytum procumbens (devil’s claw)
Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Juniperus communis (juniper)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)
Myrica cerifera (bayberry)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Phytolacca americana (poke)

Populus tremuloides (aspen)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Salix spp. (willow)

Smilax spp. (sarsaparilla)

Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Unrtica dioica (nettle)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)
Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

The activity of these herbs as antirheumatic agents
can be explained as an expression of a more broadly rele-
vant action, either the plant’s main action or a more holis-
tic synergy of a number of plant actions. For example, al-
teratives can work in a variety of different ways, as can
anti-inflammatory herbs. Of course, the main actions that
contribute to an herb’s antirheumatic activity cannot al-
ways be identified.

Table 19.2. Possible Mechanism of Action of
Antirheumatic Herbs

ACTION HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens,
Betula spp., Dioscorea villosa,

Filipendula ulmaria, Gaultheria procumbens,
Guaiacum officinale, Harpagophytum
procumbens, Menyanthes trifoliata,

Populus tremuloides, Tanacetum parthenium

Alterative Arctium lappa, Mahonia aquifolium,

Fucus vesiculosus, Guaiacum officinale,
Harpagophytum procumbens, Iris versicolor,
Menyanthes irifoliata, Phytolacca americana,

Rumex crispus, Smilax spp., Urtica dioica

----- PAGE 418 -----
410 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

ACTION HERBS

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Apium graveolens,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
E, purpureum, Juniperus communis,

Petroselinum crispum, Taraxacum officinale

Circulatory stimulant Armoracia rusticana, Brassica spp.,
Capsicum annuum, Myrica cerifera,

Rosmarinus officinalis, Zanthoxylum americanum,

Zingiber officinale
Antispasmodic Cimicifuga racemosa, Viburnum opulus
Other action Arnica montana, Artemisia absinthium,

(or basis unclear) A. vulgaris, Caulophyttum thalictroides

Rubefacients

Rubefacients are herbs that, when applied to the skin, stim-
ulate circulation in that area, increasing blood supply and
relieving congestion and inflammation. This action makes
rubefacients particularly useful in liniments for muscular
rheumatism and similar conditions. Rubefacients are for
topical use only. They should be used with care on sensi-
tive skin, and not used at all when the skin is damaged.

Rubefacient Herbs

Armoracia rusticana (horseradish)
Brassica spp. (mustard)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Gaultheria procumbens (wintergreen)
Mentha piperita (peppermint oil)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary oil)
Senecio jacobaea (ragwort)

Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Diuretics

Diuretics support the work of the kidneys in eliminating
metabolic wastes, toxins, and the products of inflamma-
tion. This action is essential in musculoskeletal condi-
tions, as these waste products and toxins lie at the root of
many problems, including arthritis and rheumatism. If
any kidney problems exist, they must also be treated. For
supporting the vital work of the kidneys, the following
herbs are often considered specific for rheumatism.

Diuretic Herbs

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)

Eupatorium purpureum (gravel root)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion leaf)

Circulatory Stimulants

Another way to cleanse the body of toxins is by stimulating
blood circulation, which increases blood flow to muscles
and joints. To accomplish this without straining the heart,
we can use herbs that stimulate peripheral circulation.

Herbs That Stimulate Peripheral Circulation
Capsicum annuum (cayenne)

Phytolacca americana (poke root)

Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)

Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Pain Relievers

While the purist never merely treats symptoms, the
healer aims to relieve suffering. Thus, it may be necessary
to use herbs with the intention of lessening the often se-
vere pain of conditions like rheumatism. These, of course,
should be used only as one part of an approach designed
to treat the cause of disease. Anti-inflammatory herbs will
relieve pain to some extent, but the only truly effective
way to alleviate pain is to clear the underlying problem.
Herbs listed here can be used to help relieve pain in the
context of a whole body approach.

Herbal Analgesics

Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Piscidia erythrina (Jamaica dogwood)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

Digestive System Tonics

The digestive system must be in good working order, as
nutrients must be properly absorbed in order for the mus-
culoskeletal system to operate at its peak. Bitter tonics
may be helpful here.

Useful Bitter Tonic Herbs
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)

If the patient is troubled by constipation, laxatives
may be indicated, especially those that act by stimulating
the liver.

----- PAGE 419 -----
Hepatic Stimulants

Rheum palmatum (rhubarb root)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion root)

RHEUMATIC DISEASES AND
ARTHRITIS

More than 100 conditions are technically classified as
rheumatic diseases. The conditions that make up this group
of health problems share many common symptoms, in-
cluding pain, stiffness, and swelling of joints and the sup-
porting structures of the body, such as muscles, tendons,
ligaments, and bones. Some of these diseases may also af-
fect other parts of the body.

Although the term arthritis is often used as a general
descriptor for all rheumatic diseases, this is incorrect. The
word arthritis literally means “joint inflammation,” and is
correctly applied to describe the swelling, redness, heat,
and pain caused by tissue injury or joint disease. The
many different types of arthritis comprise just a portion of
the total group of rheumatic diseases.

Some rheumatic diseases are described as connective tis-
sue diseases because they primarily affect the body’s connec-
tive tissues—the supporting framework of the body and its
internal organs. Connective tissue is found everywhere in
the body and includes cartilage, bone, and the binding,
supportive components of the skin. Other rheumatic con-
ditions are classified as autoimmune diseases because they are

associated with a systemic problem in which the immune
system harms the body’s own healthy tissues.

Here we will look briefly at a few examples of some
of the more common rheumatic diseases, Treatment ap-
proaches are detailed later in this chapter.

Osteoarthritis

Also known as degenerative joint disease, osteoarthritis is
the most common type of arthritis, affecting an estimated
20.7 million American adults. Osteoarthritis primarily af-
fects cartilage, the tissue that cushions the ends of bones
in the joints. The condition occurs when cartilage begins
to fray, wear, and decay. In extreme cases, the cartilage
may wear away entirely. Bony spurs (pointy outcroppings
of bone) may form at the edges of a joint. Osteoarthritis
causes joint pain, reduced joint motion, loss of function,

and disability.

Rheumatoid Arthritis

Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory disease of the
lining of the joint that results in pain, stiffness, swelling,

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM .@ 411

deformity, and loss of joint function. The inflammation
most often affects joints of the hands and feet and tends
to occur equally on both. sides of the body. This symme-
try helps distinguish rheumatoid arthritis from other
types of arthritis. About 2.1 million Americans are af-
flicted with rheumatoid arthritis.

Although the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis are
caused by inflammation. of the connective tissues, the
cause is not at all clear. A characteristic sign of rheuma-
toid arthritis is chronic inflammation of the synovial
membranes, or inner linings of the joint capsules. The
synovial mass proliferates and destroys cartilage, bone,
and adjacent structures. The widespread inflammation
may also affect other tissues, leading to painful joints, loss
of mobility, and generalized soreness and depression.
Blood tests often reveal the presence of rheumatoid fac-
tors, proteins produced by the immune system in re-
sponse to the rheumatic process.

Fibromyalgia

Fibromyalgia causes pain and stiffness throughout the tis-
sues that support and move the bones and joints. Pain and
localized tender points occur in the muscles and tendons,
particularly those of the neck, spine, shoulders, and hips.
Patients may experience: widespread pain, fatigue, and
sleep disturbances.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

Systemic lupus erythematosus (also known as lupus or
SLE) is an autoimmune disease in which the immune sys-
tem harms the body’s tissues. In SLE, this can result in in-
flammation of and damage to joints, skin, kidneys, heart,
lungs, blood vessels, and brain.

Ankylosing Spondylitis

This is a type of arthritis that primarily affects the spine,
but it may also impact the hips, shoulders, and knees. The
tendons and ligaments around the bones and joints in the
spine become inflamed, resulting in pain and stiffness, es-
pecially in the lower back. Ankylosing spondylitis tends to
affect people in late adolescence or early adulthood.

Gout

This form of arthritis is caused by deposits of needlelike
crystals of uric acid in the connective tissue, joint spaces,
or both. Uric acid is a normal breakdown product of
purines, which are present in body tissues and in many
foods. Normally, uric acid passes through the kidney into
urine and is eliminated. Elowever, if the concentration of
uric acid in the blood rises above normal levels, sodium

----- PAGE 420 -----
412 «¢. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

urate crystals may form. These needlelike crystals cause
inflammation, swelling, and pain in the affected joint.
The joint most commonly affected is the big toe.

Psoriatic Arthritis

This form of arthritis affects some patients with psoriasis,
a common scaling skin disorder. Psoriatic arthritis often
affects the joints at the ends of the fingers and is accom-
panied by changes in the fingernails and toenails. In some
people, the spine is also involved.

Bursitis

This condition involves inflammation of the bursae,
small, fluid-filled sacs that serve to reduce friction be-
tween bones and other moving structures in the joints.
The inflammation may result from arthritis in the joint or
from injury to or infection of the bursae. Bursitis pro-
duces pain and tenderness and may limit the movement of
nearby joints.

Tendinitis

This refers to inflammation of tendons (tough cords of
tissue that connect muscle to bone) caused by overuse, in-
jury, or related rheumatic conditions. Tendinitis produces
pain and tenderness and may restrict the movement of
nearby joints.

ARTHRITIS AND PAIN

Pain is the body’s warning system. The International
Association for the Study of Pain defines pai as an un-
pleasant experience associated with actual or potential tis-
sue damage to a person’s body. Specialized cells called
neurons transmit pain signals and are found throughout
the skin and other body tissues. These cells respond to
trauma, such as injury or tissue damage. For example,
when a knife cuts the skin, chemical signals travel from
neurons in the skin through nerves in the spinal cord to
the brain, where they are interpreted as pain.

The pain of arthritis may be acute or chronic. Acute
pain is temporary; it may last a few seconds or longer, but
wanes as healing occurs. Some conditions that cause acute
pain are burns, cuts, and fractures. Chronic pain, such as
that caused by osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis,
ranges from mild to severe and can last a lifetime.

Arthritic pain may be caused by a number of pro-
cesses, including muscle strain, fatigue, and inflammation
of the synovial membranes of the joints, the tendons, or
the ligaments. A combination of these factors contributes
to the intensity of the pain. For reasons that are not

clearly understood, the experience of arthritis pain varies
greatly from person to person. Contributing factors in-
clude swelling within the joint, amount of heat or redness
present, and damage that has occurred within the joint. In
addition, pain levels are affected by different activities.
Some patients note pain in their joints when they first get
out of bed in the morning, while others develop pain after
prolonged use of the joint. Each individual has a different
threshold and tolerance for pain, which is affected by
both physical and emotional factors.

Conventional Arthritis Medications

A number of over-the-counter medications can help re-
lieve acute pain. Because osteoarthritis involves little in-
flammation, pain relievers like acetaminophen may prove
effective. The pain of rheumatoid arthritis is generally
caused by inflammation, and thus may respond better to

aspirin or another nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
(NSAID), such as ibuprofen.

Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drags, or NSAIDs, are
the most widely used drugs in the United States. They are
used to treat pain, fever, and inflammation that occur as a
result of acute injuries, rheumatoid arthritis, and os-
teoarthritis. They are not curative, but do help to lessen
pain and inflammation.

Unfortunately, NSAIDs are not without side effects,
and some of these can be life threatening. For example,
gastrointestinal bleeding due to use of NSAIDs kills al-
most 9,000 Americans each year. In addition, all of these
drugs can produce a number of similar mild, temporary
side effects.

Minor Side Effects of NSAIDs

Gastrointestinal: Heartburn, dyspepsia, diarrhea, constipa-
tion, abdominal pain, nausea, stomatitis, decreased
appetite, vomiting

Central nervous system: Headache, insomnia, dizziness,
drowsiness, tinnitus, confusion, unusual weakness

Visual: Loss of visual acuity, blurred or double vision

Skin: Itching, rash, photosensitivity reactions, eruptions,
hives

Cardiovascular: Edema, palpitations, rapid heartbeat

Genitourinary: Burning or painful urination, vaginal
bleeding, blood in urine, cystitis

Unfortunately, these drugs can also produce far more
serious problems. Adverse effects in the kidneys are of
particular concern in the elderly, because kidney function

----- PAGE 421 -----
is often already compromised by aging or complications
of chronic diseases, such as diabetes and hypertension.

Serious Side Effects of NSAIDs

Gastrointestinal: Gastric and/or duodenal ulceration, gastro-
intestinal bleeding (advanced age is a risk factor)

Cardiovascular: Angina, cardiac arrhythmias, exacerbation
of congestive heart failure

Kidney: Interstitial nephritis, acute renal failure, hyper-
kalemia (high serum potassium)

Skin: Exfoliative dermatitis, erythema multiforme, other
unusual skin problems

Blood: Anemia, leukopenia

Liver: Jaundice, hepatitis

If NSAIDs are being used, the patient should follow
a number of simple steps to lessen the impact of side ef-
fects. Take NSAIDs with food, and drink six to eight
glasses of water each day to decrease gastrointestinal side
effects. Also, the patient should not recline within a half
hour of taking NSAIDs. If the person is at risk for ulcer-
ation, he or she should consult with a physician and phar-
macist on a routine basis to decrease the chances of a life-
threatening gastrointestinal ulceration. As serious
ulcerations do not necessarily produce any symptoms, do
not rely upon symptoms to predict ulcer development.

Risk Factors for. Ulceration with NSAIDs
Advanced age

History of peptic ulcer disease or cardiovascular disease
High-dose NSAID use

Long duration of NSAID use

Heavy smoking or drinking

Kidney or liver failure

Use of certain drugs, such as Coumadin and prednisone

A number of powerful prescription drugs may be
used to treat rheumatoid arthritis that does not respond
to treatment with NSAIDs. These include methotrexate,
hydroxychloroquine, penicillamine, and gold injections.
These drugs are thought to influence and correct the im-
mune system abnormalities responsible for diseases like
rheumatoid arthritis. Use of these medications requires
careful monitoring by the physician to minimize the rav-
ages of side effects.

Corticosteroids, such as prednisone, are prescribed
for a number of rheumatic conditions because they de-
crease inflammation and suppress the activity of the im-
mune system. Short-term side effects of corticosteroids
include swelling, increased appetite, weight gain, and
emotional swings. These side effects usually disappear

Tit MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM @ 413

when the drug is discontinued. However, discontinuing
corticosteroids suddenly is dangerous. Side effects that
may occur after long-term use include stretch marks, ex-
cessive hair growth, osteoporosis, high blood pressure,
damage to the arteries, high blood sugar, infections, and
cataracts.

COMPONENTS OF A HOLISTIC
TREATMENT PROGRAM FOR
ARTHRITIS

One of the long-term goals of arthritis treatment is to help
the patient cope with having a chronic, often disabling dis-
ease. The patient may be caught in a self-reinforcing
cycle of pain, depression, and stress. Breaking out of this
cycle is easier if the patient is empowered by taking on a
role as an active participant, along with the health care
professional, in managing the pain.

Some simple methods can alleviate pain for short pe-
riods of time. This temporary relief can make it easier for
people who have arthritis to exercise.

Diet

An important part of any treatment program for arthritis
is a well-balanced diet. Along with exercise, a well-balanced
diet helps control weight and maintains overall good
health. Weight contro} is particularly important here, be-
cause extra weight puts pressure on some joints and can
aggravate arthritis.

One of the proposed causes of rheumatism and
arthritis is accumulation of toxins or waste products in the
affected tissue. A major contributing factor is inappropri-
ate diet—consumption of foods that are either wrong for
the individual’s body or so devitalized and adulterated
that they are detrimental for that reason alone. Dietary
measures are especially essential for people with gout.
These patients should avoid alcohol and foods high in
purines, such as organ meats (liver, kidney), sardines, and
anchovies.

As a general guideline, any foods that cause bodily
reactions should be avoided, as should foods that cause di-
gestive problems or other adverse effects, including sub-
tle allergic reactions. Ideally, one should consume foods
that are fresh and untreated, as opposed to processed
foods full of additives and preservatives.

Dairy products and gluten (mainly from wheat prod-
ucts) often cause either overt allergic reactions or subtle
ones, such as the minor digestive upsets of heartburn
and flatulence. If these foods cause reactions, they should
be avoided. In general, the patient should minimize

----- PAGE 422 -----
414. o TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SySTEM

consumption of meat, eggs, and dairy products, as well as
very acidic foods like vinegar and pickles. The patient
should also shun foods rich in oxalic acid, including
rhubarb, gooseberries, black currants, and red currants.
Coffee, black tea, alcohol, sugar, salt, and any food or
beverage made from red grapes should also be avoided.
Instead, the patient should increase consumption of
fruits and vegetables, especially green and root vegeta-
bles. Citrus fruits, which, in spite of their citric acid, ap-
pear to have an alkalinizing effect on the metabolism, are
fine. The patient should drink at least 3 pints (1.5 liters)
of fluid daily to help flush the body. This fluid should
preferably be water with a low mineral content or water
mixed with a little apple cider vinegar or apple juice.
Taking at least 500 mg/day of vitamin C supplement is
recommended. Fish and white meat may be eaten.

Glucosamine Sulfate

Glucosamine sulfate is a nutritional supplement that may
enhance the reconstruction and healing of cartilage.
Glucosamine is an amino sugar, a molecule composed of an
amino acid and a simple sugar. The body uses about 20 dif-
ferent amino sugars as sources of energy or ingredients for
the assembly of tissue components. Amino sugars are the
structural basis of connective tissue and lubricating fluids.
Just as amino acids are the building blocks of proteins,
amino sugars are the building blocks of very large
molecules called glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), also known
as mucopolysaccharides. GAGs are large, spongy, water-
holding molecules that form the gel-like matrix of ground
substance, or the “glue” that holds our bodies together.
This substance is found in all connective tissue and mucous
membranes. Glucosamine macromolecules are the basic
substrate of cartilage, ligaments, tendons, and bones.
During normal use, connective tissue is constantly
broken down and either replaced or restructured, creat-
ing a continuous demand for glucosamine. The normal
diet is not a good source of glucosamine, so the body syn-
thesizes it from glucose and the amino acid glutamine.
Normally, the body produces enough glucosamine, but
under some conditions, the production of glucosamine
and its subsequent assembly into larger GAGs may be im-
paired. These conditions include severe stress, surgery,
burns, and major injuries, as well as aging. A lack of gly-
coproteins or other substances based on amino sugars has
been observed in many diseases, including osteoarthritis.
It appears that supplementation with glucosamine
sulfate might stimulate the synthesis of the missing glyco-
proteins. A number of studies have compared glu-
cosamine sulfate with ibuprofen for the treatment of

osteoarthritis.! A recent randomized, double-blind, con-
trolled clinical trial compared the use of glucosamine sul-
fate and ibuprofen in patients diagnosed with temporo-
mandibular joint (TMJ) osteoarthritis. The researchers
concluded that both glucosamine sulfate and ibuprofen
reduced pain levels in these patients. However, glu-
cosamine sulfate had a significantly greater influence in
reducing pain produced during function and pain caused
by daily activities.

Glucosamine sulfate is indicated for joint problems
such as osteoarthritis. Onset of action is seen after two
to eight weeks of treatment, as it works by stimulating
the endogenous synthesis of the missing macro-
molecules. The suggested dose for osteoarthritis is 500
mg three times a day.

In commercial formulations, glucosamine sulfate is
often combined with chondroitin sulfate. However, the
evidence for the actual efficacy of chondroitin sulfate
when taken by mouth is equivocal.

Heat and Cold Therapy

Heat and cold can both be used to reduce the pain and in-
flammation of arthritis. Studies have shown that heat and
cold therapies are equally effective in alleviating pain, al-
though they are usually avoided in acute gout. The deci-
sion to use heat or cold for arthritis pain depends on the
type of arthritis.

Heat therapy increases blood flow, pain tolerance,
and flexibility. Heat therapy can involve treatment with
paraffin wax, microwaves, ultrasound, or moist heat.
Physical therapists are needed to apply paraffin wax, mi-
crowave, or ultrasound therapy, but anyone can apply
heat on his or her own. Applying moist heat, such as a
warm bath or shower, or dry heat, such as a heating pad,
to the painful joint for about 15 minutes often relieves
pain. Deep heat is not recommended for patients with
acutely inflamed joints, but deep heat is often used
around the shoulder in people with osteoarthritis to relax
tight tendons before stretching exercises.

Cold therapy numbs the nerves around the joint, re-
ducing pain, relieving inflammation, and easing muscle
spasms. Cold therapy can involve cold packs, ice massage,
soaking in cold water, or the use of over-the-counter
sprays or ointments that cool the skin and joints.
Wrapping an ice pack (or a bag of frozen vegetables) in a
towel and placing it on the sore area for about 15 minutes
may help to reduce swelling and stop the pain. Cold ther-
apy is often used for acutely inflamed joints; however,
people with Raynaud’s disease should not use this
method.

----- PAGE 423 -----
Weight Reduction
Excess weight puts extra stress on joints, such as the knees
and hips. A recent study found that when obese arthritis
patients lost weight, they experienced significant reduc-
tions in pain and stiffness as well as an improvement in
their quality of life.”

Devices
Splints and braces are commonly used in the treatment of
arthritis pain. These help support weakened joints or
allow them to rest. Some of these devices prevent the joint
from moving; others allow some movement. A splint or
brace should be used only with professional guidance to
ensure that the device fits properly and is worn correctly.
Incorrect use can cause joint damage, stiffness, and pain.
Other kinds of devices may also help ease pain. For
example, using a cane when walking can take weight off
an arthritic joint. A shoe insert may ease pain caused by
arthritis of the foot or knee while walking.

Hydrotherapy, Mobilization Therapy, and
Relaxation Therapy

Hydrotherapy involves exercising or relaxing in warm
water, which helps relax tense muscles and relieve pain.
This type of exercise improves muscle strength and joint
movement.

Mobilization therapies include traction (gentle,
steady pulling), massage, and manipulation (using the
hands to restore normal movement to stiff joints). When
performed by a trained professional, these methods can
help control pain, increase joint motion, and improve
muscle and tendon flexibility. Appropriate massage will in-
crease blood flow and warmth to a stressed area. However,
arthritis-stressed joints are very sensitive, so the therapist
must be familiar with the problems of the disease.

Relaxation therapy helps reduce pain by teaching pa-
tients various ways to release muscle tension throughout
the body. In one method of relaxation therapy, known as
progressive relaxation, the patient tightens one muscle
group at a time, then slowly releases the tension.

Exercise

Exercise can benefit patients with arthritis in many ways.
It lessens joint pain and stiffness and increases flexibility,
muscle strength, and endurance. It also helps with weight
reduction and contributes to an improved sense of well-
being. Exercise plans for patients with arthritis may in-
clude instruction about proper use of joints as well as
ways to conserve energy and eliminate unnecessary mo-
tion. The amount and type of exercise for a given patient

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM @ 415

with arthritis will vary according to which joints are in-
volved, the amount of inflammation, how stable the joints
are, and whether the patient has undergone a joint re-
placement procedure.

In general, three types of exercise are best for people
with arthritis:

Range-of-motion exercises help maintain normal joint
movement, relieve stiffness, and help maintain or in-
crease flexibility.

Strengthening exercises help maintain or increase muscle
strength. Strong muscles support and protect arthritic
joints.

Aerobic or endurance exercises improve cardiovascular fit-
ness and help control weight, which ts critical, as excess
weight puts extra pressure on many joints.

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS FOR
MUSCULOSKELETAL HEALTH

The various forms of arthritis are perhaps the most im-
portant inflammatory conditions that affect humanity,
and throughout the world herbal medicines are used to
treat them. About one in seven Americans exhibits some
form of arthritis, which is usually characterized by in-
flammation in the affected tissue. The typical signs of in-
flammation (warmth, redness, swelling, and pain) are
often present.

In some types of arthritis, inflammation is caused by
autoimmune reactions. Why the body sometimes mounts
an immune system reaction against its own tissue is un-
known. We do know that such autoimmune reactions re-
sult in inflammation when “anti-self” antibodies react
with intact connective tissue and synovial membranes.
Rheumatoid arthritis is a common autoimmune form of
arthritis.

Utilizing a broad holistic approach, herbal medicine
works with the whole body to promote amelioration of
the condition while alleviating pain and discomfort.
Simply using anti-inflammatory and antirheumatic reme-
dies is not enough. Therapy must focus on improving
liver function, circulation, and elimination, as well as the
quality of the patient’s life and experience.

We need not look in. too much depth at the differ-
ences among the various kinds of arthritis. A finely de-
tailed differential diagnosis may not even be necessary for
holistic treatment. It is necessary, however, to recognize
the influence of the patient’s genetic framework and the
contributions of various factors, including lifestyle and
diet, to the development of the condition for the particu-
lar individual. These conditions occur as a result of the

----- PAGE 424 -----
416 <2. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

body’s inability to deal with pressures from wrong diet
and lifestyle or other stresses. The aim of treatment is not
to attack the symptoms in an effort to regain vitality, but
rather to help the individual attain a state of health in
which the body will be better able to take care of itself.

Arthritis and Friction
The concept of friction provides us with an important in-
sight as to how to approach these conditions. The joint
changes that occur in arthritis cause bones to rub together
in a manner that causes friction, but often a long history
of friction precedes these physical changes. Friction can
be caused by particular physical activities—for example,
when a farmer develops osteoarthritis in the shoulder on
which he has carried hay bales every morning for years. It
may also be related to muscle tension that binds joints too
tightly together, which is usually due to a history of fric-
tion in life.

The Collins Dictionary defines friction in the following
way:

A resistance encountered when one body moves relative to
another body with which it is in contact... disagreement
or conflict.

When considering the roots of rheumatic and
arthritic problems, this definition seems to cover it all—
whether the “two bodies” involved are bones, people, or
differing emotions and beliefs. Conflicts and the friction
they engender may take many forms, but the experience
is fundamentally an inner one. For some, conflict is a state
of mind, or an attitude with which to relate to the world.
Such conflict really takes place between inner aspects of
the individual, as a manifestation of psychological dishar-
mony. The inner conflict may be externalized as conflict
in relationships or lifestyle, but the roots are often deep in
the psyche.

When trying to create an environment conducive to
healing within the body, as much attention must be paid
to emotional and mental harmony as to diet and herbal
medicine. An outlook on life that is tight, defensive, and
lacking in vulnerability and openness will tend to feed the
rheumatism. On the other hand, initiating an inner pro-
cess of relaxation to reduce emotional friction, allow free
interaction with other people, and open up emotions and
beliefs sets the stage for the miracle of self-healing to
occur, Herbs can facilitate this process.

It is possible to cleanse the whole system and to re-
move the source of the rheumatic or arthritic develop-

ment by using appropriate herbs in combination with
other techniques that support and aid the entire body.
Such treatment takes time, as a degenerative process that
developed over time cannot be reversed in just one
month. However, when the right treatment is initiated,
the practitioner may hear comments like “I already feel
better within myself” long before the actual symptoms of
pain or stiffness are gone.

With rheumatic and arthritic problems, perhaps
more than with any other condition, it is essential to treat
the whole person. Otherwise, improvement will be only
slight or temporary. When one takes the individual’s
unique picture into account, it is possible to open the
gates for a quite miraculous healing to occur. Although a
general need for cleansing will be common to all patients,
each must also be approached as a unique being. Does the
digestive system need any kind of help? Are the kidneys
working well? Is the patient under much stress? Is the en-
docrine system working harmoniously? How is the diet?

EXTERNAL APPLICATIONS FOR
MUSCULOSKELETAL PROBLEMS

External applications of various herbs can help relieve
discomfort. This plethora of prescriptions leans heavily
on the wealth of traditional experience that characterizes
herbalism. They may be used safely in myalgia and os-
teoarthritis, but those containing hot spices (such as
cayenne, mustard, and ginger) should not be used by pa-
tients with rheumatoid arthritis.

These remedies may be antispasmodic, rubefacient,
or anti-inflammatory in nature. There are many possible
external applications of herbs, and the choice will often
depend upon what plants are available and local tradi-
tions. Here is a brief list of external applications used tra-
ditionally for musculoskeletal conditions, taken from
many different sources and organized by primary herbal
component.

Black Mustard (Brassica nigra)

Mustard seeds can be applied externally to ease acute local
pain, sciatica, and gout. Prepare a poultice by mixing powdered
mustard seeds with warm water to form a paste. Spread onto
brown paper and apply to affected area. For rheumatic pain,
mustard oil, a powerful local irritant, may be incorporated into
liniments for application to affected areas. This treatment
should not be used in rheumatoid arthritis.

----- PAGE 425 -----
White Mustard (Brassica alba)

Poultices made with mustard flowers, bread crumbs, and vinegar
are a traditional treatment for rheumatic and sciatic pains. As an
alternative, rnix white rnustard seeds with black mustard seeds.
Although mustard poultices may redden the skin, they are very
stimulating and efficient.

Cayenne (Capsicum annuum)

Cayenne is an important ingredient in this traditional stimulat-
ing application, used to increase local circulation in arthritis and

rheumatism.
Capsicum annuum powder 1 part
Verbascum thapsus leaf 1 part
Ulmus rubra powder 1 part

Apple cider vinegar Enough to dampen the mixture

Mix ingredients to make a poultice. If the cayenne causes too
powerful a burning sensation, cover the skin with vegetable oil
before applying poultice.

Another way to use cayenne is to mix equal parts of
cayenne and glycerin, shake well, and apply to painful joints. As
in the above application, if cayenne causes a burning sensation,
apply vegetable oil first. Cayenne powder or tincture may also
be rubbed on inflamed areas for added relief.

Lavender Essential Oil (Lavandula spp.)

A small amount of essential oil of lavender, added to a fixed oil
(such as almond oil) is a useful anti-inflammatory for the treat-
ment of rheumatic complaints.

Lobelia (Lobelia inflata)

For cramps or the relief of rheumatic pain, try this traditional an-
tispasmodic tincture.

Lobelia inflata powder (crushed seed and herb) 1 0z

Symplocarpus foetidus (root and rhizome) loz
Scutellaria lateriflora (herb) loz
Commiphora molmol (gum myrrh) loz
Valeriana officinalis (root) loz

Capsicum annuum (dried fruit) "oz

Infuse herbs for one week in 1 quart of brandy in a closely
corked, wide-necked bottle. Shake well daily. Strain, press out
clear liquid, and rub mixture on affected areas.

Mullein (Verbascum thapsus)

Mullein combines well with Cimicifuga racemosa and Lobelia
inflata in liniments. For swollen joints, and to relieve the aches
and pains of arthritis and rheumatism, rub mullein oil thor-
oughly into skin, or saturate a piece of cotton with the mullein

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM «2 417

oil, apply to skin, and cover with a dry dressing. Prepare mullein
oil by infusing mullein flowers in olive oil.

For the treatment of painful and swollen joints, pour boil-
ing vinegar over a small quantity of mullein, cover, and simmer
slowly for 20 to 30 minutes. Strain; add a small amount of tinc-
tures of cayenne and lobelia. Apply to affected areas.

Sassafras (Sassafras albidum)

Here is a recipe for a traditional North American liniment for
rheumatic problems.

Sassafras albidum tincture loz
Zanthoxylum americanum tincture loz
Capsicum annuum tincture loz
Commiphora molmol tincture loz
Camphor tincture loz
Distilled water 8 oz

Shake ingredients together well and apply to affected parts.

MYALGIA

A group of common nonarticular rheumatic disorders
characterized by achy pain, tenderness, and stiffness of
muscles, areas of tendon insertions, and adjacent soft-
tissue structures. (The Merck Manual)

Myalgia, also generally called rheumatism, is a notori-
ously vague and misused description for aches and pains
in the musculature. Since these symptoms are also com-
mon to the early stages of many infections and a range of
autoimmune conditions, they may cal] for a more detailed
differential diagnosis. A safe rule of thumb is to consider
the problem more deeply if symptoms cannot be eased to
some degree within two weeks,

Treatment of Myalgia

An important aspect of treatment is to support the mus-
culoskeletal system by using appropriate tonics. Beyond
that, many other parts of the body may also be involved,
depending upon the individual.

Sports injuries. If myalgia is the result of long-standing
sports injuries, the addition of antispasmodics can help
loosen the muscles. Connective tissue must also be
strengthened.

Digestive disorders. If the patient has a history of digestive
problems, appropriate digestive tonics are indicated.
Cardiovascular issues. Cardiovascular tonics should be
added if the patient has hypertension or overt heart
disease. The balance “f herbs for active treatment of

----- PAGE 426 -----
418 @ TREATMEN! APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

both rheumatism and cardiovascular problems must be
determined by the professional judgment of the
herbalist.

Stress. Long-standing stress can lead to the development
of tension and tightness in the muscles. This, in turn,
may hold the joints too tightly, resulting in friction.
Over the course of years, this can develop into “wear-
and-tear” arthritis (osteoarthritis), but in the short
term will cause pain and stiffness.

Actions Indicated

Antirheumatics help because of their general value for this
body system.

Anti-inflammatories are especially indicated if there is
much sensitivity to touch.

Alteratives are indicated if there is a suspicion of a sys-
temic problem.

Antispasmodics ease any associated muscular tension, often
the core of this problem.

Circulatory stimulants may help by increasing local circula-
tion; however, they are usually best used in the form of
rubefacients.

Rubefacients stimulate circulatory activity, thus increasing
removal of tissue waste and the local supply of oxygen
and nutrients.

Analgesics are of limited, symptomatic value only.

Diuretics appear to be very effective in easing vague
rheumatic aches and pains.

Nervines may be indicated.

Specific Remedies

Most of the salicylate-containing anti-inflammatory
herbs are considered specifics in the various folk tradi-
tions of the world. Especially important are Filipendula ul-
maria (meadowsweet), Gaultheria procumbens (winter-
green), Populus tremuloides (aspen), and Salix spp. (willow
bark). In addition, we can add Angelica archangelica (an-
gelica), Apium graveolens (celery seed), and, in fact, all of
the herbs in the general antirheumatic category. External
applications will often help. These may be rubefacients,
circulatory stimulants, salicin-containing essential oils, or
even antispasmodic herbs. The choice will ultimately de-
pend upon the patient’s response to different remedies.

A Prescription for Myalgia

Salix spp. 2 parts
Angelica archangelica | part
Urtica dioica 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

An Antispasmodic Rub

Lobelia inflata
Viburnum opulus

1 part
1 part

Rub tincture mixture into painful muscles as needed.

The internal treatment supplies a basic range of anti-
rheumatic herbs that provide salicylate anti-inflammatory
actions, along with support for the digestive process and
more generalized alterative effects. Possible external
treatments are so numerous that the choice is as much a
matter of cultural preference as of therapeutic judgment.

Table 19.3. Actions Supplied by Myalgia
Prescriptions

ACTION HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Angelica archangelica, Salix spp., Viburnum opulus

Antispasrnodic Lobelia inflata, Viburnum opulus
Alterative Urtica dioica

Diuretic Angelica archangelica, Urtica dioica

Broader Context of Treatment

Dietary factors must be considered. Please see sugges-
tions given in the section on osteoarthritis. A careful re-
view of the patient's lifestyle will help clarify issues related
to posture, work conditions, stress, and other factors.
Chiropractic, osteopathy, aromatherapy, massage, and at-
tention to appropriate exercise may all prove useful.

OSTEOARTHRITIS

An arthropathy with altered hyaline cartilage and charac-
terized by loss of articular cartilage and hypertrophy of
bone, producing osteophytes. (The Merck Manual)

Osteoarthritis, also called degenerative joint disease, is
the most common form of arthritis. It affects about one
in six Americans, including 80% of people over the age of
70. By implication, more than 20 million people in the
United States probably have osteoarthritis. The disease
affects both men and women, but is more common in
men before age 45 and more common in women after
age 45,

In a healthy joint, the ends of the bones are encased
in smooth cartilage. They are protected by a joint capsule,
which is lined with a synovial membrane that produces

----- PAGE 427 -----
synovial fluid. The capsule and fluid protect the cartilage,
muscles, and connective tissues. The joint includes the
following components:

Cartilage. This forms a hard but slippery coating on the
end of each bone.

Joint capsule, This tough membrane sac holds all the
bones and other joint parts together.

Synovial fluid. Synovial fluid lubricates the joint and keeps
the cartilage smooth and healthy.

Muscles, ligaments, and tendons. Together, muscles and con-
nective tissues keep the bones stable and allow the joint
to bend and move. Ligaments are tough, cordlike con-
nective tissues that connect one bone to another.
Tendons are tough, fibrous connective tissue cords that
connect muscles to bones.

Osteoarthritis primarily affects the cartilage of the
joints. Healthy cartilage allows the bones to glide
smoothly over one another, and also absorbs energy from
the shock of physical movement, such as walking or
repetitive motions. In osteoarthritis, the surface layer of
this cartilage breaks down and wears away. The bones
under the cartilage are then able to rub together, causing
pain, swelling, and loss of motion. Over time, the joint
may lose its normal shape, and bone spurs may grow on
the edges of the joint. Bits of bone or cartilage can break
off and float inside the joint space, causing still more pain
and damage.

Unlike some other forms of arthritis, osteoarthritis
affects joints only, not internal organs. Rheumatoid
arthritis, for example, impacts other parts of the body in
addition to the joints. Although osteoarthritis can occur
in any joint, it most often affects the ends of the fingers,
thumbs, neck, lower back, knees, and hips.

Body Parts Commonly Affected by Osteoarthritis

Hands. Small, bony knobs (called Heberden’s nodes) ap-
pear on the end joints of the fingers. Similar knobs
may appear on the middle joints of the fingers. The
fingers can become enlarged and gnarled, and may
ache or feel stiff and numb. The base of the thumb
joint is also commonly affected.

Knees. Knees, the body’s primary weight-bearing joints,
are commonly affected by osteoarthritis, becoming
stiff, swollen, and painful.

Hips. Osteoarthritis in the hips can cause pain, stiffness,
and severe disability. The pain may be felt in the hips,
groin, inner thighs, or knees. Osteoarthritis in the hip
can limit the individual’s ability to move and bend,
making daily activities a challenge.

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM @ 419

Spine. Osteoarthritis of -he spine can cause stiffness and
pain in the neck or in the lower back. Weakness or
numbness of the arms or legs may also occur.

Treatment of Osteoarthritis

In addition to attention zo musculoskeletal issues, the di-
gestive system needs special care. Beyond that, treatment
will depend upon the individual's specific case. Always re-
member the general principles of good elimination, but
never resort to strenuous “purging and puking.”

Actions Indicated

Antirbeumatics will usually help, but selection must be
based on a sound therapeutic rationale.

Anti-inflammatories are fundamental here, as their use not
only eases the symptom picture but also helps arrest de-
generative changes to bony tissue. Salicylate-based
herbs, such as Filipendula ulmaria, are especially helpful.

Alteratives are the key to any attempt to transform sys-
temic problems (if present). However, if the os-
teoarthritis is associated primarily with physical wear-
and-tear, alteratives are not quite as fundamental. In
cases like this, Menyanthes trifoliata is primarily indi-
cated.

Antispasmodics lessen the impact of physical friction by re-
laxing the muscular envelope around the arthroses.
Cimicifuga racemosa proves effective here.

Circulatory stimulants support the healing process by in-
creasing blood flow through the tissue. The bark and
berries of Zanthoxylum americanum are good choices.

Specific Remedies

Both Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean) and Harpagophytum
procumbens (devil’s claw) could be considered specifics
here. However, because of the multifactorial etiology of
osteoarthritis, it is unlikely that there will be any one spe-
cific remedy.

Urtica dioica (nettle) is a traditional European remedy
that is both taken internally and used externally as a rube-
facient. This external use involves fresh, raw leaf and is
not for the fainthearted! One study, performed in 1999 at
Plymouth Medical School in the United Kingdom, exam-
ined the traditional reputation of nettle sting for relieving
joint pain? The results showed that nettle sting was
markedly effective in relieving pain for many patients.
The authors noted, “No observed side effects were re-
ported, except a transient urticarial rash,” which should
come as no surprise to anyone familiar with this plant!

----- PAGE 428 -----
420 @ TREATMIN1 APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

A Prescription for Osteoarthritis

Menyanthes trifoliata 2 parts
Filipendula ulmaria 1 parts
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Zanthoxylum americanum 1 part
Apium graveolens 1 part
Angelica archangelica 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, use
external treatments as indicated. If the patient experiences
stomach irritation related to Menyanthes, add Althaea.

Table 19.4. Actions Supplied by Prescription
for Osteoarthritis

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Menyanthes trifoliata, Cimicifuga racemosa

Anti-inflammatory
{salicylate

Filipendula ulmaria

Anti-inflammatory
{general)

Angelica archangelica, Menyanthes trifoliata,

Cimicifuga racemosa
Nervine antispasmodic — Cimicifuga racemosa, Apium graveolens

Peripheral vasodilator  Zanthoxylum americanum

Diuretic Apium graveolens, Achillea millefolium
Carminative Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens
Bitter tonic Menyanthes trifoliata, Achillea millefolium

External Treatments for Osteoarthritis

External remedies may be used to ease pain and reduce
inflammation, at the same time helping to eliminate tox-
ins by stimulating circulation to the affected area. While
such treatment will not lead to a fundamental change on
its own, it will contribute to the healing process and ease
discomfort.

A Warming, Stimulating Liniment

A very straightforward liniment can be made by mixing equal
parts of glycerin and tincture of cayenne. Rub this into the af-
fected joints or muscles. Care must be taken not to use the lin-
iment on broken skin or on the sensitive skin of the face, as it
will cause a burning sensation. This is the “heat” that relieves
pain in cold, aching joints and stiff muscles.

St. John’s Wort Oil

If there is pain in the muscle tissue or any nerve pain, St. John’s
wort oil (Hypericum perforatum) can be effective. Make St.
John’s wort oil in late summer by picking fresh blossoms and
putting them into oil:

Fresh, just-opened
Hypericum perforatum flowers 100 g (4 02)

Olive or sunflower oil 1 pint (% liter)

Crush the flowers in a tablespoon of the oil and place in a clear
glass container. Pour the rest of the oil over the flowers and mix
well. Leave the container open in a warm place for three to five
days, then seal the container well and place it in sunshine or an-
other warm place for three to six weeks. Shake daily until the oil
takes on a bright red color. Next, press the mixture through a
cloth and let stand for a day to allow the oil to separate from
the water. Carefully pour off the oil and store in an airtight,
Opaque container. St. John’s wort oil may be rubbed on areas of
rheumatic pain, used for neuralgic or sciatic pains, or applied to
minor burns.

Broader Context of Treatment

Exercise is an essential component of any treatment plan
for osteoarthritis. Appropriate activity improves mood
and outlook, decreases pain, increases flexibility, improves
heart health and blood flow, helps reduce or maintain
weight, and promotes general physical fitness. However,
determining the amount and form of exercise to recom-
mend for a patient with osteoarthritis will depend on
which joints are involved, how stable they are, and
whether the patient has undergone a joint replacement
procedure. The specifics will vary from individual to in-
dividual, so the patient should seek advice from a doctor
or physical therapist.

Strength training. Exercise bands are inexpensive devices
that are useful for resistance training.

Aerobic exercise. This form of activity helps keep the lungs
and circulatory system in shape.

Range of motion exercises. These activities help keep the
joints limber.

Agility activities. These exercises are intended to help the
patient maintain daily living skills.

When exercising and during normal daily activities, it
is important for the patient to stay aware of the need to
rest and protect the joints. The patient must learn to rec-
ognize the body’s signals, and know when to stop or slow
down in order to prevent pain. For some people, relax-

----- PAGE 429 -----
ation, stress reduction, and biofeedback techniques can
help. Others may need to use canes or splints to take pres-
sure off the joints. Splints provide extra support for weak-
ened joints and can help keep the joint in the correct po-
sition. However, splints should be used for limited
periods only, because joints and muscles must be exer-
cised to prevent stiffness and weakness.

Exercise and a healthy diet facilitate weight control,
another essential component of osteoarthritis treatment.
Losing weight reduces stress on weight-bearing joints
and limits further injury.

Nutrition is another very important factor in the suc-
cessful treatment of osteoarthritis. While there is a certain
degree of controversy as to which foods or supplements are
most effective, it is always appropriate to focus on avoiding
foods that definitely aggravate arthritic problems.

For a basic osteoarthritis exclusion diet, the patient
should avoid the following foods and beverages:

Coffee, both regular and decaffeinated

Red meat of any kind

Vinegar and anything based upon vinegar (for example,
pickles), with the possible exception of apple cider
vinegar

Plants in the Solanaceae (nightshade) family, such as
tomatoes, eggplant, peppers, potatoes, and tobacco

High-acid vegetables, such as tomatoes and rhubarb

High-acid berries, such as gooseberries, red currants, and
black currants

Refined white flour products

Artificial additives, flavorings, and preservatives

Processed foods

Red wine, port, and sherry

Carbonated drinks

Shellfish

Any food or beverage that causes specific problems for
the patient

Exclusion diets produce the best results in earlier,
more painful stages of this long-term condition. In long-
standing osteoarthritis, a balance must be struck between
the adoption of good eating habits that will have a posi-
tive psychological impact on the patient and adherence to
a nutritional dogma that may, in the long run, be of ques-
tionable efficacy.

Pain relief is, of course, an ongoing concern in the
management of this chronic condition. As discussed ear-
lier, there are a number of nonpharmaceutical ways to re-
lieve the pain of osteoarthritis. Warm towels, hot packs,
and warm baths represent ways to apply moist heat to the
joint, relieving pain and stiffness. In some cases, a cold

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM @ 421

pack (such as a bag of ice or frozen vegetables wrapped in
a towel) can relieve pain or numb the sore area. Water
therapy in a heated pool may also relieve pain and stiffness.

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Pizzorno and
Murray suggest the following supplements:*

Glucosamine sulfate: 1,500 mg/day
Vitamin E: 600 TU/day

Vitamin A: 5,000 TU/day

Vitamin C: 1 to 3g/day

Vitamin Bg: 50 mg/day

Pantothenic acid: 12.5 mg/day
Methionine: 400 mg three times a day
Zinc: 45 mg/day

Copper: | mg/day

Numerous physical aids and supports are available for
patients who have become disabled by this disease. A
wealth of simple inventions, called activities of daily living
(ADL) devices, can help patients manage everyday life
tasks. These range from specially designed kitchen de-
vices (such as cutlery, can openers, and faucet grips) to
brushes with extended handles and adaptations to help
with using the telephone, These devices can enormously
improve the patient’s quality and experience of life. More
information can be obtained from occupational therapists
and other physical therapy specialists. Other sources of
information are the Arthritis Foundation and local agen-
cies dedicated to the concerns of aging.

RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS

A chronic syndrome characterized by nonspecific, usually
symmetric inflammation of the peripheral joints, poten-
tially resulting in progressive destruction of articular and
periarticular structures; generalized manifestations may
also be present. (The Merck Manual)

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory condition
that involves not only the joints, but other connective tis-
sue as well. About 2.1 million Americans, or 1% of the
adult population of the United States, have rheumatoid
arthritis. Rheumatoid arthritis affects all races and ethnic
groups. The disease most often begins in middle age and
occurs with increased frequency in older people, but it
may also affect children and young adults. Like some
other forms of arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis occurs much
more frequently in women than in men. Two to three
times as many women as ren develop the disease.
Rheumatoid arthritis is one of several autoimmune
arthritic diseases. An important laboratory finding in this
condition is the presence of rheumatoid factor (RF), a

----- PAGE 430 -----
422 o TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

special antibody active against the normal antibodies in
the bloodstream. Why RF develops is unknown, but cur-
rent theories point to an exaggerated immune response to
long-term stimulation by infectious agents or foreign
substances. RF itself is not directly responsible for the in-
flammatory process, but functions solely as a marker for
the disease.

The joint destruction that occurs in severe rheuma-
toid arthritis is caused by inflammation of the synovial
membrane, the thin, smooth capsule that lines the joints.
As part of the immune response to the unknown stimulus,
white blood cells and antibodies infiltrate the synovial
membranes, inducing them to proliferate and fold over
on themselves. Persistent or recurrent inflammation re-
sults in permanent damage to the joint cartilage, bones,
ligaments, and tendons. This widespread inflammatory
process may also involve other tissues, including blood
vessels, skin, nerves, muscles, heart, and lungs. The result
is painful joints, loss of mobility, and generalized soreness
and depression.

Several special features distinguish rheumatoid
arthritis from other types of arthritis. For example,
rheumatoid arthritis generally occurs symmetrically. That
is, if one knee or hand is involved, the other will be also.
The disease often affects the wrist joints and the finger
joints closest to the hand. It can also impact other parts of
the body, and may be associated with fatigue, occasional
fever, and a general sense of malaise.

Signs and Symptoms of Rheumatoid Arthritis

Joint pain, aching, and stiffness come on gradually, followed
in a few weeks by joint swelling, redness, and warmth.

Presentation is usually symmetrical. The hands, wrists, shoul-
ders, elbows, feet, ankles and knees on both sides of the
body are typically involved, but the patient may initially
present with inflammation of a single joint.

Symptoms tend to be worst in the morning and diminish as
the day goes on.

Rheumatoid nodules (small, firm lumps beneath the skin)
appear in some patients, especially around the elbows.

Fatigue. The patient often experiences distressing fatigue
in the early afternoon and has difficulty sleeping in
general.

Other organs may be affected. Vasculitis, or inflammation of
the blood vessels, may cause skin rashes, ulcers, and
gangrene. Other manifestations include scarring of the
lungs, inflammation of the membranes surrounding
the heart and lungs, nerve damage, dry eyes and mouth
(Sjogrens syndrome), and enlargement of the spleen

and lymph nodes.

The experience of rheumatoid arthritis varies greatly
from person to person. The condition may last only a few
months and resolve without causing any noticeable dam-
age. It may take the form of mild or moderate disease
with periods of worsened symptoms, called flares, and pe-
riods during which the patient feels better, called remis-
sions. The most severe form of rheumatoid arthritis is ac-
tive most of the time, lasts for many years, and leads to
serious joint damage and disability.

For about 5% to 10% of rheumatoid arthritis pa-
tients, the arthritis is mild or limited to one or two
episodes. Another 25% have an erratic pattern of pro-
longed remissions and periods of relapse. In the majority,
however, the clinical course is progressive with intermit-
tent flare-ups. Most patients continue to function despite
pain and discomfort, but about 10% of rheumatoid
arthritis patients progress to severe permanent joint de-
formity, limitation of movement, or serious disability.

Treatment of Rheumatoid Arthritis

The herbal treatment guidelines given here ensure that
appropriate tonics are included. Potentially, every sys-
tem and organ of the body may need tonic support in
this autoimmune condition that so severely affects con-
nective tissue. The two primary foci for support are the
musculoskeletal and immune systems. Nervine tonics
are also indicated. If there are problems with the digestive
system, emphasize tonics as well as remedies for specific
symptoms.

Actions Indicated

Because of the nature of the inflammation in rheuma-
toid arthritis, this is where phytosterol-containing anti-
inflammatory herbs, such as Dioscorea villosa (wild
yam) and Bupleurum, come into their own. However,
the salicylate-containing herbs are still helpful.
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet) fits perfectly.
Phytosterol- and salicylate-containing herbs comple-
ment one another well.

The complex of potential causes of this autoimmune
condition includes aspects of psychology. Even if a causal
role cannot be proved, there can be no doubt that anxiety
and depression are major aggravating factors for rheuma-
toid arthritis. Nervine relaxants also help as antispasmod-
ics, and nervine tonics will ease the constant stress caused
by the pain and discomfort.

Antirheumatics will help, but their selection must be based
on a rationale that takes into account the individual's
unique issues.

----- PAGE 431 -----
Anti-inflammatories are very important here, as much of
the symptom picture is the direct result of the inflam-
matory process.

Alteratives play a pivotal role in any immune system work.
Menyanthes trifoliata is essential.

Antispasmodics, such as Cimicifuga racemosa, will ease any
associated muscular tension.

Circulatory stimulants are not as crucial in rheumatoid
arthritis as they are in osteoarthritis.

Rubefacients are not as relevant here as in osteoarthritis,
and, in fact, can aggravate symptoms of rheumatoid
arthritis.

Analgesics will ease both the pain and the stress response
to the pain.

Nervines are especially relevant, considering the acknowl-
edged psychosomatic contribution to this problem.
Tonics and antidepressants will support the patient in
coping with this extremely tiring and debilitating con-
dition. Nervine relaxants help as antispasmodics.

Hypnotics will help with sleep in the face of pain.

Specific Remedies

There are no specific remedies for rheumatoid arthritis.
This is to be expected, due to the multifactorial nature of
this immune-mediated condition. However, alterative-
based antirheumatic herbs are of special relevance here,
with an emphasis on the alterative action. These include
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean), Harpagophytum procum-
bens (devil’s claw), and Arctium lappa (burdock). Guaiacum
and Dioscorea villosa (wild yam) are especially useful as
anti-inflammatories. Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew) can
be very helpful for some people.

Beyond this, appropriate treatment and herb selec-
tion are largely a reflection of the diagnostic skill of the
practitioner, Much will depend on the patient’s adoption
of appropriate dietary and lifestyle changes and adherence
to the dosage regimen.

A Prescription for Rheumatoid Arthritis

Menyanthes trifoliata 2 parts
Filipendula ulmaria 1/2 parts
Dioscorea villosa 1/2 parts
Guaiacum officinale 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Cimicifuga racemosa 1 part
Apium graveolens 1 part
Angelica archangelica 1 part
Achillea millefolium 1 part
Hypericum perforatum 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM & 423

A Prescription for Sleep and Pain Relief

Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Piscidia erythrina 1 part
Passiflora incarnata 1 part

Dosage: 5 to 15 ml of tincture one-half hour before retiring

The digestive systerr. must be working well, so treat
any stomach irritation as a priority. These prescriptions
do not take such problems into account. As in os-
teoarthritis, if the patient is experiencing epigastric ten-
derness due to the harshness of Menyanthes or Guaiacum,
add Althaea.

Table 19.5. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Rheumatoid Arthritis

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Menyanthes trifoliata, Guaiacum

officinale, Cimicifuga racemosa

Anti-inflammatory (salicylate) Filipendula ulmaria

Anti-inflammatory (saponin) Guaiacum officinale

Anti-inflammatory (general) Angelica archangelica, Menyanthes
trifoliata, Guaiacum officinale,

Cimicifuga racemosa

Nervine (antispasmodic) Valeriana officinalis, Cimicifuga

racemosa, Apium graveolens

Nervine (tonic and antidepressant) Hypericum perforatum

Diuretic Apium graveolens,
Achillea millefolium
Carminative Angelica archangelica, Valeriana
officinalis, Apium graveolens
Bitter tonic Menyanthes trifoliata,

Achillea millefolium

Broader Context of Treatment

As in osteoarthritis, the patient must strike a good balance
between rest and exercise, resting more when the disease
is active and exercising more when it is not. Rest helps re-
duce active joint inflammation and pain and eases fatigue.
Short rest breaks every now and then are more helpful
than long ones. Exercise maintains healthy and strong
muscles, preserving joint mobility and flexibility. Exercise
can also help with sleep problems, reduce pain, foster a
positive attitude, and facilitate weight loss.

----- PAGE 432 -----
424 <=. TREATMEN1 APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Rheumatoid arthritis is often as much an emotional
challenge as a physical one. People with this condition
commonly experience fear, anger, and frustration—
emotions that can greatly increase the level of stress al-
ready generated by pain and physical limitation. Although
stress does not appear to cause rheumatoid arthritis, it
makes coping with the disease much more difficult. A
number of techniques can help patients cope with stress.
Regular rest periods can be beneficial, as can relaxation,
distraction, or visualization exercises. See chapter 16 for
more suggestions on managing stress.

The daily living aids mentioned in the discussion on
osteoarthritis can be just as helpful for patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. The general dietary suggestions
given for osteoarthritis are also pertinent here. However,
the nutritional supplement recommendations are differ-
ent. In Téxthook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Pizzorno and
Murray suggest the following supplements:°

DHEA: 50 to 200 mg/day

EPA: 1.8 g/day; or flaxseed oil: 1 tablespoon/day
Pantothenic acid: 500 mg four times a day
Quercetin: 250 mg three times a day, between meals
Vitamin C: 1 to 3 g/day

Vitamin E; 400 IU/day

Copper: 1 mg/day

Manganese: 15 mg/day

Selenium: 200 mcg/day

Zine: 45 mg/day

OSTEOPOROSIS

A generalized, progressive diminution in bone tissue mass
per unit volume, causing skeletal weakness, even though
the ratio of mineral to organic elements is unchanged in
the remaining morphologically normal bone. (The Merck
Manual)

Osteoporosis is a disease that weakens bones to the point
at which they break easily, especially those in the hip,
spine, and wrist. About 25 million Americans have osteo-
porosis, and 80% of these people are women. One of two
women and one in eight men over the age of 50 will at
some point have an osteoporosis-related fracture.
Although the exact cause of osteoporosis is unknown,
the process by which the bone becomes porous is under-
stood. Normally, 6% to 12% of an adult’s total skeleton is
replaced each year. After skeletal mass peaks—usually
around the age of 35—bones begin to lose calcium faster
than they can replace it. For women, the loss of bone den-

sity speeds up during the first three to seven years after
menopause, and then slows down again. This post-
menopausal increase in bone loss is believed to be caused
by the decline in estrogen production.

Certain conditions that impair the body’s ability to ab-
sorb calcium, such as kidney disease, Cushing’s syndrome,
and hyperthyroidism, can also lead to osteoporosis. Other
factors associated with osteoporosis are surgical removal
of part of the stomach or intestine and excessive use of
glucocorticoids, other steroids, or anticonvulsant drugs.
Prolonged immobility due to paralysis or illness can cause
calcium loss, leading to eventual bone loss.

Osteoporosis is preventable. A diet rich in calcium,
vitamin D, and phytoestrogens and a lifestyle that in-
cludes regular exercise are thought to be the best ways to
prevent osteoporosis.

Calcium

Calcium-rich foods, such as dairy products, are the pre-
ferred source of calcium. Calcium-fortified foods and
calcium supplements are other means by which optimal cal-
cium intake can be reached in those who cannot meet this
need by ingesting conventional foods.

Phosphorus-rich foods should be avoided, as they can
promote bone loss. High-phosphorus foods include red
meats, soft drinks, and foods containing phosphate addi-
tives. Overconsumption of alcohol and caffeine is thought
to impair calcium absorption and should be avoided.

Good Food Sources of Calcium

Low-fat dairy products, such as cheese, yogurt, and milk

Canned fish with edible bones, such as salmon and
sardines

Dark green leafy vegetables, such as kale, collards, and
broccoli

Calcium-fortified foods, such as bread made with calcium-
fortified flour and calcium-fortified orange juice

As most women get only one half to one third as
much calcium as they need from the diet, calcium supple-
ments can make up the difference. The chelated forms of
calcium supplements are most effective. These include
calcium citrate and calcium gluconate.

Conclusions of a panel convened by the National
Institutes of Health were published in the December 28,
1994, issue of the Journal of the American Medical
Association. The panel’s recommended intake levels, pre-
sented in table 19.6, include both dietary and supplemen-
tal calcium.

----- PAGE 433 -----
Table 19.6. Optimal Calcium Intake®

AGE RECOMMENDED INTAKE
Birth-6 months 400 mg/day

6-12 months 600 mg/day

1-5 years 800 mg/day

6-10 years 800~1,200 mg/day

Tl-24 years 1,200-1,500 mg/day

Women 25-50 years 1,000 mg/day

Pregnant or lactating wornen ,200-1,500 mg/day
Postmenopausal women on ,000 mg/day
estrogen replacement therapy

Postmenopausal women not ,500 mg/day

on estrogen therapy

Men 25-65 years ,000 mg/day
Women and men over 65 500 mg/day

Vitamin D and Magnesium

Adequate vitamin D is essential for optimal calcium ab-
sorption. Even a brief period of sun exposure each day
provides enough vitamin D for most people. Taking vita-
min D supplements (400 to 800 IU/day) may be helpful if
the individual does not live in a sunny climate.
Magnesium is also necessary to help the body absorb cal-
cium. The recommended daily dose of magnesium is 250
to 350 mg.

Exercise

Exercise not only builds bone strength, but it also helps
prevent bone loss. Weight-bearing exercises that put
stress on bones, such as dancing, running, walking, stair
climbing, and aerobics, reduce bone loss and help prevent
osteoporosis. To benefit from the exercise, it must be
done at least three times a week for 30 to 45 minutes.

Phytoestrogens

Plant estrogenic substances, or phytoestrogens, are con-
stituents of many herbs with a historical use for condi-
tions that are now treated with synthetic estrogens. They
may be suitable alternatives to estrogens for the preven-
tion of osteoporosis in menopausal women. Given the
protective benefits of soy isoflavones against breast cancer
alone, the regular consumption of soy foods is encouraged.

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM @ 425

Herbal and Nutritional Treatments for
Osteoporosis
Herbal and nutritional treatment cannot eliminate osteo-
porosis, but it can slow the process. The North American
tradition relies on herbs such as Equisetum arvense (horse-
tail), Avena sativa (oat straw), and Urtica dioica (nettles) for
the long-term treatment of osteoporosis. Some believe
that they are effective because they have a high calcium
content. In fact, these herbs do not contain particularly
high levels of calcium, but they are often effective anyway!

Taking into account the physiological processes that
underlie osteoporosis, herbal hormonal normalizers may
be helpful if started early enough. Antirheumatic herbs
can help with pain in the joints and muscles, and anti-
inflammatory herbs will similarly reduce the discomfort

‘

associated with this problem.

A Prescription for Osteoporosis

Vitex agnus-castus 2 parts
Equisetum arvense ] part
Avena sativa | part
Urtica dioica ] part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

Broader Context of Treatment
Here are some general preventive guidelines.

Eat foods rich in calcium, such as nonfat milk, low-fat yo-
gurt, broccoli, cauliflower, salmon, tofu, sesame seeds,
almonds, and leafy green vegetables.

Eat foods that contain plant estrogens, especially tofu and
other soy products.

Avoid foods that can interfere with absorption of calcium, such
as red meats, soft drinks, and excessive amounts of al-
cohol and caffeine.

Do weight-bearing exercises for 30 to 45 minutes at least
three times a week.

Do not smoke. Some studies have shown that women who
smoke increase their risk of developing osteoporosis by
50%.

Avoid. antacids containing aluminum, as they can prevent
calcium absorption by binding with phosphorus in the
intestines.

In addition, the following supplements are recom-
mended to help prevent and treat osteoporosis:’

High-potency multiple vitamin and mineral formula
Calcium: 800 to 1,200 mg/day
Vitamin D: 400 TU/day

----- PAGE 434 -----
426 — TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Magnesium: 400 to 800 mg/day
Boron (as sodium tetrahydraborate): 3 to 5 mg/day

GOUT:

A metabolic disease marked by a painful inflammation of
the joints, deposits of urates in and around the joints, and
usually an excessive amount of uric acid in the blood.
(The Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary)

Gout is one of the most painful of the rheumatic diseases.
It is caused by deposits of needlelike crystals of uric acid
in the connective tissue, joint spaces, or both. The in-
flammatory process here is initiated by the deposition of
uric acid from the bloodstream in the joint. When these
crystals are ingested by white blood cells, the cells release
enzymes that generate inflammation.

Gout accounts for about 5% of all cases of arthritis.
Pseudogout, also a crystal-induced arthritis, is a condition
with similar symptoms that results from deposits of cal-
cium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals in the joints. It
may also be called calcium pyrophosphate deposition dis-
ease, crystal deposition disease, or chondrocalcinosis.

To understand gout, it is first necessary to have a
basic knowledge of the chemistry of uric acid. This natu-
rally occurring substance is a product of the chemical
breakdown of the purine bases that compose the genetic
material, DNA. As cells die and release DNA from their
chromosomes, purines are converted into uric acid that is
excreted in the urine and, to a lesser extent, through the
intestinal tract. The amount of uric acid dissolved in the
bloodstream is directly related to this delicate balance be-
tween uric acid production and excretion.

Normally, uric acid is dissolved in the blood and
passes through the kidneys into the urine, where it is
eliminated. If the body increases its production of uric
acid or if the kidneys do not eliminate enough uric acid
from the body, uric acid builds up, resulting in a condition
called Ayperuricemia. Hyperuricemia may also occur when
a person eats too many high-purine foods, such as liver,
dried beans and peas, anchovies,
Hyperuricemia by itself is not dangerous, but if hyper-
uricemia leads to the formation of uric acid crystals, gout
may develop. However, only 1 in 20 people with hyper-

and gravies.

uricemia goes on to develop gout.

Acute attacks of gout are caused by the body’s in-
flammatory reaction to the intermittent precipitation of
uric acid crystals into the joints. The excess crystals build
up in the joint spaces, causing inflammation. Deposits of
uric acid, called tophi, can appear as lumps under the skin
around the joints and at the rim of the ear. In addition,

uric acid crystals can collect in the kidneys and cause kid-
ney stones. For many people, gout first affects the joints
of the big toe, a condition called podagra.

Risk Factors for the Development of

Hyperuricemia and Gout

Genetics may play a role in determining a person’s risk,
since 6% to 18% of people with gout have a family his-
tory of the disease.

Obesity increases the risk of developing hyperuricemia and
gout, because excessive food intake increases the body’s
production of uric acid.

Overconsumption of alcohol can lead to hyperuricemia, be-
cause it interferes with the elimination of uric acid
from the body.

Eating too many purine-rich foods can cause or aggravate
gout.

An enzyme defect that interferes with the way the body
breaks down purines causes gout in a smal] number of
people.

Exposure to lead in the environment can cause gout.

Some people are at risk for developing high uric acid
levels because they have coexisting medical conditions or
because they take certain medicines. The following
medicines can lead to hyperuricemia because they reduce
the body’s ability to eliminate uric acid:

* Diuretics

* Salicylates, or medicines made from salicylic acid, such
as aspirin

¢ The vitamin niacin, also called nicotinic acid

* Cyclosporine, a medicine used to control the body’s re-
jection of transplanted organs

¢ Levodopa, a medicine used to treat Parkinson’s
disease

Treatment of Gout

Actions Indicated

Diuretics play a pivotal role in any attempt to go beyond
mere symptom relief, as they can help flush the urates
from the body.

Anti-inflammatories may help, but probably not nearly as
much as the patient would like. Inflammation is an ap-
propriate body response to the presence of crystals.

Specific Remedies

Colchicine, from Colchicum autwmnale (autumn crocus), is
a specific allopathic drug. However, use of the whole
plant is very unsafe, due to its inherent toxicity.

----- PAGE 435 -----
A Prescription for Gout

Eupatorium purpureum 2 parts
Elymus repens 2 parts
Apium graveolens 2 parts
Guaiacum officinale 1 part

Dosage: up to 5ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, a
strong infusion of Urtica dioica should be drunk often.

Broader Context of Treatment
Gout appears to be common among people who eat diets
that include meat and animal fats, but is unusual in peo-
ple who follow vegetarian diets. In addition, rapid weight-
loss diets may increase uric acid levels in the blood.

Here are some recommendations to help predisposed
people avoid gout attacks:

Drink 6 pints of fluid a day. Slightly alkaline, natural
spring-water is recommended. This helps dilute the
urine and promote excretion of uric acid through con-
tinued flushing of the kidneys.

Avoid purine-rich foods, such as anchovies, asparagus, crab,
fish roe, herring, kidney, liver, sweetbreads, meat
gravies and broth, mushrooms, mussels, peas, beans,
and sardines. s

Avoid all alcoholic beverages.

Eat raw fruit, vegetables, grains, seeds, and nuts. Cherries are
especially recommended; the patient should consume
‘2 pound of fresh or canned cherries a day.

Exercise regularly and maintain a healthy body weight. Lose
weight if overweight.

Cherries are particularly effective in lowering uric
acid levels and preventing attacks of gout. Cherries,
hawthorn berries, blueberries, and other dark red-blue
berries are rich sources of constituents called anthocyani-
dins and proanthocyanidins. These compounds give those
fruits their deep red-blue color, and have the ability to
prevent breakdown of collagen in connective tissue.

Anthocyanidins and proanthocyanidins affect colla-
gen metabolism in a number of ways:

¢ Reinforce the collagen matrix of connective tissue
(ground substance, cartilage, tendons, etc.)

¢ Minimize free radical damage through antioxidant
activity

© Inhibit the breakdown of collagen during inflammation

These effects on collagen structures make flavonoids

extremely useful in the treatment of a wide variety of in-

flammatory conditions, including gout and rheumatoid

arthritis.

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM .& 427

There are a number of simple ways to reduce pain
and inflammation during an acute gout attack. However,
if the joint is too painful to touch, they can be difficult to
implement. If the pain is not too severe, apply a plastic
bag containing a few ice cubes or a bag of frozen vegeta-
bles to the joint to relieve painful swelling. Wrap the cold
bag in a soft cloth or towel and hold it against the painful
area for up to five minutes at a time, then repeat as
needed. Because even the pressure of a sheet or blanket
can cause pain in a gout-afflicted joint, at bedtime rest the
gouty foot inside a cardboard box or a plastic laundry bas-
ket turned on its side.

BURSITIS AND TENDINITIS

Bursitis: Acute or chronic inflammation of a bursa. (The
Merck Manual)

Tendinitis: Inflammation of a tendon (tendinitis) and the
lining of the tendon sheath (tenosynovitis), usually occur-
ring simultaneously. (The Merck Manual)

A bursa is a pocket of connective tissue adjacent to a joint.
Lined by a smooth inner surface, the bursa facilitates the
gliding movements of muscles and tendons over bony
protuberances. Bursitis is inflammation of a bursa that re-
sults in pain, tenderness, stiffness, and, in some cases,
swelling and redness. The inflammatory process may af-
fect any bursa, but bursitis is most common in the shoul-
der, elbow, hip, and knee.

Bursitis that occurs in the knees is often called
“housemaid’s knee” it is called “tennis elbow” when it af-
fects that joint. The condition may be caused by a hard
knock or accident or by slow, gradual change. When it is
part of the gradual development of rheumatic tendencies,
it should be treated as described in the section on myalgia.
When acute (often due to an accident or injury), the best
treatment is to use a compress or stimulating liniment on
the affected area. (See External Applications for
Musculoskeletal Problems earlier in this chapter.) Both
will help reduce inflammation and ease pain. However, if
the problem continues, an internal treatment program
should be initiated. See treatment recommendations for
myalgia.

Bursitis is associated with strenuous activity, particu-
larly among manual workers and athletes. However, it can
also affect otherwise sedentary people who push their
bodies past reasonable limits. Warming up before strenu-
ous exercise and cooling down afterward is the most ef-
fective way to avoid bursitis and other strains affecting the
bones, muscles, and ligarnents.

----- PAGE 436 -----
428 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Tendinitis is an inflammation in or around a tendon,
the fibrous tissue that connects muscle to bone. Tendons
withstand bending, stretching, and twisting, but can be-
come inflamed because of overuse, disease, or injury.
The pain can be significant, and worsens if continued
use of the joint furthers the damage. Most tendinitis
heals in about two weeks, but chronic tendinitis can take
more than six weeks to resolve, especially if the sufferer
does not give the tendon adequate time to heal before
using it.

Tendons can become inflamed when overstressed by
any activity, but the most common cause by far is repeti-
tive stress—using the same joint for the same stressful
movement again and again. This happens not only in
sports, but also in many types of office work and other
situations.

Treatment of Bursitis and Tendinitis

While the patient may be tempted to “tough out” the
pain, this is not a good idea. Left untreated, chronic bur-
sitis can lead to the formation of calcium deposits in soft
tissues, and may even cause permanent limitation of mo-
tion in the affected joint.

Actions Indicated

Antirheumatics often help; the choice will depend upon
the practitioner's interpretation of the patient’s total
picture.

Anti-inflammatories provide the primary action needed for
symptomatic relief. Salix is an example.

Antispasmodics, such as Viburnum opulus, ease local muscle
tension.

Circulatory stimulants and rubefacients contribute by in-
creasing local blood circulation.

Analgesics may help with pain. However, the legal herbal anal-
gesics can do very little in such cases, so pain relief is best
achieved with anti-inflammatories and antispasmodics.

A Prescription for Bursitis or Tendinitis

Salix spp. 2 parts
Viburnum opulus 2 parts
Apium graveolens 2 parts
Zanthoxylum americanum 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

An Antispasmodic Rub
Lobelia inflata
Viburnum opulus

1 part
1 part

Rub tincture mixture into painful muscles as needed

Table 19.7. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Bursitis and Tendinitis

ACTION HERBS
Anti-inflammatory (salicylate) Salix spp.
Anti-inflammatory (general) Apium graveolens

Antispasmodic Lobelia inflata, Viburnum oputus,

Apium graveolens

Circulatory stimulant Zanthoxylum americanum

Broader Context of Treatment

Diathermy (deep-heat therapy) can help relieve the dis-
comfort and inflammation of bursitis and tendinitis and
also soothe tense muscles, nerves, and tendons. The goals
of treatment are to restore painless movement to the joint
and to maintain the strength of surrounding muscles
while giving the injured tissues me to heal. Adequate
rest is crucial. Returning too soon to the activity that
caused the injury can lead to chronic tendinitis or torn
tendons. An immediate treatment for tendinitis and bur-
sitis is known by the acronym RICE, which stands for rest,
ice, compression, and elevation.

Rest is mainly a matter of remembering not to use the
joint, especially for the same action by which it was
injured.

Ice can be a bag of frozen vegetables if no ice pack is
handy.

Compression is best provided by wrapping the area snugly,
but not painfully tight, with a sports bandage.

Elevation reduces blood pressure in the injured area.
Elevate the ankle by putting it on a footstool, for ex-
ample, or elevate the elbow onto a table.

RESTLESS LEGS SYNDROME

Restless legs syndrome is a puzzling neurological disorder
for which a cure remains elusive. The syndrome is char-
acterized by tingling or crawling sensations deep in the
legs, associated with an overwhelming desire to move the
legs to relieve the discomfort. The symptoms often
worsen at night.

Restless legs syndrome is believed to be a genetic
neurological condition that is activated by a chemical im-
balance in the brain. Research shows that caffeine can ag-
gravate symptoms. The syndrome has also been linked to
iron or folic acid deficiency, especially in people with kid-
ney disease.

----- PAGE 437 -----
Treatment of Restless Legs Syndrome

Herbs with strong relaxing qualities may be effective in
reducing muscle tension and relieving pain. Such herbs
include Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis, Piper
methysticum, and Cimicifuga racemosa. Viburnum opulus
may also help relax muscles.

To help correct nutrient deficiencies that may con-
tribute to symptoms, the patient should take vitamin E, a
multivitamin containing iron, and B complex. These
should be taken in the standard RDA doses. To offset folic
acid deficiency, the patient should take 400 to 1,000
meg/day of this nutrient.

Other recommendations include:

Avoid stimulants, such as caffeine and decongestants.
Avoid stimulating activities up to three hours before bed,
including exercising and consuming a heavy meal.
Keep the bedroom quiet and cool; an overly warm room ap-
pears to aggravate restless legs syndrome.

Practice relaxation techniques, such as yoga, biofeedback,
and meditation, to reduce stress.

Soak the feet in cool water for relief. Never use ice water,
which can cause nerve damage.

Leg Massage

1. Sit on the floor and bend one knee, keeping the foot
flat. Grasp the calf in both hands and use the
thumbs to find the muscle that runs along the out-
side of the shinbone, below the kneecap. Massage
the muscle all the way down to the anklebone.

2. Place both thumbs on the inside of the leg near the
anklebone. Keeping the hands around the calf for
support, massage the inside of the leg vigorously
with both thumbs, moving from the ankle up to the
knee.

3. Finally, use the thumbs and fingers of both hands to
knead the back and sides of the calf muscle. Work
from the knee down to the ankle. When finished
massaging one leg, repeat the entire process on the
other. Alternately massage both legs several times.

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM @ 429

References

1. Thie NM, Prasad NG, Major PW. Evaluation of glu-
cosamine sulfate compared to ibuprofen for the treat-
ment of temporomandibular joint osteoarthritis: a ran-
domized double blind controlled 3 month clinical trial.
The Journal of Rheumatology 2001 Jun; 28(6):1347-55.

2. Messier SP, Loeser RF, Mitchell MN, et al. Exercise and
weight loss in obese older adults with knee osteoarthri-
us: a preliminary study. Journal of the American Geriatrics
Society 2000 Sep; 48(9):1062-72.

3. Randall, et al. Nettle sting of Urtica dioica for joint
pain—an exploratory study of this complementary
therapy.” Complementary Therapies in Medicine 1999 Sep;
7(3):126-3 1.

4, Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

5. Ibid.

6. NIH Consensus Coriference. Optimal calcium intake.
NIH Consensus Development Panel on Optimal
Calcium Intake. The Journal of the American Medical
Association 1994, 272:1942-48,

7. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999,

Suggested Reading

Hoffmann D. Healthy Bones and Joints: A Natural Approach to
Treating Arthritis, Osteoporosis, Tendinitis, Myalgia,
Bursitis. Pownal, VT: Storey Books, 2000.

----- PAGE 438 -----
20

MN

THE SKIN

he skin is the body’s largest organ. It consists of a

| thin outer layer called the epidermis and a much

thicker inner layer called the dermis. Beneath the

dermis is a layer of little lobes of fat bound together by

tough fibers that extend down from the dermis. Between

the epidermis and dermis is the basement membrane, to

which both layers are attached. This characteristic layer-

ing of cells, from the live and actively replicating cells of

the stratum germinatum to the dead flakes on the surface,
provides the unique setting for the skin diseases.

The skin fulfills a number of important functions. As
the interface between the body’s internal structures and
the environment, the skin serves as a protective coat for
the body against mechanical injury and attack by bacteria,
fungi, viruses, and parasites. The pigment melanin pro-
tects against ultraviolet radiation. The skin is also a major
organ of elimination through the functions of: sweating
and sloughing off dead skin cells. In addition, a number of
immune responses occur in the skin.

In various ways, the skin also plays a vital role in tem-
perature regulation. Variable amounts of heat are lost
through the skin by transfer from the dermis capillaries to
the cooler epidermal cells. The amounts lost vary accord-
ing to constriction or dilation of the dermal blood cells.
The layer of insulating fat modifies the amount of heat
conducted from the depths of the body. Sweating cools
the epidermis through evaporation.

The skin also serves as a primary sensory organ. The
five sensations that arise from stimulation of skin nerves
are touch, pain, heat, cold, and pressure. Other skin sen-
sations, such as vibration, are composites of these basic
sensations. In hairy skin, the nerve endings are simple,
threadlike, naked terminals. In skin that is not hairy, there
are several types of specialized nerve endings. Although
they look the same, each nerve ending is capable of re-
sponding to only one of the five basic types of sensation.

Finally, the skin is the interface between our con-
sciousness and the world, the vehicle through which we
express, communicate, and perceive. Thus, psychological

430

and spiritual aspects of the individual impact and are im-
pacted by the skin.

This array of functions highlights the complexity of
the relationships among the skin, the internal organs, and
the psychology of the individual. From this awareness
comes an important therapeutic insight: Effective phy-
totherapeutic treatment of skin disease must be mediated
through internal medication, not topical application.
Treatment of skin problems must take into account
the whole panoply of issues involved. Similarly, the widely
held view that many skin problems are caused by “nerves”
is not very helpful. There is a deep and complex relation-
ship between the epidermis and the nervous system.
Developmentally, nerve and skin cells derive from the
same tissue in the human embryo. The close functional

relationship between the skin and the nervous system fa-
cilitates many aspects of homeostasis, such as body tem-
perature control.

In addition, the psychological relationship between
the individual and the skin is deep and complex. An in-
dividual expresses and experiences much of his or her
self-image through the skin. Thus, perception of the
world and communication to the world are also vital
skin functions.

To conclude that there is a simple causal relationship
between the nervous system and skin disorders ignores all
of the insights gained through the holistic perspective.
Anyone with obvious skin problems may well become
stressed, developing psychological coping mechanisms
that appear to be manifestations of nervous system issues.
But which comes first?

HERBS FOR THE TREATMENT OF
SKIN PROBLEMS

Internal treatment of skin problems will often be relevant,
but it may be appropriate to also apply herb externally for
local effects.

----- PAGE 439 -----
Alteratives

As with the musculoskeletal system, the skin is often the
focus for manifestations of systemic illness. For the phy-
totherapist, it should come as no surprise that alterative
herbs are again the cornerstone of any fundamental heal-
ing transformation. The therapist is continually faced
with the challenge of selecting appropriate alteratives for
given individuals, Because of its focus on secondary ac-
tions and system affinities, our herb selection model often
helps, but sometimes it is not the answer.

I have found the following generalization to be help-
ful. Bear in mind that as with all generalizations, there are
many exceptions. However, it is possible to broadly group
alterative herbs according to their botany and their im-
pact on elimination.

Table 20.1. Alteratives Grouped by Plant Part and
Route of Elimination

PLANT PART USED PRIMARY. ELIMINATION HERBAL EXAMPLES
PATHWAY/ACTION
Leaf Kidney/diuretic Galium aparine,
Trifolium pratense,
Urtica dioica
Root, rhizome, wood _Liver/hepatic Arctium lappa,

Mahonia aquifolium,
Rumex crispus

Herbs for Topical Application
Herbs offer a range of actions that directly impact the
skin, and can be applied directly by choosing the most
relevant method. Ste/laria media (chickweed), for example,
is an extremely effective remedy for the relief of itching.
The only itching for which it offers little relief is that due
to jaundice. It is most effective in a nongreasy form, such
as a bath, fomentation, poultice, lotion, or cream.

Herbal actions useful for topical application can be
divided into two broad groups.

1. Actions that exert specific local effects on areas of skin
to which herbs are applied include anti-inflammatory,
antimicrobial, antipruritic, astringent, emollient,
rubefacient, and vulnerary.

2. Actions intended primarily for internal effect but
enter the body via absorption through the skin po-
tentially include all herbal actions. However, alter-
ative actions have been most commonly applied in
this way.

THE SKIN.@ 431

Table 20.2. Herbs and Actions for Topical Use

ACTION HERBS

Antipruritic Calendula officinalis, Hamamelis virginiana,

Hypericum perforatum, Stellaria media

Anti-inflammatory — Calendula officinalis, Hypericum perforatum,
Matricaria recutita, Plantago spp.,

various anti-inflammatory essential oils

Emollient Althaea officinalis, Malva sylvestris,
Symphytum officinale, Ulmus rubra

Astringent Achillea raillefolium, Geranium maculatum,
Hamamelis virginiana

Vulnerary Symphytum officinale

Antimicrobial Allium sativum, Commiphora molmol, Hydrastis

canadensis, strongly antimicrobial essential oils
including Thymus vulgaris, Eucalyptus globulus,
Melaleuca spp.

Herbs for Topical Application: Pharmacy
Considerations

The whole array of topical herbal formulations developed
over the years deserves a special mention. See chapter 11
for more details on these various applications.

Baths

Baths, also known as ba/neotherapy, represent one of the
most pleasant ways to apply medications to the skin! They
are especially useful in treating widespread skin eruptions,
removing crusts and scales, and relieving inflammation and
itching. In short, any remedy added to a bath counts as bal-
neotherapy. Some commonly used bath additions are:

Salts. These range from simple table or Epsom salts to the
therapeutically important salt from the Dead Sea.

Oils. Essential oils can be added to supply a wide range of
properties. In the bath, they act through the skin but
also via the nose. Fixed oils may be added to baths too,
for their lubricating and softening properties.

Herbal extracts. These can be infusions, decoctions, or
tinctures.

Colloidal oatmeal. This remedy can be very antipruritic
and drying for conditions such as weeping eczema and
psoriasis.

Fomentations and Compresses
These methods facilitate the local application of liquid
formulations. They have the advantage of convenience

----- PAGE 440 -----
432 <x TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

and relative cleanliness, as compared with poultices.
Infusions, decoctions, tinctures, and oils can all be applied
in this way.

Poultices

Poultices are similar to fomentations and compresses but
instead incorporate the herb in some solid form, whether
whole leaf, mashed cut herb, or any relevant plant part
applied directly to the skin and held in place with a cloth.

Lotions

Lotions are liquid formulations for carrying the herbs.
The specific effects will depend upon both herbs and ve-
hicle. However, no matter what remedies they contain,
lotions will usually have a cooling effect due to evapora-
tion. They rarely need to be washed off, as part will be ab-
sorbed and the rest will evaporate.

Creams

Creams are suspensions of oil in water, and can be formu-
lated to be either greasy or nongreasy. They are primarily
emollient and protective. An advantage of creams is that
they do not insulate the skin too much and thus will not
cause a
Overheating can aggravate itching in many skin problems.

localized increase in skin temperature.

Ointments (Salves)

An ointment is a semisolid, lipid-based application.
Because fats are used as ointment bases (for example,
cocoa butter and beeswax), they extract plant constituents
well. In addition, the fats soften at skin temperature and
thus make the extracted material available to the skin.
Like creams, ointments and salves are emollient and pro-
tective, but they remain on the skin longer. This tenacity
will confer a local warming effect.

Pastes

A paste, or a mixture of powder in an ointment base, is a
traditional pharmaceutical formulation that is, unfortu-
nately, becoming rare. This is largely a matter of conve-
nience for dispensers, because they can be very time-
consuming to make. Pastes are indicated when the goal is
to keep the effects of the herbs on the surface for ex-
tended periods of tine. Their contents are not absorbed
well, but do impact the skin surface. They are useful in
conditions such as psoriasis, in which they facilitate the
removal of scales.

Powders

These are dry, finely powdered herbs or minerals. Examples
include colloidal oatmeal, Lycopodium powder, cornstarch,
and various clays. Their primary benefit is that they take up
moisture—for example, perspiration or exudates of
eczema. They can also be antipruritic and antimicrobial.

ECZEMA AND DERMATITIS

Superficial inflammation of the skin, characterized by
vesicles (when acute), redness, edema, oozing, crusting,
scaling, and usually itching. (The Merck Manual)

The terms eczema and dermatitis are the cause of much
confusion. In keeping with the broad guidelines given in
The Merck Manual, we shall use these terms synony-
mously to indicate superficial inflammation of the skin.
The dermatologist subdivides dermatitis and eczema into
a range of different disease entities distinguished by loca-
tion and appearance. For the phytotherapist, however, the
most important distinction is between cases with an in-
ternal or endogenous cause and those with a contact or
exogenous cause.

In cases of dermatitis or eczema of exogenous cause,
it is often possible to solve the problem simply by remov-
ing or avoiding the surface irritant, if it can be identified!
Such problems, often called contact dermatitis, are com-
monly caused by:

Industrial solvents

* Dyes

Nickel and other metals

¢ Leather-tanning chemicals
¢ Some soaps

In such cases, eczema is the final result of a complex
series of internal reactions to allergens and irritants. It is
often associated with other allergic diseases, such as hay
fever and asthma, but may also occur alone. The rash of
eczema is very itchy, peeling, thickened, and sometimes
weepy, and is typically seen in the creases of joints and
around the trunk. The rash may fluctuate seasonally and
can even change over the course of the day. Scratching
may lead to bleeding and infection. Blood tests in indi-
viduals with eczema reveal increased levels of cells and
chemicals associated with general allergic reactions.

One variation of eczema occurs on the palms of the
hands and sometimes on the soles of the feet. This type
may be quite frustrating to treat, because the common ex-
posure to moisture, irritants, and injury of these areas

----- PAGE 441 -----
leads to self-perpetuation of the disease. Furthermore,
the thickness of the skin in these regions makes topical
therapy more difficult.

A number of factors can aggravate eczema, although
the specifics vary from person to person. Dietary factors
are particularly important, especially in children. Milk
and milk products are the most common triggers.
Primary aggravating factors for eczema are:

* Stress

Mechanical irritation
° Heat

Dietary factors

‘Treatment of Eczema

Eczema requires the practitioner to be at his or her most
insightful. Ideally, the nature of the underlying cause will
identify what systems call for toning. However, with the
exception of obvious allergies or contact irritants, this can
be problematic for a skin problem like eczema.

The skin obviously needs support, but in addition the
nervous system, digestive system and liver, immune sys-
tem, and others may need attention. In many ways, the
therapeutic conclusion will depend upon the herbalist’s
theoretical interpretation of eczema, rather than the pa-
tient’s case history.

Actions Indicated

Alteratives are the classic remedies for the treatment of
eczema. How they work is unclear, but they can often
be dramatically effective.

Antipruritics, remedies that reduce the sensation of itch-
ing, are indicated, not simply to make the patient feel
better, but also to reduce physical trauma caused by
scratching.

Anti-inflammatories applied topically and taken internally
speed the curative work of the alteratives, but do not
replace them.

Lymphatic tonics, which may be considered a type of alter-
ative, are especially helpful for eczema in children.
Nervine relaxants help with the commonly associated prob-
lem of anxiety. They also often ease itching and even in-
flammation in the skin because of their relaxing effect on
the peripheral nerves of the autonomic nervous system.

Diuretics ensure adequate elimination through the kid-
neys. Diuretic alteratives are most relevant.

Hepatics will contribute support for liver function and the
digestive process. Hepatic alteratives are best here.

Viulneraries support the healing of skin lesions when ap-
plied topically, but do not replace appropriate internal
treatment.

THE SKIN @ 433

Astringents, used topically, reduce any weeping or oozing
of fluids.

Emollient herbs are suitable for topical applications where
soothing is needed. The demarcation among emol-
lient, anti-inflammatory, and antipruritic herbs is
rather meaningless here.

Specific Remedies

For internal treatment, the leafy alteratives are often con-
sidered the closest to specifics for this often intransigent
condition. These are also often diuretic and lymphatic
remedies. Herbs in this group include:

Fumaria officinalis (famitory)
Galium aparine (cleavers)
Scrophularia nodosa (figwort)
Trifolium ‘pratense (red clover)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Viola tricolor (heartsease)

The rooty alteratives tend to be hepatic in nature.
They can often be too strong for eczema, aggravating the
problem instead of healing it. For intransigent cases un-
responsive to the herbs already listed, stronger remedies
are indicated. For eczema, effective examples include:

Arctium lappa (burdock)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)

Relevant herbs for topical use abound. However, al-
ways bear in mind that healing must be based upon inter-
nal medication, not salves. Select remedies according to
the actions most appropriate for the individual's specific
symptoms. The choice often will also depend on factors
such as availability and aesthetics. Examples include:

Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Aydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Plantago spp. (plantain)
Stellaria media (chickweed)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

A Prescription for Eczema

Galium aparine 1 part
Urtica dioica 1 part
Trifolium pratense 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the
patient should drink an infusion of fresh Urtica dioica or Galium
aparine two or three times a day.

----- PAGE 442 -----
434 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES By BODY SYSTEM

Table 20.3. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Eczema

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Galium aparine, Urtica dioica, Trifolium pratense

Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica
Nervine relaxant Trifolium pratense
Anti-inflammatory — Galium aparine
Diuretic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Hepatic (mild) Galium aparine, Trifolium pratense

A Prescription for Persistent Eczema Unresponsive
to Mild Alteratives

Galium aparine | part
Arctium lappa 1 part
Scrophularia nodosa 1 part

Dosage: 2.5 ml of tincture three times a day. Build up the dosage
to 5 ml three times a day. In addition, the patient should drink
an infusion of fresh or dried Urtica dioica two or three times a
day.

Care should be taken initially with Scrophularia nodosa, as
it can produce the opposite of the desired result in some pa-
tients. If there is a flare-up of the skin eruption, cut down on the
Scrophularia and try again. This is not a healing crisis!

Table 20.4. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Persistent Eczema

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Scrophularia nodosa, Galium aparine, Urtica dioica,
Arctium lappa

Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Nervine relaxant Trifolium pratense

Anti-inflammatory — Galium aparine

Diuretic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica, Arctium lappa

Hepatic (mild) Galium aparine, Arctium lappa

A Prescription for Atopic Eczema
Associated with Asthma

2 parts

2 parts

1 part (see chapter 15, page 332)

Urtica dioica

Trifolium pratense

Dyspnea Formula
Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. The relative
proportion of alterative herbs to Dyspnea Formula will depend
upon the patient's specific needs. In addition, the patient should
drink an infusion of fresh Urtica dioica or Galium aparine two or
three times a day.

Broader Context of Treatment

Tf dietary triggers can be identified, it is essential for the
patient to avoid them completely. Often, patients may
find it challenging to adhere to specific food restrictions,
especially young children. The parents who must enforce
the diet will need much support from the therapist (and
maybe some Scutellaria!). Even if no obvious food triggers
exist, it is always worth excluding milk and milk products.
This may be particularly relevant for children who were
not breast-fed or were weaned too soon. Researchers at
the Hospital for Sick Children in London have shown
that children often develop eczema when weaned from
breast milk to cow’s milk or other foods. Goat's milk,
sheep’s milk, and soy milk rarely trigger allergy problems.

Here are some common eczema triggers:

¢ Cow’s milk

° Eggs

¢ Cheese

¢ Fish

* Sugar

¢ Food additives

Supplements suggested for inclusion in a broad
therapeutic approach to the treatment of eczema by
Drs. Pizzorno and Murray in Textbook of Natural
Medicine include:!

Vitamin ‘A: 50,000 TU/day

Vitamin E: 400 TU/day (mixed tocopherols)

Zinc: 50 mg/day as picolinate (decrease dosage as condi-
tion clears)

Quercetin: 200 to 400 mg three times a day (taken 5 min-
utes before meals)

EPA and DHA: 540 mg and 360 mg/day, or flaxseed oil:
10g daily

Evening primrose oil: 3,000 mg/day

----- PAGE 443 -----
Other authorities have recommended supplementa-
tion with vitamin C and vitamin B complex in addition to
the other supplements listed.

PSORIASIS

A chronic and recurrent disease characterized by dry,
well-circumscribed, silvery, scaling papules and plaques of
various sizes. (The Merck Manual)

This is a common skin disease of unknown cause that af-
fects up to 3% of the American population. Onset usually
occurs before age 20, but all age groups may be affected.
The severity of this condition can vary from the presence
of one or two cosmetically annoying lesions to a physi-
cally disabling and disfiguring affliction of the entire body
surface. The condition is not contagious in any way, and
general health usually is not affected. However, it is no
exaggeration to say that in extreme cases, psoriasis be ru-
inous to the individual's physical, emotional, and eco-
nomic well-being. In addition, some cases are associated
with a severe form of arthritis, called psoriatic arthritis,
that affects general health in much the same way as
rheumatoid arthritis does.

Psoriasis usually develops slowly, following a typical
course of remission and recurrence. The characteristic
psoriatic plaques, or lesions, are sharply demarcated, red
and raised, covered with silvery scales, and bleed easily.
These plaques do not usually itch, and will heal without
leaving scar tissue or affecting hair growth. The nails may
become pitted. Some patients have a tendency to develop
psoriasis at the sites of physical trauma or irritation
(called Koebner phenomena).

Common sites for psoriasis are:

¢ Bony protuberances (knees, elbows, sacrum)

* Scalp

¢ External parts of ears

* Nails, eyebrows

¢ Back, buttocks, and, occasionally, generalized on the
trunk

¢ Skin folds, such as the umbilicus

Treatment of Psoriasis

To develop a therapeutic approach to this intransigent
condition, it is important to understand the processes that
underlie the turnover of cells in the skin. In normal skin,
it takes about 28 days for an epidermal cell to go from
creation to shedding or scaling. Psoriatic cells complete
this process in three or four days, or almost nine times

THE SKIN @ 435

faster than usual. However, there appears to be no impair-
ment of the normal reguiatory mechanisms of cell divi-
sion. Thus, the result is often enormous cell buildup, in-
adequate maturation, and finally plaque formation. Much
of psoriasis therapy is directed toward removing these
plaques in a non-traumatic fashion and to easing any at-
tendant discomfort.

The underlying cause of the rapid epithelial cell
turnover characteristic of psoriasis is not known.
Theories abound and vary according to the practitioner’s
particular belief system. Some believe the cause is pri-
marily nutritional. Others invoke stress and psychological
factors, while those with reductionist inclinations put it
down to genetics.

Undoubtedly, the immune system is involved on
some level, leading some authorities to describe psoriasis
as an autoimmune condition. Flare-ups commonly ac-
company infections, especially infections of the upper res-
piratory tract. Environmental factors, such as injury,
stress, and cold climate, are important for some patients.
About one third of patients experience spontaneous re-
mission of disease.

In short, psoriasis represents a classic example of a
condition for which a holistic perspective is essential. In
designing a treatment program, the practitioner must ex-
plore as many aspects of the individual’s life as is feasible.

Actions Indicated

Alteratives are important, as they are for all internally gen-
erated skin problems. In practice, the rooty hepatic al-
teratives often are the best choice.

Anti-inflammatories, applied topically and taken internally,
will speed the curative work of the alteratives, but not
replace them. They are most helpful during flare-ups
and exacerbations.

Lymphatic tonics improve the health of the internal
environment,

Nervine relaxants ease the anxiety that often accompanies
psoriasis. They will also soothe skin discomfort, includ-
ing itching and even inflammation, due to their relax-
ing effects on the peripheral nerves of the autonomic
nervous system.

Diuretics ensure adequate elimination via the kidneys.

Hepatics support liver function and the digestive process.

Vulneraries support the healing of skin lesions when ap-
plied topically, but are not as effective here as one
might hope. Remember, there is no wound to heal.

Astringents, used topically, may help in reducing redness,
heat, and itching through local vasoconstrictor effects.

Emollients assist in the process of scale removal.

----- PAGE 444 -----
436 «<<. TREATMEN! APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

Antipruritics used topically may help, but itching is not a
major factor in psoriasis.

Diaphoretics have been suggested as a means of increasing
circulation in the skin, thus promoting elimination
and, in theory, general skin health.

It is important to be aware that while they may be
helpful, diaphoretics may also aggravate psoriasis in some
people. They may cause local overstimulation, with an
end result of increasing cell replication rates and thus
desquamation. This is not a major contraindication, but
keep it in mind.

Specific Remedies
Many different herbs have been described as specific for
psoriasis, depending upon local botany and cultural pref-
erences. However, there are probably no true specifics.
This is to be expected in light of the multifactorial, sys-
temic nature of psoriasis. Some people respond incredibly
well to one herb, while others show no response at all.
This can prove both challenging and frustrating for the
practitioner, let alone the patient!

The woody, hepatic alteratives are the herbs that
come closest to being specifics for psoriasis. Herbs in this
group include:

Arctium lappa (burdock)

Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Smilax spp. (sarsaparilla)

Of course, any of the other alteratives may prove to
be specific for a given individual. Important leafy alter-
atives to consider include:

Galium aparine (cleavers)
Larrea tridentata (chaparral)
Scrophularia nodosa (figwort)
Trifolium pratense (red clover)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Viola tricolor (heartsease)

Numerous herbs are relevant for topical application.
An important goal is to lift and remove psoriatic scales
while reducing local inflammation. This often means that
the form of the topical application is as important as any
remedies it contains. Choice of topical application will be
governed to some extent by the personal preferences of
the patient, so experimentation may be necessary. Widely
used plants include:

Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Plantago spp. (plantain)

Populus balsamifera var. balsamifera (balm of Gilead)
Stellaria media (chickweed)
Thuja occidentalis (thuja)

A Prescription for Psoriasis

Arctium lappa 1 part
Rumex Crispus 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Scutellaria lateriflora 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the
patient should drink an infusion of fresh Urtica dioica or Galium
aparine two or three times a day.

Table 20.5. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Psoriasis

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Rumex crispus,

Urtica dioica
Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica
Nervine relaxant Scutellaria lateriflora
Anti-inflammatory — Galium aparine
Diuretic Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Hepatic Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Rumex crispus

A Prescription for Psoriasis with Anxiety and Tension

Arctium lappa 1 part
Rumex crispus 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Verbena officinalis 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. The patient also
should drink an infusion of Matricaria recutita as desired.

Table 20.6. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Psoriasis with Anxiety

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Arctium lappa, Galium aparine,
Rumex crispus, Urtica dioica

Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Nervine relaxant Valeriana officinalis, Verbena officinalis

----- PAGE 445 -----
THE SKIN @ 437

ACTION HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Galium aparine

Diuretic Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Hepatic Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Rumex crispus,

Verbena officinalis

A Prescription for Intransigent, Unresponsive Psoriasis

Arctium lappa 2 parts
Rumex crispus 2 parts
Smilax spp. 2 parts
Phytolacca americana 1 part
Valeriana officinalis 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the pa-
tient should drink an infusion of fresh Urtica dioica or Galium
aparine two or three times a day.

Care must be taken with this combination, and it is
not advisable for children because of the inclusion of
Phytolacca americana (poke root).

Table 20.7. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Unresponsive Psoriasis

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Phytolacca
americana, Rumex crispus, Smilax spp.,
Urtica dioica

Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Phytolacca americana,

Urtica dioica

Nervine relaxant Valeriana officinalis

Anti-inflammatory Galium aparine

Diuretic Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Hepatic Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Rumex crispus,

Smilax spp.

A Prescription for a Patient with Psoriasis
and Hypertension

Arctium lappa 2 parts
Rumex crispus 2 parts
Galium aparine 2 parts
Valeriana officinalis 1 part
Crataegus spp. 1 part
Tilia platyphyllos ] part
Achillea millefolium 1 part

Dosage: 5 ml of tincture three times a day. The patient should
also drink an infusion of Matricaria recutita, Tilia platyphyllos,
or Trifolium pratense as desired. Allium sativum should be
added to the diet or used as a dietary supplement: 1 clove of
fresh garlic or 200 to 300 mg of standardized extract three
times a day.

The last prescriptior. is designed for a case in which
hypertension is not the primary concern. Thus, the bulk
of the dose consists of alterative herbs, rather than hy-
potensive remedies.

Table 20.8. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Psoriasis with Hypertension

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Phytolacca
americana, Rumex crispus, Smilax spp.,
Urtica dioica

Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Phytolacca americana,

Urtica dioica
Nervine relaxant Tilia platyphyllos, Valeriana officinalis

Anti-inflammatory Galium aparine

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Arctium lappa,
Crataegus spp., Galium aparine,
Tilia platyphyllos, Urtica dioica

Hepatic Allium sativum, Arctium lappa, Galium aparine,
Rumex crispus, Smilax spp.

Hypotensive Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum,

Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos,
Valeriana officinalis

----- PAGE 446 -----
438 << TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Broader Context of Treatment
Both practitioner and patient should be aware of the many
non-herbal treatment and coping options for psoriasis.
Psoriasis is a condition in which patient empowerment be-
comes vital. Patients bear the burden of the label “psoria-
sis sufferer,” and so they suffer. They are often told litle
about the range of simple nursing techniques that could
make their negative skin experience easier to live with.
The skin is an interface between the person and his or
her world. It senses and expresses. Psoriasis impacts the
individual’s experience of the world in two broad ways:

The physical distress makes it difficult for the patient to feel
at ease.

The psychological trauma of feeling “disfigured” may lead to
social isolation and depression.

The therapist must be prepared to help and advise in
these areas as well as with the purely herbal issues. Stress
management is critically important, and will ideally be
part of an overall reevaluation by the patient of lifestyle,
personal goals, and life vision.

For most people with psoriasis, exposure to sunlight
helps alleviate and sometimes even clear the condition.
Unfortunately, we have disrupted our environment so
greatly that this can no longer be generally recom-
mended, as UV light entering through the depleted
ozone layer is potentially more damaging than helpful.
However, the Dead Sea may be safer, because it is so far
below sea level. Here occurs a quality of UV light not
found anywhere else on the planet. Because the light
passes through additional layers of air on its way to this
area, more of the harmful spectrum may be filtered out.
The salts of the Dead Sea itself are also beneficial for pso-
riasis. (Of course, none of this takes into account possible
human dangers, such as war!)

Much of the nutritional advice available for psoriasis
is contradictory. In my therapeutic experience, I have
seen success with both a grapefruit fast and a no-citrus
diet! Psoriasis is the epitome of a “holistic” disease, it
being almost impossible to generalize about recommen-
dations. Specifics of diet must be based upon the individ-
ual, not the pathology.

Supplements suggested for inclusion in a broad ther-
apeutic approach to the treatment of psoriasis by Pizzorno
and Murray in Textbook of Natural Medicine are:?

High-potency multiple vitamin and mineral formula

Flaxseed oil: 1 tablespoon/day

Vitamin A: 50,000 TU/day (do not use in pregnancy or for
women planning to become pregnant)

Vitamin E: 400 IU/day
Chromium: 400 TU/day
Selenium: 200 meg/day
Zinc: 30 mg/day

ACNE

A common inflammatory pilosebaceous disease charac-
terized by comedones, papules, pustules, inflamed nod-
ules, superficial pus-filled cysts, and, in extreme cases,
canalizing and deep, inflamed, sometimes purulent, sacs.
(The Merck Manual)

Acne is a common, potentially disfiguring skin disease.
Unfortunately, it often affects those in an emotionally
vulnerable stage of life—adolescents. Acne involves the
sebaceous glands in the skin, which secrete lubrication
(sebum) for the hair follicles (pilosebaceous follicles) and
surrounding skin. These are located in greatest concen-
trations on the face, back, shoulders, and chest. Acne is
most common in adolescents, with a peak in the late
teens. Acne may, however, appear for the first time in the
mid-20s or later and can persist into the 40s or 50s.
Acne lesions are commonly of three types:

Blackheads are glands plugged with excessive material that
discolors on exposure to air.

Whiteheads are small collections of pus within glands.

Nodules or. papules are the red and inflamed areas of more
extensive infection.

A complex of causes underlies acne. Unfortunately,
determining underlying causes is rarely as simple as blam-
ing fats, chocolate, and sugar. Important predisposing fac-
tors include:

Genetic predisposition. Statistics suggest that the strongest
single factor in the development of acne is family his-
tory. While the common conclusion is that the disor-
der has a genetic basis, it might be argued that it is re-
lated to generations of inappropriate nutrition,

Hormonal changes in adolescence. Stimulation of the seba-
ceous glands seems to occur with the production of
androgens (the masculinizing hormone found in both
sexes) at puberty. People with acne seem to produce
normal amounts of androgens, but their skin may sim-
ply be unusually sensitive to its effects.

Skin flora. The bacteria normally present on the skin, or
the skin flora, do not cause acne. However, blackheads
and whiteheads are filled with trapped sebum and
bacteria.

----- PAGE 447 -----
Nutrition. Although it is popularly thought that diet is a
major factor in acne, there is no clear scientific evi-
dence to support this. However, the quality of nutri-
tional intake is fundamental to quality of life, so it
makes sense to limit the intake of saturated fats and
sugar, even if they do not cause acne.

One explanation for the physiological processes be-
hind the characteristic skin eruptions of acne suggests this
sequence of events:

Stimulation by androgens (male sex hormones) causes an in-
crease in the amount and thickness of oil secretion, so
more lipid is present in the follicles.

Changes in skin ecology promote bacterial growth, especially
Propionibacterium acnes.

Sebaceous glands become obstructed by comedones (blackheads
and whiteheads).

Any consequent disruption of follicular epithelium allows dis~
charge of pus into the dermis.

Inflammatory reaction develops.

Pathological changes ensue in the following sequence:

papules — pustules — nodules — cysts

Treatment of Acne

The endocrine system must be given tonic support. This
is ideal, but general endocrine toning is not a simple thing.
Toning work can be focused through the use of hepatic al-
teratives. If there has been long-term antibiotic use, the
immune system must be strengthened. See chapter 21 for
more information.

Actions Indicated

Alteratives are the core of any treatment. Hepatic alter-
atives are especially helpful.

Hormonal normalizers are indicated because of the andro-
gen involvement. However, impacting these hormones
in an appropriate way is not always a straightforward
matter.

Antimicrobials help the body deal with secondary infec-
tion. They may be used both internally and topically.

Lymphatic tonics support lymphatic drainage from the skin
and underlying tissues.

Hepatics are vital, partly for the generalized benefit im-
parted by their liver-toning effects, but also because
they have a specific role in detoxification.

Diuretics are important in ensuring adequate elimination
through the kidneys.

Anti-inflammatories can be helpful when used topically
within the context of daily hygiene.

THE SKIN @ 439

Astringents, used topically, help in cleansing and avoiding
secondary infection. .

Specific Remedies
‘Traditionally, there are no definite specifics here, other
than hepatic alteratives. However, tea tree oil (Melaleuca
alternifolia) has specifically relevant properties. The pri-
mary constituent of the oil is terpinene-4-ol, which con-
stitutes up to 60% of the oil. Australian standards set a
minimum content of 30% terpinene-4-ol. Tea tree oil and
terpinene-4-ol in particular have been shown to possess
significant antimicrobial properties. Organisms inhibited
include Candida albicans, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus au-
reus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, and Propionibacterium acnes.
For acne, tea tree oil applied topically in a 5% to 15% di-
lution three or four times daily is recommended.

Keep in mind that there is no specific herb that nor-
malizes levels of androgens. Occasionally, however, Vitex
can have a beneficial effect in adolescent girls.

A Prescription for Acne

Iris versicolor 1 part
Arctium lappa 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. The patient
should also drink an infusion of Urtica dioica two or three times
a day. In addition, apply Calendula officinalis topically as a wash,
in the form of an infusion mixed with distilled Hamamelis vir-
giniana (witch hazel).

Broader Context of Treatment

‘There are a number of non-herbal issues to address, rang-
ing from diet and hygiene to coping with a whole com-
plex of emotions. It is often important to explain the na~
ture of the problem to the patient, as well as the treatment
you propose. Especially for adolescents, there may be a
need to address unspoken feelings, such as fear and guilt.
Be sure the patient understands the following issues:

Acne is not related to sexual activity. Masturbation and sex
are not causes of acne. This antiquated notion harks
back to the 16th century, when excess semen secretion
was believed to aggravate acne. Marriage was pur-
ported to be the cure. It has no scientific validity.

Acne is not caused by dirt and cannot be washed away. It is
related to an imbalance (hormonal or chemical) that
causes the oil in the skin to form blackheads.

----- PAGE 448 -----
440 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Personal hygiene is important, but an obsession with
washing can aggravate the problem. It may be helpful to
review some specifics with the patient:

Keep the hands away from the face, avoiding friction of the
skin,

Do not squeeze pimples or blackheads, as squeezing the skin
makes the acne worse. The blackhead may be pushed
deeper into the skin, possibly causing the follicle to
rupture,

Keep the hair off the face, and wash the hair daily, if needed.

Avoid cosmetics that contain synthetic chemicals.

Ideas about nutrition “dos and don’ts” for acne
abound. Some generalizations are clear, including avoid-
ing refined foods, red meat, and high-fat or carbohydrate-
rich foods. A diet rich in green leafy vegetables and fruit
is indicated.

Textbook of Natural. Medicine recommends the follow-
ing supplements:

Vitamin A: 100,00 [U/day for three months
Vitamin E: 400 TO/day

Vitamin C; 1,000 mg/day

Zinc: 50 mg/day (as picolinate)

Selenium: 200 mcg/day

Brewer's yeast: | tablespoon twice a day

References
1. Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. The Textbook of Natural
Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999,

2, Ibid.
3. Ibid.

----- PAGE 449 -----
THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

n recent years, the immune system has become an in-

creasingly critical area of focus in all branches of

medicine. This is not just because of the acquired
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) epidemic, but also
because of the statistical explosion in the incidence of a
whole range of autoimmune diseases. To comprehend the
possible contributions that holistic approaches can make
to the treatment of these conditions, it is important to
have a grasp of the biological basis for immunity.

Just as important is an understanding of the role the
immune system plays in human life. The new, but still in-
complete, insights granted us by the field of immunology
illuminate the profound complexity of human biochemi-
cal processes—and the ways in which they interact with
equally complex ecological processes. However, much
more than biochemistry is involved. Herbal medicine is as
limited as orthodox medicine if it is used only to affect
T- and B-lymphocyte function, without the benefit of a
broader holistic context.

Some important insights arise when immune system
function is viewed from an ecological perspective, not
simply a biochemical or medical one, Human immunity is
a vital component of the interface between the individual
and the world. The role of the human immune system is
not simply to resist the dangers present in the environ-
ment. Rather, it is part of the complex and beautiful dance
of elements flowing back and forth between the human
body and the rest of the world. Seen within the context of
ecology, both human and environmental, immunity is
about harmony.

All of this leads us to some concepts and interpretations
that raise exciting possibilities for the practitioner of holis-
tic medicine, whether phytotherapist or medical doctor.

Human immunity is ecology in action. In other words,
there is a multifactorial relationship at play between indi-
viduals and their environment. There is a complex web of
interactions between the inner world of the body and
mind and the outer world of the environment—its peo-
ple, its culture, its food, in fact, everything. The practi-

441

tioner must not only identify and understand both sides
of this relationship, but must also comprehend the nature
of the relationship. This can prove extremely challenging,
as the relationship will be in dynamic flux at all times.

Immunity represents an ecological interface between inner
and outer environments. Such interfaces are critical to the
health and well-being of the Earth itself. Think of the in-
terfaces between desert and savanna, rain forest and
mountains, woodland and grassland, agriculture and
wilderness. These transition zones facilitate the integra-
tion and fine-tuning of biomes and biosphere health. In
human ecology, the immune system is governed by a
complex of processes that allow resistance and embrace at
the same time. To focus on only one side of this profound
interaction is to miss the point and compromise under-
standing of the whole.

Immunity is an expression of homeostasis. Homeostasis is
an umbrella concept that describes the profound physio-
logical processes that maintain a stable internal environ-
ment within a human being. This inner homeostasis can
be seen as a reflection of planetary homeostasis. In fact,
the recognition of these planet-wide processes led James
Lovelock to propose the Gaia hypothesis.

Immunity is an expression of relationship. This is im-
plicit in everything discussed so far, but also carries the
implication that the very nature of relationship plays a role
in immune system well-being. Thus, the practitioner
must explore patients’ relationships with the world on all
levels, from the food they eat, to the people they love (or
hate), to the way they relate to nature.

In short, as with all holistic healing, any approach to
whole body immunity must address the following aspects
of human life:

Bodily health and wholeness. We must ensure that the phys-
ical body has the appropriate nutritional and healing
support to prevent or treat any ills that may affect it.

Emotional well-being. We must ensure that the patient has
a nurturing, feeling experience of life, encompassing
both the joy and the pain of human existence.

----- PAGE 450 -----
442 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BopDy SYSTEM

Mental vision and perspective. We must help create a mind-
set within which the individual can find his or her own
place in the world and make life choices from the cen-
ter of his or her being, not from a victim’s stance.

Spiritual openness and vitality. This will take the shape of
whatever feels appropriate for the individual.

The new field of psychoneuroimmunology is starting
to point us in directions that hold much promise for the
future. The relationship between stress and immune sys-
tem suppression has been well established in both animal
and human research. We now know that in the presence
of stress, a large and complex array of mechanical, chem-
ical, and immune changes take place, as the body attempts
to defend itself or restore homeostasis.

The term psychoneuroimmunology comes from our
growing understanding of these mind-body connections.
Psycho denotes thinking, emotions, and mood states; neuro
implies involvement of the neurological and neuroendo-
crine systems; and immunology refers to cellular structures
and the immune system. An increasing body of evidence
indicates that the nervous system is capable of modulating
the immune response. It appears that the immune system
may be able to communicate with the nervous system
using neuromodulators and neurohormones secreted by
lymphocytes, and receptors for these substances have
been found on human T-lymphocytes. Activation of these
receptors can be stimulatory or inhibitory, depending on
the neuroactive substance involved.

UNDERSTANDING THE HERBAL
POSSIBILITIES

The various phytotherapeutic systems of the world have
much to offer the holistic practitioner working with the
human immune system. However, confusion and misin-
formation abound in this field. Much of the “phytoper-
plexity” comes from ill-informed attempts to blend in-
sights from different traditions without a clear grasp of
the underlying principles.

Attempts at multicultural therapeutics are to be ap-
plauded, but must proceed from a solid understanding of
the systems involved. Without such a foundation, there is
no real therapy, only wishful thinking. The work of
herbalist Michael Tierra provides an excellent example of
what can be achieved. Consider, for example, the com-
monly held belief in the Western herbal community that
Panax ginseng is for men and Angelica sinensis (dong quai)
is for women. This is simply not the case. My minimal
grasp of the profundities of traditional Chinese medicine

tells me that Panax is the strongest yang tonic, while
A. sinensis is the most yielding yin tonic. This leads to en-
tirely different therapeutic implications.

It is also extremely challenging to build bridges be-
tween traditional phytotherapy and the abundance of
scientific data flowing from the field of immunological
research. It is too easy to discard the insights of tradi-
tional approaches in favor of research published in peer-
reviewed journals. This is imprudent, because important
insights may be gained when one takes into account the
herbal wisdom garnered through generations of experi-
ence. By the same token, we must avoid the temptation to
jump to unwarranted conclusions about the results of an-
imal research on isolated constituents, as the implications
for human therapy are not always clear. See chapter 10 for
a more in-depth discussion of this important issue.

On the other hand, there are many ways to use herbs
to enhance the vitality of the immune system. All of the
diverse herbal traditions, with their unique cultural roots
and expressions, have valuable insights into treatments
and specific herbs. This should come as no surprise in
light of the ecological nature of immunity already dis-
cussed. Herbal medicine is ecological medicine; it is
based on an ecological relationship that has evolved
through geological time. By virtue of this special rela-
tionship between plants and people, there are remedies
that directly address the ecological process of human im-
mune responses.

The contribution of phytotherapy to immune system
health provides a good example of the ways in which tra-
ditional knowledge is now being confirmed by modern
pharmacology. In both the laboratory and the clinic, a
growing number of herbal remedies have been shown to
have marked effects upon the immune system. Some
stimulate immune system responses, but most can best be
described as modulators. That is, these remedies facilitate
greater immune system flexibility in the body’s natural re-
sponse to disease. However, rather than focus on particu-
lar plants, we shall look at the whole treatment process.
An overemphasis on specific plant immunostimulants is
little more than “organic drug therapy,” which is not the
goal of the holistic herbalist.

Immunostimulation or Inmunomodulation?
As pharmacologists discover the possibilities offered by
the plant kingdom, they have found it necessary to coin
new words to describe how plants work. In general, these
terms describe normalizing, whole-plant actions—actions
that are not covered by the semantics of reductionist,
active-constituent research.

----- PAGE 451 -----
Immunostimulants or immunopotentiators lead to a
nonspecific stimulation of the immunological defense
system. Nonspecific immunostimulants do not affect im-
mune system memory cells, and because their pharmaco-
logical effects fade relatively quickly, they must be admin-
istered either at intervals gr continuously. The protective
immunity conferred by immunostimulants happens
quickly, and has been termed paramunity.

Immunomodulation and immunoregulation are terms that
have been proposed to denote any. effect on immune sys-
tem responsiveness. For example, herbs may also stimulate
T-suppressor cells and thereby reduce immune resistance.
Tmmunoadjuvants are substances that enhance the produc-
tion of antibodies without acting as antigens themselves.
The effects of adjuvants are often thymus-dependent.
The phytotherapist is actually quite at home with
these somewhat vague concepts. After all, human life is
rarely governed by logic and rational thinking! From the
allopathic perspective, however, the concept of immuno-
stimulation offers a number of therapeutic possibilities.
These hint at the important changes in perspective that
are under way within the field of orthodox medicine.

For example, immunostimulation may prove to offer
an alternative to conventional drug treatment of infections.
This may be especially true for immunocompromised
patients, or those with impaired immune system function.
As immunostimulation is focused on boosting the body’s
own immune mechanisms, it may represent an opportu-
nity to prevent opportunistic infections in high-risk
patients.

In addition, immunomodulators ‘have potential con-
tributions to make to the therapy of malignant diseases. It
is a well-known fact that stimulation of specific compo-
nents of the immune system, such as macrophages and
killer cells, can inhibit tumor growth. Plant-based im-
munostimulators may also contribute to the treatment of
autoimmune diseases.

As discussed in chapter 9, immunological defense is a
complicated interplay of many factors. However, the mul-
tifactorial nature of whole plant pharmacology often con-
founds researchers’ attempts to identify the mechanisms
at work. To simplify matters, it seems clear that no mat-
ter what the primary target of the immunostimulant,
whether T- or B-lymphocytes or the complement system,
an incréase in the activity of macrophages and granulo-
cytes plays a central role in immunomodulation.

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM @ 443

A PHYTOTHERAPEUTIC APPROACH
TO THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

It should be apparent by now that the plant kingdom can
have a major impact upon the function of the human im-
mune system—an impact that a competent holistic prac-
titioner can use to advantage. There are many ideas about
how this can be best approached. The ideas and theories
I discuss in the following sections represent an attempt to
bring together the perspectives of the traditional
European approach, insights offered by Asian medicine,
and the contributions of sharmacological research.
Because immunity miust be seen in the context of
homeostatic, whole-system function, we must also em-
phasize general detoxification and elimination. This, in
turn, illuminates some of the primary ways in which herbs
contribute to preventive medicine and wellness. The im-
portant insights of herbalist Christopher Hobbs in this
area are an inspiration to this author and many other
herbalists.
Hobbs identifies three relevant levels of herbal activity:

¢ Deep immune activation
¢ Surface immune activation

* Adaptogenic action or hormonal modulation

Deep Immune Activation
Plants that impact the immune system within the tissue
that mediates its work are generating increasing interest
in the herbal and research communities. These can be
termed deep immune activators. As discussed in chapter 9,
pharmacology points to saponins and complex polysac-
charides as key contributors to the role of plants in this
area, but please remember that herbs act as biological
wholes, not just as vehicles for active ingredients.
Important Asian immunomodulators that have been
incorporated into Western herbal practice include:

Astragalus membranaceus (astragalus)
Codonopsis tangshen (codonopsis)
Ganoderma lucidum (reishi mushroom)
Lentinus edodes (shiitake mushroom)
Ligustrum lucidum (privet)

Schisandra chinensis (schizandra)

An abstruse point must be made here. It may appear
that the primary herbs for immunomodulation come from
Asia, usually China. By extension, it may seem that Western
herbalism is at a disadvantage and suffers from a lack of
research on Western plants. However, this is an artifact of
research funding, not an herbal reality. Until very recently,
the preponderance of research on immunomodulating

----- PAGE 452 -----
444 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

plants and their constituents was performed in Asia, pri-
marily in the People’s Republic of China, India, and
Japan. Funding for these studies was driven by a desire to
improve the lot of the people of these countries.
Consequently, and quite appropriately, the research fo~
cused on the plants used medicinally in those nations.

Comparatively little attention has been paid to plant
immunomodulators by American and European re~
searchers. This should not be taken to mean that no
Western plants have such properties, only that the re~
search community lacks the funding needed to investigate
them. If we examine the properties of Western herbs tra-
ditionally used to treat immune system problems, it can
be argued that the traditional alteratives, tonics, and di-
gestive bitters address deep immune issues in a similar
way to better-studied Asian herbs.

Surface Immune Activation

These are the many plants known as antimicrobials, or
“immune system boosters.” The more attention re-
searchers give these plants, the greater the range of mech-
anisms are found to explain their activity. Examples of
these plants are:

Allium sativum (garlic)
Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)
Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Commiphora molmol (myrrh)
Echinacea spp. (echinacea)
Thuja occidentalis (thuja)

Usnea spp. (usnea)

Hormonal Modulators

Remedies in this group work though some hormonal
modulation of the immune response. As is discussed in
chapter 22, a number of endocrine functions can be af-
fected by herbs. For example, adaptogens exert their ef-
fects via the adrenal glands and the general adaptation
system (GAS). See chapter 16 for more information on
this important coping mechanism.

Adaptogens that work via the adrenals and the gen-
eral adaptation syndrome include Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Siberian ginseng) and Panax spp. (Korean and American
ginseng).

HERBS AND THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

The array of available information on the immune system
and herbal approaches to treatment can be truly daunt-
ing! The therapeutic suggestions that follow are based

upon my training and clinical experience in England and
Wales. I must emphasize this point, as the approach may
seem too simplistic in light of the impressive body of re-
search on specific plants that now exists.

Remember, the approach we are taking here is based
on the needs of human beings, not on the use of specific
plants. Any other approach may lead to an attempt to fit
a patient into the indications for a certain plant, instead of
identifying the needs of the individual and what herbs
might best address them.

Immune System Pathologies
The phytotherapist can choose from among a number of
therapeutic options for treating the immune system. Most
exciting is the ability to generally support the system in
the absence of overt pathology. Nurturing wellness
through preventive medicine becomes a readily achiev-
able goal when we use immunomodulators within the
context of the holistic approach. In addition, a range of
immune system pathologies may be addressed with herbs.
Immune system problems can be grouped into a
number of different categories.

Immunodeficiency Diseases

These pathologies are associated with malfunction of one
or more of the major aspects of the immune response.
This category is usually divided into two subgroups:

Primary immune deficiency disease. This type, which
may be either hereditary or acquired, is disease caused
by immune deficiency.

Secondary immune deficiency disease. In this kind of im-
mune deficiency disorder, the immune deficiency is the
result of another disease or diseases. An extreme exam-
ple is AIDS.

Hypersensitivity Reactions

These are normal immunity processes that become dam-
aging rather than protective. The pathological processes
arise as a result of specific interactions between an antigen
and components of the immune system. Four types are

known.

Type I. Anaphylactic reactions are caused by release of a
pharmacologically active substance, such as _his-
tamine, from IgE-sensitized mast cells and ba-
sophils after contact with specific antigens. Other
examples of Type I hypersensitivity reactions are
atopic diseases, such as hay fever, and allergic asthma.

Type II. In these cytotoxic reactions, binding of antibody
to an antigen on the cell surface produces damage to

----- PAGE 453 -----
that cell through a variety of mechanisms. Examples
are blood transfusion and Rh incompatibility
reactions.

Type IL Immune complex reactions result from deposi-
tion of solubie, circulating antigen-antibody com-
plexes in vessels or tissue. This process seems to be
implicated in autoimmune conditions such as
rheumatoid arthritis.

Type IV. In cell-mediated immunity, immune responses
are mediated by T-cells rather than antibodies. An
example is contact sensitivity to poison oak and
poison ivy. Graft rejections may also be Type IV
reactions.

Autoimmune Diseases

Autoimmune diseases are conditions in which lympho-
cytes produce antibodies that attack the body’s own cells
and tissues as if they were foreign substances, thus caus-
ing pathological damage. Any organ or tissue may be in-
volved. Conditions thought to have an autoimmune basis
include rheumatoid arthritis, polyarthritis, chronic active
hepatitis, multiple sclerosis, and psoriasis.

Various theories have been put forth to explain the
etiology of autoimmune disease. Researchers believe that
the embryonic immune system contains lymphocytes that
can produce self-reacting antibodies, but which are some-
how inactivated as the system develops. They suggest that
autoimmune diseases arise through some kind of disrup-
tion of this inactivation mechanism. A process called
immunoregulation has been postulated to explain the
complex homeostatic mechanisms that hold the “auto-
reactive” cells in check.

This invocation of homeostasis has interesting impli-
cations for the holistic practitioner. In fact, the fascinat-
ing complexities of biochemical and cytological im-
munology can be mesmerizing to both theorist and
therapist. Phytotherapists often become infatuated with
the research findings on interactions between plants and
the immune system at the expense of a holistic perspec-
tive that perceives the person as whole, not just a reflec-
tion of blood chemistry. However, these ideas about
homeostatic immunoregulation do point to a possible
bridge between the reductionist science of immunology
and concepts of wholeness, whether whole plant actions
or the whole body perspective of holistic medicine.

Cancer

A direct relationship exists between the immune system
and the development of tumors. This highlights the pos-
sibilities for prevention and treatment that may be

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM @ 445

achieved by working with immunity. The use of herbs in
a broad holistic context can help the body function and
heal. This is discussed in greater detail later.

Transplant Problems
Immune system rejection of transplanted organs presents
a particular problem. Successful transplantation depends
on the similarity between tissues of the body and those of
the transplanted organ, because cytotoxic T-cells will act
vigorously to destroy any foreign tissue in the body.
After surgery, the patient receives immunosuppres-
sive therapy to inhibit the immunological rejection. This
will involve one or more of the following treatments:

* Corticosteroids to suppress inflammation
* Cytotoxic drugs

* Radiation therapy

Anti-lymphocyte globulins

* Cyclosporine

These approaches kill rapidly dividing cells, such as
activated lymphocytes, and have severe side effects.
However, cyclosporine greatly improves survival from
organ transplants. Cyclosporines are a group of cyclic
oligopeptides first discovered in Tolypocladium inflatum, a
white mold from Norway. Interestingly, it has been de-
termined that in its sexual state, T imflatum is actually
Cordyceps subsessilis, an extremely rare fungus that has been
reported only five or six times before.! However, a related
species, C. sinensis, is a well-known remedy in traditional
Chinese medicine. Recent pharmacological research
shows it to have a range of immunological activities.’ In
spite of all this, however, transplant issues are inappropri-
ate for phytotherapeutic treatment.

Where does all of this leave the phytotherapist?
‘What actions or specific herbs are indicated for these
conditions? Western herbalism seems to have got itself
tied in knots around the word immune, and both profes-
sionals and nonprofessionals are showing symptoms of
conceptual overload. Appropriate remedies for immune
system problems must be selected on the basis of individ-
ual need. This can be determined only through careful di-
agnosis, which in turn requires the practitioner to be
knowledgeable about the complexities of the process. The
word immune does not mean Echinacea!

The real question involves knowing when to use im-
munostimulant herbs and, even more important, when
not to. Stimulating immune system activity may be inap-
propriate in some conditions and vital in others. The clas-
sic Eclectic, Physiomedicalist, and European texts on
herbal therapy do not address these considerations. In an

----- PAGE 454 -----
446 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

attempt to clarify the issue for myself, I have established
provisional guidelines for identifying therapeutic situa-
tions in which immunostimulation is indicated and those
for which it may be contraindicated.

In general, it seems safe to say that immunostimulant
plants should be avoided in conditions that involve inap-
propriate activity of some aspect of the immune complex.
In autoimmune conditions, for example, any stimulation
might increase the production or pathological impact of
antibodies. The same may be said for hypersensitivity re-
actions, even though an external antigen may be present.
Transplant rejection issues also fit into this category, but
are rarely encountered by the phytotherapist.

Conditions for which immunostimulants are proba-
bly contraindicated include:

* Autoimmune diseases
¢ Hypersensitivity reactions
¢ Organ transplantation

On the other hand, immunostimulant plants are fun-
damentally important in conditions related to inadequate
or compromised immune system activity. Individuals may
become immunocompromised for a variety of reasons, in-
cluding the presence of pathogenic or parasitic organisms
and inadequate immune responses to cancerous changes
in the body’s own cells.

Conditions for which immunostimulants are proba-
bly indicated include:

* Infections
* Cancer
* Immunodeficiency disease (for example, AIDS)

Note my use of the word probably in the contraindi-
cations and indications just given. The phytotherapist is
completely at home with multifaceted plant effects, as
well as the diversity and mutability of people. It is a
mistake to view a plant simply as an “immunostimulant.”
A remedy that has a specific value in the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis may also demonstrate immuno-
stimulant activity in the laboratory. However, a long-
standing use of a plant based on many generations of ex-
perience has more value in practice than theoretical
concerns raised by in vitro or animal studies.

GENERAL SUPPORT PROTOCOLS

A number of general treatment guidelines have particular
relevance in the broader approach taken to the immune
system in this chapter. Of course, these protocols have a
much wider application, and will prove useful for many
patients with conditions discussed elsewhere in the book.
The protocols include detoxification,
medicine, postoperative recovery, and general guidelines
for treating infection.

preventive

DETOXIFICATION

The particular herbal approach to detoxification de-
scribed here is based upon the premise that the human
body is self-healing and homeostatic, and that the thera-
pist must simply support normal processes. The body has
effective and astoundingly complex mechanisms for rid-
ding the body of waste and poisons. The phytotherapist
can aid the process by using basic, simple, and safe herbs.
The important point is to address eliminative processes as
a whole, not just to focus on the colon.

This means that whenever such a program is under-
taken, the phytotherapist must ensure that all organs of
elimination receive support. In addition, it is essential to
provide support for whatever specific area of the body is
under the most toxic pressure—for example, the lungs of
a tobacco smoker or the liver of a person who has alcohol-
related problems.

Details on applying the principles of detoxification
for specific conditions are given in the appropriate sec-
tions, but here is a brief summary:

* Support the whol process of elimination
* Provide specific support for over-taxed organs
* Alleviate symptoms and address any pathology present

Herbal Actions and Elimination

The physiological impact of certain herbal actions makes
them particularly valuable for supporting various path-
ways of elimination in the body.

Note that no particular herbs are specified here. The
skill and insight of the practitioner will determine the
choice of appropriate plants. The actions model pre-
sented in this book provides a relatively straightforward
method for formulating a prescription that will be effec-
tive in prompting appropriate elimination work while ad-
dressing the unique needs of the individual.

----- PAGE 455 -----
Table 21.1. Appropriate Actions to Support Specific
Pathways of Elimination

BODY SYSTEM HERBAL ACTIONS

Digestive system and colon _—_Aperient/laxative

Urinary system and kidneys Diuretic
Liver and blood Hepatic, alterative
Lymphatic system Alterative, lymphatic tonic
Skin Diaphoretic, alterative

Respiratory system Expectorant, pulmonary, anticatarrhal

Whole body onic, bitter, alterative, adaptogen,

antimicrobial

Selection of Herbs with Appropriate Actions
Selection criteria should take into account secondary ac-
tions as well as system affinity, as described in chapter
12. However, when the goal is to stimulate elimination,
the phytotherapist should emphasize gentle remedies.
Overly active plants can cause an intense elimination re-
action. This can be unpleasant and uncomfortable, not
to mention that it is of very questionable therapeutic
benefit.

The phenomenon known as “purging and puking”
does not represent a healing crisis, but rather the worst
aspects of 19th-century medicine. In a similar vein, I can
detect no valid rationale behind wellness programs based
on the fatuous concept of “no pain, no gain.” I would
suggest that we always keep in mind the relevance of the
advice given by Hippocrates: “First do no harm.”

Table 21.2 provides a brief list of herbs that effec-
tively supply the desired actions with only a mild impact
on the body.

Table 21.2. Herbs to Support Eliminative Processes

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Aperient/laxative Rumex crispus, Taraxacum officinale root

Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Sambucus nigra

Diuretic Galium aparine, Taraxacum officinale leaf

Expectorant, Marrubium vulgare, Verbascum thapsus,

pulmonary tonic Tussilago farfara

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM > 447

ACTION HERBS
Hepatic Taraxacum officinale root, Silybum marianum
Lymphatic tonic Calendula officinalis, Galium aparine,

Trifolium pratense

THE CONTRIBUTION OF HERBS TO
PREVENTIVE MEDICINE

Balance and harmony are the keys to successful preven-
tive medicine, bringing us back to the ideas proposed at
the beginning of this chapter. There must be a clear and
free flow of energy throughout the various aspects of the
individual's life. Thus, we must address issues that go be-
yond the transformative effects of herbs upon metabolic
and physiological processes.

Nutrition must support the body’s efforts to build itself in
a way that ensures health and wholeness.

Structural factors must be addressed by a skilled practi-
tioner, if indicated, but also through appropriate exer-
cise, dance, or any other enjoyable expression of
movement.

A conscious and free-flowing emotional life is fundamental to
achieving any inner harmony. This does not mean that
everyone must undergo in-depth psychotherapy, but
that attention be given in an appropriate form to the
individual’s emotional needs.

Mental factors are crucial, as we are what we think! The
Bible says that without vision, people die. Without a
personal vision, life becomes a slow process of degen-
eration and decay. The same can be said about issues
affecting self-image and personal purpose.

Attention to spiritual issues is vital. Openness to spirituality
can take whatever form is meaningful to the individ-
ual—whether an organized religion, appreciation of
nature or art, or a simple joy in being alive.

The plant kingdom offers much to the therapist inter-
ested in preventive medicine. The key is not to focus on
specific plant remedies, but instead to understand the role
of herbal actions in maintaining health and correct physio-
logical activity. Taking ito account the insights about
homeostasis provided by the biomedical model, it should
be clear that the proper use of herbs will support the body’s
own attempts to maintain a stable internal environment.

The phytotherapist should consider a number of ac-
tions and herbal processes when formulating a program
of preventive medicine, A. review of each part of this pro-
cess will demonstrate that each step is mutually support-
ive. Similarly, when applying the concepts of secondary

----- PAGE 456 -----
448 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

actions and system affinities, it becomes apparent that
there is much overlap among herbs used to support the
various aspects of whole body support.

System tonics. System tonics will nourish and tone the
whole system’s form and function without eliciting
specific physiological or biochemical responses.

Bitter tonics. This group of herbs will have a generalized
toning effect in addition to specific properties.

Detoxification. Cleansing and detoxification can be gently
facilitated through herbal support of the body’s elimi-
native functions.

Table 21.3 summarizes traditionally used system ton-
ics in European and North American phytotherapy. Note
that in the case of the digestive system, no one herb serves
as an all-around tonic. In this case, choose appropriate
herbal actions for the digestive system to support the
work of bitters.

Table 21.3. Primary System Tonics in European and
North American Phytotherapy

BODY SYSTEM TONIC HERBS

Cardiovascular Crataegus spp., Allium sativum, Ginkgo biloba

Respiratory Verbascum thapsus, Inula helenium
Digestive Filipendula ulmaria, Gentiana lutea,
Matricaria recutita
Liver Gentiana lutea, Silybum marianum,
Taraxacum officinale root
Urinary Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Zea mays
Reproductive
Women: Mitchella repens, Rubus idaeus
Men: Serenoa repens
Nervous Avena sativa, Scutellaria lateriflora,

Hypericum perforatum
Musculoskeletal Apium graveolens, Urtica dioica

Skin Galium aparine, Urtica dioica, Trifolium pratense

POSTOPERATIVE RECOVERY

While herbs can in no way replace surgery, they can con-
tribute much to the success of surgical procedures. In the
suggestions given here, we shall assume that the opera-

tion contemplated is appropriate for the patient con-
cerned, which is not always the case! As we are in no way
attempting to achieve the same goals as the surgery, the
first step is to clarify what goals the herbs are intended to
fulfill.

Simply stated, herbs can facilitate and support post-
operative healing. While the specifics will vary from per-
son to person, a few broad generalizations prove useful.
The primary contributions herbalism offers in this area
are gentle, normalizing tonics. These are inherently safe,
nontoxic plants that might even be considered foods. The
use of these herbs should raise no objection with the
physician involved, as they will cause no negative drug
interactions.

The key is to use relevant tonics to support the heal-
ing process in the tissue, organs, or body systems that will
experience the most trauma during the surgery. Herbs
can help with two main aspects of postoperative healing.
First, they will facilitate healing of the actual tissues af-
fected by the surgery, including skin, connective, cardio-
vascular, and nervous system tissues. Second, they will
help support the whole body in the face of the stress it will
experience.

Herbal tonics contribute the following to the postop-
erative recovery process:

¢ Support the immune system

¢ Help the liver and nervous system deal with the effects
of anesthesia .

* Alleviate symptomatic discomfort where possible or
appropriate

* Facilitate optimal scar formation

Support the Specific Focus of Surgery

To support the body system that is the focus of the surgi-
cal procedure, choose relevant tonic remedies according
to their nurturing effects upon specific parts of the body.
For example, Crataegus would be an appropriate choice
for a patient undergoing surgery to correct cardiovascular
problems.

In addition, no matter what the purpose of the oper-
ation, it will involve cutting through layers of skin, vari-
ous membranes of the body, small blood vessels, and pos-
sibly nerves. The body will normally heal such wounds
quite adequately on its own, but the older the person is,
the more help the tissue may require. Staying with gentle
remedies, consider Urtica for skin and membranes,
Crataegus and Ginkgo for blood vessels, and Hypericum for
nerves.

----- PAGE 457 -----
Protect the Whole Body from the

Effects of Excessive Stress

The stress experienced during surgery is not simply stress
associated with worry and anxiety, but also the physiolog-
ical stress of the operation itself. Adaptogens are irre-
placeable here. In short, they help increase the body’s re-
sistance and resilience in the face of stress. They help the
body adapt around the problem and avoid the possibility
of collapse. The most relevant adaptogen is Eleutherococcus
Senticosus.

Support the Immune System

There are many issues to consider before choosing the
appropriate approach. Unless one is sure of the relevance
and safety of immunostimulant herbs for the particular
individual and operation involved, avoid strong im-
munostimulants and instead use a mild alterative, such as
Urtica or Galium.

Protect Against the Effects of Anesthesia

The liver is the primary site for the breakdown and elim-
ination of the metabolic waste products of the anesthesia
used during the operation. Appropriate remedies will
support the liver’s detoxification process, facilitating the
removal of the metabolites from the body and speeding
the return to normal. Silybum is the main herb to con-
sider, as it is best to avoid stronger liver stimulants after
an operation. Very mild bitters will have a safe and gentle
stimulating effect on the nervous system and support the
action of Silybum.

Alleviate Symptomatic Discomfort

Another primary goal is to alleviate discomfort related to
the surgery, whenever and however possible. This will, of
course, vary from operation to operation and person to
person, but much symptomatic postoperative discomfort
can be eased through the use of gentle effector herbs.

Help Facilitate Optimal Scar Formation

In the process of healing the incision, the body forms scar
tissue. The amount of scar tissue that forms can be lim-
ited through the use of a variety of plant medicines with-
out compromising the viability of the wound healing.
Such wound-healing herbs have been traditionally called
vulneraries. Examples are Calendula and Hypericum, which
are both excellent for this purpose when blended with vi-
tamin E oil.

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM @ 449

Gallbladder Surgery: An Example

‘What herbs might we use to support postoperative recov-
ery after successful gallbladder removal surgery? Actual
remedies and protocols for treating gallbladder disease
are discussed in chapter ]3, but here is an example of how
we might apply the process just discussed to facilitate re-
covery from this common surgical procedure.

Table 21.4. Actions and Herbs to Facilitate Recovery
from Gallbladder Surgery

DESIRED ACTION PREOPERATIVE POSTOPERATIVE

Operation site tonic Chionanthus virginicus — Chionanthus virginicus

Specific tissue tonic Crataegus, Equisetum — Ginkgo, Calendula

Nervous system Hypericum Hypericum

tissue tonic perforatum perforatum

Adaptogenic support —_Eleutherococcus Eleutherococcus
senticosus senticosus

Urtica dioica or
Galium aparine

Urtica dioica or
Galiura aparine

Immune system tonic

Detoxification support — Silybum marianum Silybum marianum

Symptomatic relief Depends on Depends on
individual’s symptom __individual’s symptom
picture picture

Scar formation Calendula officinalis Calendula officinalis
or Hypericum or Hypericum
perforatum perforatum

Actions Supplied by Pre- and Postoperative Herb

Choices

For the operation site, the yallbladder, any appropriate mild
tonic hepatic or cholagogue will do. An alternative to
Chionanthus virginicus might be Chelone glabra. In this
particular case, care must be taken to avoid herbs that
strongly stimulate the liver’s production of bile.
However, gentle remedies are indicated to help move
bile in the face of stasis.

Specific tissue tonics. In this case, the preoperative goal is to
strengthen skin, connective, and cardiovascular tissues,
while the postoperative goal is to facilitate healing.
Postoperatively, we have replaced Crataegus with
Ginkgo as the cardiovascular tonic because of its ability
to help increase the availability of oxygen to the brain
after anesthesia. Equivetwm was replaced by Calendula

----- PAGE 458 -----
450 @ TREATMENL APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

for the postoperative treatment to prevent possible
constipation.

Nervous system tonic. Hypericum perforatum has a unique
ability to promote the healing of physically damaged
nerves. One of its folk names in Germany translates as
“the comfrey of the nervous system.”

Adaptogenic support. Adaptogens are essential to ease the
body’s stress response. Stress has a major effect upon
physiology and healing time, and adaptogens offer di-
rect support. Adaptogenic herbs are more appropriate
than relaxing nervines for postoperative recovery, as
the patient will already be under the influence of
chemical sedation.

Immune system support. Some variety of help for the im-
mune system can be very important, but it is best to be
safe and use gentle, tried-and-true alteratives.

Detoxification. The liver is the primary site for the break-
down of anesthesia metabolites. The mild bitters will
have a safe, stimulating effect on the nervous system.

Symptomatic relief. A possible issue here might be consti-
pation, which can be initially treated with a mild alter-
ative laxative, such as Rummex crispus. No stimulating
laxatives should be used, as they may cause straining
and damage to the operation scar.

Scar formation. Apply vitamin E oil with a vulnerary, such
as Calendula officinalis or Hypericum ‘perforatum, to the
incision site. Antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory es-
sential oils may also be indicated.

In addition to the herbal suggestions given here, con-
sider the use of homeopathic arnica before the operation.
This preparation may be considered a specific when it
comes to the treatment of bruising. Great attention must
also be paid to diet and support for the patient from fam-
ily and friends.

INFECTION

Infection seems to be a concomitant aspect of living
within the biosphere of planet Earth. Human beings live
in constant contact and ecological dialogue with vast
numbers of bacteria, viruses, and fungi. The immune sys-
tem has evolved in such a way that this interaction causes
a health problem only occasionally. In fact, our well-being
depends on healthy and positive relationships with a
range of organisms that live in and on our body. The bac-
terial flora of the intestines and the microorganisms on
the skin provide good examples.

Infection occurs when the body is exposed to organ-
isms that become a threat to good health. These may be
nonpathogenic under normal circumstances, but can be-

come pathogenic to the individual for any of a variety of
reasons. In any case, the immune system will be involved.
If the individual’s immune response is compromised in
some way, the ecological balance between host and mi-
crobe will be altered, allowing the microbe to thrive.
Either way, herbal treatment must focus on supporting
appropriate immune response.

The herbal traditions of the world abound with
plants that have a reputation for antimicrobial activity.
Keep in mind, however, that they do not always achieve
the desired results. When used correctly, conventional
antibiotic medications can save lives. Largely because of
these drugs, the scourge of epidemic infectious disease
has been eliminated for the most part in the Western
world. This is a truly miraculous achievement.

For severe infection, phytotherapy is not always ade-
quate, especially for people with a weakened immune re-
sponse. Such infections (for example, meningitis) require
antibiotic treatment. As a dedicated herbalist who recog-
nizes the limitations of my chosen therapy, I celebrate the
existence of these medicines. The role of the healer is the al-
leviation of suffering, not the promotion of a belief system.

All of this is not meant to imply that whole plant
medicine has nothing to offer in the treatment of infec-
tion! In fact, herbal treatment has much to contribute.
Various herbal remedies can:

Boost the immune response, helping the body to rid itself of
pathogens by either deep or surface immune system
stimulation.

Exert direct antimicrobial effects against offending organ-
isms. To be effective, the plant constituent must reach
the site of infection, which is not always easy.

Tone and strengthen tissue, organs, or whole systems af-
fected by the infection.

Facilitate recuperation from the infection and also from the
use of antibiotics.

Antimicrobial Plants

The phytopharmacology journals are full of reports of
plants that have apparent antimicrobial effects. The re-
search usually takes the form of screening large numbers
of plants, often a local flora, for an antimicrobial out-
come, rather than an investigation of the specific mech-
anism involved. In light of this vast variety, I find the cur-
rent preoccupation with Echinacea strange, as wonderful
as this plant is. The practitioner should be familiar with
a range of such herbs, their strengths and their limita-
tions. For example, the Eclectics recommended Baptisia
tinctoria (wild indigo) in combination with Echinacea for
acute febrile infections. Please refer to chapters 25 and

----- PAGE 459 -----
26 for more information on the wide variety of herbal
antimicrobials.

General Guidelines for Treating Infection.
Because the body responds with a similar immune system
response no matter what the cause of infection, it is
possible to make some herbal generalizations. The details
will vary somewhat with the nature of the disease, the
needs of the specific individual, and other medications the
patient might be taking. In the guidelines given here, the
herbs mentioned are meant to serve only as suggestions.
Each case must be seen afresh.

Selecting Antimicrobial Herbs
The selection of appropriate antimicrobial herbs should
take into account the following considerations:

Site of infection. For example, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bear-
berry) may be appropriate for a bladder infection,
while Commiphora molmol (myrrh) may be a good
choice for topical application to the skin.

The patient’s age and general state of health. Use gentler
herbs for the young, old, or debilitated. For example,
choose Nepeta cataria (catnip) as a diaphoretic for chil-
dren, reserving Armoracia rusticana (horseradish) for
adults.

Specifics for the particular pathogen. Unfortunately, this is
not always possible.

Selecting Relevant Tonics

The antimicrobial herbs selected should always be used
with appropriate tonic remedies. These may be selected
based on:

The site of infection. For example, Verbascum thapsus may
be the right choice for a lung infection, while Galinm
aparine is more appropriate for lymphatic tissue
infections,

Specific prevention issues for the individual. For example, use
Crataegus if there is any concern about cardiovascular
health, or Ginkgo biloba for an elderly patient.

Broader insights from the medical or family health history.

Symptom Support

Support the body in dealing with any fever that might ac-
company the infection, using diaphoretics when appro-
priate. In addition, if necessary, alleviate any symptomatic
discomfort. Specifics will vary with each infection.

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM @ 451

Herbal Support for Antibiotic Therapy
There is no reason why the benefits of phytotherapy
should not be utilized to support a patient under treat-
ment with antibiotics. This assumes, of course, that the
antibiotics have been prescribed for appropriate reasons!
The herbal focus must be on tonics that will help
the body cope with the intense biochemical battle that is
under way. Selection can be based on these criteria:

Site of infection.

The need to support the digestive system and liver, as intesti-
nal side effects are common with antibiotics.

Specific prevention issues for the individual.

Broader insights from the individual’s medical or family
health history.

Immune support may be appropriate, but do not try
to duplicate the work of the antibiotics by overusing an-
timicrobial herbs! If necessary, symptomatic support may
also be appropriate, and will depend on the individual’s
symptom picture.

Recuperation after Antibiotic Therapy

Once a course of antibiotics has been completed, herbs
may be used to speed convalescence. They may also help
the individual avoid any recurrence of the infection and
prevent secondary problems that may result from the
temporarily weakened immune response. The focus here
should be on general nuirition, as well as herbal tonics.

Actions Indicated

Bitters will safely stimulate normal metabolism.

Gentle diuretics and hepatics will support elimination.

Specific tonics will support the tissue affected at the site
of infection and the primary sites of symptomatic
discomfort.

Immune support is important. This may entail both
deep and surface work. Focus on deep immune support if:

© The infection is a chronic or recurrent problem

© The patient is very debilitated after the infection

¢ The patient is elderly

¢ The patient is under much stress of any kind, and thus
at risk of becoming inmunocompromised

MANIFESTATIONS OF INFECTION

Manifestations of infection are very diverse, varying with
the pathogen involved, the site of infection, and the bodily

----- PAGE 460 -----
452 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

response of the person involved. Common signs of infec-
tion include:

¢ Local inflammation at the site of infection

* Systemic signs including malaise, weakness, musculo-
skeletal aches and pains, headache, anorexia, fever,
chills

¢ Increase of leukocytes in the blood and other blood
changes seen in the lab

Infections ofithe Digestive System

Infections of the intestinal tract often manifest with the
predominant symptom of diarrhea. The body’s attempt to
rid the body of the offending pathogen sets into motion
processes that empty material from the gut. Treatment
should incorporate the guidelines given in chapter 13 for
diarrhea, along with appropriate antimicrobial herbs.
Essential oil-containing herbs are especially useful here.
Chronic forms of infection may manifest as some type of
colitis; please refer to chapter 13 for more information on
the management of this condition.

Antimicrobial Herbs for the Digestive System
Allium sativum (garlic)

Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Carum carvi (caraway)
Coriandrum sativum (coriander)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Syzygium aromaticum (clove)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Cardiovascular Infections

Infections affecting the heart and blood vessels can be ex-
tremely dangerous, and herbalism is not the most appro-
priate therapeutic modality.

Respiratory Tract Infections

The respiratory tract is one of the most common sites of
infection in the human body. Fortunately, infections of
the upper and lower respiratory tracts often respond well
to herbal therapy. Please refer to chapter 15 for specific
information on the treatment of bronchitis, sinusitis, and
other infections of this system.

Antimicrobial Herbs for the Respiratory Tract

Allium sativum (garlic)
Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)

Commiphora molmol (myrrh)

Echinacea spp. (echinacea)

Eucalyptus spp. (eucalyptus)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)

Inula helenium (elecampane)

Ligusticum porteri (osha)

Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae (balsam of Peru)
Pimpinella anisum (anise)

Populus balsamifera var. balsamifera (balm of Gilead)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Usnea spp. (usnea)

Nervous System Infections

Infection of nervous system tissue can be extremely dan-
gerous and difficult to treat. Conditions such as meningi-
tis are best treated with conventional drugs, although
using herbs in a supportive role, as described above, is
fine. See chapter 16 for an herbal approach to the treat-
ment of shingles, an intransigent viral infection of the
nerve ganglia.

VAGINITIS

Inflammation (as from bacterial or fungal infection, aller-
gic reaction, or hormone deficiency) of the vagina that
may be marked by irritation and vaginal discharge. (The
Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary)

Symptoms of vaginitis include itching, burning, and a
vaginal discharge that is different from normal secretions.
The discharge may vary in consistency, color, and smell.
The discomfort may be inside the vagina or on the vulva
just outside the vagina. Discomfort during urination or
sexual intercourse may also occur.

The term vaginitis describes a range of disorders that
cause infection or inflammation of the vagina. The disor-
der may result from infection with organisms such as bac-
teria, yeast, and viruses, but may also be caused by irrita-
tion from chemicals in creams, sprays, or clothing. In
some cases, vaginitis is caused by organisms that are
passed between sexual partners.

Some vaginal discharge is quite common and normal
for women of childbearing age. Normally, cervical glands
produce a clear mucus secretion that drains downward,
mixing with bacteria, discarded vaginal cells, and
Bartholin’s gland secretions. These substances may turn
the mucus a whitish color (leukorrhea) and the discharge
turns yellowish when exposed to air.

At certain times of the menstrual cycle, the cervical
glands produce more mucus, depending on the amount of

----- PAGE 461 -----
estrogen produced. This is normal. Sexual excitement and
emotional stress are both associated with a normal vaginal
discharge. This discharge is a clear, mucuslike secretion.
Disease may be indicated if vaginal discharge is abnormal
in color, odor, or consistency, or if the amount of dis-
charge is significantly increased or decreased. When the
abnormal discharge is caused by a sexually transmitted dis-
ease, the sexual partner(s) may require treatment as well.

Good hygiene can help prevent some of the causes of
abnormal discharge, and help treat it if it occurs. A moist
environment encourages the growth of yeast bacteria, so
it is important to keep the area around the vulva dry. The
woman should wear cotton underpants and avoid panty
hose.

Treatment of Vaginitis
The material that follows, from Family Herbal: A Guide
to Living Life with Energy, Health, and Vitality by herbal-
ist Rosemary Gladstar, is an example of American folk
herbalism at its best. Gladstar’s approach epitomizes the
ways in which competent herbalism can address the real
needs of real people in an affordable and accessible way.
Gladstar suggests three components of effective and
safe treatment:

¢ Herbs taken internally, to address the infection

¢ An herbal dusting powder, to help dry excessive
moisture

¢ Dietary measures

In the treatment suggestion given here, Gladstar rec-
ommends the use of capsules, which have a long tradition
in American folk herbalism. The core herbs have been se-
lected for their antibacterial and antifungal properties,
combined with the soothing demulcency of marshmallow
to minimize stomach irritation.

A Prescription for Vaginitis‘
Black walnut hull powder
Chaparral powder
Echinacea root powder
Goldenseal root powder (organically cultivated)
Marshmallow root powder
Pau d’arco powder

Mix equal parts of the powders thoroughly and encapsulate in
size OO capsules. Take 2 capsules three times daily for 5 days,
then take 2 days off. Continue this cycle for 4 weeks, or until
symptoms subside.

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM 453

Dusting Powder (Yoni Powder)5

1 cup fine white clay

Ya cup cornstarch

2 tablespoons black walnut hull powder

2 tablespoons myrrh powder

1 tablespoon goldenseal root powder (organically cultivated)

A drop or two of tea tree essential oil (optional)
Combine all the ingredients and mix together using a wire whisk.
Spoon some into a jar with a shaker top for easy application.
Store the remainder in a glass jar with a tight-fitting lid.

Broader Context of Treatment

Attention to diet is of paramount importance. Emphasis
should be placed on light, wholesome meals that are heal-
ing to the body and help restore a normal, slightly acidic
pH to the vagina.

Dietary Guidelines for Vaginitis®

* Eat whole grains, such as brown rice, millet, and
buckwheat.

¢ Eat nourishing soups, such as miso, chicken, and veg-
etable broths.

¢ Include steamed vegetables, especially the dark green
leafy types.

¢ Avoid red meat.

¢ Eat plenty of lemons and grapefruit, but avoid sweet
citrus fruits, such as oranges.

* Cranberries and unsweetened cranberry juice are
highly recommended.

¢ Avoid alcohol and sweets during the course of a yeast
infection.

Yogurt and acidophilus help replenish the normal
flora of a healthy vagina and are important elements of a
dietary program to combat a yeast infection. If you have
allergies to dairy foods, goat yogurt and nondairy aci-
dophilus are available. In addition, with each meal drink
1 teaspoon of apple cider vinegar mixed with 1 teaspoon
of honey in 1/4 cup of warm water. This old-fashioned
tonic helps restore the body’s acid-alkaline balance.

GENITOURINARY TRACT
INFECTIONS

A range of antimicrobials are uniquely suited to treating
this part of the body. They are usually herbs rich in es-
sential oils. Please see chapter 18 for details on appropri-
ate herbal treatments and contraindications for these

----- PAGE 462 -----
454 2 TREATMEN! APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

herbs. As noted there, great care must be taken in patients
with a history of kidney disease to completely avoid stim-
ulating diuretics, such as Juniperus. In addition, consider
the treatment protocol given for prostatitis, at right.

Antimicrobial Herbs for the Genitourinary Tract
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Agathosma betulina (buchu)

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)

Elymus repens (couch grass)

Juniperus communis (juniper)

Petroselinum crispum (parsley)

PROSTATITIS
Infection of the prostate gland. (The Merck Manual)

Prostatitis causes a number of troublesome symptoms, in-
cluding aching pain and pressure in the prostate area, dys-
uria (painful urination), nocturia (nighttime urination),
and dribbling. Hematuria (blood in the urine) may be
present. The pain and pressure may make sitting down
uncomfortable. Acute cases may be accompanied by fever.

Treatment of Prostatitis

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials that work well in the urinary system are
fundamental to treatment success.

Prostate tonics are indicated, as for benign prostatic
hyperplasia.

Diuretics will promote voiding of urine. However, they
may be contraindicated if there is marked blockage due
to prostate swelling.

Demulcents that soothe the urinary system (demulcent di-
uretics) can help alleviate some of the symptoms.

Specific Remedies

While not specific per se, useful antimicrobials include
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry), Agathosma betulina
(buchu), and Elymus repens (couch grass). Useful prostatic
tonics include Serenoa repens (saw palmetto) and
Hydrangea arborescens (hydrangea); other herbs that might
fulfill such a role are Turnera diffusa (damiana) and Smilax
spp. (sarsaparilla).

A Prescription for Prostatitis

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi 1 part
Agathosma betulina 1 part
Echinacea spp. 1 part
Serenoa repens 1 part
Zea mays 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the
patient should drink an infusion of equal parts of dried Zea
mays and Achillea millefolium throughout the day.

Table 21.5. Actions Supplied by Combination for
Prostatitis

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Agathosma betulina,

Echinacea spp., Achillea millefolium

Prostate tonic Serenoa repens

Diuretic Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Agathosma betulina,
Zea mays, Achillea millefolium
Demulcent Zea mays

Broader Context of Treatment
In Male Sexual Vitality, Michael Murray, N.D., suggests
addressing the following factors:’

Relax the musculature in the region. This is best achieved
through stress management and relaxation techniques,
but relaxing nervines may also be indicated.

Drink plenty of ‘pure water.

Chew pumpkin seeds (Cucurbita pepo)in amounts up to '/2
cup a day.

Murray also recommends the following supplements:®

Vitamin E: 800 IU/day
Calcium-magnesium combination: 400 to 600 mg/day
Zinc picolinate: 20 to 50 mg/day

SKIN INFECTIONS

In light of the constant exposure of our massive skin sur-
face to injury, bacteria, and various other foreign sub-
stances, it is rather incredible that the skin is not more
frequently afflicted with infections. A number of factors
account for this, including the skin’s keratin layer, the
chemicals in sebum and perspiration, and the internal
defenses present in the bloodstream. Nonetheless, skin

----- PAGE 463 -----
infections do occur, and vary from trivial to life threaten-
ing. Of the many different types of bacterial infection that
can occur, here we shall review a treatment for boils. Please
refer to chapter 24 for a discussion of impetigo in children.

BOILS

Acute, tender, perifollicular inflammatory nodules result-
ing from infection by staphylococci. (The Merck Manual)

Boils, also known as furwncles, are infections that manifest
as localized abscesses starting in the hair follicles. They
emerge as tender, red, pus-filled lumps in the skin that
often come to a “head” and subsequently drain. When
deeper furuncles form and coalesce, the term carbuncle ap-
plies. A carbuncle may drain at several openings in the
same region. The shoulders, face, scalp, buttocks, and
armpits are common sites for carbuncles.

Treatment of Boils

Actions Indicated

Alteratives offer the most benefit in the treatment of boils,
although I am unable to give a satisfactory explanation
of how they work or why!

Antimicrobials help the body rid itself of the infection. In
this case, it is difficult to say whether they work
through direct bactericidal effects or indirect stimula-
tion of the immune response.

Lymphatic tonics promote the general drainage of fluid.

Diuretics are especially important in supporting the elim-
inative work of the kidneys.

Hepatics are similarly helpful for the liver.

Vulnerary, anti-inflammatory, antipruritic, and astringent
herbs may all be helpful topically.

Specific Remedies

The stronger hepatic alteratives are often considered
specifics. Their strength highlights the need to take care
with dosage. Important examples of hepatic alteratives are
listed here. In addition, Echinacea is strongly indicated.

Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Larrea tridentata (chaparral)
Phytolacca americana (poke)
Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)

‘THE IMMUNE SYSTEM 2 455

A Prescription for Boils

Echinacea spp. 3 parts
Galium aparine 2 parts
Rumex crispus 1 part
Phytolacca americana T part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the
patient should drink an infusion of Urtica dioica (preferably
made from fresh herb) twice a day.

Table 21.6. Actions Supplied by Prescription for Boils

ACTION HERBS

Alterative Echinacea spp., Galium aparine, Rumex crispus,
Phytolacca americana, Urtica dioica

Antimicrobial Echinacea spp.

Lymphatic tonic Galium aparine, Phytolacca americana

Diuretic Galium aparine, Urtica dioica

Hepatic Rumex crispus

FUNGAL SKIN INFECTIONS

Superficial infections caused by dermatophytes—fungi
that invade only dead tissues of the skin or its ap-
pendages. (The Merck Manual)

Fungal infections of the skin are very common in people
ofall ages. They are caused by microscopic fungal organ-
isms that normally live on the skin surface without caus-
ing symptoms. Under the right conditions of moisture,
warmth, irritation, or minor skin injury, they begin to
grow more rapidly and invasively, causing a range of
health problems. Certain underlying conditions may in-
crease the likelihood that a fungal infection will occur,
and should be considered when the infection is highly re-
sistant to treatment or follows a recurrent course. They
include some endocrine disorders and immune diseases.

A variety of fungal infections can affect human skin,
especially in tropical environments where the heat and
humidity allow the fungi to thrive. The pathogens most
frequently responsible for fungal infections are known as
dermatophytes.

Common Fungal Skin Infections

Tinea, caused by the fungus Trichophyton, manifests in an
itchy, red, scaly patch that spreads outward as it grows.
Hairs in the area may fall out or break. The skin may

----- PAGE 464 -----
456 @ TREATMINI APPROACHES BY BODY SySTEM

crack and become secondarily infected with bacteria. The
fungus is spread by hairbrushes, clothes, and other per-
sonal contact.

‘The most common forms of tinea are:

Tinea capitis (ringworm of the scalp or neck)

‘Tinea barbae (ringworm of the beard area)

Tinea corporis (ringworm involving non-hairy parts of
the body, such as the arms, shoulders, and face)

Tinea cruris (“jock itch”)

Tinea pedis (“athlete’s foot”)

‘The discussion below of an herbal treatment for tinea
pedis can be broadly applied to the other foci of fungal
infections.

Treatment of Athlete’s Foot
Athlete’s foot, or tinea pedis, is a fungal infection of the
toes and foot characterized by an itchy, scaly, malodorous
rash between the toes. Cracks, irritation, redness, and
bacterial infection may complicate the picture. Sports en-
thusiasts are not the only ones to suffer from athlete’s
foot. Hot weather and shoes that do not allow the feet to
“breathe” are two predisposing factors. Most susceptible
are people who have previously had the infection, adult
men, people whose feet perspire heavily, and those with a
weakened immune response. Women, children, and peo-
ple who go barefoot do not often contract it. Internal
treatments do little to help, unless the infection is an ex-
pression of an immune system problem.

Fungicidal essential oils and essential oil-rich plants
are the most effective topical treatments. Allium sativum
can be both dramatically effective and extremely odorous!

Effective Antifungal Herbs

Allium sativum (garlic)

Commiphora molmol (myrrh essential oil)
Melaleuca spp. (tea tree oil)

A combination of equal parts lavender and myrrh es-
sential oils is a long-standing treatment for athlete’s foot
among aromatherapists in the United Kingdom. Myrrh is
fungicidal and lavender is anti-inflammatory and vulner-
ary. For the first few days of treatment, dissolve the oils in
rubbing alcohol and apply to skin until the skin no longer
seems moist or weepy. Continue treatment with an oint-
ment or cream containing 3% to 5% essential oil until the
skin is completely clear. If the skin is deeply cracked and
painful, calendula oil can be valuable as well.

In addition, the following hygiene pointers are
important:

Clean thoroughly and repeatedly around toenails and finger-
nails, as the minute fungal mycelium often lodges
under the nails and causes repeated infections.

Keep the feet dry, especially between the toes.

Wear open-toed shoes or sandals when you must wear shoes.
Avoid vinyl uppers and athletic shoes with rubber
soles. Cotton socks are better than synthetic.

Wash the feet and soak them in a vinegar and water solution
(2 to 4 tablespoons of vinegar per pint of water) for 20
minutes three times daily. The use of herbal vinegars
would also be appropriate.

CANCER

A proliferation of cells whose unique trait—loss of nor-
mal controls—results in unregulated growth, lack of dif-
ferentiation, local tissue invasion, and metastasis. (The
Merck Manual}

Herbal remedies have a long and honorable history in the
treatment of cancer, and it may surprise some to learn
that they are still at the core of modern medicine’s re-
sponse to this intransigent disease. For a comprehensive
historical review of plants used in treating cancer, the in-
terested reader is referred to Plants Used Against Cancer: A
Survey, by J. L. Hartwell?

Incredible resources go into cancer research, some of
which are focused on plants. However, the results from all
of this research attention are nowhere near as dramatic as
what might be expected. This should not lead us to the
conclusion that plants have little or no role in the treat-
ment of cancer. Rather, it illuminates the basic failing of
orthodox medicine’s approach to degenerative disease in
general and cancer in particular. For a detailed look at
plants, cancer research, and the limitations of this re-
search approach, please refer to chapter 9.

Cancer is a general term applied to a variety of malig-
nant diseases that affect many different parts of the body.
These diseases are characterized by rapid and uncon-
trolled formation of abnormal cells. These may mass
together to form a growth or tumor, or proliferate
throughout the body, initiating abnormal cell growth at
other sites. If the process is not arrested, it may progress
until it causes the death of the affected individual. Cancer
is encountered in all higher animals, and plants also de-
velop growths that resemble cancer.

‘The search for a chemical anticancer magic bullet or
specific cytotoxic plant is predicated upon a rationale that
might very well be flawed—that is, the idea that specific

----- PAGE 465 -----
constituents represent the basis of a plant’s therapeutic ef-
fect. This is not to deny that Western medicine has gar-
nered a harvest of great benefit for a suffering humanity.
Reductionist pharmacology has furnished medicine with
powerful tools for the treatment of acute, life-threatening
diseases and alleviation of suffering through speedy ame-
lioration of symptoms. However, bear in mind that the
major cause of death in the Western world is now degen-
erative disease, not acute infection. On the one hand, this
change is a reflection of the successes of the allopathic
approach; smallpox has been eradicated, polio no longer
occurs in epidemic proportions, and tuberculosis is no
longer the scourge it once was. On the other hand, these
very successes highlight the inadequacy of the conven-
tional approach to treating degenerative diseases.

Using the unfortunate militaristic imagery made
popular by allopathic advocacy groups, we can say that
acute infection has been “conquered.” However, the vast
sums and resources that have been invested toward con-
quering cancer have not produced the expected results.
While the lobbyists for what has been called the cancer
industry might conclude that more research funds are
needed, holistic practitioners may come to a different
conclusion. In short, the dearth of dramatic break-
throughs in cancer research might suggest that the allo-
pathic context is not the appropriate one within which to
perceive and address the complexity of factors at play in
cancer. Multifactorial interactions are the strong suit of
holistic medicine. This is not meant as a commentary on
the effectiveness of specific holistic techniques, but
merely emphasizes the need for a context that embraces
more than oncogenes, tumor pathology, and carcinogens.

From the perspective of holistic medicine, any ap-
proach to cancer must be more than just an attack on a
tumor. It must take into account the whole of the indi-
vidual’s life. A deep process of healing and reevaluation is
essential. All of the issues raised at the beginning of this
chapter and throughout this book must be addressed.
Herbs demonstrate their relevance and efficacy in cancer
only when used as a component of a treatment program
constructed to address the individual in a holistic way.
Such inclusive holistic approaches are, unfortunately, rare
in the West. Much of so-called holistic cancer therapy is
simply chemotherapy-free therapy.

Atrue holistic approach to cancer will involve the fol-
lowing factors:

A medical approach to destroying the tumor. This may take
the form of improving the body’s own immune response
to destroying cancer cells. Herbal immunostimulants

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM 457

have much to offer here. Allopathic approaches may
utilize cytotoxic plants, chemotherapy, surgery, and
radiation.

Therapeutics geared to supporting the whole body. These take
into account the patient’s non-cancer issues, and may
involve the use of tonics and other means of support
for normal body processes, such as elimination and
general homeostatic integration.

Nutritional reevaluation. This may entail identifying foods
that have either an anticancer or a carcinogenic role,
but, more important, should focus on ensuring that the
body receives appropriate nourishment.

Bodywork appropriate for the individual. For example, mas-
sage does not cure cancer, but may play a vital role in
managing stress, making it an integral part of holistic
cancer treatment.

Emotional and mental support. While it may sound simple,
this is a complex and formidable proposition! Stress
management is essential, but so is in-depth counseling
of some kind.

Counseling helps ilhaminate the reactions and coping
mechanisms that come into play in response to cancer.
However, more exciting are the potentially life-transforming
insights that the patient may gain in the process. Within
the context of transpersonal psychotherapy, it is possi-
ble to see illness as a gift that offers many insights and
possibilities for growth and transformation. As a com-
ponent of a broad, holistic treatment approach to can-
cer, the process can facilitate major emotional, mental,
and spiritual healing even in the face of terminal bodily
disease.

Integrating all of these ideas to formulate a holistic
treatment program is challenging. The phytotherapist
has much to offer, but without knowledge, understanding,
and experience in the modalities mentioned above, herbs
are not enough. Herbs can make a major contribution,
but if used in isolation, they are in principle no different
from chemotherapy. They may have more to offer in
terms of general body health, but are less effective cyto-
toxic agents.

The term anticancer herb can foster false hopes. The
National Cancer Institute defines commonly used terms
in the following way:

A cytotoxic agent is toxic to tumors in laboratory cultures.
Antitumor activity occurs if cytotoxicity demonstrated in the
laboratory also occurs in tumor cells in living animals.
Anticancer is a term reserved for materials that are toxic to

tumor cells in clinical trials with humans.

----- PAGE 466 -----
458 «. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

One conclusion that can be drawn from all of this is
that the holistically oriented herbalist tends to minimize
the role of cytotoxic plants when developing an approach
to treating cancer. While they can be life saving, they are
not the core of treatment. There are a number of inher-
ent problems with these plants, but the most important
problem is how to use such potent plants safely.

An argument against the use of herbal medicines be-
comes relevant here. The huge variation in amounts of
constituents in individual plants makes accurate prescrib-
ing or ensuring standardized protocols impossible. As
phytotherapy is founded upon the use of gentle normaliz-
ers, or, at most, effectors that do not contain potent con-
stituents, this issue is irrelevant in most cases. However, it
becomes pertinent when potentially harmful cytotoxic
plants are concerned.

The mere existence of cytotoxic herbs does not mean
that they must be used. Similarly, the herbalist does not
necessarily use the many powerful plant poisons, nar-
cotics, and purgatives that the natural world offers. The
selection of remedies for cancer must be dictated by the
practitioner's interpretation of the individual’s needs,
which in turn is an expression of the therapeutic philoso-
phy within which they work. The holistic practitioner will
consider using such powerful remedies only within the
context of a broad, holistic approach. We must act on
these insights in practice or they become nothing more
than hot air—and there is enough air pollution already!

In light of these dosage issues and the therapeutic
ecology discussed throughout this book, I have concluded
that ifa practitioner decides that direct cytotoxicity is ap-
propriate, chemotherapy may well be safer than cytotoxic
plants. This statement may offend the natural medicine
purist, but the needs of the patient a/ways outweigh philo-
sophical dogma.

A Holistic Approach to the Treatment of
Cancer

So how are herbs most appropriately used in the treat-
ment of cancer? By applying herbs with immunostimu-
lant and immunomodulating properties in a holistic con-
text, the practitioner may develop a protocol that does
not depend on potentially poisonous plants. If we apply
the model developed in this book, some clear guidelines
become apparent.

Herbal Actions
Application of the term anticancer to herbal actions may
be misleading. Appropriate herbal actions for cancer may

include alterative, lymphatic, and tonic. Other actions
will be indicated by the symptom picture and issues
unique to the type of tumor involved. In addition, the
needs of the individual will suggest actions necessary for
system support.

System Tonics

Tonic support for the site of the tumor is essential. Tonics
can also be used to address other factors revealed by a re-
view of the patient’s medical and family history.

System Support

This will take some form of immune system support, with
an emphasis on deep immune stimulation, eliminative
support, and stress management.

Specific Remedies

Many plants around the world have a reputation for anti-
cancer activity. Unfortunately, they do not work as
claimed! Instead, they are largely alterative, lymphatic,
hepatic, or diuretic remedies, and have much to con-
tribute to the holistic approach suggested here. However,
used in isolation, they will not replace such an approach.
Common examples of such remedies from the European
and North American traditions are listed here.

Herbs to Support a Holistic Approach to Cancer
Arctium lappa (burdock)

Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Galium aparine (cleavers)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Larrea tridentata (chaparral)
Phytolacca americana (poke)

Rumex crispus (yellow dock)
Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)
Scrophularia nodosa (figwort)
Stillingia sylvatica (queen’s delight)
Thuja occidentalis (thuja)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Viola odorata (sweet violet)

Viscum album (mistletoe)

‘Why are no prescriptions suggested or treatment
protocols given in this discussion on cancer? I have two
reasons, one theoretical and one personal.

If we can draw any clear conclusion from this theo-
retical discussion, it is that each individual must be treated
as just that—a unique individual—not a tumor site. As the

----- PAGE 467 -----
holistic approach proposes that we avoid cytotoxic reme-
dies, the factors to address within the protocol will be
fundamentally the same as those for immune support in
general, with a possibly greater emphasis on alterative and
lymphatic remedies.

However, the main reason I have not suggested any
prescriptions here is a personal one. My clinical experi-
ence with treating cancer is limited, and so I have con-
cluded that all I can ethically write is the review of theory
presented here. The herbal literature is replete with treat-
ments and cancer cures that have no basis in reality. An
exception to this is Herbal Medicine, Healing and Cancer, by
Donald Yance. Written by an experienced, knowledge-
able, and realistically compassionate herbalist, the book
bodes well for the future of traditional herbalism in the
United States.

Table 21.7, adapted from Yance’s book, briefly sum-
marizes his three-stage approach to the treatment of cancer.
Please refer to his book for more explanation and details.

THE IMMUNE SYSTEM > 459

Table 21.7. Three-Stage Herbal Protocol for Cancer’”®

STAGE OF TREATMENT ACTIONS REQUIRED

Stage 1: Tonic therapy Herbs to strengthen the individual's

constitution and vitality

Tonics, adaptogens, and herbal
immune-enhancers

Stage 2: Liver and lymph
detoxification

Antioxidant, liver-detoxifying,
anti-inflammatory, and anti-angiogenic
herbs; alteratives and lymphatics

Gene-repairing, enzyme-inhibiting,
and cytotoxic herbs

Stage 3: Cytotoxic therapy

Herbs that can alter the action of
hormonal receptor-type cancers

Adapted from Donald Yance, Herbal Medicine, Healing and Cancer. (Los Angeles: Keats
Publishing, 1999).

Isolated Constituents with Promise in Cancer

Two plant constituents that appear to have much to offer as supplementation to an individual-
ized protocol for the treatment of cancer are artemisinin and di-indolymethane. Artemisinin is a
sesquiterpene found in Artemisia annua, a plant known as sweet Annie in North America and qing
hao in China. It was initially introduced into Western medicine as a treatment for malaria.
Extensive clinical trials have demonstrated that artemisinin is effective against Plasmodium falci-
parum, the causative parasitic protozoan that is transmitted to humans via the Anopheles
mosquito. Subsequent research showed activity against strains of Plasmodium that had become
resistant to chloroquine.” In recent years, artemisinin has attracted attention as a potential anti-
cancer drug, and appears to be effective against a wide variety of cancers, especially leukemia
and colon cancer. Intermediate activities were also shown against melanoma, breast, ovarian,
prostate, CNS, and renal cancer.”

Di-indolylmethane is a dimer of indole-3-carbinol, a glucosinolate found in cruciferous veg-
etables. Both of these compounds appear to have potent anticancer properties.® Vegetables that
contain them include brussels sprouts, broccoli, and cabbages. Di-indolylmethane and indole-3-
carbinol stimulate biotransformation in the liver, converting estradiol to nontoxic metabolites."
These glucosinolates are believed to be responsible for the lowered risk of cancer associated with
the consumption of cruciferous vegetables." They appear to be especially protective against
breast and cervical cancer. One reason for this may be an ability to increase the breakdown of es-
trogens."* Estradiol, for example, may have carcinogenic properties when its levels become high,
while the other estrogens have noncarcinogenic or perhaps even anticarcinogenic properties. As
an increasing amount of estrogen-type substances are appearing in the food and water chain
{probably due primarily to the wide use of pesticides and plastics), di-indolylrnethane and indole-
3-carbinol may be viewed as important preventive substances.

----- PAGE 468 -----
460 @ TREATMENI! APPROACHES BY BODY SySTEM

References

1.

a

10.

ll.

War

=e

www.news.cornell.edu/releases/Sept96/cyclosporine.hrs.
html.

Weng SC, Chou CJ, Lin LC, et al. Immunomodulatory
functions of extracts from the Chinese medicinal fungus
Cordyceps cicadae. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 2002
Nov; 83(1-2):79-85.

Gladstar R, Family Herbal: A Guide to Living Life with
Energy, Health, and Vitality. Pownal, VT: Storey Books,
2001.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Murray MT. Male Sexual Vitality. Rocklin, CA: Prima,
1994.

Ibid.

Hartwell JL. Plants Used Against Cancer: A Survey.
Lawrence, KS: Quarterman Publications, 1984.

Yance DR. Herbal Medicine, Healing and Cancer Los
Angeles: Keats Publishing, 1999.

Samuelsson, G. Drugs of Natural Origin. Stockholm:
Swedish Pharmaceutical Press, 1992.

Efferth, et al. Antimalaria drug is also active against can-
cer. International Journal of Oncology 2001; 18; 767-73.

. Broadbent TA, Broadbent HS. The chemistry and phar-

macology of indole-3-carbinol (indole-3-methanol) and
3-(methoxymethyl)indole [part I]. Current Medicinal
Chemistry 1998; 5:337-52.

. Ibid., 469-91.
. Hecht SS. Chemoprevention of cancer by isothio-

cyanates, modifiers of carcinogen metabolism. Journal of
Nutrition 1999; 129:768S-745 [review].

. Bradlow HL, Sepkovic DW, Telang NT, and Osborne

MP. Multifunctional aspects of the action of indole-3-
carbinol as an antitumor agent. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1999; 889:204-13.

Suggested Reading
Boik J. Cancer and Natural Medicine: A Textbook of Basic Science

and Clinical Research. Princeton, MN: Oregon Medical
Press, 1996.

Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy: Modern

Herbal Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone,
1999.

Yance DR. Herbal Medicine, Healing and Cancer. Los Angeles:

Keats Publishing, 1999.

----- PAGE 469 -----
22

fone

THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM

he herbal traditions do not provide an abundance
of information about the treatment of endocrine
disorders. This is not surprising, as our under-
standing of the functions of this important body system is
a very recent development. In addition, a comprehensive
review of phytotherapy for the endocrine system has yet
to be written. When used skillfully within the context of
an appropriate holistic approach, herbs can make a major
contribution to treatment of endocrine disorders.
However, the results achieved with herbs may not ade-
quately replace drug treatment.

The endocrine system influences cellular metabolism
by means of hormones. Endocrine glands, also known as
ductless glands, release hormones into the blood or
lymph. Hormones are chemical messengers that are
transported throughout the body. The body’s responses
to the presence of hormones occur after a lag period of
seconds or even days, but once initiated, the responses
tend to be much more prolonged than those induced by
the nervous system.

The endocrine glands include the pituitary, thyroid,
parathyroid, adrenal, pineal, and thymus glands.
Additionally, several non-endocrine organs contain areas
of endocrine tissue that produce hormones. Such organs
include the pancreas and the gonads. The hypothalamus,
a part of the nervous system, produces and releases hor-
mones, so is considered a neuroendocrine organ.

THE THYROID GLAND

The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped organ located at
the base of the neck, just above the collarbone. The main
function of this gland is the production of thyroxine, an
iodine-containing hormone. Thyroxine controls the rate
and intensity of most physiologic functions. The regula-
tion of heart rate, sweating, digestive action, body tem-
perature, calorie consumption, and many other activities
depends at least in part on this hormone.

The pituitary gland, located at the base of the front

461

of the brain, controls the thyroid itself. The pituitary re-
leases thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), required by
the thyroid to produce thyroxine. In turn, production of
pituitary TSH depends upon the presence of thyrotropin-
releasing hormone, which comes from the hypothalamus.
Thus, a complex and delicate set of interactions governs
the function of the thyroid, and many physical and emo-
tional factors can also play a role.

HYPOTHYROIDISM

The characteristic clinical response to thyroid hormone
deficiency in the adult. (The Merck Manual)

Hypothyroidism, also known as myxedema, is underactiv-
ity of the thyroid that results in deficiency of thyroid hor-
mone. Although the disorder may be caused by any of a
variety of diseases that a“fect the hypothalamus and pitu-
itary gland, it is primarily related to disorders of the thy-
roid gland itself.

Inadequate secretion of thyroid hormone leads to a
general slowing of all physical and mental processes. The
condition is characterized by an overall depression of
most cellular enzyme systems and oxidative processes. As
the metabolic activity of all cells in the body slows, there
is a reduction in the rate of oxygen consumption, leading
to a decrease in oxidation of nutrients for energy and less
body heat production.

The signs and symptoms, all of which result from this
slowdown of metabolism, range from nonspecific com-
plaints to severe symptoms that may become life threat-
ening if unrecognized and untreated. Fatigue, lack of en-
ergy, cold intolerance, severe constipation, heavy
menstrual periods, and weight gain despite a diminishing
appetite may go unnoticed or be attributed to other con-
ditions, such as stress, depression, and overwork. As
symptoms worsen, they may become more obvious with
time. These can include slowed pulse, muscle aches,
puffiness around the eyes, hair loss, hoarseness, sluggish

----- PAGE 470 -----
462 «@ TREATsiiNT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

reflexes, and cool, dry, coarse skin. Changes in mood and
personality, simulating psychiatric disturbance, may
occur. The thyroid gland may become enlarged, produc-
ing a goiter in the neck. Hypothyroidism is a risk factor
for a range of problems including atherosclerosis, skin
problems, and constipation.

Treatment of Hypothyroidism

Orthodox therapy for hypothyroidism is based upon daily
thyroid hormone replacement therapy. As no herbs ade-
quately fulfill this action, drug therapy will often remain
the basis of treatment, and the role of phytotherapy will
be to help the body deal with the repercussions of the
condition and its treatment. In mild cases, the use of bit-
ters may sometimes be enough, but it will be beneficial in
all cases. Other than bitters, the seaweed Fucus vesiculosus
(bladderwrack) has been traditionally used to treat this
condition. While it has much to offer, it is only truly spe-
cific when the patient has an iodine deficiency.

Herbs can support hormone replacement therapy in
a number of important ways. Hypothyroidism accelerates
the development of atherosclerosis, due to deposition of
mucopolysaccharides in the heart muscle, placing patients
at higher risk of coronary artery disease. This damage
may be lessened through the use of cardiovascular tonics,
such as Crataegus spp., Ginkgo biloba, and Allium sativum.

In addition, herbs can help ease problems related to
functional and structural changes in the skin. While they
may provide only symptomatic relief, this is nonetheless
essential for the patient. Emollients, circulatory stimu-
lants, and other remedies may be valuable here, but the
specifics will depend upon the patient’s experience.
Moisturizing actions are especially important, because the
skin is usually dry and scaly in this condition.

Other symptoms may also be relieved with herbs.
For chronic constipation, hepatic laxatives are the best
choice, as they also support liver function. Examples of
herbs that may be helpful include Rumex crispus (yellow
dock) and Juglans cinerea (butternut). In extreme cases,
anthraquinone-containing herbs, such as Rhamnus purshi-
ana (cascara sagrada) and Senna alexandrina, may be re-
quired. See chapters 10 and 13 for important cautions
about the use of these powerful laxatives.

Nervine tonics and other nervines may be indicated,
but avoid the stronger relaxing remedies, such as Humulus
lupulus (hops) and Valeriana officinalis (valerian). This is
because they may have too sedating an effect on body
function. Antidepressant herbs like Hypericum perforatum
(St. John’s wort) and Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort) can be
helpful.

HYPERTHYROIDISM

A clinical condition encompassing several specific dis-
eases, characterized by hypermetabolism and elevated
serum levels of free thyroid hormones. (The Merck
Manual)

Hyperthyroidism, or overactivity of the thyroid gland,
has a number of possible causes. It may be due to the
presence of a growth or tumor (either benign or malig-
nant) or a self-limited inflammation of the gland, proba-
bly due to viral infection. The most common cause is
Graves’ disease, an autoimmune disorder related to the
production of thyroid antibodies that have a stimulating
effect on the gland. This same process causes the deposi-
tion of a thick substance within the skin, behind the eyes,
and elsewhere.

Clinical manifestations of hyperthyroidism, espe-
cially excessive body heat, increased neuromuscular and
cardiovascular activity, and hyperactivity, are the result of
heightened metabolic rate. Accelerated pulse rate can
range from 90 to 160 beats per minute.

Symptoms of Hyperthyroidism

Nervousness, hyperexcitement, irritability, apprehension,
sleeplessness

Difficulty sitting quietly

Rapid pulse at rest and upon exertion; heart palpitations

Low heat tolerance, profuse perspiration, flushed skin
(e.g., warm, moist hands)

Fine tremor of hands, changes in bowel habits (constipa-
tion or diarrhea)

Increased appetite and progressive weight loss

Muscle fatigue and weakness

Amenorrhea

Bulging eyes (exophthahmos), producing a startled expression

Treatment of Hyperthyroidism

Symptomatic amelioration of this condition is often
straightforward. However, control of the underlying
cause of the symptoms—excessive production of thyroid
hormones—is challenging. Used as symptomatic relief,
however, herbs can support the work of prescription
medications.

Actions Indicated

Relaxing nervines will ease agitation and anxiety. In this
case, specific relaxing nervines are indicated (Lycopus
virginicus or L. europaeus, discussed under Specific
Remedies).

----- PAGE 471 -----
Cardiac tonics are indicated, to help the heart function
healthily in the face of the hormone-stimulated
workload.

Specific Remedies

Traditional herbal treatment for hyperthyroidism pro-
vides us with one of the best examples of a condition for
which a definite specific exists. This is Lycopus virginicus or
L. europaeus, commonly known as bugleweed. The herb is
a useful relaxing nervine, but in addition has a sometimes
dramatic effect in improving the symptom picture associ-
ated with hyperthyroid conditions. I have seen no data on
changes in thyroxine serum levels in patients using
Lycopus, and thus cannot say that the improvement is re-
lated to any direct impact of the herb on hormone levels.
Nonetheless, it does seem to help.

A Prescription for Hyperthyroidism

Lycopus spp. 4 parts
Leonurus cardiaca 2 parts
Scutellaria spp. 2 parts
Crataegus spp. T part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day

A Prescription for Insomnia Associated

with Hyperthyroidism
Valeriana officinalis | part
Passiflora incarnata ] part

Dosage: 5 to 15 ml of tincture a half hour before retiring

Table 22.1. Actions Supplied by Combination for
Hyperthyroidism

ACTION HERBS

Nervine tonic Scutellaria spp.

Nervine relaxant Lycopus spp., Leonurus cardiaca, Scutellaria spp.,

Valeriana officinalis, Passiflora incarnata

Cardiovascular tonic Crataegus spp.

DIABETES MELLITUS

A syndrome characterized by hyperglycemia resulting
from absolute or relative impairment in insulin and/or in-
sulin action. (The Merck Manual}

Diabetes mellitus, characterized by glycosuria (glucose in
the urine) and hyperglycemia (elevated blood sugar levels),

‘THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM @ 463

is an unfortunately common, chronic metabolic disorder
involving carbohydrate, fat, and protein metabolism.
Although the most widely recognized manifestation of
diabetes is hyperglycemia, this is a complex and multi-
faceted disease that potentially affects every organ in
the body.

Regulation of blood sugar, a complex homeostatic
process, is dependent upon the presence of insulin, a hor-
mone produced in specialized cells in the pancreas, called
islets of Langerhans. The insulin is absorbed into the
bloodstream, which carries it to the rest of the body.
Insulin fulfills several important roles:

Mobilizes glucose to leave the blood and enter the cells of
various body organs.

Facilitates other metabolic processes that foster the storage of
energy in fat and other body substances and regulate
the release of these stores into the blood.

Insufficient levels of insulin cause blood glucose lev-
els to rise, especially after a meal. Without insulin, body
organs are unable to extract glucose from the blood and
begin to rely on alternate sources of energy, especially
certain fats. Their metabolites, called ketones, begin to
accumulate in the blood. Metabolic changes in diabetes
alter the way in which the body handles fats, including
cholesterol. This leads to their accumulation in the small
arteries of the body, often those of the eyes, kidneys,
heart, and brain. Thus, people with diabetes have an in-
creased incidence of blindness, kidney failure, heart at-
tack, and stroke.

There are two different forms of diabetes.

Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus (IDDM)
Insulin-dependent or Type I diabetes is often called juve-
nile onset diabetes, since it usually first presents in child-
hood or young adulthood. The condition is characterized
by a near total lack of insulin production; this is related to
a deficiency in insulin synthesis and secretion from the
islets of Langerhans, clusters of cells found in the pan-
creas. The pathogenesis of the disease may be autoim-
mune in nature or related to infection with coxsackie
virus B4 or mumps virus. Type I diabetes is treated with
insulin and diet; there is no role for oral hypoglycemics.

Non-Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus
(NIDDM)

Non-insulin-dependent or Type II diabetes usually occurs
in elderly or overweight people, and is thus also called
maturity onset diabetes. It is caused by a deficiency in or
diminished effectiveness of insulin, and is much more

----- PAGE 472 -----
464 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

common than Type I. Non-insulin-dependent diabetes
may be secondary to other diseases, such as pancreatitis.
It may also occur as a result of insulin antagonism, such as
that caused by Cushing’s syndrome or steroid therapy.
When NIDDM occurs in young people, a genetic com-
ponent appears to be involved.

Other causes of impaired glucose tolerance include
pregnancy and thyrotoxicosis, a condition resulting from
the presence of excess thyroid hormone, which in turn
may result from either overproduction by the thyroid
gland or loss of storage function and leakage from the
gland. In addition, the gradual development of relative in-
sulin deficiency is part of the normal aging process. In
NIDDM, the aim of treatment is to regularize blood
sugar levels through the use of hypoglycemics, glucosi-
dase inhibitors, sugar-restricted diets, and complex carbo-
hydrate preparations that delay the absorption of glucose
from the gut. People with NIDDM retain the ability to
produce some insulin, but the response to a meal is long
delayed and often inadequate.

Symptoms of either type of diabetes include fatigue,
increased appetite (if enough blood sugar is lost to the
urine), and increased urination, as the sugar causes the
kidney to produce higher volumes to dissolve the excess
load. Because of the accelerated loss of body fluid, the pa-
tient experiences greater thirst. As levels of blood sugar
rise and ketosis occurs, body fluids become acidic. One of
the body’s defenses against acidity is to decrease the
amount of carbon dioxide in the blood, which leads to
an increase in the rate and depth of respiration.
Complications due to arterial blockage are common, in-
cluding vision loss, heart problems, kidney damage, and
peripheral neuropathy. Such problems usually develop
over many years.

Treatment of Diabetes

The plant world offers many hypoglycemic herbs, and
these have much to contribute to a comprehensive man-
agement program for NIDDM. Insulin-dependent dia-
betes will rarely respond well to hypoglycemic agents, as
the islets of Langerhans are largely incapacitated. Herbs
will not replace necessary insulin therapy.

Laboratory screenings similar to those used to iden-
tify cytotoxic plants have demonstrated that plant hypo-
glycemics do exist, and many hundreds have been docu-
mented. Please see chapter 9 for a discussion about this
research.

Hypoglycemic Herbs from the European Tradition
Allium sativum (garlic)

Galega officinalis (goat's rue)

Morus alba (mulberry leaf)

Olea europaea (olive leaf)

Vaccinium myrtillus (bilberry)

Interestingly, goat’s rue is also an effective galacta-
gogue, hinting at a possible effect on the pituitary or hy-
pothalamus. Remember that gentle endocrine stimulation
is also one of the properties of bitters, and for some peo-
ple these herbs may be dramatically effective in lowering
blood sugar.

On the experimental level, many plants have been
shown to have some degree of hypoglycemic activity, but
their mechanisms of action are not always clear. Here are
some examples cited in Medical Botany, by Lewis and
Elvin-Lewis.!

Plants with Hypoglycemic Activity in Animal
Studies

Anacardium occidentale (cashew)

Apium graveolens (celery)

Arctium lappa (burdock)

Avena sativa (oats)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)

Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Eupatorium purpureum (gravel root)
Euphorbia pilulifera (pill-bearing spurge)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Lophophora williamsii (peyote)

Panax ginseng (ginseng)

Spinacia oleracea (spinach)

Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)

The challenge for the herbal practitioner is the ap-
propriate application of hypoglycemics. Such remedies
can sometimes have a rapid impact on blood sugar levels,
but this will vary from patient to patient. They can be
used safely only as part of a comprehensive diabetes man-
agement program suitable for the particular individual.
Very close observation of glucose levels in urine and
blood is required. As this is beyond the scope of this dis-
cussion, no protocols for the use of hypoglycemic agents
will be given here.

On the other hand, herbal preventive work to avoid
long-term complications of diabetes may be undertaken
quite safely, even if no attempt is made to alter insulin lev-
els. For the reasons discussed earlier, particular attention

----- PAGE 473 -----
should be given to the cardiovascular system. Heart and
vascular tonics are appropriate for long-term use, espe-
cially Crataegus spp., Ginkgo biloba, and Vaccinium myrtillus.

THE ADRENAL GLANDS

Ideas about remedies for the adrenal glands abound.
Unfortunately, they often reflect a fundamental lack of
knowledge about the physiology and function of this im-
portant part of the endocrine system. The concepts
couched in the vague terms used in much “alternative”
literature are often valid and helpful, but the invocation of
adrenal tonic effects must be based upon an understand-
ing of actual physiology.

One adrenal gland sits astride each kidney, deep in
the back part of the abdomen. Each of these glands has
two parts with markedly different functions: a cortex, or
outer part, and a medulla, or central portion. Therapy in-
tended to affect these glands must be appropriate to the
adrenal function the practitioner wants to address.

The Adrenal Medulla

The adrenal medulla secretes the hormones adrenaline
(epinephrine) and noradrenaline (norepinephrine), which
are responsible for the rapid increases in nervous system
and metabolic activity involved in the general adaptation
system (GAS). Please see chapter 16 for more informa-
tion on this important stress response mechanism and the
contribution herbs can make to support the adrenal
medulla.

Functions of Adrenaline

* Acts on a- and f-receptors

* Increases contractility and excitability of heart muscle,
thus increasing cardiac output

¢ Facilitates blood flow to muscles, brain, and viscera

¢ Enhances blood sugar levels by stimulating conversion
of glycogen to glucose in liver

* Inhibits smooth muscle contractions

Functions of Noradrenaline

* Acts primarily on o-receptors

© Increases peripheral vascular resistance, leading to in-
creased blood pressure

The Adrenal Cortex

The adrenal cortex is responsible for production of glu-
cocorticoids, such as cortisol and hydrocortisone, which
help regulate metabolism, the immune system, certain as-

‘THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM -@ 465

pects of behavior, and many other processes. The cortex
also secretes mineralocorticoids, such as aldosterone and
desoxycorticosterone. Aldosterone is fundamental to the
homeostatic control of sodium and potassium secretion
by the kidney. These hormones are synthesized from
cholesterol.

Functions of Glucocorticoids

¢ Enhance protein catabolism and inhibit protein
synthesis

¢ Antagonize action of insulin

* Increase synthesis of glucose by the liver

¢ Influence body defense mechanism and reactions to
stress

¢ Influence emotions

Functions of Mineralocorticoids

¢ Regulate reabsorption of sodium cations

¢ Regulate excretion of potassium cations by renal
tubules

While the cortex and medulla produce different hor-
mones in response to different stimuli, they share a com-
plex role in certain situations—for example, the stress re-
sponse. The immediate stress response is controlled
mainly, although not completely, by the medulla, while
long-term stress responses are handled by the surround-
ing cortex. Please refer to chapter 16 for a more detailed
discussion of the physio:ogical responses that constitute
this reaction.

Herbs to Support the Adrenal Medulla

Adaptogens constitute the core of herbal support for con-
ditions affecting the adrenal medulla. Saponins, such as
the eleutherosides found in Eleutherococcus senticosus
(Siberian ginseng), directly impact this part of the adrenal
gland. Nervine tonic support of some kind is usually indi-
cated as well, Although nervines will not directly affect
the medulla, they will provide general systemic support to
help ease the impact of tension and anxiety. Bitter tonics
can be helpful as well. Examples of useful adaptogens are
Panax spp. (ginseng), Eleutherococcus senticosus, and
Withania somnifera (ashwaganda). Relevant nervine tonics
include Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap), Hypericum perfora-
tum (St. John’s wort), and Avena sativa (oats).

Herbs to Support the Adrenal Cortex

Herbal medicines can affect the function of the adrenal
cortex in a variety of ways. Most important are the direct
effects of plants rich in saponins, such as Glycyrrhiza

----- PAGE 474 -----
466 « TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SySTEM

glabra (licorice) and Dioscorea villosa (wild yam).
Adaptogens will help support the cortex in its response to
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).

Gheyrrhiza is in fact proving controversial because of
its effects upon the adrenal cortex. Aldosterone is part of
what has been called the renin-aldosterone-angiotensin
axis, a hormonal homeostatic complex that regulates the
volume of urine passed and electrolyte balance in the
blood. When Glycyrrhiza is eaten or taken in great excess,
its direct impact upon aldosterone can lead to potassium
depletion. This is a very rare occurrence, but it is men-
tioned in pharmacology books as one of the dangers of
herbal medicine. Such effects must be taken seriously,

however, with hypertensive patients. Géycyrrbiza is con-
traindicated for these patients.

On the other hand, case reports from the United
Kingdom indicate that some people with Addison’s dis-
ease benefit greatly from the use of Glycyrrhiza.
Addison’s disease results from damage to the adrenal cor-
tex, which leads to decreased production of adrenocorti-
cal hormones.

References
1. Lewis WH, Elvin-Lewis M. Medical Botany. New York:
J. Wiley, 2003.

----- PAGE 475 -----
23

cH

PHYTOTHERAPY AND THE ELDERLY

at is aging? To some extent, the answer to
this question is a subjective one, reflecting be-
lief system as much as fact. Here we shall

briefly consider some ideas about the nature of biological
aging. The more extreme proponents of the current im-
mortality movement suggest that aging is simply an arti-
fact of bad nutrition and cramped life vision. Because
these immortality advocates tout certain herbs as part of
the approach to life extension, we will focus some atten-
tion on ideas of aging.
However, I must start by acknowledging my personal
bias on these issues. The very expensive products and ap-
proaches proposed by some prominent exponents of “life
extension” strike me as a clever moneymaking plan based
on some unsavory elitist tendencies. There is a tendency in
these circles to see illness as something the patient creates
or attracts into his or her life. On some level, this may well
be true, as illness can provide one with the profound gift of
a learning opportunity. On the other hand, this insight has
become an unfortunately powerful tool for browbeating
and a source of guilt and judgment for the patient. In my
opinion, this is nothing short of new age fascism.
Appropriate nutrition

can do much to improve qual-
ity of life, health in general, and specific illness. Similarly,
as should be clear at this point in the book, I have a deep
respect for the role of vision and spirituality in human
life. The Bible says, “Without vision, the people die.”
However, it does mot say that with vision, the people will
live forever. The fandamental importance of vision and
spirituality is qualitative, not quantitative. By bringing
these qualities into our lives, we heal and transform our-
selves and the world. Having a longer chronological life
span is not the point.

The material in this chapter is structured differently
from that in the other treatment chapters. We will focus
primarily on a range of issues germane to elder health.
Discussions on most of the specific health conditions that
affect elders can be found in the appropriate body system
chapters by following the cross-references given here.

467

Genetic Theories of Aging

One group of ideas about aging is based upon the plethora
of insights provided by molecular biology about DNA and
RNA function and structure. Theories have been proposed
that suggest that aging is related to problems with stability
of DNA over time, and with the transcription of informa-
tion from the chromosomal DNA to RNA. In fact, there is
a different theory for each phase of the process. For those
who are interested, the most relevant ideas are known as
the error theory, the redundant message theory, the transcrip-
tion theory, and the programmed theory.'

Non-Genetic Theories of Aging

A number of non-DNA-based theories of aging have also
been proposed, and it is here that herbalism may be most
relevant. It should be clear by now to the reader what con-
tribution herbs may make in each of the following areas.

The immunological theory proposes that alterations in the
immune system contribute to the changes associated
with old age. With advancing age, the immune system
is thought to become less efficient. Its capacity to deal
with infection is reduced, and there is a greater likeli-
hood of autoimmune reactions.

The connective tissue theory relates aging to changes in the
collagen, elastin, and ground substance of this ubiqui-
tous tissue. As collagen makes up 25% of body protein,
any changes to this tissue will have marked effects on
overall health.

The free radical theory holds that the changes of aging are
caused by the combination of free radicals with essen-
tial molecules. Free radicals are chemicals whose outer
orbits contain unpaired electrons, making them highly
reactive.

Free radicals are a normal but short-lived aspect of
metabolism. The core problem is peroxidation of fats,
which damages membranes in the body. Even though the
body has a range of mechanisms to cope with it, the
damage caused by free radicals can be extensive. The free

----- PAGE 476 -----
468 =. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

radical theory is the one most often cited by the longevity
movement as a key insight. The question is whether free
radical production is the fundamental cause of aging or
simply an ancillary phenomenon that exacerbates age-
related changes due to some other cause.

Spiritual and Socioeconomic Issues

In addition to biological factors, sociological, economic,
and spiritual issues play a profound role in aging.
Although a detailed discussion of the complex of factors
at play is beyond the scope of this book, a few brief points
must be made.

Age is not a disease. Death is not an evil to be avoided
at all costs. Our culture has developed some distorted
perceptions about old age, seeing it as the undesirable
mirror image of youth. This blinkered perception ignores
the incredible value of wisdom and experience. It denies
our elders a voice and disregards the valuable contribu-
tions they have to offer. Our whole culture suffers as a re-
sult. We are dealing with spiritual issues here. There must
be an affirmation of aging and death, and an acknowledg-
ment of the rites of passage that these life stages represent.

Much of the illness of elders either results from or is
aggravated by socioeconomic factors that are not medical
at all. Issues such as isolation and poverty that manifest in
cardiovascular disease will not be helped by hawthorn. If
our culture is truly going to evolve into a “kinder, gentler”
one, then we must pay attention to these thorny questions.

TONING AND NURTURING
HEALTH IN ELDERS

As with most theories, the truth may well be some com-
bination of all of the ideas just discussed! Where does this
leave the phytotherapist? The first step is to identify any
therapeutic insights that may be gained by differentiating
among alterable and largely unalterable manifestations of
aging. The degree and timing of such changes will vary
from person to person, depending upon genetics,
lifestyle, environmental conditions, and other factors.

Largely Unalterable Manifestations of Aging
Farsightedness

Fibrosis and stiffening of arteries

Graying of hair

High-tone hearing loss

Loss of skin elasticity

Fortunately, some age-related changes can be altered
or avoided through various preventive approaches. In
most cases, the best way to use any applicable remedy is
within a broader treatment context, as indicated in the
relevant body system chapters.

Table 23.1. Possibly Alterable Manifestations of Aging

MANIFESTATION = TREATMENT STRATEGIES
Agility Stretching exercises, appropriate herbs
Arthritis Diet, exercise, weight control, appropriate herbs

Blood pressure Exercise, reduced salt intake, obesity, appropriate

herbs

Cancer Diet, exercise, weight control, tobacco avoidance;
herbs

Cognition Practice, appropriate herbs

Heart disease Diet, exercise, weight control, tobacco avoidance,

herbs

Heart reserve Aerobic exercise, appropriate herbs

Isolation Practice, socialization
Memory Practice, appropriate herbs
Mobility Stretching exercises, appropriate herbs

Physical fitness Exercise, weight control, tobacco avoidance, herbs

Reaction time Exercise, appropriate herbs

A basic premise of my philosophy is that phytother-
apy can go beyond the treatment of illness to nurture
health. This strength of this approach lies in the use of
tonics and gentle effector remedies; stronger effectors are
reserved for use only when absolutely necessary. This is
also the basis of herbal treatment for elders. Thus, every-
thing covered so far in this book has relevance to the
treatment of older individuals.

Perhaps the most outstanding contribution that
herbs can make to the health of elders is through system
tonics. Tonics and gentle normalizer remedies not only
are largely free of side effects, but also offer possibilities—
unmatched by any conventional treatments—for the
maintenance of wellness and the prevention of many
problems associated with aging.

----- PAGE 477 -----
Prescribing Issues Unique to Elders

‘When considering herbal therapy for elders, it is impor-
tant to acknowledge the effects of certain age-related
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic changes. Safe
drug or herb prescribing for older patients must be based
on an understanding of the alterations in absorption, dis-
tribution, and elimination mechanisms that occur as part
of the aging process. Taking such issues into considera-
tion can prevent many complications.

Although these concerns are not as important for the
phytotherapist as for the physician prescribing conven-
tional drugs, they still exist. A brief review ofsome of the
factors involved for both plant extracts and chemical
drugs is provided here; see chapter 9 for more informa-
tion. Details on calculating dosages for elders are pro-
vided in chapter 12.

Drug Absorption

In order for a substance to enter the bloodstream when
taken by mouth, the absorptive lining of the gastroin-
testinal tract must be healthy. Medicines must remain in
contact with the lining for an adequate amount of time
for absorption to occur. There must also be an adequate
blood flow to and from the site of absorption. Normal
age-related changes impact all of these factors. There is a
reduction in mucosal surface area, a decrease in blood
flow to the intestines, and changes in both the amount
and nature of secretions.

Plasma Binding

Plant constituents are transported via the blood once they
have been absorbed from the intestines. The more com-
plex molecules are often bound with a blood protein, such
as albumin. Such protein-bound drugs can compete for
binding sites, which in turn may have a profound effect
on availability of medications.

Distribution

With advancing age, the proportion of body water and
lean body mass decreases, while body fat increases. This
favors the distribution of fat-soluble over water-soluble
constituents.

Elimination

The effect of a medicine ceases when it is eliminated from
the body or changed into some inactive form. This in-
volves liver metabolism, kidney function, and elimination
at other sites around the body, all factors that become less
efficient with age.

PHYTOTHERAPY AND THE ELDERLY @ 469

Paradoxical Reactions

The main concern for elders are effects known as para-
doxical reactions. With very elderly people, it is not unusual
for a medicine to have an effect that is opposite of-what is
expected. For example, the tranquilizer Valium (diazepam)
can have a marked stimulating effect in some elders. This
is an unpredictable response, so careful observation ofa
patient's initial response is crucial. It is essential to be aware
of potential paradoxical responses to herbal medications.

PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF
DISEASE IN ELDERS

Elders have special needs, and plants can address these
needs. Whenever possible, the focus should be on tonics
and normalizers. Careful attention must be given to the
dosage of stronger effectors, because of the range of phar-
macological issues just discussed. A general rule of thumb
is to use a lower dosage for elders than for younger adults.
Such concerns do not arise if prescriptions emphasize
tonics. See chapter 12 for more information on dosages
for elders.

THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM

A range of cardiovascular tonic remedies are uniquely
suited for treating problems of the heart and blood vessels
in elders. While they do not have the dramatic, rapid, and
often lifesaving effects of many currently available drugs,
they confer a definite advantage for the phytotherapist
addressing the chronic degenerative conditions often
found in this age group.

Each cardiovascular tonic has a distinct area of appli-
cation. Considering the prevalence of water retention
(edema) related to the aging heart, diuretics can be espe-
cially valuable.

Appropriate Cardiovascular Tonics for Elders
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut)
Allium sativum (garlic)

Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)

Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Taraxacum officinale (dancelion leaf)
Tilia spp. (linden)

Vaccinium myrtillus (bilberry)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

----- PAGE 478 -----
470 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

In addition to these gentle tonics, suggested treat-
ments outlined in chapter 14 are relevant here. The
treatment outlines given for arteriosclerosis, mild conges-
tive heart failure, angina pectoris, hypertension, and pe-
ripheral vascular disease are all relevant for elders.

An important exception may be the use of Cytisus sco-
‘parius (Scotch broom) in the treatment of hypotension. It
may prove too strong for some elderly people, and so
should be avoided. In addition, please refer to chapters 9
and 14 for discussions on the difference between car-
dioactive and cardiotonic remedies and the conditions for
which these herbs are appropriate.

More than with any other age group, it is essential to
avoid the inappropriate use of cardiac glycoside-containing
herbs in elders. Because of the pharmacodynamic and
pharmacokinetic changes discussed earlier, it is all too easy
to build up toxic levels of these chemicals in the body. If
this kind of support for heart function is needed, it is safest
to use the glycosides in a standardized form to ensure that
dosage is correct. This is almost impossible with Digitalis
(foxglove), which highlights the value of pharmaceutical
preparations of digitalis glycosides. These are obtainable
only as prescription drugs. In short, this is a clear example
of when to avoid herbal forms of strong effectors.

Fortunately, such potent treatment is not always nec-
essary. Perhaps more important, it is not the only option.
As highlighted in chapter 14, Crataegus spp. (hawthorn) is
the best-known and possibly the most valuable tonic rem-
edy for the cardiovascular system found in the plant king-
dom. Crataegus facilitates a gentle but long-term, sus-
tained effect on degenerative, age-related changes in the
myocardium. The herb is of particular value for cases in
which there is no overt disease, but the patient is experi-
encing a loss of function due to advancing age. Crataegus
helps to maintain the heart in a healthy condition, mini-
mizing the risk of the development of coronary disease.
See chapter 14 for specific indications.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

A lifetime of exposure to air pollution and cigarette smoke
(whether one’s own or secondhand) will damage even the
strongest lungs. The suggested treatment outlines given in
chapter 15 for acute and chronic bronchitis, asthma, and
emphysema are all relevant for elder patients.

A variety of remedies are appropriate for respiratory
problems in elders, each with a distinct area of application.

Appropriate Respiratory Remedies for Elders
Allium sativum (garlic)

Asclepias tuberosa (pleurisy root)
Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Inula helenium (elecampane)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Prunus serotina (wild cherry bark)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)
Verbascum thapsus (muilein)

A number of stronger effectors may be found useful
in more intransigent conditions, such as emphysema.
However, these should be reserved for cases in which the
gentler herbs have not produced the desired results.

Stronger Effectors for Respiratory Problems in Elders
Grindelia camporum (gumweed)

Lobelia inflata (lobelia)

Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

A variety of remedies are appropriate for neurological
problems in elders, each with a particular area of applica-
tion. Treatments for nervous system problems outlined in
chapter 16 are relevant here. Particularly pertinent to el-
ders are the discussions of stress management, depression,
and insomnia, as well as the treatment approaches to pe-
ripheral neuropathy and shingles.

Nervine Tonics

Avena sativa (oats)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)

Nervine Relaxants

Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Tilia spp. (linden)

Hypnotics

Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

----- PAGE 479 -----
Antidepressants

Avena sativa (oats)

Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort )
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Verbena officinalis (vervain)

A caution must be voiced about the use of Valeriana
with elders. A very small number of people experience a
paradoxical reaction to this remedy. Instead of a relaxing
or hypnotic effect, these people have the opposite physi-
ological response—that is, a caffeinelike stimulation. This
is more of a possibility with the elderly. If this happens,
Valeriana should be avoided in the future. If a paradoxical
reaction does occur, Scutellaria will ease the unpleasant
symptoms quite effectively. Note that Humulus lupulus
was not included in the list of relevant hypnotics. This is
because it has a tendency to induce depression if used
consistently.

An herb of particular relevance to the elderly is Ginkgo
biloba. While it has a popular reputation as a “memory”
herb, it should be considered a cardiovascular remedy.
Ginkgo leaf extract has been shown to influence arteries,
veins, capillaries, blood components (erythrocytes,
platelets), arterial blood flow, capillary perfusion, and ve-
nous return. Due in part to its potent antioxidant proper-
ties, its ability to enhance peripheral and cerebral circula-
tion, and its inhibitory effects on platelet activating factor,
ginkgo’s primary application lies in the treatment of cere-
brovascular dysfunction and peripheral vascular disorders.

Overall, studies confirm the efficacy of ginkgo extract
for treating disturbances of cerebrovascular function, es-
pecially in elderly patients.? Well-designed studies have
demonstrated therapeutic efficacy for mild to moderate
forms of degenerative dementia. In Europe, ginkgo ex-
tract is administered clinically at a total daily dosage of
120 to 240 mg of standardized extract containing at least
24% ginkgo flavone glycoside and 6% terpene lactones
(ginkgolides and bilobalide) for at least eight weeks. The
German Commission E recommends administration for a
period of not less than eight weeks for the treatment of
chronic conditions.

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM

Please see chapter 13 for treatment approaches to a num-
ber of specific pathologies that commonly affect the el-
derly. These include esophagitis and gastroesophageal
reflux, gastritis, peptic ulceration, hiatus hernia, indiges-
tion, irritable bowel syndrome, constipation, diarrhea,
diverticulitis, and gallbladder disease. Of course, close at-

PHYTOTHERAPY AND THE ELDERLY -@ 471

tention must be paid to nutrition and any prescription
medications the patient is taking. The advice given under
Broader Context of Treatment for each of these condi-
tions is relevant to elders as well.

An abundance of herbal remedies are appropriate for
the treatment of digestive problems in elders. Some of the
many possibilities are listed here. The choice will depend
in part on the herbs’ secondary actions.

Herbs Appropriate for Digestive Problems in Elders
Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony)
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)
Silybum marianum (milk thistle)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Ulmus rubra (slippery elra)

In addition to ameliorating underlying digestive tract
disease, herbs have much to offer for general symptomatic
relief of digestive upsets. With safe, normalizing herbal
remedies, it is possible to avoid side effects and minimize
paradoxical reactions or synergistic drug interactions.
This is especially the case when digestive symptoms are
related to side effects of essential allopathic medications.

THE URINARY SYSTEM

‘Treatments outlined in chapter 17 are relevant here. In ad-
dition to general approaches to the safe herbal treatment of
water retention, the chapter provides treatment sugges-
tions for conditions such as cystitis and urinary calculus.

Of all the diuretics and other urinary system herbs,
the following are especially appropriate for urinary prob-
lems in elders. Their relevance reflects a combination of
safety, efficacy, and appropriate secondary actions.

Appropriate Urinary Tract Remedies for Elders
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)

Elymus repens (couch grass)

Galium aparine (cleavers)

Sambucus nigra (elder)

Taraxacum officinale (dandelion leaf)

Vaccinium macrocarpon (cranberry)

----- PAGE 480 -----
472 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

THE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM

Chapter 18 includes treatment discussions for post-
menopausal problems and benign prostate hypertrophy.

Reproductive System Tonics for Elders
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)

Mitchella repens (partridgeberry)

Serenoa repens (saw palmetto)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

Y. prunifolium (black haw)

Vitex agnus-castus (chasteberry)

THE MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM

The plethora of musculoskeletal problems so common to
elders represents an area of health care that is particularly
well suited to herbal treatment. Consult the treatments
outlined in chapter 19 for myalgia, rheumatism, os-
teoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and osteoporosis. Of
particular importance are the suggested guidelines con-
cerning nutrition and lifestyle.

Once again, the phytotherapist can call upon the gift of
toning herbs for the treatment of these problems. There is
usually no need to resort to intense treatments for muscu-
loskeletal problems in elders, as the milder antirheumatic
herbs are often effective, given time. This is not meant to
imply that these herbs can completely alleviate the damage
of osteoarthritis in someone who has had the condition for
years. However, the patient will feel better, perhaps better
than he or she has in years, within the limitations of any
structural damage that may have occurred with time.

In addition, make it a priority to address any digestive
symptoms present in older patients with rheumatic con-
ditions. Any such symptoms are an indication that the
processes of digestion, assimilation, and elimination are
not functioning at optimal levels. This can be related to
either functional or organic problems, but the body’s nu-
tritional status will suffer no matter what the cause, which
in turn may aggravate arthritic conditions.

Of the many herbs that may prove useful for treating
this body system, consider the following as possible tonics.

Musculoskeletal Tonics for Elders
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Angelica archangelica (angelica)

Betula spp. (birch)

Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)

Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)
Salix spp. (willow bark)

Urtica dioica (nettle)

A number of stronger effectors may be useful for
more unresponsive cases of arthritis, but these should be
reserved for patients for whom gentler herbs have not
produced the desired results.

Stronger Musculoskeletal Effectors
Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Harpagophytum procumbens (devil’s claw)
Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)

THE SKIN

Treatments outlined in chapter 20 are relevant here. Skin
problems are often a lifelong challenge, and may be slow
to respond to treatment in the elderly. However, the sug-
gestions for topical symptom relief can be very beneficial.
The topical anti-inflammatory activity of Calendula offici-
nalis and of Hypericum perforatum are particularly valuable.

As with all of the body systems, a range of remedies
are appropriate for skin problems in elders. Again, the em-
phasis should be on gentle alteratives and tonics, with
extra focus on general liver, digestive, and kidney function.
Many essential oils are also helpful when applied topically.

Herbs for Skin Conditions in Elders
Calendula officinalis (calendula)

Galum aparine (cleavers)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Plantago major (plantain)

Stellaria media (chickweed)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

Urtica dioica (nettle)

Viola tricolor (heartsease)

References
1. Bennett JC, Plum F, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine. 20th
edition. Philadelphia: Saunders, 1996.
2. McKenna DJ, Jones K, Hughes K. Efficacy, safety, and
use of Ginkgo biloba in clinical and preclinical applica-
tions, Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine 2001
Sep-Oct; 7(5):70-86, 88-90.

Suggested Reading
Hoffmann D. An Elder’s Herbal. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts
Press, 1993.

----- PAGE 481 -----
24

fans 0)

PHYTOTHERAPY AND CHILDREN

ith its focus on preventive medicine, holistic
W. approaches to health can be most helpful for

many common childhood problems. Con-
ditions brought under control during childhood can often
be avoided entirely during adult life. Examples are asthma
and eczema, both of which can start at a very early age
and become an ongoing theme throughout a person’ life.
If treated successfully with herbs during childhood, the
condition rarely continues into adulthood.

The healing capacity of children can be quite incred-
ible. Not to be overlooked when treating childhood ail-
ments is the relevance of tender loving care. Children re-
spond to love and caring in wonderful ways. So do adults,
if they give themselves the chance!

A number of useful books have been written about
herbs for children. I highly recommend those listed in
Suggested Reading for this chapter. In different but com-
plementary ways, these books are all sources of therapeu-
tic and practical insights that go beyond the experience of
this author. After all, Mother knows best!

This chapter is structured differently from the spe-
cific treatment chapters. Here we will discuss a variety of
issues specific to children’s health, including some dis-
eases and conditions that primarily affect children.
Treatment approaches for conditions that commonly af-
fect children as well as adults can be found by following
cross-references to the appropriate body system chapters,

PRESCRIBING ISSUES UNIQUE TO
CHILDREN

Normal physiology in children is different from that of
adults. Similarly, children respond to medications differ-
ently, which is a reflection of pharmacokinetic issues.! For
example, in infants, delayed gastrointestinal transit time
affects drug absorption and lower levels of enzymes impact
drug metabolism. These differences are most significant in
infants, but can be an issue up to the age of six years.
While such considerations are crucial when it comes to

473

prescription medications, in phytotherapy they can be
largely avoided through an emphasis on herbal tonics.

Care must be taken with dosage for children. Because
of their smaller body size, children obviously require
lower dosages than adults do, but there is no clear-cut
guideline for herbal formulations. Chapter 12 provides
various pharmaceutical methods of deriving dosages for
children based on age or body size.

Noncompliance with therapy is widespread among
children. Among pediatric patients, an estimated 34% to
82% have been reported to be noncompliant with drug
therapy regimens.’ Thus, palatability is a critical factor
with children, as it impacts whether or not the child will
take the herbs. The taste and smell of herbal remedies can
play a vital role in enhancing compliance. This is an area
in which the creativity of the herbal medicine-maker can
make all the difference. For example, can the child take a
tablet or capsule instead?

In dispensing herbal medicines for children, it is im-
portant to educate both parents and child. The more the
parents understand the disease, the treatment, and how to
administer the medicine, the more likely the child is to
take the remedy. It is often important to find out who is
administering the medicines and where. The dosage reg-
imen may have to be adjusted so that medications are al-
ways given at home, as opposed to at school or some
other location that is not conducive to compliance.

CHILDHOOD DISEASES

The so-called childhood diseases are viral syndromes
most often seen in children who lack immunity until they
have recovered from the disease. The disease rarely re-
curs. While these diseases are usually not serious, they
can cause severe fever and discomfort, and occasionally
lead to serious complications. In adults, the same diseases
can have different and much more severe manifestations.
Some of the most common are outlined here.

----- PAGE 482 -----
474 = TREATMENL APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

MEASLES

A highly contagious acute disease characterized by fever,
cough, coryza, conjunctivitis, eruptions (Koplik’s spots) on
the buccal and labial mucosa, and a spreading mucopapu-
lar cutaneous rash. (The Merck Manual)

Measles, or rubeola, is a viral infection that can be spread
by physical contact or through the air via respiratory
droplets. One bout usually confers immunity for life, but a
few children get measles twice. The incubation period is
between 7 and 14 days. The disease is most communicable
two to four days before and up to five days after the rash
appears.

Measles is characterized by fever, red eyes with light
sensitivity, runny nose, dry and sometimes severe cough,
and white spots (Koplik’s spots) on the inside of the
cheeks. These are seen two days before the red rash ap-
pears, which first develops near the scalp and later spreads
to the upper body. After three to four days, the rash takes
on a brownish, bronzy appearance, and peeling may
occur. Symptoms may be severe, and children with
measles are pretty sick and miserable. The rash lasts
about seven days, but the child usually begins to feel bet-
ter by the fourth day.

Treatment of Measles

The herbal contribution to the treatment of measles is
based on alleviation of symptomatic distress. The primary
areas to address are fever, itching, eye sensitivity, and
coughing. Convalescent recovery will be facilitated by
good nutrition and, possibly, the use of bitter tonics such
as Gentiana lutea (gentian) and, if the cough is persistent,
Marrubium vulgare (horehound).

Actions Indicated

Diaphoretics help ease fever; diaphoretic teas such as
Nepeta cataria, Achillea millefolium, and Tilia spp. are es-
pecially appropriate.

Antipruritics will help relieve itching. Stellaria media is
particularly effective.

Demutcent expectoranis help with both the cough and the
sore throat. Herbs to consider include Tissilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus, and Glycyrrhiza glabra. If a stronger
remedy is indicated, use Marrubium vulgare.

To relieve itching, choose an aesthetic, pleasant ap-
proach if possible. Dabbing distilled Hamamelis virginiana
(witch hazel) on itchy skin will usually provide immediate
but very temporarily relief.

Eyestrain due to photosensitivity is common, so the
child should rest in a darkened room. A wash made of

eyebright (Euphrasia spp.) or a chamomile compress
(Matricaria recutita) will ease the discomfort, but not re-
place the need for reduced light. Here are refreshingly
clear instructions for making an eyebright eyewash from
Natural Child Care, by Maribeth Riggs.

Eyebright Eyewash’

Infuse '/2 oz. of dried eyebright in 1 cup of water. It is especially
important to strain well to ensure that no particles remain in the
infusion. When comfortably warm for the eyes, it is ready to use.
This herbal wash is to be used only once.

MUMPS

An acute contagious, generalized viral disease, usually
causing painful enlargement of the salivary glands, most
commonly the parotids. (The Merck Manual)

Mumps is a virus infection of the parotid glands, two of
the six salivary glands located just below and in front of
the ears. This contagious condition, spread by respiratory
droplets, is seen commonly between the ages of 2 and 12
years. It has an incubation period of 14 to 24 days. It can
occur in adults who did not experience the disease in
childhood. The condition is much more serious in adults
and can lead to sterility in men.

The common symptom picture includes fever,
swelling of the parotid glands, achiness, and restlessness.
The swelling of the parotids can be very alarming and
change the patient's appearance quite dramatically. The
jaw may become stiff because of glandular swelling. The
testicles are involved in up to one fifth of males, especially
older patients. Mild meningitis marked by headache or
stiff neck is, unfortunately, not rare. Any development of
a painfully stiff neck or severe headache calls for immedi-
ate professional help.

Treatment of Mumps

In addition to the herbal treatment suggested here, symp-
toms may be relieved by intermittently applying ice or
heat to the affected neck area. Acetaminophen may also
be appropriate for pain relief, do not give aspirin to chil-
dren with a viral illness because of the risk of Reye’s syn-
drome. Warm salt-water gargles, soft foods, and extra flu-
ids may also help relieve symptoms.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials are the key to successfully clearing the
infection.

----- PAGE 483 -----
Lymphatic alteratives are crucial to help drain the affected
glands.

Hepatics will help if there is associated constipation. These
should be very mild.

Anti-inflammatories and demulcents may be helpful in alle-
viating pain and discomfort in the throat.

Specific Remedies

No specifics in the strict sense are used in Western herbal-
ism, but lymphatic herbs might be seen as specifics.
However, lymphatics for children must be chosen very care-
fully. Phytolacca is an excellent remedy here, but great care
must be taken with dosage in young children. Phytolacca can
be a powerful emetic and purgative in higher doses.

A Prescription for Mumps

Galium aparine 4 parts
Echinacea spp. 4 parts
Urtica dioica 3 parts
Phytolacca americana T part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. In addition, the
child should drink an infusion of equal parts Nepeta cataria and
Trifolium pratense often.

Table 24.1. Actions Supplied by Prescription for
Mumps

ACTION HERBS

Antimicrobial Echinacea spp.

Lymphatic Galium aparine, Echinacea spp., Phytolacca americana

Alterative Galium aparine, Echinacea spp., Urtica dioica,
Phytolacca americana

THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM

Many of the treatments outlined in chapter 13 are rele-
vant here. Most common in children are indigestion,
constipation, and diarrhea. Many gentle effector herbs
are appropriate for treating children’s digestive problems.
Carminatives are especially important, because the volatile
oils they contain are often gently anti-inflammatory and
antispasmodic. Thus, they can be rapidly effective at eas-
ing colic and cramping pain.

Herbs for Digestive Problems in Children
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Anethum graveolens (dill)

PHYTOTHERAPY AND CHILDREN 475

Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Pimpinella anisum (aniseed)

Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Ulmus rubra (slippery elm)

COLIC

A symptom complex of early infancy that is characterized
by paroxysms of crying, apparent abdominal pain, and ir-
ritability. (The Merck Manual)

Colic refers to painful contractions of the gastrointestinal
tract. About 10% to 15% of normal, healthy babies have
colic. In true, severe colic, the baby will be difficult to
console, expressing discomfort with high-pitched crying
and drawing up the feet into the belly. If the baby has
been crying for two hours without interruption, seek pro-
fessional help in order to rule out other sources of pain,
such as ear infection and intestinal obstruction.

Infantile colic usually starts at one month of age and
resolves by four months. The causes are not well under-
stood, but the condition tends to occur in babies with a
sensitive or vigorous temperament and a below-average
need for sleep. Ideas about causes include overly rapid
feeding, overeating, swallowing excessive air, lack of
burping, emotional tension between parent and child, and
improper feeding technique (that is, incorrect position-
ing). The physiological mechanism behind colic is
thought to be excessive fermentation and gas production
in the intestines, and may even be related to foods eaten
by the nursing mother.

The parents of colicky babies will often be under
great stress. The infant may be stimulated into fussy be-
havior by parental stress, creating a cycle of positive feed-
back. Parents will frequently experience feelings of frus-
tration, anger, despair, and helplessness, and it may be
appropriate to treat the parents for stress-related prob-
lems (see chapter 16 for suggestions).

Treatment of Colic

A range of herbs may help the baby directly, but they will
not replace the suggestions given below. Mild, carmina-
tive, relaxing nervines are often helpful and may be made
into pleasant-tasting teas or infusions to be added to a

----- PAGE 484 -----
476 a TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

bath. Such preparations can incorporate any of the herbs
listed here. Selection will be based on taste or relevant
secondary actions. For example, Trifolium pratense also has
much to offer in the treatment of childhood eczema.

Soothing Herbs for Colicky Babies
Anethum graveolens (dill)

Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)

Nepeta cataria (catnip)

Tilia spp. (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

The following illustrates some non-herbal issues to
consider when treating infantile colic.

Change the nursing mother’s diet. Common gas-producing
foods eaten by nursing mothers include dairy products,
garlic, vegetables in the cabbage family, orange juice,
very spicy foods, caffeine-containing foods (such as
chocolate, coffee, and tea), and anything in particular
that produces gas for the mother.

Recommend soothing herb teas for the mother. Relaxing
nervines may help, especially those containing carmi-
native volatile oils. Examples include Matricaria recu-
tita, Melissa officinalis, Tilia spp., and Trifolium pratense.

Use rhythmic motions. Rhythmic movements help ease
both abdominal discomfort and emotional distress for
the infant. Examples include gentle rocking, car rides,
walking with the baby in a front pack, baby swings, and
setting the baby in an infant seat on top of a clothes
dryer.

Encourage sucking. Some babies will not suck during colic
attacks, and it is not a good idea to continually feed a
colicky infant. However, the infant may be encouraged
to suck his or her own hand or fingers, or a teething
object.

Apply heat. Lay the baby over a warm hot-water bottle
wrapped in a towel; while the baby is in a flexed posi-
tion rhythmically pat its back. Give the baby a warm
bath.

Alter feeding position. Try feeding the baby in a sitting po-
sition to help prevent ingestion of air. Burp the baby
often during feeding.

Change the formula or the type of water used to make it, if
the baby is bottle-fed.

Give acidophilus. This is not usually needed for breast-fed
babies; however, some babies greatly benefit from the
addition of acidophilus to the diet. This can be mixed

with water and fed by bottle or eyedropper. Never give
honey to babies less than one year of age, as it has been as-
sociated with infantile botulism.

CONSTIPATION
Although constipation is rarely seen in breast-fed babies,
it is not abnormal for breast-fed babies to have bowel
movements as infrequently as one in seven days. Treat a
breast-fed infant for constipation only if the child appears
to be in pain and cries during the bowel movement.
Indications for the treatment of constipation in bottle-
fed babies and young children include:

Painful passage of stools, Pain during bowel movements is
abnormal, and in some cases trauma to the anal canal
can lead to anal fissure. Bright red blood around the
anus or on toilet paper suggests the presence of an anal
fissure.

Inability to pass stools. Treatment is indicated for children
who feel the need to have a bowel movement and are
unable to do so. The exception is infants younger than
one year of age, who may grunt, push, strain, and be-
come flushed in the face during bowel movements.
This is normal behavior, as long as the episode is not
accompanied by pain.

Infrequent bowel movements, occurring less often than once
in four days for young children, generally indicate that
treatment is needed.

If bowel movements are accompanied by much pain,
abdominal bloating, or crying, it is important to seek
skilled diagnosis to rule out conditions such as
Hirschsprung’s disease, impaction, and other potential se-
rious disorders. It is inappropriate to use laxative remedies
with children unless absolutely necessary, as children’s
constipation almost always responds to dietary change.

Treatment of Children’s Constipation
If the suggestions given here are not adequate, see chap-
ter 13 for suggestions on using gentle, bulking laxative
remedies. The strong, stimulant anthraquinone laxatives
should be avoided with children.

The National Institute of Child Health and
Development provides the following guidelines for treat-
ing constipated infants and children.*

Infants less than 2 months old should be examined by a
physician.

Infants 2 to 4 months old may be given | ounce of fruit juice
(grape, pear, apple, cherry, or prune) per month of age
twice a day.

----- PAGE 485 -----
Infants older than 4 months who have begun solid foods
may be given high-fiber baby foods (e.g., peas, beans,
apricots, prunes, peaches, pears, plums, and spinach)
twice a day.

Children older than J year will benefit from the same di-
etary changes as adults (i.e., more fruits, vegetables,
and whole-grain foods high in fiber). In addition, in-
crease intake of fruit juices such as apple, pear, cherry,
grape, and prune.

For older children, try these suggestions:

Increase intake of water.

Increase consumption of fruits and vegetables, particularly raw
foods with peels, such as figs, pears, apricots, legumes,
celery, cucumber, lettuce, and apples. Raisins may also
be beneficial.

Increase fiber intake with whole-grain cereals or bran
muffins.

Reduce intake of constipating foods, such as dairy products,
white rice, bananas, cooked carrots, and white flour.
Use psyllium seed preparations in children older than 2 years

of age.

Give flavored cod-liver oil.

DIARRHEA

The number and consistency of normal stools varies
greatly among infants and children. Loose stools are nor-
mal in breast-fed infants. If the baby is vomiting and hav-
ing frequent watery stools, however, there is a danger of
dehydration and loss of electrolyte balance. If a child has
nausea or vomiting, the liquids should be given in small
amounts but very frequently, often every 15 minutes.

Seek medical attention immediately if there is blood
in the stool, abdominal pain causing crying for more than
two hours, or signs of dehydration, such as lack of turgor,
depression of the anterior fontanel, and dry mucous
membranes.

Infection with the bacteria Shigella, Salmonella, and
Campylobacter often results in blood-flecked diarrhea.
Children on antibiotics may experience diarrhea, but this
is less likely if they eat yogurt with active live cultures
while taking antibiotics. However, the most common
cause of children’s diarrhea is mild viral infection.

Treatment of Children’s Diarrhea

A number of the astringent herbs are particularly suitable
for children. One of the most useful is Filipendula ulmaria
(meadowsweet). In addition, try the following remedies.

PHYTOTHERAPY AND CHILDREN <>» 477

Herbs Useful for Children’s Diarrhea
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Euphrasia spp. (eyebright)

Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)
Plantago major (plantain)

Potentilla erecta (tormentil)

Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)

Rubus idaeus (raspberry leaf)

Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod)

Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

INDIGESTION

Indigestion is very common in children, but is rarely a se-
rious health problem. It may be triggered by eating too
fast, overeating, eating particular foods, or drinking car-
bonated drinks. In addition to the information given for
functional dyspepsia in chapter 13, the overriding issue
that must be taken into account for children is taste! If
they do not like the medicine, they will not take it, and
medicinal plants work orly if they are actually taken.

Treatment of Indigestion in Children
The key to success here is selecting appropriate carmina-
tive remedies that will also be palatable to the child.
Carminatives will ease the movement of food or gas
through the intestinal tract. Carminative oils stimulate in-
testinal peristalsis, the wavelike contractions that move
food through the intestine and promote the expulsion of
gas from the gastrointestinal tract.

The following formula from Maribeth Riggs is a
good example of what can be concocted to treat children’s
indigestion when taste is taken into account.

An Indigestion Tea for Children®
1 tablespoon fennel seed
1 tablespoon dried sweet orange peel
2 cups water
Honey to taste

Decoct the fennel seed and orange peel in water. Use a covered
pot. Bring to a boil and gently simmer for 20 minutes. Strain out
the herbs and discard them. Any unused portion of the tea can
be kept in a refrigerator and reheated for further use. Discard any
remaining tea after 2 days.

Serve the tea as warm as is comfortable for the child.
Sweeten it with honey to taste. Give the child 2 cup of tea
every 2 hours whenever she experiences stomach pain from gas.

----- PAGE 486 -----
478 a TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

NAUSEA

Nausea, the sensation of feeling sick in the stomach with-
out actually vomiting, is a common symptom in children.
The cause must always be ascertained to ensure that no
serious health problem is developing. There is a wide
range of possible causes, including infection, food sensi-
tivities, and emotional overexcitement.

Treatment of Nausea

Relief is usually easy to achieve with carminatives, as long
as the child’s tastes are taken into account. Nausea in chil-
dren responds readily to a tea of peppermint, and even to
sucking on a peppermint candy. Peppermint often pre-
vents vomiting, although not in cases of food poisoning or
when the stomach really needs to be evacuated. Ginger
can be helpful, especially when the nausea is related to
motion sickness. Ginger ale and candied ginger are two
good ways to give a child ginger, and both are easy to
carry. Sliced, crystallized ginger is sold in the Chinese
food section of many grocery stores.

THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM

Many effective and safe herbal approaches to respiratory
problems in children are recognized worldwide. Whether
an acute infection, such as bronchitis, influenza, the com-
mon cold, or sinusitis, or an immune system issue, such as
asthma or hay fever, treatment with herbs can be benefi-
cial. Herbal therapy makes a particularly valuable contri-
bution in the treatment of a form of atopic asthma closely
associated with eczema. Please see chapter 15 for more
details on the treatment of this and many other respira-
tory conditions.

Remedies Appropriate for Children’s Respiratory
Problems

Allium sativum (garlic)

Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Plyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Inula helenium (elecampane)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Prunus serotina (wild cherry bark)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)
Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

Here is a prescription from Maribeth Riggs for licorice
lollipops. These make a particularly tasty and effective
treatment for hoarseness and sore throats of any cause.

Licorice Lollipops®

1 five-inch-long piece licorice root

2 tablespoons honey

| cup water
Place the licorice root, honey, and water in a covered pot; bring
to a boil and simmer for 5 minutes. (Omit the honey if you use
Chinese licorice.) Strain out the herb and set it aside to cool.
eep the licorice tea to drink, or discard if you wish. When the
softened licorice roat is cool enough to hold comfortably in the
hand, give it to the child to suck on. Keep the dried licorice root
in a labeled jar with a tight-fitting lid, away from children.
Discard any unused root after 6 months.

Application: Give a child with a hoarse throat softened

icorice root once each day in the morning or afternoon to suck

on for as long as he or she wishes. Remember that licorice root
is slightly stimulating and a mild laxative, so it should be eaten
only in the morning or early afternoon. The hoarse throat usu-
ally disappears after 2 days.

OTITIS MEDIA

A bacterial or viral infection in the middle ear, usually sec-
ondary to an upper respiratory infection. (The Merck
Manual)

Otitis media, or middle ear infection, is one of the most
common early childhood diseases and is often the result
of problems with the eustachian tubes in the ears.
Normally, the eustachian tube is closed and flat, prevent-
ing organisms from entering the middle ear from the pha-
ryngeal cavity. The tube opens to allow drainage of secre-
tions produced by the middle ear mucosa and to equalize
pressure between the middle ear and the outside environ-
ment. If drainage is impaired, normal secretions are re-
tained. This causes any air in the tube to be reabsorbed
and produces negative pressure within the middle ear. If
the tube opens, this negative pressure will draw bacteria
into the middle ear, where they quickly proliferate.

As purulent fluid accumulates in the middle ear, in-
creasing discomfort results. Infants will become irritable
and indicate discomfort by holding or pulling their ears
or rolling their heads from side to side. Young children
will complain of pain, to put it mildly! Otitis media may
be accompanied by fever of up to 104°F.

In serious otitis media, the child may not even appear
ill. There may be a feeling of fullness in the ear and a pop-
ping sensation during swallowing. The child will be less
responsive and may have some painless hearing loss.

----- PAGE 487 -----
Inflammation of the tympanic membrane alone is not di-
agnostic of middle ear infection. Just like a child’s cheeks,
the tympanic membrane may become flushed with in-
creased crying, allergy, or mild physical irritation.

Treatment of Otitis Media

Unfortunately, many pediatricians prescribe antibiotics
on the basis of a slightly red tympanic membrane. Not
uncommonly, children receive numerous courses of med-
ication. It is more difficult to treat children after long-
term medication has failed to ameliorate the condition.

Actions Indicated

Antimicrobials are, of course, the key to successfully clear-
ing the infection.

Anti-inflammatories may be helpful, but work best when
applied topically.

Alteratives and lymphatic tonics can prove most effective in
treating intransigent problems.

A Prescription for Otitis Media

Echinacea spp. 2 parts
Baptisia tinctoria 1 part
Galium aparine 1 part

Dosage: up to 5 ml of tincture three times a day. Warm mullein
flower oil introduced into the ear can serve as an effective anti-
inflammatory.

Broader Context of Treatment

In Textbook of Natural Medicine, Drs. Murray and Pizzorno
recommend the following supplements.” Note that the
dosage given varies with the age of the patient (see table
12.15 for dosage adjustment by age).

Beta-carotene: age 12, 20,000 [U/day (200,000 [U/day
maximum)

Vitamin C: age 12, 500 mg/day

Zinc picolinate: age 12, 2.5 mg/day (15 mg/day maximum)

Bioflavonoids: age 12, 50 mg/day (250 mg/day maximum)

Evening primrose oil: age 12, 1 capsule/day

THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

Treatinents outlined in chapter 16 are relevant for chil-
dren, as long as remedies are selected carefully. The core
selection issue is the need to avoid stronger relaxing
nervines. For children, a mild nervine chosen from one of
the lists provided here is usually more than adequate.

PHYTOTHERAPY AND CHILDREN @ 479

Herbs such as Tilia and Trifolium added to a bath as an in-
fusion will have a calming effect and will prove useful be-
fore bedtime. Trifolium is especially relevant for problems
compounded by irritating skin conditions.

Nervine Tonics for Children
Avena sativa (oats)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)

Nervine Relaxants for Children
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)
Leontrus cardiaca (motherwort)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Nepeta cataria (catnip)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

Hypnotics for Children

Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)

ATTENTION DEFICIT DISORDER

A neurobiological condition characterized by develop-
mentally inappropriate levels of attention, concentration,
activity, distractibility, and impulsivity. (The Merriam-
Webster Medical Dictionary)

Hyperactivity or attention deficit disorder (ADD) is a
thorny issue that raises a plethora of questions. There is
no doubt that extreme hyperactivity occurs and can be re-
lated to dietary factors. ADD is the most commonly diag-
nosed behavioral disorder of childhood, affecting an esti-
mated 3% to 5% of school-aged children. The incidence
of ADD has been increasing over the last 15 years, possi-
bly related to either better diagnosis or over-diagnosis.
The disorder is 3 to 10 times more common in male than
female children.

However, there seems to be an unfortunate trend to
label children “hyperactive” simply because the teacher or
parents do not have the time or patience for very active,
perceptive, inquisitive, or creative children. The Merck
Manual points out that “claims that a child is hyperactive
often reflect the tolerance level of the annoyed person.”
Since when has not fitting in to the normal mold become
a disease? The use of psychopharmaceuticals to control
hyperactive children sounds a little bit like the Soviet

----- PAGE 488 -----
480 <3 TREATMEN' APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

psychiatrists’ solution of prescribing major tranquilizers
to dissidents, Rather than sedating our children so they
can deal with their world, why not change the nature of
school so it is more challenging and exciting?

When the child is experiencing a real problem, how-
ever, herbs may offer some help, provided that two par-
ticular areas are in some way addressed.

Psychological factors. Such factors can be of paramount im-
portance, but these are not herbal issues.

Food irritants. ‘There is increasing evidence that chemical
irritants may play a role in hyperactivity. These may be
pollutants (such as heavy metals) or artificial food ad-
ditives (such as colorings and flavors).

Herbs can contribute in two areas: by calming the
nervous system and by helping the liver detoxify any of-
fending substances. Ireatment suggestions for stress-re-
lated issues can be found in chapter 16. See chapter 21 for
guidelines on detoxification. Other herbs to consider in
support ofa broad treatment plan that also addresses di-
etary and psychological issues are listed here. Keep in
mind that the phytotherapist can also help with parental
stress and exhaustion!

Supportive Herbs for Hyperactive Children
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)

Silybum marianum (milk thistle)

Tilia spp. (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

THE SKIN

There are a number of remedies appropriate for skin
problems in children. Each has a distinct area of applica-
tion, and some are for external use only. Please refer to
chapter 20 for herbal approaches to common childhood
problems such as psoriasis and eczema. Treatments for di-
aper rash, cradle cap, and impetigo are discussed here.
‘The treatment outlined in chapter 15 for atopic asthma
and eczema is also relevant.

The herbs listed here for skin problems in children
can often be used both internally and topically. Many es-
sential oils can also be helpful as topical applications. For
details, please refer to specific plant entries in chapter 26,

Herbs for Children’s Skin Problems
Calendula officinalis (calendula)

Galium aparine (cleavers)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Plantago major (plantain)

Stellaria media (chickweed)
Trifolium pratense (red clover)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Viola tricolor (heartsease)

DIAPER RASH

An irritation of the skin caused by dampness, the interac-
tion of urine (and ammonia from the urine), and feces. A
rash is any skin swelling (bumps) or blotches on a baby
(can be red, skin-colored, or slightly lighter or darker than
skin color). (The Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary)

Diaper rash is caused by a skin reaction to irritating dia-
pers and prolonged contact with stool, urine, perspira-
tion, soaps, detergents, or creams. ‘Typically, the rash af-
fects the groin area around the genitals and buttocks. It is
red and scaly with tiny bumps, blisters, or cracks. When
areas outside the diaper region are affected, it is impor-
tant to rule out yeast infections, eczema, psoriasis, and
other problems. Fever, pus, and digestive symptoms are
not caused by simple diaper rash, and should prompt an
evaluation for other problems.

Riggs suggests a well-formulated ointment for the
treatment of this common condition:

Diaper Rash Ointment®

This ointment is made from ingredients that will help keep the
surface of an infant's skin dry, nourish the skin, and fight bacteria.
Comfrey root, chickweed, and marshmallow root all have one
thing in common: They contain large amounts of calcium, which
can help stimulate tissue growth. Comfrey root, in particular, is
noted for its healing powers, sporting common folk names like
knitbone and bruisewort, These three herbs combined with gold-
enseal powder, which serves as a topical antiseptic, are an excel-
lent combination for combating diaper rash. Beeswax and sweet
almond oil both have skin-nourishing and soothing qualities. This
ointment is also good for mild abrasions, sunburns, and hives.

1 tablespoon chickweed

1 tablespoon marshmallow root

1 tablespoon comfrey root

Va teaspoon goldenseal root powder

1 cup sweet almond oil

Vs cup beeswax

Combine the chickweed, marshmallow root, comfrey root, and
goldenseal root powder in a cast-iron frying pan with the sweet
almond oil. Gently fry the mixture for 5 to 10 minutes. Be care-
ful not to let the herbs burn. When the mixture is hot, add the
beeswax and melt it down. When the beeswax is completely
melted, strain the mixture through a cheesecloth into a small,

----- PAGE 489 -----
labeled jar with a tight-fitting lid. Refrigerate the ointment until
it solidifies. The final ointment is an opaque tan color and smells
of beeswax and comfrey root. Keep the ointment in a conve-
nient place near the infant's changing table, away from heat.
Discard any used portion after 2 months.

Application: Apply the ointment by gently rubbing it on the
diaper area each time the diaper is changed. This ointment is
very soothing to a rashy infant. Three or four applications are
usually enough to get rid of diaper rash. If the infant's diaper
rash does not respond to this treatment, or if it keeps reappear-
ing, investigate factors such as the proper disinfection of dia-
pers, changes in diet, and other skin disorders.

Broader Context of Treatment

Herbs will not usually be enough to clear diaper rash, un-
less used in the context of appropriate attention to the fol-
lowing issues.

Change wet diapers promptly and frequently. Switch the type
of diaper used, either from disposable to cloth or vice
versa.

Use a protective ointment (beeswax, zinc oxide, calendula,
or Diaper Rash Ointment, page 480).

Avoid or reduce the use of occlusive rubber pants over the diaper

Allow baby to go without a diaper, and let air and sun dry the
area.

Do not use talcum powder or cornstarch. If you must powder,
use a clay product.

CRADLE CAP

An inflammatory scaling disease of the scalp, face, and
occasionally other areas of the body. (The Merck Manual)

When this rash occurs on the scalp alone, it is known as
cradle cap. When it extends to the face, it is termed sebor-
rheic dermatitis, because it occurs where the greatest num-
ber of oil-producing sebaceous glands are located.
Seborrheic dermatitis is a noninfectious form of eczema
that is very common in infants, usually beginning in the
first weeks of life and slowly disappearing over a period of
weeks or months. Unlike atopic or contact eczema, it is
rarely uncomfortable or itchy. The cause is unknown.
Cradle cap and other forms of seborrheic dermatitis are
not infections, signs of allergy, or related to poor hygiene.

Treatment of Cradle Cap
Calendula officinalis (calendula) and Plantago major (plan-
tain) are appropriate to soothe heat, soreness, and associ-

PHYTOTHERAPY AND CHILDREN & 481

ated dry skin. The form of topical application may be cru-
cial for most effective symptom relief, and it may be nec-
essary to experiment to see which best suits the baby.
Both of these herbs may be used in the form of ointment,
cream, lotion, or wash. Oily preparations will help to
loosen scales, but might cause discomfort and heat
through an insulating effect.

A mucilaginous wash made from a strong decoction
of Symphytum officinale (comfrey root) will soothe, mois-
turize, and serve as an effective vulnerary. Follow the
wash with an ointment made from calendula, elder flower,
or plantain.

Broader Context of Treatment

The scalp should be gently washed with a mild baby
shampoo, which, along with soft brushing, will help remove
the scales. Stronger medicated shampoos (anti-seborrhea
shampoos containing sulfur and 2% salicylic acid) may
loosen the scales more quickly, but can be irritating.
Applying baby oil is neither helpful nor necessary, as it al-
lows scales to build up cn the scalp. Occasionally, a sec-
ondary yeast infection may occur on the affected skin,
most likely in the crease areas rather than on the scalp.
The area will become extremely red and itchy.

IMPETIGO

A superficial vesiculopustular skin infection. (The Merck
Manual)

Impetigo is an infection of the skin usually caused by a
streptococcal bacterium, and occasionally by Staphylo-
coccus aureus. The face is most commonly affected, but
other exposed areas can be involved as well. Typically, im-
petigo is restricted to children and is highly contagious.
The characteristic appearance is one of multiple tiny pus-
filled blisters that break readily, leading to a larger, more
widespread eruption forming the characteristic honey-
colored crusts. Itching is common, and scratching may
spread the infection.

Treatment of Impetigo

Internal support of general health, elimination, and im-
mune response is not always necessary, but is indicated if
the child is generally prone to illness.

Actions Indicated for Topical Medication

Antimicrobials are, of course, the key to clearing the infec-
tion, but work best when applied topically.

----- PAGE 490 -----
482 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

Vulneraries may be helpful after the infection has cleared,
to prevent discoloration or scarring of the skin.

Antipruritics may, in theory, be useful. However, because
of the pathogen present on the skin, itching may not
stop until the infection is cleared.

Anti-inflammatories may be helpful, but the same com-
ments made for antipruritics are also relevant here.

Actions Indicated for Internal Treatment

Alteratives, antimicrobials, lymphatic tonics, diuretics, and
hepatics may all be appropriate, for reasons similar to
those discussed in chapter 20 for eczema. They will zot
replace topical treatments.

Nervines may be indicated if the child is experiencing dis-
tress. However, it is often the parents who benefit most
from nervines!

Specific Remedies
I am not aware of any specifics for impetigo, but the
stronger antimicrobial herbs will help. Topical applica-
tions of Commiphora molmol (myrrh), Hydrastis canadensis
(goldenseal), and Melaleuca alternifolia (tea tree oil) have
all proved useful. Ellingwood refers to successful use of
Echinacea, both internally and externally.

A Topical Prescription for Impetigo
Commiphora molmol
Hydrastis canadensis

1 part

1 part

Gently apply this tincture combination to the affected areas, as
described below.

Broader Context of Treatment

While effective, the application of tinctures high in alco-
hol may be too intense for the child. They may be added
to a base ointment or lotion. An ointment may also be
made directly from dried herbs. Apply topically, following
the guidelines given here. Be careful when touching le-
sions and applying herbs, as the infection can spread
through contact.

Remove the crusts gently with a warm wet washcloth, as the
bacteria live underneath the crusts and will continue to
multiply until the crusts are removed.

Apply the tincture or oimtment.

Remove crusts and apply ointment several times a day. If the
lesions become too large and are not controlled, the
child may develop systemic complications.

Because of the highly contagious nature of impetigo,
the child should be kept out of school for at least two days
after the initiation of treatment. Towels, sheets, and
clothing contaminated with drainage should be washed
with chlorine bleach. Jt may be necessary to seek medical
assistance under certain circumstances to avoid systemic
complications. If the child has a sore throat or fever, if the
impetigo is in an inaccessible area (such as the ear canal or
nostril), or if significant improvement is not seen after
two to three days of treatment, consult a doctor.

References

1. Kanneh A. Paediatric pharmacological principles: an up-
date. Part 2. Pharmacokinetics: absorption and distribu-
tion. Pediatric Nursing 2002 Nov; 14(9):39-43.

2. Matsui DM. Drug compliance in pediatrics. Pediatric
Clinics of North America 1997; 44:1-13.

3. Riggs M. Natural Child Care. New York: Harmony
Books, 1989.

4. Article on the National Library of Medicine Web site:
www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/.

5. Riggs M. Natural Child Care. New York: Harmony
Books, 1989.

6. Ibid.

7, Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

8. Riggs M. Natural Child Care. New York: Harmony
Books, 1989.

Suggested Reading

Bove M. An Encyclopedia of Natural Healing for Children and
Infants. Chicago: Keats, 2001.

Gladstar R. Rosemary Gladstar’s Herbal Remedies for Children’s
Health. Pownal, VT: Storey Books, 1999.

McIntyre, A. The Complete Woman’s Herbal: A Manual of
Healing Herbs and Nutrition for Personal Well-being and
Family Care. New York: EL. Holt, 1995.

Riggs, M. Natural Child Care. New York: Harmony Books,
1989.

----- PAGE 491 -----
25

MN

HERBAL ACTIONS

he therapeutic section of this book emphasizes

traditional herbal medicine. Thus, this chapter

presents a more traditional perspective on herbal
actions, as opposed to results of scientific research on
herbs or constituents. The actions listed here reflect tra-
ditional observations of outcome. The material may or
may not be in line with current scientific thinking, al-
though scientific research bears out many of these tradi-
tional actions. The core issue is that in clinical practice,
the medical herbalist will find these actions relevant and
useful in the real world with real patients.

ADAPTOGEN

Soviet scientists coined the term adaptogen in 1964 to de-
scribe herbs that produce an increase in bodily resistance
and vitality, helping the body adapt to and defend against
the effects of environmental stress, Adaptogens increase
the body’s nonspecific resistance to damaging man-made
factors and illnesses. According to a more recent defini-
tion, adaptogens must:!

Show a nonspecific activity—that is, increase the body's abil-
ity to resist physical, chemical, or biological noxious
agents.

Have a normalizing fluence independent of the nature of
the pathological state.

Be innocuous and not influence normal body functions
more than required.

This implies that adaptogens reinforce the nonspe-
cific power of the body’s resistance against stressors. They
increase its general capacity to withstand stressful situa-
tions, and hence guard against disease caused by over-
stress. The general aims of treatment with adaptogens are
to reduce stress reactions during the alarm phase of the
stress response and to prevent or at least delay the state of
exhaustion, and thus provide a certain level of protection
against long-term stress. See chapter 16 for more infor-
mation on the stress response and the general adaptation
syndrome.

483

Adaptogens appear to moderate the stress response in
the following ways:

Enable a more vapid but less exaggerated response. Blood glu-
cose rises more rapid.y after the onset of stress, but
does not rise as high.

Allow a more sustained peak. Blood glucose is elevated (and
therefore available for cell function) for a longer pe-
riod of time.

Foster a more gradual decline. There is a less precipitous
drop in blood glucose.

Thus, adaptogens do not block the stress response,
but instead smooth out the associated highs and lows.
This conserves energy in the alarm phase for use in the
resistance phase. These effects may be related to adapto-
gens’ effects on glucose metabolism:

¢ Stimulate the liver to convert glycogen to glucose,
leading to increased blood glucose levels

¢ Enhance entry of glucose into cells

¢ Enhance utilization of glucose within cells

The specific mechanism of adaptogenic activity has
not yet been elucidated, but some generalizations can be
made. Pretreatment with adaptogens appears to alter en-
docrine functions of the pituitary-adrenal gland axis.
Regular pretreatment with adaptogens causes a normal-
ization of stress hormone levels and a generally decreased
predisposition to stress. Other body systems also respond
to the direct or indirect regulatory influences of adapto-
gens. For example, adaptogens have been shown to influ-
ence the pituitary gonadal system, to confer immunos-
timulatory actions, and to activate cognitive functions. To
date, it is still unknown which cellular mechanisms are
addressed during these processes.

A number of herbs can be described as adaptogens,
based upon both clinical and in vitro research. It is worth
noting that most of these plants are used primarily in
Asian countries. This does not mean that adaptogens are
found only in Asia, but rather that only Asian scientists
have gotten research grarits to study them!

----- PAGE 492 -----
484 «2 TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Adaptogenic Herbs

Acanthopanax sessiliflorum (wu jia pi)
Albizzia julibrissin (silk tree)

Aralia elata (Japanese angelica tree)
A. manshurica (Manchurian aralia)
Aralia schmidtii (Sakhalin spikenard)
Cicer arietinum (chickpea)

Codonoposis pilosula (dang shen)
Echinopanax elatus (Asian devil’s club)
Eleutherococcus senticosus (Siberian ginseng)
Eucommia ulmoides (hardy rubber tree)
Ganoderma lucidum (reishi mushroom)
Hoppea dichotoma

Leuzea carthamotdes (maral root)
Ocimum sanctum (boly basil)

Panax ginseng (Korean ginseng)

P quinquéfolius (American ginseng)
Rhodiola rosea (roseroot stonecrop)
Schisandra chinensis (schizandra)
Tinospora cordifolia (guduchi)

Trichopus zeylanicus (arogyappacha)
Withania somnifera (ashwaganda)

ALTERATIVE

Alteratives are herbs that gradually restore proper func-
tion to the body and increase overall health and vitality.
This sounds very unclear, and, indeed, their mode of ac-
tion on the body is not understood. However, their value
in holistic health care cannot be denied.

In broad terms, alteratives seem to alter the body’s
metabolic processes to improve tissues’ ability to deal
with a range of body functions, from nutrition to elimi-
nation, Many of the herbs with this action help the body
eliminate waste through the kidneys, liver, lungs, or skin.
Some work by stimulating digestive function and some
are immunomodulators. Others simply work! Folk heal-
ing traditions sometimes invoke the concept of “blood
cleansing,” which, while hinting at much, actually says
very little. If the blood truly needed cleansing, a major
medical emergency would be afoot.

Immunological research on certain secondary plant
products, especially saponins, has led to some interesting
suggestions for the basis of alterative action, explored in
more detail in chapter 6. Remember, however, that the
specifics of plant activity are the result of the way the
whole plant works upon the human body, not simply the
effects of “active ingredients.”

Alteratives can be used safely as supportive therapy in
many diverse conditions, and should be considered first

for cases of chronic inflammatory and degenerative dis-
eases. These include skin diseases, various types of arthri-
tis, and a wide range of autoimmune problems.

Primary Alterative Herbs
Allium sativum (garlic)

Arctium lappa (burdock)

Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)
Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Echinacea spp. (echinacea)
Fumaria officinalis (famitory)
Galium aparine (cleavers)
Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Larrea tridentata (chaparral)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)
Phytolacca americana (poke)
Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)
Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)
Scrophularia nodosa (figwort)
Smilax spp. (sarsaparilla)

Stillingia sylvatica (queen’s delight)
Trifolium pratense (red clover)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Body System Affinities

Certain alteratives are particularly well suited to specific
body systems or parts. Other remedies may also have al-
terative actions, as has already been pointed out, but here
we shall limit ourselves to the alteratives most often indi-
cated for each body system. See specific body system
chapters for more information on how each alterative
should best be used.

Cardiovascular. In general, alterative activity is not
specifically indicated for this system. However, by na-
ture, alteratives will aid circulation by helping the
whole body work at its peak. Alteratives to support the
lymphatic aspects of circulation include Galium
aparine, Phytolacca americana, and Echinacea spp.
Scrophularia nodosa, useful in chronic eczema, also has
positive inotropic actions. The hypocholesteremic and
hypotensive actions of Allium sativum are well known.

Respiratory. The main alteratives that also possess bene-
ficial properties for the lungs and respiratory system as
a whole are Allium sativum, Hydrastis canadensis, San-
guinaria canadensis, Baptisia tinctoria, and Echinacea spp.

----- PAGE 493 -----
Digestive. All of the alteratives that work on the liver,
pancreas, and other digestive system organs are of
great importance in herbal medicine. Examples in-
clude Adium sativum, Arctium lappa, Chionanthus vir-
ginicus, Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor, Menyanthes
trifoliata, Rumex crispus, Smilax spp., and Urtica dioica.

Urinary. Some of the herbs described as diuretics could
be characterized as urinary system alteratives. These
include Galium aparine and Urtica dioica.

Reproductive. Here, the general alteratives are always of
value, but specifics include Cimicifuga racemosa and
Hydrastis canadensis.

Musculoskeletal. Many alteratives are important here,
including Cimicifuga racemosa, Menyanthes trifoliata,
and Arctium lappa.

Nervous. By helping the body to be healthy and whole,
all alteratives aid the strained nervous system.
However, Pulsatilla vulgaris and Trifolium pratense are
especially helpful as alteratives with nervine actions.

Skin. The list of alteratives for the skin could include all
of the herbs listed here, plus many more. This is the
system for which alteratives are most often used. It is
important to remember that in holistic herbalism, aid-
ing and supporting the whole body in its return to
health is always more important than applying specific
remedies. Alteratives often used for the skin are
Arctium lappa, Mahonia aquifolium, Fumaria officinalis,
Galium aparine, Echinacea spp., Scrophularia nodosa,
Smilax spp., Rumex crispus, and Trifolium pratense.

Table 25.1. Alteratives and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Anticatarrhal Allium sativum, Baptisia tinctoria, Echinacea spp.,

Hydrastis canadensis, Phytolacca americana,
Urtica dioica

Anti-inflammatory Galium aparine, Guaiacum officinale, Hydrastis
canadensis, Iris versicolor, Menyanthes trifoliata,
Smilax spp.

Antimicrobial Agathosma betulina, Allium sativum, Baptisia
tinctoria, Echinacea spp., Hydrastis canadensis,
Larrea tridentata, Phytolacca americana, Pulsatilla

vulgaris, Sanguinaria canadensis

Allium sativum, Cimicifuga racemosa, Pulsatilla
vulgaris, Sanguinaria canadensis, Trifolium pratense

Antispasmodic

Astringent Hydrastis canadensis, Urtica dioica

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 485

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Bitter Arctium lappa, Hydrastis canadensis, Menyanthes
trifoliata

Diaphoretic Allium sativum, Guaiacum officinale, Stillingia
sylvatica, Smilax spp.

Diuretic Agathosma betulina, Arctium lappa, Galium aparine,
Guaiacum officinale, Iris versicolor, Menyanthes
trifoliata, Smilax spp., Urtica dioica

Emmenagogue —Cimicifuga racemosa

Expectorant Sanguinaria canadensis, Trifolium pratense,
Verbascum thapsus

Hepatic Allium sativum, Arctium lappa, Chionanthus
virginicus, Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor,
Mahonia aquifolium, Menyanthes trifoliata,
Phytolacca emericana, Rumex crispus

Hypotensive Allium sativum, Cimicifuga racemosa, Urtica dioica

Nervine Cimicifuga racemosa, Pulsatilla vulgaris, Trifolium
pratense

Vulnerary Galium aparine, Hydrastis.canadensis

Table 25.2. Relative Strengths of Alterative Herbs

STRENGTH —_HERBS

Mild Allium sativum, Baptisia tinctoria, Chionanthus virginicus,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Echinacea spp., Mahonia aquifolium,
Menyanthes trifoliata, Pulsatilla vulgaris

Strong Arctium lappa, Fumaria officinalis, Galium aparine,
Guaiacum officinale, Hydrastis canadensis, Rumex crispus,
Scrophularia nodosa, Smilax spp., Trifolium pratense,

Urtica dioica

Very strong Iris versicolor, Larrea tridentata,
(use with care) Phytolacca americana, Sassafras albidum,
Sanguinaria canadensis, Stillingia sylvatica

ANTICATARRHAL

Anticatarrhal herbs help the body remove excess mucus,
whether in the sinuses or in other parts of the body. They
are used mainly for ear, ‘nose, and throat infections, but
also have an essential role to play in many broader-based
treatment approaches.

----- PAGE 494 -----
486 <2 TREATMENT APPROACHES By BODY SYSTEM

Mucus is an essential body product. However, in re-
sponse to infection or some other problem, the body may
produce excess quantities in its attempt to remove the
problematic organism or wastes. Some anticatarrhal
remedies work by producing a less viscous mucus secre-
tion that is easier for the body to remove. Others reduce
mucus secretion directly. This is not as desirable as it
sounds, as it may cause a buildup of: waste that cannot be
cleared from the sinuses. While the specific mode of ac-
tion of anticatarrhal herbs remains uncertain, undeniable
clinical experience tells us that they work!

The following constituents have been suggested as
being pivotal to the action of anticatarrhal herbs.

Tannins have an astringent action and are common to
many herbs in this group.

Volatile oil-rich plants can have anticatarrhal effects, in
part due to their antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory
actions.

Flavones and flavonoids, inclading commonly found com-
pounds like quercetin, apparently contribute to the
total effect.

Important Anticatarrhal Herbs
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Allium sativum (garlic)

Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)
Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss)
Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Echinacea spp. (echinacea)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)
Euphrasia spp. (eyebright)
Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Inula helenium (elecampane)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Salvia officinalis (sage)

Sambucus nigra (elder)

Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)
Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

Body System Affinities
Each system of the body has plants that are particularly
suited to it, some of which are anticatarrhals. Here we

shall see which remedies act as primary anticatarrhals for
each of the following body systems.

Cardiovascular. Anticatarrhal action is not directly rele-
vant to the cardiovascular system. However, it could be
said that anticatarrhal remedies help the system by
contributing to general detoxification and elimination.
Such herbs include Capsicum annuum, Allium sativum,
and Achillea millefolium.

Respiratory. All of the herbs listed as primary anti-
catarrhals have a beneficial effect on both the upper
and lower respiratory systems.

Digestive. Anticatarrhals that have bitter, demulcent,
carminative, hepatic, or astringent properties make
useful therapeutic contributions to digestive problems.
Important examples are Allium sativum, Althaea offici-
nalis, Capsicum annuum, Cetraria islandica, Chondrus
crispus, Eupatorium perfoliatum, Geranium maculatum,
Hydrastis canadensis, Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis,
and Thymus vulgaris,

Urinary. In addition to their anticatarrhal properties,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi and Solidago virgaurea are im-
portant herbs for the urinary system.

Reproductive. While the herbs listed below may all play
a role in the holistic treatment of-an individual with re-
productive system issues, none of them is a primary
remedy for male or female problems. Achillea mille-
folium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Geranium maculatum,
and Hydrastis canadensis would be the first supportive
remedies to consider.

Musculoskeletal. Again, none of these plants is a pri-
mary remedy for the musculoskeletal system.

Nervous. Similarly, none of these plants is a primary
remedy for the nervous system.

Skin. Anticatarrhals may be indirectly indicated for the
treatment of a range of skin problems because they
support the body’s cleansing processes. Consider
Allium sativum, Baptisia tinctoria, Echinacea spp.,
Hydrastis canadensis, and Sambucus nigra.

Table 25.3. Anticatarrhal Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Alterative Allium sativum, Baptisia tinctoria, Echinacea spp.,

Hydrastis canadensis, Verbascum thapsus

Anti-inflammatory  Euphrasia spp., Geranium maculatum,

Hydrastis canadensis, Solidago virgaurea

----- PAGE 495 -----
HERBAL ACTIONS . 487

SECONDARY
ACTION

Antimicrobial

Antispasmodic

Astringent

Bitter

Carminative

Demulcent

Diaphoretic

Diuretic

Emmenagogue

Expectorant

Hepatic

Hypotensive

Laxative

Nervine

HERBS

Achillea mitlefolium, Allium sativum,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Baptisia tinctoria,
Capsicum annuum, Echinacea spp., lnula helenium,
Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis,

Solidago virgaurea, Thymus vulgaris

Allium sativum, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Hyssopus officinalis, Mentha piperita,
Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Euphrasia spp., Geranium maculatum,
Hydrastis canadensis, Salvia officinalis,
Thymus vulgaris

Achillea millefolium, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Hydrastis canadensis

Capsicum annuum, Hyssopus officinalis,
Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis,
Solidago virgaurea, Thymus vulgaris

Althaea officinalis, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Cetraria islandica, Chondrus crispus,
Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum,

Eupatorium perfoliatum, Hyssopus officinalis,
Inula helenium, Mentha piperita, Sambucus nigra,
Solidago virgaurea

Achillea millefolium, Althaea officinalis,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Sambucus nigra,
Solidago virgaurea, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus

Achillea millefolium, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Althaea officinalis, Cetraria islandica,

Chondrus crispus, Hyssopus officinalis,

Sambucus nigra, Thymus vulgaris, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus

Allium sativum, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Hydrastis canadensis

Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum

Eupatorium perfoliatum, Hydrastis canadensis,
Sambucus nigra

Hyssopus officinalis

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Tonic Achillea millefolium, Capsicum annuum,

Echinacea spp., Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Hydrastis canadensis

Vulnerary Althaea officinalis, Geranium maculatum,

Sambucus nigra, Verbascum thapsus

Strengths of anticatarrhal herbs are relative, because
their efficacy depends upon the nature of the cause, rather
than on their potency as anticatarrhals. For example, bet-
ter results may be achieved with Echinacea than with
Solidago if infection is the cause.

ANTI-INFLAMMATORY

Herbs that help the body combat inflammation are
known as anti-inflammatory remedies. Orthodox medicine
places much emphasis on chemicals that work to reduce
symptoms of inflammation and ease suffering. However,
symptom alleviation is not the best way to use herbal anti-
inflammatories. They are safe to use for the relief of pain
and discomfort, but offer most when used in combination
with other remedies to address the underlying problem.

In keeping with the theme of this chapter, the group-
ings given here reflect traditional observations of out-
come. For a pharmacological review of anti-inflammatory
natural products, please refer to chapter 9. As discussed
there, secondary metabolites produce anti-inflammatory
actions by interacting with the inflammatory cascade in a
number of different ways. While these insights are inter-
esting, using them to reach coherent clinical conclusions
is challenging, as are all extrapolations from constituent
studies to whole-plant phytotherapy.

Inflammation is a normal body response to infection
and other problems. Through localized biochemical and
tissue changes, the inflammatory reaction often brings
about the changes necessary to heal the focus of disease
and restore health. Unless this response is life threaten-
ing, it is a mistake to inhibit it. For example, simply sup-
pressing symptoms of inflammation in the stomach to re-
lieve discomfort will not alter the underlying causes of the
symptoms, and possibly could lead to the development of
a stomach ulcer.

We have become conditioned to see inflammation as
something to suppress and smother, rather than to work
with and support. Herbal remedies offer us the possibility

----- PAGE 496 -----
488 «@ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

to work with body processes, but as in all health matters,
there is a balance to achieve. Here, we need to know when
to work with inflammation and when to suppress it.

Types of Anti-Inflammatory Herbs

Attempts to classify anti-inflammatory herbs by relative
strength are not very helpful. It is far more useful in the
therapeutic sense to group them in terms of the body sys-
tem or tissue for which they are most appropriate or by
their pharmacological mode of action.

Treating inflammation with herbs is usually ap-
proached in terms of what tissue or organ is the focus of
inflammation. Based upon the different ways herbal anti-
inflammatories are thought to work, there are four groups
of anti-inflammatory herbs. I cannot overemphasize that
the action of a whole plant is always more than the action
of any specific constituent chemical. Keeping this holistic
perspective in mind, let us look at the following groups of
anti-inflammatory remedies:

Salicylate-Containing Anti-Inflammatory Herbs

A large range of plants contain salts of salicylic acid, the
molecule from which aspirin was developed. Such plants
are most useful for musculoskeletal inflammations, such
as arthritis. Herbs containing significant quantities of sal-
icylic acid have a marked anti-inflammatory effect, with-
out posing the dangers to the stomach that aspirin does.
In fact, Filipendula ulmaria, rich in salicylates, can even be
used to stanch mild stomach hemorrhage. Other plants
rich in such constituents include Salix spp., Gaultheria
procumbens, Betula spp., many poplars, and Viburnum
prunifolium.

Plants Containing Steroid Precursors

Steroids were first isolated from plant material, and some
herbs contain molecules that may be metabolized by the
body into inflammation-fighting steroidal molecules.
Such plants will help reduce some kinds of inflammation,
especially inflammation of autoimmune origin. Examples
are Glycyrrhiza glabra and Dioscorea villosa, which contains
diosgenin.

Essential Oil-Rich Plants

Many aromatic herbs high in essential oils have anti-
inflammatory actions. One of the best of these remedies
is Matricaria recutita, which is rich in terpenes, such as
bisabolol and chamazulene. These herbs are especially
useful for digestive system inflammations when taken by
mouth, for respiratory problems when inhaled in some
form, and for skin inflammations when used topically.

Calendula officinalis and Hypericum perforatum are other
well-known plants containing oils that soothe and reduce
inflammation.

Resin-Containing Plants

A number of resin-containing plants reduce inflammation
in some areas of the body, but often cause inflammation
in the stomach. This limits their usefulness, but they are
irreplaceable for some arthritic conditions. Examples are
Menyanthes trifoliata, Harpagophytum ‘procumbens, and
Guaiacum officinale.

Other Types of Anti-Inflammatory Herbs

As is common with herbal remedies, no clear-cut chemical
basis can be identified to explain the anti-inflammatory ac-
tions of some plants. This in no way negates their value,
because there is more to health and well-being than phar-
maceutical chemistry. It might also mean that no one has
yet gotten a grant to study that plant!

One of the many remedies in this group we can men-
tion is Cimicifuga racemosa. Demulcent herbs often have
an apparently anti-inflammatory effect, but this is related
to their ability to soothe inflamed surfaces, not to reduc-
tions in the cellular inflammatory response.

Major Anti-Inflammatory Herbs
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut)
Alchemilla arvensis (lady’s mantle)
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Anethum graveolens (dill)

Angelica archangelica (angelica)

Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Asclepias tuberosa (pleurisy root)

Betula spp. (birch)

Borago officinalis (borage)

Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse)
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss)
Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)

Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)

Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)

Galium aparine (cleavers)

Gaultheria procumbens (wintergreen)
Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)
Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice)

----- PAGE 497 -----
Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Hamamelis virginiana (witch hazel)
Harpagophytum procumbens (devil’s claw)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Matva sylvestris (mallow)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)
Plantago major (plantain)

Populus tremuloides (quaking aspen)
Salix spp. (willow)

Salvia officinalis (sage)

Sambucus nigra (elder)

Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod)
Stellaria media (chickweed)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)

Tilia platypbyllos (linden)

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)

Ulmus rubra (slippery elm)

Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

V. prunifolium (black haw)

Zea mays (cornsilk)

Body System Affinities

For each system of the body, there’are plants that are par-
ticularly well suited that also act as anti-inflammatory
remedies. This allows the herbalist to nurture the health
and vitality of a body system while at the same time less-
ening any inflammation.

Circulatory. A number of herbs may be used to reduce
inflammations in blood vessels, including Tilia platy-
phyllos, Crataegus spp., Aesculus bippocastanum, and
Achillea millefolium.

Respiratory. As it is a common site for inflammatory
conditions, it should come as no surprise that a whole
range of anti-inflammatories work well in either the
upper or the lower respiratory system. For the lower
respiratory system, consider Asclepias tuberosa, Cetraria
islandica, Chondrus crispus, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hyssopus
officinalis, Tussilago farfara, and Verbascum thapsus. For
the upper respiratory system, consider Sambucus nigra
and Solidago virgaurea.

HERBAL ACTIONS 2 489

Digestive. As herbal remedies go directly to the digestive

system, they are particularly useful in inflammatory
conditions that affect it, from stomach ulcers to colitis
and hemorrhoids. Such herbs include Matricaria recu-
tita, Dioscorea villosa, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hydrastis
canadensis, Calendula, and Mentha piperita. Demulcent
remedies rich in mucilage, such as Althaea officinalis,
can have the localized effect of reducing inflammation
through contact soothing.

Urinary. A number of herbs soothe the tissue of the uri-

nary tract directly as their anti-inflammatory con-
stituents pass through the kidneys and bladder. Plants
that soothe the tissue and fight infection will also have
an anti-inflammatory action. Specific urinary tract
anti-inflammatory remedies include Solidago virgaurea
and Zea mays.

Reproductive. Many tonics and other specific repro-

ductive remedies will often have anti-inflammatory
actions—for example, Alchemilla arvensis and Caulo-
phyllum thalictroides.

Musculoskeletal. For hardworking and abused muscles

and bones, salicylate-containing remedies come into
their own. Swlix spp., Filipendula ulmaria, Populus
tremuloides, and Betula spp. are excellent. Others to con-
sider are Menyanthes trifoliata, Harpagophytum procum-
bens, Cimicifuga racertosa, Tanacetum parthenium, and
Dioscorea villosa. Arthritic conditions respond well to
herbal therapy, but as always, herbs work best when
used as part of a holistic approach to treating the per-
son, not simply the disease.

Nervous. While the nervous system often feels as if it

needs anti-inflammatories, the best remedies for the
“inflamed state of mind” are the relaxing nervines. The
only direct anti-inflammatory for nervous system tis-
sue is Hypericum perforatum, which helps speed the re-
covery of damaged nerves. However, many nervines
can play a supportive role, including Avena sativa and
Valeriana officinalis.

Skin. Numerous remedies reduce inflammation on the

skin. A selection of these gifts of the natural world in-
cludes Calendula officinalis, Hypericum perforatum,
Commiphora molmol, Hydrastis canadensis, Arnica mon-
tana, Stellaria media, and Plantago major.

----- PAGE 498 -----
490 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Table 25.4. Anti-Inflammatory Herbs and
Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Anticatarrhal Achillea millefolium, Althaea officinalis, Cetraria islandica, Chondrus crispus, Geranium maculatum, Hydrastis canadensis, Hyssopus
officinalis, Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis, Sambucus nigra, Solidago virgaurea, Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Calendula officinalis, Hydrastis canadensis, Hypericum perforatum, Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita, Populus

Antispasmodic

Astringent

Bitter

Carminative

Cholagogue

Demulcent

Diaphoretic

Diuretic

Emnmenagogue

Expectorant

Hepatic

Laxative

Nervine

Tonic

Vulnerary

* tremuloides, Salvia officinalis, Solidago virgaurea

Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Asclepias tuberosa, Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,
Foeniculum vulgare, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp., Matricaria recutita, Mentha
piperita, Populus tremuloides, Salvia officinalis, Sambucus nigra, Tilia platyphyllos, Trigonella foenum-graecum, Verbascum thapsus,
Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

Achillea millefolium, Aesculus hippocastanum, Alchemilla arvensis, Calendula officinalis, Capsella bursa-pastoris, Filioendula ulmaria,
Geranium maculatum, Hamamelis virginiana, Hydrastis canadensis, Plantago major, Populus tremuloides, Salvia officinalis,
Solidago virgaurea, Symphytum officinale, Tilia platyphyllos, Verbascum thapsus

Achillea millefolium, Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita, Menyanthes trifoliata

Achillea millefolium, Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Filipendula ulmaria, Foeniculum vulgare,
Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp., Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis, Solidago virgaurea,
Tilia platyphyllos, Trigonella foenum-graecum

Calendula officinalis, Dioscorea villosa, Hydrastis canadensis, Menyanthes trifoliata

Althaea officinalis, Cetraria istandica, Chondrus crispus, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Malva sylvestris, Stellaria media, Symphytum officinale,
Trigonella foenum-graecum, Ulmus rubra, Verbascum thapsus, Zea mays

Achillea millefolium, Angelica archangelica, Asclepias tuberosa, Guaiacum officinale, Hyssopus officinalis, Mentha piperita,
Sambucus nigra, Solidago virgaurea, Tilia platyphyllos

Achillea millefolium, Alchemilla arvensis, Apium graveolens, Crataegus spp., Galium aparine, Menyanthes trifoliata, Plantago major,
Sambucus nigra, Solidago virgaurea, Tilia platyphyllos, Zea mays

Achillea millefolium, Alchemilla arvensis, Calendula officinalis, Caulophyllum thalictroides, Cimicifuga racemosa, Hydrastis canadensis,
Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp., Salvia officinalis, Tilia platyphyllos, Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

Althaea officinalis, Asclepias tuberosa, Cetraria islandica, Chondrus crispus, Glycyrthiza glabra, Hydrastis canadensis, Hyssopus
officinalis, Malva sylvestris, Plantago major, Sambucus nigra, Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Achillea millefolium, Calendula officinalis, Dioscorea villosa, Foeniculum vulgare, Glyeyrrhiza glabra, Hydrastis canadensis,
Hyssopus officinalis, Menyanthes trifoliata, Trigonella foenum-graecum

Hydrastis canadensis, Glycyrrhiza glabra

Apium graveolens, Borago officinalis, Cimicifuga racemosa, Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp.,
Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita, Tilia platyphyllos, Viburnum prunifolium

Achillea millefolium, Cimicifuga racemosa, Crataegus spp., Filipendula ulmaria, Hydrastis canadensis, Hypericum perforatum,
Verbascum thapsus

Achillea millefolium, Alchemilla arvensis, Althaea officinalis, Calendula officinalis, Filipendula ulmaria, Hamamelis virginiana,
Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis, Malva sylvestris, Matricaria recutita, Plantago major, Stellaria media, Symphytum
officinale

----- PAGE 499 -----
ANTIMICROBIAL

Antimicrobial herbs help the body destroy or resist
pathogenic microorganisms in some way. The action cov-
ers the whole gamut of microorganisms, including bacte-
ria, fungi, and viruses. However, it would be inappropri-
ate to talk about these plants as being “antibiotic,” as this
term literally means “anti-life.” There are times when an-
tibiotic drugs are essential and life saving, but not as often
as they are actually used. At times, supportive and pre-
ventive remedies allow the body to bypass the need for
chemical intervention. But when an emergency arises, let
us be thankful for the existence of antibiotics.

When using herbal remedies, we have the opportu-
nity to help the body strengthen its own resistance to
pathogens and throw off the illness. Some plant remedies
contain chemicals that are antiseptic or act as specific poi-
sons to certain organisms. In general, however, we are
talking about plants that support the immune process,
augmenting the integrity of the individual’s own defense
system.

How Antimicrobial Herbs Work

It would be a mistake to attempt an overarching general-
ization about mechanisms of action for herbal antimicro-
bials. The use of the term antimicrobial is a description of
expected outcome, rather than a description of process.
Antimicrobial effects may be related to direct interactions
with pathogens or mediated via the herb’s interaction
with the immune response. These herbs may also work
through indirect actions by stimulating immune re-
sponses. As examples of the diversity of mechanisms in-
volved, consider the following:

Melaleuca alternifolia (tea tree) contains an oil, rich in ter-
pinene-4-ol, that directly interferes with a pathogen’s
metabolism, thus killing it? Other herbs rich in
volatile oils also work directly to kill microorganisms.
Examples include Allium sativum, Thymus vulgaris, and
Eucalyptus spp.

Echinacea directly stimulates the body’s own immune re-
sponse and thus is often an effective antimicrobial agent.

Vaccinium macrocarpon (cranberry juice) blocks the adhe-
sion of uropathogenic E. coli to the walls of the bladder,
thus offering a useful treatment for cystitis.

Important Herbal Antimicrobials
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Allium sativum (garlic)

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Artemisia abrotanum (southernwood)
A. absinthium (wormwood)

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 491

Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)
Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Carum carvi (caraway)
Commiphora molmol (myrrh)
Coriandrum sativum (coriander)
Echinacea spp. (echinacea)
Eucalyptus spp. (eucalyptus)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Inula helenium (elecampane)
Juniperus communis (juniper)
Ligusticum porteri (osha)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae (balsam of Peru)
Olea europaea (olive)

Origanum majorana (marjoram)
Pimpinella anisum (aniseed)
Plantago major (plantain)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Ruta graveolens (rue)

Salvia officinalis (sage)
Syzygium aromaticum (clove)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Usnea spp. (usnea)

Body System Affinities

By the nature of infection and the body’s immune re-
sponse to it, a general systemic treatment is always ap-
propriate, even if given in conjunction with specific local
remedies. Ways in these remedies can be used are dis-
cussed in specific body system chapters.

Cardiovascular. Among antimicrobial herbs, Allium
sativum and Achillea millefolium have a reputation as
tonics for this system. Allium sativum is especially ap-
propriate because of its broad value for the cardiovas-
cular system in general.

Respiratory. In addition to Echinacea spp., Baptisia tincto-
ria, and Commiphora molmol, we can add Pimpinella
anisum, Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae, Syzygium
aromaticum, Inula helenium, Ligusticum porteri, and
Thymus vulgaris, which also possess different varieties
of expectorant effects.

Digestive. Many volatile oil-containing herbs and some
digestive bitters have an antimicrobial effect in the in-
testines. Some to consider are Echinacea spp., Allium
sativum, Artemisia absinthium, Calendula officinalis,
Commiphora molmol, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canaden-
sis, and Salvia officinalis.

----- PAGE 500 -----
492 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES By BoDy SYSTEM

Urinary. Effective remedies are Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Juniperus communis, Eucalyptus spp., and Achillea mille-
folium. Be aware that if there is any suggestion of kid-
ney disease, some of the urinary antimicrobial reme-
dies can be too strong.

Reproductive. Here, useful herbs include Echinacea spp.,
Allium sativum, Artemisia abrotanum, and Tropaeolum
majus, as well as urinary antimicrobials.

Musculoskeletal. Echinacea spp. and Baptisia tinctoria
provide a good basis for treatment.

Nervous. Hypericum perforatum or Phytolacca americana,
in combination with nervines and other antimicrobial
herbs, will help with the intransigent infections that
can affect the nervous system.

Skin. Many antimicrobial herbs can be used on the skin.
A wash of Thymus vulgaris, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Origanum majorana, or Allium sativum can be most ef-
fective. Commiphora molmol is one of the strongest ex-
ternal remedies.

Table 25.5. Antimicrobial Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Alterative Allium sativum, Baptisia tinctoria, Echinacea spp.,

Hydrastis canadensis, Inula helenium

Anticatarrhal Allium sativum, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,

Baptisia tinctoria, Capsicum annuum, Echinacea spp.,
Eucalyptus spp., Hydrastis canadensis,

Inula helenium, Mentha piperita,

Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae, Salvia officinalis,

Thymus vulgaris

Anti-inflammatory Artemisia absinthium, Calendula officinalis,
Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita,
Plantago major

Allium sativum, Carum carvi,

Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita,
Pimpinella anisum, Rosmarinus officinalis,

Ruta graveolens, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Antispasmodic

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Carum carvi, Commiphora molmol, Plantago major,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis,

Thymus vulgaris

Bitter Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis,

Ruta graveolens

SECONDARY
ACTION

Carminative

Demulcent

Diaphoretic

Diuretic

Emmenagogue

Expectorant

Hepatic

Hypotensive

Laxative

Nervine

Tonic

Vulnerary

HERBS

Artemisia absinthium, Capsicum annuum,
Carum carvi, Commiphora molmol,
Coriandrum sativum, Juniperus communis,
Mentha piperita, Pimpinella anisum,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis,
Syzygium aromaticum, Thymus vulgaris

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Plantago major

Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum,
Baptisia tinctoria, Capsicum annuum, Inula helenium,
Mentha piperita, Origanum majorana

Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Eucalyptus spp., Juniperus communis, Plantago major

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,

A. absinthium, Calendula officinalis,

Carum carvi, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis,
Origanum majorana, Rosmarinus officinalis,

Ruta graveolens, Thymus vulgaris

Carum carvi, Commiphora molmol, Eucalyptus spp.,
fnula helenium, Ligusticum porteri,

Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae,

Origanum majorana, Pimpinella anisum,

Plantago major, Ruta graveolens, Thymus vulgaris

Allium sativum, Artemisia abrotanum,
Calendula officinalis, Gentiana lutea,
Hyadrastis canadensis, Inula helenium, Ruta graveolens

Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum, Olea europaea

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis,
Ruta graveolens

Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita,
Rosmarinus officinalis

Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum,

Artemisia absinthium, Calendula officinalis,
Capsicum annuum, Echinacea spp., Gentiana lutea,
Hydrastis canadensis, Hypericum perforatum,
Inula helenium, Ruta graveolens

Achillea millefolium, Calendula officinalis,
Commiphora molmol, Hydrastis canadensis,
Hypericum perforatum, Plantago major

----- PAGE 501 -----
Table 25.6. Relative Strengths of Antimicrobial
Herbs

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild Calendula officinalis, Carum carvi, Coriandrum sativum,
Gentiana lutea, Olea europaea, Origanum majorana,
Pimpinella anisum, Plantago major, Syzygium aromaticum

Moderate Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium,
Capsicum annuum, Hypericum perforatum, Mentha piperita ,

Rosmarinus officinalis, Ruta graveolens, Salvia officinalis

Allium sativum, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Baptisia tinctoria,
Commiphora molmol, Echinacea spp., Eucalyptus spp.,
Hydrastis canadensis, Inula helenium, Juniperus communis,
Ligusticum porteri, Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae,
Thymus vulgaris, Usnea spp.

Strong

ANTIRHEUMATIC

‘These are remedies that improve quality of life for pa-
tients with rheumatic problems. This is not meant to sug-
gest that they have a specific effect upon the disease or
even necessarily upon the musculoskeletal tissue itself.
The term antirheumatic is a description of an expected
outcome, rather than an implied mechanism. As such, it is
very limited in its applicability.

The activity of these herbs can be explained as an ex-
pression of a more broadly relevant action. This may be
the herb’s primary action or a more holistic synergy of the
plant’s actions. For example, the alteratives may work in a
number of different ways in rheumatic conditions, as can
anti-inflammatory herbs. Of course, it is not always pos-
sible to identify the mechanism of action.

Important Antirheumatic Herbs
Achillea milléfolium (yarrow)
Angelica archangelica (angelica)
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Arctium lappa (burdock)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Armoracia rusticana (horseradish)
Arnica montana (arnica)

Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)
Betula spp. (birch)

Brassica spp. (mustard)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Caulophyllum thahetroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 493

Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)

E. purpureum (gravel root)
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Fucus vesiculosus (bladderwrack)
Gaultheria procumbens (wintergreen)
Guaiacum officinale (guaiacum)
Harpagophytum procumbens (devil’s claw)
Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Juniperus communis (janiper)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)
Myrica cerifera (bayberry)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Phytolacca americana (poke)

Populus tremuloides (aspen)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Salix spp. (willow)

Smilax spp. (sarsaparilla)

Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Urtica dioica (nettle)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)
Zanthoxylum americanum: (prickly ash)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Table 25.7. Possible Mechanism of Action of
Antirheumatic Herbs

ACTION HERBS.

Anti-inflammatory Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens,
Betula spp., Dioscorea villosa,

Filipendula ulmaria, Gaultheria procumbens,
Guaiacum officinale,

Harpagophytum procumbens,

Menyanthes trifoliata, Populus tremuloides,
Tanacetum parthenium

Alterative Arctium lappa, Mahonia aquifolium,

Fucus vesiculosus, Guaiacum officinale,
Harpagophytum procumbens, Iris versicolor,
Menyanthes trifoliata, Phytolacca americana,

Rumex crispus, Smilax spp., Urtica dioica

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Apium graveolens,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
E. purpureum, Juniperus communis,

Petroselinum crispum, Taraxacum officinale

----- PAGE 502 -----
494 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

ACTION HERBS

Circulatory stimulant Armoracia rusticana, Brassica spp.,
Capsicum annuum, Myrica cerifera,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Zanthoxylum americanum,

Zingiber officinale
Antispasmodic Cimicifuga racemosa, Viburnum opulus

Other action
(or basis unclear)

Arnica montana, Artemisia absinthium,
A, vulgaris, Caulophyllum thalictroides

Table 25.8. Relative Strengths of
Antirheumatic Herbs

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Arnica montana, Artemisia absinthium, A. vulgaris,
Caulophyllum thalictroides, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
£, purpureum, Fucus vesiculosus, Mahonia aquifolium,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Rumex crispus,
Taraxacum officinale

Moderate Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Arctium lappa,
Armoracia rusticana, Betula spp., Brassica spp.,

Capsicum annuum, Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,
Filipendula ulmaria, Gaultheria procumbens,
Harpagophytum procumbens, Menyanthes trifoliata,
Myrica cerifera, Petroselinum crispum,

Populus tremuloides, Salix spp., Smilax spp., Urtica dioica,
Viburnum opulus, Zanthoxylum americanum,

Zingiber officinale

Strong Guaiacum officinale, Iris versicolor, Juniperus communis,

Phytolacca americana, Tanacetum parthenium

ANTISPASMODIC

Antispasmodic herbs prevent or ease spasms or cramps in
the muscles. They thus reduce muscular tension in the
body, and, as many antispasmodics are also nervines, they
will sometimes ease psychological tension as well. The
term antispasmodic is synonymous with spasmolytic.

How Antispasmodics Work

Some antispasmodics work in a general way to reduce
muscle spasms throughout the body, and others specifi-
cally work on certain organs or systems. Antispasmodics
relax the autonomic nervous system, but not necessarily
the central nervous system. For this reason, they facilitate

physical relaxation of muscles without necessarily causing
a sedative effect. When needed in the intestinal tract, as
in colic, carminative herbs will usually suffice as antispas-
modics. The relaxing expectorants have a localized anti-
spasmodic effect in the respiratory system, but may also
have a broader effect upon the body. ”

General Antispasmodic Herbs
Anethum graveolens (dill)

Angelica archangelica (angelica)
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)

Carum carvi (caraway)

Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Daucus carota (wild carrot)

Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)

Drosera rotundifolia (sundew)
Elettaria cardamomum (cardamom)
Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)
Ghyyrrhiza glabra (licorice)
Humulus lupulus (hops)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Lactuca virosa (wild lettuce)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Lobelia inflata (\obelia)

Lycopus spp. (bugleweed)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)

M. pulegium (pennyroyal)

Nepeta cataria (catnip)

Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Pimpinella anisum (aniseed)

Piper methysticum (kava kava)
Piscidia erythrina Jamaica dogwood)
Prunus serotina (wild cherry bark)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Salvia officinalis var. rubia (red sage)
Sambucus nigra (elder)

Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Symplocarpus foetidus (skunk cabbage)
Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)
Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)
Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)

----- PAGE 503 -----
Turnera diffusa (damiana)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Verbascum thapsus (mullein)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)
Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)
V. prunifolium (black haw)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. Leonurus cardiaca, Viburnum opulus,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Melissa officinalis, Lavandula spp.,
and Valeriana officinalis are important here.

Respiratory. A range of antispasmodics are useful in the
respiratory system, including Lactuca virosa, Prunus
serotina, Lobelia inflata, Grindelia camporum, Euphorbia
pilulifera, and Pimpinella anisum.

Digestive. All of the carminative herbs tend to act as an-
tispasmodics in the gut, and hepatics can have such an
action for gallbladder conditions. Specific herbs to
consider are Matricaria recutita, Viburnum opulus, Vi
prunifolium, Valeriana officinalis, Humulus lupulus,
Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris,
Anethum graveolens, Foeniculum vulgare, and Dioscorea
villosa.

Urinary. Think of Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium, and
Daucus carota.

Reproductive. Here, Viburnum opulus and V. prunifolium
come into their own. The nervine antispasmodics,
such as Valeriana officinalis and Scutellaria lateriflora, are
also helpful.

Musculoskeletal. Primary muscle relaxant remedies in-
clude Piper methysticum, Viburnum opulus, Ve pruni-
folium, Valeriana officinalis, and Scutellaria lateriflora.
Externally, Lobelia inflata can be helpful.

Nervous. See Nervine for more information.

Skin. Antispasmodics are not directly relevant here.

Table 25.9. Antispasmodic Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Alterative Cimicifuga racemosa, Trifolium pratense
Analgesic Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,

Eschscholzia californica, Hypericum perforatum,
Lactuca virosa, Mentha piperita,

Passiflora incarnata, Piscidia erythrina,

Valeriana officinalis

HERBAL ACTIONS . 495

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Anticatarrhal Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp.,

Anti-inflammatory

Antimicrobial

Astringent

Bitter

Carminative

Demulcent

Diaphoretic

Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,

Nepeta cataria, Salvia officinalis, Sambucus nigra,
Thymus vulgaris, Tilia platyphyllos,

Trigonella foenum-graecum, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus, Zingiber officinale

Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens,
Dioscorea villosa, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp., Matricaria recutita,

Melissa officinalis, Mentha piperita,

Salvia officinalis, Sambucus nigra,

Tilia platyphyllos, Tussilago farfara

Carum carvi, Drosera rotundifolia, Humulus
lupulus, Hypericum perforatum, Lavandula spp.,
Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita, Pimpinella
anisum, Piper methysticum, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Thymus vulgaris

Glechoma hederacea, Humulus lupulus, Hypericum
perforatum, Lycopus spp., Prunus serotina, Salvia
officinalis, Rosmarinus officinalis, Tilia platyphyllos,
Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

Artemisia vulgaris, Humulus lupulus,
Matricaria recutita

Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica,
Artemisia vulgaris, Carum carvi, Daucus carota,
Elettaria cardamomum, Foeniculum vulgare,
Humulus lupulus, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp., Leonurus cardiaca,

Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,

Mentha piperita, M. pulegium, Nepeta cataria,
Petroselinum crispum, Pimpinella anisum,
Salvia officinalis var. rubia, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Thymus vulgaris, Trigonella foenum-graecum,
Valeriana officinalis, Verbena officinalis,
Zingiber officinale

Drosera rotundifolia, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Trigonelle foenum-graecum, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus

Angelica archangelica, Cimicifuga racemosa,
Hyssopus officinalis, Mentha piperita, Nepeta
cataria, Rosmarinus officinalis, Sambucus nigra,
Symplocarpus foetidus, Tilia platyphylios, Verbena
officinalis, Zingiber officinale

----- PAGE 504 -----
496 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM -

SECONDARY
ACTION

HERBS

Diuretic

Emmenagogue

Expectorant

Hepatic

Hypnotic

Hypotensive

Nervine relaxant

Tonic

Vulnerary

Angelica archangelica, Daucus carota, Lycopus spp.,
Nepeta cataria, Petroselinum crispum,

Piper methysticum, Sambucus nigra,

Tilia platyphyllos, Turnera diffusa, Tussilago farfara

Artemisia vulgaris, Marrubium vulgare, Carum carvi,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Leonurus cardiaca,
Mentha pulegium

Angelica archangelica, Carum carvi, Daucus carota,
Drosera rotundifolia, Foeniculum vulgare,
Glyeyrrhiza glabra, Lycopus spp. Nepeta cataria,
Petroselinum crispum, Pimpinella anisum,
Symplocarpus foetidus, Thymus vulgaris,
Trigonella foenum-graecum, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus

Verbena officinalis

Eschscholzia californica, Humulus lupulus,
Lactuca virosa, Matricaria recutita,
Passiflora incarnata, Piper methysticum,
Piscidia erythrina, Tilia platyphyllos,
Valeriana officinalis

Leonurus cardiaca, Passiflora incarnata,
Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia platyphyllos,
Valeriana officinalis

Cimicifuga racemosa, Eschscholzia californica,
Humulus lupulus, Hypericum perforatum,
Hyssopus officinalis, Lactuca virosa, Lavandula spp.,
Leonurus cardiaca, Lobelia inflata, Lycopus spp.,
Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,

Mentha piperita, Nepeta cataria,

Passiflora incarnata, Piper methysticum,

Piscidia erythrina, Prunus serotina,

Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia platyphyllos,
Valeriana officinalis, Viburnum opulus,

V. prunifolium

Artemisia vulgaris, Hypericum perforatum,
Scutellaria lateriflora, Trigonella foenum-graecum,
Tumera diffusa, Tussilago farfara,

Verbena officinalis

Nepeta cataria, Hypericum perforatum,
Matricaria recutita, Sambucus nigra,
Trigonella foenum-graecum, Verbascum thapsus

Table 25.10. Relative Strengths of
Antispasmodic Herbs

STRENGTH — HERBS

Mild Anethum graveolens, Angelica archangelica, Carum carvi,
Daucus carota, Elettaria cardamomum,
Foeniculum vulgare, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Mentha piperita,
M. pulegium, Petroselinum crispum, Pimpinella anisum,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis, Sambucus nigra,
Trigonella foenum-graecum, Verbascum thapsus

Moderate Apium graveolens, Artemisia vulgaris,

Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp., Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,
Nepeta cataria, Tilia platyphyllos, Trifolium pratense,

Turnera diffusa, Tussilago farfara, Zingiber officinale

Strong Cimicifuga racemosa, Dioscorea villosa,

Drosera rotundifolia, Eschscholzia californica,

Humultus lupulus, Lactuca virosa, Leonurus cardiaca,
Lobelia inflata, Lycopus europaeus, Piper methysticum,
Piscidia erythrina, Prunus serotina, Pulsatilla vulgaris,
Scutellaria lateriflora, Symplocarpus foetidus,

Thymus vulgaris, Valeriana officinalis, Verbena officinalis,

Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

ASTRINGENT

If you have ever had a cup of ordinary tea, you have ex-
perienced astringency. The tightening of the tissue of the
mouth demonstrates the astringent action of the tea
plant, Camellia sinensis. Astringents are sometimes called
styptics when applied externally to stop bleeding, or anti-
hemorrhagics when used for internal bleeding.

How Astringents Work

Astringent action is due to a diverse group of complex
chemicals, called tannins or gallotannins, that have cer-
tain chemical and physical properties in common. All
members of this group have phenolic characteristics, are
soluble in water, and have molecular weights ranging
from 500 to 3,000, There are two groups: derivatives of
flavonols called condensed tannins and the more important
hydrolyzable tannins. See chapter 7 for more details on the
chemistry of tannins.

The name tannin comes from the use of these con-
stituents in the tanning industry. They have the effect of
precipitating, or denaturing, protein molecules. They also
precipitate starch, gelatin, alkaloids, and salts of heavy
metals. One of the few incompatibilities found when mak-

----- PAGE 505 -----
ing herbal medicines is that astringent, tannin-rich reme-
dies will create precipitates with herbs high in alkaloids.

This alteration of protein is how animal skin is
turned into leather. In other words, astringents produce a
kind of temporary leather coat on the surface of tissue.
Because of this activity, tannins have a number of thera-
peutic benefits:

Reduce irritation on the surface of tissues through a sort of
numbing action.

Reduce surface inflammation.

Create a barrier against infection, which is of great help for
wounds and burns.

Astringents have a role in a wide range of problems in
many parts of the body, but are of great importance in
wound healing and conditions affecting the digestive sys-
tem. In the gut, they reduce inflammation, improve
symptoms of diarrhea, and are widely used in various dis-
eases of digestion. However, long-term use as medicine or
too much tea in the diet can be deleterious to health, as
this will eventually inhibit proper food absorption across
the gut wall.

Herbal Astringents

Acacia catechu (black catechu)
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut)
Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Camellia sinensis (tea)

Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse)
Cola acuminata (kola)

Equisetum arvense (horsetail)
Euphrasia spp. (eyebright)
Filipendula ulmaria (meadowsweet)
Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)
Hamamelis virginiana (witch hazel)
Inula helenium (elecampane)
Lycopus spp. (bugleweed)

Myrica cerifera (bayberry)

Plantago major (plantain)
Polygonum bistorta (bistort)

Prunus serotina (wild cherry bark)
Quercus spp. (oak)

Rheum palmatum (rhubarb)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Rubus idaeus (raspberry)

R. villosus (blackberry)

HERBAL ACTIONS 2 497

Salvia officinalis (sage)

Solidago virgaurea (goldenrod)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Verbascum thapsus (mullein)
Vinca major (periwinkle)

Body System Affinities

As with other actions, certain astringents are particularly
suited to specific body systems. Here we shall see which
remedies act as astringents for each system.

Cardiovascular. Astringents are rarely needed internally
for this system, although they are used externally for
bruises that can be seen under the skin. However, cer-
tain cardiovascular remedies are also astringents, in-
cluding Achillea millefolium, Aesculus bippocastanum, and
Cytisus scoparius.

Respiratory. The anticatarrhal remedies often also have
astringent properties. Achillea millefolium, Capsella
bursa-pastoris, Hydrastis canadensis, Euphrasia spp., and
Plantago major are examples.

Digestive. Of many possibilities, here are a few examples
of astringents for this system: Quercus spp., Acacia cate-
chu, Polygonum bistorta, Potentilla erecta, Hamamelis vir-
giniana, Geranium maculatum, Symphytum officinale,
Filipendula ulmaria, Agrimonia eupatoria, Hydrastis
canadensis, Capsella bursa-pastoris, and Salvia officinalis.

Urinary. Many of the astringents already mentioned are
useful here, but some specifics are Equisetum arvense,
Achillea millefolium, and Elymus repens.

Reproductive. Here we can mention Geranium macula-
tum, Vinca major, Alchemilla arvensis, and Hydrastis
canadensis,

Musculoskeletal. Astringency is not often directly rele-
vant in this system.

Nervous. Astringency is also not often directly relevant
here.

Skin. Of the many external astringents, or styptics, some
examples are Achillea millefolium, Arnica montana,
Capsella bursa-pastoris, Equisetum arvense, Hamamelis
virginiana, Plantago major, Quercus spp., and just about
all of the other astringents mentioned above.

----- PAGE 506 -----
498 <@ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Table 25.11. Astringent Herbs and Secondary Actions

Table 25.12. Relative Strengths of Astringent Herbs

SECONDARY
ACTION

HERBS

Anticatarrhal Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Euphrasia spp., Geranium maculatum,
Glechoma hederacea, Inula helenium,
Polygonum bistorta, Salvia officinalis,

Solidago virgaurea, Verbascum thapsus

Anti-inflammatory — Euphrasia spp., Filipendula ulmaria,
Geranium maculatum, Hamamelis virginiana,
Plantago major, Polygonum bistorta, Quercus spp.,

Solidago virgaurea

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Acacia catechy, Inula helenium, Quercus spp.,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis,
Solidago virgaurea

Antispasmodic Lycopus spp., Prunus serotina,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis

Bitter Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Prunus serotina

Demulcent Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Plantago major,
Symphytum officinale, Verbascum thapsus

Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Inula helenium,
Myrica cerifera, Solidago virgaurea

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Cola acuminata,
Glechoma hederacea, Lycopus spp.,
Plantago major, Solidago virgaurea,
Verbascum thapsus

Emmenagogue Achillea millefolium, Rubus idaeus

Expectorant Glechoma hederacea, Inula helenium,
Plantago major, Prunus serotina,
Symphytum officinale, Verbascum thapsus

Hepatic Agrimonia eupatoria

Hypotensive Achillea millefolium

Nervine Cola acuminata, Prunus serotina,
Rosmarinus officinalis

Tonic Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Rubus idaeus, Verbascum thapsus

Vulnerary Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,

Geranium maculatum, Symphytum officinale

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild or gentle Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Lycopus spp., Plantago major,
Pulmonaria officinalis, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Salvia officinalis, Solidago virgaurea,
Symphytum officinale, Verbascum thapsus

Moderate Achillea millefolium, Aesculus hippocastanum,
Capsella bursa-pastoris, Euphrasia spp.,
Filipendula ulmaria, Geranium maculatum,
Glechoma hederacea, Hieracium pilosella,

Inula helenium, Potentilla erecta, Prunus serotina,

Ranunculus ficaria, Rheum palmatum

Strong Acacia catechu, Agrimonia eupatoria, Cola acuminata,
Hamamelis virginiana, Myrica cerifera,
Polygonum bistorta, Quercus spp., Rubus villosus,

Vinca major

BITTER

‘The bitters are of major importance to the digestive sys-
tem and to the rest of the body. Quite simply, these are
remedies that have a bitter taste. Their broad effects on
tone and function offer an opportunity to treat the body
as a whole. These herbs can range from mildly bitter
remedies, like Achillea millefolium and Taraxacum officinale
leaf, to profoundly distasteful herbs, such as Ruta grave-
olens and Artemisia absinthium. It is, of course, the taste of
rue and wormwood that has made their names symbolic
in our language of extreme distress or woe. I don’t think
they taste quite that bad!

Bitters have a major role in holistic herbal treatment
and especially preventive herbal medicine. Because of
their wide effect on the body’s physiology, they help enor-
mously in treating the body as an integrated whole.

How Bitters Work

The constituents that contribute bitterness to an herb are
usually described as bitter principles. A range of molecular
structures share the bitter property; that is, they trigger a
response in the bitter receptors of the back of the tongue.
Examples of such constituents are monoterpenes, iri-
doids, sesquiterpenes, and alkaloids.

‘Taste is a phenomenon of chemoreception, limited to
the damp area inside the mouth. About 9,000 chemore-
ceptors, called taste buds, occur on the tongue in groups
of 50 to 100 specialized cells. They are found largely on
the perimeter of the tongue in adults, but cover the whole

----- PAGE 507 -----
tongue in children. Different regions of the tongue respond
to the four basic tastes: sweet, salty, sour, and bitter.

Molecules that evoke taste are described as sapid,
which comes from the Latin sapere, meaning “to taste.”
Sapidity depends upon solubility in water, which allows a
molecule to penetrate the taste buds. The sensation of
taste occurs when part of a molecule fits into a taste re-
ceptor in a specific taste bud. Less is known about the
receptors for bitterness than for those for the other tastes.

Absinthin, found in plants of the genus Artemisia,
such as A. absinthium, is so bitter it can be tasted at dilu-
tions of 1:30,000! Great diversity and complexity is found
among these bitter principles, but it appears that they all
work in a similar way by triggering a sensory response in
the mouth. The sensation of bitterness, and no doubt
many other taste subtleties, is directed by the nerves to
the central nervous system. From there, a message goes to
the gut, giving rise to the release of the digestive hormone
gastrin. This in turn leads to a whole range of effects, all
of value to the digestive process and general bodily
health. Among the many actions of bitters, they:

Stimulate appetite. This helps in convalescence and condi-
tions associated with reduced appetite, including de-
pression. Of course, stimulation of appetite is not al-
ways desirable!

Stimulate release of digestive juices from the pancreas, duode-
num, and liver. This will help in a wide range of prob-
lems related to inefficient or allergy-impaired digestion.

Aid the liver in detoxification work and increase the flow of
bile. The possibilities here are great, as many health
problems have their roots in an overworked liver. This
is the apparent value of bitters taken after meals, such
as coffee and liqueurs like Chartreuse.

Help regulate secretion of pancreatic hormones that regulate
blood sugar, insulin, and glucagon. This means that di-
abetics should use caution when taking bitters for any
reason, as they may upset blood sugar balance.
However, in the hands of a skilled practitioner, these
remedies may have some relevance in the treatment of
late-onset diabetes.

Help the gut wall repair damage by stimulating self-repair
mechanisms.

Other effects occur in a much broader way, support-
ing the healthy activity of the heart and circulation in
general. Herbalists have long known about the subtle psy-
chological effects of bitter remedies. They may even have
antidepressant actions in some cases, especially after viral

Hersat ACTIONS 2 499

infection. Bitters such as Artemisia vulgaris and Gentiana
lutea have a generally tonic effect on consciousness.

The therapeutic ramifications of all of these actions
are many. The tonic effects of these remedies go beyond
specific digestive hormone activity. As digestion and as-
similation of food is basic to health, bitter stimulation can
often fundamentally ameliorate an underlying pathology
that has nothing to do with the digestive process. In gen-
eral, these benefits will not occur unless the bitter herb is
tasted, so they should nox be given in a capsule intended
to help the patient avoid the unpleasant taste.

In practice, there appears to be much overlap between
bitter and tonic remedies. The mechanism of action of
bitters is not always clear, but it is evident that these
herbs act to promote health and increase self-healing and
resistance—yet another wonderful gift of nature.

Contraindications for Bitters

These mirror the genera] indications for bitters. For ex-
ample, in situations for which exocrine gland stimulation
is inappropriate, bitters would also be contraindicated, as
they may cause inappropriate peristaltic stimulation. Do
not use bitters in the following conditions:

Pregnancy

Kidney stones

Gallbladder disease
Dysmenorrhea
Gastroesophageal reflux clisease
Hiatus hernia -

Gastritis

Peptic ulcer

Herbal Bitters

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Artemisia abrotanum (southernwood)
A. absinthium (wormwood)

A, vulgaris (mugwort)

Berberis vulgaris (bearberry)
Centaurium erythraea (centaury)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Menyanthes irifoliata (bogbean)
Ruta graveolens (rue)

Tanacetum vulgare (tansy)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)

----- PAGE 508 -----
500 =- TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SysTEM

Body System Affinities

Bitters range from mild herbs, including Matricaria recu-
tita and Achillea millefolium, to quite intense remedies,
such as Artemisia absinthium, Gentiana lutea, and Ruta
graveolens. Not only do we have a choice of intensity of
bitterness, but we also can select bitters based on associ-
ated actions and system affinities. By nature of their bit-
terness, these herbs are widely applicable in a tonic sense.
A fair sprinkling of bitter herbs can still be found in offi-
cial pharmacopoeias.

Cardiovascular. Anything that helps digestion and eases
flatulence will take pressure off the heart. Relaxing bit-
ters, such as Humulus lupulus and Valeriana officinalis,
may have a specific role in this system.

Respiratory. Certain bitters have expectorant actions,
and in the case of Marrubium vulgare, we have an ex-
cellent remedy for all chest problems combined with
the value of a potent bitter.

Digestive. A wide range of plants can be named here.
The following list takes into account the liver and pan-
creas as organs of the digestive system: Artemisia vul-
garis, A. absinthium, Berberis vulgaris, Centaurium ery-
thraea, Chelidonium majus, Chelone glabra, Gentiana
lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Humulus lupulus, Ruta grave-
olens, and Peumus boldus.

Urinary. The bitter action is not directly relevant to this
system.

Reproductive. Many bitter herbs have the ability to ini-
tiate delayed menstrual periods. They may, however,
cause some cramping, and must not be used during
pregnancy. The following are the most relevant:
Artemisia abrotanum, A. absinthium, A. vulgaris, Ruta
graveolens, and, to a lesser degree because of its mild-
ness, Achillea millefolium.

Musculoskeletal. Anything that helps with digestion and
assimilation of food will benefit the musculoskeletal
system. A bitter that is particularly valuable for this sys-
tem is Menyanthes trifoliata.

Nervous. By stimulating healthy body processes, bitters
support the nervous system in cases of depression and
general nervous debility. Any bitter can work, but
those most often used ate Gentiana lutea, Artemisia vul-
garis, and A. absinthium.

Skin. Bitters herbs may benefit the skin through an
alterative-like cleansing action.

Table 25.13. Bitter Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Anticatarrhal Achillea millefolium, Centaurium erythraea,

Eupatorium perfoliatum, Hydrastis canadensis,
Marrubium vulgare

Anti-inflammatory Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium,
Hydrastis canadensis, Matricaria recutita,
Menyanthes trifoliata

Antimicrobial ‘Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, A. vulgaris, Hydrastis canadensis,

Matricaria recutita

Antispasmodic Marrubium vulgare, Matricaria recutita,

Ruta graveolens
Astringent Achillea millefolium, Hydrastis canadensis
Carminative Artemisia abrotanum, A. absinthium, Centaurium
erythraea, Matricaria recutita, Tanacetum vulgare
Cholagogue Artemisia abrotanum, A. absinthium, A. vulgaris,
Berberis vulgaris, Centaurium erythraea, Gentiana
lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Tanacetum vulgare
Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Eupatorium perfoliatum
Diuretic Achillea millefolium
Emmenagogue Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, A. vulgaris, Centaurium erythraea,
Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Ruta
graveolens, Tanacetum vulgare
Expectorant Marrubium vulgare
Hepatic Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, A. vulgaris, Berberis vulgaris,
Centaurium erythraea, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis
canadensis, Ruta graveolens, Tanacetum vulgare
Laxative Berberis vulgaris, Centaurium erythraea, Eupatorium
perfoliatum, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis
Nervine Artemisia vulgaris, Centaurium erythraea,
Matricaria recutita
Tonic Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium,
A. vulgaris, Centaurium erythraea, Hydrastis
canadensis, Marrubium vulgare, Ruta graveolens
Vulnerary Achillea millefolium, Hydrastis canadensis,

Marrubium vulgare, Matricaria recutita

----- PAGE 509 -----
Table 25.14. Relative Strengths of Bitter Herbs

STRENGTH — HERBS

Mild Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum, A. vulgaris,
Matricaria recutita, Taraxacum officinale

Strong Artemisia absinthium, Berberis vulgaris, Centaurium
erythraea, Eupatorium perfoliatum, Gentiana lutea,
Hydrastis canadensis, Marrubium vulgare, Ruta graveolens,
Tanacetum vulgare

CARDIAC REMEDIES

This is a general category for herbal remedies that have
some kind of action on the heart. Some of the remedies in
this group are powerful cardioactive agents, such as
Digitalis (foxglove), while others are gentler and safer car-
diotonics, like Crataegus (hawthorn) and Tilia (linden). As
discussed in chapter 9, care must be taken with these
terms, as they have different meanings in orthodox and
herbal medicine.

Cardiotonic

These are plants that have an observably beneficial action
on the heart and blood vessels but do not contain cardiac
glycosides. How they work is either completely obscure
or an area of pharmacological debate, but flavones appear
to be major contributors to their beneficial actions.
Examples of traditionally used cardiotonic herbs in
Western herbalism are Crataegus, Tilia platyphyllos, Allium
sativum, and Leonurus cardiaca. The cliterpene forskolin is
the positively inotropic constituent of Coleus forskoblii, a
cardiotonic herb from India that is gaining increased at-
tention. For more details on the pharmacology of some of
these plants, please refer to the discussion in chapter 9.

Cardioactive

These plants owe their effects on the heart to their content
of cardiac glycosides, and thus have both the benefits and the
drawbacks of these constituents. The main danger is that
glycosides will accumulate in the body, as their elimination
rates tend to be low. Clinically trained phytotherapists pre-
fer to use Convallaria majalis over Digitalis, as there is less
chance that such problems will develop. However, without
appropriate training as to the safe use of Convallaria, phy-
totherapists should avoid the use of this herb too.

Primary Cardiovascular Remedies
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Aesculus hippocastanum (horse chestnut)

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 501

Allium sativum (garlic)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)

Coleus forskoblii (coleus)

Convallaria majalis (lily of the valley)
Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)

Cytisus scoparius (broom)

Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Lycopus spp. (bugleweed)

Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Scrophularia nodosa (figwort)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Urginea maritima (squill)
Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Body System Affinities

As cardiac remedies are very specific to the cardiovascular
system, they are not usually directly relevant to condi-
tions involving other body systems, although they do con-
tribute greatly to general health when indicated.
However, many cardiac tonics have other actions, and
these are the properties that we will explore here.

Cardiovascular. Primarily cardioactive remedies include
Convallaria majalis and Digitalis lanata. Other plants
that mimic this cardioactive effect but do not contain
cardiac glycosides include Cytisus scoparius, Urginea
maritima, Scropbularia nodosa, and Lycopus spp. All must
be used with caution in order to avoid toxicity prob-
lems in heart patients. The primary cardiotonic herbs
to consider will be Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos, and
possibly Coleus forskoblii. Remedies that specifically
benefit blood vessels include Crataegus spp., Tilia platy-
phyllos, Aesculus hippocastanum, Allium sativum, Ginkgo
biloba, and Achillea millefolium.

Respiratory. Any problem with the activity of the heart
might have an effect on lung congestion due to a
backup of blood waiting to be pumped. Thus, cardiac
tonics may benefit the lungs by helping the heart.
Allium sativum is renowned for its antimicrobial and
generally beneficial action on the lungs.

Digestive. A number of cardiac remedies support the
function of this system, including Rosmarinus offici-
nalis, Tilia platyphyllos, Leonurus cardiaca, Achillea mille-
folium, Angelica archangelica, Allium sativum, and
Melissa officinalis.

Urinary. Most of the herbs that have a direct impact on
the heart’s action also increase the amount of blood
that passes through the kidneys, and so act as diuretics.

----- PAGE 510 -----
502 = TREATMENI APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Achillea millefolium is used in urinary problems, as is
Cytisus scoparius. Any cardioactive properties must be
taken into account, especially with Gytisus scoparius.

Reproductive. The cardiac tonics are not directly in-
volved in the function of this system. Achillea mille-
folium may play a role as a gentle emmenagogue.

Musculoskeletal. Herbs that act as circulatory stimu-
lants are important here because they increase periph-
eral blood flow. This can reduce swelling and ease stiff-
ness. Such herbs include Capsicum annuum, Zingiber
officinale, Zanthoxylum americanum, Brassica spp., and
Armoracia rusticana.

Nervous. Leonurus cardiaca, Tilia platypbyllos, Melissa offic-
inalis, and Rosmarinus officinalis all have a relaxing effect
on the nervous system. As we shall see, many nervines
help the circulatory system by relaxing the mind and
body as a whole.

Skin. The only directly applicable remedy here is
Scropbularia nodosa. However, when a skin problem is
related to varicosity. in veins, cardiac tonics are very
important. Herbs that can help include Crataegus spp.,
Aesculus hippocastanum, Achillea millefolium, and Tilia

platypbyllos.

CARMINATIVE

Carminatives ease discomfort caused by flatulence. The
term carminative describes an expected outcome, rather
than a specific mechanism of action. However, to a large
extent, the mode of action of carminative herbs appears to
be related to the complex of volatile oils they contain.
These terpene oils have local anti-inflammatory and anti-
spasmodic effects upon the mucous lining and the muscle
coats of the alimentary canal. An example is farnesene, a
constituent of many complex plant volatile oils with
carminative actions, such as Matricaria recutita. Volatile
oils and their activities are discussed in more depth in
chapter 6.

Origanum compactum is a species of oregano used as
an antispasmodic remedy for the gastrointestinal tract, es-
pecially in Morocco.‘ Belgian researchers have found that
the infusion of flowers and leaves inhibits contractions
triggered in guinea pig ileum by acetylcholine, histamine,
serotonin, nicotine, 1,1-dimethyl-4-phenylpiperazine io-
dide, and even electrical stimulation. The main active
components in the essential oil were identified as thymol
and carvacrol. This example may help explain the well-
known actions of all of the carminative remedies.

Herbal Carminatives

Allium sativum (garlic)

Anethum graveolens (dill)

Angelica archangelica (angelica)
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
Carum carvi (caraway)
Cinnamomum spp. (cinnamon)
Elettaria cardamomum (cardamom)
Eucalyptus globulus (eucalyptus)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)
Gaultberia procumbens (wintergreen)
Humulus lupulus (hops)

Juniperus communis (juniper)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)

M. pulegium (pennyroyal)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Pimpinella anisum (aniseed)

Salvia officinalis (sage)

Thymus spp. (thyme)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Body System Affinities

By the nature of their actions, carminatives work on the
gut, and thus may have more generalized effects on other
body systems. As carminative actions are due largely to
volatile oil content, some of these oils have quite specific
effects on other parts of the body.

Cardiovascular. Carminatives may ease apparent cardiac
symptoms by eliminating the pressure of flatulence
and digestive pain. While most of the carminatives
have no action on this system at all, volatile oils of the
following herbs do have cardiovascular effects: Allium
sativum, Capsicum annuum, Leonurus cardiaca, Matri-
caria recutita, Melissa officinalis, and Zingiber officinale.

Respiratory. Many carminative herbs support this system
through antispasmodic, antimicrobial, or anticatarrhal
actions. These include Avium sativum, Angelica
archangelica, Brassica spp., Eucalyptus spp., Mentha
piperita, Pimpinella anisum, Salvia officinalis, and Thymus
vulgaris.

Digestive. As carminatives act specifically on the diges-
tive tract, the list of herbs appropriate for this system
is extremely long. All of the herbs listed as carmina-
tives may be relevant.

----- PAGE 511 -----
Urinary. Because of their volatile oil content, some
carminatives act as diuretics and rnay even irritate the
kidneys. Prime examples are Juniperus communis and
Eucalyptus spp.

Reproductive. Again, some volatile oils have effects
upon the female reproductive system. A problematic
example is Mentha pulegium, a plant whose oil can
prove damaging to the reproductive system. However,
as will be discussed in chapter 26, the whole herb does
not pose the same dangers as the essential oil.

Musculoskeletal. Apium graveolens is a carminative that is
also a specific anti-inflammatory for this system. Others
include Angelica archangelica and Gaultheria procumbens.

Nervous, Many volatile oil-containing remedies will
soothe the nervous system. These include Valeriana of-
ficinalis, Matricaria recutita, Humulus lupulus, and
Melissa officinalis.

Skin. Carminatives may be relevant to the skin in that
they support digestion and metabolism in general. In
some cases, a carminative herb will be good for the
skin because the plant or its oils also have other ef-
fects. An example is the antimicrobial Thymus vulgaris,
which can be useful when applied topically for its anti-
septic properties.

Table 25.15. Carminative Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Alterative Allium sativum

Allium sativum, Eucalyptus spp., Matricaria recutita,
Mentha piperita, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Anticatarrhal

Anti-inflammatory Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens, Artemisia
absinthium, Gaultheria procumbens, Matricaria
recutita, Melissa officinalis, Mentha piperita

Allium sativum, Artemisia absinthium,

Eucalyptus spp., Humulus lupulus, Juniperus
communis, Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,
Pimpinella anisum, Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Antimicrobial

Allium sativum, Anethum graveolens,

Angelica archangelica, Artemisia absinthium,

Carum carvi, Eucalyptus spp., Leonurus cardiaca,
Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,

Mentha piperita, Pimpinella anisum, Salvia officinalis,

Antispasmodic

Thymus vulgaris, Valeriana officinalis

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 503

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Astringent Carum carvi, Cinnamomum spp., Gaultheria
procumbens, Humulus luputus, Salvia officinalis,
Thymus vulgaris
Bitter Artemisia absinthium, Humulus lupulus,
Matricaria recutita
Diaphoretic Allium sativum, Angelica archangelica, Melissa
officinalis, Mentha piperita, M. pulegium,
Zingiber officinale
Diuretic Angelica archangelica, Apium graveolens,
Brassica spp. Gaultheria procumbens,
Juniperus communis, Petroselinum crispum
Emmenagogue Carum carvi, Gaultheria procumbens, Leonurus
cardiaca, Mentha pulegium, Petroselinum crispum
Expectorant Angelica archangelica, Carum carvi, Eucalyptus spp.,
Petroselinum crispum, Pimpinella anisum,
Thymus vulgaris
Galactagogue Anethum graveolens, Carum carvi, Eucalyptus spp.,

Gaultheria procumbens

Allium sativum, Melissa officinalis,
Valeriana officinalis

Hypotensive

Nervine Apium graveolens, Humutus lupulus, Leonurus
cardiaca, Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,
Mentha piperita, Valeriana officinalis

Rubefacient Allium sativum, Brassica spp., Eucalyptus spp.,
Juniperus communis, Petroselinum crispum

Tonic Allium sativum, Artemisia absinthium,
Matricaria recutita

Vulnerary Matricaria recutita

CHOLAGOGUE

Cholagogues have the specific effect of stimulating the
flow of bile from the liver. Orthodox pharmacology dif-
ferentiates between direct cholagogues, which actually in-
crease the amount of secreted bile, and indirect chola-
gogues, which simply increase the amount of bile being
released by the gallbladder. This distinction is not very
important in herbal practice, especially as we are not
going to use purified ox bile (a cholagogue used in sup-
plements that was official in the eleventh U.S. National
Formulary).

----- PAGE 512 -----
504 TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

By nature of the action, cholagogues are quite spe-
cific in that they act on the liver. In general, however,
they function as body tonics. The secretion of bile is of
great help to the whole digestive and assimilative pro-
cess. After all, “we are what we digest” just much as “we
are what we eat.” The role of bile is partially to facilitate
fat digestion, but also to act as a natural laxative and thus
cleanse the system. Without exploring the vast complex-
ities of liver function, it is worth noting that bile forma-
tion and flow are fundamental to it all. Thus, the value of
these herbs goes far beyond the simple release of bile.
They help ensure a strong and healthy liver and so en-
liven the whole being. Most bitters and hepatics are also
cholagogues.

Indications for Cholagogues

Long-term maintenance of dyskinesia of the bile duct, to stim-
ulate normal contractions to deliver bile to the small
intestine.

Disorders caused by insufficient or congested bile, such as in-
tractable biliary constipation, jaundice, and mild
hepatitis.

Symptoms of indigestion, to aid in the digestion of fat-soluble
substances.

To support the liver’s detoxification work.

Contraindications for Cholagogues

Painful gallstones. Increased contractile activity could fur-
ther constrict the bile duct, leading to incredibly in-
tense pain.

Acute bilious colic.

Obstructive jaundice, for the same reasons as painful gall-
stones.

Acute cholecystitis, unless gallstones have been ruled out.
Cholecystitis can be caused by infection, but the cause
must be determined before a cholagogue is used.

Acute viral hepatitis.

Extremely toxic liver disorders. A cholagogue may be too
stressful for a liver that is severely damaged; but this
must be weighed against the potential benefit to be
derived.

Herbal Cholagogues

Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)
Berberis vulgaris (barberry)
Chelidonium magus (celandine)
Chelone glabra (balmony)
Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree)
Cynara scolymus (artichoke)
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)

Euonymus atropurpureus (wahoo)
Eupatorium perfolatum (boneset)
Fumaria officinalis (famitory)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Fuglans cinerea (butternut)
Leptandra virginica (black root)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Peumus boldus (boldo)

Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)

Salvia officinalis (sage)

Taraxacum officinale root (dandelion)

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. The value of cholagogues in this system
comes through general improvement of body function.
However, only when a cholagogue has additional diuretic
actions can any direct claims be made for this system.

Respiratory. Certain cholagogues are also antimicrobial
and anticatarrhal and in this way benefit the whole
system. Some are also mucous membrane tonics, in-
cluding Expatorium ‘perfoliatum, Hydrastis canadensis,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis, and Baptisia
uinctoria.

Digestive. Here we have a long list that includes Cynara
scolymus, Melissa officinalis, Berberis vulgaris, Leptandra
virginica, Iris versicolor, Peumus boldus, Juglans cinerea,
Taraxacum officinale root, Chionanthus virginicus bark,
Gentiana lutea, Chelidonium majus, Euonymus atropur-
pureus, and Dioscorea villosa.

Urinary. Cholagogues confer only indirect benefits to
this system. However, Taraxacum officinale root is par-
tially diuretic in action, although weaker than the
leaves. Expatorium perfoliatum can be an effective di-
uretic in feverish conditions.

Reproductive. Cholagogue remedies such as Hydrastis
canadensis and Berberis vulgaris have a marked action on
the inuscles of the uterus, as they are strong bitters.
Rosmarinus officinalis has a tonic and emmenagogue ac-
tion, while most bitters stimulate the womb or men-
strual activity.

Musculoskeletal. Cholagogues help in this system by
generally supporting the body’s metabolic activity,

Nervous. Because they help with assimilation, chola-
gogues have an enlivening “side effect” in the nervous
system. These remedies may actively ease debility and
depression. Rosmarinus officinalis is a nervine.

----- PAGE 513 -----
Skin. Taken internally, cholagogues often aid in cleansing
the body and so may help clear skin problems.
Examples are Iris versicolor, Taraxacum officinale,
Fumaria officinalis, Hydrastis canadensis, Mabonia aqui-
folium, and Rumex crispus. Hydrastis canadensis may also
be of use externally.

Table 25.16. Cholagogues and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Alterative Baptisia tinctoria, Chionanthus virginicus,

Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor,
Mahonia aquifolium, Rumex crispus

Anticatarrhal Baptisia tinctoria, Eupatorium perfoliatum,

Hydrastis canadensis

Anti-inflammatory Berberis vulgaris, Dioscoree villosa,
Fumaria officinalis, Hydrastis canadensis,
Iris versicolor, Rosmarinus officinalis

Antimicrobial Baptisia tinctoria, Berberis vulgaris,
Chelidonium majus, Hydrastis canadensis,
Mahonia aquifolium, Rosmarinus officinalis,

Salvia officinalis

Antispasmodic Dioscorea villosa, Leptandra virginica,

Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis

Astringent Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis

Bitter Baptisia tinctoria, Berberis vulgaris, Chelone glabra,
Cynara scolymus, Euonymus atropurpureus,
Eupatorium perfoliatum, Fumaria officinalis,
Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Juglans cinerea,
Mahonia aquifolium, Peumus boldus,

Taraxacum officinale root

Diaphoretic Berberis vulgaris, Dioscorea villosa,

Eupatorium perfoliatum, Rosmarinus officinalis

Diuretic Chionanthus virginicus, Euonymus atropurpureus,
Eupatorium perfoliatum, Fumaria officinalis,

Iris versicolor, Peumus boldus

Emmenagogue Baptisia tinctoria, Berberis vulgaris, Chelone glabra,
Cynara scolymus, Euonymus atropurpureus,
Eupatorium perfoliatum, Fumaria officinalis,
Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis cenadensis, Juglans cinerea,
Mahonia aquifolium, Peumus boldus,

Rosmarinus officinalis, Taraxacum officinale root

HERBAL ACTIONS 2 505

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Laxative All cholagogues to some degree, especially
Juglans cinerea, Taraxacum officinale root,
Rumex crispus

Nervine Rosmarinus officinalis

Tonic Chelone glabra, Chionanthus virginicus,
Eupatorium perfoliatum, Gentiana lutea,
Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor, Peumus boldus,
Rumex crispus, Taraxacum officinale root

Vulnerary Hydrastis canadensis

Table 25.17. Relative Strengths of Cholagogues

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild Chelone glabra, Chionanthus virginicus, Gynara scolymus,
Dioscorea villosa, Euonymus atropurpureus,
Eupatorium perfoliatum, Fumaria officinalis,
Leptandra virginica, Peumus boldus,
Rosmarinus officinalis, Rumex crispus, Salvia officinalis,
Taraxacum officinale root

Strong Baptisia tinctoria, Berberis vulgaris, Chelidonium majus,
Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor,

Juglans cinerea, Mahonia aquifolium

DEMULCENT

Demulcent herbs are rich in mucilage and can soothe and
protect irritated or inflamed internal tissue. When used
topically on the skin, demulcents are called emollients.

As with many other herbal actions, pharmacology
does not provide an adequate explanation for how demul-
cents work. They are rich in carbohydrate mucilage made
up of complex polysaccharide molecules. Thus, they be-
come slimy and gummy when they come in contact with
water. This physical property has a clear and direct action
on the lining of the intestines, where it soothes and re-
duces irritation by direct contact.

However, some demulcents have similar actions far
from the site of their absorption into the body—for ex-
ample, the urinary tract or lungs. Clearly, these remedies
do not work through a direct action, because the mucilage
breaks down into its constituent parts as it is absorbed,
and thus cannot soothe by direct contact with the target
tissue. However, there is no doubt that some herbs do act

----- PAGE 514 -----
506 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

as demulcents to the urinary tract or lungs—it is simply
unclear how they do so.

In general, all mucilage-containing demulcents have
the following general properties:

Reduce irritation down the whole length of the bowel.

Lessen the sensitivity of the digestive system to gastric acids
and to digestive bitters.

Help prevent diarrhea.

Reduce digestive muscle spasms that cause colic.

Ease coughing by soothing bronchial tension.

Relax painful. spasms in the bladder and urinary system, and
sometimes even in the uterus.

Herbal Demulcents

Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Avena sativa (oat) :
Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss)
Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Elymus repens (couch grass)
Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice)
Linum usitatissimum (flax)
Malva sylvestris (mallow)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)
Ulmus rubra (slippery elm)
Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

Zea mays (cornsilk)

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. Tilia platypbyllos and Aesculus hippocas-
tanum have a soothing action on blood vessels.

Respiratory. Many plants soothe inflammation in the
chest, throat and sinuses, including Inula helenium,
Symphytum officinale, Verbascum thapsus, Tussilago far-
fara, Solidago virgaurea, Althaea officinalis root,
Glycyrrhiza glabra, and Pulmonaria officinalis.

Digestive. Numerous plants can be used here, especially
Symphytum officinale, Althaea officinalis, Cetraria islandica,
Chondrus crispus, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Linum usitatissi-
mum, and Ulmus rubra. These remedies can be applied
freely whenever a soothing demulcent is indicated.

Urinary. Excellent kidney and bladder demulcents are
Elymus repens and Petroselinum crispum.

Reproductive. There are many tonic and anti-inflamma-
tory remedies for this system, but no real demulcents.

Musculoskeletal. Vulneraries and anti-inflammatories
have a more direct value in this system than demul-
cents as such. The undeniable value of Sywephytum of-
ficinale here is related to its vulnerary properties.

Nervous. Demulcents are of direct value in this system
only when applied to the skin, as in shingles. However,
skin tonics may be thought of as “surrogate” demul-
cents, especially Avena sativa.

Skin. The emollient herbs are all demulcent, including
Symphytum officinale, Althaea officinalis, Plantago major,
Stellaria media, Ulmus rubra, and Linum usitatissimum.

Table 25.18. Demulcent Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION
Anticatarrhal Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Anti-inflammatory Althaea officinalis, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Malva sylvestris, Symphytum officinale,
Tussilago farfara, Ulmus rubra, Verbascum thapsus

Antimicrobial Elymus repens
Antispasmodic Tussilago farfara, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Malva sylvestris,
Verbascum thapsus
Astringent Althaea officinalis, Malva sylvestris,
Symphytum officinale, Tussilago farfara, Ulmus rubra
Diaphoretic Verbascum thapsus
Diuretic Althaea officinalis, Elymus repens, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus, Zea mays
Expectorant Chondtus crispus, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Malva sylvestris, Symphytum officinale,
Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus
Laxative Glycyrrhiza glabra, Linum usitatissimum
Tonic Glycyrrhiza glabra, Tussilago farfara,
Verbascum thapsus, Zea mays
Vulnerary Althaea officinalis, Malva sylvestris, Symphytum
officinale, Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus
DIURETIC

Diuretics are agents that help the body rid itself of excess
fluids by increasing the kidneys’ rate of urine production.
The accumulation of excess fluids in tissues, known as
edema, is symptomatic of a wide range of heart, kidney,
liver, and other disorders. The underlying causes of such
disorders must be addressed, but diuretics may help when
used in conjunction with other herbs.

----- PAGE 515 -----
Many diuretics alter the excretion of electrolytes by
the kidneys. An electrolyte is a chemical that, when dis-
solved in a suitable solvent, forms a medium that conducts
an electric current. Electrolytes, including sodium and
potassium salts, are involved in many body processes,
such as the regulation of blood pressure, nerve impulse
transmission, and muscle contraction.

Strictly speaking, a diuretic is a remedy that increases
the secretion and elimination of urine from the body. In
the ancient traditions of herbal medicine, the term diuretic
tends to be applied more broadly to herbs that have some
sort of beneficial action on the urinary system. Thus, the
term may be used zo describe not only true diuretics, but
also urinary demulcents and anti-inflammatory remedies.
Needless to say, this can lead to confusion when selecting
remedies for a particular individual. In general, diuretics
have a vital role to play in any holistic treatment of illness,
as they help the body eliminate waste and support the
whole process of inner cleansing. Many diaphoretic herbs
act as diuretics when taken cold.

There are number of ways to categorize diuretics, but
first, an important distinction must be made between two

broad groups of plant diuretics:

¢ Plants that act as diuretics by increasing kidney blood
flow

© Plants that reduce water reabsorption in the nephrons
of the kidney

The first group of herbs includes not only diuretics
like Cytisus scoparius, but also all cardioactive and circula-
tory stimulant herbs. These increase blood flow to the
kidney through effects on the heart or other parts of the
body. Because more blood passes through the kidney,
more urine is produced. Caffeine-containing herbs, such
as tea and coffee, also have this effect.

The second group may work via many different
means, but as is often the case with medicinal plants, a
dearth of research in this area limits the value of taking an
overtly pharmacological perspective.

Types of Diuretics

As mentioned, in addition to herbs that have a straight-
forward diuretic impact, other so-called diuretics benefit
the urinary system through very different actions. We can
reduce inflammation through the use of urinary demul-
cents and anti-inflammatories and treat infection directly
with antimicrobial diuretics. Similarly, if urinary tract prob-
lems are associated with stone formation, plants known as
antilithics can help. These are discussed in chapter 17.

HERBAL ACTIONS -e 507

True Herbal Diuretics

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Agathosma betulina (buchu)
Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony)
Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Arctium lappa (burdock)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (bearberry)
Cola acuminata (kola)

Collinsonia canadensis (stoneroot)
Convallaria majalis (lily of the valley)
Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)
Cucurbita pepo (pumpkin)

Cytisus scoparius (Scotch broom)
Daucus carota (wild carrot)
Equisetum arvense (horsetail)
Eryngium maritimum (sea holly)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)
E. purpureum (gravel root)
Galium aparine (cleavers)

Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Juniperus communis (juniper)
Parietaria judaica (pellitory of the wall)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Peumus boldus (boldo)

Sambucus nigra (elder)

Serenoa repens (saw palmetto)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Zea mays (corn silk)

Table 25.19. Types of Diuretics

ACTION HERBS

Anti-inflammatory Apium graveolens, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Eupatorium purpureum, Galium aparine, Zea mays

Antilithic Collinsonia canadensis, Eupatorium purpureum

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Agathosma betulina, Juniperus communis

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Equisetum arvense,
Cytisus scoparius, Cola acuminata

Demulcent Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Collinsonia canadensis,

Zea mays

----- PAGE 516 -----
508 «<. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. As already noted, cardioactive remedies
have a diuretic effect because they increase blood flow
through the kidneys. All diuretics that help remove
water from the body can be of benefit for the cardiovas-
cular system, including Convallaria majalis, OCytisus sco-
parius, Taraxacum officinale, and Achillea millefolium. Care
should be taken to ensure that the right herb is used for
the specific condition. For example, Cytisus scoparius
should not be used in people with high blood pressure.

Respiratory. If chest congestion is related to heart prob-
lems, most of the diuretics will be of value. Remedies
with an affinity for this system include Eupatorium per-
foliatum, Galium aparine, Sambucus nigra, Achillea mille-
sfolium, and Eucalyptus spp.

Digestive. Some laxative herbs also act as diuretics. Here
we can mention Agrimonia eupatoria, Iris versicolor,
Peumus boldus, Apium graveolens, Taraxacum officinale,
and Petroselinum crispum.

Urinary. All of the remedies listed here are applicable to
this system.

Reproductive. Antiseptic diuretics often have similar ef-
fects in the reproductive system. Of special relevance is
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi. Serenoa repens is a mild diuretic.

Musculoskeletal. Because of their cleansing actions,
many diuretics help with problems of muscles and
bones. Eupatorium perfoliatum, Apium graveolens,
Achillea millefolium, and Eupatorium purpureum are a
few examples.

Nervous. Lycopus spp. is the only true diuretic that bene-
fits the nervous system directly. However, if there is
much tension, a relaxing nervine may allow the passage
of more urine.

Skin. All of the diuretics can potentially help the skin
through inner cleansing actions. Especially important
are Galum aparine, Elymus repens, and Taraxacum officinale.

Table 25.20. Diuretics and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Alterative Arctium lappa, Galium aparine, Iris versicolor
Anticatarrhal Eupatorium perfoliatum, Sambucus nigra

Anti-inflammatory Apium graveolens, Eupatorium purpureum,
Galium aparine, Iris versicolor

Achillea millefolium, Agathosma betulina,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Elymus repens,

Antimicrobial

Juniperus communis, Serenoa repens

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Cola acuminata,
Cytisus scoparius, Galium aparine, Lycopus spp.

Bitter Agrimonia eupatoria

Cardioactive Convallaria majalis, Cytisus scoparius, Lycopus spp.

Demulcent Alchemilla vulgaris, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Collinsonia canadensis, Elymus repens,
Parietaria diffusa, Zea mays

Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
Sambucus nigra, Tilia platyphyllos

Emmenagogue Achillea millefolium, Petroselinum crispum

Expectorant Petroselinum crispum, Sambucus nigra

Hepatic Iris versicolor, Peumus boldus

Hypotensive Achillea millefolium, Crataegus spp.,
Tilia platyphyllos

Laxative Iris versicolor, Eupatorium perfoliatum

Nervine Apium graveolens, Cola acuminata, Lycopus spp.,
Tilia platyphylios

Tonic Agathosma betulina, Agrimonia eupatoria,

Eupatorium perfoliatum, Galium aparine,
Taraxacum officinale \eaf

Table 25.21. Relative Strengths of Herbal Diuretics

STRENGTH — HERBS

Mild Arctium lappa, Crataegus spp., Iris versicolor,
Peumus boldus, Serenoa repens, Tilia platyphyllos

Moderate — Agrimonia eupatoria, Cola acuminata,

Collinsonia canadensis, Convallaria majalis,

Cucurbita pepo, Lycopus spp., Sambucus nigra, Zea mays
Strong Achillea millefolium, Agathosma betulina, Alchemilla

vulgaris , Apium graveolens, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi,
Cytisus scoparius, Daucus carota, Elymus repens, Galium
aparine, Eryngium maritimum, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
E, purpureum, Juniperus communis, Parietaria diffusa,
Petroselinum crispum, Taraxacum officinale

----- PAGE 517 -----
EMMENAGOGUE

The term emmenagogue is widely used to describe plants
that are used to treat conditions of the female reproduc-
tive system. It has come to imply, almost by default, any
remedy with some kind of effect on the function or tissue
of the reproductive system. Strictly speaking, however,
emmenagogues are remedies that stimulate menstrual
flow and activity.

Herbal Emmenagogues

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Artemisia abrotanum (southernwood)
A, absinthium (wormwood)

A, vulgaris (mugwort)

Calendula officinalis (calendula)
Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Marsdenia condurango (condurango)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)

M. pulegium (pennyroyal)

Mitchella repens (partridgeberry)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Phytolacca americana (poke)
Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Rubus idaeus (raspberry)

Ruta graveolens (rue)

Salvia officinalis (sage)

Tanacetum parthenium (feverfew)

T. vulgare (tansy)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Tropaeolum majus (nasturtium)
Valeriana officinalis (valerian)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)
Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

V. prunifolium (black haw)

Vitex agnus-castus (chasteberry)
Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Today, most herbals use the term emmenagogue
broadly, to denote remedies that tone and normalize the

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 509

function of the female reproductive system. Such a loose
definition has little meaning, as it obscures the specific
benefits these herbs offer. Emmenagogues provide a
whole range of distinct actions with either direct or indi-
rect benefits for the reproductive system. To clarify this
situation, the next section groups some of the more ton-
ing “emmenagogues” in terms of their main impact on
the menstrual process. Remember that all bitters have an
emmenagogue effect in the strict sense of the word.

Uterine Tonics

These are plants that have a toning, strengthening, nour-
ishing effect upon both the tissue and the function of the
female reproductive system. We do not have a good un-
derstanding of how and why they work, but this should
not belittle their remarkable therapeutic value.
Determining differential indications for these herbs is
one of the most confused areas in modern herbalism.

Uterine Tonic Herbs

Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Mitchella repens (partridge berry)

Rubus idaeus (raspberry lee f)

Herbs That Stimulate Menstruation

Of the many plants that s:imulate the menstrual process,
some also have a tonic effect. Simply triggering menstru-
ation implies nothing more than that. Of the emmena-
gogues listed here, some work through bitter stimulation
and others through localized irritation. These herbs will
also nourish the system to some degree.

True Emmenagogues
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)
Mitchella repens (partridgeberry)

Hormonal Normalizers

Many claims might be made about plants that affect hor-
monal balance, but we will limit our discussion here to
those that have an observable influence. Little endocrino-
logical research has been undertaken on these herbs, so it
is impossible to be specific about their actions. Thus, the
herbalist usually talks in terms of hormonal modulator or
hormonal normalizers.

The most important of these herbs in the European
tradition is Vitex agnus-castus. It is appropriate to describe
this plant as a normalizer, as it seems to bring the body
back to normal function no matter which female sex

----- PAGE 518 -----
510 @ TREATWENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

hormone is deficient or in excess. The uterine tonics and
bitters may have some similar effects because of their
general toning abilities, but none is as dependable as Vitex
agnus-castus.

Hormonal Normalizing Herbs
Bitter tonics

Uterine tonics

Vitex agnus-castus

Uterine Astringents

A number of herbs can reduce blood loss from the uterus,
whether related to menorrhagia (excessive menstrual
bleeding), metrorrhagia (bleeding between periods), or
organic disease, such as fibroids. How these herbs work is
an important but unanswered question. No astringent
tannin can reach uterine tissue from the gut. It is possible
that some, but not all, of these herbs have some kind of
hormonal effect. Of the many valuable remedies listed as
astringents earlier in this chapter, the most toning for the
uterus is Achillea millefolium.

Important Uterine Astringents
Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Alchemilla arvense (\ady’s mantle)
Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse)
Geranium maculatum (cranesbill)

Vinca major (periwinkle)

Uterine Demulcents

Just as with uterine astringents, it is unclear how uterine
demulcents reach the uterus, There is no way that mu-
copolysaccharides can find their way to the uterus from
the digestive system; nonetheless, there is no question
that these remedies soothe inflamed tissue in the uterus.
The most important of these herbs is Caulophyllum
thalictroides.

Nervines and Antispasmodics

There are a number of valuable remedies that impact the
complex autonomic innervation of the reproductive sys-
tem. The appropriate nervine or antispasmodic remedy
can go a long way toward correcting functional tone.

Uterine Nervines and Antispasmodic Herbs
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)

Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

Y. prunifolium (black haw)

Table 25.22. Emmenagogues and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY
ACTION

HERBS

Anticatarrhal Achillea millefolium, Hydrastis canadensis,
Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp.,
Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,

Rosmarinus officinalis, Thymus vulgaris

Anti-inflammatory Calendula officinalis, Caulophyllum thalictroides,
Lavandula spp., Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,
Tanacetum parthenium, Thymus vulgaris

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, Matricaria recutita, Rosmarinus
officinalis, Salvia officinalis, Tanacetum vulgare,

Thymus vulgaris, Tropaeolum majus

Antispasmodic Calendula officinalis, Caulophyllum thalictroides,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp., Leonurus cardiaca, Matricaria
recutita, Mentha piperita, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Thymus vulgaris, Tilia platyphyllos, Valeriana

officinalis, Verbena officinalis, Viburnum opulus

Alterative Cimicifuga racemosa

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium,

Hydrastis canadensis, Mitchella repens, Rubus idaeus,
Salvia officinalis, Thymus vulgaris, Tilia platyphyllos,
Viburnum opulus

Astringent

Carminative Artemisia abrotanum, A. absinthium,

A. vulgaris, Gentiana lutea, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp., Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita,
Petroselinum crispum, Rosmarinus officinalis,

Ruta graveolens, Salvia officinalis, Tanacetum
parthenium, T, vulgare, Thymus vulgaris,
Tropaeolum majus, Valeriana officinalis,

Zingiber officinale

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,

A, absinthium, Gentiana lutea, Hydrastis canadensis,
Marrubium vulgare, Matricaria recutita,

Ruta graveolens, Tanacetum parthenium,

T. vulgare, Tropaeolum majus

Bitter

Demulcent Trigonella foenum-graecum

Achillea millefolium, Hyssopus officinalis,
Mentha piperita, M. pulegium, Tilia platyphylios,
Zingiber officinale

Diaphoretic

Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Mitchella repens,

Petroselinum crispum, Tilia platyphyllos

----- PAGE 519 -----
SECONDARY
ACTION

HERBS

Expectorant Hyssopus officinalis, Marrubium vulgare, Petroselinum

crispum, Thymus vulgaris, Trigonella foenum-graecum

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia abrotanum,
A. absinthium, Calendula officinalis, Gentiana {utea,
Ruta graveolens, Verbena officinalis

Hepatic

Hypotensive Achillea millefolium, Lavandula spp.,

Valeriana officinalis

Laxative Hydrastis canadensis

Nervine Artemisia vulgaris, Cimicifuga racemosa, Hyssopus
officinalis, Lavandula spp., Leonurus cardiaca,
Matricaria recutita, Mentha piperita, Rosmarinus
officinalis, Tilia platyphyllos, Valeriana officinalis,

Verbena officinalis

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium,

A. vulgaris, Caulophyllum thalictroides, Gentiana
lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Leonurus cardiaca,
Matricaria recutita, Mitchella repens, Rubus idaeus,
Trigonella foenum-graecum, Tropaeolum majus,
Verbena officinalis, Vitex agnus-castus

Tonic

Achillea millefolium, Artemisia absinthium,
Calendula officinalis, Hydrastis canadensis,

Vulnerary

Matricaria recutita

Table 25.23. Relative Strengths of True
Emmenagogues

STRENGTH — HERBS

Mild Achillea millefolium, Calendula officinalis, Hyssopus
officinalis, Lavandula spp., Leonurus cardiaca, Matricaria
recutita, Mentha piperita, Petroselinum crispum, Pulsatilla
vulgaris, Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis, Thymus
vulgaris, Tilia platyphyllos, Trigonella foenum-graecum,
Valeriana officinalis, Verbena officinalis, Viburnum opulus,
V, prunifolium

Moderate Caulophyllum thalictroides, Cimicifuga racemosa,
Mentha pulegium, Mitchella repens, Rubus idaeus,
Senecio aureus, Vitex agnus-castus

Strong Artemisia abrotanum, A. absinthium, A. vulgaris, Gentiana

lutea, Hydrastis canadensis, Marrubium vulgare, Marsdenia
condurango, Ruta graveolens, Tanacetum parthenium,
T. vulgare, Tropaeolum majus, Zingiber officinale

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 511

EXPECTORANT

These are herbs that facilitate or accelerate the removal of
bronchial secretions from the bronchi and trachea.
However, this is another carelessly used term that in prac-
tice often simply means a remedy that “does something”
for the respiratory system. To further elucidate the activ-
ity and the therapeutic indications of the various remedies
known as expectorants, we may categorize them as follows.

Table 25.24. Expectorant Subcategories

TYPE OF EXPECTORANT = PROPOSED MECHANISM OF ACTION
Stimulating Alkaloid-containing
Saponin-containing
Volatile oil-containing
Relaxing Demiulcent

Anti-inflammatory (often also antimicrobial)
Antispasmodic (alkaloid-containing)
Volatile oil-containing

Stimulating Expectorants

Stimulating expectorants act in different ways to produce
the same effect. It is not always clear how specific reme-
dies work, but current thinking suggests the following
processes:

Irvitate the bronchioles to stimulate expulsion of any mate-
rial present.

Liquefy viscid sputum so that it can be cleared by coughing.
The sputum is moved upward by the fine hairs of the
ciliated epithelium lining the bronchiole tubes.
Reducing viscosity facilitates this transport.

Most stimulating expectorants contain alkaloids,
saponins, or volatile oils. However, not all chemicals in
these groups or plants that contain these constituents
have this activity.

Alkaloid-Based Action

The major component of Cephaelis ipecacuanha is an alka-
loid called emetine. It is emetic, induces nausea, and in-
creases gastric secretions. ‘This stimulation has a reflex ef-
fect on the bronchial mucosa via the gastrobronchial
vagus reflex, again leading to an increase in secretion.
Some other expectorants also work in this way and so can
cause vomiting in high doses.

Spices promote expectoration by stimulating secre-
tory activicy in the salivary and gastric glands. Examples
include anise, caraway, and. fenugreek. This action results

----- PAGE 520 -----
512 @ TREATMENI APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

in increased production and reduced viscosity of
bronchial secretions, which facilitate expectoration. This
helps explain why spicy foods are beneficial in easing
chronic bronchitis, while bland foods tend to encourage
the condition.

Saponin-Based Action

The root of Primula veris, an expectorant commonly used
in Europe, contains 5% to 10% saponin glycosides and
0.25% volatile oil. The plant is indicated for all forms of
chronic bronchitis, especially simple coughs that persist
for a long time with inadequate expectoration. The action
of the saponins here is not clearly understood. It may be
based on reflex mechanisms induced through gastric stim-
ulation, which is mediated via the vagus nerve. This effect
is much less marked than that of the alkaloid-containing
Cephaelis ipecacuanha.

Stimulating Expectorant Herbs
Bellis perennis (English daisy)
Cephaelis ipecacuanha (ipecac)
Hieracium pilosella (mouse ear)
Inula helenium (elecampane)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Myroxylon balsamum var. balsamum (Tolu balsam)
Polygala senega (Seneca snakeroot)
Populus candicans (balm of Gilead)
Primula veris (cowslip)
Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)
Urginea maritima (squill)

Viola odorata (sweet violet)

Relaxing Expectorants

The relaxing expectorants seem also to act by reflex, but
here the reflex action works to soothe bronchial spasm
and loosen mucus secretions. These remedies help to pro-
duce a thinner mucus that is easier to expel, allowing the
more viscous mucus to move and thus be eliminated. This
makes relaxing expectorants useful for dry, irritating
coughs. This action is similar in some respects to that of
demulcents, and both actions owe much to their content
of mucilage and, occasionally, volatile oils.

Relaxing Expectorant Herbs
Althaea officinalis (marshmallow)
Asclepias tuberosa (pleurisy root)
Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss)
Chondrus crispus (Irish moss)
Drosera rotundifolia (sundew)
Glycyrrhiza glabra (licorice)

Grindelia camporum (gumweed)
Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)
Lobelia inflata (lobelia)

Pimpinella anisum (aniseed)
Prunus serotina (wild cherry bark)
Pulmonaria officinalis (lungwort)
Symphytum officinale (comfrey)
Symplocarpus foetidus (skunk cabbage)
Thuja occidentalis (thuja)

Thymus vulgaris (thyme)

Tussilago farfara (coltsfoot)
Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Amphoteric Remedies

A third group of expectorants is especially valuable in any
broader treatment for the lungs. These may work either
as relaxing or as stimulating expectorants. They have
been called amphoteric remedies, after a phenomenon in
chemistry in which the same molecule can act as either an
acid or an alkali.

Amphoteric Expectorant Herbs
Allium sativum (garlic)

Sambucus nigra (elder)

Verbascum thapsus (mullein)

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. A congestive problem in the lungs can
eventually have a deleterious effect upon the heart, so,
by stretching a point somewhat, we could say that res-
piratory remedies may help the heart.

Respiratory. Obviously, all of the expectorants are rele-
vant here.

Digestive. All of the stimulating expectorants may act as
emetics if taken in too high a dose (for example,
Cephaelis ipecacuanha), while the relaxing expectorants
may be either demulcents (Symphytum officinale) or
carmunatives (Pimpinella anisum).

Urinary. Some expectorants also soothe the urinary
system—for example, cornsilk (Zea mays). Expectorants
aid the excretion of waste through the lungs, and may
also have some effect upon other eliminative functions.

Reproductive. Expectorant herbs that are also antispas-
modic will help with menstrual cramps (for example,
Lobelia inflata), although the alkaloid-rich or saponin-
containing emetics should be avoided during pregnancy.
Hydrastis canadensis, which can work as an expectorant
while toning the mucous membranes of the respiratory
system, may also be of value in the reproductive tract.

----- PAGE 521 -----
Musculoskeletal. Stimulating expectorants can be used
in liniments that increase circulation to the muscles
and thus ease aches and pains. Examples include
Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae and Thymus vulgaris.
Lobelia inflata is a good muscle relaxant.

Nervous. Primula veris, Verbena officinalis, Thymus vul-
garis, and Hyssopus officinalis can all have relaxing
nervine actions.

Skin. By supporting respiration and thus the whole of a
person’s health, these remedies may help the skin in a
broad holistic way. Expectorants that may be used in-
ternally or externally for the skin include Populus can-
dicans, Symphytum officinale, Sambucus nigra, Inula hele-
nium, Allium sativum, and Hydrastis canadensis.

Table 25.25. Expectorant Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Alterative Sanguinaria canadensis, Thuja occidentalis,
Verbascum thapsus

Anticatarrhal Althaea officinalis, Cetraria islandica, Chondrus

crispus, Hyssopus officinalis, Sambucus nigra, Thymus
vulgaris, Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Anti-inflammatory Althaea officinalis, Asclepias tuberosa, Cetraria
islandica, Chondrus crispus, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Hydrastis canadensis, Hyssopus officinalis, Sambucus
nigra, Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Antimicrobial Allium sativum, Carum carvi, Eucalyptus spp., Inula
helenium, Ligusticum porteri, Myroxylon balsamum
var. balsamum, Origanum majorana, Pimpinella
anisum, Plantago major, Populus candicans, Ruta

&raveolens, Thymus vulgaris

Antispasmodic Allium sativum, Angelica archangelica, Asclepias
tuberosa, Carum carvi, Daucus carota, Drosera
rotundifolia, Foeniculum vulgare, Glycyrrhiza glabra,
Grindelia camporum, Hyssopus officinalis, Lobelia
inflata, Lycopus spp., Marrubium vulgare, Nepeta
cataria, Petroselinum crispum, Pimpinella anisum,
Prunus serotina, Sanguinaria canadensis,
Symplocarpus foetidus, Thymus vulgaris, Trigonella
foenum-graecum, Tussilago farfara, Verbascum thapsus

Astringent Glechoma hederacea, Hydrastis canadensis,
Inula helenium, Plantago major, Prunus serotina,
Symphytum officinale, Thuja occidentalis,

Thymus vulgaris, Verbascum thapsus

HERBAL ACTIONS e513

SECONDARY HERBS.

ACTION

Bitter Hydrastis canadensis, Marrubium vulgare,
Prunus serotina

Carminative Asclepias tuberosa, Hyssopus officinalis,
Pimpinella anisum, Thymus vulgaris

Demulcent Cetraria islendica, Chondrus crispus,
Glycyrrhiza glabra, Symphytum officinale root,
Tussilago ferfara, Verbascum thapsus

Diaphoretic Allium sativum, Asclepias tuberosa,
Hyssopus officinalis, inula helenium, Polygala senega,
Sambucus nigra flower, Symplocarpus foetidus

Diuretic Glechoma hederacea, Solidago virgaurea,
Tussilago farfara

Emmenagogue Hyssopus officinalis, Marrubium vulgare,
Petroselinum crispum, Thymus vulgaris,
Trigonella foenum-graecum

Nervine Hyssopus officinalis, Lobelia inflata, Prunus serotina,
Verbena officinalis

Vulnerary Marrubium vulgare, Populus candicans,
Symphytum officinale root, Verbascum thapsus

HEPATIC

Hepatics are herbal remedies that aid the work of the liver
in a range of ways. Traditionally, they were considered to
tone, strengthen, and, in some cases, increase the flow of
bile. In a broad holistic approach to health, hepatics are of
great importance because of the fundamental role the
liver plays in the working of the body.

There is no single or simple answer as to how hepat-
ics work. Bitters and cholagogues all act as hepatics, but
so do a whole array of other remedies that do not have
those specific actions. Hepatics are the epitome of the
herbal remedy that does wonders for the body without a
clearly defined mechanism of action. The lack of bio-
chemical knowledge about the way in which they work
does not keep them from working.

For a more detailed look at the phytotherapeutic ap-
proach to liver disease, please see chapter 13. The funda-
mentally important antihepatotoxic action of some hep-
atic remedies, including Silybum marianum, is discussed in
chapter 9.

----- PAGE 522 -----
514 @ TREATMENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Hepatic Herbs

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Agrimonia eupatoria (agrimony)
Aloe vera (aloe)

Apium graveolens (celery seed)
Armoracia rusticana (horseradish)
Artemisia absinthium (wormwood)
Baptisia tinctoria (wild indigo)
Berberis vulgaris (barberry)
Centaurium erythraea (centaury)
Chelone glabra (balmony)
Chionanthus virginicus (fringetree)
Curcuma longa (turmeric)

Cynara scolymus (artichoke)
Dioscorea villosa (wild yam)
Euonymus atropurpureus (wahoo)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)
Fumaria officinalis (fumitory)
Galium aparine (cleavers)
Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Hydrastis canadensis (goldenseal)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Inula helenium (e\ecampane)

Iris versicolor (blue flag)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Leptandra virginica (black root)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon grape)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Menyanthes trifoliata (bogbean)
Peumus boldus (boldo)

Rhamnus cathartica (buckthorn)

R. ‘purshiana (cascara sagrada)
Rumex crispus (yellow dock)
Silybum marianum (milk thistle)
Taraxacum officinale (dandelion)
Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. The value of hepatics in this system
comes through general improvement of body func-
tioning. Only when a hepatic also has diuretic action
can any direct claims be made.

Respiratory. Certain hepatics are also antimicrobial and
anticatarrhal, which will benefit the respiratory system.
Also, mucous membrane tonics help here, including
herbs such as Eupatorium perfoliatum, Hydrastis
canadensis, Rosmarinus officinalis, Salvia officinalis, and
Baptisia tinctoria.

Digestive. Here we have a long list, which includes Agri-
monia eupatoria, Chelone glabra, Berberis vulgaris,

Leptandra virginica, Iris versicolor, Peumus boldus, Fuglans
cinerea, Taraxacum officinale root, Chionanthus virginicus
bark, Gentiana lutea, Euonymus atropurpureus, and
Dioscorea villosa.

Urinary. Hepatics confer only an indirect benefit to this
system. However, Taraxacum officinale root is partially
diuretic in action, although weaker than the leaves.
Eupatorium ‘perfoliatum can be a marked diuretic in
feverish conditions.

Reproductive. Hepatic plants such as Hydrastis canaden-
sis and Berberis vulgaris have a pronounced action on
the muscles of the uterus. Rosmarinus officinalis is a
tonic and emmenagogue, and most bitters will also
stimulate the uterus or menstrual activity.

Musculoskeletal. Hepatics help in this system by gener-
ally supporting the body’s metabolic activity.

Nervous, Because hepatics support metabolism in gen-
eral, they also have an enlivening “side effect” in the
nervous system. They are appropriate for use in the
treatment of debility and depression.

Skin. Taken internally, hepatic remedies often aid in
cleansing and so clear skin problems. Examples are Iris
versicolor, Taraxacum officinale, Fumaria officinalis,
Hydrastis canadensis, Mahonia aquifolium, and Rumex
crispus. Hydrastis canadensis may also be helpful in cer-
tain conditions when used externally.

Table 25.26. Hepatic Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Alterative Agrimonia eupatoria, Chionanthus virginicus,
Fumaria officinalis, Galium aparine, Iris versicolor,
Mahonia aquifolium, Rumex crispus,
Taraxacum officinale, Zanthoxylum americanum

Anticatarrhal Baptisia tinctoria, Hydrastis canadensis,

Mahonia aquifolium

Anti-inflammatory Apium graveolens, Artemisia absinthium,
Dioscorea villosa, Galium aparine, Iris versicolor,
Menyanthes trifoliata

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Baptisia tinctoria,
Berberis vulgaris, Inula helenium

anispasmodic —_-Dioscorea villosa, Foeniculum vulgare,
Hyssopus officinalis, Leonurus cardiaca,
Leptandra virginica, Melissa officinalis

Astringent Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria,

Berberis vulgaris, Galium aparine, Hydrastis canadensis

----- PAGE 523 -----
HERBAL ACTIONS @ 515

SECONDARY
ACTION

HERBS

Bitter Agrimonia eupatoria, Artemisia absinthium, Berberis
vulgaris, Centaurium erythraea, Gentiana lutea,
Hydrastis canadensis, Menyanthes trifoliata

Carminative Apium graveolens, Armoracia rusticana, Artemisia
absinthium, Foeniculum vulgare, Hyssopus officinalis,

Melissa officinalis, Zanthoxylum americanum

Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Baptisia tinctoria, Berberis
vulgaris, Hyssopus officinalis, Inula helenium,
Leptandra virginica, Melissa officinalis,

Zanthoxylum americanum

Achillea millefolium, Agrimonia eupatoria, Armoracia
rusticana, Chionanthus virginicus, Euonymus
atropurpureus, Fumaria officinalis, Galium aparine,
Iris versicolor, Menyanthes trifoliata, Peumus boldus

Diuretic

Emmenagogue Artemisia absinthium, Berberis vulgaris,

Leonurus cardiaca

Expectorant Foeniculum vulgare. Hysscpus officinalis,

Inula helenium

Hypotensive Achillea millefolium

Laxative Armoracia rusticana, Chelone glabra,
Chionanthus virginicus, Euonymus atropurpureus,
Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor,
Mahonia aquifolium, Rumex crispus,

Taraxacum officinale

Nervine Apium graveolens, Hyssopus officinalis,

Leonurus cardiaca, Melissa officinalis

Tonic Agrimonia eupatoria, Chelone glabra,
Chionanthus virginicus, Galium aparine,
Hydrastis canadensis, Mahonia aquifolium,
Taraxacum officinale, Zanthoxylum americanum

Vulnerary Agrimonia eupatoria, Hydrastis canadensis

Table 25.27. Relative Strengths of Hepatics
STRENGTH — HERBS

Mild Achillea millefolium, Apium graveolens, Baptisia tinctoria,
Dioscorea villosa, Foeniculum vulgare, Fumaria officinalis,
Galium aparine, Hyssopus officinalis, Inula helenium,
Leonurus cardiaca, Melissa officinalis,
Zanthoxylum americanum

STRENGTH HERBS

Moderate — Agrimonia eupatoria, Armoracia rusticana.

Artemisia absinthium, Berberis vulgaris,

Centaurium erythraea, Chelone glabra,

Chionanthus virginicus, Cynara scolymus,

Eyonymus atropurpureus, Gentiana lutea,

Hydrastis canadensis, Iris versicolor, Leptandra virginica,
Mahonia aquifolium, Menyanthes trifoliata,

Peumus boldus, Rhamnus purshiana, Rumex crispus,

Silybum marianum, Taraxacum officinale

HYPNOTIC

Hypnotics are nervine remedies that help induce a deep
and healing state of sleep. These herbs vary from mild,
volatile oil-containing herbs that ease psychological ten-
sions and have gentle muscle relaxant properties to pow-
erful remedies containing strong alkaloids that work di-
rectly on the central nervous system to induce sleep.

Hypnotic herbs should always be used within the
context of a holistic approach to sleep problems—that is,
one that embraces relaxation techniques, nutrition, and
lifestyle in general. For a detailed approach to the thera-
peutic use of these herbs, please see chapter 16.

Hypnotic Herbs

Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)
Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Humutus lupulus (hops)

Lactuca virosa (wild lettuce)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)
Phytolacca americana (poke)

Piscidia erythrina Jamaica dogwood)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)
Stachys officinalis (wood betony)
Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Body System Affinities
It is safe to say that all of the hypnotic remedies can help
the whole body in that sleep is so vital to overall health.

Cardiovascular. Here we can mention Leonurus cardiaca,
Tilia platypbyllos, and Melissa officinalis, Notice that
these herbs are all in the “milder” category. Viscum
album can help but must be used with care.

----- PAGE 524 -----
516 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

Respiratory. All of the hypnotics can help as antispas-
modics in conditions such as asthma if used at the right
dosage. Lactuca virosa eases irritable coughs.

Digestive. The relaxing nervines and carminatives are
important, of which we can mention Matricaria recu-
tita, Verbena officinalis, Melissa officinalis, Humulus
lupulus, and Valeriana officinalis. Antispasmodics will
help with intestinal colic—for example, Humulus
lupulus, Piscidia erythrina, Passiflora incarnata, and
Valeriana officinalis,

Urinary. Hypnotics are important here when used as
muscle relaxants.

Reproductive. The same comment made for the urinary
system holds true here.

Musculoskeletal. All hypnotics help reduce muscle ten-
sion and even the pain associated with problems in this
system. They may be used internally or as lotions.
Especially important are Piscidia erythrina and
Valeriana officinalis.

Nervous. All these remedies work on the nervous system.

Skin. The value of hypnotics here is to ensure that the
body has a good, recuperative rest each night.

Table 25.28. Relative Strengths of Hypnotic Herbs

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild Artemisia vulgaris, Stachys officinalis, Leonurus cardiaca,
Matricaria recutita, Tilia platyphyllos

Moderate Eschscholzia californica, Pulsatilla vulgaris,
Scutellaria lateriflora, Verbena officinalis

Strong Humulus luputlus, Lactuca virosa, Piscidia erythrina,
Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis

HYPOTENSIVE

Hypotensive remedies reduce elevated blood pressure,
tending to normalize both systolic and diastolic pressure.
A number of different mechanisms may be involved; these
are explored in more depth in chapter 9. Please see chap-
ter 14 for details on the therapeutic uses of these herbs.

Hypotensive Herbs

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)

Allium cepa (onion)

A, sativum (garlic)

Caulophyllum thalictroides (blue cohosh)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Crataegus spp. (hawthorn)

Eleutherococcus senticosus (Siberian ginseng)
Fagopyrum esculentum (buckwheat)
Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)
Petroselinum crispum (parsley)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Trigonella foenum-graecum (fenugreek)
Urtica dioica (nettles)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

Vi prunifolium (black haw)

Viscum album (mistletoe)

Table 25.29, Hypotensive Herbs and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Adaptogen Eleutherococcus senticosus

Alterative Allium sativum, Cimicifuga racemosa, Urtica dioica
Anticatarrhal Allium cepa, A, sativum,

Trigonella foenum-graecum

Anti-inflammatory Caulophyllum thalictroides, Cimicifuga racemosa,

Valeriana officinalis
Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum, A. cepa

Antispasmodic Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum

Astringent Caulophyllum thalictroides, Cimicifuga racemosa,
Leonurus cardiaca, Passiflora incarnata,
Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia platyphyllos,
Urtica dioica, Valeriana officinalis,
Verbena officinalis, Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium
Bitter Achillea millefolium
Cardiotonic Allium sativum, Crataegus spp., Leonurus cardiaca
Carminative Petroselinum crispum, Valeriana officinalis
Cholagogue Allium sativum, Verbena officinalis
Demulcent Trigonella foenum-graecum
Diaphoretic Achillea millefolium, Allium cepa, A. sativum,
Tilia platyphyllos, Verbena officinalis
Diuretic Achillea millefolium, Petroselinum crispum,

Tilia platyphyllos, Urtica dioica

----- PAGE 525 -----
SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Emmenagogue Caulophyllum thalictroides, Cimicifuga racemosa,
Leonurus cardiaca, Petroselinum crispum

Expectorant Allium cepa, A. sativum, Petroselinum crispum,
Trigonella foenum-graecura

Galactagogue Trigonella foenum-graecurn

Hepatic Allium cepa, Verbena officinalis

Laxative Verbena officinalis

Nervine Cimicifuga racemosa, Leonurus cardiaca,
Passiflora incarnata, Scutellaria lateriflora,
Tilia platyphylios, Valeriana officinalis,
Verbena officinalis, Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium,
Viscum album

Vulnerary Allium cepa, Trigonella foenum-graecum

Table 25.30. Relative Strengths of Hypotensive
Herbs

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild Allium cepa, Caulophyllum thalictroides,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Urtica dioica, Verbena officinalis

Moderate — Achillea millefolium, Eleutherocaccus senticosus,
Leonurus cardiaca, Passiflora incarnata,
Petroselinum crispum, Scutellaria lateriflora,

Valeriana officinalis, Viburnum prunifolium

Allium sativum, Crataegus spp., Tilia platyphyllos,
Trigonella foenum-graecum, Viburnum opulus,
Viscum album

Strong

NERVINE

A nervine is a plant remedy with sorne kind of beneficial
effect upon the nervous system. This makes the word
nervine another catchall term, and in order to study them
properly, it is helpful to sort them into a number of cate-
gories. It may be superfluous to point this out, but any
successful herbal treatment of nervous system problems
must involve the whole body, heart and mind, not simply
the signs of agitation and worry. Of course, herbs can re-
duce agitation greatly, but the whole system must be
strengthened in the face of the storm!

HERBAL ACTIONS .@ 517

Table 25.31. Primary Nervine Categories

NERVINE ACTION — HERBAL EXAMPLES

Tonic Avena sativa, Hypericum perforatum,
Scutellaria lateriflora

Relaxant Piper metiysticum, Scutellaria lateriflora,
Valeriana officinalis, Verbena officinalis

Stimulant Coffea arabica, Camellia sinensis, Cola acuminata,
Paullinia cupana

Hypnotic Humulus lupulus, Passiflora incarnata,

Valeriana officinalis

Antispasmodic Piper metitysticum, Valeriana officinalis,

Viburnum opulus
Antidepressant Artemisia vulgaris, Hypericum perforatum
Adaptogen Panax spp., Eleutherococcus senticosus
Analgesic Piscidia erythrina, Gelsemium sempervirens

Nervine Tonics

Perhaps the most important contribution herbs can make
to the whole field of neurology lies in their ability to
strengthen and nourish the nervous system. In cases of
shock, stress, and nervous debility, nervine tonics
strengthen and restore tissues directly. They can con-
tribute to the healing of damaged nervous tissue, whether
due to a pathological prccess or to physical trauma. This
invaluable group of tonic remedies is best exemplified by
Avena sativa, which has no additional relaxing or stimu-
lating effects. Nervine tonics that also have a relaxing effect
are Scutellaria lateriflora and Hypericum perforatum.

Nervine Relaxants
This group of nervines are most important in times of
stress and confusion, as they can alleviate many of the ac-
companying symptoms. “They should always be used in a
broad holistic way, not simply to tranquilize. Too much
tranquilizing, even with herbal medication, can in time
deplete and weigh heavily on the whole nervous system.

As illustrated in table 25.32, many nervine relaxants
can be selected on the basis of their secondary actions to
treat additional problems. This is one of the great bene-
fits of using herbal remedies to help with stress and anxi-
ety problems. The physical symptoms that can so often
accompany the dis-ease of anxiety may be treated with
herbs that work on the anxiety itself.

In addition to herbs that work directly on the nervous

----- PAGE 526 -----
518 :<. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

system, antispasmodic herbs—those that affect the pe-
ripheral nerves and the muscle tissue—may have an indi-
rect relaxing action on the whole system. Putting the
physical body at ease promotes ease in the psyche. Many
nervine relaxants have this antispasmodic action. Also see
Hypnotics, which at lower dosages also have a relaxing
action on the mind and body.

Nervine Relaxants

Artemisia vulgaris (mugwort)

Ballota nigra (black horehound)
Borago officinalis (borage)
Chamaemelum nobile (Roman chamomile)
Cimicifuga racemosa (black cohosh)
Eschscholzia californica (California poppy)
Humuilus lupulus (hops)

Hypericum perforatum (St. John’s wort)
Hyssopus officinalis (hyssop)

Lactuca virosa (wild lettuce)

Lavandula spp. (lavender)

Leonurus cardiaca (motherwort)
Lobelia inflata (lobelia)

Matricaria recutita (chamomile)
Melissa officinalis (lemon balm)
Passiflora incarnata (passionflower)
Piper methysticum (kava)

Piscidia erythrina Jamaica dogwood)
Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasqueflower)
Scutellaria lateriflora (skullcap)

Stachys betonica (wood betony)

Tilia platyphyllos (linden)

Trifolium pratense (red clover)

Turnera diffusa (damiana)

Valeriana officinalis (valerian)

Verbena officinalis (vervain)

Viburnum opulus (cramp bark)

VY. prunifolium (black haw)

Body System Affinities

Cardiovascular. Melissa officinalis, Tila platyphyllos, and
Leonurus cardiaca are all mild sedatives that are helpful
to the cardiovascular system. However, most remedies
that lessen overactivity of the nervous system will also
aid the heart and have a positive impact on circulatory
conditions, such as high blood pressure.

Respiratory. Most sedatives will help with problems ac-
companied by chest tension, such as asthma, but
specifically, we can mention Cimicifuga racemosa,
Lactuca virosa, Leonurus cardiaca, Lobelia inflata, and

Lycopus spp.

Digestive. All of the antispasmodic remedies may be of
value here in easing spasms or colic. However, seda-
tives that actively aid digestion include mild herbs such
as Melissa officinalis, Matricaria recutita, and Lavandula
spp., plus the stronger herbs Humulus lupulus and
Valeriana officinalis.

Urinary. Serenva repens is a gentle sedative that also works
on the urinary system.

Reproductive. Cimicifuga racemosa, Caulophyllum thalic-
troides, Viburnum spp., Leonurus cardiaca, Serenoa repens,
and Lactuca virosa all have an affinity for this system.

Musculoskeletal. All sedative remedies will help ease
muscular tension and pain in this complex system.
Remedies to bear in mind are Cimicifuga racemosa, Fucus
vesiculosus, Viburnum prunifolium, and Dioscorea villosa.

Nervous. All of the nervine remedies are relevant here.

Skin. All nervines may help the skin in an indirect way,
but the following have a good reputation for skin con-
ditions: Trifolium pratense, Hypericum perforatum, and
Cimicifuga racemosa.

Table 25.32. Nervine Relaxants and Secondary
Actions

SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Alterative Cimicifuga racemosa, Trifolium pratense
Analgesic Hypericum perforatum, Lactuca virosa, Matricaria

recutita, Passiflora incarnata, Piscidia erythrina

Anticatarrhal Hyssopus officinalis, Matricaria recutita,

Tilia platyphyllos

Anti-inflammatory Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,
Tilia platyphyllos

Humulus lupulus, Matricaria recutita,
Phytolacca americana

Antimicrobial

Cimicifuga racemosa, Humulus lupulus,
Hypericum perforatum, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp. Leonurus cardiaca, Lobelia inflata,
Matricaria recutita, Melissa officinalis,

Passiflora incarnata, Phytolacca americana,

Piper methysticum, Scutellaria lateriflora,

Tilia platyphyllos, Valeriana officinalis,

Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

Antispasmodic

Ballota nigra, Humulus lupulus,
Hypericum perforatum, Tilia platyphyltos,
Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

Astringent

----- PAGE 527 -----
SECONDARY HERBS

ACTION

Bitter Artemisia vulgaris, Humutus luputus,
Matricaria recutita

Carminative Artemisia vulgaris, Humulus luputus,
Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula spp.,
Leonurus cardiaca, Matricaria recutita,
Melissa officinalis, Valeriana officinalis

Diaphoretic Cimicifuga racemosa, Hyssopus officinalis,
Tilia platyphyllos, Verbena officinalis

Diuretic Tilia platyphyllos

Ermmenagogue Artemisia vulgaris, Ballota nigra,
Cimicifuga racemosa, Leonurus cardiaca

Expectorant Hyssopus officinalis, Lobelia inflata,
Marrubium vulgare

Hepatic Verbena officinalis

Hypnotic Eschscholzia californica, Humutus lupulus,
Lactuca virosa, Matricaria recutita,
Passiflora incarnata, Valeriana officinalis

Hypotensive Leonurus cardiaca, Passiflora incarnata,
Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia platyphyllos,
Valeriana officinalis

Vulnerary Borago officinalis, Hypericum perforatum,

Matricaria recutita

Table 25.33. Relative Strengths of Relaxing Nervines

STRENGTH HERBS

Mild Ballota nigra, Betonica officinalis, Borago officinalis,
Chamaemelum nobile, Hyssopus officinalis,
Lavandula spp., Trifolium pratense, Melissa officinalis,
Viburnum opulus, V. prunifolium

Moderate Artemisia vulgaris, Cimicifuga racemosa,

Hypericum perforatum, Leonurus cardiaca, Lobelia inflata,
Matricaria recutita, Pulsatilla vulgaris,

Scutellaria lateriflora, Tilia platyphyllos, Turnera diffusa,

Verbena officinalis

Strong Eschscholzia californica, Humulus luputlus, Lactuca virosa,

Passiflora incarnata, Piscidia erytirina, Valeriana officinalis

HErsal ACTIONS @ 519

Nervine Stimulants
Direct stimulation of nervous tissue is not often needed in
our hyperactive modern lives. In most cases, it is more ap-
propriate to stimulate the body’s innate vitality with the
help of nervine or bitter tonics. These herbs work to aug-
ment bodily harmony, and thus have a much deeper and
longer-lasting effect than nervine stimulants. In the 19th
century, herbalists placed much more emphasis upon stim-
ulant herbs. It is, perhaps, a sign of our times that the
world now supplies us with more than enough stimulation.

When direct nervire stimulation is indicated, the
best herb to use is Cola acuminata, although Paullinia cu-
pana, Coffea arabica, ex paraguayensis, and Camellia sinen-
sis may also be used. One problem with these commonly
used stimulants is their side effects; they are themselves
implicated in the development of certain minor psycho-
logical problems, such as anxiety and tension.

Some of the volatile oil-rich herbs are also valuable
stimulants. Some of the best and most common are
Rosmarinus officinalis and Mentha piperita.

STIMULANT

The very word stimulant has different connotations, de-
pending upon one’s assumptions. In herbal medicine, the
term is used to describe an action that quickens and en-
livens the physiological activity of the body. All physio-
logical process can be stimulated to some degree.
Consider stimulant laxatives, circulatory stimulants, and
bitters, which often act as stimulants.

On the other hand, stimulating physiological pro-
cesses is not necessarily appropriate. The individual’s
needs and his or her unicue state of health must be taken
into account. Debility may be related not only to too lit-
tle activity in the body, but also to too much. This is a
problem of differential diagnosis that calls for skill,
knowledge, and a certain amount of intuition.

Tn some cases, specific stimulant effects are related to
the presence of alkaloids in the plant. Caffeine, perhaps
the best known and most widely used of these alkaloids, is
present in such herbs as Coffea arabica, Camellia sinensis,
Ilex paraguayensis, and Cola acuminata, as well as in choco-
late (Theobroma cacao). The coca tree (Erythroxylum coca),
the source of the drug cocaine, contains other stimulating
alkaloids. Whenever stimulants of this nature are used,

they should be combined with nervine tonics or relaxants
to balance out any overst)mulation.

----- PAGE 528 -----
520 «<<. TREATMEN?E APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Herbal Stimulants

Achillea millefolium (yarrow)
Allium sativum (garlic)

Angelica archangelica (angelica)
Armoracia rusticana (horseradish)
Artemisia abrotanum (southernwood)
A. absinthium (wormwood)

A. vulgaris (mugwort)

Brassica spp. (mustard)

Capsicum annuum (cayenne)
Carum carvi (caraway)

Cephaelis ipecacuanha (ipecac)
Chelidonium majus (celandine)
Cola acuminata (kola)

Elettaria cardamomum (cardamom)
Eupatorium perfoliatum (boneset)
E. purpureum (gravel root)
Foeniculum vulgare (fennel)

Fucus vesiculosus (kelp)

Gentiana lutea (gentian)

Inula helenium (elecampane)
Juniperus communis (juniper)
Marrubium vulgare (horehound)
Marsdenia condurango (condurango)
Mentha piperita (peppermint)
Myrica cerifera (bayberry)

Panax spp. (ginseng)

Polygala senega (Seneca snakeroot)
Rhamnus cathartica (buckthorn)

R. pursbiana (cascara sagrada)
Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary)
Ruta graveolens (rue)

Sanguinaria canadensis (bloodroot)
Senna alexandrina (senna)
Tanacetum vulgare (tansy)

Zanthoxylum americanum (prickly ash)

Zingiber officinale (ginger)

Body System Affinities

Digestive. As already discussed, bitters may be consid-
ered stimulants. Note Chelone glabra, Myrica cerifera,
Carum carvi, Elettaria cardamomum, Cinnamomum spp.,
Taraxacum officinale root, Alpina galanga, Allium
sativum, Gentiana lutea, Armoracia rusticana, Brassica
spp., Mentha piperita, Rosmarinus officinalis, Ruta grave-
olens, and Artemisia absinthium.

Urinary. Relevant stimulants with diuretic properties in-
clude Eucalyptus spp., Eupatorium purpureum, Juniperus
communis, and Achillea millefolium.

Reproductive. Stimulants for this system usually act as
emmenagogues, and so should not be used during
pregnancy. Important examples include Mentha
pulegium, Ruta graveolens, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Artemisia abrotanum, Tanacetum vulgare, and Artemisia
absinthium.

Musculoskeletal. The vital role of both Zingiber officinale
and Capsicum annuum are reinforced here as stimulants
of peripheral circulation. We can add Brassica spp. and
Armoracia rusticana, In general, rubefacient remedies
are stimulants.

Nervous. Nervous system stimulants include Cola acumi-
nata, Paullinia cupana, Coffea arabica, Camellia sinensis,
and Hex paraguayensis.

Skin. Rubefacients are stimulants, promoting local circu-
lation to the area of skin where they are applied.
Vulneraries stimulate healing, but are not stimulants as
such,

Table 25.34. Stimulant Herbs and Secondary Actions

SECONDARY HERBS
ACTION

Anti-inflammatory Mentha piperita

Antimicrobial Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum,
Artemisia abrotanum, Capsicum annuum,
Inula helenium, Mentha piperita,

Cardiovascular. Stimulant actions must be used with
care in people with cardiovascular problems, but if ap-
plied with knowledge, appropriate stimulation can
often aid and support an ailing heart. Myrica cerifera,
Panax spp., Zanthoxylum americanum, Rosmarinus offic-
inalis, Ruta graveolens, Artemisia absinthium, and
Achillea millefolium may be helpful here.

Respiratory. The diaphoretic chest remedies can be con-
sidered stimulant in action. Specifics include Angelica
archangelica, Eucalyptus spp., Allium sativum, Armoracia
rusticana, Brassica spp., Glechoma hederacea, Mentha
piperita, Salvia officinalis, Marrubium vulgare, and
Achillea millefolium.

Rosmarinus officinalis, Sanguinaria canadensis

Astringent Marrubium vulgare, Carum carvi

Bitter Artemisia abrotanum, A, absinthium, A. vulgaris,

Gentiana lutea, Marrubium vulgare, Ruta graveolens,
Tanacetum vulgare

Carminative Angelica archangelica, Artemisia absinthium,

Capsicum annuum, Carum carvi,

Flettaria cardamomum, Foeniculum vulgare,
Mentha piperita, Rosmarinus officinalis,
Tanacetum vulgare, Zingiber officinale

----- PAGE 529 -----
SECONDARY
ACTION

Diaphoretic

Diuretic

Emmenagogue

Expectorant

Hepatic
Hypotensive

Vulnerary

HERBS

Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum,

Angelica archangelica, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
E. purpureum, Mentha piperita, Polygala senega,
Tanacetum vulgare, Zingiber officinale

Achillea millefolium, Angelica archangelica,
Brassica spp., Daucus carota, Eupatorium perfoliatum,
£ purpureum

Artemisia abrotanum, A. absinthium, A. vulgaris,
Carum carvi, Marrubium vulgare, Ruta graveolens,
Tanacetum vulgare

Achillea millefolium, Angelica archangelica,
Carum carvi, Foeniculum vulgare, Inula helenium,
Marrubium vulgare, Polygala senega,

Sanguinaria canadensis

Artemisia abrotanum, A. vulgaris, Gentiana lutea
Achillea millefolium, Allium sativum

Achillea millefolium, Capsicum annuum

HERBAL ACTIONS @ 521

References

1. Wagner H, Norr H, Winterhoff H. Plant adaptogens.
Phytomedicine 1994, 1:63-76.

2. Carson CF, Riley TV. The antimicrobial activity of tea

tree oil. The Medical Journal of Australia 1994, 160:236.

3. Howell AB, Vorsa N, Der Maderosian A, Foo LY.
Inhibition of the adherence of P-fimbriated Esherichia
coli to uroepithelial-vell surfaces by proanthocyanidin ex-
tracts from cranberries. The New England Journal of
Medicine 1998; 339:10854 [letter].

----- PAGE 530 -----
n understanding of the herbal materia medica is
A basis of herbal medicine. As pointed out in

chapter 1, the list of herbs that could potentially
be included here is many thousands long! However, the
materia medica that follows reflects my experience and
training, and so emphasizes the European and North
American herbs most often encountered in Western
herbal medicine. The fact that most of the herbs used in
ayurveda or traditional Chinese medicine are not in-
cluded is in no way a rejection of their value, but simply a
reflection of my focus on Western herbalism.

MATERIA MEDICA OUTLINE

Each materia medica entry follows the same general for-
mat, explained here.

Latin binomial
Common name
Taxonomic family

Other Names or Related Species: Many herbs have nu-
merous regional names. Alternative common names com-
monly used in North American herbalism are included
under this heading. If there are nomenclature issues, such
as recent binomial changes, they are also noted here.
Other species commonly used medicinally are listed as
Related Species.

Part Used: This entry lists the part or parts of the herb
used medicinally.

Constituents: The lists provided here represent a com-
pilation of relevant phytochemical research on the par-
ticular remedy. This is not a comprehensive constituent
listing, as each plant contains many hundreds of thou-
sands of distinct chemicals, both organic and inorganic.
Thus, I have listed only the most relevant chemicals, and
did not include the ubiquitous primary constituents found
in all plants.

The information provided here reflects current phar-
macological thinking about which chemicals are the pri-

26

SN

MATERIA MEDICA

522

mary contributors to the plant’s actions. It is important to
remember, however, that fashions and insights come in
and out of favor in science as much as in any other area of
human endeavor. For more details on a constituent or
group of constituents, please refer to the chapters on phy-
tochemistry in part 1 of this book.

A wealth of scientific information about the whole
range of different plant components is available.
However, this does not necessarily tell us much about the
value and benefits of the herb when used in healing. The
activity of the whole plant is always more than the sum of
its parts, just as a human being is more than the sum of his
or her biochemistry. Knowing the chemistry of sesquiter-
penes is not the same as knowing chamomile.

Actions: This section provides an overview of the phiysi-
ological actions demonstrated by the herb, which are ex-
plored in depth in chapter 25 (Herbal Actions). Knowing
an herb’s actions is the key to using it holistically and ef-
fectively. The approach followed here is based on the
practice of medical herbalism developed during the 19th
and 20th centuries in North America and the United
Kingdom.

Indications: Here I provide a brief overview of the clini-
cal indications for the herb. As there is so much variabil-
ity among both people and plants (the gift of diversity!),
the indications provided in herbals are rarely all encom-
passing. Thus, the indications listed reflect my particular
training and experience.

In addition, I have included quotations from some
invaluable but difficult-to-find texts from the 19th-century
Eclectic and Physiomedicalist traditions. These sources
of therapeutic information are based upon years of clini-
cal experience. Much of the technical language and writ-
ing style reflects the time periods in which these physi-
cians were practicing, so it probably sounds strange to
modern ears. I have not changed their words or gram-
mar, although I could not resist occasional comments.
Their Victorian terminology and spelling have been left
untouched.

----- PAGE 531 -----
Texts cited include:

Priest and Priest: {rom Priest and Priest, Herbal
Medications. London: L. N. Fowler and Co. Ltd.,
1982.

Ellingwood: from Ellingwood, Finley. American Materia
Medica, Therapeutics and Pharmacognosy. 1898.
Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Publications,
1983.

Felter: from Felter, Harvey W. The Eclectic Materia
Medica, Pharmacology and Therapeutics. 1922.
Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Publications,
1983.

King’s: from Felter, Harvey W, and Lloyd, John Uri.
King’s American Dispensatory vols. 1 and 2, 1892.
Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Publications,
1983.

Safety Considerations: If there are any concerns about

the safe use of the herb, the issues are discussed under this
heading, including side effects, contraindications, and

drug interactions.

Preparations and Dosage: This section lists dosage
ranges for various herbal preparations, taken from a
number of sources. I have provided details of concentra-
tion (weight/volume ratios, expressed as “w/v”) and alco-
hol percentages for tinctures and liquid extracts. For ex-
ample, a tincture containing 1 part herb to 5 parts solvent
in a menstruum composed of 45% alcohol is denoted as
“1:5 in 45%.” More information on. these calculations
may be found in chapter 11.

References: Whenever possible, at the end of the entry I have
provided a reference to a more technical monograph that cov-

ers pharmacology, clinical trials, and regulatory status for that

herb.

Key to Dosage Sources

Unless otherwise indicated in the text, the sources
listed here are the pharmacopoeias from which |
took the official medicine-making standards cited
in Preparations and Dosage. They are abbreviated in
the text according to the following key:

BPC: British Pharmacopoeia Codex, 4th ed. (1898)
BHP: British Herbal Pharmacopoeia (1990)

BHC: British Herbal Compendium (1992)

Comm. E: German Commission E Monographs
(1998)

USP: United States Pharmacopoeia, 9th ed. (1916)

son ans

Materia MEDICA 523

Achillea millefolium L.
Yarrow
Asteraceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: 0.3% to 1.4% volatile oil (a- and B-pinene,
borneol, bornyl acetate, camphor, a-caryophyllene, 1,8 ci-
neole); sesquiterpene lactones (achillicin, achillin, achilli-
folin, millifin, millifolide); 3% to 4% tannins; flavonoids
(apigenin, luteolin, isorhamnetin, rutin); alkaloids (be-
tonicine, stachydrine, achiceine, moschatine, trigonelline,
and others); phenolic acids (caffeic, salicylic); coumarins!

Actions: Diaphoretic, hypotensive, astringent, anti-
inflammatory, antispasmedic, diuretic, antimicrobial, bit-
ter, hepatic

Indications: Achillea is an important diaphoretic herb
and is a standard remedy for helping the body deal with
fever. It stimulates digestion and tones blood vessels. As a
urinary tract antiseptic, it is indicated in infections such
as cystitis, for which it is most effective if used fresh.
Achillea is considered a specific in thrombotic conditions
associated with hypertension, and is thought to lower
blood pressure through dilation of peripheral vessels.
Researchers believe that its anti-inflammatory and anti-
spasmodic actions are related to its content of flavonoids.”
Used externally, Achillea aids in wound healing, Ant-
microbial activity against a range of bacteria has been re-
ported for water and ether extracts of the plant.’

Priest and Priest described Achillea as a

. . mild, slow and stimulating diaphoretic: indicated for
the first stage of acute febrile reactions. For atonic and re-
laxed tissues where there is free discharge or passive hem-
orrhage of bright red blood. Cold preparations stimulate
the appetite and tone the digestive organs.

Priest and Priest gave the following specific indica-
tions: acute stage of colds, influenza, and respiratory catar-
rhs; chronic diarrhea and dysentery; epistaxis, intestinal
hemorrhage, and bleeding hemorrhoids; uterine hemor-
rhage, profuse protracted menstruation, and leukorrhea.

Safety Considerations: Hypersensitivity to yarrow and
other plants in the Asteraceae family has been reported.
Some authorities caution against using Achillea during
pregnancy.* No restrictions during lactation are suggested.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
(1:5 in 25%) three times a day. To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk hot
three times a day. When the patient is feverish, it should
be drunk hourly.

----- PAGE 532 -----
524 =. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Dosage recommended by the BHC is 2 to 4 g of
dried herb, 2 to 4 ml of tincture, 1 to 2 ml fluid extract
(1:1 in 25%), or 3 to 5 ml pressed juice from fresh herb
three times a day. Commission E recommends 4.5 g dried
herb, 3 teaspoons pressed juice, or 3 g fresh flowers daily.

Yarrow, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E Monographs

Aesculus hippocastanum L.
Horse Chestnut
Hippocastanaceae

Other Names: Do not confuse this plant with its North
American relative Aescalus glabra, commonly known as
buckeye.

Parts Used: Seeds, pericarp

Constituents: 3% to 6% triterpene saponin glycosides, a
complex mixture known as aescin (escin); 0.2% to 0.3%
flavonoids; coumarin derivatives (esculetin and esculin);
condensed tannins; sterols (including stigmasterol, o-
spinasterol, and f-sitosterol); fatty acids (such as
linolenic, palmitic, and stearic acids)’

Actions: Astringent, anti-inflammatory, venous tonic

Indications: Aesculus has unique actions on the vessels of
the circulatory system. The herb appears to increase the
elasticity and tone of the veins while decreasing vein per-
meability. It may be used internally in the treatment of
phlebitis, vein inflammation, varicosities, and hemor-
rhoids. Externally, it may be used as a lotion for the same
conditions, as well as for leg ulcers.

Aescin has antiexudative actions and a tightening ef-
fect on the vasculature. Aesculus extract may reduce the
activity of lysosomal enzymes, which is increased in
chronic pathological conditions of the veins and inhibits
the breakdown of mucopolysaccharides in the capillary
walls. A reduction in the activity of these enzymes has the
effect of decreasing vascular permeability, leading to im-
provement in symptoms of chronic venous insufficiency
(including sensations of tiredness, heaviness, pruritus,
pain, and swelling in the legs).®

A study of 22 patients with venous insufficiency
showed that 1,200 mg of Aesculus extract (standardized to
50 mg aescin per capsule) lowered capillary filtration by
22% in 3 hours.’ A review of 13 clinical studies reported
that horse chestnut was superior to placebo in improving
symptoms of chronic venous insufficiency. The pooled
results showed that horse chestnut reduced edema, pain,
fatigue, tenseness, and in some cases, pruritus in the legs.

Safety Considerations: The seed contains coumarin
derivatives that may theoretically interact with anticoag-
ulant medications.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of dried fruit
and leave to infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day or used as a lotion.

Commercial extracts are usually standardized to 16%
triterpene glycosides, calculated as aescin. Recommended
doses are the equivalent of 50 mg aescin two or three
times a day (300 to 900 mg of a 16% extract). Com-
mission FE. recommends a total daily dose of 100 mg
aescin, corresponding to 250 to 312.5 mg extract in
delayed-release form.

Horsechestnut seed, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Agathosma betulina Berg.) Bartl. and Wendl.
Buchu
Rutaceae

Other Names: Until recently, the binomial was
Barosma betulina.

Part Used: Leaf

Constituents: Volatile oils, 1.0% to 3.5% (limonene,
menthone, pulegone); flavonoids (rutin, diosmetin, dios-
min, hesperidin, quercetin, and derivatives); miscella-
neous; vitamins of the B group, tannins, mucilage®
Actions: Diuretic, urinary antiseptic

Indications: Buchu is useful in infections of the genitouri-
nary system, such as cystitis, urethritis, and prostatitis. Its
healing and soothing properties indicate its use in combi-
nation with other relevant remedies for many conditions
affecting this system. It is especially useful when dysuria is
part of the symptom picture. However, the volatile oil con-
tent may make it too irritating for people with a history of
kidney disease.

Safety Considerations: Remedies high in antimicrobial
oils may be contraindicated in people with kidney disease.
The volatile oil of buchu contains diosmin and pulegone,
which can cause irritation. However, there have been no
reports of adverse effects.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoonfuls of dried
herb and infuse for 10 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHC recommends 1 to 2 g in infusion of dried
herb, 2 to 4 ml tincture (1:5 in 60%), or 0.5 to 1.5 ml fluid
extract (1:1 in 90%) three times daily.

Buchu, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

----- PAGE 533 -----
Agrimonia eupatoria L.
Agrimony
Rosaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Tannins (3% to 21%); coumarins;
flavonoids (glycosides of luteolin, apigenin, and
quercetin); polysaccharides; glycosidal bitters!

Actions: Astringent, tonic, bitter, diuretic, vulnerary, an-
tispasmodic, diaphoretic, carminative, hepatic, chola-
gogue

Indications: The combination of astringency and bitter
tonic properties in agrimony makes this herb a valuable
remedy. This is especially true when astringent activity is
needed in the digestive system, as agrimony also con-
tributes a tonic action through bitter stimulation of di-
gestive and liver secretions. Agrimony may be used to
treat indigestion, and is a specific for childhood diarrhea.
It is the herb of choice in early-stage appendicitis, and its
properties give it a role in the treatment of mucous coli-
tis. It may also be helpful for urinary incontinence and
cystitis. Agrimony has a long tradition of use as a spring
tonic. As a gargle, it helps relieve sore throats and laryn-
gitis. Used in ointment form, it aids in the healing of
wounds and bruises.

In one study, agrimony infusion was used successfully
to treat cutaneous porphyria in a group of 20 patients.1!
Results demonstrated improvements in skin eruptions as
well as decreases in serum iron concentrations and uri-
nary porphyrins. Activity against Staphylococcus aureus and
a-hemolytic streptococci has been reported.”

In another study, a preparation containing agrimony
was used to treat 35 patients suffering from chronic gas-
troduodenitis.3 After 25 days of therapy, 75% of the pa-
tients were free of pain, 95% from dyspeptic symptoms,
and 76% from palpitation pains. Gastroscopy indicated
that previous erosions and hemorrhagic mucous changes
had healed. No side effects or signs of toxicity were
observed.

Priest and Priest described agrimony as a

... gently stimulating toni¢ with a gastro-intestinal em-
phasis that is suitable for both infants and the elderly. It
influences mucous membranes, promotes assimilation
and restores debilitated conditions.

They provided the following specific indications:
genera} alimentary weakness, hepatic weakness, enuresis,
diarrhea, leukorrhea, rheumatism, and arthritis.

MATERIA MEDICA @ 525

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of the dried
herb and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

Commission E states that the average daily dosage is 3
g of herb or equivalent preparation. Ellingwood recom-
mended { dram of pulverized leaves as decoction or 0.25 to
1 dram of tincture. Dosage given in the United States
Dispensatory (23rd ed.) is 1 dram (4 g) or more.

Agrimony, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Alchemilla vulgaris L.
Lady’s Mantle
Rosaceae

Parts Used: Leaf, flowering shoots

Constituents: Tannins, consisting mainly of glycosides
of ellagic acid; salicylic acid (trace amounts)'*

Actions: Astringent, diuretic, anti-inflammatory, emme-
nagogue, vulnerary

Indications: This and other species of A/chemilla have been
widely used in folk medicine throughout Europe. Lady’s
mantle helps reduce pains associated with menstrual peri-
ods and ameliorates excessive bleeding. It also has a role to
play in easing symptoms of menopause. As an emmena-
gogue, it can stimulate proper menstrual flow. However, in
the often apparently paradoxical way of herbal remedies,
the herb is also a useful uterine astringent, helpful in both
menorrhagia and metrorrhagia. Its astringency makes it
beneficial in the treatment of diarrhea, as a mouthwash for
sores and ulcers, and as a gargle for laryngitis.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day. For use in diarrhea, or as a mouthwash or lo-
tion, make a stronger infusion by boiling the herb for a
few minutes to extract all the tannin.

Dosage recommended in the BHP is 2 to 4 g dried
herb or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%).

Lady’s Mantle, The Complete German Commission E Monographs

----- PAGE 534 -----
526 se. TREATWENI APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Allium sativum L.
Garlic
Liliaceae

Part Used: Bulb

Constituents: Organosulfur compounds (alliin, con-
verted to allicin in the presence of the enzyme allinase),
miscellaneous: enzymes including allinase, B vitamins,
minerals, flavonoids!*

Actions: Antimicrobial, diaphoretic, hypocholesteremic,
cholagogue, hypotensive, antispasmodic

Indications: Used daily, garlic aids and supports the body
in ways that no other herb can match. It is an effective an-
timicrobial, acting on bacteria, viruses, and parasites of
the alimentary tract. The volatile oil is largely excreted
via the lungs, making garlic useful in infections of the res-
piratory system, such as chronic bronchitis, respiratory
catarrh, recurrent colds, and influenza. It may also be
helpful in the treatment of whooping cough and as part of
a broader approach to bronchial asthma. In general, garlic
may be used as preventive medicine against most infec-
tious conditions, digestive as well as respiratory. In the
digestive tract, garlic is thought to support the develop-
ment of the natural bacterial flora while killing pathogenic
organisms.

Garlic has a range of effects upon cardiovascular
health, It reduces serum cholesterol and triglyceride lev-
els while raising levels of high-density lipoproteins
(HDL). It can also act as an effective inhibitor of platelet-
activating factor (PAF), Garlic’s antioxidant properties
help prevent the peroxidation of fats, yet another con-
tributing factor in the development of atherosclerosis.
Taken together, these properties provide a potential way
to prevent atherosclerosis, thrombosis, hypertension,
heart attack, and stroke.

According to epidemiological evidence, garlic may
have cancer-preventive properties, especially against can-
cers of the gastrointestinal tract. It has been used exter-
nally for the treatment of the fungal infection ringworm
and as a suppository against pinworm (Enterobius vermic-
udaris). Immune potentiation and hypoglycemic actions in
humans have also been reported.

Safety Considerations: At high doses, garlic may irritate
the intestinal mucosa, causing nausea, diarrhea, vomiting,
and burning of the mouth. However, in humans, daily ad-
ministration of high doses of garlic essential oil (approxi-
mately 120 mg, equivalent to 60 g/day fresh garlic) over a
period of 3 months did not cause any adverse effects.'¢
Contact dermatitis from occupational exposure has been
reported.

Therapeutic doses (not dietary) of garlic may poten-
tiate the activity of anticoagulant medications and the an-
tithrombotic actions of anti-inflammatory medications,
such as aspirin. Caution is advised both before and after
surgical procedures.!7!8

Preparations and Dosage: A clove should be eaten daily
for prophylaxis. During acute infections, 1 clove three
times a day is indicated. Alternatively, use garlic oil cap-
sules at a dosage of 1 capsule a day as a prophylactic or
1 capsule three times a day for infection. Recommended
dosage of standardized garlic powder (6 mg allicin yield)
is 600 to 900 mg/day. Enteric-coated garlic supplements
can help control after-odor on breath and skin.

Commission E suggests a daily dosage of 4 g fresh
garlic or equivalent preparations.

Koch HP, Lawson D, eds. Garlic: The Science and Therapeutic
Application of Allium sativum L, and Related Species. Baltimore:
Williams and Wilkins Publishing Co., 1996.

Althaea officinalis L.
Marshmallow
Malvaceae

Parts Used: Root, leaf

Constituents: Root: Mucilage (18% to 35%, consisting of
a number of polysaccharides); miscellaneous: about 35%
pectin, 1% to 2% asparagine, tannins

Leaf: Mucilage (including a low-molecular-weight D-
glucan); flavonoids (such as kaempferol, quercetin, and
diosmetin glucosides); scopoletin (a coumarin); polyphe-
nolic acids (including syringic, caffeic, salicylic, vanillic,
p-coumaric)!?

Actions: Demulcent, emollient, diuretic, anti-inflamma-
tory, expectorant

Indications: Because of the abundance of mucilage it
contains, marshmallow is an excellent demulcent that is
indicated whenever such an action is needed. Marsh-
mallow root has been used primarily in the digestive
system, and leaf in the urinary system and lungs. All in-
flammatory disorders of the gastrointestinal tract will
benefit from the application of marshmallow root, in-
cluding inflammations of the mouth, gastritis, peptic
ulceration, and colitis. Leaf helps in cystitis, urethritis,
and urinary gravel, as well as bronchitis, respiratory
catarrh, and irritating coughs.

Externally, the herb is often used as an ingredient in
drawing ointments for abscesses and boils and as an emol-
lient for varicose veins and ulcers. The mucilage has
demonstrated hypoglycemic activity in nondiabetic
mice.*? Antimicrobial activity against Pseudomonas aerugi-

----- PAGE 535 -----
nosa, Proteus vulgaris, and Staphylococcus aureus has been
documented.?!
Priest and Priest considered marshmallow a

. .. soothing demulcent indicated for inflamed and irri-
tated states of mucous membranes. Particularly suitable
for the elderly with chronic inflammatory conditions af-
fecting the gastrointestinal system or genitourinary tract.

They gave the following specific indications: acute
respiratory disease, gastroenteritis, peptic ulcer, cystitis,
urethritis, inflammation of the mouth and throat, in-
flamed hemorrhoids and wounds, burns and scalds, bed-
sores, abscesses, boils, and skin ulcers.

Safety Considerations: Marshmallow may delay absorp-
tion of other drugs taken at the same time.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). A cold infusion of marsh-
mallow root may be made by infusing overnight 2 to 4 g
of root in 1 cup of cold water.

Dosage recommended by the BHC is 2 to 5 gas dried
herb or cold infusion or 5 to 15 ml tincture. The BPC
(1949) suggests a dosage of 2 to 10 ml of syrup.
Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 6 g root or
5g leaf.

Marshmallow leaf and Marshmallow root, in Herbal Medicine,
Expanded Commission E Monographs

Anethum graveolens L.
Dill

Apiaceae

Part Used: Seed

Constituents: Volatile oil (mainly carvone, with dihydro-
carvone, limonene, a- and f-phellandrene, eugenol,
anethole, myristicin, carveole, x-pinene); flavonoids
(kaempferol); coumarins (such as scopoletin, esculetin,
bergapten, umbelliferone); xanthone derivatives, such as
dillanoside; miscellaneous: triterpenes, phenolic acids,
protein, fixed oil??

Actions: Carminative, aromatic, antispasmodic, anti-
inflammatory, galactagogue

Indications: Dill is an excellent remedy for flatulence
and associated colic. This is the herb of choice for chil-
dren’s colic. It also stimulates milk flow in nursing moth-
ers. Chewing the seeds helps clear bad breath.

Safety Considerations: Contact with juice from the
fresh plant may cause photodermatitis.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour

Materia MEDICA 527

1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of gently
crushed seeds and infuse in a covered container for 10 to
15 minutes. For the treatment of flatulence, take a cup of
this infusion before meals.

According to Commission E, average daily dosage is
3 g of seed or equivalent preparations, or 0.1 to 0.3 ml es-
sential oil. Dosage from the United States Dispensatory
(23rd ed., 1948) is 15 grains to 1 dram (1 to 4 g) seed. The
BPC recommends 15 to 30 ml of dill water (hydrosol) or
0.3 to 0.2 ml of essential oil. The BHP recommends | to
2 g dried herb or 1 to 2 ml fluid extract. Dosage listed in
the BHC is 2 to 6 g of dried herb, 2 to 4 ml tincture (1:5
in 25%), or 2 to 6 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%).

Dill seed, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Angelica archangelica L.
Angelica

Apiaceae

Other Name: European angelica

Parts Used: Root and leaf (medicinal); stem and seed
(confectionery)

Constituents: Volatile oils (0.3% to 1.0%, highest in
seeds): a@- and £-phellandrene, a-pinene, a-thujene,
limonene, B-caryophyllene, linalool, borneol, acetalde-
hyde; macrocyclic lactones; phthalates (hexamethyl-
phthalate); furanocoumarin glycosides (angelicin, umbelli-
ferone, psoralen, bergapten, imperatoren); miscellaneous:
sugars, plant acids, flavonoids, and sterols”?

Actions: Astringent, tonic, diuretic, vulnerary, chola-
gogue, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Angelica is a useful expectorant for coughs,
bronchitis, and pleurisy, especially when accompanied by
fever, colds, or influenza, Angelica leaf may be used as a
compress to treat inflammations of the chest. The con-
tent of carminative essential oil explains its use easing in-
testinal colic and flatulence. As a digestive agent, angelica «
stimulates appetite and may be helpful in anorexia ner-
vosa. It has also been shown to help ease rheumatic in-
flammations. In cystitis, it acts as a urinary antiseptic. The
furanocoumarin constituent bergapten has been used in
the PUVA treatment of psoriasis. (PUVA is an acronym
describing oral administration of psoralen and subsequent
exposure to long-wavelength ultraviolet light.)

Angelica is a common flavoring for liqueurs, such as
Chartreuse and Benedictine, and is an ingredient of gin
and vermouth. The leaves may be used as a garnish or in
salads, and the candied stalks in cakes and pudding.

Safety Considerations: Because of its furanocoumarin

----- PAGE 536 -----
$28 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bony SysTEM

constituents, angelica may provoke photosensitivity re-
actions. During treatment with angelica, patients should
avoid prolonged sunbathing and exposure to strong UV
radiation.

In addition, some authorities state that because of the
coumarin constituents, high doses of angelica may inter-
fere with anticoagulant therapy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). To make a decoction, place
1 teaspoon of cut root in 1 cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 2 minutes. Remove from heat and let
stand for 15 minutes. Decoction dosage is 1 cup three
times a day.

The BHP recommends 2.5 g dried herb, 2 to 5 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 5 ml liquid extract (1:1 in
25%) three times daily. Commission E recommends a
daily dose of 4.5 g dried herb, 1.5 ml tincture (1:5), or 1.5
to 3.0 ml fluid extract (1:1). The total daily essential oil
dosage is in the range of 10 to 20 drops.

Angelica root, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Apium graveolens L.
Celery Seed
Apiaceae

Part Used: Dried ripe seed

Constituents: Volatile oil (2% to 3%): limonene (60%),
selenine (10% to 15%), a-eudesmol and f-eudesmol,
santalol; phthalides (3-n-butylphthalide, ligustilide,
sedanolide, and sedanenolide),; furanocoumarins (api-
gravin, bergapten, celerin, isoimperatorin, isopimpinellin,
umbelliferone, 8-hydroxy-5-methoxypsoralen); flavonoids
{apiin, apigenin, isoquercitrin, and others)**

Actions: Antirheumatic, anti-inflammatory, diuretic,
carminative, antispasmodic, nervine

Indications: Celery seed finds its main use in the treat-
ment of rheumatism, arthritis, and gout. It is especially
useful in rheumatoid arthritis associated with mental de-
pression. Its value in rheumatic conditions is related pri-
marily to its diuretic action. Celery seed is also used as a
urinary antiseptic, largely because of its content of apiol, a
volatile oil constituent.

In mice, phthalide constituents showed sedative and
antispasmodic activities.?> Celery seed oil has been re-
ported to be active against Bacillus subtilis, Vibrio cholerae,
Staphylococcus aureus, S. albus, Shigella dysenteriae, Coryne-
bacterium diphtheriae, Salmonella typhi, Streptococcus faecalis,
S. pyogenes, Pacillus pumilus, and Pseudomonas solanacearum.*6

No activity against Escherichia colt, Sarcina lutea, or
Pseudomonas aeruginosa was observed.

Safety Considerations: While no problems have been
documented for celery seed, photosensitivity reactions re-
sulting from external contact with celery stems have been
reported.?’ This has been attributed to their content of
furanocoumarins, which are known photosensitizing
agents.”

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of freshly
crushed seeds; infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15
minutes. This should be drunk three times a day.

Dosage from the BHC is 0.5 to 3 g dried seed (or in-
fusion), 2 to 8 ml tincture (1:5 in 90%), or 0.5 to 2 ml
fluid extract (1:1 in 90%) three times a day.

Apii fructus, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Arctium lappa L.
Burdock
Asteraceae

Parts Used: Root, rhizome, leaf

Constituents: Lignans (arctigenin, arctiin, and matai-
resinol); polyacetylenes; carbohydrates: inulin (45% to
50%), mucilage, pectin, sugars; miscellaneous: organic
acids, fatty acids, and phenolic acids’?

Actions: Alterative, diuretic, bitter

Indications: Burdock is a valuable remedy for the treat-
ment of skin conditions that result in dry and scaly
patches. It may be most effective for psoriasis if used over
a long period of time. It has value when used as part of a
wider treatment program for rheumatic complaints, espe-
cially when associated with psoriasis.

Part of burdock’s action is related to bitter stimula-
tion of digestive juice secretion, especially bile secretion.
Thus, it helps with digestion and appetite, and has been
used in anorexia nervosa and similar conditions. It has
also been used to support kidney function and to treat
cystitis. In general, burdock will move the body to a state
of integration and health, improving indicators of sys-
temic imbalance, such as skin problems and dandruff
Externally, burdock may be applied as a compress or
poultice to speed healing of wounds and ulcers. Eczema
and psoriasis may also be treated this way, but it is impor-
tant to remember that such skin problems can be healed
only from within, with the help of internal remedies.

Animal studies using roots and leaves of burdock
plants that had not yet flowered demonstrated diuretic,

----- PAGE 537 -----
hypoglycemic, and antifurunculous properties.*° The an-
timicrobial activity documented for burdock has been at-
tributed to its polyacetylene constituents, although only
traces of these compounds are found in dried commercial
herb.3! Other studies have suggested that burdock may af-
ford protection against mutagenicity.??> Burdock has
also shown antitumor activity.** In zn animal study, the
addition of dietary fiber (5%) from burdock roots to the
diet of rats provided protection against toxicity from var-
ious artificial food colorings.>*
Priest and Priest considered burdock a

. .. general alterative: influences skin, kidneys, mucous
and serous membranes, to remove accumulated waste
products. It is specific for eruptions on the head, face and
neck, and for acute irritable and inflammatory conditions.

They gave the following specific indications: eczema,
psoriasis, dermatitis; boils, carbuncles, sties, sores,
rheumatism, gout, and sciatica.

Safety Considerations: Potentially, burdock may cause
allergic reactions in people sensitive to plants in the
Asteraceae family.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 teaspoon of root into 1 cup of water, bring to a boil, and
simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHC recommends 2 to 6 g of dried root by de-
coction, 8 to 12 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%), or 2 to 6 ml
fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Burdock root, in The Complete German Commission E
Monographs

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) K. Spreng.
Bearberry
Ericaceae

Other Names: Uva-ursi, kinnikinnick
Part Used: Leaf

Constituents: Hydroquinones (arbutin, methylarbutin);
iridoids (monotropein); flavonoids (quercitrin, iso-
quercitrin, myricacitrin, and others); miscellaneous: tan-
nins; volatile oil; ursolic, malic and gallic acids*®

Actions: Diuretic, astringent, antimicrobial, demulcent

Indications: Bearberry has a specific antiseptic and as-
tringent effect on the membranes of the urinary system.
It generally soothes, tones, and strengthens these tissues.
It is specifically used for conditions in which there is
gravel or ulceration in the kidney or bladder. It may be

Materia Merpica @ 529

applied in the treatment of acute urinary tract infections,
such as pyelitis and cystitis, or used as part of a holistic ap-
proach to chronic kidney problems. It has proved effec-
tive for some cases of bed-wetting. As a douche, it may be
helpful in the treatment of vaginal ulceration and infec-
tion.

Ellingwood provided the following specific indica-
tions for bearberry:

Its direct influence is upon relaxed conditions of the blad-
der walls, to which it imparts tone and induces normal
contraction. It restrains excessive mucous discharges.

He recommended the herb for ulceration of the blad-
der, cystitis, pyelitis, pyelonephritis, and gonorrhea.

Safety Considerations: Urinary acidifiers inhibit the
conversion of arbutin to active hydroquinone, rendering
bearberry less effective.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried
leaves; infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Commission E recommends 10 to 12 g (equivalent to
400 to 840 mg of arbutin) in 150 ml water as infusion or
cold macerate. Dosage from BHC is 1.5 to 2.5 g dried leaf
infusion or cold aqueous extract, 2 to 4 ml tincture (1:5 in
25%), or 1.5 to 2.5 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%).

Bearberry, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Arnica montana L.
Arnica
Asteraceae

Part Used: Flower head

Constituents: Sesquiterpene lactones (arnifolin, arnicol-
ides, helenalin); flavonoicls (such as eupafolin, patuletin,
and spinacetin); volatile oil, containing thymol and vari-
ous ethers of thymol; miscellaneous: phenolic acids,
coumarins, resins, bitters (arnicin), tannins, carotenes*”

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, vulnerary

Indications: This herb should not be taken internally, as
it is potentially toxic. However, arnica provides us with
one of the best external remedies for local healing, and
may be considered a specific when it comes to the treat-
ment of bruises and sprains. The homeopathic preparation
is entirely safe to take internally, especially when used ac-
cording to homeopathic directions. The herb itself, used
externally, will help relieve pain and inflammation of
phlebitis, rheumatism, and similar conditions. In fact, it

----- PAGE 538 -----
530 <=. TREATWENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

may be used on the skin in all cases of pain or inflamma-
tion, as long as the skin is not broken.

Arnica has been shown to be an immunostimulant, as
both the sesquiterpene lactone helenalin and the polysac-
charide fraction stimulate phagocytosis. Sesquiterpene
lactones are known to have anti-inflammatory activity,
and their biological effects appear to be mediated through
immunological processes. The fact that helenalin is an
anti-inflammatory sesquiterpene lactone might help ac-
count for the value of arnica for pain and inflammation.

Safety Considerations: Due to the toxicity of the
sesquiterpene lactones it contains, oral use of arnica must
be avoided altogether. Topical applications of arnica may
cause an allergy in the form of painful, itchy, inflamma-
tory changes to the skin in some people.

Preparations and Dosage: For topical use, a simple folk
tincture will suffice. Pour !/2 liter (1 pint) of 70% alcohol
over 50 g (2 ounces) of freshly picked flowers in a clear
glass container. Seal and let stand for at least a week in the
sun or a warm place. Filter and store in a sealed container;
keep out of direct sunlight. Use as needed.

Arnica flowers, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Artemisia absinthium L.
Wormwood
Asteraceae

Parts Used: Leaf, flowering top

Constituents: Volatile oil, including a- and B-thujone
(35%); sesquiterpene lactones (absinthin, artemetin,
matricin, isoabsinthin, artemolin); acetylenes, flavonoids;
phenolic acids; lignans (diayangambin and epiyangambin)°*
Actions: Bitter, carminative, antimicrobial, anthelmintic,
antidepressant

Indications: Traditionally, wormwood has been used in a
wide range of conditions, from indigestion to depression,
many of which have been validated by scientific analysis.
The herb is primarily used as a bitter to stimulate and in-
vigorate the whole digestive process. It is helpful in indi-
gestion, especially when due to a deficient quantity or
quality of gastric juices. As the name implies, wormwood
is a powerful remedy against worm infestations, espe-
cially roundworm and pinworm. The herb may also be
used to help the body deal with fever and infections. It
has a long history of use as an antidepressant.

Safety Considerations: Adverse effects are likely only
with overdose, and are due primarily to the effects of thu-
jone, which is toxic. Taken in high doses, wormwood

preparations may cause intoxication with vomiting, severe
diarrhea, retention of urine, stupor, and convulsions.
Aqueous extracts contain relatively little thujone.
Wormwood is contraindicated for patients with stomach
hyperacidity and intestinal ulcers. Avoid during pregnancy.

Concerns about the safety of wormwood are related
largely to the presence of the monoterpene constituent
thujone in the essential oil (see chapter 6 for more infor-
mation). Concerns about the toxicity of wormwood
essential oil are well founded; however, the amount of es-
sential oil in the dried herb is low, minimizing danger.

Thujone is also a component of certain other essen-
tial oils, including white cedar oil (from the leaves of
Thuja occidentalis) and tansy oil (from the leaves and tops
of Tanacetum vulgare). It is also found in the leaves of the
culinary sage (Salvia officinalis) and of rosemary
(Rosmarinus officinalis). For purposes of comparison, the
thujone content of selected plants is listed here.

Salvia officinalis (sage leaf): 1,453 to 12,636 ppm

Artemisia absinthium (wormwood leaf): 3,500 ppm

Rosmarinus officinalis (rosemary plant): 84 to 399 ppm

Antifertility studies were conducted in rats using dry
extract of wormwood (probably containing some essential
oil). Oral administration of this extract at a dosage of 200
mg/kg for 7 days caused a significant anti-implantation
effect.*? Daily oral administration of thujone to rats at 10
mg/kg produced convulsions on day 38 of the study (after
intake of a total of 380 mg of thujone) in 5% of the rats.
The oral LDs9 of mixed a- and B-thujones has been de-
termined to be 192 mg/kg in rats, 230 mg/kg in mice, and
395 mg/kg in guinea pigs; however, a-thujone is more
toxic than B-thujone.*? Overdose of wormwood in humans
may cause major CNS disturbances, including convul-
sions and paralysis leading to unconsciousness and death.
Very high doses of wormwood tincture have been re-
ported to induce abortion.

Dilute aqueous extracts of dried wormwood contain
only trace amounts of essential oil. T:hujone-free worm-
wood extracts can be prepared with extraction procedures
using either water, 30% ethanol, or supercritical carbon
dioxide extraction technology.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:1 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of the dried
herb; infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. To avoid the extremely bitter taste
when using wormwood as an anthelmintic, powdered
wormwood tnay be taken in pill form to eliminate worms.

Commission E lists a daily dosage of 2 to 3 g of herb
as a water infusion. BPC recommends 3 to 10 ml of tinc-

----- PAGE 539 -----
ture daily. Dosage from the BHP is | to 2 g of dried herb
or | to 2 ml of fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Artemisiae herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Artemisia vulgaris L.
Mugwort

Asteraceae

Parts Used: Leaf, root

Constituents: Volatile oil (linalool, 1,8-cineole, B-thujone,
borneol, a- and B-pinene); sesquiterpene lactones (vul-
garin); flavonoids; coumarin derivatives; triterpenes*!

Actions: Bitter tonic, stimulant, nervine tonic, emmena-
gogue

Indications: As a bitter, mugwort may be used whenever
digestive stimulation is indicated. However, the herb sup-
ports digestion not only through bitter stimulation, but
also through carminative actions conferred by the volatile
oils it contains. In addition, it has a mild nervine action,
which also appears to be related to volatile oil content,
that may help ease depression and tension. Thus, it is es-
sential that the volatile oil is not lost in preparation.
Mugwort may also be used as an emmenagogue to pro-
mote normal menstrual flow.

Safety Considerations: Mugwort is potentially allergenic
to people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae family.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes in a covered container.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Dosage from the BHP is 0.5 to 2 g of dried herb or
0.5 to 2 ml of fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Mugwort, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Asclepias tuberosa L.
Pleurisy Root
Asclepiadaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Cardenolides (including asclepiadin);
flavonoids (rutin, kaempferol, quercetin, and isorham-
netin); miscellaneous: friedalin, a- and B-amyrin, lupeol,
viburnitol, choline sugars®

Actions: Diaphoretic, expectorant, antispasmodic, carmi-
native, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Pleurisy root is effective against respiratory
infections, reducing inflammation and promoting expec-

MaTERIA MEDICA @ 531

toration. It can be used in the treatment of bronchitis, in-
fluenza, and other respiratory conditions. The fact that it
also has diaphoretic and antispasmodic powers explains
why it is so highly valued for treating pleurisy and pneu-
monia. In the laboratory, low doses of extracts of Asclepias
species stimulated uterine contractions and exhibited es-
trogenic effects.”

Priest and Priest gave the following specific indica-
tions: catarrhal complaints from cold and damp, hard dry
cough, bronchitis, pleurisy, peritonitis, pneumonia, in-
fluenza, intercostal rheumatism, and other intercostal dis-
eases. According to King’s:

It was one of the most common medicines employed by
the Eclectic fathers. The drug has fallen into unmerited
neglect, and could profitably be employed at the present
day for purposes for which much more powerful, and
sometimes dangerous, drugs are used. It has an extensive
range of usefulness, being possessed of diaphoretic, di-
uretic, laxative, tonic, cartninative, expectorant, and prob-
ably anti-spasmodic properties.

Pleurisy root is one of the best diaphoretics of the
Eclectic materia medica. lt is not stimulating, and may be
used to promote diaphoresis, no matter how high the de-
gree of fever. Pleurisy roat has a deservedly good reputa~
tion in respiratory diseases. It acts upon the mucous
membrane of the pulmonary tract, augmenting the secre-

tions and favoring easy expectoration. . . . As its popular
name indicates, pleurisy root is of much value in treating
pleurisy. Not only is its action on serous membranes
marked, but itis very effectual in imtercostal neuralgia and
rheumatism, as well as in pericardial pains.

In pneumonia, as well as in bronchitis, it is best
adapted to the acute stage, where the lesion seems to be
extensive, taking in a large area of lung parenchyma and
mucous tissues. In the convalescing stage of pneumonia,
and other respiratory lesions, when suppression of the ex-
pectoration and dyspnoea threaten, small doses at fre-
quent intervals will correct the trouble. It, as well as
Eupbrasia and Matricaria, is among our best drugs for
snuffles, or acute nasal cararrh of infants.

It is an excellent remedy for ordinary colds. It is, in
fact one of our best drugs for catarrhal conditions,
whether of the pulmonary or gastrointestinal tract, espe-
cially when produced by recent colds. Stomach troubles,
particularly those of children, are often markedly bene-
fited by small doses.

Safety Considerations: Asclepias increases the risk of car-
diac glycoside toxicity if taken with drugs or herbs that
contain such constituents.

----- PAGE 540 -----
532 © TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over '/2 to 1 teaspoon of the herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Pleurisy root, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Astragalus membranaceus (Fisch.) Bunge
Astragalus
Fabaceae

Part Used: Root

Constituents: Triterpenoid saponin glycosides (astraga-
losides I-VII); flavonoid glycosides and aglycones; high-
molecular-weight polysaccharides*

Action: Immunomodulator

Indications:. Astragalus has been used since ancient times
in traditional Chinese medicine. When research illumi-
nated its effects upon the immune system, it was adopted
as an important remedy in the West. Studies indicate that
the polysaccharides in astragalus intensify phagocytosis in
reticuloendothelial systems, stimulate pituitary-adrenal
cortical activity, and restore depleted red blood cell for-
mation in bone marrow. Astragalus is also one of the
herbs known to stimulate the body’s natural production of
interferon.

Astragalus has been used in combination with drug
therapies to reduce their toxicity and ameliorate side ef-
fects. The herb has been employed to treat chronic
leukopenia (low white blood cell count) related to treat-
ment with steroids, anticancer drugs, and other thera-
pies.“ In an in vitro study, researchers were able to use a
lower dose of interleukin 2 (IL 2), a common cancer
treatment, by combining the drug with astragalus. High
doses of IL 2 are associated with significant side effects.”
The addition of astragalus potentiated IL 2 activity ten-
fold, thus potentially facilitating a lower dose of IL 2 for
the same therapeutic outcome. In a laboratory study, as-
tragalus prevented liver damage induced by the common
anticancer drug stilbenemide.*®

Astragalus appears to strengthen both nonspecific and
specific immunity. ‘The conclusion drawn by most Western
herbalists is that astragalus is an ideal remedy for anyone
who might be immunocompromised. It strengthens many
functions of the immune system, helps protect the liver
from damage, and may have valuable anticancer effects.

Safety Considerations: Astragalus potentiates the effects
of interleukin 2 and acyclovir, but may be incompatible

with immunosuppressive drugs (e.g., cyclosporine, aza-
thioprine, and methotrexate).’?

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 4 to 8 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
2 to 4 teaspoons of root into 1 cup of water, bring to a
boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day. In traditional Chinese medicine,
pieces of root are boiled in soups and removed prior to
serving.

Astragalus, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Avena sativa L.
Oats
Poaceae

Other name: Oatstraw
Parts Used: Seed, whole plant

Constituents: Proteins (prolamines known as avenins);
C-glycosyl flavones; avenacosides (spirostanol glycosides);
fixed oil; vitamin E; starch*®

Actions: Nervine tonic, antidepressant, nutritive, demul-
cent, vulnerary

Indications: Oats is one of the best remedies for “feeding”
the nervous system, especially when the patient is under
stress. It is considered a specific in cases of nervous de-
bility and exhaustion associated with depression. Oats may
be used in combination with most of the other nervines,
both relaxant and stimulant, to strengthen the whole ner-
vous system. It is also used to treat general debility.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 3 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an oatstraw infu-
sion, pour 1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 3 teaspoons of
dried straw and leave to infuse 10 to 15 minutes, This
should be drunk three times a day.

A soothing bath for use in treating neuralgia and irri-
tated skin conditions can be made by boiling 1 pound of
shredded oatstraw in 2 quarts of water for one-half hour,
Strain the liquid and add to the bath. Alternately, put
cooked rolled oats into a muslin bag and soak it in the
bathwater.

Dosage recommended by the BHP is 1 to 5 ml tinc-
ture (1:5 in 45%) or 0.6 to 2 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%)
three times daily. Commission E suggests using 100 g
dried herb for one full bath.

Avenae herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

----- PAGE 541 -----
Ballota nigra L.
Black Horehound

Lamiaceae

Constituents: Diterpenes (marrubiin, ballonigrin, bal-
lotinone)>!

Actions: Antiemetic, nervine, astringent, emmenagogue,
expectorant

Indications: Black horehound—not to be confused with
white horehound (Marrubium vulgare)—is an excellent
remedy for calming nausea and vomiting when the cause
lies within the nervous system, rather than in the stom-
ach. It may be safely used for motion sickness, for exam-
ple, in which nausea is triggered through the inner ear
and the central nervous system. This herb is also of value
in treating nausea and vomiting caused by pregnancy or
nervousness. Black horehound has a reputation as a nor-
malizer of menstrual function and as a mild expectorant.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 19 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day, or as needed.

Horehound, Black, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Baptisia tinctoria (L.) Venten.
Wild Indigo

Fabaceae
Part Used: Root

Constituents: Isoflavones (genistein, biochanin A);
flavonoids; alkaloids (such as cytisine); coumarins;
polysaccharides”?

Actions: Antimicrobial, anticatarrhal

Indications: Wild indigo is especially valuable for the
treatment of infections and catarrh of the ear, nose, and
throat. It may be used for laryngitis, tonsillitis, pharyngi-
tis, and catarrhal infections of the nose and sinuses. Taken
both internally and as a mouthwash, it heals mouth ulcers
and gingivitis and helps control pyorrhea. Systemically, it
may be useful in the treatment of enlarged and inflamed
lymph glands (lymphadenitis) and to reduce fevers. A
douche of wild indigo decoction will improve leukorrhea.

Ellingwood had much to say about this neglected
remedy:

Materia MEDICA <. 533

The agent has been widely used for many years by our
practitioners in the treatment of typhoid conditions, and
has established its position as an important remedy. In
scarlet fever, with its specific indications, it is a useful
remedy. Large doses are not necessary, but it should be
employed early and the use persisted in. In the treatment
of low fevers this agent is said to exercise marked sedative
power over the fever.

It is advised in all diseases of the glandular system,
and in hepatic derangements especially, with symptoms of
the character. In the various forms of stomatitis, putrid
sore throat and scarlatiiaa; in inflammation of the bow-
els, where there is a tendency to typhoid conditions, es-
pecially ulcerative inflammation of any of the internal
organs; in dyspepsia, with great irritability and offensive
decomposition of food; in scrofula and in cutaneous in-
fections, the agent should be long continued. In the long
protracted and sluggish forms of fevers, with great de-
pression of the vital forces; in ulceration of the nipples or
mammary glands, or cf the cervix uteri, it is spoken
highly of.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | ml three
times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, put !/2 to
1 teaspoon of dried root in | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Berberis vulgaris L.
Barberry
Berberidaceae

Part Used: Bark of root or stem

Constituents: [soquinoline alkaloids (berberine, berba-
mine); miscellaneous: chelidonic acid, resin, tannins*?

Actions: Cholagogue, hepatic, antiemetic, bitter, laxative

Indications: Barberry is a traditional remedy for correct-
ing liver function and promoting the flow of bile. It is in-
dicated when gallstones or gallbladder inflammation is
present and when jaundice occurs due to a congested state
of the liver. As a bitter tonic with mild laxative effects, it
helps strengthen and cleanse the system in weak or debil-
itated people. Barberry has the interesting ability to re-
duce the size of an enlarged spleen. It has antimalarial ac-
tions and is effective against infections caused by the
protozoan Leishmania spp.
Priest and Priest described barberry as follows:

----- PAGE 542 -----
534 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

... stimulating tonic hepatic: influences the mucosa gen-
erally, removing mucoid accumulations and controlling
excess secretion. Improves appetite, digestion and assimi-
lation. Indicated for “gouty” constitutions.

They provided the following specific indications: bil-
iary catarrh with constipation and jaundice, gastritis, bil-
iousness, debility during convalescence, ulcerative stom-
atitis, and eczema of the hands.

Safety Considerations: Avoid during pregnancy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, put
1 teaspoon of herb into | cup of cold water and bring to
a boil. Simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BPC suggests a dosage of 1 to 3.5 ml fluid ex-
tract three times a day. Recommended dosage from the
BHP is 1 to 2 g of dried herb, 2 to 4 ml tincture (1:10 in
60%), or 2 to 3 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times
a day.

Barberry, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Betula alba L.
Birch
Betulaceae

Parts Used: Young leaf, twig

Constituents: Flavonoids (mainly hyperoside, with lute-
olin and quercetin glycosides)**

Actions: Diuretic, anti-inflammatory, antiseptic, tonic

Indications: Birch leaf is an effective remedy for cystitis
and other infections of the urinary system and helps elim-
inate excess water from the body. Perhaps because of this
cleansing, diuretic activity, the plant has been used to
treat gout, rheumatism, and mild arthritic pain. Birch
bark helps ease muscle pain if applied externally, with the
fresh, wet, internal side of the bark placed against the
skin.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of dried leaf
and infuse for 10 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Commission E suggests a dosage of 2 to 3 g dried
herb several times a day.

Betulae folium, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Brassica nigra (L.) W.D,J. Koch
Black Mustard
Brassicaceae

Other Names and Related Species: Formerly Sinapsis
nigra. White mustard (Brassica alba Rabenh., non L., syn.
Sinapsis alba L.) may be used interchangeably.

Part Used: Seed

Constituents: Glucosinolates (black mustard contains
sinigrin, white mustard sinalbin); miscellaneous: sinapine,
sinapic acid, fixed oil, protein, mucilage*®

Actions: Rubefacient, irritant, stimulant, diuretic, emetic

Indications: This well-known spice finds its main use in
medicine as a stimulating external application. The rube-
facient action causes mild irritation to the skin, which
stimulates the circulation in that area and relieves muscu-
lar and skeletal pain. This also gives it a role in the treat-
ment of chilblains. Because of its stimulating, diaphoretic
action, mustard can be applied in the same ways that
cayenne and ginger are. For feverishness, colds, and in-
fluenza, mustard seed may be taken as a tea or ground and
sprinkled into a bath. An infusion or poultice of mustard
is useful in the treatment of bronchitis.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported. May cause skin irritation when
applied externally, especially in fair-skinned people.

Preparations and Dosage: Mustard is most commonly
used as a poultice, which can be made by mixing 100 g (4
oz) of freshly ground mustard seeds with enough warm
water (at about 45°C or 110°F) to form a thick paste.
Spread this mixture onto a piece of cloth the size of the
body area to be covered. To prevent the paste from stick-
ing to the skin, first lay a piece of dampened gauze on the
skin. Apply the cloth spread with mustard and remove
after 1 minute. The skin may be reddened by this treat-
ment, but may be soothed by the application of olive oil
afterward.

To make an infusion, pour | cup of boiling water over
1 teaspoon of mustard flour (powder) and infuse for $
minutes. This may be drunk three times a day. For a foot-
bath, make an infusion using | tablespoon of bruised
seeds to | liter (2 pints) of boiling water.

Calendula officinalis L.
Calendula
Asteraceae

Other Names: Marigold, pot marigold
Parts Used: Petals, flower head

----- PAGE 543 -----
Constituents: Triterpenes (calendulosides A-D); flavo-
noids (including narcissin, rutin); volatile oil; chlorogenic
acid®®

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, antispasmodic, lymphatic,
astringent, vulnerary, emmenagogue, cholagogue, anti-

fungal

Indications: Calendula may be used safely whenever
there is inflammation on the skin, whether due to infec-
tion or physical damage. It may be zpplied for any exter-
nal bleeding or wound, bruising, or strains. The herb is
also of benefit for slow-healing wounds and skin ulcers,
and ideal for first-aid treatment of minor burns and
scalds. Calendula may be applied locally as a lotion, poul-
tice, or compress, depending on which is most appropri-
ate, Calendula has long been used throughout Europe for
wound healing and treatment of both skin and gastric ul-
cers. Its healing power appears to be based at least in part
on its terpene content.
When taken internally, calendula has anti-inflammatory
actions in the digestive system, and thus may be used in
the treatment of gastric and duodenal ulcers. As a chola-
gogue, it helps relieve gallbladder problems and many of
the vague digestive complaints known as “indigestion.”
Calendula demonstrates marked antifungal activity
and may be used both internally and externally to combat
fungal infections. As an emmenagogue, it has a reputation
for helping with delayed menstruation and easing painful
periods, In general, it is considered a normalizer of the
menstrual process.
In the laboratory, calendula has demonstrated anti-
inflammatory, antibacterial, and antiviral activities.*” A
combination of allantoin and calendula extract applied to
surgically induced skin wounds in rats was reported to
stimulate physiological regeneration and granulation.
Allantoin alone exerted a much weaker action.*®

Safety Considerations: Calendula is a possible allergen
for those with known sensitivity to members of the
Asteraceae family.

Calendula was shown to be noritoxic when adminis-
tered chronically to mice in the form of aqueous extract.*?
No symptoms of toxicity were observed after administra-
tion of a calendula flower extract at a dosage of 0.15 g/kg
to hamsters older than 18 months and rats older than 21
months.°

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of flowers and

MATERIA MEDICA @ 535

infuse for 10 to 1S minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day. Calendula may be applied externally as a lotion
or ointment for cuts, bruises, diaper rash, sore nipples,
burns, and scalds.

Dosage recommended in the BHP is 1 to 4 g dried
herb, 0.3 to 1.2 ml tincture, or 0.5 to 1 ml liquid extract
three times daily. Commission E suggests 1 to 2 g dried
herb per cup of water (150 ml) or 2 to 4 ml tincture daily,

Calendula flower, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Capsella bursa-pastoris (L.) Medikus
Shepherd’s Purse
Brassicaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Flavonoids (luteolin-7-rutinoside, quercetin-
3-rutinoside); plant acids (fumaric and bursic acids)*!

Actions: Astringent, diuretic, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Shepherd’s purse may be used whenever a
gentle diuretic is indicated—for instance, to alleviate
water retention due to kidney problems. As an astringent,
the herb proves effective in the treatment of diarrhea,
wounds, nosebleeds, and other conditions. It traditionally
was used to stimulate the menstrual process, but is also of
value in reducing excess menstrual flow.

Ellingwood recommended shepherd’s purse for
hematuria, passive hemorrhage, chronic menorrhagia, in-
testinal hemorrhage, gastric hemorrhage, atonic dyspep-
sia, diarrhea, and dysentery, and externally for bruised or
strained muscles, bleeding piles, and rheumatic joints.

Safety Considerations: Because of its oxalic acid con-
tent, patients with kidney stones should avoid shepherd’s
purse.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. For menstrual condi-
tions, a cup should be drunk every 2 to 3 hours just before
and during the period. Otherwise, it should be drunk
three times a day.

Dosage listed in the BHP is | to 4 g dried herb or 1
to 4 ml liquid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.
Commission E recommends 10 to 15 g of herb or equiv-
alent preparations daily.

Shepherd’s Purse, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

----- PAGE 544 -----
536 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Capsicum annuum L.
Cayenne
Solanaceae

Part Used: Fruit

Constituents: Capsaicinoids (up to 1.5%): capsaicin, di-
hydrocapsaicin, others; carotenoids (capsanthin, capsoru-
bin, carotene); steroidal saponins, known as capsicidins, in
seed and root®

Actions: Stimulant, carminative, anticatarrhal, sialagogue,
rubefacient, antimicrobial

Indications: Cayenne is the most useful of the systemic
stimulants. It stimulates blood flow, strengthening the
heart, arteries, capillaries, and nerves. A general tonic, it is
especially useful for toning both the circulatory and diges-
tive systems. Cayenne may be helpful in cases of flatulent
dyspepsia and colic. It may also be used in conditions
marked by insufficient peripheral circulation leading to
cold hands and feet and, possibly, chilblains. It is also valu-
able for debility and for warding off colds.

Externally, cayenne is applied as a rubefacient for
problems such as lumbago and rheumatic pains. As an
ointment, it can help with unbroken chilblains, as long as
it is used in moderation. As a gargle for laryngitis, it com-
bines well with myrrh. This combination also makes a
good antiseptic wash.

Research has shown that capsaicin blocks the trans-
mission of pain and itching by nerve fibers in the skin.
Capsaicin applied in the form of a topical cream helps re-
lieve pain by depleting local supplies of a neurotransmitter
called substance P, which transmits pain and itching sig-
nals from the nerves in the skin to the spinal cord. A link
exists between many painful disorders and unusually high
levels of substance P in nerve fibers. Unlike other local
anesthetics, cayenne does not block impulses to all of the
nerve fibers, only type C fibers, which are strictly related to
pain. Thus, it does not interfere with perception of touch,
temperature, and pressure.

In numerous clinical studies, a topical cream con-
taining 0.025% or 0.075% capsaicin has proved helpful
in treating painful and itchy skin disorders, including
psoriasis, shingles, diabetic neuropathy, and postmastec-
tomy pain. Capsaicin cream may also be effective in
relieving the severe, stabbing pain associated with
trigeminal neuralgia, a disorder that affects the largest
nerve in the face. Improvement was generally apparent
after several days of applying the cream three times daily.
Capsaicin cream also shows promise in reducing the pain
of arthritis.®

King’s described cayenne thus:

Capsicum is a pure, energetic, permanent stimulant, pro-
ducing in large doses vomiting, purging, pains in the
stomach and bowels, heat and inflammation of the stom-
ach, giddiness, a species of intoxication and an enfeebled
condition of the nervous power. The infusion is much
used in colds, catarrh, hoarseness, etc. In atonic dyspepsia
and catarrhal gastritis it stimulates the nerves of the stom-
ach, promotes the secretion of the digestive juices, and as-
sists peristaltic motion .. . Capsicum meets the debility of
young and old, but is particularly useful in the elderly,
when the body-heat is low, vitality depressed and reaction
sluggish. Tired, painful muscles, stiffened joints and re-
laxation of any part are common conditions in the elderly
that are, in a measure, rectified by Capsicum. Flatulence
in dyspeptic states may be dispelled by capsicum.
Externally, the infusion and tincture have been found
valuable as a stimulating gargle in the ulcerated throat of
scarlatina. If used early in tonsillitis, with relaxation, it
may abort the trouble, but if it does not, its use should be
discontinued until the active inflammation has subsided.
Hoarseness, from atony of the vocal cords, is relieved by
it, and it is a remedy for relaxed uvula. It enters into var-
ious tinctures and liniments. The concentrated tincture of
capsicum has been highly recommended in the treatment
of chilblains and toothache. In the former, a piece of
sponge of flannel must be saturated with it, and rubbed
well over the seat of the chilblain, until a strong tingling
and electrical feeling is produced. This application should
be continued daily, until che disease is removed; relief will
be experienced on the very first application and fre-
quently there will be a total removal of the disease after

the second or third application. This, however, will de-
pend upon the severity of the case.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 0.25 to
1 ml three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion,
pour | cup of boiling water over !/2 to 1 teaspoon of
cayenne and infuse for 10 minutes. Mix a tablespoon of
this infusion with hot water and drink when needed.

Dosage recommended in the BPC is 0.06 g of dried
herb or 0.3 to 0.9 ml tincture three times daily. The BHP
recommends 30 to 120 mg of dried herb or 0.3 to 1 ml of
tincture three times daily.

Cayenne pepper, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E.
Monographs

----- PAGE 545 -----
Carum carvi L.
Caraway
Apiaceae

Part Used: Seed

Constituents: Volatile oil, consisting of carvone (40% to
60%) and limonene, with other constituents; flavonoids
(mainly quercetin derivatives); miscellaneous: polysaccha-
ride, protein, fixed oil, calcium oxalate®

Actions: Carminative, antispasmodic, expectorant, em-
menagogue, galactagogue, astringent, antimicrobial

Indications: Caraway is used as a calming herb to ease
flatulent dyspepsia and intestinal colic, especially in chil-
dren. It also helps stimulate appetite. Its astringency
makes it useful in the treatment of diarrhea and, when ap-
plied as a gargle, in laryngitis. It may be employed for
bronchitis and bronchial asthma, and its antispasmodic
actions help relieve menstrual pains. Caraway has been
used to increase milk flow in nursing mothers.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of freshly crushed
seeds and infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 min-
utes. This should be drunk three times a day.

Carvi fructus, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Centaurium erythraea Rain.
Centaury
Gentianaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Secoiridoids: gentiopicroside (gentio-
picrin), swertiamarin; alkaloids (gentianine, gentianidine,
gentioflavine); xanthone derivatives; phenolic acids;
triterpenes (B-sitosterol, campesterol, brassicasterol, stig-
masterol, a- and B-amyrin, erythrodiol)””

Actions; Bitter, hepatic

Indications: Centaury may be used whenever a digestive
and gastric stimulant is needed. It is indicated primarily
for appetite loss (anorexia) associated with liver weakness.
Centaury is helpful in dyspepsia and any other condition
involving sluggish digestion.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour

Materia Mepica ©. 537

1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for § to 10 minutes. Drink 1 cup one half hour be-
fore meals.

Commission E recommends an average daily dosage
of 6 g dried herb or equivalent preparations, or 1 to 2 ml
extract daily.

Centaurii herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Cepbaelis ipecacuanba (Brot.) A. Rich.
Ipecacuanha
Rubiaceae

Other Name: Ipecac
Parts Used: Root, rhizome

Constituents: Isoquinoline alkaloids (2% to 3%): mainly
emetine, cephaeline, psychotrine; tannins: ipecacuanhin
and ipecacuanhic acid®

Actions; Expectorant, emetic, sialagogue, antiprotozoal

Indications: Ipecac is used mainly as an expectorant for
conditions such as bronchitis and whooping cough. At
higher doses, it is a powerful emetic, and as such is used
to treat poisoning. Care must be taken when using this
herb. After administration of an effective emetic dose, the
patient should drink large amounts of water. In the same
way that ipecac promotes expectoration through stimula-
tion and subsequent elimination of mucus, it fosters the
production of saliva. It has been found effective against
amoebic dysentery.

Safety Considerations: Because it is an emetic, ipecac
will prevent the absorption of drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: Ipecac is a very powerful
herb, so only a small amount should be used. Use 0.01 to
0.25 g of herb for an infusion. Pour { cup of boiling water
over a pea-sized amount of herb and infuse for 5 minutes.
This may be drunk three times a day.

Ipecacuanhae radix, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Cetraria islandica
Iceland Moss
Parmeliaceae

Part Used: Whole plant (a lichen)

Constituents: Lichen acids (fumarprotocetraric, proto-
cetrari¢, cetraric, usnic); polysaccharides (about 50%):
mainly lichenin and isolichenin; miscellaneous: furan
derivatives, fatty acid, lactones, terpenes

Actions: Demulcent, anti-inflammatory, antiemetic, ex-
peéctorant

----- PAGE 546 -----
538 <<. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Indications: As a soothing demulcent with a high mu-
cilage content, Iceland moss is valuable in gastritis, vom-
iting, and dyspepsia. It is also often used in respiratory
catarrh and bronchitis to soothe mucous membranes. Its
nourishing qualities give it a role in the treatment of
cachexia, a state of malnourishment and debility.

King’s described Iceland moss as

.,. demulcent, tonic and nutritious. Excessive doses may
induce nausea and looseness of the bowels, while ordinary
doses improve the appetite, digestion and general nutri-
tion. Constipation is not produced by it, and the circula-
tion is unaffected. Its nutritive qualities are undoubtedly
due to its starch. The bitterness of cetrarin may be de-
tected in the nursing mother’s milk. Used as a demulcent
in chronic catarrhs, chronic dysentery and diarrhea, and
as a tonic in dyspepsia, convalescence and exhausting dis-
eases. Boiled with milk, it forms an excellent nutritive and
tonic in phthisis and general debility. It relieves the cough
of chronic bronchitis.

Safety Considerations: Because of its high mucilage
content, Iceland moss may impair absorption of drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make a decoction, put
1 teaspoon of shredded moss in 1 cup of cold water. Boil
for 3 minutes and let stand for 10 minutes. A cup should
be drunk morning and evening.

Commission E recommends 4 to 6 g of herb or
equivalent preparations daily.

Iceland moss, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Chelone ‘glabra L.
Balmony
Scrophulariaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Very little research has been conducted on
this plant. Only resins and bitters have been reported.
Actions: Cholagogue, hepatic, bitter, antiemetic, stimu-
lant, laxative

Indications: Balmony is an excellent agent for liver prob-
lems and acts as a tonic for the whole digestive system.
The herb stimulates the secretion of digestive juices, and
in this way produces its laxative actions. Balmony is used
to treat gallstones, inflammation of the gallbladder, and
jaundice. It is considered a specific for gallstones that lead
to congestive jaundice. The herb stimulates appetite;
eases colic, dyspepsia, and biliousness; and is beneficial in

debility. Externally, it has been used to treat inflamed
breasts, painful ulcers, and piles.
Priest and Priest said that balmony is a

. .. mild relaxing hepatic influencing the mucous mem-
branes, stimulating appetite and toning the stomach, It is
suitable for children and the elderly. Indicated for gas-
trointestinal disturbances after prolonged illness.

They gave the following specific indications: atonic
conditions, malaise and debility, dyspepsia, malabsorp-
tion, roundworms and threadworms, colitis from hepatic
dysfunction, and chronic jaundice.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:10 in 40%). To make an infusion,
pour | cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Chionanthus virginicus L.
Fringetree
Oleaceae

Part Used: Bark
Constituents: Phyllyrin (a lignin glycoside); chionanthin”°

Actions: Hepatic, cholagogue, alterative, diuretic, tonic,
antiemetic, laxative

Indications: This valuable herb may be safely used for
many liver problems, especially when jaundice is part of
the picture. It is a specific for the treatment of gallbladder
inflammation and a valuable component of treatment for
gallstones. Fringetree aids the liver in general, and as such
is often used as a tonic as part of a wider treatment to sup-
port the whole body. Because it stimulates the release of
bile, it also acts as a gentle and effective laxative.
Ellingwood considered fringetree specific for

... the liver. It isa remedy for hepatic engorgement; jaun-
dice more or less pronounced; pain over the region of the
gall-bladder; pain in the epigastrium; pain radiating from
the navel over the abdomen; soreness in the region of the
liver, extending to the umbilicus; enlargement of the of
the liver, determined by percussion; nausea; occasional
vomiting; constipation with dry feces, temperature
slightly above normal; skin usually yellow.

In addition, he recommended it for acute congestion
of the liver, catarrh of the common bile duct, acute jaun-
dice, jaundice of childhood, bilious headaches, malarial

----- PAGE 547 -----
conditions, diabetes mellitus, sugar in the urine, and ty-
phoid fever.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of herb and
infuse for 10 to 19 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Chondrus crispus (L.) Stackh.
Trish Moss
Gigartinacea

Part Used: Dried thallus (Note: This is a seaweed, not a
moss.)

Constituents: Polysaccharides; the extract, also known as
carrageenan, consists of sulfated, straight-chain galactans.
(There are a variety of grades of carrageenan of different
molecular weights, including a food grade with a molecu-
lar weight of about 100,000 to 500,000.)’!

Actions: Expectorant, demulcent, anti-inflammatory

Indications: With modern attention on dramatically ef-
fective “miracle drugs,” it is refreshing to remember the
nourishing and strengthening food medicines, such as
Trish moss. The safety of this seaweed allows it to make
some unique contributions to health care. Its main tradi-
tional use was for respiratory illness, where it often
served as the core of prescriptions used to treat irritating
coughs, bronchitis, and many other lung problems.

Trish moss may be freely used in digestive conditions
for which a demulcent is indicated, such as gastritis and
ulceration of the stomach and duodenum. Its soothing ac-
tivity makes it helpful for inflammations of the urinary

system, and it was once used extensively in the same way
cornsilk is used today. It has also been used as a food as
part of maintenance diets for people with diabetes.
However, in the past, its primary role was in speeding re-
cuperation from debilitating illness, which once received
a greater focus of attention than it does today. Herbs such
as Irish moss and other tonic, nutritive remedies have
much to offer in facilitating proper recovery of health
after major disease.
King’s suggested the use of Irish moss as

...a demulcent in chronic affections of the air passages,
chronic diarrhea and dysentery, scrofula, rickets, enlarged
mesenteric glands, irritation of the bladder and kidneys,
etc. As a culinary article, it may be employed in the prepa-
ration of jellies, white soup, blanc mange, etc.

Mareria MEDICA ¢ 539

Safety Considerations: Irish moss may impair absorp-
tion of drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: To use fresh, wash the sea-
weed well, add 1 cup to 3 cups of milk or water, and fla-
vor to taste. Simmer slowly until most of the seaweed has
dissolved. Remove any undissolved fragments and pour it
into a mold to set.

The dried seaweed is best made into a decoction.
Steep 1 oz of dried Irish moss in cold water for 15 min-
utes, boil for 10 to 15 minutes in 3 pints of water (or
milk), and strain. It may be combined with licorice,
lemon, ginger, or cinnamon and sweetened to taste.

Cimicifuga racemosa (L.) Nutt.
Black Cohosh
Ranunculaceae

Parts Used: Dried root and rhizome (not fresh)
Constituents: Triterpene glycosides (actein, cimicifugo-
side, cimifugine, racemoside, cimiracemosides); isoferulic
acid; salicylic acid; miscellaneous: volatile oil, tannins”?

Actions: Emmenagogue, antispasmodic, anti-inflammatory,
antirheumatic, alterative, nervine, hypotensive

Indications: Black cohosh is a valuable relaxant and nor-
malizer of the female reproductive system. It may be used
to good effect to treat painful or delayed menstruation,
and relieves cramping pain in the womb and cramping as-
sociated with ovulation. Modern interest in this herb has
focused on its gynecological uses. While it is of un-
doubted value in this area, its contribution to the treat-
ment of arthritic disorders should not be overlooked. It is
very effective against rheumatic pain, including that of
rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, and muscle problems,
and is helpful for neurological pain, including sciatica and
neuralgia. As a relaxing riervine, it may be used in many
situations where such an agent is needed. It has also been
found beneficial for tinnitus.

Black cohosh helps to ease the physical and mental
changes associated with perimenopause and menopause,
as well as hormonal deficits resulting from ovariectomy or
hysterectomy in younger women. Clinical studies support
the primary application of black cohosh for the treatment
of menopausal symptoms such as hot flashes, headache,
vertigo, heart palpitations, ringing in the ears, and a range
of associated psychological symptoms, including irritabil-
ity, sleep disturbances, and depressive moods. Black co-
hosh extract has also been used successfully in women
younger than 40 years for treatment of hormonal deficits
resulting from ovariectomy or hysterectomy. At least 8
weeks of treatment are required to alleviate symptoms. A

----- PAGE 548 -----
540 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

review of clinical studies showed that trials have ranged in
length from 8 weeks to as long as 6 months.”

Because of the wealth of accrued experience presented
in King’s American Dispensatory, I have included a passage
from its extensive monograph on black cohosh:

This is a very active, powerful, and useful remedy, and ap-
pears to fulfil a great number of indications. It possesses an
undoubted influence over the nervous system. In small
doses the appetite and digestion are improved, and larger
amounts augment the secretions of the gastrointestinal
tract. The heart-beat is slowed and given increased power
by it, while arterial tension is elevated.

Upon the reproductive organs it exerts a specific in-
fluence, promoting the menstrual discharge, and by its
power of increasing contractility of the unstriped fibres of

the uterus, it acts as an efficient parturient. ... Few of our

remedies have acquired as great a reputation in the treat-
ment of rheumatism and neuralgia. Indeed, few cases of
rheumatism, or conditions depending upon a rheumatic
basis, will present, which will not be influenced for the
better by Crmicifuga.

Muscular pain of a rheumatoid character, when not
amounting to a true rheumatic attack, and other rheuma-
toid pains when acute and not of spinal origin such as gas-
tralgia, enteralgia, tenesmic vesical pains, pleurodynia,
pain in the mediastina orbits or ears, are relieved by
Cimicifuga.

By its special affinity for the female reproductive or-
gans, it is an efficient agent for the restoration of suppressed
menses, In dysmenorrhoea it is surpassed by no other
drug, being of greatest utility in irritative and congestive
conditions of the uterus and appendages, characterized by
tensive, dragging pains, resembling the pains of rheuma~
tism. If the patient be despondent and chilly, combine
Cimicifuga with Pulsatilla, especially in anemic subjects. . . .

Cimicifuga has proved a better agent in obstetrical
practice than ergot. It produces natural intermittent uter-

ine contractions, whereas ergot produces constant con-
tractions, thereby endangering the life of the child, or

rupture of the uterus. Where the pains are inefficient, fee-
ble, or irregular, Cimicifuga will stimulate to normal ac-
tion. Tt is an excellent “partus praeparator” if given for
several weeks before confinement. It is a diagnostic agent
to differentiate between spurious and true labor pains, the
latter being increased, while the former are dissipated
under its use. It is the best and safest agent known for the
relief of after-pains, and is effectual in allaying the general
excitement of the nervous system after labor.
Preparations of Cimicifuga, to be of any medicinal value,
must be prepared from recently dried roots.

Safety Considerations: When used at the recommended
dosage, no adverse effects are to be expected. The herb
should not be used during pregnancy, except to assist

birth.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, pour
1 cup of water over !/2 to | teaspoon of dried root, bring
to a boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should
be drunk three times a day.

Dosage listed in the BPC is 1.8 to 3.6 ml tincture
(1:10 in 60%) or 0.3 to 1.8 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 90%).
Commission E suggests a daily dosage of 40% to 60%
ethanol extract corresponding to 40 mg of drug. The
USP recommends | g dried herb or | ml liquid extract.

Black Cohosh, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Cola acuminata Schumann
Cola
Sterculiaceae

Other Names: Cola vera; kola
Part Used: Seed kernel (the kernel freed from the testa)

Constituents: Caffeine, with traces of theobromine; tan-
nins and other phenolics; miscellaneous: phlobaphene (an
anthocyanin pigment known as kola red), betaine”*

Actions: Central nervous system stimulant, antidepres-
sant, astringent, diuretic

Indications: Cola has a marked stimulating effect on
human consciousness. It can be used whenever there is a
need for direct stimulation, which is less often than some
may believe! If the health and function of the nervous sys-
tem is improved, it will usually not need such stimulation.
In the short term, however, cola may be used in nervous
debility, states of atony, and weakness.

Cola can be viewed as specific in cases of depression
associated with weakness and debility, and may act as a
specific in nervous diarrhea, It will help in general de-
pression and, in some people, may even give rise to eu-
phoric states. It may also be beneficial for some types of
migraine. Because of its stimulant properties, it can be a
valuable part of treatment for anorexia.

Safety Considerations: Because it contains caffeine, cola
may cause all of the reactions and potential drug interac-
tions associated with this constituent. In addition, it may
cause cumulative caffeine effects when used in combina-
tion with coffee, black or green tea, guarana, or mate.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of powdered cola nuts in a cup of water,

----- PAGE 549 -----
bring to a boil, and simmer gently for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk when needed.

Dosage recommended in the BHC is 1 to 3 g pow-
dered cotyledons, i to 4 ml tincture (1:5 in 60%), or 0.6
to 1.2 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 60%) three times a day.
Commission E lists a daily dosage of 2 to 6 g dried herb,
10 to 30 g tincture, or 2.5 to 7.5 g fluid extract.

Cola nut, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Collinsonia canadensis L.
Stoneroot
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Root, rhizome

Constituents: Essential oil; tannins; saponins; alkaloids;
resins; organic acid’
Actions: Antilithic, diuretic, diaphoretic
Indications: As its name suggests, stoneroot finds its
main use in the treatment and prevention of stone and
gravel in the urinary system and gallbladder. It may be
used as a prophylactic, but is also an excellent remedy
when the body needs assistance in. passing stones or
gravel. It is a strong diuretic.

In his extensive monograph, Ellingwood gave the fol-
lowing indications for stoneroot:

Hemorrhoids, catarrhal gastritis, pain in the rectum,
heart tonic, rheumatic inflammation, laryngitis, pharyn-
gitis, clergyman’s sore throat, dysentery, ulcers, fistula, in-
flammation of the middle ear, acute cystitis, vaginismus.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of dried root in | cup of water, bring to
a boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHP recommends | to 4 ¢ dried herb, 2 to 8 ml
tineture (1:5 in 40%), or 1 to 4 ml liquid extract (1:1 in
25%) three times a day.

Stone Root, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Commiphora molmol (Nees) Engl.
Myrrh
Burseraceae

Part Used: Gum resin

MATERIA MEDICA -@ 541

Constituents: Volatile oil (1.5% to 17%); gum (up to
60%); resins (up to 40%, average 20%); sterols”

Actions: Antimicrobial, astringent, carminative, anti-
catarrhal, expectorant, vulnerary

Indications: Myrrh is an effective antimicrobial agent
that has been shown to work in two complementary ways.
Its primary action is to stimulate the production of white
blood corpuscles, which have antipathogenic actions.
Secondarily, it has a direct antimicrobial effect.

Myrrh may be used in a wide range of conditions ap-
propriate for treatment with an antimicrobial agent. It
finds specific use in the treatment of infections of the
mouth, such as mouth ulcers, gingivitis, and pyorrhea, as
well as catarrhal problerns, such as pharyngitis and si-
nusitis. Myrrh is often employed as part of an approach
to the treatment of the common cold, and may be of
benefit for laryngitis and respiratory complaints.
Systemically, it is useful in the treatment of boils and
similar conditions, glandular fever, and brucellosis.
Applied externally, it is healing and antiseptic for wounds
and abrasions.

Anti-inflammatory and antipyretic actions have been
documented in mice.”” Hypoglycemic activity in both nor-
mal and diabetic rats has been reported.”® The proposed
mode of action involved a decrease in gluconeogenesis and
an increase in peripheral utilization of glucose in diabetic
rats.

Safety Considerations: Use of undiluted tincture of
myrrh in the mouth may give rise to a transient burning
sensation and irritation of the palate. Theoretically,
myrrh may interfere with existing antidiabetic therapy,
as hypoglycemic properties have been documented.

Preparations and Dosage: The resin dissolves much
more easily in alcohol than in water, so tincture is pre-
ferred and is easily obtainable. Dosage is 1 to 4 ml three
times a day (1:1 in 90%). As the resin is difficult to dis-
solve in water, it should be powdered well for an infusion.
Pour | cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of
myrrh powder and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This
should be drunk three times a day.

For external use, Commission E recommends dab-
bing the skin two to three times daily with undiluted tinc-
ture. As a rinse or gargle, add 5 to 10 drops of tincture to
a glass of water. Dental powders should contain 10%
powdered resin.

Myrrh, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E Monographs

----- PAGE 550 -----
542 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Crataegus laevigata (Poir.) DC.
Hawthorn

Rosaceae

Parts Used: Traditionally, berry; modern products often
use flower and leaf

Constituents: Flavonoids (leaf and flower, up to 1.78%):
vitexin, quercetin, hyperoside, rutin; oligomeric pro-
cyanidins (leaf and flower, 1.0% to 2.4%); triterpene acids
(leaf and flower, up to 0.6%): ursolic, oleanolic, cratae-
golic acids; phenolic acids (caffeic, chlorogenic, and re-
lated phenolcarboxylic acids)””

Actions: Cardiotonic, diuretic, astringent, hypotensive

Indications: A tonic in the true sense, Crataegus can be
considered a specific remedy for most cardiovascular dis-
ease. A whole plant preparation should be used, as the in-
dividual effects of isolated constituents proved insignifi-
cant when tested in the laboratory. The whole plant, on
the other hand, has unique and valuable properties. After
a four-year study commissioned by the German Federal
Ministry of Health, Crataegus gained recognition as a
heart remedy in Europe. Please see chapter 14 for a more
detailed discussion of these research results and the pos-
sible mechanisms of action of this important herb.

Hawthorn’s primary attribute appears to be an ability
to improve coronary circulation. It dilates the coronary
arteries, relieving cardiac hypoxemia. Consequently, it re-
duces the likelihood of angina attacks and relieves symp-
toms of angina when they occur. The herb thus directly af-
fects the cells of the cardiac muscle, enhancing both
activity and nutrition.

Crataegus is also positively inotropic; that is, it in-
creases the contractility of cardiac muscle. However, it is
quite different in activity from the cardiac glycoside-con-
taining remedies. They impact the contractile fibers,
while Crataegus assists with the availability and utilization
of energy, facilitating a gentle but sustained reversal of
degenerative, age-related changes.

Used in conjunction with other cardiac herbs,
Crataegus helps keep the heart in healthy condition, min-

“ imizing the risk of the development of coronary disease.
It is indicated for cardiovascular degenerative disease,
coronary artery disease, and associated conditions, in-
cluding angina pectoris, mild congestive heart failure, es-
sential hypertension, and recovery after myocardial in-
farction. It is especially beneficial for loss of function due
to old age that has not yet resulted in overt pathology. It
causes no toxicity, accumulation, or habituation, and is
safe for long-term use in the elderly.

Safety Considerations: Hawthorn enhances the activity
of cardioactive drugs, such as Digitalis spp., Convallaria
majalis, strophanthin, and the cardiac glycosides digitoxin
and digoxin. However, because of its coronary vasodilat-
ing and antiarrhythmic effects, it also potentially reduces
the toxicity of these cardiac glycosides by reducing the
dosage needed to achieve the desired effect.

Hawthorn procyanidins have reportedly potentiated
coronary artery dilation caused by theophylline, caffeine,
papaverine, sodium nitrate, adenosine, and epinephrine.
However, the European Scientific Cooperative on
Phytotherapy (ESCOP) monograph does not list any in-
teractions, so some authorities apparently do not consider
these interactions significant.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2.5 ml
three times daily, then 2.5 ml morning and evening as a
maintenance dose (1:5 in 40%). For the treatment of
acute or severe conditions, use up to 5 ml three times a
day. In the elderly, treatment should be continued over
many months. To make an infusion, infuse 2 teaspoons of
dried herb in 1 cup of boiling water; this should be drunk
three times a day.

Dosage suggested in the BHP is 0.3 to 1 g dried herb,
1 to 2 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 1 to 2 ml liquid extract
(1:1 in 25%) three times a day. Commission E recom-
mends 160 to 900 mg water-ethanol extract (correspond-
ing to 30 to 168.7 mg procyanidins, calculated as epicate-
chin, and 3.5 to 19.8 mg flavonoids, calculated as
hyperoside).

Hawthorn, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Daucus carota L.
Wild Carrot
Apiaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts, seed

Constituents: Flavonoids; daucine (an alkaloid); volatile
oil; petroselinic acid; tannins®?

Actions: Diuretic, antilithic, carminative, antispasmodic,
antirheumatic

Indications: The volatile oil present in wild carrot is an
active urinary antiseptic, which helps explain its applica-
tion in such conditions as cystitis and prostatitis. It has
been considered a specific for the treatment of kidney
stones. For the treatment of gout and rheumatism, it is
used as a diuretic in combination with other remedies.
The seeds may be used as a settling carminative agent for
the relief of flatulence and colic.

----- PAGE 551 -----
Safety Considerations: Juice of the fresh plant may
cause photosensitivity.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion of
aerial parts, pour | cup of boiling water over | teaspoon
of dried herb and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should
be drunk three times a day. To prepare an infusion of
seeds, use '/3 to | teaspoon per cup of water. This should
be drunk three times a day.

Wild Carrot, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Dioscorea villosa L.
Wild Yam
Dioscoreaceae

Parts Used: Dried underground parts

Constituents: Steroidal saponins, based on diosgenin:
dioscin, dioscorin, and others*!

Actions: Antispasmodic, anti-irflammatory, anti-

rheumatic, hepatic, cholagogue, diaphoretic

Indications: This valuable herb was at one time the sole
source of the chemicals used as raw material for the man-
ufacture of contraceptive hormones. However, this
should not be taken to mean that the herb is a source of
so-called natural progesterone. The human body is inca-
pable of converting the sapogenins to sex hormones.

In herbal medicine, wild yam is a remedy that can be
used to relieve intestinal colic, soothe diverticulitis, ease
dysmenorrhea, and relieve ovarian and uterine pains.
It is of great use in the treatment of rheumatoid arthri-
tis, especially the acute phase, in which there is intense
inflammation.

Priest and Priest described wild yam and its indica-
tions in the following way:

. .. autonomic nerve relaxant, especially for gastrointesti-
nal conditions, vegetative neuroses and hyperaesthesiae.
Rheumatic syndromes arising trom hepatic and intestinal
dysfunction.

They offered the following specific indications: bil-
ious colic, flatulence, gastrointestinal irritation, neuralgic
conditions, dysmenorrhea, uterine pains, nervousness,
restlessness, and pains of pregnancy.

Ellingwood considered it specific for

... sudden spasmodic griping pain in the stomach and
bowels. It is specific in bilious colic, in the pain of the
passing of gallstones, in mild cases, anc! is valuable in spas-

modie colic of any kind.

MaTERIA MEDICA €: 543

In addition, Ellingwood recommended it for neuralgic
dysmenorrhea, ovarian neuralgia, and cramplike pains.
King’s provides the following monograph:

It is a specific in bilious colic, having proved almost in-
variably successful in doses of '/2 pint of the decoction, re~
peated every half hour or hour. No other medicine is re-
quired, as it gives prompt and permanent relief in the
most severe cases. In fact: it is not only of value in bilious
colic, but in all forms of colic and other painful abdomi-

nal neuroses and all forms of gastro-intestinal irritation. If
it does not relieve in one hour, the medicine should be
discontinued. It has allayed the pain incident to the pas-

sage of biliary calculi when given with full doses of
gelsemium.

It will likewise allay nausea, also spasms of the bow-
els and combined with equal parts of Cornus sericea in de-
coction, is eminently beneficial in the nausea and vomit-
ing of pregnancy. This root appears to exert an action
especially upon enfeebled and irritable mucous tissues

that become painful from spasmodic contractions of their
muscular fibers; hence its value in bilious colic, in painful
dysenteric tenesmus, in dysmenorrhoea (the result of
spasmodic irritation of the mucous membrane), of the
cervix utert and in spasmodic irritations of the gastric mu-
cous membrane attended with pain, nausea and vomiting.
It is reputed useful in indigestion with hepatic derange-
ment, in chronic hepatic congestion and in the chronic
gastritis of drunkards. Ic is also useful in after-pains.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of herb in | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer gently for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHP recommends 2 to 4 g dried herb, 2 to 10 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in
45%) three times daily.

Drosera rotundifolia L.

Sundew

Droseraceae

Parts Used: Whole plant

Constituents: Naphthoquinones, including plumbagin;
flavonoids (kaempferol, myricetin, quercetin, hypero-
side); miscellaneous: carotenoids, plant acids, resin, tan-
nins, ascorbic acid*?

Actions: Antispasmodic, antitussive, expectorant

----- PAGE 552 -----
544 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Indications: Sundew may be used to great benefit in
bronchitis and whooping cough. The presence of
plumbagin helps to explain its actions here, as the con-
stituent has been shown to be active against Streptococcus,
Staphylococcus, and Pneumococcus bacteria. Sundew is also
effective against infections in other parts of the respira-
tory tract, and its relaxing effect upon involuntary mus-
cles makes it useful in relieving asthma. In addition to
pulmonary conditions, sundew has a long history of use
for treating stomach ulcers.

Drosera prevents acetylcholine- or histamine-induced
bronchospasm and has antitussive properties. These anti-
spasmodic actions have been attributed to its naphtho-
quinone constituents. Antimicrobial properties have been
documented for the naphthoquinones. In vivo, plumba-
gin demonstrated a broad spectrum of activity against
various gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, in-
fluenza viruses, pathogenic fungi, and parasitic proto-
zoans. Successful treatment of Microsporum infections in
guinea pigs by local applications of 0.25% to 0.5% solu-
tions of plumbagin (in 40% alcohol) or 1% emulsions has
been reported. However, plumbagin was ineffective
against Lamblia muris and tuberculosis infection when
administered orally to mice for 5 days.®

Safety Considerations: No side effects or toxicity has
been documented. Plumbagin has a LDsg of 15 mg/kg
body weight (i.p.) in mice.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is ] to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day. Commission E recommends a dosage of 3 g
herb daily.

Droserae longifoliae herba, in Herbal Drugs and
Phytopharmaceuticals

Echinacea spp.
Echinacea
Asteraceae

Other Name: Purple coneflower. The main Echinacea
species available in commerce are E. purpurea, E. angusti-
folia, and E. pallida.

Part Used: Root

Constituents: Caffeic acid esters (0.6% to 2.1%) includ-
ing echinacoside (in £. angustifolia but not E. purpurea)
and cichoric acid (E. purpurea only); alkylamides, mostly
unsaturated isobutyl amides (including dodeca-2,4,8,10-
tetraenoic acid); polysaccharides (including echinacin B);
polyacetylenes; essential oil®

Actions: Antimicrobial, immunomodulator, anti-
inflammatory, anticatarrhal, vulnerary, alterative

Indications: Echinacea is one of the primary remedies
for helping the body rid itself of microbial infections. It is
often effective against both bacterial and viral attacks. It
may be used for conditions such as boils, septicemia, and
similar infections, and, in conjunction with other herbs, it
may be used for any infection anywhere in the body. For
example, in combination with yarrow or bearberry, it is
effective against cystitis.

Echinacea is especially useful for infections of the
upper respiratory tract, including laryngitis, tonsillitis,
the common cold, and other catarrhal conditions of the
nose and sinus. In general, it may be used widely and
safely. Tincture or decoction of echinacea may be used as
a mouthwash for gingivitis or pyorrhea. The herb may be
applied externally as a lotion to treat septic sores and cuts.

Much research has focused upon this plant, providing
important insights into its activity and potential uses.
Constituents from the roots have demonstrated mild ac-
tivity against Streptococcus and Staphylococcus aureus. The
caffeic acid derivative echinacoside was the most active;
about 6 mg were reported to be equivalent to 1 unit of
penicillin.2° Treatment with tincture reduced both the
rate of growth and the rate of reproduction of Trichomonas
vaginalis, and was deemed effective in halting recurrence
of Candida albicans infection.**

In other studies, echinacea appeared to prevent infec-
tion and repair tissue damaged by infection, partially by
inhibiting the activity of the enzyme hyaluronidase.®” The
hyaluronidase system is a primary defense mechanism in
which connective “ground substance,” composed largely
of hyaluronic acid, acts as a barrier against pathogenic
organisms. Some pathogens activate an enzyme,
hyaluronidase, which destroys the integrity of the ground
substance. The barrier then becomes leaky, allowing
pathogens to invade, attach themselves to exposed cells,
penetrate the membranes, and kill the cells. The result is an
inflammatory infection.

Echinacea inhibits the action of hyaluronidase by
bonding with it in some way, causing a temporary in-
crease in the integrity of the barrier and impairing the
ability of pathogens to stimulate the destruction of the
ground substance. A range of constituents mediates this
process, especially a complex polysaccharide called echi-
nacin B. This anti-hyaluronidase action also supports the
regeneration of connective tissue destroyed during infec-
tion and the elimination of pathogenic organisms that
create infection.

Purified polysaccharides from echinacea strongly ac-

----- PAGE 553 -----
tivate the body’s macrophage-mediated defense system.
Macrophages initiate the destruction of pathogens and
cancer cells. Echinacea activates macrophages on its
own, independent of any effect on T cells. A tumor-
inhibiting principle—an oncolytic lipid-soluble hydro-
carbon from the essential oil—has also been identified.
The echinacoside glycosides appeat to be the primary
“antibiotics” in echinacea, but they probably function
synergistically with many other active substances present
in the plant. The polysaccharides possess the best immune-
stimulating properties and are also antiviral. Other con-
stituents have been shown to possess good antitumor,
bacteriostatic, and anesthetic properties.

Clinical data support the use of echinacea in a vari-
ety of situations.® It is indicated primarily for the pre-
vention and treatment of acute infections, particularly
colds, influenza, and other acute upper respiratory tract
infections, in which it reduces both the duration and
severity of symptoms. This all points to a conclusion that
echinacea’s actions are related on some level to immune
system function, as it helps the body deal with infections
and stimulates immune response. The herb activates the
macrophages that destroy cancer cells and pathogens and
increases phagocytosis by raising levels of white blood
cells, such as neutrophils, monocytes, eosinophils, and B-
lymphocytes. It also affects propericin levels, suggesting
activation of the complement system.

Safety Considerations: Echinacea rnay cause allergic re-
actions in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae fam-
ily. Theoretically, it may interfere with immunosuppres-
sant therapy.

Preparations and Dosage: Echinacea is often inappropri-
ately used as “daily immune support.” It is more appro-
priately used to treat active infection or at the first sign of
an acute infection.

Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml three times a day (1:5 in
40%). To make a decoction, put 1 to 2 teaspoons of root
in 1 cup of water and bring slowly to a boil. Let simmer
for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three times
a day.

The BHC recommends 1 g dried root, 2 to § ml tinc-
ture (1:5 in 45%), or 0.5 to 1 ml of fluid extract (1:1 in
45%) of Echinacea angustifolia three times daily.
Commission E suggests E. pallida tincture (1:5 in 50%,
from dry extract) corresponding to 900 mg herb or 6 to
9 ml expressed juice of E. purpurea daily.

Echinacea, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

MATERIA MEDICA <> 545

Eleutherococcus senticosus (Rupr. and
Maxim.) Maxim.

Siberian Ginseng

Araliaceae

Other Names: Acanthopanax senticosus; eleuthero
Part Used: Root

Constituents: Eleutherosides A-E; glycosides of a range
of aglycones, including sterols, lignans, and phenolics;
polysaccharides®!

Action: Adaptogen

Indications: Siberian ginseng is one of the primary adap-
togens in use today. As discussed in more detail in chap-
ter 25, an adaptogen is « substance that acts to enhance
the body’s nonspecific resistance to various internal and
external stressors. Because of this nonspecific action,
Siberian ginseng can be recommended as a general tonic
with a very wide range of clinical indications.

Siberian ginseng improves the body’s resistance to
environmental stressors and enhances physical and men-
tal performance. It stimulates many aspects of the im-
mune response, is antihepatotoxic, and increases resis-
tance to oxygen deprivation of the heart.” The herb is
especially useful for conditions influenced by the stress
response, including angina, hypertension, hypotension,
various types of neuroses, chronic bronchitis, and cancer.
It is beneficial against the effects of prolonged stress or
overwork such as exhaustion, irritability, insomnia, and
mild depression.

Siberian ginseng may also be employed to support re-

covery from acute or chronic diseases, trauma, surgery,
and other stressful events, and can help counter the de-
bilitating effects of treatrnents such as chemotherapy and
radiation. It may be taken on a long-term basis to mini-
mize the incidence of acute infections and to generally
improve well-being.
Safety Considerations: Siberian ginseng may interfere
with cardiac medications (including hypo- and hyperten-
sive drugs) and hypoglycemic agents. It may also enhance
some drug effects, In a clinical study, the herb appeared to
increase the efficacy of the antibiotics monomycin and
kanamycin, used to treat Shigella dysentery and Proteus
enterocolitis.

Preparations and Dosage: Based upon clinical studies,
standard tincture dosage is 50 to 100 drops three times a
day. An equivalent dosage for a solid extract concentrated
at a ratio of 20:1 would be 100 to 200 mg. The recom-
mended regimen is usually for a 6-week course of treat-
ment followed by a 2-week break.

----- PAGE 554 -----
546 2 TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Dosage recommended in the BHC is 2 to 3 g dried
root and rhizome or equivalent preparations three times
daily. Commission E suggests 2 to 3 g of root daily.

Siberian Ginseng, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Elymus repens (L.) Beauvois
Couch Grass
Poaceae

Other Name: Formerly Agropyron repens
Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Carbohydrates (10%): triticin, inositol,
mannitol, and mucilage; volatile oil (0.05%), mainly
agropyrene; flavonoids (tricin)

Actions: Diuretic, demulcent, antimicrobial

Indications: Couch grass may be used in urinary tract in-
fections such as cystitis, urethritis, and prostatitis. Its
demulcent properties soothe irritation and inflammation.
The herb is of value in the treatment of benign prostatic
hypertrophy (BPH, or enlarged prostate), and may also
be used for kidney stones and gravel. As a tonic diuretic,
couch grass has been used in combination with other
herbs for rheumatism. Research has demonstrated broad
antibiotic activity for the terpene constituent agropyrene
and its oxidation product.

Safety Considerations: There is a theoretical risk of
potassium depletion when couch grass is used in combi-
nation with potassium-depleting diuretics.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
2 teaspoons of cut rhizome in | cup of water, bring to a
boil, and simmer for 10 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Dosage recommendations from the BHP are 4 to 8 g
dried herb, 5 to 15 ml tincture (1:5 in 40%), or 4 to 8 ml
fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day. The BPC lists
a fluid extract dosage of 3.5 ml to 20 ml three times a day.
Commission E recommends 6 to 9 g dried herb daily.

Couch Grass, in The Complete German Commission E
Monographs

Ephedra sinica Stapf
Ephedra
Ephedraceae

Other Name: Ma huang
Part Used: Stem

Constituents: Alkaloids (L-ephedrine, with D-ephedrine,
pseudoephedrine, norephedrine, N-methylephedrine,

benzylmethylamine); flavonoid glycosides; glycans;
proanthocyanidins”>

Actions: Vasodilator, hypertensive, circulatory stimulant,
antiallergic

Indications: Ephedra has been used in China for at least
5,000 years to treat a range of health problems. This an-
cient medicinal plant was also mentioned in the Hindu
Vedas. With the discovery of the alkaloids in ephedra, this
time-honored, traditional herbal wisdom was verified,
providing modern medicine with important healing tools.

Ephedra contains a range of therapeutically active al-
kaloids, which sometimes amount to up to 2% of the dried
herb. Various Asian Ephedra species provide the source
material for the widely used alkaloids ephedrine and pseu-
doephedrine, mainly E. sinica and E. equisetina from China
and E. gerardiana from India. The alkaloids present in
ephedra have apparently opposite effects on the body.
The whole plant, as used in traditional herbal medicine,
has an overall beneficial, balancing action.

A brief review of the pharmacology of these alkaloids
may prove illuminating. Ephedrine was the first ephedra
alkaloid to find wide use in Western medicine, being
hailed as a “cure for asthma” because of its ability to relax
airways in the lungs. Unfortunately, as is often the way
with miracle cures, it soon became clear that this isolated
ephedra constituent had unacceptable side effects that
dramatically limited its use. The adverse effects were re-
lated to the way in which ephedrine stimulates the auto-
nomic nervous system, which has the effect of elevating
blood pressure, among others. Studies on the whole
plant, however, demonstrated only a slight blood pressure
elevation. This led researchers to the discovery that pseu-
doephedrine, another ephedra alkaloid, slightly reduces
heart rate and lowers blood pressure, thus avoiding the
side effects of ephedrine.®

Pseudoephedrine is also an effective bronchodilator,
equivalent in strength to ephedrine. However, it has the
advantage of causing less stimulation of the nervous sys-
tem, and thus less vasoconstriction, tachycardia, and
other cardiovascular symptoms. Clinical studies have
shown that pseudoephedrine has insignificant side effects.
The efficacy and safety of pseudoephedrine are recog-
nized by the Food and Drug Administration, which ap-
proved it as an over-the-counter nasal decongestant.

All of these findings confirm the traditional applica-
tions of Ephedra sinica as an etfective treatment for nasal
congestion and sinus pressure, whether due to the com-
mon cold, allergies, or sinusitis. The herb is used with
great success in the treatment of asthma, bronchial
asthma, bronchitis, and associated conditions, because of

----- PAGE 555 -----
its power to relieve spasms in the brenchial tubes. It eases
allergic reactions, giving it a role in the treatment of hay
fever and other allergies. It may also be employed to treat
low blood pressure and circulatory insufficiency.

Safety Considerations: Combined with cardiac glyco-
sides or halothane, ephedra can produce cardiac arrhyth-
mias. Guanethidine enhances the sympathomimetic ef-
fect of ephedra. Combining ephedra with monoamine
oxidase inhibitors can significantly increase the sympath-
omimetic action of the alkaloid ephedrine in the herb,
possibly causing fatal hypertension. Used in combination
with secale alkaloid derivatives (e.g., ergotamine) or oxy-
tocin can produce hypertension.°78

Ephedra is contraindicated for people with certain
health problems. It should not be used in the presence of
cardiovascular conditions, thyroid disease, or diabetes, or
by men experiencing difficulty urinating due to prostate
enlargement.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:4 in 45%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of the dried herb in 1 cup of water, bring
to a boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should
be drunk three times a day.

Commission E recommends a single daily dose cor-
responding to 15 to 30 mg total alkaloid.

Ephedra, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Equisetum arvense L.
Horsetail
Equisetaceae

Part Used: Dried stem

Constituents: Alkaloids (including nicotine, palustrine,
and palustrinine); flavonoids (such as isoquercitrin and
equicetrin); sterols (including cholesterol, isofucosterol,
campesterol); silicic acid; miscellaneous: a saponin (equi-
sitonin), dimethylsulphone, thiaminase, aconitic acid”?

Actions: Astringent, diuretic, vulnerary

Indications: Horsetail is an excellent astringent for the
genitourinary system, reducing hemorrhage. While it acts
as a mild diuretic, its toning and astringent actions make
it invaluable in the treatment of incontinence and bed-
wetting in children. It is considered a specific for cases of
inflammation or benign enlargement of the prostate
gland. Applied externally, it is a vulnerary that helps heal
skin wounds. In some cases, it has been found to ease the
pain of rheumatism and stimulate the healing of
chilblains.

Materia MEDICA = 547

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried plant and
infuse for 15 to 20 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Horsetail may be used to make a bath to help with
rheumatic pain and chilblains. Steep 100 g (3'/2 ounces) of
herb in hot water for | hour and add to the bath.

The BHC recommends | to 4 g dried herb, 2 to 6 ml
tincture (1:5 in 25%), or | to 4 ml fluid extract three times
a day. Commission E suggests 6 g of herb or equivalent
preparations daily.

Horsetail, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Eschscholzia californica Cham.
California Poppy
Papaveraceae

Parts Used: Dried aeria} parts
Constituents: Alkaloids; flavone glycosides!
Actions: Nervine, hypnotic, antispasmodic, anodyne

Indications: California poppy has been used as a sedative
and hypnotic for children, especially in cases of overex-
citement and sleeplessness. It can be used wherever an an-
tispasmodic remedy is indicated—for example, for colic
pain. It may also be useful to treat gallbladder colic.

Safety Considerations: California poppy has additive ef-
fects when used with other sedatives.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture (1:5 in 25%) dosage
is 1 to 4 ml at night for sleeplessness in children. For an-
tispasmodic indications, «ase 0.5 to 2 ml three times daily.
To make an infusion, pour | cup of boiling water over 1
to 2 teaspoons of dried herb and infuse for 10 minutes. A
cup drunk at night will promote restful sleep.

Eucalyptus globulus Labill.
Eucalyptus
Myrtaceae

Other Name: Blue gum

Parts Used: Leaf, essential oil distilled from leaf
Constituents: Volatile oil (0.5% to 3.5%): 1,8-cineole
(= eucalyptol, 70% to 85%); a-pinene, p-pinene, d-
limonene, a@-phellandrene; polyphenolic acids (caffeic,
ferulic, gallic, protocatechuic, and others); flavonoids (in-
cluding eucalyptin, hyperosides, rutin)'®!

----- PAGE 556 -----
548 «2. TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SySTEM

Actions: Antimicrobial, antispasmodic, expectorant,
stimulant, febrifuge

Indications: Eucalyptus leaf is used topically as an anti-
microbial and internally as a decongestant and expecto-
rant. The essential oil is used in aromatherapy.

King’s American Dispensatory described the way this
plant was used by the Eclectic physicians. Here are some
relevant excerpts:

Eucalyptus globulus has for a long time been known as a
remedy for intermittent fever among the natives of the
countries of its origin. Aside from its alleged utility in in-
termittents, this agent has had other virtues attributed to
it, as follows: The leaves and their preparations have been
successfully used as a tonic and gently stimulating stom-
achic, in atonic dyspepsia, and in catarrh of the stomach
and typhoid fever; also advised in mucous catarrhal affec-
tions generally, in pseudo-membranous laryngitis, in
asthma, with profuse secretion, and in chronic bronchitis,
with or without emphysema, and in whooping-cough; it
has likewise proved efficient in chronic catarrh of the
bladder, where the urine is high-colored, contains an ab-
normal amount of mucus, or, perhaps, some purulent
matter, and micturation is attended with much pain.
More recently it has been recommended as a diuretic in
the treatment of dropsy. Both the leaves and the oil are
excitants and deodorizers, and, as such, have been suc-
cessfully employed as local applications in bronchial af-
fections with fetid expectoration, in ozena, in fetid or pro-
fuse mucous discharges, in vaginal leucorrhoea, offensive
lochial discharges, gonorrhoeal discharges, indolent, fetid
wounds or ulcers, cancerous ulcerations, in septicemia,
and in gangrene. The leaves may, in some cases, be ap-
plied alone, directly to the part, in form of cataplasm; or
they may be combined with other articles to form a poul-

tice. The oil may be applied of full strength, or diluted
with some other agent. In throat and pulmonary mal-
adies, a tincture diluted, or a medicated water, may be in-
haled in the form of spray; if the oil be employed, it may
be dropped on some cotton placed in a small tube, from
which the vapor may be inhaled. As a deodorizer, the tinc-
ture or the oil may be sprinkled or sprayed upon the of-
fensive body, or the atmosphere of an apartment may be
frequently sprayed with the same. Externally applied, the
oil gives relief in some forms of neuralgic and rheumatic
pains. The leaves of Eucalyptus, made up into cigars or
cigarettes, and smoked, have been advised to afford relief
in bronchial catarrh, asthma, and other affections of the
respiratory organs. .. . Excalyptus honey, gathered by bees
from Eucalyptus flowers, is quite active, and has been rec-

ommended for parasitic and putrescent conditions, gon-
orrhoea, fevers, and catarrhal diseases.

A plant preparation containing a mixture of various
herbal tinctures, including eucalyptus, has been used suc-
cessfully to treat chronic suppurative otitis. The efficacy
of the preparation was attributed to the antibacterial and
anti-inflammatory actions of the herbs.!”

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 ml three
times a day (1:5 in 25%). Make an infusion with 1 to 2
teaspoons of the leaves to 1 cup of boiling water. Infuse in
a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

Commission E recommends a daily dose of 4 to 6 g
leaf or 3 to 9 g tincture.

Eucalyptus leaf and oil, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded
Commission E Monographs

Euonymus atropurpureus Jacq.
Wahoo
Celastraceae

Other Name: Spindle tree
Part Used: Root

Constituents: Cardenolides based on digitoxigenin; al-
kaloids, such as asparagine and atropurpurine; sterols (eu-
onysterol, atropurpurol, homoeuonysterol)'™

Actions: Cholagogue, hepatic, laxative, diuretic, circula-
tory stimulant

Indications: Wahoo is one of the primary liver herbs. It
alleviates congestion in the liver, facilitating the free flow
of bile and thus supporting the digestive process. It may
be used to treat jaundice and gallbladder problems, such
as inflammation and pain or congestion due to stones. It
will relieve constipation due to liver or gallbladder prob-
lems. Because of its normalizing action upon the liver, it
may be beneficial for a range of skin problems in which
the liver may play a role.
Ellingwood considered wahoo specific for

.». indigestion with biliousness, constipation, chronic in-
termittents with cachexia, pulmonary phthisis with night
sweats and great weakness; dropsical affections following
acute disease; in convalescence from severe intermittent
fever; enlargement of the liver; chronic bronchitis.

In addition, he recommended it for malarial cachexia,
as a nutritive tonic, as a hepatic stimulant, and for chronic
pulmonary complaints.

----- PAGE 557 -----
Safety Considerations: Wahoo is contraindicated for
people taking cardiac glycosides or other cardioactive
agents.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, pour
1 cup of water over 1/2 to 1 teaspoon of herb, bring to a
boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHC lists a dosage of 0.3 to 1 g dried bark, 5 to
15 ml expressed juice, 0.6 to 2.6 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%),
or 0.3 to 1 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 45%) three times a day.

Euonymus Bark, in British Herbal. Compendium, vol. 1

Eupatorium perfoliatum L.
Boneset
Asteraceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Sesquiterpene lactones (eupafolin, euper-
folitin, eufoliatin, eufoliatorin, euperfolide, eucannabino-
lide, and helenalin); immunostimulatory polysaccharides;
flavonoids (quercetin, kaempferol, hyperoside, astragalin,
rutin, eupatorin, and others); miscellaneous: diterpenes
(dendroidinic acid, hebenolide); sterols; volatile oil!"

Actions: Diaphoretic, bitter, laxative, tonic, antispas-
modic, carminative, astringent

Indications: Boneset is one of the best remedies for the
relief of symptoms that accompany influenza. It will
speedily relieve aches and pains and help the body deal
with any fever present. Boneset may also be used to help
clear the upper respiratory tract of mucus congestion. Its
mild aperient activity eases constipation. Overall, it is a
safe choice for any fever and for use as a general cleansing
agent. It may also provide symptomatic relief as part of
treatment for muscular rheumatism.

High dilutions of various sesquiterpene lactones iso-
lated from E. perfoliatum demonstrated immunostimulant
activity.!°5 In addition, polysaccharide fractions from E.
perfoliatum showed immumostimulaat actions in granulo-
cyte, macrophage, and carbon clearance tests!

King’s American Dispensatory included an extensive
monograph on boneset, an excerpt of which is included
here:

As a tonic, it is useful in remittent, intermittent, and ty-
phoid fevers, dyspepsia, and general debility. In intermit-
tent fever, a strong infusion, as hot as can be comfortably
swallowed, is administered for the purpose of vomiting
freely. This is also attended with profuse diaphoresis, and
sooner or later by an evacuation of the bowels. During the

MaTeRIA MEDICA @ 549

intermission, the cold infusion or extract is given every
hour as a tonic and antiperiodic. The chill and succeeding
fever is slight, the skin dry, and not, as a rule, followed by
perspiration; there are pains in the bones, praecordial op-
pression, and great thirst. If, however, the case is one in
which the fever lasts all day, a slight sweating may follow
at night. Another indication in ague is vomiting, espe-
cially of much bile. Eupatorium given as above, or some-
times in small doses, may relieve headache of intermittent
character when the intermissions are irregular. In epi-
demic influenza the warm infusion is valuable as an
emetic and diaphoretic, likewise in febrile diseases,
catarrh, colds, with hoarseness and pleuritic pains, and
wherever such effects are indicated. In influenza it re-
lieves the pain in the limbs and back. Its popular name
“boneset” is derived from its well-known property of re-

lieving the deep seated pains in the limbs which accom-
pany this disorder, and colds and rheumatism. Often this
pain is periosteal, and if neuralgic in character, or due to
a febrile condition, Eupatorium will relieve it. But it is not
a remedy for periosteal pain due to inflammation or to or-
ganic changes in the periosteum. On the other hand,
when given until the patient sweats, and then continued
in 5-drop doses of specific eupatorium it has relieved the
severe nocturnal muscular and “bone pains” of syphilis. It
is a remedy for the cough of the aged, that cough in which
there is an abundance of secretion, but lack of power to
expectorate. The cough of measles, common colds, of
asthma, and hoarseness are also relieved by it. Unless
given in excess it acts as a good tonic to the gastric func-
tions, increasing the appetite and power of digestion.

Safety Considerations: Boneset may cause allergic reac-
tions in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae family.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk as
hot as possible. For fevers or flu, it should be drunk every
half hour; otherwise, drink three times a day.

Boneset, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care Professionals
Eupatorium purpureum L.

Gravel Root
Asteraceae

Other Name: Also commonly known as Joe pye. Do not
confuse with boneset (Eupatorium perfoliatum).

Parts Used: Rhizome, root

Constituents: Volatile oil, of unknown composition;
flavonoids (including euparin); resin!”

----- PAGE 558 -----
550 <= TREATMEN! APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Actions: Diuretic, antilithic, antirheumatic

Indications: Gravel root is used primarily to treat kidney
stones or gravel. It may also be of benefit in urinary tract
infections, such as cystitis or urethritis, and can also play
a useful role in a systemic treatment of rheumatism and
gout.

Ellingwood considered it to have the following
indications:

Irritation of the bladder in women from displacement and
chronic inflammation of the uterus; and suppression of
urine, partial or complete, during or after pregnancy,

He recommended it for dropsy, strangury, gravel,
hematuria, diseases of the kidney and bladder due to an ex-
cess of uric acid, chronic endometriosis, leukorrhea,
chronic uterine disease, threatened abortion, ovarian and
uterine atony, dysmenorrhea, dysuria, constant desire to
urinate, intermittent fever, and severe bone pains.

Safety Considerations: Gravel root may cause allergic
reaction in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae
family.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 ml three
times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put 1 tea-
spoon of herb in | cup of water, bring to a boil, and sim-
mer for 10 minutes. This should be drunk three times a day.

Gravel Root, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Eupbrasia officinalis L.
Eyebright
Scrophulariaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Iridoid glycosides, including aucubin
(0.5%); tannins (about 12%, both condensed and hy-
drolyzable gallic acid types); phenolic acids (including
caffeic and ferulic); volatile oil (about 0.2%); flavonoids!

Actions: Anticatarrhal, astringent, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Eyebright is an excellent remedy for
mucous membrane problems. Its combination of anti-
inflammatory and astringent properties makes it relevant
for many conditions. Used internally, eyebright is a pow-
erful anticatarrhal, and thus may be used to treat nasal
catarrh, sinusitis, and other congestive states. However,
the herb is best known for its use in eye conditions, in-
cluding acute or chronic inflammations, stinging and
weeping eyes, and oversensitivity to light. It may be ap-
plied as a compress in conjunction with internal use for
conjunctivitis and blepharitis.

Priest and Priest described it as a

... mild stimulating astringent. Vaso-constrictor to vessels
of nasal and conjunctival membranes, Specific for conges-
tive conditions of the eyes with profuse lachrymation.

‘They gave these specific indications: catarrhal ble-
pharitis, rhinitis, sinusitis, conjunctivitis, hay fever, acute
coryza, irritable sneezing, and lachrymation.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 5 to 10 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

For a compress, place 1 teaspoon of 1 dried herb in
1/ liter (1 pint) of water. Boil for 10 minutes and let cool
slightly. Moisten a cloth in the nkewarm liquid, wring
out slightly, and place over the eyes. Leave the compress
in place for 15 minutes. Repeat several times a day.

Eyebright, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Filipendula ulmaria (..) Maxim.
Meadowsweet
Rosaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Volatile oil; salicylaldehyde (up to 70%),
ethylsalicylate, methylsalicylate, phenolic glycosides (spi-
raein, monotropin, gaultherin); flavonoids (flavonols,
flavones, flavanones, and chalcone derivatives); polyphe-
nolics and other tannins, mainly hydrolyzable (1% in al-
cohol extract, 12.5% in aqueous extract); miscellaneous:
phenylcarboxylic acids, coumarin, vitamin C!”

Actions: Antirheumatic, anti-inflammatory, carminative,
antacid, antiemetic, astringent

Indications: Meadowsweet is one of the best digestive
remedies available. As such, it will be indicated in many
conditions, if they are approached holistically. The herb
protects and soothes the mucous membranes of the di-
gestive tract, reducing excess acidity and easing nausea. It
is used in the treatment of heartburn, hyperacidity, gas-
tritis, and peptic ulceration, Its gentle astringency is espe-
cially helpful in children’s diarrhea. The presence of as-
pirin-like chemicals (alicylates) explains meadowsweet’s
ability to reduce fever and relieve the pain of rheumatism
in muscles and joints.

Safety Considerations: Meadowsweet should be avoided
by people with salicylate sensitivity.

----- PAGE 559 -----
Preparations and Dosage: ‘Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day or as needed.
The BHC recommends 2 to 6 g dried herb, 2 to 4 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 6 ml fluid extract (1:1 in
25%) three times daily. Commission E suggests 2.5 to 3.5 g
flower or 4 to 5 g herb or equivalent preparations daily.

Meadowsweet, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Foeniculum vulgare Mill.
Fennel

Apiaceae

Part Used: Seed

Constituents: Volatile oil (8%): anethole (60% to 80%),
fenchone (10% to 30%); flavonoids (mainly rutin,
quercetin, and kaempferol glycosides); coumarins (ber-
gapten, imperatorin, xanthotoxin, and marmesin); miscel-

laneous: sterols, fixed oils, sugars!!®

Actions: Carminative, aromatic, antispasmodic, anti-in-
flammatory, galactagogue, hepatic

Indications: Fennel is an excellent stomach and intestinal
remedy that relieves flatulence and colic while stimulating
digestion and appetite. It is similar to aniseed in its calm-
ing effect in bronchitis and other coughs, and is a good
choice for flavoring cough remedies. Fennel may increase
milk flow in nursing mothers. Used externally, the essen-
tial oil eases muscular and rheumatic pains. Fennel infu-
sion may be used as a compress to treat conjunctivitis and
blepharitis (inflammation of the eyelids).

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour | cup
of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of slightly crushed
seeds and infuse in a covered container for 10 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day. To ease flatulence,
take a cup '/2 hour before meals.

Recommended dosage from the BHP is 0.3 to 0.6 g
herb or 0.8 to 2 ml liquid extract (1:1 in 70%) three times
daily. The USP suggests 1 g herb, 15 ml fennel water (hy-
drosol), or 0.2 ml essential oil. Fhe BPC suggests a three
times daily dose of 25 to 30 ml fennel water or 0.3 ml oil three
times daily. Daily dosage recommended by Commission E
is § to 7 g herb, 10 to 20 g syrup or honey, 5 to 7.5 ml
compound fennel tincture, or equivalent preparations.

Fennel fruit, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Materia MEDICA <> 551

Fucus vesiculosus L.
Kelp
Fucaceae

Other Name: Bladderwrack
Part Used: Whole plant (a seaweed)

Constituents: Phenolic compounds (phloroglucinol,
fucols); mucopolysaccharides (algin); sulphuryl-, sulpho-
nyl-, and phosphonyl-glycosyl ester diglycerides; polar
lipids; trace metals (particularly iodine)!!!
Actions: Antihypothyroid, antirheumatic

Indications: Bladderwrack has proved useful in the treat-
ment of underactive thyroid and goiter. By regulating
thyroid function, the seaweed helps bring about improve-
ment in all related symptoms. For cases in which obesity
is associated with thyroid trouble, this herb may aid in
weight loss. It has a reputation for helping to relieve
symptoms of rheumatism and rheumatoid arthritis, when
both taken internally and applied externally to inflamed
joints.

Safety Considerations: Kelp’s iodine content may cause
hyper- or hypothyroidism, and it may interfere with ex-
isting treatment for abnormal thyroid function.!!? In gen-
eral, brown seaweeds are known to concentrate various
heavy metals and other toxic elements. Elevated urinary
arsenic concentrations have been traced to ingestion of
kelp tablets. Prolonged ingestion of kelp may reduce gas-
trointestinal iron absorption (due to the binding proper-
ties of fucoidan), resulting in a slow reduction in
hemoglobin, packed cell volume, and serum iron concen-
trations. Prolonged ingestion may also affect absorption
of sodium and potassium ions (alginic acid) and cause
diarrhea.!3

Preparations and Dosage: Kelp may be taken in tablet
form as a dietary supplement or as an infusion. For an in-
fusion, pour | cup of boiling water over 2 to 3 teaspoons
of dried herb and steep for 10 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHC recommends 0.8 to 2 g dried thallus, 2 to
6 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%), or 0.5 to 2 ml fluid extract (1:1
in 25%) three times daily.

Fucus, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Fumaria officinalis DC.
Fumitory

Fumariaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Isoquinoline alkaloids!'*

----- PAGE 560 -----
552 @ TREATMEN1] APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Actions: Diuretic, laxative, alterative, hepatic

Indications: Fumitory has a long history of use for the
treatment of skin problems, such as eczema and acne. Its
action is probably related to general cleansing mediated
via the kidneys and liver. Fumitory may also be used as an
eyewash to soothe conjunctivitis.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This may be drunk freely,
but for skin problems, it should be drunk at least three
times a day.

The BHC lists a dosage of 2 to 4 g dried herb or 2 to
4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.
Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 6 g dried
herb.

Fumariae herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Galega officinalis L.
Goat’s Rue
Fabaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Amines (galegine, 4-hydroxygalegine,
peganine); flavonoids; saponins!!>

Actions: Hypoglycemic, galactagogue, diuretic, diaphoretic
Indications: Goat’s rue is one of many herbal remedies
with the ability to reduce blood sugar levels. It is thus po-
tentially indicated in diabetes mellitus. It cannot replace
insulin therapy, however, and should be used only under
professional supervision.

Goat's rue is also an effective galactagogue. It stimu-
lates both the production and flow of breast milk, and has
been shown to increase milk output by up to 50% in some
cases. It may also stimulate the development of the mam-
mary glands.

Safety Considerations: Goat's rue may potentiate the
action of hypoglycemic drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:10 in 45%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk twice
a day.

Galegae herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Galium aparine L.
Cleavers
Rubiaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Plant acids (caffeic, p-coumaric, gallic,
p-hydroxybenzoic, salicylic, citric); coumarins; iridoids
(asperuloside, rubichloric acid); tannins!!®

Actions: Diuretic, alterative, anti-inflammatory, tonic,
astringent

Indications: Cleavers is a very valuable plant, being per-
haps the best tonic available for the lymphatic system.
As a lymphatic tonic with alterative and diuretic actions,
it may be used safely for a wide range of problems in-
volving the lymphatic system. These include swollen
glands (lymphadenitis) anywhere in the body, especially
tonsillitis and adenoid trouble.

Cleavers is helpful in skin conditions, especially the
dry types, such as psoriasis. It makes a useful contribution
to the treatment of cystitis and other urinary tract condi-
tions associated with pain, and may be combined with uri-
nary demulcents for this. There is a long tradition of
using cleavers to treat ulcers and tumors. Cleavers also
makes an excellent vegetable.

Priest and Priest described cleavers as a

. soothing, relaxing and diffusive diuretic: increases
aqueous excretion, corrects inability to pass normal
catabolic wastes and relieves irritation. Preferred diuretic
for exanthemas.

They gave these specific indications: dropsy, renal
obstructions, bladder stone, gravel, calculi, scalding mic-
turation, dysuria, irritable bladder, cystitis, enuresis in
children, eczema, and psoriasis.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparation and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 4 to 8 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 to 3 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. A pleasant and effective way of using
fresh cleavers is to juice or simply puree in a blender. The
resulting deep green liquid must be used right away or it
will ferment. However, it may be frozen immediately for
future use. An ice cube-sized piece makes an ideal dose.

Dosage listed in the BHC is 2 to 4 g dried herb, 5 to
15 ml expressed juice, 4 to 10 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%), or
2 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Clivers, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care Professionals

----- PAGE 561 -----
Gentiana lutea L.
Gentian
Gentianaceae

Parts Used: Dried rhizome and roct

Constituents: Iridoids: marogentin, gentiopicroside
(= gentiopicrin), swertiamarin; xanthones (gentisein, gen-
tisin, isogentisin); alkaloids: mainly gentianine (0.6% to
0.8%) and gentialutine; phenolic acids (including gen-
tisic, caffeic, protocatechuic, syringic, sinapic acids); mis-
cellaneous: sugars (such as gentianose and gentiobiose),
traces of volatile oil!!7

Actions: Bitter, sialagogue, hepatic, cholagogue, antimi-
crobial, anthelmintic, emmenagogue
Indications: Gentian is an excellent bitter that, like all
bitters, stimulates the appetite and digestion via general
stimulation of digestive juices. Thus, it promotes the pro-
duction of saliva, gastric juices, and bile. Because of this
stimulation, it has a generally fortitying effect. It also ac-
celerates the emptying of the stomach. It is indicated for
most cases involving lack of appetite and digestive slug-
gishness, as well as dyspepsia and flatulence.

Priest and Priest considered it an

... intense, bitter, stimulating tonic: influences digestive
organs, mucous membranes and the portal circulation.
Indicated for atonic and sub-acid states: slowly promotes
peristalsis and facilitates assimilation.

They offered the following specific indications: lan-
guid conditions and general debility, anorexia, alimentary
insufficiency; portal congestion, biliousness, and jaundice.

Safety Considerations: In predisposed persons, gentian
may cause headaches. Gentian is contraindicated during
pregnancy and for those with gastric or duodenal ulcers.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%), 15 to 30 minutes before
meals, or any time acute stomach pains are associated
with a feeling of fullness. To make a decoction, put '/2
teaspoon of shredded root in 1 cup of water and boil for
5 minutes. This should be drunk warm about 15 to 30
minutes before meals, or according to the guidelines
given for tincture.

Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 2 to 4 ¢
root, | to 3 ml tincture, or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract. The USP
(23th ed., 1943) suggests 1 to 2 g as decoction three times
daily; the BHP recommends 0.6 to 2 g by infusion or de-
coction or | to 4 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%) three times daily.

Gentian root, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E.
Monographs

MATERIA MEDICA & 553

Geranium maculatum L.
Cranesbill
Geraniaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Tannins, including gallic acid (levels are
highest just before flowering)!!§

Actions: Astringent, antihemorrhagic, anti-inflammatory,
vulnerary

Indications: American cranesbill is an effective astringent
used for diarrhea, dysentery, and hemorrhoids. When
duodenal or gastric ulceration is associated with bleeding,
this remedy may be used in combination with other rele-
vant herbs. Cranesbill will help when blood is lost in the
feces, although careful diagnosis is vital. It is also indicated
for the treatment of menorrhagia (excessive blood loss
during menstruation) or metrorrhagia (uterine hemor-
rhage). As a douche, it may be used to treat leukorrhea.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For a decoction, put | to
2 teaspoons of rhizome in | cup of cold water, bring to a
boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHP recommends | to 2 g by decoction, 2 to
4 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 1 to 2 ml liquid extract (1:1
in 45%) three times a day.

Ginkgo biloba L.

Ginkgo

Ginkgoaceae

Parts Used: Leaf; seed kernel is used extensively in tradi-
tional Chinese medicine

Constituents: Diterpene lactones (ginkgolides A, B, C,
and J); sesquiterpene lactone (bilobalide); flavonol glyco-
sides (mainly flavone glycosides, including ginkgetin,
quercetin, and kaempferol derivatives)!!°

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, vasodilator, relaxant, diges-
tive bitter, uterine stimulant

Indications: The modern use of ginkgo is not derived
from traditional Chinese medicine, although ginkgo fruit
has a long history of use in that system. Extracts of Ginkgo
biloba leaf were introduced into Western medical practice
in 1965 in Germany. Most pharmacologic studies on
ginkgo leaf for the treatment of peripheral vascular dis-
ease and cerebral insufficiency have utilized the propri-
etary extract EGb 761 and, more recently, L] 1370, not the
crude leaf or simple extracts.!?°

----- PAGE 562 -----
554 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Ginkgo’s primary actions are to increase blood sup-
ply, antagonize platelet activating factor (PAF), and pro-
tect and enhance brain function (an action known as cere-
broprotection). Its ability to improve circulation and thus
blood supply appears to be due to both its vasodilating
properties and its ability to reduce total blood viscosity.

Various mechanisms may underlie the vasodilating
activity—for example, effects on prostaglandin meta-
bolism that increase the synthesis of the vasodilator
prostacyclin. Ginkgo’s antioxidant, radical-scavenging
properties may also play a role. Its ability to lower patho-
logically elevated total blood viscosity seems to be due to
its PAF antagonism, which results in a reduction in
erythrocyte aggregation.

The ginkgolides and bilobalide appear to be respon-
sible for the herb’s cerebroprotective properties.!?!
Among other factors, researchers have studied ginkgo’s
ability to increase tolerance to hypoxia, protect against is-
chemia, improve energy metabolism, and reduce edema
in order to demonstrate the protective actions of ginkgo
extracts on experimentally damaged brain.

Other ginkgo actions are based on its radical-
scavenging effects and PAF antagonism. The constituents
of ginkgo extract with PAF-antagonistic activity are the
ginkgolides. In particular, ginkgolide B has been found to
be a very active PAF antagonist. As discussed elsewhere,
PAF binding to PAF receptors on target cells leads to the
release of mediators and to various physiologic reactions,
such as vasodilation and platelet aggregation. These ac-
tions are responsible for asthma, inflammation, and ana-
phylaxis. PAF antagonists block the PAF receptors of tar-
get cells. This inhibition of platelet aggregation appears
to be one of the most relevant actions associated with
ginkgo use.

Ginkgo’s main clinical indication is for the treatment
of cerebral insufficiency, a common problem in the el-
derly.'?? Among the symptoms typical of cerebral insuffi-
ciency are difficulties with concentration and memory,
absentmindedness, confusion, lack of energy, tiredness,
decreased physical performance, depressed mood, and
anxiety. Headache, vertigo, and tinnitus are other com-
mon complaints. These symptoms are associated with
impaired cerebral circulation, and are sometimes thought
to be early indications of dementia, either the degenera-
tive or the multiple infarct type. However, in some cases,
no explanation for the symptoms can be found.

Many experimental and clinical studies support the
efficacy of ginkgo extract in the treatment of peripheral
blood flow disorders. Vertigo, hearing disorders, and tin-
nitus have many and varied causes, but are often associ-
ated with insufficient perfusion of the brain or inner ear.

Vertigo is regarded as one of the pathologic conditions
that respond best to ginkgo extract. Ginkgo can also
contribute, as part of a broader treatment, to the control
of peripheral arterial occlusive disease (intermittent
claudication).

Safety Considerations: Ginkgo may have an additive
effect when used with other antiplatelet agents. One pa-
tient taking 40 mg of a 50:1 concentrated extract twice
daily in combination with long-term aspirin therapy ex-
perienced bleeding from the iris.!23 However, it is im-
portant to note that ginkgo has demonstrated a very low
incidence of side effects and a relative lack of reported
drug interactions, evidenced by the fact that many el-
derly patients taking ginkgo are taking multiple other
medications simultaneously.

Ginkgo may potentiate the effects of papaverine used
to treat male impotence.!?* Raw ginkgo fruits are report-
edly toxic. Ginkgo extracts, however, are derived from the
leaves.

Preparations and Dosage: Dosage of standardized ex-
tract is 120 to 240 mg/day in divided doses, 50:1 stan-
dardized leaf extract containing 22% to 27% ginkgo
flavone glycosides and 5% to 7% terpene lactones
(ginkgolides ‘A, B, C, and bilobalides). For optimal results,
4 to 8 weeks of daily use are required.

Commission E recommends 120 to 240 mg dry ex-
tract in two or three doses to treat disturbances of perfor-
mance related to organic brain syndromes. For other car-
diovascular indications, it recommends 120 to 160 mg in
two or three doses.

Ginkgo, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Glycyrrhiza glabra L.
Licorice
Fabaceae

Part Used: Dried root

Constituents: Oleanane triterpenes (glycyrrhizin, gly-
acid, and _ phytosterols);  flavanones;
isoflavonoids, chalcones; polysaccharides (mainly glu-
cans); volatile oil (containing fenchone, linalool, furfuryl
alcohol, benzaldehyde); miscellaneous: starch, sugars,
amino acid!?5

cyrrhetinic

Actions: Expectorant, demulcent, anti-inflammatory, an-
tihepatotoxic, antispasmodic, mild laxative

Indications: Licorice is a traditional herbal remedy with
an ancient history and worldwide usage. Modern research
has demonstrated that the herb has effects upon the en-
docrine system and the liver, among other organs. The
triterpenes of Glycyrrhiza are metabolized in the body to

----- PAGE 563 -----
molecules with a structure similar to that of the adrenal
cortex hormones. This may be the basis of the herb’s anti-
inflammatory action.

As an antihepatotoxic, licorice can be effective in the
treatment of chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis, for which it
is widely used in Japan. Much of the liver-oriented re-
search has focused upon the triterpene glycyrrhizin.
Studies show that this constituent inhibits hepatocyte in-
jury caused by carbon tetrachloride, benzene hexachlo-
ride, and polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB).'?¢ It inhibits
the growth of several DNA and RNA viruses and irre-
versibly inactivates herpes simplex virus particles.'?”

Licorice has a wide range of applications for
bronchial problems, including catarrh, bronchitis, and
coughs in general. The herb is used :n orthodox medicine
as a treatment for peptic ulcers, and is similarly used in
herbal medicine for gastritis and ulcers. It may also be ef-
fective in relieving abdominal colic.

King’s described it thus:

Liquorice root is emollient, demulcent and nutritive. It
acts upon mucous surfaces, lessening irritation and is con-
sequently useful in coughs, catarrhs, irritation of the uri-
nary organs and pain of the intestines in diarrhoea. It is
commonly administered in decoction, sometimes alone,
at other times with the addition of other agents and which
is the preferable mode of using it. As a general rule, the
acrid principle should be removed previous to forming a
decoction. When boiled for some time the water becomes
impregnated with its acrid resin; hence, in preparing a de-
coction for the purpose of sweetening diet drinks or cov-
ering the taste of nauseous drugs, it should not be boiled
over 5 minutes. The efficiency of the root in old bronchial
affections may be due to this acrid resin. The powdered
root is also employed to give the proper solidity to pills
and to prevent their adhesion; the extract for imparting
the proper viscidity to them. The extract, in the form of
lozenge, held in the mouth until it has dissolved, is a very

popular and efficient remedy in coughs and pectoral af-
fections. The bitterness of quinine, quassia, aloes and the
acrid taste of senega, guaiacum are masked by Liquorice.

Safety Considerations: Side effects are minimal if daily
intake is less than 10 mg of glycyrrhizin. Chronic use may
cause hypokalemia, headache, spastic numbness, hyper-
tension, weak limbs, dizziness, and edema. Glycyrrhizin
and glycyrrhetinic acid have antidiuretic, mineralocorti-
coid-type actions, but these constituents are removed
from most commercial extracts. The resulting extracts are
denoted as “deglycyrrhizinated.”

Prolonged use in conjunction with thiazide and loop

MATERIA MEDICA @ 555

diuretics and cardiac glycosides is contraindicated, and
licorice should not be administered in combination with
spironolactone or amiloride.'?8 This herb is not recom-
mended for patients taking cardiac glycosides, hypoten-
sive agents, corticoids, diuretic drugs, or monoamine ox-
idase inhibitors.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 3 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1/2 to 1 teaspoon of root in 1 cup of-water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 to 1§ minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Commission E recommends an average daily dosage
of 5 to 15 g root, equivalent to 200 to 600 mg of gly-
cyrrhizin. Dosage according to the BHP is 1 to 5 g (by in-
fusion or decoction) or 2 to 5 ml liquid extract three times
a day.

Licorice, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Grindelia squarrosa (Pursh) Dunal
Gumweed
Asteraceae

Related Species: Grindelia camporum
Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Diterpenes (grindelic acid and others);
flavonoids (including acacetin, kumatakenin, quercetin);

resins!”

Actions: Antispasmodic, expectorant, hypotensive

Indications: Gumweed acts to relax smooth muscles and
heart muscles. This helps to explain its use in the treat-
ment of asthmatic and bronchial conditions, especially
when these are associated with rapid heartbeat and ner-
vous response. The herb may be used for asthma, bron-
chitis, whooping cough, and upper respiratory catarrh.
Because of its relaxing effect on the heart and pulse rate,
it may reduce blood pressure. Externally, it can be applied
in a lotion to treat poison ivy dermatitis.

King’s discussed in detail the indications for two

species:

The grindelias leave in the mouth a bitter, acrid sensation,
which persists for some time and is accompanied or fol-
lowed by an increased flow of saliva. On account of their
irritant effects upon the kidneys, they act as diuretics. The
brain and cord are first stimulated by them, followed by
motor impairment of the lower extremities and a desire to
sleep. The number of respirations are reduced by them.
Grindelia robusta has been found especially efficient in
asthma giving prompt relief. Occasionally, however, as is,
indeed, the case with all the therapeutical agents, it has

----- PAGE 564 -----
556 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

failed but the circumstances attending these failures have
not yet been determined. It has likewise been found effi-
cient in bronchial affections, in pertussis, and in some
renal maladies. Prof, Scudder was partial to this remedy as
a local application in chronic diseases of the skin with fee-
ble circulation, particularly old chronic and indolent ul-
cers. Grindelia squarrosa has been highly eulogized as an
efficient remedy in intermittent fever and in other malar-
ial affections, also to remove the splenic enlargement
which frequently follows those disorders. Why two plants
so closely allied as the G. robusta and the G. squarrosa, and
possessing nearly identical constituents, should give such
discordant therapeutical results, is certainly enigmatical.
The fact is, that many physicians have a great proneness
to run after new remedies, especially when introduced
under some pretentious name, and to place a marvelous
credulity in the statements of interested parties, who are
incapable of determining accurate conclusions as to the
value of a remedy. [Author’s note: This is as relevant
today as it was 100 years ago!] As a local application, the
fluid extract is stated to be of value in the painful
eczematous inflammation and vesicular eruption resulting
from contact with the poison vine or the poison oak.

Safety Considerations: Gumweed may theoretically
cause allergic reactions in people sensitive to plants in the
Asteraceae family.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over | teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHC recommends 0.3 to 1 g resin or 1 to 4 ml
tincture (1:5 in 90%) up to three times daily. According to
Commission E, total daily dosage is 4 to 6 g of drug or
equivalent preparations or 1.5 to 3 ml tincture (1:10 or
1:5, 60% to 80%).

Gumweed herb, in The Complete German Commission E
Monographs

Guaiacum officinale L.

Guaiacum

Zygophyllaceae

Other Name: Guaiac

Part Used: Heartwood

Constituents: Lignans (furoguaiacidin,
furoguaiacin, furoguaiaoxidin); resins (15% to 20%), in-
cluding guaiaretic, hydroguaiaretic, guaiacic, and a- and
B-guaiaconic acids; miscellaneous: vanillin, terpenoids
(including guaiagutin, guaiasaponin)!?°

guaiacin,

Actions: Antirheumatic, anti-inflammatory, laxative, di-
aphoretic, diuretic

Indications: Guaiacum is a specific for rheumatic com-
plaints. It is especially useful in cases involving much in-
flammation and pain, and is thus valuable for chronic
rheumatism and rheumatoid arthritis. It helps in the
treatment of gout and may be used to prevent recurrence
of this disease.

Safety Considerations: Due to the high content of
resins in this valuable herb, care must be taken with pa-
tients with gastritis or peptic ulceration, who may be
more likely to experience stomach upset.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 90%). Commission E recom-
mends 4.5 g of herb or equivalent preparations daily.

Guaiac wood, in The Complete German Commission E
Monographs

Hamamelis virginiana L.
Witch Hazel
Hamamelidaceae

Parts Used: Twig, leaf

Constituents: Tannins (hamamelitannins); flavonoids
(quercetin, kaempferol, astragalin, myricitrin); volatile
oil; saponins; resin?!

Actions: Astringent, anti-inflammatory

Indications: This herb can be found in most households
in the form of distilled witch hazel. It is one of the easiest-
to-use astringents for external use. As with all astringents,
witch hazel may be applied in all cases of bleeding, inter-
nal and external. It is especially valuable for easing symp-
toms of hemorrhoids, and has a well-deserved reputation
for the treatment of bruises, inflamed swellings, and vari-
cose veins. Witch hazel helps control diarrhea and is use-
ful in dysentery.
Ellingwood considered it specific for

. .. soreness of muscles, muscular aching, a bruised sensa-
tion, soreness from violent muscular exertion, soreness
from bruises and strains, soreness and muscular aching
from cold and exposure, relaxed mucous membranes,
dark blue membranes from venous stasis, veins dilated,
relaxed, enlarged, and full varicoses.

In addition, he recommended it for sore throat, ton-
sillitis, diphtheria, acute catarrh, diarrhea, hemorrhoids,
prolapse of the bowel, leukorrhea, and sore breasts.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

----- PAGE 565 -----
Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour | cup
of boiling water over | teaspoon of dried herb and infuse
for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three times a
day. Witch hazel can be made into an excellent ointment
and many other topical formulations.

Witchhazel, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Harpagophytum ‘procumbens IDC. ex Meisn.
Devil’s Claw
Pedaliaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Iridoid glycosides (harpagide, harpago-
side, procumbide); flavonoids (kaempferol and luteolin
glycosides); phenolic acids (chlorogenic and cinnamic
acid); a quinone (harpagoquinone); miscellaneous:
triterpenes, oleanolic and ursolic acid derivatives, esters,
sugars!*?

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, antirheumatic, anodyne,
hepatic

Indications: This valuable plant has proved effective in
some cases of arthritis. This appears to be due to the pres-
ence of a glycoside called harpagoside, which reduces in-
flammation in the joints. Unfortunately, devil’s claw is
not always effective, but it is well worth considering for
arthritis associated with inflammation and pain. The
plant also helps with liver and gallbladder complaints.

Safety Considerations: No drug interactions have been
reported. Pharmacological research suggests a potential
protective action against arrhythmia, which has led to the
speculation that it may interact with antiarrhythmic
agents.!33

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For a decoction, put '/2 to
1 teaspoon of rhizome into | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. The regimen should be continued for
at least 1 month.

Commission E recommends 1.5 g daily for loss of ap-
petite, otherwise 4.5 g daily.

Devil’s claw, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Humulus lupulus L.

Hops

Cannabaceae

Part Used: Inflorescence (strobile)

Constituents: Volatile oil (humulene, B-caryophyllene,
myrcene, farnesene); flavonoids (mainly glycosides of

MATERIA MEDICA = 557

kaempferol and quercetin); oleoresin (3% to 12%): humu-
lone, lupulene; estrogenic substances of undetermined
structure; miscellaneous: tannins, lipids, xanthohumol (a
chalcone)!4

Actions: Sedative, hypnotic, antimicrobial, antispas-
modic, astringent

Indications: Hops has a marked relaxing effect upon the
central nervous system, and is used extensively for the
treatment of insomnia. It eases tension and anxiety, and is
appropriate for cases in which tension leads to restlessness,
headache, and indigestion. As it is also astringent, it may be
valuable for conditions such as mucous colitis. However,
patients experiencing significant depression should avoid
hops, as it may accentuate this mood state. Externally, its
antiseptic action is applied to treat skin ulcers.

Clinical studies generally refer to hops given in com-
bination with one or more additional herbs. Hops in
combination with valerian has been reported to improve
sleep disturbances.'*° A combination of hops, chicory, and
peppermint was shown to relieve pain in patients with
chronic cholecystitis (calculous and non-calculous).!%6

Ellingwood considered hops specific for “marked cases
of nerve irritation and wakefulness where anxiety and
worry are the cause.” He recommended it for hysteria, in-
somnia, acute local inflammations, facial neuralgia, delir-
ium tremens, and excessive sexual excitement.

Safety Considerations: Do not use hops in patients
with marked depression, as the sedative effect may ac-
centuate symptoms. The sedative action may also poten-
tiate the effects of alcohol or of existing sedative therapy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and in-
fuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes. A cup
should be drunk at night to induce sleep. This dose may
be strengthened if needed.

The BHC suggests 0.5 to 1 g dried strobiles, 1 to 2 ml
tincture (1:5 in 60%), or 0.5 to 1 ml fluid extract (1:1 in
45%) three times daily and before going to bed.
According to Commission E, dosage is 0.5 g dried herb as
a single dose.

Hops, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E Monographs

Hydrangea arborescens L.
Hydrangea
Hydrangeaceae

Parts Used: Dried root and rhizome

Constituents: Flavonoids (kaempferol and quercetin),
coumarin (hydrangin); saponin; volatile oil!3”

----- PAGE 566 -----
558 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Actions: Diuretic, antilithic
Indications: Hydrangea’s primary use is for the treat-
ment of inflamed or enlarged prostate. It may also be ef-
fective against urinary stones and gravel associated with
infections, such as cystitis.

Ellingwood gave the following specific symptomatol-
ogy for this underutilized remedy:

... frequent urination with heat, burning, accompanied
with quick, sharp, acute pains in the urethra; partial sup-
pression of urine with general irritation and aching or
pain in the back, pain from the passage of renal sand, are
direct indications for this agent. I am convinced after a
lifetime of experience that it is more universally a sedative
to pain and distress in kidneys and urinary bladder than
any other one remedy.

Ellingwood also recommended hydrangea for acute
nephritis, urinary gravel, backache due to urinary tract
problems, and urinary irritation.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
2 teaspoons of root in | cup of water, bring to a boil, and
simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Hydrangea, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for. Health-Care
Professionals

Hydrastis canadensis L.
Goldenseal
Ranunculaceae

Parts Used: Root, rhizome

Constituents: Isoquinoline alkaloids (2.5% to 6.0%):
hydrastine (1.5% to 4.0%), berberine (0.5% to6.0%); fatty
acids; resin, phenylpropanoids (meconin, chlorogenic
acid); phytosterins; a small amount of volatile oil!38

Actions: Bitter, hepatic, alterative, anticatarrhal, anti-
microbial, anti-inflammatory, laxative, emmenagogue,
oxytocic
Indications: Goldenseal is one of our most useful reme-
dies, and owes much of its value to its tonic effects on
mucous membranes. This probably accounts for its effec-
tiveness in digestive problems, from peptic ulcers to colitis.
The alkaloids it contains stimulate bile production and se-
cretion, and this bitter stimulant activity makes it useful
for loss of appetite.

Goldenseal is effective in catarrhal conditions, espe-

cially sinus disorders. The herb’s pharmacological activ-
ity, including its antimicrobial properties, is usually at-
tributed to the isoquinoline alkaloid constituents, primar-
ily hydrastine and berberine. Berberine has
immunostimulant, antispasmodic, sedative, hypotensive,
uterotonic, cholerectic, and carminative actions. It also
has marked antimicrobial activity, and while not in the
same league as pharmaceutical antibiotics, it has a broad
spectrum of antibiotic activity. Activity has been demon-
strated against a number of bacteria, protozoans, and
fungi in vitro.13°

Traditionally, Hydrastis canadensis was used during
labor to help contractions, but for this very reason, it
should not be taken during pregnancy. Applied externally,
it can help with eczema, ringworm, itching, earache, and
conjunctivitis.

Ellingwood recommended it for numerous conditions:

. .. functional disorders of the stomach, catarrhal gastri-
tis, atonic dyspepsia, chronic constipation, hepatic con-
gestion, chronic alcoholism, hepatic congestion, general
debility, protracted fevers, cerebral engorgements, pros-
trating night sweats, menorrhagia or metrorrhagia due to
uterine subinvolution, postpartum haemorrhage, tumors,
catarrhal conditions, aphthous ulcers, indolent ulcers,
nasal catarrh, diphtheria, tonsillitis, inflammation of the
eyes, leucorrhoea, anal fissure, eczema, gall stones, chole-
cystitis, congestive jaundice, goitre, non-malignant mam-
mary tumors.

Safety Considerations: Goldenseal is contraindicated
for individuals with elevated blood pressure. Prolonged
use of goldenseal may decrease vitamin B absorption.
Like all berberine-containing plants and strong bitters,
Hydrastis is not recommended for use during pregnancy.
Uterine stimulant properties have been reported for
berberine, canadine, hydrastine, and hydrastinine.!°
Goldenseal should not be taken during lactation.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 ml three
times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour 1 cup
of boiling water over 1/2 to 1 teaspoon of powdered root
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. Decoct unpowdered root in the usual
way, by simmering.

Dosage from the BPC is 2 to 4 ml tincture or 0.3 to
0.9 ml liquid extract three times a day. Dosage provided
in the BHC is 0.5 to 1 g dried rhizome and root, 4 to 10
ml tincture (1:10 in 60%), or 0.3 to 1 ml fluid extract (1:1
in 60%) three times daily.
Berberis bark and Hydrastis root, in Principles and Practice of
Phytotherapy

----- PAGE 567 -----
Hypericum perforatum L.
St. John’s Wort
Clusiaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Volatile oil (caryophyllene, methyl-2-oc-
tane, m-nonane, ”-octanal, n-decanal, a- and B-pinene);
naphthodianthones (hypericin, pseudohypericin); phloro-
glucinols (hyperforin); catechins; proanthocyanidins;
flavonoids (hyperoside, rutin)!*!

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, astringent, vulnerary, ner-
vine, antimicrobial

Indications: Taken internally, St. John’s wort has sedative
and pain-relieving effects, giving it a place in the treat-
ment of neuralgia, anxiety, tension, and similar problems.
It is considered especially appropriate for use when
menopausal changes trigger irritability and anxiety. St.
John’s wort is increasingly recommended to treat depres-
sion, an indication that is supported by numerous clinica
trials in both Europe and the United States.!4? However,
in my opinion these claims are overblown.

St. John’s wort is helpful for neuralgic pain and wil
ease fibrositis, sciatica, and rheumatic pain. Externally, it
is a valuable healing and anti-inflammatory remedy.
Applied in lotion form, it speeds the healing of wounds
and bruises, varicose veins, and mild burns. An infused oi
is especially useful for the healing of sunburn.

‘The mechanism of action for the purported antide-
pressant activity of Hypericum ‘perforatum is not under-
stood. One study tested the herb in several biochemica
models relevant to the mechanism of action of antide-
pressant drugs—for example, monoamine oxidase (MIAO)
inhibition. Jt was found to have weak MAO-A and MAO-
B inhibition activity in vitro, but the study authors con-
cluded that MAO inhibition does not explain the herb’s
antidepressant activity.“ While hypericin is considered
an MAO inhibitor, newer studies indicate that the con-
stituent hyperforin is also active. Thus, based on cur-
rently available information, the whole extract must be
considered the “active ingredient,” as the single con-
stituents responsible for this activity remain unknown.
Consequently, dosage should be based on the quantity of
total extract, not on hypericin content.

Priest and Priest described St. John’s wort as a

. . sedative nervine for muscular twitching and chor-
eiform movements—especially indicated for nerve in-
juries to the extremities and teeth/gums. Promotes elimi-

nation of catabolic waste products.

They provided the following specific indications:

MATERIA MEDICA 2+ 559

painful injuries to sacral spine and coccyx, traumatic
shock, hemorrhoids with pain and bleeding, facial neural-
gia after dental extractions and toothache, neurasthenia,
chorea, and depression.

Safety Considerations: No adverse reactions have been
confirmed at dose levels up to 1 mg of total hypericin,!##
Photosensitization at high doses has been reported during
experimental antiviral treatment with synthetic hypericin
(35 mg intravenously) in HIV-positive patients.!#5 While
a few instances of photosensitization have been docu-
mented, this appears to be very rare. A recent study uti-
lizing human keratinocyte cell cultures demonstrated that
usual therapeutic doses of Hypericum extracts are about 30
to 50 times below the phototoxic level."

‘There have been reports of elevated serotonin levels
in patients taking selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(e.g., sertraline) in combination with St. John’s wort.!4”
Evidence suggests that St. John’s wort affects the hepatic
cytochrome P4;9 system, increasing the activity of its most
abundant isozyme, CYP A. Thus, theoretically, the herb
could reduce the activity of simultaneously administered
drugs that are known substrates for this isozyme, including
nonsedating antihistamines, oral contraceptives, certain
antiretroviral agents, antiepileptic medications, calcium
channel-blockers, cyclosporine, some chemotherapeutic
drugs, macrolide antibiotics, and selected antifungals.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). ‘To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. See chapter 11 or 19 for instructions on
making St. John’s wort—infused oil for external application.

Based on clinical studies, dosage of standardized ex-
tract is 300 mg three times a day of extract standardized
to 3% to 5% hyperforin. Dosage recommended in the
BHP is 2 to4 g dried herb, 2 to 4 ml tincture (1:10 in 45%),
or 2 to 4-ml (1:1 in 25%) three times a day, Commission E
suggest 2 to 4 g of herb or 0.2 to 1 mg total hypericin in
other forms of application.

St John’s wort, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Hyssopus officinalis V..
Hyssop

Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Diterpenes (marrubiin); triterpenoid
saponins (oleanolic and ursolic acids); volatile oil (camphor,
pinocaphone, thujone, and many others); flavonoids

----- PAGE 568 -----
560 < TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

(including diosmin and hesperidin); miscellaneous: hys-
sopin (a glucoside), tannins (5% to 8%), resin!*8

Actions: Antispasmodic, expectorant, diaphoretic,
nervine, anti-inflammatory, carminative

Indications: Hyssop has an interesting range of uses,
largely attributed to the antispasmodic action of its
volatile oil. The herb is used for coughs, bronchitis, and
chronic catarrh. Its diaphoretic properties explain its use
for the common cold. As a nervine, it may be taken for
anxiety states and petit mal seizures.

King’s Dispensatory considered hyssop a

.. stimulant, aromatic, carminative and tonic. Principally
used in quinsy and other sore throats, as a gargle, com-
bined with sage and alum, in infusion sweetened with
honey. Also recommended in asthma, coughs, and other
affections of the chest, as an expectorant. The leaves ap-
plied to bruises, speedily relieve the pain, and disperse
every spot or mark from the affected parts.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over I to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Hyssop, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Inula helenium L.
Elecampane
Asteraceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Sesquiterpene lactones, including alanto-
lactone (= helenalin), isoalantolactone; polysaccharides,
mainly inulin (up to 44%); miscellaneous: sterols, resin!”

Actions: Expectorant, antitussive, diaphoretic, hepatic,
antimicrobial

Indications: Elecampane is a specific for irritating
bronchial coughs, especially in children. It may be used
whenever copious catarrh is present—for example, in
bronchitis or emphysema. It can be helpful in asthma and
bronchial asthma, and has been applied for the treatment
of tuberculosis.

This remedy provides a good illustration of the com-
plex and integrated ways in which herbs work. The mu-
cilage has a relaxing effect, while the essential oils bring
about stimulation, so the herb both soothes irritation and
promotes expectoration. These actions are combined with

an overall antibacterial effect. Its bitter principle stimulates
digestion and appetite.
Priest and Priest considered elecampane a

. . gently stimulating tonic expectorant for chronic
catarrhal conditions: warming, strengthening and cleans-
ing to pulmonary inucous membranes. Indicated for
chronic pectoral states with excessive catarrhal expectora-
tion and/or a tubercular diathesis.

They suggested it for the following specific indica-
tions: bronchial and gastric catarrh, chronic bronchitis,
tuberculosis, pneumoconiosis, silicosis, pertussis, emphy-
sematous conditions, and chronic cough in the elderly.

Safety Considerations: Elecampane may cause allergic
reactions in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae
family.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of cold water over | teaspoon of shredded root. Let
stand for 8 to 10 hours. Heat and take very hot three
times a day.

Helenii rhizoma, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Tris versicolor L.
Blue Flag
Tridaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Volatile oil, containing furfural; iridin
(also known as irisin, a glycoside); acids (including sali-
cylic and isophthalic); miscellaneous: a monocyclic C3;

triterpenoid, gum, resin, sterols!*°

Actions: Cholagogue, hepatic, alterative, laxative, di-
uretic, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Blue flag is used in the treatment of skin dis-
eases, and apparently works in this area through effects on
the liver, the main detoxifying organ of the body. It is
valuable as part of a wider treatment for eczema and
psoriasis.

Priest and Priest described blue flag as a

. . . positive alterative for chronic, torpid conditions: in-
fluences glandular system, lymphatics, liver and gall
ducts, and intestinal glands. Specific for hepatic conges-
tion due to venous or lymphatic stasis.

They recommended it for chronic hepatitis,
rheumatic conditions, toxic sciatica, scrophulous skin
conditions, eczema, psoriasis, herpes, enlarged thyroid
gland, and uterine fibroids.

----- PAGE 569 -----
Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | ml three
times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put | tea-
spoon of dried herb into | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

According to the BHC, dosage is 0.6 to 2 g dried rhi-
zome (or by decoction), 3 to 10 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%),
or 0.6 to 2 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 45%) three times daily.

Blue Flag, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Juniperus communis L.
Juniper

Cupressaceae

Part Used: Dried fruit (berry)

Constituents: Volatile oil (0.2% to 3.42%): myrcene,
sabinene, a- and §-pinene, 4-cineole, camphene, limo-
nene; condensed tannins; diterpenes; flavonoids (amento-
flavone, quercetin, isoquercitrin, apigenin); miscellaneous:
sugars, resin, vitamin Clo!

Actions: Diuretic, antimicrobial, carminative, anti-
rheumatic

Indications: The actions documented for juniper are pri-
marily associated with its volatile oil components. Juniper
berries make an excellent antiseptic for urinary tract con-
ditions such as cystitis. Their essential oil is quite stimu-
lating to the kidney nephrons, however, so people with
kidney disease should avoid this herb.

Juniper’s bitter action aids digestion and eases flatu-
lent colic. The herb is taken internally for rheumatism
and arthritis, and, used externally, helps relieve pain in the
joints or muscles. In the laboratory, a juniper extract
demonstrated potent inhibition of herpes simplex virus
type I in human cell culture.!5?

Safety Considerations: With prolonged use or over-
dose, juniper may cause renal damage, evidenced by renal
pain with an increased urge to urinate, pain during urina-
tion, and hematuria and albuminuria (the presence of
blood and protein, respectively, in the urine). People with
kidney disease should not take juniper berries. They
should also be avoided in pregnancy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 0.5 to 1 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | teaspoon of lightly crushed
berries and infuse in a covered container for 20 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Materia MEDICA <> 561

Commission E recommends a total daily dosage of
2 g to a maximum of 10 g of dried juniper fruit, corre-
sponding to 20 to 100 mg of essential oil.

Juniper berry, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Lactuca virosa L.
Wild Lettuce
Asteraceae

Part Used: Dried leaf

Constituents: Lactucin (a sesquiterpene lactone);
flavonoids (mainly based on quercetin); coumarins (ci-
choriin and aesculin); N-methyl-B-phenethylamine!?

Actions: Nervine, anodyne, hypnotic, antispasmodic

Indications: The latex of wild lettuce was at one time
sold as “lettuce opium,” or “lactucarium,” as it was called
in the official pharmacopoeias of the day. Wild lettuce is
a valuable remedy for insomnia and restlessness. As an an-
tispasmodic, it can be applied as part of a holistic treat-
ment for whooping cough and dry irritated coughs in
general. It relieves colic pains in the intestines and uterus,
and so may be used in dysmenorrhea. It also eases mus-
cular pains related to rheumatism. The herb has been
used as an anaphrodisiac.

Safety Considerations: Wild lettuce may cause allergic
reactions in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae
family,

Preparations and Dosaye: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Dosage recommended in the BHC is 0.5 to 4 g dried
herb or 0.5 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times
daily. The USP gives a dosage of 2 ml lactucarium tinc-
ture three times a day.

Wild Lettuce, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Lavandula angustifolia Miller
Lavender
Lamiaceae

Part Used: Flower

Constituents: Volatile oil (linalyl acetate, linalol, lavan-
dulyl acetate, borneol, limonene, caryophyllene);
coumarins (umbelliferone, herniarin, coumarin); miscel-
laneous: triterpenes (e.g., ursolic acid), flavonoids (e.g.,
luteolin)!

----- PAGE 570 -----
562 — TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Actions: Carminative, antispasmodic, relaxing nervine,
antidepressant, rubefacient, emmenagogue, hypotensive

Indications: This beautiful herb has many uses, culinary,
cosmetic, and medicinal. It can help relieve headaches,
particularly when they are stress-related. Lavender may
be quite effective in clearing depression, especially if
used in conjunction with other remedies, and can also be
used to promote natural sleep. As a gentle, strengthening
nervous system tonic, it may be used to treat states of
nervous debility and exhaustion, The essential oil may be
applied externally as a stimulating liniment to help ease
aches and pains of rheumatism. The general safety and
efficacy of the essential of lavender make it widely appli-
cable in topical formulations.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: To make an infusion to take
internally, pour | cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of
dried herb and infuse in a covered container for 10 min-
utes. This can be drunk three times a day. Lavender es-
sential oil should not be taken internally, but can be in-
haled, rubbed on the skin, or added to baths.

Commission E recommends | to 2 teaspoons of herb
per cup of water or | to 4 drops (approximately 20 to
80 mg) of lavender essential oil.

Lavender flower, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Leonurus cardiaca L.
Motherwort
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Iridoids (leonuride and others); labdane
diterpenes (including leocardin); flavonoids (apigenin,
kaempferol, and quercetin glucosides); caffeic acid; alka-
loids (0.35%): tachydrine, betonicine, turicin, leonurine;
tannins (2% to 8%); volatile oil (0.05%)!55

Actions: Nervine, emmenagogue, antispasmodic, hep-
atic, cardiotonic, hypotensive

Indications: The binomial of this plant illustrates the
range of uses to which it has been put. “Motherwort” in-
dicates its relevance for menstrual and uterine conditions,
while “cardiaca” suggests that it is beneficial in cardiovas-
cular and circulatory system treatments.

The herb is valuable for stimulating delayed or sup-
pressed menstruation, especially when anxiety or tension
is involved, and may be used to ease false labor pains. It is
a useful relaxing tonic for menopausal changes.

Motherwort is also an excellent heart tonic, strengthen-
ing without straining. It is considered a specific for tachy-
cardia (heart palpitations), especially when brought on by
anxiety or other such causes. It may be used in all heart
conditions associated with anxiety and tension.

Motherwort has demonstrated cardioactivity in vitro.
An alcoholic extract was found to have a direct inhibitory
effect on myocardial cells: It exerted an antagonistic ac-
tion against calcium chloride and stimulated both a- and
B-adrenoceptors.!%

According to Priest and Priest, motherwort is

. .. diffuse, stimulating and relaxing, an antispasmodic
nervine: indicated for reflex conditions affecting cardiac
function, and as a simple cardiac tonic. It also influences
pre-menstrual nerve tension and muscular rigidity.

They provided the following specific indications:
anemic nervousness and insomnia, palpitations, cardiac
weakness after infections, neurosis, hyperthyroid cardiac
reactions, premenstrual syndrome, congestive amenor-
rhea, and dysmenorrhea.

Safety Considerations: Excessive use of motherwort
may interfere with other cardiovascular treatments.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour 1 cup
of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of dried herb and in-
fuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

According to the BHC, dosage is 2 to 4 g dried herb,
4to 10 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract
(1:1 in 25%) three times daily. Commission E recom-
mends 4.5 g herb or equivalent preparations.

Motherwort herb, in The Complete German Commission E
Monographs

Leptandra virginica (L.) Nutt.
Black Root
Scrophulariaceae

Other Name: Veronicastrum virginicum (L.) Farw.
Parts Used: Rhizome, root

Constituents: Volatile oil (cinnamic acid, methoxycin-
namic acid, dimethoxycinnamic acid); saponins; mannitol;
dextrose; tannins!5”

Actions: Cholagogue, hepatic, laxative, diaphoretic, anti-
spasmodic

Indications: Black root is used to relieve liver congestion

and to treat inflamed gallbladder (cholecystitis). Black
root is also appropriate for use in jaundice caused by liver

----- PAGE 571 -----
congestion; in fact, it will help whenever there is any sign
of liver dysfunction. For example, because chronic consti-
pation is often related to liver problems, this herb is an
ideal remedy for that condition.

Priest and Priest described black root as a

... mild relaxing hepatic for torpid and congestive condi-
tions, influencing the liver assisting the secretion of bile.
It also cleanses the alimentary tract of viscid mucus and
stimulates peristalsis.

They provided the following specific indications:
hepatitis, cholecystitis, chronic hepatic torpor, non-
obstructive jaundice, to clear the bowels in febrile states,
hemorrhoids, and skin eruptions.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb in 1 cup of cold water, bring
to a boil, and simmer for 10 minutes. Take 1 cup three
times a day.

Lobelia inflata L.
Lobelia
Campanulaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Piperidine alkaloids (0.48%): lobeline, lo-
belanidine, lobelanine; chelidonic acid; miscellaneous:
resins, gums, fats!?®

Actions: Antiasthmatic, antispasrnodic, expectorant,
emetic, nervine

Indications: Lobelia has a general depressant action on
the central and autonomic nervous systems and on neu-
romuscular activity. It may be used for many conditions in
combination with other herbs, to further their effective-
ness when relaxation is needed. Its primary specific use is
for bronchial asthma and bronchitis.

Much of the pharmacological activity of lobelia is at-
tributed to its alkaloid constituents, principally lobeline.
Analysis of its action reveals apparently paradoxical ef-
fects. Lobeline has peripheral and central effects similar
to those of nicotine, but is less potent. Hence, lobeline
initially causes CNS stimulation, followed by respiratory
depression.

Ellingwood considered lobelia specific for

. . Irritable, spasmodic and oppressed breathing, and in
respiratory problems from exalted nerve force and nerve
irritation. It is contra-indicated in general relaxation and

Materia MEDICA @ 563

in dyspnoea from enlarged or fatty heart, or from hy-
dropericardium, or enfeebled heart, with valvular incom-
petence. It is specific in threatened spasm with exalted
nerve action—a high degree of nerve tension with great
restlessness and excitability, flushed face and contracted
pupils. It is a prompt emetic in full doses.

The high regard that the Eclectics had for Lobelia is
reflected in Elingwood’s recommendation for the follow-
ing pathologies: spasmodic asthma, whooping cough,
spasmodic croup, membranous croup, infantile convul-
sions, puerperal eclampsia, epilepsy, tetanus, hysterical
paroxysms, hysterical convulsions, rigid os uteri, diph-
theria, tonsillitis, and pneumonia.

Safety Considerations: The side effects of lobeline and
lobelia are similar to these of nicotine and tobacco, and
include nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, coughing,
tremors, and dizziness. Symptoms of overdose include
profuse diaphoresis, tachycardia, convulsions, hypother-
mia, hypotension, and coma. Lobelia should not be used
during pregnancy or lactation.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 0.5 to 1
ml three times a day (1:5 in 40%), To make an infusion,
pour 1 cup of boiling water over '/1 teaspoon of dried
herb and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

Dosage listed in the BHC is 50 to 200 mg dried herb
or 0.4 to 1.6 ml tincture (1:8 in 60%) up to three times
daily.

Lobelia, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals. For more information on the Eclectic physicians’
use of this important plant, see pages 235-242 of Ellingwood’s
American Materia Medica, Therapeutics and Pharmacognosy and
pages 1199-1205 of Kings American Dispensatory.

Lycopus virginicus L..
Bugleweed
Lamiaceae

Other Names: Sweet ougle, water bugle, gypsywort.
Related species include L.. europaeus and L. americanus,

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Phenolic acid derivatives (caffeic, ros-
marinic, chlorogenic, aad ellagic acids); pimaric acid
methyl ester!*?

Actions: Diuretic, peripheral vasoconstrictor, astringent,
nervine, antitussive

Indications: Bugleweed is a specific for overactive thy-
roid, especially when symptoms include shortness of
breath, palpitations, and shaking. It may also be safely

----- PAGE 572 -----
564 < TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

used in cases of heart palpitations of nervous origin.
Bugleweed will support a weak heart associated with an
accumulation of water in the body. As a sedative cough
reliever, it helps ease irritating coughs, especially those of
nervous origin.

Ellingwood described the specific symptomatology of
bugleweed thus:

In diseases of the heart, either functional or organic,
marked by irritability and irregularity of the organ, dysp-
noea, feeling of oppression in the cardiac region, its ad-
ministration is followed by gratifying results.
Hypertrophy and dilatation have been known to undergo

marked diminution in consequence of its administration.
As for its therapeutic uses, he said:

It possesses tonic, sedative, astringent and narcotic prop-
erties and has been successfully used in incipient phthisis,
hemoptysis, etc. It acts like digitalis in reducing the ve-
locity of the pulse, but has no cumulative effects. In peri-
carditis and endocarditis its sedative action lessens the
frequency of the pulse, irritability and its attendant in-
flammation, in a manner equaled by no other remedy.
Exopthalmic goiter. In diseases of the respiratory appara-
tus lycopus has been found to be very useful. Hemoptysis,
associated with rapid and tumultuous heart’s action, yields
readily to its influence, as does hemorrhage from any
part.

Safety Considerations: Bugleweed may interfere with
the action of thyroid hormones because it blocks conver-
sion of thyroxin to T3 in the liver. In vitro, it has also
been shown to interfere with thyroxin production by in-
hibiting thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour |
cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and in-
fuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Commission E suggests a daily dosage of 1 to 2 g

dried herb for infusion or extract equivalent to 20 mg of
herb.

Bugleweed, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Mabonia aquifolium (Pursh) Nutt.
Oregon Grape
Berberidaceae

Other Names: Mountain grape, holly mahonia.
Formerly Berberis aquifolium.

Parts Used: Rhizome, root

Constituents: Alkaloids of the isoquinoline type (berber-
ine, berbamine, hydrastine, oxycanthine)'®

Actions: Alterative, cholagogue, laxative, antiemetic, an-
ticatarrhal, tonic

Indications: Oregon grape finds its main use for the
treatment of chronic and scaly skin conditions, such as
psoriasis and eczema. As skin problems of this nature gen-
erally have systemic causes, the tonic activity of Oregon
grape on the liver and gallbladder may explain its effec-
tiveness. It may be helpful for stomach and gallbladder
conditions, especially when there is associated nausea and
vomiting. As a laxative, it may be safely used to treat
chronic constipation.
Ellingwood considered Oregon grape specific for:

...$caly, pustular and other skin disease due to the disor-
dered conditions of the blood. It is the most reliable al-
terative when the influences of the dyscrasia is apparent in
the skin. It is given freely during the treatment of skin
diseases where an alterative is considered an essential part
of the treatment.

In addition, he recommended it for pimples, rough-
ness, eczema capitis, eczema genitalis, pruritis, scaly
eczema, psoriasis, pityriasis, chronic dermatosis, glandu-
lar indurations, ulcerations, and syphilis.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of root in | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

The BHP recommends 1 to 2 g dried herb or 1 to 2
ml liquid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Marrubium vulgare L.
Horehound
Lamiaceae

Other Name: White horehound
Parts Used: Dried leaf, flowering top

Constituents: Diterpene lactones: marrubiin (0.3% to
1.0%), with premarrubiin; diterpene alcohols (marruciol,
marrubenol, sclareol, peregrinin, dihydroperegrinin);
volatile oil (containing -pinene, sabinene, limonene,
camphene, p-cymol, o-terpinolene); flavonoids (apigenin,
luteolin, quercetin, and their glycosides); alkaloids (traces
of the pyrrolidine betonicine and its isomer turicine);
miscellaneous: choline, alkanes, phytosterols, tannins!®!

----- PAGE 573 -----
Actions: Expectorant, antispasmodic, bitter, vulnerary,
emmenagogue
Indications: Horehound is a valuable plant for the treat-
ment of bronchitis, especially when the patient has a non-
productive cough. It relaxes the smooth muscles of the
bronchus while promoting mucus production and thus
expectoration. It is beneficial in the treatment of whoop-
ing cough. Its bitter action stimulates the flow and secre-
tion of bile from the gallbladder, aiding digestion.
‘Horehound is also used externally to promote wound
healing.

King’s described this valuable remedy in the following
terms:

Horehound is a stimulant tonic, expectorant, and di-
uretic. Its stimulant action apon the laryngeal and
bronchial mucous membranes is pronounced and it, un-
doubtedly, also influences the respiratory function. It is
used in the form of a syrup, in coughs, colds, chronic
catarrh, asthma and all pulmonary affections. The warm
infusion will produce diaphoresis, and sometimes diure-
sis, and has been used with benefit in jaundice, asthma,
hoarseness, and amenorrhoea; the cold infusion is an ex-
cellent tonic in some forms of dyspepsia, acts as a vermifuge.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over !/2 to | teaspoon of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 19 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Commission E recommends a daily dose of 4.5 g
dried herb or 2 to 6 tablespoons pressed juice.

Horehound herb, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Marsdenia reichenbachii Triana
Condurango

Asclepiadaceae

Other Name: Marsdenia condwrango Reichb. F.
Part Used: Dried bark

Constituents: Glycosides (based on condurangogenins,
known as condurangoglycosides); miscellaneous: essential
oil, phytosterols, sugars, starch, fat!

Actions: Bitter, emmenagogue

Indications: Condurango is a bitter that may be used to
treat a whole range of digestive and stomach problems. It
is best known for its ability to stimulate appetite, an ac-

Materia Mepica 565

tion common to all bitters. However, in addition, this
herb relaxes the nerves of the stomach, making it useful
for settling indigestion associated with nervous tension

and anxiety.
Ellingwood had this to say about condurango:

The influence of the agent is exercised directly upon the

stomach as a tonic and corrective of perverted action. It

is of service in gastric ulcer and in the early stages of can-

cer of the stomach, for which it was originally lauded as

a cure. It is depended upon by some enthusiastic users to

retard progress of some cases of this disease and to re-

lieve distress and urgent symptoms when fully developed.
Tt cannot be curative. It will be found of service, proba-
bly, in catarrhal gastritis with extreme atonicity and
threatened ulceration. In these cases its virtues as a tonic
and restorative will find exercise to the full extent of their
influence. It deserves thorough investigation and faithful
trial. It may be given in the form of a warm decoction
with excellent advantage. A wine of Condurango is pre-
pared which has good influence upon the stomach. Half
an ounce may be taken with the meals.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over I to 2 teaspoons of powdered
herb and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

Commission E suggests a daily dosage of 2 to 4 g
dried bark, 2 to § ml tincture, or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract.

Condurango cortex, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Matricaria recutita L.
German Chamomile
Asteraceae

Other Names: Do nox confuse with Chamaemelum nobile
(= Anthemis nobilis), commonly known as Roman
chamomile.

Part Used: Flower head

Constituents: Sesquiterpenes (chamazulene, a-bisabolol,
bisabolol oxide); sesquiterpene lactones (matricin, matri-
carin); flavonoid glycosides (6% to 8%): apigenin, lute-
olin, quercetin, isorhamnetm!®

Actions: Nervine, antispasmodic, carminative, anti-
inflammatory, antimicrobial, bitter, vulnerary

Indications: A comprchensive list of medicinal uses
for chamomile would be very long. Included would be

----- PAGE 574 -----
566 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Reena menopausal depression, loss of ap-
: ; » gastric ulcers, diarrhea, colic, aches and
Pains of flu, migraine, neuralgia, teething, vertigo, mo-
tion sickness, conjunctivitis, inflamed skin, urticaria, and
many others! This may seem too good to be true, but it
simply reflects the wide range of chamomile’ actions in
the body.

Chamomile, probably the most widely used relaxing
nervine herb in the Western world, is safe for use in all
types of anxiety and stress-related disorders. It relaxes and
tones the nervous system, and is especially valuable when
anxiety and tension produce digestive symptoms, such as
82s, colic pains, and even ulcers. This ability to ease phys-
ical symptoms as well as underlying psychological tension
is one of the great benefits of herbal remedies in stress
and anxiety. Chamomile makes a wonderful late-night tea
to ensure restful sleep. It is helpful for anxious children or
teething infants when added to bathwater.

As an antispasmodic herb, chamomile works on pe-
ripheral nerves and muscles, and thus indirectly relaxes
the whole body. When the physical body is at ease, the
mind and heart follow. The herb prevents and eases mus-
cle cramps, whether in the legs or in the abdomen. When
added to a bath after a hard day, chamomile infusion or
essential oil relaxes the body and eases the cares and
weight of a troubled heart and mind.

Because chamomile is rich in essential oil, it acts on
the digestive system, promoting proper function. This
usually involves soothing the walls of the intestines, eas-
ing griping pains, and facilitating the elimination of gas.
A cup of hot chamomile tea is a simple, effective way to
relieve indigestion. It calms inflammations, such as gastri-
tis, and helps prevent ulcers.

Used internally, it is an effective anti-inflammatory
remedy for the digestive and respiratory system; it has a
similar action on the skin when applied externally. A
steam inhalation of chamomile essential oil puts its valu-
able constituents in contact with inflamed mucous mem-
branes in the sinuses and lungs. Chamomile is also a mild
antimicrobial that helps the body destroy or resist
pathogenic microorganisms. As an anticatarrhal, it assists
in the elimination of excess mucus buildup in the sinus
area. It may be used to treat head colds and allergies, such
as hay fever.

Safety Considerations: Chamomile may cause allergic
reactions in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae
family. However, such reactions are extremely rare.

Preparations and Dosage: Chamomile may be used in
any of the ways plants are prepared as medicines. It may

be used fresh or dried in infusions, and tincture is an ex-
cellent dosage form to ensure that all constituents are ex-
tracted and available. Chamomile essential oil is valued in
aromatherapy.

For an infusion, infuse 2 to 3 teaspoons of herb in I
cup of boiling water for 10 minutes in a covered con-
tainer. This should be drunk three or four times a day
Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml three times a day (1:5 in
40%).

Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 3 g
herb as an infusion and 3% to 10% infusion for poultice.
The BHC suggests 2 to 4 g herb as infusion, 3 to 10 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 1 to 4 ml liquid extract (L:l in
45%) three times a day.

Chamomile, German, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Melaleuca alternifolia L.
Tea Tree
Myrtaceae

Other Name: Ti tree
Part Used: Essential oil

Constituents: Volatile oil, containing a range of terpenes

and sesquiterpenes'®

Action: Antimicrobial

Indications: Tea tree essential oi] is an important an-
tibacterial and antifungal agent. While it is undoubtedly
useful, it seems to have attracted the modern equivalent
of the old purveyors of “snake oil.” Some of the claims
made have a kernel of truth to them; however, many are
exaggerated for promotional reasons.

A list of conditions for which Melaleuca oil has been
suggested includes sinusitis, the common cold, sinus
blockage, laryngitis, coughs, aphthous ulcers, boils,
cuts, bites, sunburn, miliaria, parasites, head lice, her-
pes infection, impetigo, psoriasis, infected seborrheic
dermatitis, tinea infection (including ringworm of the
scalp and athlete’s foot), fungal infections of the nails,
thrush, and trichomonal vaginitis. All of the fungal or
parasitic problems should respond well to treatment
with tea tree oil.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tea tree essential oil 1s for
external use, and people with sensitive skin should dilute
it first with a fixed carrier oil, such as almond oil.
Currently, a wide range of products containing tea tree oil
are available, including toothpaste, soap, and shampoo.

----- PAGE 575 -----
Melissa officinalis L.
Lemon Balm
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Dried or fresh aerial parts

Constituents: Volatile oil (0.1% to 0.2%): neral and
geranial, caryophyllene oxide, and a whole range of ter-
penes; flavonoids in low concentrations (luteolin-7-
glucoside and rhamnazin); polyphenolics (including pro-
tocatechuic acid, caffeic acid, rosmarinic acid, and tannins);
triterpenic acids, such as ursolic and pomolic acids!

Actions: Carminative, nervine, antispasmodic, antide-
pressant, diaphoretic, antimicrobial, hepatic

Indications: Lemon balm, an excellent carminative herb,
relieves spasms in the digestive tract and is useful in flat-
ulent dyspepsia. Because of its mild antidepressant prop-
erties, it is primarily indicated when dyspepsia is associ-
ated with anxiety or depression, as the gently sedative oils
relieve tension and stress reactions. The volatile oil ap-
pears to act on the interface between the digestive tract
and the nervous system. The herb has been described by
some herbalists as a trophorestorative for the nervous sys-
tem, similar in some ways to oats.

Lemon balm is appropriate for neuralgia, anxiety-in-
duced palpitations, insomnia, and migraine associated
with tension. Lemon balm has a tonic effect on the heart
and circulatory system and causes mild vasodilation of pe-
ripheral vessels, thus lowering blood pressure. It may be
used for feverish conditions, such as influenza.

Hot-water extracts have antiviral properties, possibly
due in part to the presence of rosmarinic acid and other
polyphenolics. A lotion-based extract may be applied to
herpes simplex skin lesions, the antiviral activity having
been confirmed in both laboratory and clinical trials.

Lemon balm’s hormone-regulating effects have
also been well documented in the laboratory. Freeze-
dried aqueous extracts have been shown to inhibit
many of the effects of thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH) on the thyroid gland. In laboratory studies, it
interfered with the binding of TSH to plasma mem-
branes and inhibited the enzyme iodothyronine de-
iodinase in vitro. It also inhibits the receptor-binding
and other biological activity of immunoglobulins in the
blood of patients with Graves’ disease, a condition that
causes hyperthyroidism.

Safety Considerations: Lemon balm may interfere with
the action of thyroid hormones.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 6 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour 1

MATERIA MEDICA -@ 567

cup of boiling water over 2 to 3 teaspoons of dried herb
or 4 to 6 g of fresh herb and infuse in a covered container
for 10 to 15 minutes. A cup of this tea should be taken
morning and evening or when needed.

Commission E recommends 1.5 to 4.5 g dried herb as
an infusion, taken several times a day. Dosage listed in the
BHC is 2 to 4 g as infusion, 2 to 6 ml tincture (1:5 in
45%), or 2 to 4 ml liquid extract (1:1 in 45%).

Melissae folium, in Herba! Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Mentha pulegium L.
Pennyroyal
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Aerial pares

Constituents: Volatile oil (1% to 2%): pulegone, iso-
pulegone, menthol, isomenthone, limonene, piperitone;
miscellaneous: bitters, tannins!®

Actions: Carminative, diaphoretic, stimulant, emmenagogue

Indications: With its richly aromatic volatile oil, penny-
royal is helpful for flatulence and related abdominal colic.
It relieves spasmodic pain and eases anxiety. However, its
main application is as an emmenagogue, used to stimulate
the menstrual process and to strengthen uterine contrac-
tions. Pennyroyal essential oil is toxic and should be
avoided completely.

Safety Considerations: Human fatalities related to in-
gestion of pennyroyal essential oil as an abortifacient have
been reported. The dose required for an abortifacient ef-
fect is close to the toxic dose, and fatalities have been re-
lated to both nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity. Doses of
1 ounce have proved fatal.!67

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three umes a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Dosage recommended in the BHP is | to 4 ¢ dried
herb or 1 to 4 ml liquid extract (1:1 in 45%).

Pennyroyal, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Mentha x piperita L.
Peppermint
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Phenolic acids (caffeic, chlorogenic, and
rosmarinic acid); essential oil (up to 1.5%), the major

----- PAGE 576 -----
568 <= TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

components of which are menthol, menthone, and men-
thyl acetate; flavonoids (glycosides of apigenin, dios-
metin, and luteolin); tannins!®

Actions: Carminative, anti-inflammatory, antispasmodic,
aromatic, diaphoretic, antiemetic, nervine, antimicrobial,
analgesic

Indications: Peppermint is an excellent carminative with
relaxing effects on the muscles of the digestive system. It
combats flatulence, flatulent dyspepsia, intestinal colic,
and associated conditions, and stimulates the flow of bile
and digestive juices, The volatile oil acts as a mild anaes-
thetic to the stomach wall, allaying feelings of nausea and
the desire to vomit. It also help relieve the nausea and
vomiting of pregnancy and of motion sickness.

Peppermint can play a role in the treatment of ulcer-
ative conditions of the bowels. It is a traditional treatment
for fevers, colds, and influenza. As an inhalant, pepper-
mint provides temporary relief of nasal catarrh. It may
help with headaches associated with indigestion, and its
nervine actions ease anxiety and tension. Used for dys-
menorrhea, it relieves pain and eases associated tension.
Externally, peppermint is applied to soothe itching and
inflammation of the skin.

Ellingwood considered peppermint specific for

. .. flatulent colic, gastrodynia, nausea, vomiting, spas-
modic pain in the bowels, hiccough, palpitation from indi-
gestion, griping, irritability of the stomach, diarrhoea with
abdominal pain, nervous headache, painful gonorrhoea.

In addition, he recommended it for fevers associated
with nausea and vomiting, local pain relief in rheumatism
(essential oil), symptomatic relief of asthma and chronic
bronchitis, toothache, acute indigestion, and pruritis ani.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over a heaping teaspoon of dried
herb and infuse in a covered container for 10 minutes.
This may be drunk as often as desired.

According to Commission E, daily dosage is 3 to 6 g
herb, 5 to 15 g tincture, or equivalent preparations. For
essential oil, it suggests a daily dosage internally of 6 to 12
drops, or 3 to 4 drops in hot water as an inhalation. For
irritable colon, it recommends a single dose of 0.2 ml, or
an average daily dose of 0.6 ml essential oil in enteric-
coated capsules. (Enteric-coated capsules are designed to
dissolve after they pass the stomach, thus facilitating ac-
tivity in the intestines.) The BHC suggests 2 to 3 g herb

by infusion or 2 to 4 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%) three times
a day.

Menthae piperitae folium, in Herbal Drugs and
Phytopharmaceuticals

Menyanthes trifoliata L.
Bogbean
Menyanthaceae

Other Name: Buckbean
Part Used: Leaf

Constituents: Anthraquinones (including emodin, aloe-
emodin, chrysophanol, and rhein glycosides); flavonoid
glycosides (hyperin, kaempferol, quercetin, rutin, trifolio-
side); alkaloids (gentianin and gentianidine); coumarins
(scopoletin); iridoids!?

Actions: Bitter, diuretic, cholagogue, antirheumatic

Indications: Bogbean is a most useful herb for rheuma-
tism, osteoarthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis. However,
because of its stimulating effects in the digestive system,
it should not be used for rheumatism accompanied by col-
itis or diarrhea. It acts as an aperient by stimulating the
walls of the colon, and markedly promotes secretion of
digestive juices and bile flow. It is thus useful for debili-
tated states related to sluggish digestion, indigestion, and
disorders of the liver and gallbladder.

Safety Considerations: Excessive doses of bogbean may
irritate the gastrointestinal tract, causing diarrhea, grip-
ing pains, nausea, and vomiting.'”°
Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour | cup
of boiling water over | to 2 teaspoons of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 19 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

According to the BHC, dosage is 0.5 to 2 g dried leaf,
4 to 10 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%), or 1 to 2 ml fluid extract
(i:1 in 25%) three times daily. Commission E recom-
mends a daily dosage of 1.5 to 3 g dried herb.

Menyanthidis folium, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Mitchella repens L.
Partridgeberry
Rubiaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Largely unknown; unspecified alkaloids,
saponins, glycosides, tannins, and mucilages have been
reported!”!

----- PAGE 577 -----
Actions: Parturient, emmenagozue, diuretic, tonic,
astringent

Indications: Partridgeberry is among the best remedies
for preparing the uterus and whole body for childbirth. It
should be taken for some weeks before the child is due to
help ensure a safe and wonderful birth for both mother
and baby. Partridgeberry may also help relieve the pain of
dysmenorrhea. As an astringent, it has been used to treat
colitis, especially if there is much mucus.
According to King’s,

Partridge berry is parturient, diuretic, and astringent.
Used in dropsy, suppression of urine and diarrhoea, in de-
coction. It seems to have an especial affinity for the
uterus, exerting a powerful tonic and alterative influence
upon this organ, and has hence been found highly bene-
ficial in many uterine derangements, as in amenorrhoea,
some forms of dysmenorrhoea, menorrhagia, chronic
congestion of the uterus, enfeebled uterine nervous sys-
tem, etc. Dose of a strong decoction, from 2 to 4 fluid
ounces, 2 or 3 times a day. The berries are a popular rem-
edy for diarrhoea and dysuria. Used as follows, partridge
berry is highly recommended as a cure for sore nipples:
Take 2 ounces of the herb, fresh if possible, and make a
strong decoction with a pint of water, then strain, and add

as much good cream as there is liquid of the decoction.
Boil the whole down to the consistence of a soft salve, and
when cool, anoint the nipple with it every time the child
is removed from the breast.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion,
pour | cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHP recommends 2 to 4 g dried herb or 2 to 4
ml liquid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Myrica cerifera L.
Bayberry
Myricaceae

Part Used: Bark

Constituents: Triterpenes (including taraxerol, taraxe-
rone, and myricadiol); flavonoids (such as myricitrin);
tannins (bark 3.9%, total aqueous extract 34.82%); mis-
cellaneous: phenols, resins, gums'??

Actions: Astringent, circulatory stimulant, diaphoretic

MaTERIA MEDICA @ 569

Indications: As a circulatory stimulant, bayberry may
have a role in holistic approaches to many conditions.
Because of its specific actions, it is a valuable astringent
for diarrhea and dysentery. Bayberry is also indicated for
mucous colitis. Applied as a gargle, it soothes sore throats,
and when used as a douche, it helps with leukorrhea. It
may also be used for the treatment of colds.
Ellingwood described bayberry as a

. .. Stimulating astringent indicated where ever there is
excessive mucous discharge. For atonic or persistent diar-
rhoea and locally for bleeding gums.

In addition, he recommended it for dysentery, stom-
atitis, nasal catarrh, measles and scarlet fever, convulsions,
and jaundice.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 teaspoon of herb into a cup of cold water and bring to a
boil. Let sit for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Bayberry, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Nepeta cataria L.
Catnip
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Leaf, flowering top

Constituents: Volatile oil (carvacrol, citronellal, nerol,
geraniol, pulegone, thymol, nepetalic acid); iridoids (in-
cluding epideoxyloganic acid and 7-deoxyloganic acid);
tannins!

Actions: Carminative, antispasmodic, diaphoretic, ner-
vine, astringent

Indications: Catnip is a traditional cold and flu remedy.
It is a valuable diaphoretic helpful in any feverish condi-
tion, especially acute bronchitis. As a carminative with an-
tispasmodic properties, catnip eases stomach upset, dys-
pepsia, flatulence, and colic. It is a perfect remedy for the
treatment of diarrhea in children. Its nervine sedative ac-
tion adds to its generally relaxing properties.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 6 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). For an infusion, pour |
cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried herb and

----- PAGE 578 -----
570 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes. This
should be drunk three times a day.

Dosage listed in the BHP is 2 to 4 g dried herb, 3 to
6 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%), or 2 to 4 ml liquid extract (1:1
in 25%).

Panax ginseng L.

Korean Ginseng

Araliaceae

Other Species: American ginseng is Panax quinguefolius,
also known as Canadian ginseng.

Part Used: Root

Constituents: Triterpene glycosides, called ginsenosides
or panaxosides, of which 13 have been isolated (e.g., des-
ignated ginsenosides Ra, Rb, Rgl, Rg2, and others); gly-
cans (panaxans A-E); volatile oil!”4

Actions: Adaptogen, tonic, stimulant, hypoglycemic
Indications: Ginseng has an ancient history, and much
folklore has accumulated about its actions and uses. The
genus name, Panax, is derived from the Latin panacea,
meaning “cure all.” Unfortunately, many of the claims
made for ginseng are exaggerated, but it is clear that this
is an important remedy.

Ginseng is an adaptogen, a substance that acts to en-
hance nonspecific resistance to various external and inter-
nal stressors. Thus, it has a wide range of possible thera-
peutic uses. Its best therapeutic application is for weak or
elderly people, for whom the adaptogenic and stimulating
properties can be profoundly useful. It should not be used
indiscriminately, as its stimulating properties are con-
traindicated in some pathologies. For example, Chinese
herbalists caution against the use of ginseng in acute in-
flammatory diseases and bronchitis. The ginseng used by
the 19th-century Eclectic physicians was P. quinguefolius.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Ginseng root is often
chewed, or a decoction may be made as follows: Put '/2
teaspoon of powdered root in 1 cup of water, bring to a
boil, and simmer gently for 10 minutes. Drink three times
a day. The tincture dose is 1 to 2 ml three times a day (1:5
in 60%).

A common daily dosage used in clinical trials is 200
mg of a 5:1 standardized extract. Commission E. recom-
mends a daily dose of 1 to 2 g of root or equivalent
preparations.

Ginseng, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Parietaria diffusa L.
Pellitory ofithe Wall
Urticaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Flavonoids (glycosides of quercetin,
kaempferol, and isorhamnetin); glucoproteins; bitter
principle; tannins!”

Actions: Diuretic, demulcent

Indications: Pellitory of the wall may be used to treat any
inflammation of the urinary tract, especially when a
soothing action is needed. It is beneficial for cystitis and
pyelitis, and acts a good general diuretic when used to re-
lieve water retention related to kidney problems. It has an
especially valuable role to play in the treatment of kidney
stones or gravel.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Passiflora incarnata L.
Passionflower
Passifloraceae

Parts Used: Leaf, whole plant

Constituents: Alkaloids (harmine, harman, harmol,
harmaline, harmalol, passaflorine); flavonoids (apigenin,
homoorientin, isovitexin, kaempferol, luteolin, orientin,
quercetin, rutin, saponaretin, saponarin, vitexen)!76

Actions: Nervine, hypnotic, antispasmodic, anodyne,
hypotensive

Indications: Passiflora is used for its sedative and sooth-
ing properties and to lower blood pressure, prevent
tachycardia, and relieve insomnia. It has a depressant ef-
fect on the central nervous system and acts as a hypoten-
sive. The pharmacological actions of many of the
flavonoids, such as apigenin, are well known, and include
antispasmodic and anti-inflammatory effects. The alka-
loids and flavonoids in passionflower have shown sedative
activity in animals.

Passionflower is the herb of choice for intransigent
insomnia. It eases the transition into restful sleep without
causing any next-day hangover. It may be used whenever
an antispasmodic is indicated (for example, for
Parkinson’s disease, seizures, or hysteria). It can be effec-

----- PAGE 579 -----
tive for nerve pain, such as neuralgia, and the viral infec-
tion of nerves called shingles. Passionflower may also be
helpful for asthma associated with spasmodic activity and
states of tension.

Safety Considerations: Passionflower will potentiate the
effects of sedative drugs. Theoretically, it is contra-
indicated for people taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml,
taken once in the evening for sleeplessness or twice a day
for other conditions (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion,
pour 1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb
and infuse for 15 minutes. As with tincture, drink a cup in
the evening for sleeplessness or 1 cup twice a day for
other indications.

The BHP lists a dosage of 0.25 to 1 g dried herb, 0.5
to 2 ml tincture (1:8 in 45%), or 0.5 to 1 ml liquid extract
(1:1 in 25%) three times a day. Dosage recommended in
the BHC is 0.5 to 2 g dried herb or 0.5 to 2 ml fluid ex-
tract (1:1 in 25%) up to four times daily.

Passionflower herb, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Petroselinum crispum (Mill.) Nyman ex

A. W. Hill

Parsley

Apiaceae

Parts Used: Taproot, leaf, seed

Constituents: Volatile oil (containing apiole, myristicin,
B-phellandrene, and others); coumarins; flavonoids;
phthalides; vitamins!7’

Actions: Diuretic, emmenagogue, carminative, antispas-
modic, expectorant, hypotensive

Indications: Fresh parsley, so widely used in cooking, is a
rich source of vitamin C. Medicinally, the herb has three
main areas of usage. First, it is an effective diuretic that
helps the body eliminate excess water, and may be used
whenever such an action is desired. (Remember, however,
that the cause of the problem must also be sought and
treated.) It is also an emmenagogue, used to stimulate the
menstrual process. Thus, medicinal use of parsley during
pregnancy is not advisable, as it may cause excessive stim-
ulation of the womb. Finally, it has value as a carminative
to ease flatulence and accompanying colic pains.

Safety Considerations: Parsley can cause allergic reac-
tions. The essential oil is a photosensitizer. Do not use
the essential oil or extracts in medicinal doses during
pregnancy.

MareRIA MEDICA -e» 571

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of leaf or root
and infuse in a covered container for 5 to 10 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

The BHC recommends 2 to 4 g dried herb or 2 to
4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times daily. Com-
mission E suggests a daily dose of 6 g herb or equivalent
preparations.

Parsley herb and root, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission
E Monographs

Peumus boldus Molina
Boldo
Monimiaceae

Part Used: Dried leaf

Constituents: Isoquinoline alkaloids (up to 0.7%): bol-
dine, isoboldine, and isocorydine; volatile oil (2.5%):
p-cymene, 1,8-cineole, ascaridole, linalool; flavonoid gly-
cosides, based on isorhainnetin!”®

Actions: Cholagogue, hepatic, diuretic

Indications: Boldo is a specific for gallbladder problems,
such as stones and inflammations. It is also used when
there is visceral pain related to other problems in the liver
or gallbladder. Boldo, in combination with cascara,
rhubarb, and gentian, is effective against a variety of
symptoms, including loss of appetite, digestive difficul-
ties, constipation, flatulence, and itching.!”? Boldo also
has mild urinary demulcent and antiseptic properties, and
so may be useful in cystitis.

Safety Considerations: Because of the volatile oil con-
tent, excessive doses of boldo may cause renal irritation.
Thus, it should be avoided by individuals with existing
kidney disease. Ascaridole is toxic, and use of boldo es-
sential oil is not recommended.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Average daily dose recommended by Commission E
is 3 g of herb or equivalent preparations. The BHP sug-
gests 0.6 to 2 g dried herk or 0.6 to 2 ml liquid extract (1:1
in 45%) three times a day.

Bolco leaf. in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

----- PAGE 580 -----
572 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Phytolacca americana L.
Poke
Phytolaccaceae

Part Used: Root

Constituents: Triterpenoid saponins (phytolaccosides
A-E, based on the aglycones phytolaccagenin and phyto-
laccic acid); lectins (a mixture known as “pokeweed mito-
gen,” consisting of a series of glycoproteins)!®°

Actions: Antirheumatic, stimulant, anticatarrhal, purga-
tive, emetic

Indications: Poke root is a strong but valuable herb. It
helps eliminate catarrh and supports cleansing of the lym-
phatic glands, and may be seen primarily as a remedy for
infections of the upper respiratory tract. It may be used to
treat catarrh, tonsillitis, laryngitis, swollen glands, and
mumps.

Lymphatic problems elsewhere in the body may also
benefit from the use of poke, especially mastitis, for which
it can be taken internally and applied as a poultice. The herb
may also have value in rheumatism, particularly long-
standing disorders. Used externally as a lotion or oint-
ment, it may be used to rid the skin of scabies and other
pests. Care must be taken with this herb, as it is powerfully
emetic and purgative in large doses.

Priest and Priest described poke as a

... stimulating and relaxing alterative: promotes the re-
moval of catabolic wastes and the products of fatty de-
generation. Specific for skeletal congestions, and for
serous and glandular tissues.

They gave the following specific indications: chronic
rheumatism and arthritis, neuralgia and lumbago, tonsil-
litis and parotitis, mastitis, ovaritis, orchitis, enlarged thy-
roid, and enlarged lymph nodes.

Safety Considerations: In large doses, poke is a power-
ful emetic and purgative.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 0.25 ml
three times a day (1:10 in 45%). For a decoction, only a
small amount of this herb should be used. Put '/a tea-
spoon of root in 1 cup of water, bring to a boil, and sim-
mer gently for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Poke root, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Pimpinella anisum L.
Anise

Apiaceae

Other Name: Aniseed
Part Used: Dried seed

Constituents: Volatile oil (1% to 4%), consisting of
largely trans-anethole (70% to 90%), also dianethole and
photoanethole; coumarins (such as bergapten, umbelli-
ferone, scopoletin); flavonoids (rutin, isovitexin, quer-
cetin, luteolin, apigenin glycosides); phenylpropanoids;
miscellaneous: lipids, fatty acids, sterols, proteins,
carbohydrates!®!

Actions: Expectorant, antispasmodic, carminative, an-
timicrobial, aromatic, galactagogue

Indications: The internal use of anise (also known as
aniseed) to ease griping, intestinal colic, and flatulence is
based upon its volatile oil content. The oil also has ex-
pectorant and antispasmodic actions that underlie the
use of the herb in bronchitis, for tracheitis when there is
persistent irritable coughing, and for whooping cough.
‘Used externally, aniseed oil helps control lice, and the oil
may be applied in an ointment base for the treatment of
scabies.

Studies have demonstrated that aniseed increases
mucociliary transport, which supports its use as an expec-
torant. The herb has mild estrogenic effects thought to be
due to the presence of dianethole and photoanethole, ex-
plaining its use in folk medicine to increase milk secre-
tion, facilitate birth, and, allegedly, increase libido.

Safety Considerations: Anise may be allergenic and
photosensitizing. [t may interfere with the activity of an-
ticoagulant therapy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%), To make an infusion, the
seeds should be gently crushed just before use to release the
volatile oils. Pour 1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 tea-
spoons of the seeds and infuse in a covered container for 5
to 10 minutes. Take | cup three times daily. The tea should
be drunk slowly before meals to treat flatulence. One drop
of the essential oil may be taken internally by mixing it into
1 teaspoon of honey.

Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 3 g
dried fruit or 0.3 g essential oil.

Anis [ractus, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

----- PAGE 581 -----
Piper methysticum Forst. f.
Kava Kava
Piperaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Kavalactones (3.5% to 15% of the root by
dried weight): methysticin, dihydromethysticin, kavain,
dihydrokavain; chalcones (flavokavains A~C)!®*

Actions: Relaxing nervine, hypnotic, antispasmodic, local
anesthetic, antifungal

Indications: Kava is a safe treatment for anxiety, with the
added benefit that it does not dampen alertness when
given at normal therapeutic doses. The antianxiety effects
of kava compare favorably to those of prescription medi-
cations often used to treat anxiety disorders, such as ben-
zodiazepines, without the side effects commonly seen with
these drugs.!®} Kava does not impair reaction time and ap-
pears to improve concentration.

In one double-blind, placebo-controlled study, 29
subjects were treated for 4 weeks with 100 mg kava ex-
tract (standardized to 70% kavalactones) three times
daily. The kava group experienced significant decreases in
symptoms of anxiety (measured on tae Hamilton Anxiety
Scale) compared with the placebo group.!* Another study
showed that kava was effective in relieving anxiety associ-
ated with menopause.

Kava possesses mild antidepressant properties, mak-
ing it suitable for the treatment of anxiety associated with
minor forms of depression. Because it is an effective mus-
cle relaxant, it is appropriate for conditions associated
with skeletal muscle spasm and tension (for example,
headaches due to neck tension). It is also a relevant hyp-
notic in cases of mild insomnia. It has local anesthetic ac-
tions on mucous membranes, so it is helpful for control of
pain related to oral conditions. The constituent kavain
has demonstrated significant analgesic effects in animal
studies, apparently via non-opiate pathways.'® Subeu-
taneous injections provided anesthesia for several hours
to several days.

Safety Considerations: A side effect of heavy kava con-
sumption is “kava dermopathy,” an ichthyosiform skin
rash characterized by noninflammatory dryness and scal-
ing of the skin. This is typically seen only in heavy, long-
term consumers of a traditional kava beverage popular in
Polynesia. However, the rash has also been observed in
people taking doses of 300 to 800 mg daily of the isolated
lactone dihydromethysticin.!® This skin reaction is re-
versible upon discontinuation of kava treatment.

Kava may potentiate the effects of substances that act

MATERIA MEDICA @ 573

on the central nervous system, such as alcohol, barbitu-
rates, and psychopharmaceutical agents. An apparently
antagonistic action or incompatibility reaction may occur:
In one case, 150 mg kava extract taken twice daily reduced
the efficacy of levodopa used in the treatment of
Parkinson’s disease.!8’

A small number of reports of hepatotoxicity related
to kava use have appeared. The evidence to confirm a role
for kava in such liver toxicity is extremely equivocal, but
has led to restrictions on availability in some countries.

Preparations and Dosage: Recommended dosage for
kava depends upon the concentration of kavalactones.
The important measure is the amount of kavalactones the
preparation is standardized to contain. Commission E
recommends preparations equivalent to 60 to 120 mg
kavalactones taken three times a day.

Kava, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Piscidia erythrina L.
Jamaica Dogwood
Fabaceae

Part Used: Stem

Constituents: Isoflavones (lisetin, jamaicin, ichthyone);
rotenoids (rotenone, milletone, isomilletone); organic
acids, including piscidic acid; B-sitosterol; tannins!*

Actions: Nervine, anodyne, antispasmodic

Indications: Jamaica dogwood is a powerful sedative, used
in its West Indian homeland as a fish poison. While the
herb is not poisonous to humans, it is important not to ex-
ceed the recommended dosage level. This is a powerful
remedy for the treatmerst of painful conditions, such as
neuralgia and migraine. One of its primary applications is
related to nervous tension or pain. It can also be used to
relieve ovarian and uterine pain.

Safety Considerations: Use Jamaica dogwood with great
care. The herb may potentiate sedative effects of con-
comitant therapies. It should not be used during preg-
nancy and lactation.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 m}
of the tincture as needed (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoc-
tion, put | teaspoon of root in 1 cup of water, bring to a
boil, and simmer gently for 10 to 15 minutes. This should
be drunk as needed.

The BHC recommends 2 to 4 g of dried root bark, §
to 15 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 8 ml of liquid ex-
tract (1:1 in 60%) three times daily.

Jamaica Dogwood, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

----- PAGE 582 -----
574 a TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SysTEM

Plantago major L.
Plantain
Plantaginaceae

Related Species: Ribwort plantain (Plantago lanceolata)
Parts Used: Leaf, aerial parts

Constituents: Iridoids (aucubin, catalpol); flavonoids
(apigenin, luteolin, scutellarin, baicalein, nepetin, hispi-
dulin, plantagoside); tannins; oleanolic acid; plant acids!®®
Actions: Vulnerary, expectorant, demulcent, anti-
inflammatory, astringent, diuretic, antimicrobial

Indications: Both greater plantain (Plantago major) and
its close relative ribwort plantain (P. lanceolata) have
valuable healing properties. Plantain acts as a gentle ex-
pectorant while soothing inflamed and sore membranes,
making it ideal for coughs and mild bronchitis. Its as-
tringency is helpful in diarrhea, hemorrhoids, and cysti-
tis accompanied by bleeding. Plantain is one of Western
herbalism’s primary topical healing agents, used as a lo-
tion, ointment, compress, or poultice for cuts and
bruises. It may be applied topically for hemorrhoids and
skin ulcerations.
Ellingwood described plantain thus:

The remedy is of value in the internal treatment of all dis-
eases of the blood. Scrofula, syphilis, specific or non-spe-
cific glandular disease and mercurial poisoning. It is used in
ulcerations ofthe mucous membrane, due to depraved con-
ditions, It may be given in diarrhoea, dysentery, the diar-
rhoea of consumption, cholera infantum, and where there
are longstanding hemorrhoids. It is also given in female
disorders, attended with fluent discharges and in hema-
turia, also in dysuria and some forms of passive hemor-
rhage. It would thus seem to possess marked astringent
properties, as well as those of an alterative character.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 3 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried herb and
infuse for 10 minutes. This should be drunk three times a
day. An ointment may be made for treatment of hemor-
rhoids and cuts.

Commission E recommends 3 to 6 g of herb or
equivalent preparations daily.

Plantain, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Polygala senega L.
Seneca Snakeroot
Polygalaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Triterpenoid saponins, based on the
aglycones senegenin, polygalacic acid, and sene-
genic acid; phenolic acids (p-coumaric, ferulic, sinapic,
p-methoxycinnamic); polygalitol, a sorbito] derivative;
methyl salicylate; sterols; fats!”

Actions: Expectorant, diaphoretic, sialagogue, emetic

Indications: Seneca snakeroot has strong expectorant ef-
fects that can be employed to treat bronchial asthma, es-
pecially in cases marked by difficulty with expectoration.
It has a general ability to stimulate secretions, including
saliva. It may be used as a mouthwash and gargle in the
treatment of pharyngitis and laryngitis. If too much is
taken, the herb may irritate the lining ofthe gut and cause
vomiting.

A quote from Ellingwood is highly suggestive of the
therapeutic possibilities this herb offers:

The agent is indicated in typhoid pneumonitis, capillary
bronchitis, in aged and debilitated subjects, chronic bron-
chitis with profuse secretion, in the declining stages of
pneumonitis, bronchitis and croup, when the inflamma-
tory condition has passed off, chronic bronchitis with
pain and soreness in the chest and asthma. The agent is in
use in the treatment of dropsy from obstruction and glan-
dular enlargement, also in rheumatism, syphilis, squa-
mous skin diseases and in amenorrhoea. In inflammation
of the eyelids and iritis it is beneficial. Snake Root has
been employed as a stimulating expectorant in chronic
bronchitis, in aged and debilitated subjects, where a stim-
ulating medicine is demanded and in the later stages of
pneumonia and catarrhal inflammation. In these cases,
given in small doses, it improves secretion, removes ab-
normal deposits and restores the strength. It is an ener-
getic stimulant to the mucous membranes of the air pas-
sages; and, when given before the inflammation has
subsided, aggravates the cough and does harm.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, pour
1 cup of boiling water over !/2 teaspoon of dried root and
simmer for 5 to 10 minutes. Drink 1 cup three times a
day.

Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 1.5 to

----- PAGE 583 -----
3 g of root, 1.5 to 3 ml of fluid extract, or 2.5 to 7.5 ml of
the tincture.

Polygalae radix, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Populus candicans L.
Balm of Gilead
Salicaceae

Part Used: Unopened buds

Constituents: Phenolic glycosides (salicin, populin,
chrysin); volatile oil (a-caryophyllene, cineole, arcurcum-
ene, bisabolene, farnesene, and others); alkanes; resins;
phenolic acids; tannins!?!

Actions: Stimulating expectorant, antimicrobial, vul-
nerary

Indications: Balm of Gilead soothes, disinfects, and as-
tringes mucous membranes, making it an excellent rem-
edy for sore throats, coughs, and laryngitis. In fact, it is
considered a specific for laryngitis accompanied by loss of
voice. It may also be used to treat chronic bronchitis.
Applied externally, it may help ease the inflammation of
rheumatism or arthritis, and may also be of benefit in dry
and scaly skin conditions, such as psoriasis and dry eczema.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
of the tincture three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an
infusion, pour | cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of
buds and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day or more often until effective (if
the patient can deal with the taste!). The herb is usually
used in the form of a syrup to improve palatability.

The BHC recommends 1.5 to 3 g root, 3 to 5 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45% ethanol), or 1 to 2 ml liquid extract
(1:1 in 25%) three times daily.

Poplar, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Populus tremuloides Michx.
Quaking Aspen

Salicaceae

Part Used: Bark

Constituents: Phenolic glycosides (salicin, populin);
tannins!%2

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, astringent, antiseptic, ano-
dyne, cholagogue, bitter tonic

Indications: Quaking aspen is a relevant anti-inflammatory
for arthritis and rheumatism accompanied by pain and

MATERIA MEDICA <> 575

swelling. Its use in this indication is quite similar to that
of willow, and it is most effective when used as part of a
broad therapeutic approach, not as the sole treatment. It
is very effective for flare-ups of rheumatoid arthritis. As a
cholagogue, it helps stimulate digestion, especially stom-
ach and liver function, particularly when loss of appetite
is part of the picture. It may also be appropriate for fever-
ish colds and other infections, such as cystitis. As an as-
tringent, it may help in the treatment of diarrhea.

Priest and Priest described quaking aspen as a

. . . bitter tonic for all general uses, especially for post~
febrile debility. Stimulates appetite and aids digestion.
Suitable for the elderly.

They gave the following specific indications: dyspep-
sia, flatulence, diarrhea, and dysentery.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb in 1 cup of water, bring to
a boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day. To stimulate appetite, drink 30
minutes before meals.

Prunus serotina Ehrh.
Wild Cherry
Rosaceae

Part Used: Dried bark

Constituents: Cyanogenetic glycoside (prunasin); ben-
zaldehyde; eudesmic acid; p-coumaric acid; scopoletin;
tannins; sugars!?

Actions: Antitussive, expectorant, astringent, nervine,
antispasmodic

Indications: Because of its powerful sedative effect on
the cough reflex, wild cherry bark finds its main use in
the treatment of irritating coughs. Thus, it has a role in
the treatment of bronchitis and whooping cough. It is
appropriate for use in combination with other herbs to
control asthma. (Remember, however, that inhibiting a
cough is not the same as healing the infection, which will
still need treatment.) In addition to this use for coughs,
wild cherry may be used as a bitter to improve sluggish
digestion. A cold infusion, applied as a wash, may be
helpful for eye inflammations.

Here is an excerpt from a lengthy monograph in
King’s on wild cherry:

Wild Cherry has a tonic and stimulating influence on the

digestive apparatus, and a simultaneous sedative action on

----- PAGE 584 -----
576 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

the nervous system and circulation. It is, therefore, valu-
able in all those cases where it is desirable to give tone and
strength to the system, without, at the same time, causing
too great an action of the heart and blood vessels, as, dur-
ing convalescence from pleurisy, pneumonia, acute hep-
atitis, and other inflammatory and febrile diseases. Its
chief property is its power of relieving irritation of the
mucous surfaces, making it an admirable remedy in many
gastro-intestinal, pulmonic, and urinary troubles. It is best
adapted to chronic troubles. Externally, it has been found
useful, in decoction, as a wash to ill conditioned ulcers and
acute ophthalmia.

Safety Considerations: Theoretically, large doses of
wild cherry bark are toxic.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For a decoction, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried bark and
simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Pulsatilla vulgaris L.
Pasqueflower
Ranunculaceae

Other Names: Pulsatilla, wind flower
Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Sesquiterpene lactones; protoanemonin
(= ranunculin), anemonin (oxidation product of pro-
toanemonin);, triterpenoid saponins (hederagenin);
flavonoids (delphinidin and pelargonidin glycosides);
anemone camphor; tannins; volatile oil!*

Actions: Nervine, antispasmodic, antibacterial

Indications: Pasqueflower is a relaxing nervine especially
useful for problems combining spasm in the reproductive
system with overall nervous tension. It may be safely used
to relieve dysmenorrhea, ovarian pain, and painful condi-
tions of the testes. It may help alleviate tension reactions
and headaches associated with such reactions, and is ap-
propriate for insomnia and general nervous overactivity.
Pasqueflower’s antibacterial actions give this herb a
role in treating skin infections, especially boils. It is simi-
larly useful in the treatment of respiratory infections and
asthma. An infused oil or tincture will ease earache.
Uterine antispasmodic activity has been documented
for Pulsatilla in laboratory studies.'% In another study, the
constituents protoanemonin and anemonin (produced
when protoanemonin oxidizes) showed sedative and an-

tipyretic properties in rodents.!%

This remedy was far more widely used in the 19th
century than it is today. The following passage comes
from the extensive monograph on Pulsatilla in King’s:

Pulsatilla forms an important remedy with the Eclectic
physicians as well as with homeopaths, who make exten-
sive use of it. According to Dr. Scudder, its most impor-
tant use is to allay irritation of the nervous system in per-
sons of feeble health, thus giving sleep and rest,
preventing unnecessary expenditure of nerve force, and,
by this means, facilitating the action of tonics and restora-
tives. It is a remedy of wide applicability, but more partic-
ularly for those conditions in which the mind is a promi-
nent factor. A gloomy mentality, a state of nerve
depression and unrest, a disposition to brood over real or
imagined trouble, a tendency to look on the dark side of
life, sadness, mild restlessness, and a state of mental un-
rest generally denominated in broad terms “nervousness,”
are factors in the condition of the patient requiring
Pulsatilla. The whole condition is one of nervous depres-
sion, the nutrition of the nerve centers are at fault.
Pulsatilla may be given to produce sleep, when there is
great exhaustion. If the insomnia is due to nervous ex-
haustion it is a prompt remedy to give rest, after which
sleep obtains. Where sleep is disturbed by unpleasant
dreams, and the patient awakens sad and languid,
Pulsatilla should be given.

In dysmenorrhoea, not due to mechanical causes,
and with the above-named nervous symptoms, no remedy
is more effective. Pulsatilla frequently proves a good rem-
edy in ovaritis and ovaralgia with tensive, tearing pain. It
is frequently a remedy for pain, when dependent on or as-
sociated with debility, and sometimes when due to acute
inflammation. It frequently proves a useful remedy in
headache of various types. It relieves the frontal headache
from nasal catarrh, nervous headache.

Safety Considerations: Fresh Pulsatilla is poisonous and

should not be ingested. External contact with the fresh
plant should also be avoided. The toxic principle, pro-
toanemonin, rapidly degrades to the nontoxic anemonin
during drying. Avoid use of Pudsatilla during pregnancy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:10 in 40%). To make an infusion,
pour | cup of boiling water over !/2 to 1 teaspoon of dried
herb and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day or as needed. Liquid extract
dosage is 0.12 to 0.3 ml (1:1 in 25%).

Pulsatilla, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

----- PAGE 585 -----
Quercus alba L.
Oak
Fagaceae

Part Used: Bark

Constituents: Tannins (15% to 20%): phlobatannin,
ellagitannins, and gallic acid!”

Actions: Astringent, anti-inflammatory, antiseptic

Indications: Oak bark may be used wherever an effective
astringent is needed—for example, for diarrhea or dysen-
tery. However, because of its high content of astringent
tannins, it may be too strong in some situations. The de-
coction is appropriate for use as a gargle for tonsillitis,
pharyngitis, and laryngitis. It may also be applied as an
enema to treat hemorrhoids and as a douche for leukor-
rhea. However, it is primarily indicated for acute diarrhea,
for which it should be taken in small, frequent doses.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug inter-
actions have been reported. However, do not use for
constipation.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). ‘Io make a decoction, put
1 teaspoon of bark in 1 cup of water, bring to a boil, and
simmer gently for 10 to 15 minutes. This can be drunk
three times a day.

Oak bark, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Rheum palmatum L.
Chinese Rhubarb
Polygonaceae

Other Names: An interchangeable species is Rbewm offic-
inale Baillon. Do not confuse with garden rhubarb.

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Anthraquinones (chrysophanol, emodin,
aloe-emodin, rhein, sennosides A-E, others); tannins; stil-
bene derivatives; volatile oil; rutin; fatty acids; calcium
oxalate!

Actions: Bitter, laxative, astringent

Indications: Rhubarb root has a ourgative action that
makes it very effective in the treatment of constipation.
However, this purgative effect is followed by an astrin-
gent effect. This means that the herb has a truly cleansing
action upon the gut, as it first removes debris and then as-
tringes the system with antiseptic properties.

According to Priest and Priest, rhubarb root is a

... mild stimulating tonic to alimentary mucous mem-

Materia MEDICA @ 577

brane, liver and gall ducts—removes viscid mucus. Small
doses—tonic hepatic. Large doses—cathartic.

They gave the following specific indications: diarrhea
and dysentery, and functional dyspepsia.

Safety Considerations: Rhubarb root may cause an in-
crease in the effectiveness and toxic effects of cardiac gly-
cosides and an effect on the action of antiarrhythmic drugs,
because it enhances loss of potassium. Potassium deficiency
can be increased by simultaneous use of thiazide diuretics,
corticoadrenal steroids, or licorice root. Because it de-
creases intestinal transit time, rhubarb root may reduce the
absorption time of orally administered drugs.' Note:
Rhubarb root may color the urine yellow or red.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
morning and evening. “fo make a decoction, put '/2 to 1
teaspoon of the root in |. cup of water, bring to a boil, and
simmer gently for 10 minutes. This should be drunk
morning and evening.

Commission E recommends a daily dosage contain-
ing 20 to 30 mg of hydroxyanthracene derivatives (calcu-
lated as rhein). Individual dosage is the smallest dosage
necessary to maintain a soft stool.

Rhei radix, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Rosmarinus officinalis L.
Rosemary
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Leaf, twig

Constituents: Volatile oil (borneol, camphene, camphor,
cineole, limonene, linaiool); flavonoids (apigenin, dios-
metin, diosmin, luteolin and derivatives); rosmarinic acid
and other phenolic acids; diterpenes (carnosol, carnosolic
acid, and rosmariquinone); rosmaricine; triterpenes (ur-
solic acid, oleanolic acid?

Actions: Carminative, antispasmodic, antidepressant,
rubefacient, antimicrobial, emmenagogue

Indications: Rosemary is a circulatory and nervine stim-
ulant. It has a toning and calming effect on digestion, es-
pecially when stomach upset is accompanied by psycho-
logical tension. Thus, conditions appropriate for
treatment with rosemary include flatulent dyspepsia with
headache or depression associated with debility. Applied
externally, it helps ease muscular pain, sciatica, and nev-
ralgia. It also acts as a stimulant to both hair follicles and
circulation in the scalp, and thus may be useful for treat-
ing premature baldness. Rosemary essential oil is most ef-
fective for this purpose.

----- PAGE 586 -----
578 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Priest and Priest considered rosemary a

... diffuse stimulant and relaxing tonic with special in-
fluence upon stomach and cerebrum. It soothes the ner-
vous system and is tonic to the vaso-motor function and
peripheral circulation. It is a suitable tonic for the elderly.

They gave the following specific indications: atonic
conditions of the stomach, gastric headache, adolescent
hypotonia, asthenia with pallid complexion, and circula-
tory weakness following stress or illness.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Commission E recommends a total daily dosage of 4
to 6 g herb or equivalent preparations.

Rosemary leaf, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Rubus idaeus L.
Red Raspberry
Rosaceae

Parts Used: Leaf, fruit

Constituents: Flavonoids (mainly glycosides of
kaempferol and quercetin), tannins, fruit sugar; volatile
oil; pectin; citric acid; malic acid?!

Actions: Astringent, tonic, parturient

Indications: Raspberry leaf has a long tradition of use in
pregnancy to strengthen and tone the tissue of the uterus.
Used for this purpose, it purportedly strengthens contrac-
tions and checks hemorrhage during labor. As an astrin-
gent, it has therapeutic applications for a wide range of
conditions, including diarrhea and leukorrhea. It also
helps ease mouth problems, such as aphthous ulcers,
bleeding gums, and inflammations, and, used as a gargle,
is effective for sore throats.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This may be drunk freely.

The USP recommends a daily dosage of 4 to 8 g
dried herb or 4 to 8 ml fluid extract.

Rubi fructicosi folium, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Rubus villosus L.
Blackberry
Rosaceae

Part Used: Bark of root and rhizome

Constituents: Tannins (20%): gallic acid; saponins (in-
cluding villosin)’0

Action: Astringent

Indications: Blackberry is an excellent, safe, and gentle
astringent remedy that can be used in all situations that
call for this action. It is appropriate for diarrhea, dysen-
tery, and other problems associated with “loose bowels.”
It was traditionally used in Britain as an external wash to
treat burns and a whole range of skin eruptions. It will
stanch bleeding and is helpful for leukorrhea.
Ellingwood considered blackberry specific for “diarrheas
of infancy.”

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 g of dried herb in | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 minutes. Drink 1 cup three times a
day.

Commission E recommends 4.5 g of dried herb daily.

Rubi idaei folium, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Rumex crispus L.
Yellow Dock
Polygonaceae

Part Used: Root

Constituents: Anthraquinone glycosides (about 3% to
4%, including nepodin, physcion, and emodin); miscella-
neous: tannins and oxalates?®

Actions: Alterative, laxative, hepatic, cholagogue, tonic

Indications: Yellow dock is used extensively in the treat-
ment of chronic skin complaints, such as psoriasis. While
anthraquinones usually have a strong cathartic action on
the bowel, in this herb they act mildly, possibly tempered
by the tannin content. Because yellow dock works in a
broader manner than herbs that simply stimulate gut ac-
tion, it isa valuable remedy for constipation. Yellow dock
promotes the flow of bile and has the somewhat obscure
action of “blood cleansing.” Its influence on the gall-
bladder gives it a role in the treatment of jaundice due to
congestion.

----- PAGE 587 -----
Priest and Priest considered yellow dock a “general
tonic alterative with special influence upon skin erup-
tions.” They gave the following specific indications:
simple deficiency anemia, eczema, psoriasis, urticaria,
prurigo (a chronic skin condition characterized by per-
sistent, intensely itchy papules), and itching hemor-
rhoids.

Safety Considerations: Fresh yellow dock root may
cause vomiting. Yellow dock may potentiate the activity of
stimulant laxatives.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of root in 1 cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer gently for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHP recommends 2 to 4 ¢ dried herb, | to 2 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in
25%) three times a day.

Yellow Dock, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Ruta graveolens L.
Rue
Rutaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Volatile oil: 2-undecanone (50% to 90%)
and others; flavonoids (including quercetin and rutin);
coumarins (bergapten, isoimperatorin, psoralen, scopo-
fetin, and umbelliferone); alkaloids (arborinine, graveo-
line); lignans (in the root): savinin and helioxanthin?°+

Actions: Antispasmodic, emmenagogue, antitussive, an-
timicrobial, bitter, abortifacient

Indications: Rue is an herb with an ancient history. The
genus name, Ruta, comes from the Greek work reno,
meaning “to set free,” an expression of its reputation for
freeing people from disease. Its main modern application
is to regulate the menstrual cycle and bring on suppressed
menses.

Its other main area of use is related to the plant’s an-
tispasmodic action. Rue relaxes smooth muscles, espe-
cially in the digestive system, where it eases griping and
bowel tension. Its ability to ease spasm gives it a role in
the treatment of spasmodic coughs. It also increases pe-
ripheral circulation and lowers elevated blood pressure.
Chewing the fresh leaf relieves tension headaches, eases
palpitations, and alleviates other anxiety problems.

Materia MEDIca @ 979

Safety Considerations: Rue essential oil is a dangerously
powerful abortifacient. Therefore, the herb should be
avoided during pregnancy and the essential oil avoided at
all times.

Preparations and Dosage: To make an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 1§ minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. Tincture dosage is 1 to 4 ml three times
a day (1:5 in 40%).

The BHP recommends 0.5 tol g of dried herb or 0.5
to 1 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Rue, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Salix alba L.
White Willow

Salicaceae
Part Used: Bark

Constituents: Phenolic glycosides (salicin, salicylic acid);
miscellaneous: tannins, catechin, p-coumaric acid,

flavonoids?
Actions: Analgesic, anti-inflammatory, tonic

Indications: Willow is an ancient remedy that has been
used in various forms to treat rheumatism and gout,
fevers, and aches and pains of all kinds. It is generally con-
sidered to be the natural form and original source of the
modern aspirin.

Safety Considerations: Willow bark has a theoretical
potential to cause interactions of the type seen with sali-
cylates, although no cases have been reported in the sci-
entific literature. The ESCOP monograph notes no in-
teractions with willow, and states that irreversible
inhibition of platelet aggregation by aspirin cannot be
induced by the structurally different salicin present in
willow.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 3 to 6 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make a decoction, put
1 to 2 teaspoons of dried bark in 1 cup of water, bring to
a boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHC recommends | to 2 g dried bark, 5 to 8 ml
tincture (1:5 in 25%), or 1 to 2 ml fluid extract (1:1 in
25% ethanol) three times a day. Commission E advises an
average daily dosage corresponding to 60 to 120 mg total
salicin.

Salicis cortex, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

----- PAGE 588 -----
580 = TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Salvia officinalis var. rubia L.
Red Sage
Lamiaceae

Part Used: Leaf

Constituents: Volatile oil (a- and $-thujone, cineole,
borneol, camphor, others); diterpene bitters: picrosalvin
(carnosol), carnosolic acid, and others; flavonoids (salvi-
genin, genkwanin, 6-methoxygenkwanin, hispidulin, lu-
teolin A); phenolic acids (rosmarinic, caffeic, labiatic);

salviatannin (a condensed catechin)*%

Actions: Carminative, antispasmodic, antimicrobial, as-
tringent, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Because of the soothing action of its volatile
oils upon the mucous membranes, red sage is the classic
remedy for inflammations of the mouth, throat, and ton-
sils. It may be used internally and as a mouthwash to treat
gingivitis, glossitis, and stomatitis, and is effective as a
gargle for aphthous ulcers. As a gargle, it also aids in the
treatment of laryngitis, pharyngitis, and tonsillitis. Used
as a compress, red sage promotes wound healing.

Taken internally, red sage is a valuable carminative
that may used to good effect in dyspepsia. It decreases
sweating, and may also be used to lessen the production
of breast milk. Red sage stimulates the muscles of the
uterus and so should be avoided during pregnancy.

Safety Considerations: Adverse reactions are likely only
with overdoses (more than 15 g sage leaf per dose) or pro-
longed use of red sage. The toxic constituent of the es-
sential oil, thujone, causes symptoms such as tachycardia,
hot flashes, convulsions, and dizziness. Avoid during
pregnancy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of leaf and in-
fuse in a covered container for 10 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day. To make a mouthwash, place 2
teaspoons of leaf in '/2 liter (1 pint) of water, bring to a
boil, and let stand, covered, for 15 minutes. Gargle deeply
with the hot infusion several times a day.

Gommission E recommends a daily dose of 4 to 6 g
dried herb, 2.5 to 7.5 g tincture, or 1.5 to 3 g fluid extract.
For gargles or rinses, it suggests 2.5 g of dried herb or 2
to 3 drops of essential oil in 100 ml of water. The BHP
recommends | to 4 g dried herb as an infusion or 1 to 4 ml
fluid extract (1:1 in 45%) three times daily.

Salviae folium, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Sambucus nigra L.
Black Elder
Caprifoliaceae

Parts Used: Flower, berry, leaf

Constituents: Flower: Triterpenes (ursolic acid, oleanolic
acid, a- and B-amyrin, sterols); fixed oils (free fatty acids,
mainly linoleic, linolenic, and palmitic acids); miscella-
neous: phenolic acids (e.g., chlorogenic acid); pectin;
sugars. Leaf: Triterpenes (similar to those found in flow-
ers); cyanogenetic glycosides, including sambunigrin;
flavonoids (kaempferol, quercetin, and many quercetin
glycosides, including hyperoside, isoquercitrin, and
rutin); miscellaneous: fatty acids, alkanes, tannins?©?

Actions: Leaf: Purgative, expectorant, diuretic, di-
aphoretic (internal); emollient, vulnerary (external).
Flower: Diaphoretic, anticatarrhal, antispasmodic. Berry:
Diaphoretic, diuretic, laxative, antirheumatic

Indications: The elder tree is a medicine chest in its own
right. The leaf is used topically for bruises, sprains,
wounds, and chilblains, and some reports hold that elder
leaf may be effective as an ointment for tumors. Elder
flower is ideal for the treatment of colds and influenza,
and a standardized black elderberry extract has demon-
strated antiviral properties. This extract was effective in
vitro against 10 strains of influenza virus. It also reduced
the duration of flu symptoms to 3 to 4 days in a double-
blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study.

Elder flower is indicated for any catarrhal inflamma-
tion ofthe upper respiratory tract, such as hay fever or si-
nusitis. Catarrhal deafness responds well to elder flower.
Elder berry has properties similar to those of the flower,
with the addition of effectiveness in rheumatism.

Sambucus also increases cytokine production. The
herb appears to strengthen cell membranes to prevent
virus penetration, possibly by inhibiting the viral enzyme
that weakens the membrane.?% An infusion made from
elder flower, St. John’s wort herb (Hypericum perforatum),
and soapwort root (Saponaria officinalis) exhibited antiviral
activity against influenza types A and B both in vivo and
in vitro, and against herpes simplex type I in vitro.2”

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Elder flower tincture dosage
is 2 to 4 ml three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an in-
fusion, pour 1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of
dried or fresh blossoms and infuse for 10 minutes. Drink
hot three times a day. To make a juice, boil fresh berries
in water for 2 to 3 minutes, then express the juice. To pre-

----- PAGE 589 -----
serve, add 1 part honey to 10 parts juice and bring to a
boil. Take 1 glass diluted with hot water twice a day.

To make an ointment, heat 3 parts fresh elder leaf
with 6 parts melted Vaseline until the leaves are crisp.
Strain and store.

The BHP recommends 3 to 5 g dried flowers, 5 to
15 ml expressed juice, 10 to 25 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%),
or 3 to 5 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Sambuci flos and Sambuci fructus, in Herbal Drugs and
Phytopharmaceuticals

Sanguinaria canadensis L.
Bloodroot
Papaveraceae

Part Used: Root

Constituents: Isoquinoline alkaloids (3% to 7%), mainly
sanguinarine???

Actions: Expectorant, antispasmodic, emetic, cathartic,
nervine, cardioactive, topical irritant:

Indications: Bloodroot finds its main use in the treat-
ment of bronchitis. While its stimulating properties are
apparent in its emetic and expectorant effects, the herb
also demonstrates a relaxing action en the bronchial mus-
cles. Thus, bloodroot’s most important contribution by
far is its effectiveness against chroric congestive condi-
tions of the lungs, including bronchitis, emphysema, and
bronchiectasis. It also has a role in the treatment of
asthma, croup, and laryngitis.

Bloodroot acts as a stimulant in cases of deficient pe-
ripheral circulation, It may be used as a snuff to treat nasal
polyps. Activities documented for bloodroot are usually
attributable to its isoquinoline alkaloid constituents—in
particular, sanguinarine. In the recent past, interest fo-
cused on the use of sanguinarine in dental hygiene prod-
ucts, and many studies investigated the efficacy of blood-
root extracts for oral hygiene. Oral rinses and toothpastes
containing bloodroot extracts were reported to signifi-
cantly reduce plaque and improve gingival and bleeding in-
dices. No alteration of the oral microbial flora or develop-
ment of resistant microbial strains has been observed with
bloodroot extracts.?!!

Ellingwood considered bloodroot specific for

... harsh, dry cough with relaxed tissues of the pharynx,
larynx and bronchi, with a sense of constriction and con-
stant irritation and uneasiness or tickling of the throat.

In addition, he recommended it for congestion of the
lungs, bronchial coughs, strident laryngitis, membranous

MareriA MEDICA <> 581

croup, otitis media (external), indolent ulcerative condi-
tions, nasal catarrh, anal fissure, epithelioma, and lupus.

Safety Considerations: Although there are no published
reports of human toxicity caused by bloodroot, at high
doses the herb may cause nausea, vomiting, a sensation of
burning in all contacted mucous membranes, bradycardia,
and hypotension. Animal studies have indicated that
bloodroot is nontoxic Curing pregnancy. However, be-
cause of the potency of :ts pharmacologically active con-
stituents, use of bloodroot during pregnancy and lactation
is best avoided.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 0.5 to 1 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, put
1 teaspoon of rhizome in 1 cup of cold water, bring to a
boil, and infuse for 10 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Bloodroot, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Scrophularia nodosa Juss.
Figwort
Scrophulariaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Iridoids (aucubin, harpagide, acetyl
harpagide, 6-a-rhamnopyranosyleatalpol); flavonoids
(diosmin, iosmetin, acecetin rhamnoside, hesperidin),
phenolic acids (ferulic, isoferulic, p-coumaric, caffeic,
vanillic, chlorogenic acids)?”

Actions: Alterative, diuretic, laxative, cardiac stimulant

Indications: Figwort is most widely used for the treat-
ment of skin problems. As an alterative, it acts in a broad
way to improve body function and bring about a state of
inner cleanliness. It may be used for eczema, psoriasis, or
any skin condition characterized by itching and irritation.
Part of its cleansing action is related to its purgative and
diuretic actions, and it may be used as a mild laxative in
constipation. Because it is a heart stimulant, figwort
should be avoided in people with tachycardia (abnormally
rapid heartbeat).
Priest and Priest described figwort as a

... gently stimulating and relaxing alterative with lower
abdominal and pelvic emphasis. Deobstruent to enlarged
and engorged lymph glaads.

They gave the following specific indications: chronic

skin disease, eczema and psoriasis, mammary tumors and
nodosities, hemorrhoids.

----- PAGE 590 -----
$82 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Safety Considerations: Figwort may potentiate the ef-
fects of cardiac glycosides.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour |
cup of boiling water over 1 to 3 teaspoons of dried leaf
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Figwort, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Scutellaria lateriflora L.
Skullcap

Lamiaceae
Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Flavonoids (baicalein, baicalin, scutellarein,
and wogonin); iridoids (including catalpol); volatile oil;

tannins?3

Actions: Nervine tonic, antispasmodic, hypotensive

Indications: Skullcap is perhaps the most relevant
nervine available to us in the Western materia medica. It
effectively soothes nervous tension while renewing and
revivifying the central nervous system. It has a long his-
tory of traditional use for the control and treatment of
petit mal seizures. Skullcap may be used to treat any con-
dition associated with exhaustion or depressed states, and
can be used with complete safety to ease premenstrual
tension. A recent clinical trial demonstrated that the
herb is an effective anxiolytic, with a proposed mecha-
nism involving flavonoid interactions with the GABA,
receptor.?44
Priest and Priest considered skullcap a

... diffusive, stimulating and relaxing nervine-cerebral
vasodilator and trophorestorative. Indicated for nervous
irritation of the cerebro-spinal nervous system.

They gave the following specific indications: func-
tional nervous exhaustion, post-febrile nervous weakness,
chorea, hysteria, agitation, epileptiform convulsions, in-
somnia, nightmares, and restless sleep.

Ellingwood considered skullcap specific for

. . two distinct lines of specific phenomena. Firstly irri-
tability of the nervous system with restlessness and ner-
vous excitability; inability to sleep without pain; general ir-
ritability with insomnia from local causes. The second is
where there is nervous disorder, characterized by irregular
muscular action, twitching, tremors and restlessness, with
or without incoordination. Its soothing influence contin-
ues for a protracted period, after the agent is discontinued.

In addition, he recommended it for delirium tremens
and nervous excitability.

Safety Considerations: Reports of hepatotoxicity at-
tributed to skullcap were later determined to be related to
adulteration with germander. Skullcap can potentiate the
effects of sedative medications.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drank
three times a day or as needed.

The BHP recommends | to 2 g dried herb, 1 to 2 ml
tincture (1:5 in 45%), or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in
25%) three times a day.

Skullcap, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Senna alexandrina Mill.
Senna
Fabaceae

Other Names: A number of closely related species and
regional sources have given rise to a range of names, in-
cluding Alexandrian senna, Kartoum senna, Tinnevelly
senna, and Indian senna.

Parts Used: Dried fruit pod, leaf

Constituents: Anthraquinone glycosides (leaf: senno-
sides A-D; fruit: sennosides A and B and a closely related
glycoside, sennoside Al); naphthalene glycosides (tinnev-
ellin glycoside and 6-hydroxymusizin glycoside); miscel-
laneous: mucilage, flavonoids, volatile oil, sugars, resins?!

Action: Cathartic

Indications: Senna is a powerful cathartic used in the
treatment of constipation that works via stimulation of in-
testinal peristalsis. However, it is vital to remember that
constipation is a symptom and that the cause must always
be sought and treated. Ellingwood recommended senna for
the treatment of temporary constipation.

Safety Considerations: Senna may reduce absorption of
oral drugs by decreasing bowel transit time. Overuse or
misuse can cause potassium loss leading to increased tox-
icity of cardiac glycosides. Senna aggravates loss of potas-
sium associated with diuretic use.

As an anthraquinone-containing cathartic, senna is
contraindicated in chronic constipation because it can
lead to dependency and other problems (see chapter 13
for more information). There are many contraindications
based upon senna’s power to stimulate peristalsis.

----- PAGE 591 -----
Contraindications include any intestinal obstruction,
stomach inflammation due to griping, and intestinal in-
flammatory disease, such as appendicitis, colitis, irritable
bowel syndrome, ulcerative colitis, and Crohn’s disease.
Senna is also contraindicated in cases of abdominal pain
of unknown origin, anal prolapse, and hemorrhoids.

Ideally, senna should not be used during pregnancy
or lactation or in children younger than 12 years of age.
However, orthodox physicians still routinely prescribe
standardized senna preparations for use during preg-
nancy. To avoid the development of impaired peristalsis
due to intestinal smooth muscle damage, do not use for
more than 10 days.

Preparations and Dosage: To make an infusion, steep
dried pods or leaves in warm water for 6 to 12 hours.
Drink in the morning and at night. Use 3 to 6 Alexan-
drian senna pods or 4 to 12 Tinnevelly senna pods per cup
of water.

The BHP recommends 0.5 to 2 ml fluid extract twice
daily.
Sennae folium, Sennae fructus acutifoliae, and Sennae fructus
angustifoliae, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Serenoa repens (Bartr.) Small
Saw Palmetto
Arecaceae

Part Used: Fruit (berry)

Constituents: Essential oil; fixed oil: 25% fatty acids
(caproic, lauric, palmitic) and 75% neutral fats; sterols;
polysaccharides*!®

Actions: Diuretic, urinary antiseptic, endocrine agent

Indications: Saw palmetto tones and strengthens the
male reproductive system, and is specific for the treat-
ment of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). Its primary
modern application is to relieve symptoms associated
with this common condition, especially difficulties with
urination.

BPH is thought to be caused by accumulation of
testosterone in the prostate. Once in the prostate, testos-
terone is converted to dihydrotestosterone (DHT).
Researchers believe that DHT is the compound responsi-
ble for the multiplication of prostate cells that results in
prostate enlargement. Saw palmetto appears to inhibit
DHT by blocking the activity of the enzyme 5-c-reductase.
The herb not only inhibits the formation of DHT, but
also inhibits DHT binding at cellular receptor binding
sites.?!7 Numerous studies show that saw palmetto extract
is effective for nearly 90% of patients with BPH. The fat-

Materia MEDICA 2 583

soluble (lipophilic) fraction of the herb, which contains
fatty acids and sterols, is considered the active component
for prostate conditions.?!®

The Eclectic use of this herb went far beyond treat-
ment of BPH. Consider the following from Ellingwood:

The direct influence of this agent is exerted upon the en-
tire reproductive apparatus, especially upon the prostate
gland of the male. It is demanded in enlarged prostate,
with throbbing, aching. dull pain, discharge of prostatic
fluid, at times discharge of mucus, also of a yellowish, wa-
tery fluid, with weakered sexual power, orchalgia, epi-
didymitis and orchitis, when associated with enlarged
prostate. In women, ovarian enlargement, with tender-
ness and dull aching pains, weakened sexual activity, and
small undeveloped mammary glands, are much benefited
by its continued use. It increases the size and secreting
power of the mammary glands where they are abnormally
small and inactive. It improves the tone and overcomes ir-
ritability of the ovaries, relieving dysmenorrhoea when
due to atonicity. To this agent is ascribed considerable

power in reducing the size of hypertrophied prostate in
older men and in quickly relieving cystic and other disor-
ders incident to this condition. It relieves irritation of the
bladder to a satisfactory extent, correcting the irritable
character of the urine, increases the muscular power of
the patient to expel the urine and produces a sense of re-
lief, that is in every way gratifying and satisfactory. . . .
An exceedingly important use for this remedy that I
have not been able to find in the books, is its use for steril-
ity. In simple cases where there is no organic lesion on the
part of the patient, this agent has an excellent reputation
for restoring the ovarian action properly and assisting in

putting the patient into an excellent condition. In its in-
fluence upon the nasal and bronchial mucous membranes
this agent has been given with excellent advantage in the
treatment of acute catarrh, chronic bronchial coughs of
all characters, including whooping cough, laryngitis and
the cough of phthisis.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, put
2 to 4 teaspoon of berries in 1 cup of water, bring to a
boil, and simmer gently for 5 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHP recommends 0.5 to 1 g dried herb or 0.6 to
1.5 ml fluid extract three times daily (1:1 in 60%).
Commission E suggests a daily dosage of 1 to 2 g berries

----- PAGE 592 -----
584 «& TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

or 320 mg of lipophilic ingredients extracted with
lipophilic solvents (this contains approximately 85% to
95% fatty acids).

Saw palmetto, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn.
Milk Thistle

Asteraceae
Part Used: Seed

Constituents: Flavolignans (1.5% to 3.0%): The mixture
known as silymarin is composed mainly of silybin, silydi-
anin, and silychristin; fixed oil (30% oleic acid, 6%
palmitic acid); sterols (cholesterol, campesterol, stigmas-
terol, and sitosterol); mucilage?!”

Actions: Hepatic, galactagogue, demulcent, cholagogue,
antihepatotoxic

Indications: Milk thistle’s traditional reputation as a liver
tonic is now supported by research showing that its con-
stituents protect liver cells from chemical damage.
Historically, milk thistle was used in Europe as a liver
tonic, and in modern phytotherapy, the herb is indicated
for a whole range of liver and gallbladder conditions, in-
cluding hepatitis and cirrhosis. It is effective in increasing
the secretion and flow of bile from the liver and gallblad-
der, and may also have value in the treatment of chronic
uterine problems. As the name implies, milk thistle pro-
motes milk secretion and is perfectly safe for use by
breast-feeding mothers.

Well-designed clinical research thoroughly supports
the efficacy of milk thistle seed extract in protecting and
treating the liver. Studies confirm that the herb can re-
store liver function impaired by disease, such as viral
hepatitis, or by exposure to toxins, including ethanol,
mushroom toxins, solvents, acetaminophen, and psy-
chotropic medications??? Research has shown that a
number of chemical components have a protective effect
on liver cells. They are all flavones and flavolignans, the
best studied of which is a complex of the flavolignans
known as silymarin. Silymarin has been shown to reverse
the effects of highly toxic alkaloids, such as phalloidine
and a-amanitine from the avenging angel mushroom
(Amanita phalloides), and to protect liver cells from their
damaging impact.

Research has provided many insights into the
metabolic basis of milk thistle’s activity. It has also shed
considerable light on the pharmacodynamics, sites of ac-
tivity, and mechanisms of action of silymarin. For exam-
ple, in a clinical study involving 15 patients taking hepa-

totoxic psychotropic medications, a twice-daily 400 mg
dose of a concentrated milk thistle seed extract protected
the liver from the adverse effects of simultaneously ad-
ministered drugs.”*! In a case study, milk thistle extract
reduced the hepatotoxic effects of phenytoin.222 More in-
formation on the pharmacology and therapeutic indica-
tions for this important herb may be found in chapters 9,
13, and 26.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: For daily use as a liver pro-
tectant, dosage is 175 mg a day of 30:1 seed extract stan-
dardized to 80% silymarin. For therapeutic and restora-
tive effects, up to 600 mg/day of extract standardized to
80% silymarin may be used.

Commission E recommends an average daily dosage
of 12 to 15 g seed or formulations equivalent to 200 to
400 mg of silymarin (calculated as silibinin).

St. Mary’s thistle, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Smilax spp.
Sarsaparilla
Liliaceae

Parts Used: Root, rhizome

Constituents: Saponins, based on the aglycones sarsa-
pogenin and smilagenin; f-sitosterol, stigmasterol, and
their glucosides’”?

Actions: Alterative, antirheumatic, diaphoretic, diuretic

Indications: Sarsaparilla is a widely applicable alterative.
It may be used to support proper functioning of the whole
body as well as to correct diffuse systemic problems, such
as skin and rheumatic conditions. It is particularly useful
for scaling skin conditions, like psoriasis, especially when
accompanied by irritation. Sarsaparilla should be consid-
ered as part of a wider treatment for chronic rheumatism,
and is especially helpful for rheumatoid arthritis.

Ellingwood recommended it for scrofula, secondary
syphilis, cutaneous disease, and rheumatic and gouty con-
ditions.

Safety Considerations: Sarsaparilla may increase ab-
sorption of digitalis glycosides.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, place
2 to 4 teaspoons of root in | cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHP recommends | to 4 g dried herb or 8 to

----- PAGE 593 -----
papule: Small, superficial bump or spot on the skin, often part
of rash.

parahormone: Chemical control agent that can be synthesized
by more than one cell type.

parasite: An organism that lives in or on another living organ-
ism while contributing nothing to its host’s welfare, often
causing irritation or interfering with function.

parasiticide: Prevents and destroys parasites such as fleas and
lice.

parathyroid hormone (PTH): Hormone that promotes vita-
min D synthesis and elevates blood calcium.

paregoric: Camphorated tincture of opium used to relieve diar-
rhea, formerly used as a painkiller.

parenchyma: Soft tissue forming the chief substance of leaves
and roots, fruit pulp, and the center of stems.

paroxysm: Sudden, violent spasm or convulsion; abrupt wors-
ening of a symptom.

parturient: Aiding childbirth.

passive immunity: Short-term resistance to a disease from the
injection of another's antibodies.

pathogen: Any agent, particularly a microorganism, that causes
disease.

pathogenesis: The process by which a disease originates and
develops, particularly the cellular and physiologic processes.

pathogenic: Causing or producing disease.

pectin: A white, colloidal carbohydrate, found in certain ripe
fruits, that has thickening properties.

pedicel: Stalk of a single flower, fruit, or leaf.

peduncle: Stalk supporting flower or flower cluster of an an-
giosperm or bearing the fruiting body of a fungus.

pepsin: Stomach enzyme that degrades proteins.

peptic: Applied to gastric secretions and areas affected by them.

peptic ulcer: Breach in lining of the digestive tract due to excess
acid, occurring in the esophagus, stomach, or duodenum.

peptide: Compound of two or more amino acids.

perennial: Plant that lives more than two years, especially a
herbaceous plant that produces flowers from the same root
structure several years in a row.

perfoliate: A leaf that appears to be perforated by the stem.

perfusion: Passage of fluid through tissue, especially blood
through the lungs.

peripheral resistance: Opposition to flow of blood in vessels.

peristalsis: Successive muscular contractions of the intestines,
which move food through the gastrointestinal tract.

peristaltic waves: Successive contractions of tubular wall.

pessary: Vaginal appliance or medicated suppository.

petal: One of the circle of flower parts inside the sepals.

petiole: The stalk of a leaf.

pH: A scale from 0 to 14 used in measuring the acidity or alka-
linity of solutions. Pure water, at pH 7.0, is considered neu-
tral. Acidity increases as the numbers decrease. Alkalinity
increases as the numbers increase.

pharmaceutical: A drug or medication manufactured and sold
by a pharmacy.

pharmacokinetic trial: A trial that studies how the drug is ab-
sorbed by the body. People in one of these trials often have
blood tests every few minutes or hours.

pharmacology: Medical science of drugs, which deals with their
actions, properties, and characteristics.

GLossary @ 617

pharmacopoeia: An official publication of drugs, in common
use Ina given country.

pharmacy: Preparation and dispensing of drugs; place where
this is done.

phase J study: The first step in human testing of a drug.
Designed to evaluate toxicity at different dose levels and
takes place with a small number of participants.

phase II study: FDA drug-testing phase for effectiveness in
humans. The stage at which drug effectiveness is estab-
lished. Proceeds only if Phase I studies show toxicity to
be within acceptable levels. Usually involves 50 to 300
volunteers.

phase III study: FDA drug-testing phase for extensive clinical
trials in humans. Expansion of phase IL study to 300 to
3,000 volunteers. Designed to back up information gath-
ered in Phase J and IT testing.

phenol: Natural or synthetic aromatic compound containing a
hydroxide (-OH) ring.

pheromone: Behavior- or development-mediating chemical
that transmits information between individuals of the same
species.

phlebitis: Inflammation of a vein wall, especially in legs as a
complication of varicose veins, causing extreme tenderness.

phlegm: See sputum.

phospholipid: Lipid compound containing a water-soluble
phosphate group.

phosphorylation: The process of adding phosphate molecular
groups to a compound.

photosynthesis: Production of organic substances from carbon
dioxide and water in green-plant cells, which chemically
transform the energy of sunlight.

physiological: Describes the natural biological processes of a
living organism,

physiology: The study of the functioning of the body, including
the physical and chernical processes of its cells, tissues, or-
gans, and systems.

phytoestrogen: A plant compound that exerts estrogen-like
effects.

phytohormone: A plant substance that mimics the action of
human hormones.

phytotherapy: The treatment of disease by plants; herbal
medicine.

piles: See hemorrhoid.

pill: Small ball or tablet of medicine to be swallowed whole; oral
contraceptive.

pinnate: A leaf composed of more than three leaflets arranged
in two rows along a common stalk.

pituitary gland: A pea-sized structure that secretes many im-
portant hormones, located behind the hypothalamus.

placebo: (Latin: “1 will satisfy.”) A medicine or preparation with
no inherent pharmacologic activity.

plaque: Sticky, colorless mixture of saliva, bacteria, and carbo-
hydrates on the surface of teeth that causes tartar and
caries.

plasma: Fluid portion of blood and lymph.

plaster: Pasty medicinal dressing applied to a body part on a
cloth as a curative counterirritant.

pleurisy: Inflammation of the pleura that cover the lungs, usu-
ally due to pneumonia or other lung disease, causing painful
breathing.

----- PAGE 594 -----
618 @ GLOSSARY

pneumoconiosis: Black lung.

pneumonia: Inflammation or infection of the lungs in which
sacs fill with pus, causing coughing and chest pain.

pneumonitis: Inflammation of the lungs.

pneumothorax: Collapsed lung.

pod: Vessel enclosing one or more seeds.

poliomyelitis: Infectious viral disease of the central nervous
system, formerly epidemic, causing stiffness and paralysis
of muscles, especially respiratory system muscles.

pollen: Fine, dustlike grains containing male sexual cells, pro-
duced in anthers or similar structures of seed plants.

polyarthritis: Inflammation of several joints at the same time.

polymer: Natural or synthetic macromolecules formed by the
repetition of an identical small molecule.

polymerase: An enzyme that forms long-chain polymers from
simple molecular components, DNA polymerase, for ex-
ample, forms DNA strands from nucleosides.

polyp: Benign growth on mucous membranes especially in the
nose, ear, or stomach,

polypeptide: Protein, polymer of amino acid subunits.

polysaccharide: A molecule composed of many sugar
molecules linked together.

pomade: A prepared perfume material obtained by the en-
fleurage process.

PPM: Parts per million.

poultice: The therapeutic application of a soft moist mass (such
as fresh herbs) to the skin, to encourage local circulation
and to relieve pain.

prednisone: Synthetic steroid, administered orally, used to treat
leukemia and Hodgkin’s disease.

press: Device for drying and flattening botanical specimens.

progesterone: Hormone that prepares the uterus to receive
and develop a fertilized egg.

prognosis: Assessment of the future course and outcome of a
patient’s disease.

prophylactic: Preventive of disease or infection.

proptosis: Forward displacement of an organ, especially the
eyeball.

prostaglandin: Hormonelike compound manufactured from
essential fatty acids.

prostatitis: Inflammation of the prostate gland due to bacterial
infection, sometimes causing urinary obstruction.

prostration: Total exhaustion.

protease: Protein-splitting enzyme.

protein: Any of a large class of organic nitrogenous substances
containing amino acids.

proteinuria: Presence of protein in the urine above normal limits.

protocol: The outline or plan for use of an experimental proce-
dure or experimental treatment.

protozoa: A group of one-celled animals, a few of which cause
human disease.

pruritis: Itching.

psoriasis: Condition characterized by chronic, itchy, scaly, sil-
very patches of skin, especially on elbows, forearms, knees,
and scalp, of unknown cause but sometimes due to anxiety.

psychomotor: Relating to disorders of muscular activity af-
fected by cerebral disturbances.

pulmonary embolism: Obstruction by a blood clot in an artery
that conveys blood from heart to lungs.

purgative: Laxative or cathartic medication.

purpura: Skin rash due to bleeding into the skin from defective
capillaries or blood platelet deficiency.

pustule: Small, pus-containing blister.

putrescence: Foul smell caused by decomposition of tissue.

pyorrhea: Periodontal disease.

pyrexia: See fever.

pyrosis: See heartburn.

quinine: Alkaloid drug used to treat malaria.
quinsy: Pus-discharging inflammation of the tonsils.

raceme: Diversely branching flowers.

radiation therapy: Treatment using X-rays, cobalt-60, radium,
neutrons, or other types of cell-destroying radiation.

radiosensitizer: Drug being studied to try to boost the effect of
radiation therapy.

rale: See crepitation.

randomized clinical trial: A study in which patients with simi-
lar traits, such as extent of disease, are chosen or selected by
chance to be placed in separate groups that are comparing
different treatments.

Raynaud’s disease: Disorder, especially in women, in which
spasms of arteries to extremities cause fingertips and toes to
turn pale, blue, and numb.

rays (ray flowers): The straplike, often sterile flowers, com-
monly called petals, surrounding the flower head of a plant
in the Composite family.

receptacle: Upper part of the stem from which the floral parts
arise.

receptor: A small, chemically defined area (of a cell) that initi-
ates a biological response upon uniting with chemically
complementary areas of natural or foreign molecules.

rectification: The process of redistillation applied to essential
oils to rid them of certain constituents.

referred pain: Pain felt in an unexpected part of the body sep-
arate from its source.

reflex: Automatic, involuntary activity caused by simple nervous
circuits.

refrigerant: Cooling; reduces fever.

regression: The state of growing smaller or disappearing; used
to describe the shrinkage or disappearance of a cancer.

regurgitation: Vomiting.

rejection: [mmune reaction to a transplanted organ.

REM sleep: Rapid eye movement sleep.

remission: The decrease or disappearance of evidence of a dis-
ease; also, the period during which this occurs.

renal calculus: Kidney stone.

renal colic: Severe pain in the kidney.

renin: A protease enzyme released by the kidney that cleaves
angiotensinogen to angiotensin I.

resectable: Capable of being removed by surgery.

resin: A natural or prepared product, either solid or semisolid in
nature. Natural resins are exudations from trees, such as
mastic; prepared resins are oleoresins from which the es-
sential oil has been removed.

resinoid: A perfumery material prepared from natural resinous
matter, such as balsam and gum resin.

----- PAGE 595 -----
resolvent: An agent that disperses swelling or affects absorption
of a new growth.

respiration: Exchange of gases between body tissues and the
surrounding environment.

respiratory arrest: Cessation of breathing.

restorative: An agent that helps strengthen and revive the body
systems.

reticulosis: Abnormal malignant overgrowth of cells of lym-
phatic glands or the immune systein.

retrovirus: A type of virus whose genetic material consists of
RNA rather than the usual DNA.

rheum: Watery discharge from mucous membranes of the
mouth, eyes, or nose.

rheumatism: Any disorder causing aches and pains in muscles
or joints.

rheumatoid arthritis; Common form of arthritis that affects
extremities, digits, and hips.

rhinitis: Inflammation of the nasal mucosa (mucous membranes
in the nasal cavities).

rhizome: Creeping horizontal stem lyiug at or just beneath the
soil surface that bears leaves at its tip and roots from its
underside.

rickettsiae: Group of parasitic organisms similar to bacteria
that infest the body through ticks or mites.

ringworm: Highly contagious fungal infection of the skin, es-
pecially the scalp and feet or under a beard.

risk: The likelihood that harm will result from exposure to a
hazard.

risk assessment: The process for evaluating the probability
of harm resulting from a given exposure to a hazardous
substance. The three steps of a risk assessment are haz-
ard identification; dose-response assessment; and risk
characterization.

risk/benefit ratio: The relation between the risks and benefits
of a given treatment or procedure.

risk management: The regulatory decision-making process,
which may take into account not only the risk assessment in-
formation, but also nonscience factors such as cost, Compet-
ing public needs, technical feasibility, and societal values.

root: The underground part of a plant that functions in absorp-
tion, aeration, and food storage and as a support system.

rosacea: Chronic acne characterized by red, pustular lesions
about the nose, cheeks, and forehead.

rosette: Leaves that are closely arranged in a spiral.

rubefacient: Generating a localized increase in blood flow
when applied to the skin, helping healing, cleansing, and
nourishment. Often used to ease the pain and swelling of
arthritic joints.

saccharide; A sugar molecule.

saliva: Watery, slightly acidic secretion of salivary glands that
moistens food and initiates its breakdown.

salt: The chemical combination of an acid and a base yielding a
salt plus water.

salve: A medicinal ointment used to soothe or heal skin irrita-
tions, burns, or wounds; ointment; unguent.

saponin: A glycoside that forms a soaplike lather when shaken
in water. There are two broad groups: the steroidal
saponins, which seem to mimic the precursors of female sex

GLossarY @ 619

hormones, and the tri-terpenoid saponins, which mimic the
adrenal hormone ACTH.

saprophyte: A free-living organism that lives on dead or putre-
fying tissues.

sarcolemma: The cell membrane of a muscle cell. Like the cell
membrane of nerves, the sarcolemma is able to conduct ac-
tion potentials.

sarcoma: A tumor of connective tissue.

scab: A hard crust of blood, serum, or pus over a healing wound.

scabies: A skin infection from an infestation of mites that causes
severe itching, especially around the groin and nipples and
between fingers.

scar: Mark left on skin by a healing wound where connective
tissues replace damaged tissues; cicatrix.

schistosomiasis: An intestinal disease in the tropics, due to in-
festation of blood flukes, that causes anemia, diarrhea,
dysentery, and cirrhosis; snail fever.

sciatica: Condition marked by pain down the back of the thigh,
due to disintegration of an intervertebral disk, accompa-
nied by numbness and a stiff back.

sclerosis: Hardening of tissue due to inflammation.

scopolamine: A belladonna derivative.

scurvy: Vitamin C deficiency from absence of fresh fruit and
vegetables in the diet that causes swollen, bleeding gums,
subcutaneous bleeding, and death when prolonged,

seborrhea: Excessive secretion by sebaceous glands in the face,
especially at puberty; see a/so seborrheic dermatitis.

seborrheic dermatitis: Skin eruption due to an excess secretion
of sebum, common on the face at puberty.

secretion: Synthesis and release of a substance by a cell or an
organ.

sedative: An agent that reduces functional activity; calming.

seed: Fertilized plant ovule containing the embryo, capable of
germinating to produce a new plant.

seizure: Sudden attack of disease or condition.

senescence: Bodily degeneration after maturity.

sepal: Leaflike, usually green, outer circle of the calyx.

septic: Affected with putrefactive destruction by disease-carrying
bacteria or their toxins.

septicemia: Tissue destruction by disease-causing bacteria or
toxins absorbed from the bloodstream; blood poisoning.

serum: Liquid portion of the blood.

sessile: Lacking a stalk.

shingles: See Herpes zoster.

sialogogue: An agent that stimulates the secretion of saliva.

side effect: A secondary and usually adverse effect, as from a
drug or other treatment.

silique: A term applied to the peculiar seedpod structure of
plants in the Mustard family.

soporific: A substance that induces sleep.

spadix: A thick, fleshy flower spike usually enveloped by a
spathe.

spasm: Sustained involuntary muscular contraction.

spasmolytic: See antispasmodic.

spastic colon: Irritable bowel syndrome.

spasticity: Resistance to passive movement of a limb; lack of
motor coordination.

spathe: A modified, leaflike structure surrounding a spadix.

----- PAGE 596 -----
62( =. GLOSSARY

species: Basic unit of biological classification ranking below
genus, including similar organisms capable of interbreeding.

spike: An inflorescence in which flowers bloom along the entire
length of a single stalk.

splanchnic: Pertaining to the internal organs.

splenic: Relating to the spleen, the largest endocrine gland.

spondylosis: Degeneration of intervertebral disks in the back-
bone, causing pain and restricting movement.

sputum: Mucus coughed up from the respiratory tract; phlegm.

staging: Method used to establish the extent of a patient’s disease.

stamen: The pollen-bearing anther with attached filaments.

standard treatment: A treatment or other intervention cur-
rently being used and considered to be of proven effective-
ness on the basis of past studies.

stenosis: Abnormal narrowing of a blood vessel or heart valve.

steroid: Any of the large family of chemical compounds in-
cluding hormones produced by the adrenal glands,
ovaries, and testes; medication used for immunosuppres-
sion and hormone replacement.

STD: A sexually transmitted disease; see a/so venereal disease.

stimulant: An agent that quickens the physiological functions
of the body.

stipule: An appendage resembling a small leaf at the base of
leaves of certain plants.

stitch: Sudden, sharp pain, usually in muscle between ribs.

stolon: A stem that takes root at intervals along the ground,
forming new plants.

stomachic: Digestive aid and tonic; improving the appetite.

stridor: Loud, harsh breathing noise due to partial obstruction
of the trachea or larynx.

stroke: Sudden weakness or paralysis, often on one side of the
body, due to interruption of blood flow to the brain caused
by thrombosis, embolus, or hemorrhage; apoplexy; cere-
brovascular accident.

sty: Acute bacterial infection of a gland at the base of an eyelash.

styptic: An astringent agent that stops or reduces external
bleeding.

subclinical: Designating suspected disease or injury that is not
developed enough to produce definite signs and symptoms.

subcutaneous: Giving a drug by injecting it under the skin.

submucosa: The tissue just below the mucous membrane.

succulent: Plant with thick, fleshy tissues that stores starch.

sudorific: An agent that causes sweating.

suppressor T cell: A lymphocyte controlled by the thymus
gland, which suppresses the immune response.

suppuration: Formation and discharge of pus.

surfactant: A compound that reduces the surface tension in
water, between water and another liquid, or between a liq-
uid and a solid.

sympatholytic: A drug that affects the sympathetic nervous
system.

symptom: Characteristic indication of disease or disorder.

synapse: Junction between two excitable cells.

syncope: Fainting.

syndrome: Set of signs and symptoms indicative of a particular
disease or condition.

synergy: The summing of the simultaneous effects of two or
more drugs such that the combined effect is greater than
the effect of either of the drugs when they are given alone.

systemic: Affecting the entire body, not just one part.

systole: Contraction of heart muscle.

systolic: The first number in a blood pressure reading; the pres-
sure in the arteries during the contraction phase of the
heartbeat.

T cell: A white blood cell that plays an important part in the im-
mune system. There are three types of T cells, each of
which has different subsets.

T-helper cell: A subset of T cells. Physicians regularly measure
T-helper cell counts in HIV-positive people. The normal
range for T-helper cells is 480-1,800, but may vary.

T-killer cell (cytoxic T cell): A white blood cell that kills for-
eign organisms after being activated by T-helper cells.

T-suppressor cell: A type of white blood cell that helps control
the body’s response to an infection.

tablet: A small disk, made from compressed powders of one or
more drugs, that is swallowed whole.

tachycardia: Abnormally increased heartbeat and pulse rate.

tannin: A compound that reacts with protein to produce a
leatherlike coating on animal tissue (as in the process of
tanning). It promotes healing and numbing (to reduce irri-
tation), reduces inflammation, and halts infection.

taproot: Deep main root from which lateral roots develop.

taxonomy: System of classifying organisms into natural related
groups based on shared features or traits.

tendril: Threadlike, often spiral part of climbing plant that
clings to or coils around objects.

teratogen: Substance that can cause birth defects.

testosterone: The principal male sex hormone produced by the
testes, used in replacement therapy and as an anabolic
steroid.

tetany: Spasm and twitching of the muscles of the face, hands,
and feet.

thallus: Nonvascular plant body without clear differentiation
into stems, leaves, or roots.

therapeutic: Pertaining to treatment.

therapeutic index: A number, LD50/ED50, which is a measure
of the approximate “safety factor” for a drug; a drug with a
high index can presumably be administered with greater
safety than one with a low index. The therapeutic index is
ordinarily calculated from data obtained from experiments
with animals.

thromboembolism: Condition in which a blood clot forms at one
point in circulation, dislodges, and moves to another point.

thrombogenic: Causing thrombosis or coagulation of the
blood.

thrombosis: Formation of a thrombus or blood clot.

thrush: Whitish spots and ulcers in the mouth due to a parasite,
especially in children; candidiasis.

thyroid hormone (TH): Thyroxine.

tincture: An herbal remedy or perfumery material prepared in
an alcohol base.

tinea: Athlete’s foot.

tinnitus: Ringing in the ears,

tissue: Group of similar cells that perform a particular function.

tonic: Nurturing and enlivening.

tonsillitis: Inflammation of the tonsils due to bacterial or viral
infection, causing sore throat and fever.

----- PAGE 597 -----
topical: Applied directly to skin surface, not taken internally.

torpor: Sluggishness; unresponsiveness to stimuli.

toxemia: Accumulation of toxins in the blood.

toxic: Poisonous.

toxin: Poisonous substance.

transaminase: An enzyme measurement that indicates the
health of the liver.

transgenic: Pertaining to the insertion by biotechnical means
of a foreign gene or genes into the genetic makeup of an
organism.

trifoliate: A plant having three distinct leaflets.

triglyceride: Neutral fat lipid molecule composed of glycerol
and three fatty acids.

troche: Small, medicinal lozenge that soothes the mouth and
throat.

tuber: Fat underground stem from which some plants grow,
similar to but shorter and thicker than a rhizome.

tumescence: Swelling, especially due to the accumulation of
blood or other fluid in tissue.

tumor: Abnormal growth of tissue in or on a body part.

tumor necrosis factor (TNF): A protein produced by
macrophages. By itself, TNF destroys cancer cells. TNF
can cause fever, chills, fatigue, headache, and inflammation.

tussis: See cough.

ulcer: Open, inflamed, nonhealing sore in skin or a mucous
membrane, especially in the lining of the alimentary canal.

ultrasound: A test in which sound waves are used to examine a
fetus or view the internal organs.

umbel: Umbrella-like; a flower in which the petioles all arise
from the top of the stem.

unguent: Substance used to soothe and heal skin; ointment;
salve.

urea: Nitrogenous waste product of kidneys.

uremia: The retention of urine by the body and the presence of
high levels of urine components in the blood.

urethritis: Inflammation of the urethra, especially among
males, due to bacterial or viral infection or obstruction.

urinalysis: The analysis of urine.

uterine: Pertaining to the uterus.

vagal: Pertaining to the vagus nerve, which supplies sensory
connections to the ear, tongue, and pharynx.

vaginitis: Irritation of the vagina, due to inflammation or infec-
tion, causing burning pain and discharge.

vapors: Mentholated salve applied to chest and nose to relieve
congestion.

varicella; Chicken pox.

varicose vein: Distended, sometimes painful vein in the leg,
rectum, or scrotum due to obstruction of blood flow.

Guossary 621

vascular plant: Any plant, such as an angiosperm, gymnosperm,
and fern, in which the xylem and phloem conduct water
and organic nutrients.

vasculitis: Inflammation of a blood vessel.

vasoconstriction: The constriction of blood vessels.

vasoconstrictor: An agent that causes narrowing of blood
vessels.

vasodilator: An agent that dilates the blood vessels.

vector: Any agent, such as insect or tick, that transmits parasitic
microorganisms and infectious diseases from host to host.

venereal disease (VD): Any infectious disease transmitted by
sexual contact, now usually called sexually transmitted dis-
ease; social disease.

ventricle: One of two lower chambers of the heart.

vermicide: A chemical agent that kills parasitic worms in the in-
testine.

vermifuge: A chemical agent used to expel parasites from the
intestine; anthelmintic.

verruca: See Wart.

vertigo: Feeling that one’s surroundings are in motion, espe-
cially spinning, due to disease of the inner ear or the
vestibular nerve.

vesicant: Causing blistering to the skin; a counterirritant.

vesicle: A small blister or sac containing fluid.

vinca alkaloid: A pharmacologically active substance (e.g., vin-
blastine or vincristine) obtained from the genus Vinca,
which includes the periwinkles.

viral load: The amount of measurable virus in the blood.

virulent: Disease-producing.

vitamin: An essential compound necessary to act as a catalyst in
normal processes of the body.

volatile: Unstable, evaporates easily; see also essential oil and
volatile oil.

volatile oil: A complex compound that is a chemical mixture of
hydrocarbons and alcohols in a plant.

voucher specimen: An identifiable piece of plant lodged as a spec-
imen at an official herbarium. This is incorporated as a per-
manent archival specimen for future reference and research.
Archival herbaria aim for their specimens to last 400 years.

vulnerary: A remedy that promotes wound healing, especially
for skin lesions and stomach ulcers.

wart: Small, hard, benign growth in skin, caused by a virus.

welt: Raised ridge on the skin caused by a slash or a blow.

wheal: Temporary, itching, red, or pale raised area of skin due
to abrasion or allergy.

whorl: A circle of leaves around a node.

xanthoma: Skin condition characterized by raised patches.
xerostomia: Diminished secretion of saliva that causes an
abnormally dry mouth, especially as a drug reaction.

----- PAGE 598 -----
absinthium
Achillea

Aconitum

Acorus
aculeatus
Aesculus
agnus-castus
Agrimonia

Agropyron
alba
Alchemilla
Allium
Aloe
alternifolia
Althaea
amara
Anemone

Anethum
Angelica
anisum

Apium

arborescens
archangelica

Arctium
Arctostaphylos
Aristolochia
Artemisia
arvense
arvensis
Asclepias
Asparagus
Astragalus

Atropa

aureus

Appendix 2

SN.

SELECTED EXAMPLES OF
BINOMIAL MEANINGS

Gr. name of a plant in Xenophon

Gr. Achilles, hero of Homer’s iad who is
said to have discovered the virtues of a
certain plant

Gr. akoniton, a kind of poisonous plant,
monk’s hood

Gr. the sweet flag found in Dioscorides
thorny, prickly

L. name for a kind of oak

Gr. pure, innocent

L. agrestis, pertaining to land, rural; L.
monas, solitary

Gr. agros, a field; L. pyr, wheat

L. white

from the Arabic for alchemy

named after Charles Allioni, Italian botanist
Gr. name for the plant

alternate leaves

Gr. althaino, to heal

bitter-tasting

daughter of the wind, from Gr. anemos,
the wind

Gr. anethon, anise, dill

Gr. angelikos, angelic, heavenly, divine
Gr. anison, anise, dill

Celtic apon, water: because of a plant’s
habitation

treelike; woody

said to have been revealed by the
Archangel Gabriel

L. arctus, narrow, straight

Gr. bear and bunch of grapes

Gr. best, birth

name, in Dioscorides, or a plant called
after Artemis (Diana)

L. arvensis, of or belonging to a field
growing on arable land

Gr. Asklepias, named for Asklepios, god
of medicine and healing

from the ancient Persian name for the
plant

Gr. astragalos, name of a kind of legumi-
nous plant.

Gr. Atropos, one of the three goddesses
of fate, the unbending one

gold, bright yellow

Avena

Ballota
Baptisia
Barosma
basilicus
belladonna
Bellis
benedictus
Berberis
Betonica

Betula
Borago

Brassica
Brugmansia

bursa-pastoris

calamus

Camellia
Calendula
campestris

Cannabis
Capsella
Capsicum
cardamomum
Carum

Cascara
Castanea
cataria

Caulophylum
Centaurea

Centella

Cephaelis

cevifera
622

L. avena, an old name for oats

Gr. ballote, a name for black horehound
to dip under water, dye

Gr. baros, weight, heaviness

Gr. basilikos, royal, kingly

beautiful lady

L. bellus, neat, charming, handsome

L. bene, well, agreeable

L. berberis, the barberry

Vettonica, the name in Pliny ofa medicinal
plant growing in the region of Spain
called Vectones or Vettones

L. betula, the birch

L. burra, a shaggy garment, referring to
the rough foliage

L. brassica, cabbage

named after Sebald Justin Brugmans
(1706-1763)

L. bursa, a pouch, purse made of skin;
L. pastoris, shepherd

L. calamus, a reed

named after George Josef Kamel
(1661-1819)

L. Kalendae, the first day of the month in
the Roman calendar; monthly blooming
L. campus, a plain; relating to a plain,
growing in a field

L. cannabis, hemp

L. capsa, box, from the form of the fruits
L. capsula, boxed

L. cardinis, pertaining to a hinge

Gr. Karon, name for caraway in
Dioscorides

Sp. cascara, bark

Gr. Kastanus, chestnut tree

L. catarius, of cats; old name of a plant at-
tractive to cats

Gr. kaulos, the stem of a plant, a cabbage
stalk

called after Chiron the Centaur, who had
wide knowledge of herbs

Gr. kenteo, to prick

Gr. Kephalotos, with a head

L. cera, wax, or L. cereus, a wax candle

----- PAGE 599 -----
Cetraria
Chelidonium
Chamealirium
Chamaemelum

Chelone
Chionanthus
Chondus
Chrysanthemum
Cimicifuga
cinerea

Cnicus

Coleus
Commiphora
communis
Conium

Convallaria

cordata
Coriandrum
Crataegus
crispus
Curcuma
Cypripedium

Datura
diffusa, -us, -um
Digitalis

dioica
Dioscorea

distichon
Drosera

Dryopteris

Elattaria
Echinacea
Ephedra
Equisetum
erythraea
Eschscholzia
Eucalyptus
Eugenia
Eupatorium

Euphorbia

Euphrasia

L. cetra, a sort of leather shield

Gr. chelidon, a swallow

L. chamaeleon, ground-lion

Gr. chamaimelon, name, in Dioscorides, of
a plant that smelled of apples

Gr. chelone, a tortoise

Gr. chion, snow, white as snow

Gr. chone, funnel, tube

Gr. chrysos, gold, flower

Gr. cimicinus, smelling like or of bugs

L. cinereus, ash-colored

Gr. knekos, a thistlelike plant used for

dyeing
Gr. koleus, a sheach
Gr. kommti, gam

L. communis, common, general

Gr. koneion, L. conium, names for this
plant

L. conulus, a cone; L. vallaris, of or be-
longing to a wall or rampart

L. cordis, the heart

ancient name for coriander

Gr. Krataigos, name of a tree in
Theophrastus

L. erispus, curled, curly, with wavy margins
Arabic kirkum, turmeric

Gr. Kypridios, belonging to Aphrodite

from Indian vernacular name

loosely spreading, spread, scatter
translation of German name Fingerhut,
thimble

Gr. di, two

named after the
Dioscorides

Gr. distoichos, in two rows

Gr. droseros, dewy, referring to the clear,
dewlike drops on the leaf glands

Gr. Dryope, daughter of Dryops and a
playmate of the wood nymphs

Greek herbalist

L. elatus, elevating

Gr. echinos, a hedgehog

Gr. ephedra, sitting upon a seat

L. equinus, horse; L. seta, bristle, hair

Gr. erythros, red, reddish

called after Johann Friedrich Eschscholtz
(1793-1831)

Gr. eu, good, well, true, nice; Gr. kalyptos,
covered, hidden

named in honor of Prince Eugene of
Savoy (1663-1735)

called after Eupator, a surname of
Mithridates, king of Pontus

called by King Juba II of Mauretania after
his physician in ordinary, Euphorbus

Gr, euphrasia, del.ght, mirth

SELECTED EXAMPLES OF BINOMIAL MEANINGS . 623

felix-mas

ficaria
Filipendula
foetidus
Fragaria
fragrans
fulvus

Fumaria

Galega

Galium

Gaultheria
Gelsemium
Gentiana
Geranium

Ginkgo
glaucus

Glechoma
globulus
Gheyrvhiza
gracilis
graveolens
Grindelia

Guaiacum

Hamamelis
Harpagophytum
Hedeoma
Hedera
hederacea
hipposcastanum

hirtus
Hordeum
horridus
hortensis
Humulus

Hydrangea
Hydrastis

Hypericum
Hyssopus

idaeus
Inula
tris

Jasminum

L. felicis, fruitful, productive; L. mas, a
male

L. ficus, a fig tree

L. filum, a thread; L. pendulus, hanging

. L. feetidus, stinking

L. fragum, a strawberry plant

L. fragrans, scented, sweet-smelling

L. fulvus, reddish yellow, tawny, gold-
colored

L. fumus, smoke

Gr. galaktos, milky

name, in Dioscorides, of G. verwam, used
to curdle milk for making cheese

Gr. gaulos, a pail, a round-bottomed vessel
It. gelsomino, jessamine

called after Gentius, an Illyrian king

Gr. Geranos, a kind of bird called the
crane, from the beaklike fruit

Jap. ginkyo, vernacular name of the
maiden-hair fern tree

Gr. glaukos, silvery, gleaming, covered
with a bloom like a plum

Gr. glechon, pennyroyal

L. globulus, a globe, ball, round as a ball
Gr. glykys, sweet, pleasant

L. gracilis, slender

L. graveolens, with a strong scent

called after David Hieronymus Grindel
(1776-1836)

‘West Indian name for Lignum-vitae

Gr. hama, all together, at the same time
Gr. hapagos, robbing, rapacious

Gr. hedys, sweet, scent

L. hedera, ivy

Celtic hederaceus, of ivy, ivy green

Gr. hippos, horse, and Gr. kastanus, chest-
nut, meaning chestnut unfit for food

L. hirtus, hairy

L. hordeum, barley

L. horridus, bristly, prickly

L. bortensis, cultivated in gardens
latinized form of a Teutonic word for
hops

Gr. hydro, water; Gr. angos, jar

Gr. hydor, water; Gr. drao, to act; an agent,
performer

Gr. byperikon, St. John’s wort

Gr. hyssopos, an aromatic plant

Gr. idios, distinct

L. inflatus, inflated, swollen

L. name of elecampane

Gr. iridos, rainbow—name of a kind of lily

latinized form of the Persian name
Yasmin

----- PAGE 600 -----
624 @ SELECTED EXAMPLES OF BINOMIAL MEANINGS

Juglans
Lactuca

Lappa
Larrea
Lavandula
Leonurus
Ligusticum
Ligustrum

Linum
Lobelia

longus
Lophophora

lucidus
Jupulus
luteum

Lycopus

maculatus
majalis

major
Malva

marianum

Marrubium
Matricaria
media
Medicago

Melaleuca

melano-
Melissa
Mentha
Menyanthes
millefolium
minimum
minor
montana

multi-, multus
muralis
TAUSCOSUS
Myrica

Myristica
myrtillus

Myrosylon

Jupiter’s nut, L. Jovis glans

L. Jactuca, lettuce; L. lac, milk, from the
white juice

L. lappa, a bur

named for Juan Antonio de la Larrea

L. lavo, to wash

L. leontus, lion

name of a plant growing in Liguria
name, in Virgil, of a plant with white
flowers

L. dinum, flax, thread, rope

called after Matthias de l’Obel, Flemish
botanist (1538-1616)

L. longus, tall, long

Gr. lophos, a crest; Gr. phoreo, to bear

L. lucidus, shining

L. lupus, a wolf

L. /uteus, golden yellow

Gr. lykos, a wolf

L. macula, spotted, speckled

used in botany to signify flowering during
May

L. major, greater

Gr. malasso, to soften

said to refer to Mary. According to leg-
ends, the white marks on the leaves of
Silybum marianum represent drops of
milk spilled when feeding the infant Jesus
during the flight to Egypt

Gr. maron, a bitter herb

L. matricis, womb

L. medius, middle, intermediate

classical name derived from the place-
name Media

Gr. melas, melaina, or malania, black,
blackness, clothed in black

Gr. melas, black

Gr. melissa, honeybee, nymph who kept bees
Gr. mintha, mint

Gr. menyo, to disclose

L. mille, thousand; L. folium, leaf

L. minimus, least, smallest, very small

L. minor, smaller

L. montanus, growing in mountainous
places

L. multus, many

L. murus, a wall; of, growing on, walls

L. muscus, moss; mosslike

Gr. myrike, ancient name of the tamarisk
Gr. myro, to flow, as it grows on banks of
running streams

Gr. myristikos, fit for anointing

Gr. Myrtilos, son of Mercury, charioteer
of Oenomaus

Gr. myron, sweet smelling oil; Gr. xylon,
wood

napellus
Nasturtium

neglectus

Nepeta

niger, -gra, -grum
nitens

nivalis

nobilis

nodosum

nudi-, nudus
Nymphaea

occidentalis
odorata
officinale, -lis

Olea
Oxalis

Paeonia
palmatum

paluster
Panax

Papaver
Parthenium
Passiflora
pellucidus
peltatum
pendulus
perennis

perforatum
Petroselinum

Peumus
Phytolacca
Piscidia
Plantago
Polygala
Populus

Potentilla
pratense

Primula
Prunella
Psychotria

Psyllium

L. napus, a kind of turnip

L. nasus, nose; L. tortus, twisting away or
torment

L. neglectus, neglected, overlooked

L. nepa, a scorpion

L. nigra, black

L. nitens, shining

L. nivis, growing in or near snow

L. nobilis, famous, noted, celebrated

L. nodus, knotty, referring to tubers or
swollen nodes

L. nudus, naked

L. Nympha, goddess of waters, meadows,
and forest

L. occidentalis, Western.

L. odoratus, sweet-smelling

L. officinalis, kept at the druggist’s shop,
(.e., used medicinally).

L. olea, olive

Gr. oxys, sharp, acid

Gr. Paionia, physician of the gods

L. palmatus, marked like the palm of the
hand

L. palustre, marsh; growing in swampy
places

L. panacaea, an herb that was supposed to
heal all diseases

L. papa, pap, thick milk

Gr. parthenos, virgin

L. passio, a passion, also a suffering

L. pellucido, transparent

L. pellatus, armed with a shield

L. pendulus, hanging down

throughout the year, through the year

L. perforatus, perforated

L. petronius, of or belonging to a moun-
tain, rock

latinized Chilean name

Gr. phyton, tree, plant

L. piscis, fish; L. caedere, to kill

L. planta, sole of the foot

L. polys, many or much; L. gala, milk

L. populus, a great number; the poplar
tree, so called from the number and con-
tinual motion of its leaves

L. potens, powerful

L. pratensis, pertaining to or growing in a
meadow

L. primus, the first

from the German word for croup

name derived from the Greek psy-
chotrophon meaning to grow in a cold
place

Gr. psylla, flea; Greek name of Plantago
psyllium. The seeds of this species resem-
ble fleas

----- PAGE 601 -----
‘pubescens

Pulmonaria
pulsatilla

purpurea

Quercus
THCEMMOSA

Ranunculus
recutita
repens
Rheum
riparius
Rosemarinus
rotundifolia
Rubus
Rumex
rupestris
Ruscus

Salix
Salvia

Sambucus
Sanguinaria
sativa
Sanguinaria
Schizandra

Scrophularia
Scutellaria
Senecio

serrulata
silvaticus

Silybuem

Smilax
Solidago
spicata
squalidus
Stachys
Stellaria
sylvatica
Symphytum

Symplocarpus
Syzygium

L. pubescens, hairs of puberty; covered
with soft hairs

L. pulmonarius, beneficial to the lungs

L. pulsata, beaten, driven about, from the
beating of the flowers by the wind
applied to various shades of purple

L. quercus, an oak

L. racemulus, the stalk of a cluster, a bunch
of berries

L. rana, a frog

L. recutitus, having a fresh or new skin
L. repo, creeping

Gr. rha, rhubarb

growing by rivers and streams

L. rorulentus, full of dew

L. rotundus, round

L. rubeo, to be red

Latin name for sorrel

L. rupis, rock, growing on rocks

L. ruscarius, of or for a butcher's broom

L. salicis, the willow

name of a plant in Pliny, perhaps from
L. salvus, safe, sound; L. salus, health
Latin name for the elder tree

L. sanguis, blood

sown, planted, cultivated

L. sanguis, blood

Gr. schizo, to divide; Gr. anthos, male
from Gr. serophula—i.e., tubercular glands
of the neck
L. scutella, salver. dish, referring to the
pouch on the calyx

L. senex, old man, because of the conspic-
uous white pappus

saw-shaped, serrated

L. silva, woodland, growing in woods

L. silybum, a kind of thistle with edible
stem

Gr. smilakos, the yew; also a bindweed

L. solidago, to put together or make whole
L. somnus, sleep; sleep-inducing, soporific
L. spica, a point

rough, unkempt, neglected, squalid

L. stachys, an ear of grain, spike

L. stella, star

L. sylvaticus, growing among trees

Gr. symphyton, name of a kind of plant
with healing properties; comfrey

Gr. symploke, a twisting together

Gr. syzygos, joined

SELECTED EXAMPLES OF BINOMIAL MEANINGS .e 625

Tanacetum
Taraxacum

thalictroides
Thuja

Thymus
Tika
tinctoria

tremulus

Trichocereus
Trifolium
Trigonella
Trillium

Tropacolum
tuberosa
Tussilago

ulmaria

Ulmus
Urtica

uva-ursi

Vaccinium
Valeriana

Verbascum
Verbena
versicolor
veris
Viburnum
villosus
Vinca
Viola
virgaurea
virosa

Viscum
Vitex
Vitis
vulgare

xanth (o)-

Zanthoxylum
Zea

Zingiber

medieval L. tanazita derived from the Gr.
athanasia, immortality

medieval Latin, ultimately from Persian,
bitter potherb

Gr. thaliktron, meadow rue

Gr. thya, an African tree with fragrant,
durable wood

Gr. thymos, to perfume or to sacrifice

L. tilia, the linden tree

L. tinctorius, of or belonging to dyeing;
bloodthirsty

Gr. tremo, shivering, trembling, quake,
quiver

Gr. thrix, hair, plus Cereus; hairy cactus
L. tria, thrice; L. folium, leaf

Gr. trigonos, triangular, three-cornered

L. trillium, an herb with leaves in whorls
of three

L. tropaeum, trophy

L. tuberosus, full of humps

L. russis, cough

medieval name for the goats-beard, a
plant with elmlike leaves

L. wlmus, the elm

the Latin name for nettles from L. ure, to
burn

L, uva, grape; L. ursi, bear

classical Latin name of the plant
medieval name, perhaps from L. valeo, be
well or strong

classical Latin name of the plant

L. verbenae, sacred boughs

changing color

of the spring

L. viburnum, the wayfaring tree

L. villosus, hairy, shaggy, rough

L. vinea, the periwinkle

L. viola, the violet

L. virga, rod; L. aureus, golden

L. virsosus, muddy, covered with slime,
poison, fetid

L. visewm, birdlime, made from the
berries of mistletoe

L. viticis, the chaste tree

classical Latin name of the grapevine
general, common, usual

Gr. xanthos, yellow

Gr. xanthos, yellow, Gr. xylon, wood
classical Greek name of another cereal
plant

Gr. zingiber, ginger

----- PAGE 602 -----
Appendix 3

HN

HERBS BY LATIN AND COMMON NAMES

HERBS BY LATIN NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME
LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME Arachis hypogaea Peanut
Aralia nudicaulis False sarsaparilla

Abelmoschus moschatus Muskseed A, racemosa American spikenard
Abies balsamea Balsam fir A. spinosa Angelica tree
Abrus precatorius Jequerity Arctium lappa Burdock
Acacia nilotica Acacia bark Arctostaphylos uva-ursi Bearberry, kinnikinnick
A, catechu Black catechu Aristolochia serpentaria Virginia snakeroot
A, senega Gum arabic Aristolochia spp. Birthwort
Acer rubrum Red maple Armoracia rusticana Horseradish
Achillea milléfolium Yarrow Arnica montana Arnica
A. ptarmica Sneezeweed Artemisia abrotanum Southernwood
Aconitum napellus Aconite, monkshood A, absinthium Wormwood
Acorus calamus Sweet flag, calamus A, annua Sweet Annie
Adiantum capillus-veneris Maidenhair fern A. dracunculus Tarragon
Adonis vernalis False hellebore A. vulgaris Mugwort
Aegopodium podagraria Ground elder, bishop’s Arum maculatum Cuckoo pint

goutweed Asarum canadense Wild ginger
Aesculus bippocastanum Horse chestnut Asclepias syriaca Milkweed
Agathosma betulina Buchu A. tuberosa Pleurisy root
Agrimonia eupatoria Agrimony Asparagus officinalis Asparagus
Ailanthus altissima Tree of heaven Astragalus gummifer Tragacanth
Ajuga chamaepitys Ground pine A, membranaceus Astragalus
A, veptans Common bugle Atropa belladonna Belladonna
Alchemilla vulgaris Lady’s mantle Avena sativa Oats, oatstraw
Aletris farinosa True unicorn root Azadiracta indica Neem
Alkanna tinctoria Alkanet
Allium cepa Onion Ballota nigra Black horehound
A, sativum Garlic Baptisia tinctoria Wild indigo
Alnus glutinosa Black alder Bellis perennis English daisy
Aloe spp. Aloe Berberis vulgaris Barberry
Aloysia triphylla Lemon verbena Betula lenta Sweet birch
Alpinia officanarum Galangal Betula spp. Birch
Alstonia scholaris Alstonia Bidens tripartita Burr marigold
Althaea officinalis Marshmallow Bixa orellana Annatto
Amaranthus hypochondriacus — Amaranth Borago officinalis Borage
Anacardium occidentale Cashew Boswellia carteri Frankincense
Anagallis arvensis Scarlet pimpernel Brassica nigra Black mustard
Anemopsis californica Yerba mansa Bryonia alba White bryony
Anethum graveolens Dill Buxus sempervirens Boxwood
Angelica archangelica Angelica
A, sinensis Dong quai Calamintha ascendens Calamint
Antennaria dioica Life everlasting, pussytoes Calendula officinalis Calendula, marigold
Anthemis cotula Mayweed Camellia sinensis Tea
Anthoxanthum odoratum Sweet vernalgrass Cannabis sativa Marijuana
Apium graveolens Celery seed Capsella bursa-pastoris Shepherd’s purse
Apocynum androsaemifolium Bitter root, spreading dogbane Capsicum annuwn Cayenne
A. cannabinum Indian hemp Carica papaya Papaya

626

----- PAGE 603 -----
Heres By LATIN AND COMMON NAMES .& 527

LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME
Carthamus tinctorius Safflower Crocus sativus Saffron

Carum carvi Caraway Croton eluteria Cascarilla
Castanea sativa Chestnut C. tighium Croton
Catharanthus roseus Madagascar periwinkle Cucurbita pepo Pumpkin
Caulophyllum thalictroides Blue cohosh Cuminum cyminum Cumin
Ceanothus americanus Red root Curcuma longa Turmeric
Celastrus scandens Bittersweet, American C. zedoaria Zedoary
Centaurea cyanus Cornflower Cuscuta epithymum Dodder

C. nigra Black knapweed Cydonia oblonga Quince
Centaurium erythraea Centaury Cymbopogon citratus Lemongrass
Centella astatica Gotu kola Cynara scolymus Artichoke
Cephaelis ipecacuanha Ipecacuanha Cynoglossum officinale Houndstongue
Ceratonia siliqua Carob Cypripedium calceolus Lady’s slipper
Cetraria islandica Iceland moss Cytisus scoparius Scotch broom
Chamaelirium luteum False unicorn root

Chamaemelum nobilis Roman chamomile Daemonorops draco Dragon's blood

Chelidonium majus
Chelone glabra
Chenopodium ambrosioides
Chimaphila umbellata
Chionanthus virginicus
Chondrus crispus

Chrysanthemum cinerariifolium

Cichorium intybus
Cimicifuga racemosa
Cinchona spp.
Cinnamomum aromaticum
C. camphora

C. verum

Citrullus colocynthis
Citrus aurantifolia
C. a. var, amara

C. sinensis

C. limon

Cladonia pyxidata
Claviceps purpurea
Cnicus benedictus
Cochlearia officinalis
Codonopsis tangshen
Coffea arabica

Cola acuminata

C. vera

Colchicum autumnale
Coleus forskoblii

Collinsonia canadensis

Commiphora molmol, C. myrrha

C. mukul

Contum maculatum
Consolida regalis
Convallaria majalis
Convolvulus scammonia
Conyza canadensis
Copaifera officinalis
Copernicia prunifera
Coptis trifolia
Corallorhiza odontorbiza
Coriandrum sativum
Cornus florida
Crataegus laevigata

C. monogyna

Celandine
Balmony
Wormseed
Pipsissewa
Fringetree
Trish moss
Pyrethrum
Chicory
Black cchosh
Quinine
Cassia
Camphor
Cinnamon
Colocynth
Lime

Bitter orange
Sweet orange
Lemon
Cupmoss
Ergot
Blessed thistle
Scurvygrass
Codonopsis
Coffee

Kola, cola
Kola, cola
Colchicum, autumn crocus
Coleus
Stoneroot
Myrrh
Guggul
Hemlock, poison hemlock
Larkspur
Lily ofthe valley
Scammeny
Fleabane
Copaiba
Carnauka
Goldthread
Coral root
Coriander
Dogwood
Hawthorn
Hawthorn

Daphne mezereum
Datura stramonium
Daucus carota
Delphinium staphisagria
Dicentra canadensis
Digitalis spp.
Dioscorea villosa
Diospyros virginiana
Dipteryx odorata
Dorema ammoniacum
Drimys winteri
Drosera rotundifolia
Dryopteris filix-mas

Echallium elaterium
Echinacea spp.

Echium vulgare
Elettaria cardamomum
Eleutherococcus senticosus
Elymus repens

Embelia ribes

Ephedra sinica

Epigaea repens
Equisetum arvense
Eriodictyon californicum
Eryngium maritimum
Erythronium americanum
Erythroxylum coca
Eschscholzia californica
Eucalyptus spp.
Euonymus atropurpureus
Eupatorium cannabinum
E. perfoliatum

E. purpureum
Euphorbia ipecacuanhae
E. pilulifera

Euphrasia officinalis

Fagopyrum esculentum
Fagus sylvatica

Ferula assa-foetida

E gummosa

Ficus carica
Filipendula ulmaria

Mezereon

Thorn apple, jimsonweed
Carrot

Stavesacre

Turkey corn
Foxglove

Wild yam

American persimmon
Tonka bean
Ammoniakum
Winter's bark
Sundew

Male fern

Wild cucumber

Echinacea, purple coneflower

Bugloss

Cardamom

Siberian ginseng
Couch grass
Embelia

Ma huang, ephedra
Arbutus

Horsetail

Yerba santa

Sea holly

Adder’s tongue, American
Coca

California poppy
Eucalyptus

Wahoo, spindle tree
Hemp agrimony
Boneset

Gravel root, Joe pye
American ipecac
Pill-bearing spurge
Eyebright

Buckwheat
Beech
Asafetida
Galbanum
Fig
Meadowsweet

----- PAGE 604 -----
628 < HERBS BY LATIN AND COMMON NAMES

LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME
Foeniculum vulgare Fennel I. germanica Orris
Fragaria vesca Strawberry 1. pseudacorus Yellow flag
Fraxinus excelsior Ash I. versicolor Blue flag
F ornus Manna
Fucus vesiculosus Bladderwrack Jasminum grandiflorum Jasmine
Fumaria officinalis Fumitory Jateorhiza columba Columbo
Juglans cinerea Butternut
Galega officinalis Goat’s rue JF. nigra Black walnut
Galipea officinalis Angostura Fi regia English walnut
Galium aparine Cleavers Juniperus communis Juniper
G. odoratum Sweet woodruff F. oxycedrus Cade juniper
G. verum Lady’s bedstraw F. sabina Savin
Ganoderma lucidum Reishi F. virginiana Eastern red cedar
Garcinia cambogia Garcinia
Garrya fremontii Feverbrush Kalmia latifolia Mountain laurel
Gaultheria procumbens Wintergreen Krameria triandra Rhatany
Gelidium amansii Agar
Gelsemium sempervirens Yellow jasmine Lactuca virosa Wild lettuce
Genista tinctoria Dyer’s greenweed Lamium album Dead nettle
Gentiana lutea Gentian Larix decidua Larch
Geranium maculatum Cranesbill L. laricina Tamarack
Geum urbanum Avens Larrea tridentata Chaparral
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo Laurus nobilis Laurel
Glechoma hederacea Ground ivy Lavandula spp. Lavender
Glycine max Soy Lawsonia inermis Henna
Ghyeyrrhiza glabra Licorice Ledum groenlandicum Labrador tea
Gnaphalium uliginosum Cudweed Lentinus edodes Shiitake
Gossypium hirsutum Cotton root Leonurus cardiaca Motherwort
Grindelia camporum Gumweed, grindelia Leptandra virginica Black root
G. squarrosa Gumweed, grindelia Ligusticum porteri Osha
Guaiacum officinale Guaiacum Ligustrum spp. Privet
Lilium candidum Madonna lily
Hamamelis virginiana Witch hazel Linum catharticum Fairy flax
Harpagophytum procumbens Devil’s claw L. usitatissimum Flax
Hedeoma pulegioides American pennyroyal Liguidambar orientalis Storax
Hedera helix Ivy Liriodendron tulipifera Tuliptree
Helianthus annuus Sunflower Liriosma ovata Muira puama
Helichrysum angustifolium Eternal flower Lobelia mflata Lobelia
Helleborus niger Black hellebore Lomatium dissectum Lomatium
Herniaria glabra Rupturewort Lonicera spp. Honeysuckle
Heuchera americana Alumroot Lophophora williamsii Peyote
Hevea spp. Rubber Lycopodium clavatum Club moss
Hieracium pilosella Mouse ear Lycopus americanus Bugleweed
Hordeum vulgare Barley L. europaeus Bugleweed
Humulus lupulus Hops L, virginicus Bugleweed
Hydnocarpus kurzi Chaulmoogra Lythrum salicaria Purple loosestrife
Hydrangea arborescens Hydrangea
Hydrastis canadensis Goldenseal Magnolia officinalis Magnolia
Hyoseyamus niger Henbane Mahonia aquifolium Oregon grape, mountain grape
Hypericum perforatum St. John’s wort Malva sylvestris Mallow
Hyssopus officinalis Hyssop Manihot esculenta Tapioca
Maranta arundinacea Arrowroot
Tex aquifolium Holly Marrubium vulgare Horehound
I. paraguariensis Paraguay tea, maté Marsdenia condurango Condurango
Ilhcium verum Star anise M. reichenbachii Condurango
Impatiens capensis Jewelweed Matricaria recutita German chamomile
Inula helenium Elecampane Medicago sativa Alfalfa, lucerne
Ipomoea orizabensis Mexican scammony root Melaleuca alternifolia Tea tree
I purga Jalap M. quinquenervia Cajeput
Iris foetidissima Stinking iris Melissa officinalis Lemon balm

----- PAGE 605 -----
HErgs BY LATIN AND COMMON NaMES .@

529

LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME
Mentha aquatica Water mint P. methysticum Kava kava

M. piperita Pepperm:nt P nigrum Black pepper

M. pulegium Pennyroyal Piscidia erythrina Jamaica dogwood
M. spicata Spearmint Pistacia lentiscus Mastic
Menyanthes trifoliata Bogbean Plantago lanceolata Ribwort plantain
Mitchella repens Partridgeberry P major Plantain
Monarda punctata Horsemint P. ovata Psyllium

Morus alba Mulberry Podophyllum peltatum Mayapple

Myrica cerifera Bayberry Pogostemon cablin Patchouli

M. gale Sweetgale Polemonium caeruleum Jacob’s ladder
Myristica fragrans Nutmeg P. reptans Abscess root
Myroxylon balsamum Balsam of Tolu Polygala senega Seneca snakeroot

var. balsamum
M. balsamum

var. pereirae
Myrrhis odorata
Myrtus communis

Nepeta cataria
Nicotiana tabacum
Nymphaea odorata

Ocimum. basilicum
Ocnothera biennis

Olea europaea

Ononsis spinosa
Ophioglossum vulgatum
Origanum majorana
O. vulgare

Oryza sativa

Oxalis acetosella

Packera aurea
Paconia officinalis
Palaquium gutta
Panax ginseng

P quinquefolius
Papaver rhoeas
Papaver somniferum
Parietaria officinalis
Passiflora incarnata
Paullinia cupana
Pausinystalia yohimbe
Petasites hybridus
Petroselinum crispum
Peumus boldus
Phoenix dactylifera
Phyllanthus emblica
Physalis alkekengi
Physostigma venenosum
Phytolacca americana
Picrorhiza kurrooa
Pilocarpus microphyllus
P jaborandi

Pimenta dioica
Pimpinella anisum

P saxifraga

Pinus strobus

Piper betle

P cubeba

Balsam of Peru

Sweet cicely
Myrtle

Catnip
Tobacco
White water lily

Basil

Evening primrose
Olive

Restharrow

Southern adder’s-tongue

Marjoram
Oregano
Rice

Wood sorrel

Life root

Peony
Gutta-percha
Ginseng, Korean
Ginseng, American
Field poppy
Opium poppy
Pellitory of the wall
Passionflower
Guarana
Yohimbe
Butterbur
Parsley

Boldo

Date palra

Amla

Winter cherry
Calabar bean
Poke

Kutki

Jaborandi
Jaborandi
Allspice

Anise, aniseed
Burnet saxifrage
White pine

Betel

Cubeb

Polygonatum biflorum
P. multiflorum
Polygonum bistorta
P. bydropiper
P multiflorum
Polypodium virginianum
Populus alba
P. balsamifera

var. balsamifera
P. gileadensis
P. tremuloides
Potentilla anserina
P. erecta
Primula veris
P. vulgaris
Prunella vulgaris
Prunus armeniaca
P africana
P cerasus
P. domestica
P. dulcis var. amara
P. laurocerasus
P. persica
P. serotina
Pueraria montana var. lobata
Pulmonaria officinalis
Pulsatilla vulgaris
Punica granatum

Quassia amara
Quercus alba

Q. robur

Quillaja saponaria

Ranunculus ficaria
Rauvolfia serpentina
Rebmannia glutinosa
Rhamnus cathartica
R. frangula

R. purshiana

Rheum officinale

R. palmatum

Rhus aromatica

R. glabra

Ribes nigrum
Ricinus communis
Rorippa nasturtium-aquaticum
Rosa canina

Solomon’s seal
Solomon’s seal
Bistort
Smartweed
Fo-ti
Polypody root
White poplar
Balm of Gilead

Balm of Gilead
Quaking aspen
Silverweed
Tormentil
Cowslip
Primrose
Self-heal
Apricot
Pygeum

Sour cherry
Plum

Almond
Cherry laurel
Peach

Wild cherry
Kudzu
Lungwort
Pasqueflower
Pomegranate

Quassia
White oak
Oak

Soap bark

Lesser celandine
Rauwolfia
Rehmannia
Purging buckthorn
Alder buckthorn
Cascara sagrada
Chinese rhubarb
Chinese rhubarb
Sweet sumac
Smooth sumac
Black currant
Castor bean
Watercress

Dog rose

----- PAGE 606 -----
630 @ HERBS BY LATIN AND COMMON NaMES

LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME
R. damascena Damask rose Tabebuia avellanedae Pau d’arco
Rosmarinus officinalis Rosemary Tamarindus indica Tamarind
Rubia cordifolia Indian madder Tanacetum parthenium Feverfew
R. tinctorum Madder T. vulgare Tansy
Rubus idaeus Raspberry Taraxacum officinale Dandelion
R. villosus Blackberry Taxus baccata English yew
Rumex acetosa Sorrel T. brevifolia Pacific yew
R. acetosella Sheep sorrel Teucrium chamaedrys Germander
R. crispus Yellow dock Theobroma cacao Cocoa
Ruscus aculeatus Butcher’s broom Thuja occidentalis Thuja, arborvitae
Ruta graveolens Rue Thymus vulgaris Thyme
Tilia cordata Litleleaf linden
Sabatia angularis American centaury T. europaea Linden
Saccharum officinarum Sugarcane T. platyphyllos Linden
Salix alba White willow Trifolium pratense Red clover
S. cinerea Willow Trigonella foenum-graecum Fenugreek
Salvia miltiorrhiza Dan shen Trillium erectum Beth root, trillium
S. officinalis Sage, garden sage Triosteum perfoliatum Feverwort
S. officinalis var. rubia Red sage Triticum aestivum Wheat
S. sclarea Clary sage Tropacolum majus Nasturtium
Sambucus ebulus Dwarf elder Turnera di Damiana
S. nigra European elder Tussilago farfara Coltsfoot
Sanguinaria canadensis Bloodroot
Sanguisorba officinalis Burnet Ulmus glabra Elm
Sanicula europaea Sanicle U. rubra Slippery elm
Santalum album Sandalwood Uncaria tomentosa Cat’s claw
Saponaria officinalis Soapwort Urginea maritima Squill
Sarracenia purpurea Pitcher plant Urtica dioica Nettle
Sassafras albidum Sassafras Usnea spp. Usnea
Satureja hortensis Summer savory Ustilago maydis Corn smut
S. montana Winter savory
Schisandra chinensis Schizandra Vaccinium macrocarpon Cranberry
Scrophularia nodosa Figwort V. myrtillus Bilberry
Scutellaria lateriflora Skullcap Valeriana officinalis Valerian
Selenicereus grandiflorus Night-blooming cereus Vanilla planifolia Vanilla
Sempervivum tectorum Houseleek Veratrum album White hellebore
Senecio jacobaea Ragwort V. viride White hellebore
Senna alexandrina Senna Verbascum thapsus Mullein
Serenoa repens Saw palmetto Verbena officinalis Vervain
Sesamum orientale Sesame Veronica beccabunga Brooklime
Silybum marianum Milk thistle V. officinalis Speedwell
Sinapsis alba White mustard Vetiveria zizanivides Vetiver
Sisymbrium officinale Hedge mustard Viburnum opulus Cramp bark
Smilax spp. Sarsaparilla V. prunifolium Black haw
Solanum dulcamara Bittersweet Vinca major Periwinkle
Solidago virgaurea Goldenrod V. minor Periwinkle
Sorbus aucuparia Mountain ash Viola odorata Sweet violet
Spigelia marilandica Pink root V. tricolor Heartsease
Stachys betonica Wood betony Viscum album Mistletoe
S. officinalis Wood betony Vitex agnus-castus Chaste tree, vitex
S. palustris Woundwort Vitis vinifera Grape
Stellaria media Chickweed
Stillingia sylvatica Queen’s delight Withania somnifera Ashwaganda
Strychnos nux-vomica Nux vomica, strychnine tree
Styrax benzoin Benzoin Xanthorhiza apiifolia Yellow root
Symphytum officinale Comfrey
Symplocarpus foetidus Skunk cabbage Zanthoxylum americanum Prickly ash
Syzygium aromaticum Clove Zea mays Cornsilk
S. cumini Jambul Zingiber officinale Ginger
Ziziphus jujuba Jujube

----- PAGE 607 -----
HERBS LISTED BY COMMON NAME

COMMON NAME

LATIN BINOMIAL

Abscess root
Acacia bark
Aconite
Adder’s tongue, American
Adder’s tongue, southern
Agar
Agrimony
Alder, black
Alder buckthorn
Alfafa

Alkanet
Allspice
Almond

Aloe

Alstonia
Alumroot
Amaranth
Amla
Ammoniakum
Angelica
Angelica tree
Angostura
Anise, aniseed
Annatto
Apricot
Arborvitae
Arbutus
Arnica
Arrowroot
Artichoke
Asafetida

Ash
Ashwaganda
Asparagus
Astragalus
Autumn crocus
Avens

Balm of Gilead

Balm of Gilead
Balmony
Balsam of Peru

Balsam of Tolu

Barberry
Barley
Basil
Bayberry
Bearberry
Beech
Belladonna
Benzoin
Betel
Beth root
Bilberry
Birch

Polemonium reptans
Acacia nilotica

Aconitum napellus
Erythronium americanum
Ophioglossum vulgatum
Gelidium amansii
Agrimonia eupatoria
Alnus glutinosa
Rhamnus frangula
Medicago sativa
Alkanna tinctoria
Pimenta dioica

Prunus dulcis var. amara
Aloe spp.

Alstonia scholaris
Heuchera americana
Amaranthus hypochondriacus
Phyllanthus emblica
Dorema ammoniacum
Angelica archangelica
Aralia spinosa

Galipea officinalis
Pimpinelli anisum

Bixa orelluna

Prunus armeniaca

Thuja occidentalis
Epigaea repens

Arnica montana
Maranta arundinacea
Cynara scolymus

Ferula assa-foetida
Fraxinus excelsior
Withania somnifera
Asparagus officinalis
Astragalus membranaceus
Colchicum autumnale
Geum urbanum

Populus balsamifera
var. balsamifera
Populus gileadensis
Chelone glabra
Myroxylon balkamum
var. pervirae
Myroxylon balsamum
var. balsamum
Berberis vulgaris
Hordeum vulgare
Ocimum basilicum
Myrica cerifera
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi
Fagus sylvatica
Atropa belladonna
Styrax benzoin
Piper betle
Trillium erectum
Vaccinium myrtillus
Betula spp.

Hergs sy LATIN AND COMMON NaMES .& $31

COMMON NAME

LATIN BINOMIAL

Birch, sweet
Birthwort
Bishop’s goutweed
Bistort

Bitter orange
Bitter root
Bittersweet
Bittersweet, American
ackberry

ack catechu
ack cohosh
ack currant
lack haw

ack hellebore
ack horehound
ack root

ack walnut
ladderwrack
essed thistle
loodroot

tue cohosh
Blue flag
Bogbean
Boldo

Boneset
Borage
Boxwood
Brooklime
Broom

Buchu
Buckwheat
Bugle
Bugleweed

BwmWmamwnwnwwsnnnrnwew

Bugloss
Burdock

Burnet

Burnet saxifrage
Burr marigold
Butcher’s broom
Butterbur
Butternut

Cade juniper
Cajeput
Calabar bean
Calamint
Calendula
California poppy
Camphor
Caraway
Cardamon
Carnauba
Carrot

Cascara sagrada
Cascarilla
Cashew

Cassia

Castor bean
Cat’s claw

B. lenta

Aristolochia spp.
Aegopodium podagraria
Polygonum bistorta
Citrus aurantium var. amara
Apocynum androsaemifolium
Solanum dukamara
Celastrus scandens
‘Rubus villosus

Acacia catechu
Cimicifuga racemosa
Ribes nigrum

Viburnum prunifolium
Helleborus niger

Ballota nigra

Leptandra virginica
Juglans nigra

Fucus vesiculosus

Cnicus benedictus
Sanguinaria canadensis
Caulophyllum thalictroides
Iris versicolor
Menyanthes trifoliata
Peumus boldus
Eupatorium perfoliatum
Borago officinalis

Buxus sempervirens
Veronica beccabunga
Cytisus scoparius
Agathosma betulina
Fagopyrum esculentum
Ajuga reptans

Lycopus virginicus, L. americanus,

L. europaeus
Echium vulgare
Arctium lappa
Sanguisorba officinalis
Pimpinella saxifraga
Bidens tripartita
Ruscus aculeatus
Petasites hybridus
Juglans cinerea

Juniperus oxycedrus
Melaleuca quinguenervia
Physostigma venenosum
Calamintha ascendens
Calendula officinalis
Eschscholzia californica
Cinnamomum campbora
Carum carvi

Elettaria cardamomum
Copernicia prunifera
Daucus carota

Rhamnus purshiana
Croton eluteria
Anacardium occidentale
Cinnamomum aromaticum
Ricinus communis
Uncaria tomentosa

----- PAGE 608 -----
632 @ Herss py LATIN AND COMMON NaMES

COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL

Catnip Nepeta cataria Dodder Cuscuta epithymum

Cayenne Capsicum annuum Dogbane, spreading Apocynum androsaemifolium
Cedar, Eastern red Juniperus virginiana Dog rose Rosa canina

Celandine Chelidonium majus Dogwood Cornus florida

Celery seed Apium graveolens Dong quai Angelica sinensis

Centaury Centaurium erythraea Dragon’s blood Daemonorops draco
Chamomile, German Matricaria recutita Dyer’s greenweed Genista tinctoria

Chamomile, Roman Chamaemelum nobilis Echinacea Echinacea angustifolia, E.. pallida

Chaparral
Chaste tree
Chaulmoogra
Cherry laurel
Cherry, sour
Chestnut
Chickweed
Chicory
Cinchona
Cinnamon
Clary sage
Cleavers
Clove

Club moss
Coca

Cocoa
Codonopsis
Coffee
Colchicum
Coleus
Colocynth
Coltsfoot
Columbo
Comfrey
Condurango
Copaiba
Coral root
Coriander
Cornflower
Cornsilk
Corn smut
Cotton root
Couch grass
Cowslip
Cramp bark
Cranberry
Cranesbill
Croton
Cubeb
Cuckoo pint
Cudweed
Cumin
Cupmoss

Daisy, English
Damiana

Dan shen
Dandelion
Date palm
Dead nettle
Devil’s claw

Dill

Larrea tridentata
Vitex agnus-castus
Hydnocarpus kurzi
Prunus laurocerasus

P cerasus

Castanea sativa
Stellaria media
Cichorium intybus
Cinchona spp.
Cinnamomum verum
Salvia sclarea

Galium aparine
Syzygium aromaticum
Lycopodium clavatum
Erythroxylum coca
Theobroma cacao
Codonopsis tangshen
Coffea arabica
Colchicum autumnale
Coleus forskoblii
Citrullus colocynthis
Tussilago farfara
Jateorhiza columba
Symphytum officinale
Marsdenia condurango
Copaifera officinalis
Corallorhiza odontorbiza
Coriandrum sativum
Centaurea cyanus

Zea mays

Ustilago maydis
Gossypium hirsutum
Elymus repens
Primula veris
Viburnum opulus
Vaccinium macrocarpon
Geranium maculatum
Croton tiglium

Piper cubeba

Arum maculatum
Gnaphalium uliginosum
Cuminum cyminum
Cladonia pyxidata

Bellis ‘perennis

Turnera diffusa

Salvia miltiorrhiza
Taraxacum officinale
Phoenix dactylifera

Lamium album
Harpagophytum procumbens
Anethum graveolens

Eastern red cedar
Elder

Elder, dwarf
Elecampane

Elm

Embelia

Ergot

Eternal flower
Eucalyptus
Evening primrose
Eyebright

Fairy flax

False hellebore
False sarsaparilla
False unicorn root
Fennel
Fenugreek
Feverbrush
Feverfew
Feverwort

Fig

Figwort
Flaxseed
Fleabane

Fo-ti

Foxglove
Frankincense
Fringetree
Fumitory

Galangal
Galbanum
Garcinia

Garlic

Gentian
Germander
Ginger

Ginkgo
Ginseng, American
Ginseng, Korean
Goat’s rue
Goldenrod
Goldenseal
Goldthread
Gotu kola
Grape

Gravel root
Ground elder
Ground ivy
Ground pine

E. purpurea
Juniperus virginiana
Sambucus nigra
S. ebulus
Inula helenium
Ulmus glabra
Embelia ribes
Claviceps purpurea
Helichrysum angustifolium
Eucalyptus spp.
Ocnothera biennis
Euphrasia officinalis

Linum catharticum
Adonis vernalis

Aralia nudicaulis
Chamaelirium luteum
Foeniculum vulgare
Trigonella foenum-graecum
Garrya fremontii
Tanacetum parthenium
Triosteum perfoliatum
Ficus carica
Scrophularia nodosa
Linum usitatissimum
Conyza canadensis
Polygonum multiflorum
Digitalis spp.

Boswellia carteri
Chionanthus virginicus
Fumaria officinalis

Alpinia officanarum
Ferula gummosa
Garcinia cambogia
Allium sativum
Gentiana lutea
Teucrium chamaedrys
Zingiber officinale
Ginkgo biloba

Panax quinquefolius

P. ginseng

Galega officinalis
Solidago virgaurea
Hydrastis canadensis
Coptis trifolia

Centella asiatica

Vitis vinifera
Eupatorium purpureum
Aegopodium podagraria
Glechoma hederacea
Ajuga chamaepitys

----- PAGE 609 -----
15 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 20% alcohol and 10% glycerin)
three times a day.

Sarsaparilla, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Solidago virgaurea L.
Goldenrod
Asteraceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Saponins (based on polygalic acid); clero-
dane diterpenes (including solidagolactones I-VII and
elongatolides C and E); phenolic glycosides; flavonoids
(such as rutin and quercetin); miscellaneous: acetylenes,
polysaccharides, tannins’’*

Actions: Anticatarrhal, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial,
astringent, diaphoretic, carminative, diuretic

Indications: Goldenrod is perhaps the first plant to con-
sider for upper respiratory catarrh, whether acute or
chronic. The plant may also be used in combination with
other herbs to treat influenza. Its carminative properties
point to a role in the treatment of flatulent dyspepsia. As
an anti-inflammatory urinary tract antiseptic, goldenrod
may be helpful in cystitis, urethritis, and similar condi-
tions affecting this system. As a gargle, goldenrod can be
effective for laryngitis and pharyngitis. It may be applied
externally to promote the healing of wounds.

Safety Considerations: Goldenrod may cause allergic
reactions in people sensitive to plants in the Asteraceae
family.
Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 to 3 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Commission E recommends a daily dosage of 6 to
12 g herb or equivalent preparations.

Goldenrod, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

Stachys betonica L.
Wood Betony

Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Alkaloids (stachydrine and betonicine);

miscellaneous: betaine, choline, tannins?’

Actions: Nervine, bitter

MarerlA Mepica e 385

Indications: Betony gently tones and strengthens the
nervous system while also soothing nervous tension. It is
helpful for nervous debility associated with anxiety and
tension. It eases headaches and neuralgia of nervous ori-
gin, especially when caused by hypertension.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 6 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Stellaria media (L.) Villars
Chickweed
Caryophyllaceae

Parts Used: Dried aerial parts

Constituents: Saponin glycosides; coumarins and hy-
droxycoumarins; flavonoids; carboxylic acids; triter-
penoids; vitamin C (about 150 to 350 mg per 100 g)??6

Actions: Antirheumatic, vulnerary, emollient

Indications: Chickweed is commonly used as an external
remedy for cuts, wounds, and, especially, itching and irri-
tation. It may be used with benefit to treat eczema or pso-
riasis associated with this sort of irritation. Chickweed has
a reputation as a remedy for rheumatism when used in-
ternally.

King’s provided the following uses:

Chickweed appears to be a cooling demulcent. I have seen
the fresh leaves bruised and applied as a poultice to indo-
lent, intractable ulcers of the leg, of many years standing,
with the most decided and immediately beneficial results;
to be changed 2 or 3 times a day. In acute ophthalmia, the
bruised leaves will likewise be found a valuable applica-
tion. An ointment, made by bruising fresh leaves in fresh
lard, may be used in many forms of cutaneous disease.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Chickweed should be used
fresh or in the form of a water extract. To make an infu-
sion, pour | cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried
herb and infuse for 5 minutes. This may be drunk three
times a day.

To make a “green drink” of fresh chickweed, place a
handful of fresh plant in the blender with some pineapple
juice; blend and strain. To ease itching, a strong infusion
of fresh plant is a useful addition to bathwater.

----- PAGE 610 -----
58¢€ << TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODy SYSTEM

Symphytum officinale L.
Comfrey
Boraginaceae

Parts Used: Root, rhizome, leaf

Constituents: Allantoin; pyrrolizidine alkaloids, includ-
ing echimidine, symphytine, lycopsamine, symlandine
(found in the fresh young leaves and in the root but, ac-
cording to two separate investigations, not in the dried
herb); phenolic acids (rosmarinic, chlorogenic, caffeic,
and lithospermic); mucilage (about 29%), composed of a
polysaccharide containing glucose and fructose; miscella-
neous: choline, asparagine, volatile oil, tannins, steroidal
saponins, triterpenes”2”

Actions: Vulnerary, demulcent, anti-inflammatory, as-
tringent, expectorant

Indications: The impressive wound-healing properties
of comfrey are due at least in part to the presence of al-
lantoin. This chemical stimulates cell proliferation and
thus supports wound healing, both internally and exter-
nally. Because it also contains a good deal of demulcent
mucilage, comfrey root is a powerful healing agent for
gastric and duodenal ulcers, hiatus hernia, and ulcerative
colitis. Its astringency makes it valuable in the treatment
of hemorrhages, wherever they occur. The root or herb
may be used to good effect in bronchitis and irritable
cough to soothe and reduce irritation while promoting
expectoration.

Used externally, comfrey leaf speeds wound healing
and fosters proper scar formation. Care should be taken
with very deep wounds, however, as external application
of comfrey can cause tissue to form over the wound be-
fore it is healed deeper down, which can lead to abscess.
Used as a compress or poultice, the herb may be used to
treat any external ulcers, wounds, and fractures; it is an
excellent treatment for chronic varicose ulcers. It has a re-
puted anticancer action in European folk herbalism.

Safety Considerations: Long-term studies with rats
have demonstrated that the pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs)
in comfrey are hepatotoxic, carcinogenic, and mutagenic.
Two of the PAs in comfrey have proved to be mutagenic
in somatic Drosophila cells at a concentration of 5x10°M.
This herb must therefore be recognized as a potentially
genotoxic carcinogen in man. However, the risk of ge-
netic damage from these pyrrolizidine alkaloids appears
to be low. An average cup of fresh comfrey leaf tea may
contain up to §.3 mg alkaloid. To minimize potential risk,
lengthy internal use is to be discouraged. Only slight ab-
sorption occurs with external application. For a more de-

tailed discussion of the toxicity of pyrrolizidine alkaloids,
please refer to chapter 10.

After external application to rats of an alcoholic ex-
tract (corresponding to a dose of 194 mg/kg of alkaloid N-
oxide mixture), 0.1% to 0.4% alkaloid was excreted in the
urine, mainly as N-oxide. Oral administration of the same
extract for the same length of time led to a 20 to 50 times
greater excretion of alkaloid in the urine.

Comfrey is banned in Australia and its use restricted
in New Zealand. In the United Kingdom, oral medicinal
preparations containing comfrey have been withdrawn
from the market.

Preparations and Dosage: Root tincture dosage is 2 to
4 ml three times a day (1:5 in 25%). To make a decoction
of the root, put | to 3 teaspoons of dried herb in 1 cup of
water, bring to a boil, and simmer for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day. A cold infusion
may be made by pouring 1 cup of cold water over 2 tea-
spoons of root; leave to stand for 6 to 8 hours. Thus, a
nighttime dose may be prepared in advance in the morn-
ing and a dose for mornings set up at night.

For leaf ointments and other preparations for exter-
nal application (containing 5% to 20% dried herb),
Commission E recommends that the daily applied dosage
not exceed 100 mcg of pyrrolizidine alkaloids with 1,2-
unsaturated necine structure, including their N-oxides.
Similarly, for root ointments and other preparations for
external use (containing 5% to 20% dried herb), the daily
applied dosage should not exceed 100 meg of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids with 1,2-unsaturated necine struc-
ture, including their N-oxides.

Symphyti radix, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Symplocarpus foetidus (L.) Salisb. ex Nutt.
Skunk Cabbage
Araceae

Parts Used: Root, rhizome

Constituents: Essential oil; 5-hydroxytryptamine;

resins?”8

Actions: Antispasmodic, diaphoretic, expectorant

Indications: Skunk cabbage may be used for any spas-
modic condition of the lungs. It relaxes and eases irritable
coughs, and may be helpful for asthma, bronchitis, and
whooping cough. As a diaphoretic, it supports the body
during fever.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

----- PAGE 611 -----
Preparations and Dosage: Traditionally, skunk cabbage
has been used as a preparation made by mixing 1 part
powdered root to 8 parts honey. Dosage is '/2 to 1 tea-
spoon of this mixture three times a day. An infusion (for
leaf) or decoction (for root) may be made with '/2 tea-
spoon of herb per cup of water. Tincture dosage is '/2 to
1 ml three times a day (1:5 in 60%).

Skunk Cabbage, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Tanacetum parthenium (L.) Schultz-Bip.
Feverfew
Asteraceae

Other Name: Until recently, the binomial was Chrysan~-
themum parthenium.

Part Used: Leaf

Constituents: Sesquiterpene lactones (parthenolide, ar-
ticanin, santamarin),; onoterpenes and sesquiterpenes
(thujone, sabinene, camphor, 1,8-cineole, umbellulone);
flavonoids (apigenin, diosmetin, quercetin, jaceidin,
jaceosidin)*??

Actions: Anti-inflammatory, vasodilator, emmenagogue,
bitter

Indications: Feverfew has regained its deserved reputa-
tion as a primary remedy for treating and preventing mi-
graine headaches, particularly those eased by the applica-
tion of warmth to the head. Feverfew may be valuable for
arthritis in the painfully active inflammatory stage. The
herb may also help alleviate dizziness and tinnitus, espe-
cially if used in conjunction with other remedies, and re-
lieve painful periods and sluggish menstrual flow.

Feverfew is the only herb used in European phy-
totherapy that is known to be specific for the treatment of
migraine. It is also the best example of a remedy well
known to medical herbalists that has recently been ac-
cepted by orthodox medicine. For more information on
clinical research on feverfew and migraine, please see
chapter 16.

Feverfew’s spectrum of pharmacological actions ap-
pears to be related to its influences on arachidonic acid
metabolism and platelet functions.

¢ Inhibits histamine secretion

* Inhibits aggregation, granular secretion, and arachi-
donate-mediated responses

¢ Exerts cytotoxic action

¢ Inhibits 5-hydroxytryptamine-mediated contractile
responses

¢ Inhibits vascular smooth muscle contractility

MATERIA MEDICA @ 587

Safety Considerations: Feverfew may cause allergic re-
sponse in people sensitive to members of the Asteraceae
family. The fresh leaves may cause mouth ulcers in sus-
ceptible people. Feverfew should not be used during
pregnancy because of its stimulant action on the uterus.
Although no drug interactions have been documented, it
is possible that feverfew may interfere with aspirin and
other anticoagulant medications because of its mecha-
nism of action,

Preparations and Dosage: The preferred dosage is the
equivalent of 1 fresh leaf one to three times a day. While
fresh leaf is preferable, tincture or tablets are adequate.
Of these formulations, freeze-dried leaf preparations (50
to 100 mg/day) are best.

For migraine prophylaxis, recommended dosage is 25
to 125 mg a day of a standardized leaf and flower extract
containing a minimum of 0.2% parthenolide. Higher
doses (up to 2 g/day) may be required for acute treatment
of migraine or for inflammatory conditions.

Feverfew, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Taraxacum officinale Weber ex Wigg.
Dandelion
Asteraceae

Parts Used: Root, leaf

Constituents: Sesquiterpene lactones (taraxacoside, oth-
ers); diterpenes, including taraxacin; triterpenes (taraxas-
terol, arnidiol, faradiol, B-amyrin); sterols (stigmasterol, B-
sitosterol); carotenoids, such as lutein and violaxanthin;
xanthophylls; flavonoids (apigenin, luteolin); polysaccha-
rides (glucans, mannans, inulin); potassium (up to 4.5% in
aerial parts)*3°

Actions: Diuretic, hepatic, cholagogue, antirheumatic,
laxative, tonic, bitter

Indications: Dandelion leaf is a powerful diuretic, with
an action comparable to that of the drug furosemide. The
usual effect of a drug that stimulates kidney function is
loss of vital potassium from the body, which can aggravate
any cardiovascular problem that may be present.
Dandelion leaf, however, is not only an effective diuretic,
but also one of the best natural sources of potassium. It is
thus an ideally balanced remedy that may be used safely
whenever diuretic action is needed, even for water reten-
tion related to heart problems. Overall, this herb is a most
valuable general tonic and perhaps the best widely appli-
cable diuretic and liver tonic.

In one study investigating the effects of oral adminis-
tration of dandelion extracts in rats and mice, leaf extracts

----- PAGE 612 -----
58£ @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

produced greater diuresis than root extracts, and a dose of
50 ml/kg body weight (equivalent to 2 g dried herb) pro-
duced an effect comparable to that of furosemide given at
a dosage of 80 mg/kg.?3!

As a hepatic and cholagogue, dandelion root may be
helpful for inflammation and congestion of the liver and
gallbladder. It is specific for cases of congestive jaun-
dice.?3? In addition, it can be very effective as part of a
wider treatment for muscular rheumatism.

Ellingwood recommended dandelion root for chronic
jaundice, autointoxication, rheumatism, blood disorders,
chronic skin eruptions, chronic gastritis, and aphthous
ulcers.

Safety Considerations: Dandelion may theoretically
cause allergic reactions in people sensitive to plants in the
Asteraceae family. There have been rare reports of con-
tact dermatitis in people coming in frequent contact with
the latex found in the stem.’#?

Preparations and Dosage: Root tincture dosage is 2.5 to
5 ml three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a root de-
coction, put 2 to 3 teaspoons of root into | cup of water,
bring to a boil, and gently simmer for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.
Leaf tincture dosage is 5 to 10 ml three times a day
(1:5 in 40%). To make a leaf infusion, pour 1 cup of boil-
ing water over | to 2 teaspoons of dried leaf and infuse for
0 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three times a day.
The leaf may also be eaten raw in salads.

The BHP recommends 3 to 5 g dried leaf or 5 to 10 ml
tincture three times a day, or 5 to 10 ml juice from fresh
leaf twice daily. Its suggested dosage for root is 0.5 to 2 g
dried root or 4 to 8 ml tincture three times daily.
Commission E recommends 4 to 10 g of dried leaf or 4 to
10 ml fluid extract of leaf daily, or 3 to 4 g cut or pow-
dered root per cup by decoction.

Taraxaci radix cum herba, in Herbal Drugs and
Phytopbarmaceuticals

Thuja occidentalis L.

Thuja

Cupressaceae

Other Names: Arborvitae, white cedar, Western hemlock
Part Used: Young twig

Constituents: Volatile oil (1%), including thujone,
flavonoid glycosides; mucilage; tannins”*

Actions: Expectorant, antimicrobial, diuretic, astrin-
gent, alterative

Indications: Thuja’s main action is related to its content

of stimulating and alterative volatile oil. In bronchial
catarrh, thuja promotes expectoration and provides sys-
temic stimulation that is especially beneficial when heart
weakness is also part of the picture. However, thuja
should be avoided in cases in which cough is due to over-
stimulation (for example, dry, irritable coughs).

Thuja has a specific reflex action on the uterus and
may help with delayed menstruation. Because of this
property, however, the herb is best avoided during preg-
nancy. Thuja may also be used for ordinary incontinence
due to loss of muscle tone. It has a role to play in the
treatment of psoriasis and rheumatism when used inter-
nally. Externally, it may be effective against warts, and
demonstrates a marked antifungal activity against ring-
worm and thrush.

Ellingwood described thuja thus:

It has been used extensively by ail physicians in the treat-
ment of cancer. It is claimed to exercise an abortive influ-
ence over incipient cancer and to retard the progress of
more advanced cases. In extreme cases it will remove the
fetor, retard the growth and materially prolong the life of
the patient. It should be given internally and the dosage
increased to the extreme limit. It should be also kept in
contact with the parts externally or injected into the
structures. Epithelioma, condylomata and all simple can-
cerous growths should be treated with it.

Thuja is directly indicated in improving conditions
of the blood. Again, it acts directly upon abnormal
growths, such as peculiar conditions of the cell structure
of the skin and other external structure. It is thus indi-
cated in all abnormal growths of the skin or mucous
membranes. It exercises a specific influence upon
catarrhal discharges, correcting the glandular faults that
are to blame for such a condition wherever they may be.
Ivis specific to urinary irritation in aged people especially;
also in childhood. It strengthens the sphincter of the
bladder.

As an external application Thuja produces at first a
sensation of smarting or tingling when applied to open
sores or wounds and it is usually best to dilute it with one,
two or four parts of water, or to combine the non-alco-
holic extract with an ointment base in the above propor-
tion. This constitutes an excellent mildly antiseptic and
actively stimulating dressing to indolent, phagedenic or
gangrenous ulcers. It is of much service in bed sores and
in other open ulcers dependent upon local or general
nerve exhaustion. In chronic skin diseases of either a non-
specific or specific character, it is a useful remedy. It is a
useful agent in the treatment of post-nasal catarrh and
nasal polypi. A small dose internally 4 or 5 times daily,

----- PAGE 613 -----
with the application of fluid hydrastis in a spray, will
quickly retard or remove such abnormal growths.

Safety Considerations: Due to its content of thujone,
large doses of thuja may be toxic; please see chapter 10 for
more information. Use in combination with other thu-
jone-containing herbs will cause an additive effect. Avoid
during pregnancy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 19 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Thymus vulgaris L.
Thyme
Lamiaceae

Parts Used: Leaf, flowering top

Constituents: Volatile oil of highly variable composi-
tion, mainly thymol, with lesser amounts of carvacrol,
flavonoids (apigenin, luteolin, thymonin, naringenin,
others); miscellaneous: labiatic acid, caffeic acid, tannins*5

Actions: Carminative, antimicrobial, antispasmodic, ex-
pectorant, astringent, anthelmintic

Indications: High in volatile oil, thyme makes a good
carminative for use in dyspepsia and sluggish digestion.
This oil is also strongly antiseptic, explaining many of
thyme’s other uses. It may be applied externally as a lotion
for infected wounds and internally for respiratory and di-
gestive infections. Used as a gargle for laryngitis and ton-
sillitis, it eases sore throats and soothes irritable coughs.
It is an excellent cough remedy, producing expectoration
and reducing spasm. It may be effective in the treatment
of bronchitis, whooping cough, and asthma. As a gentle
astringent, it may be helpful for childhood diarrhea and
bed-wetting.
King’s described it thus:

Thyme is tonic, carminative, emmenagogue and antispas-
modic. The cold infusion is useful in dyspepsia, with weak
and irritable stomach and as a stimulating tonic in conva-
lescence from exhausting diseases. The warm infusion is
beneficial in hysteria, dysmenorrhoea, flatulence, colic,
headache, and to promote perspiration. Occasionally the
leaves have been used externally, in fomentation. The oil
is valuable as a local application to neuralgic and
rheumatic pains; and, internally, to fulfil any of the indi-
cations for which the plant is used. Dose of the infusion,
from | to 3 fluid ounces.

MATERIA MEDICA 2 589

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 45%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried herb and
infuse in a covered container for 10 minutes. This should
be drunk three times a day.

Commission E recommends | to 2 g herb per 1 cup
of tea as needed or | to 2 g fluid extract one to three times
daily.

Thyme, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Tilia platypbyllos Scop.
Linden
Tiliaceae

Other Name: Lime blossom
Part Used: Dried flower

Constituents: Volatile oil (up to about 0.1%), containing
farnesol; flavonoids (kaempferol, hesperidin, quercetin,
astralagin, tiliroside, others); miscellaneous: mucilage (in
the bract), phenolic acids, tannins?

Actions: Nervine, antispasmodic, hypotensive, di-
aphoretic, diuretic, anti-inflammatory, astringent

Indications: Linden is a relaxing European remedy for
use in nervous tension. It is a valuable cardiotonic with a
reputation for preventing the development of arterioscle-
rosis and hypertension. It is considered a specific for high
blood pressure associated with arteriosclerosis and ner-
vous tension. Its relaxing action, combined with a general
tonic effect upon the circulatory system, gives linden a
role in the treatment of some types of migraine. Its blend
of diaphoretic and relaxant actions explains its value for
feverish colds and flu.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2.5 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of blossoms and in-
fuse in a covered container for 10 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day. For a diaphoretic effect in fever,
use 2 to 3 teaspoons of blossoms per cup of water.

The BHP recommends 2 to 4 g dried inflorescence,
5 to 15 ml expressed juice, 4 to 10 ml tincture (1:5 in
25%), or 2 to 4 ml fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times
daily. Commission E suggests 2 to 4 g of herb or equiva-
lent preparations daily.

Linden flower, in Herbal Medicine, Expanded Commission E
Monographs

----- PAGE 614 -----
59 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

Trifolium pratense L.
Red Clover
Fabaceae

Part Used: Flower head

Constituents: Isoflavones (biochanin A, daidzein, for-
mononetin, genistein, pratensein, trifoside); other flavo-
noids, including pectolinarin and kaempferol; volatile oil
(containing furfural); clovamides (L-dopa-caffeic acid
conjugates); coumarins (coumestrol, medicagol, cou-
marin); miscellaneous: a galactomannan, resins, minerals,
vitamins, phytoalexins’?”

Actions: Alterative, expectorant, antispasmodic

Indications: Red clover is a useful remedy for children
with skin problems. It may be used with complete safety
for any case of childhood eczema, and can be effective for
other chronic skin conditions as well, such as psoriasis.
While it is very appropriate for children, it may also be of
value for adults.

Red clover’s expectorant and antispasmodic actions
give this remedy a role in the treatment of coughs and
bronchitis, especially whooping cough. As an alterative, it
is indicated as part of a holistic approach for a wide range
of problems. There is some evidence to suggest that it has
an antineoplastic action in animals.

Priest and Priest described red clover as a

... mild, stimulating and relaxing alterative with a special
affinity for the throat and salivary glands. Especially indi-
cated for debilitated children with chronic bronchial or
throat conditions.

They gave the following specific indications: salivary
gland congestion, spasmodic or croupy coughs, pertussis;
pharyngeal inflammation; and chronic skin eruptions.

Safety Considerations: Red clover may potentiate the
effects of anticoagulant drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 3 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

The BHP recommends 4 g dried herb or 1 to 2 ml of
tincture (1:10 in 45%) three times a day.

Red Clover, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Tussilago farfara L.
Coltsfoot
Asteraceae

Other Names: Coughwort, horsehoof, foal’s foot
Parts Used: Dried flower, leaf

Constituents: Flavonoids (rutin, hyperoside, iso-
quercetin); mucilage, consisting of polysaccharides based
on glucose, galactose, fructose, arabinose, xylose; inulin;
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, including senkirkine and tussi-
lagine; tannins??®

Actions: Expectorant, antitussive, antispasmodic, demul-
cent, anticatarrhal, diuretic

Indications: Coltsfoot combines a soothing expectorant
effect with an antispasmodic action. The leaves contain
useful levels of zinc, a mineral shown to have marked
anti-inflammatory actions. Coltsfoot may be helpful for
chronic or acute bronchitis, irritating coughs, whooping
cough, and asthma. Its soothing expectorant action gives
ita role in most respiratory conditions, including emphy-
sema. As a mild diuretic, it has been used to treat cystitis.
The fresh bruised leaves can be applied externally to
boils, abscesses, and suppurating ulcers.
Priest and Priest described coltsfoot as a

. .. diffusive expectorant, sedative and demulcent: suitable
for debilitated and chronic conditions, especially where
there is a tubercular diathesis.

They gave the following specific indications: chronic
pulmonary conditions, chronic emphysema and silicosis,
pertussis, and asthma.

Safety Considerations: Several pyrrolizidine alkaloids
are known to have hepatotoxic, genotoxic, or carcino-
genic effects; however, there is no danger of acute poi-
soning when the herb is used as prescribed, particularly as
the concentration of these alkaloids in a tea is very low.
Nevertheless, do not use coltsfoot for a prolonged period
of time. (For a more detailed discussion of the toxicity of
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, please refer to chapter 10.)

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of dried
flower or leaf and infuse for 10 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day, as hot as possible.

According to Commission E, the daily dosage of
coltsfoot should not exceed 100 meg pyrrolizidine alka-
loids with 1,2-unsaturated necine structures. Do not use for
longer than 4 to 6 weeks per year.

Farfarae folium, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

----- PAGE 615 -----
Ulmus rubra Mubl.
Slippery Elm
Ulmaceae

Part Used: Inner bark

Constituents: Mucilage, composed of galactose, 3-
methyl galactose, rhamnose, and galacturonic acid

residues?3?

Actions: Demulcent, emollient, nutrient, astringent,
anti-inflammatory

Indications: Slippery elm is a soothing, nutritive demul-
cent that is perfectly suited for treating sensitive or in-
flamed mucous membrane linings in the digestive system.
The herb may be used in gastritis, gastric or duodenal
ulcer, enteritis, colitis, and similar conditions. Used to
treat diarrhea, it simultaneously soothes and astringes the
tissues of the intestinal lining.

Slippery elm makes an excellent food to be eaten dur-
ing convalescence, as it is mild and easily assimilated. It
makes an excellent poultice for external use in cases of
boils, abscesses, and ulcers.

Priest and Priest considered slippery elm

... the best demulcent for internal and external use. It lu-
bricates and soothes alimentary mucosa, relieves intesti-

nal irritation, and quietens the nervous system.

They gave the following specific indications: acute
gastritis and duodenal ulcer, diarrhea, dysentery, enteritis,
inflammation of the mouth and throat, vaginitis, burns,
scalds, and abrasions, hemorrhoids and anal fissure, vari-
cose ulcer, abscesses, boils, carbuncles, inflamed wounds,
and skin ulcers.

Safety Considerations: Slippery elm may slow the ab-
sorption of orally administered drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: To make a decoction, use 1
part powdered root to 8 parts water. First add a small
amount of powder to a little water and stir to facilitate
mixing. Bring to a boil and simmer gently for 10 to 15
minutes. Dosage is !/2 cup three times a day. For a poul-
tice, mix coarse powdered root with enough boiling water
to make a paste.

The BHC recommends 5 to 20 ml powdered bark in
hot water three times daily (1:10).

Slippery Elm, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Mareria MEDICA @ 591

Urtica dioica L.
Nettle
Urticaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts, root

Constituents: Chlorophyll (high yields); indoles, such as
histamine and serotonin; acetylcholine; flavonol glyco-
sides (isorhamnetin, kaempferol, quercetin); miscella-
neous: vitamin C and other vitamins, protein, dietary
fiber?*°

Actions: Astringent, diuretic, tonic, hypotensive

Indications: Nettle is one of the most widely applicable
plants in the materia medica. The herb strengthens and
supports the whole body. Throughout Europe, nettle is
used as a spring tonic and general detoxifying remedy. It
may be very helpful internally and topically for myalgia
and osteoarthritis.”4!

Topical use of nettle leaf involves actively stinging the
skin around the affected joint. The inflammation, and
thus the pain and stiffness, will subside for 4 to 8 days fol-
lowing the application. Such “self-flagellation” may seem
too heroic for the 21st century, but it works!

Nettle is a specific for childhood eczema and bene-
ficial for all varieties of this condition, especially nervous
eczema. It can be helpful as a component of treatment
for eczema in adults. Used internally as an astringent,
nettle will relieve symptoms of hemorrhage anywhere in
the body (for example, uterine hemorrhage).

Research has shown that nettle contains both hypo-
glycemic and hyperglycemic constituents. The hypo-
glycemic component, termed urticin, has been reported
to lower blood sugar concentrations in hyperglycemic
rabbits.’” Nettle root has been used with success to treat
the early stages of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).
Studies show that it improves urine flow, reduces urinary
frequency and nocturia, and decreases the volume of

residual urine.”43

Safety Considerations: Fresh nettle causes urticaria if
applied topically! Internal use may theoretically decrease
the efficacy of anticoagulant drugs.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2.5 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 to 3 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 19 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day. :

The BHP recommends 2 to 4 g of dried herb or 2 to
6 ml tincture three times a day (1:5 in 45%). The BHC
recommends 5 to 10 ml of fresh juice three times daily.
Commission E suggests a daily dosage of 8 to 12 g of herb

----- PAGE 616 -----
$9: TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

(or equivalent preparations) and 4 to 6 g of root (or equiv-
alent preparations).

Nettle, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Valeriana officinalis L.
Valerian
Valerianaceae

Parts Used: Rhizome, stolon, root

Constituents: Essential oil (mainly composed of
sesquiterpenes, such as bornyl acetate, B-caryophyllene,
valerone, and valerenic acid); bicyclic iridoids known as
valepotriates (including valtrate, isovaltrate, acetoxy-
valerenic acid, isovaleroxy-hydoxydidrovaltrate); baldri-
nals, found only in dried herb or extracts, are degradation
products of the valepotriates?**

Actions: Nervine, hypnotic, antispasmodic, carminative,
hypotensive, emmenagogue

Indications: Valerian has a wide range of specific uses.
However, its main indications are anxiety, nervous sleep-
lessness, and bodily symptoms of tension, such as muscle
cramping and indigestion. In short, this herb may be
safely used for any situation in which tension and anxiety
cause problems, either psychological or physical. It is a
valuable muscle relaxant, effective for muscle spasms,
uterine cramps, and intestinal colic. For some people, it
may serve as a mild pain reliever. A useful herbal sleep aid,
valerian helps promote normal sleep, as it is not powerful
enough to suppress necessary REM phases.

Valerian’s sedative and antispasmodic actions can be
partially attributed to its content of valepotriates, and, to a
lesser extent, to the sesquiterpene constituents of the
volatile oil. Various species of Valeriana are used worldwide
as relaxing remedies for hypertension and stress-related
heart conditions.

Safety Considerations: No drug interactions have been
reported by Commission E or ESCOP. Valerian may po-
tentiate the effects of sedatives. A characteristic paradox-
ical reaction oceurs in a few people, producing an un-
pleasant stimulation response.

Preparations and Dosage: To be effective, valerian must
be used at a sufficiently high dosage. The tincture (1:5 in
60%) is the most widely used preparation and is always
useful, as long as 2.5 to 5 ml (1/2 to 1 teaspoon) is given as
a single dose. Up to 10 ml may be given at one time.

To make an infusion, use 2 teaspoons of dried herb
per cup of boiling water; prepare in a closed vessel to en-
sure no loss of volatile oils. A cold infusion may be made

by pouring 1 cup of cold water over 2 teaspoons of root;
leave to stand for 8 to 10 hours. In this way, a nighttime
dose may be prepared in advance in the morning and a
dose for morning set up at night.

The BHP recommends 4 to 8 ml of the tincture three
times a day (1:8 in 60%). Commission E suggests 2 to 3 g
of dried root per cup of water, taken one to several times
a day.

Valerian, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Verbascum thapsus L.
Mullein
Scrophulariaceae

Parts Used: Dried leaf, flower

Constituents: Flavonoids (such as verbascoside and her-
peridin); mucilage; saponins; tannins; volatile oil?
Actions: Expectorant, demulcent, anti-inflammatory, an-
tispasmodic, vulnerary

Indications: Mullein is a very beneficial respiratory rem-
edy, useful for most conditions and ideal for toning the
mucous membranes of this vital system. The herb reduces
inflammation while stimulating fluid production, thus fa-
cilitating expectoration. It is considered a specific for
bronchitis characterized by a hard cough with soreness.
Its anti-inflammatory and demulcent properties indicate
its use for inflammation of the trachea and associated
conditions. For external use, an extract made by infusing
mullein flowers in olive oil is excellent for soothing and
healing any inflamed surface and for easing ear problems.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2.5 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 2 teaspoons of dried leaf or
flower and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be
drunk three times a day.

The BHP recommends 4 to 8 g dried herb or 4 to 8 ml
fluid extract (1:1 in 25%) three times a day.

Mullein Flower, in The Complete German Commission E
Monographs

Verbena officinalis L.
Vervain
Verbenaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Iridoids (verbenin, verbenalin, bastato-
side); miscellaneous: essential oil, mucilage**

----- PAGE 617 -----
Actions: Nervine tonic, sedative, antispasmodic, diaph-
oretic, hypotensive, galactagogue, hepatic

Indications: Vervain is a gentle anxiolytic. It is helpful for
easing depression and melancholia, especially after debil-
itating illness, such as influenza. Vervain may be benefi-
cial in seizure and hysteria. As a diaphoretic, it can be
used in the early stages of fevers. As a hepatic remedy, it
is appropriate for jaundice and inflammations of the gall-
bladder. It may be used as a mouthwash to treat caries and
gum disease.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2.5 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | to 3 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes.
This should be drunk three times a day.

Dosage given in the BHP is 2 to 4 g dried herb, 2 to
4 ml liquid extract (1:1 in 25%), or 4 to 10 ml tincture (1:5
in 45%).

Verbenae herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Viburnum opulus L.
Cramp Bark
Caprifoliaceae

Part Used: Dried bark

Constituents: Hydroquinones (arbutin, methylarbutin,
traces of free hydroquinone); coumarins (such as scopo-
letin and scopoline); tannins (mainly catechins)?4”

Actions: Antispasmodic, anti-inflammatory, nervine, hy-
potensive, astringent, emmenagogue

Indications: As implied by the name, cramp bark has a
richly deserved reputation for relaxing muscular tension
and spasm. It has two primary areas of use: cramps of the
voluntary muscles and uterine muscle problems. Cramp
bark relaxes the uterus and thus relieves painful menstrual
cramps (dysmenorrhea). In a similar way, it may be used
to protect against threatened miscarriage. Its astringent
action gives it a role in the treatment of excessive men-
strual blood loss and, especially, irregular bleeding during
menopause
Priest and Priest described cramp bark as a

. relaxing and stimulating nervine, cerebrospinal
vaso-stimulant. Restores sympathetic/parasympathetic
balance—has a specific action to relieve voluntary and in-
voluntary muscular spasms.

They gave the following specific indications: colicky

MaTERIA MEDICA «<3 5393

pains and spasms of tubular organs, gastrointestinal and
genitourinary use with Dioscorea villosa, and atonic condi-
tions of pelvic organs where menses is scanty or delayed.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 4 to 8 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make a decoction, put
2 teaspoons of dried herb into 1 cup of water, bring to a
boil, and simmer gently for 10 to 15 minutes. This should
be drunk hot three times a day.

The BHP recommends 2 to 4 g dried herb or 5 to
10 ml tincture (1:5 in 45%) three times a day.

Viburnum prunifolium L.
Black Haw
Caprifoliaceae

Part Used: Dried bark of stems or trunk

Constituents: Coumarins (including scopoletin, aes-
culetin); phenolic acids (including chlorogenic acid,
salicin); biflavones (amentoflavone); triterpenes (a- and
B-amyrin, oleanolic and ursolic acids)’ ,

Actions: Antispasmodic, nervine, hypotensive, astringent

Indications: Uses for black haw are similar to those for
cramp bark, to which it is closely related, Black haw is a
powerful uterine relaxant. It is helpful in the treatment of
dysmenorrhea and false labor pains as well as for prevent-
ing threatened miscarriage. Its relaxant and sedative ac-
tions explain its ability to lower blood pressure associated
with hypertension, which it accomplishes by relaxing pe-
ripheral blood vessels. Black haw’s antispasmodic proper-
ties make it appropriate for the treatment of asthma.
King’s described black haw in the tollowing way:

That it has a decided affinity for the female reproductive
organs is well established. Its principal use at the present
day is in disorders of the female organs of reproduction.
As a uterine tonic it is unquestionably of great utility. In
the hyperasthetic, or irritable condition of the uterus in-
cident to highly nervous women, or as the result of over-
work, it will be found an admirable agent. In dysmenor-
rhoea, with deficient menses, uterine colic, and in those
cases where there are severe lumbar and bearing-down
pains, it will prove an efficient drug. It is specifically indi-
cated in cramp-like menstrual pains, pains decidedly ex-
pulsive and intermittent in character and in the various
painful contractions of the pelvic muscles, so common to
disorders of women. Uterine congestion and chronic
uterine inflammation are often greatly relieved by Black

Haw. It acts promptly in spasmodic dysmenorrhoea,

----- PAGE 618 -----
594 @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

especially with excessive flow. It is a good remedy for
uterine haemorrhage attending the menopause. In amen-
orrhoea in pale, bloodless subjects, the menses are re-
stored by it. Cramps of limbs attending pregnancy yield
to both black haw and cramp bark. It is considered almost
specific for cramp in the legs, not dependent on preg-
nancy, especially when occurring at night. The condition
for which black haw is most valued is that of threatened
abortion. It is the most prompt drug in the materia med-
ica to check abortion, provided the membranes have not
ruptured. In all cases of habitual abortion it should be
given in small doses for a considerable length of time. By
its quieting effects upon the irritable womb, women who

have previously been unable to go to full term have been
aided by this drug to pass through the pregnancy without

mishaps which would otherwise have proven disastrous to
both child and mother. Viburnum opulus resembles this
agent very closely in its effects, and may be used in the
above-named conditions, for which the black haw is useful.
Specific Indications and Uses—Uterine irritability

and hyperasthesia; threatened abortion; uterine colic;
dysmenorrhoea with deficient menses; severe lumbar and
bearing-down pains; cramp-like, expulsive menstrual
pain; intermittent, painful contractions of the pelvic tis-
sues; after-pains and false pains of pregnancy; obstinate
hiccough.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 5 to 10 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make a decoction, put 2
teaspoons of dried herb in 1 cup of water, bring to a boil,
and simmer for 10 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHP recommends 2.5 to 5 g of dried herb or 5
to 10 ml tincture (1:5 in 70%).

Viburni prunifolii cortex, in Herbal Drugs and
Phytopharmaceuticals

Vinca minor. L.
Periwinkle
Apocynaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Indole alkaloids; tannins”*?

Action: Astringent

Indications: Periwinkle is an all-around astringent that
may be used internally or externally. Its main application is
excessive menstrual flow, either during the period itself

(menorrhagia) or between periods (metrorrhagia). As with
other remedies that affect the uterus, it may be used to ad-
dress similar processes in the urinary system. Thus, it may
be valuable in the treatment of hematuria (blood in the
urine). In addition, periwinkle helps with digestive prob-
lems, such as colitis and diarrhea, in which it will reduce
loss of fluid or blood while toning membranes. It may also
be effective in cases of nosebleed, bleeding gums, mouth
ulcers, and sore throat. It has a questionable reputation for
aiding in the treatment of diabetes.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is | to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over | teaspoon of dried herb and in-
fuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Periwinkle, in The Complete German Commission E Monographs

Viola odorata L.
Sweet Violet
Violaceae

Parts Used: Leaf, flower

Constituents: Phenolic glycosides (including gaultherin,
salicylic acid methyl ester); saponins (myrosin, violin);
flavonoids (rutin, violarutin); miscellaneous: odoratine
(an alkaloid), mucilage?*®

Actions: Expectorant, alterative, anti-inflammatory,
diuretic

Indications: Sweet violet has a long history of use as a
cough remedy, especially for bronchitis, and may be of
benefit in upper respiratory catarrh. With the combina-
tion of actions this herb offers, it may also help in skin
conditions (such as eczema), in urinary tract infections,
and as part of a long-term approach to rheumatism. Sweet
violet has a reputation as an “anticancer herb”; while the
concept is inappropriate, as an alterative the herb defi-
nitely has a role to play in holistic approaches to the
treatment of cancer.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of herb and infuse
in a covered container for 10 to 15 minutes. This should
be drunk three times a day.

----- PAGE 619 -----
Viola tricolor L.
Heartsease
Violaceae

Parts Used: Aerial parts

Constituents: Flavonoids (including violanthin, rutin,
violaquercitrin); methylsalicylate; miscellaneous: mu-
cilage, gums, resin, saponins?5!

Actions: Expectorant, diuretic, anti-inflammatory

Indications: Traditionally used for bronchitis and
rheumatism, heartsease is also an especially valued rem-
edy for skin diseases. Used both internally and topically,
it is helpful for eczema, psoriasis, acne, and, topically, in
babies, for cradle cap. The herb is also employed to treat
frequent and painful urination associated with conditions
such as cystitis.

Both the salicylates and the rutin contained in heart-
sease are anti-inflammatory. This action helps explain the
traditional use of the herb for arthritis. The saponins ac-
count for its expectorant action, while the mucilage it
contains soothes the chest. Heartsease is used to treat a
range of respiratory disorders, including bronchitis and
whooping cough. Due to the high concentration of rutin
in the flowers, this herb may be employed to prevent
bruising and broken capillaries and to check buildup of
fluid in the tissues (edema). It can be helpful in the treat-
ment or prevention of atherosclerosis, and thus may help
reduce blood pressure. Heartsease is mildly laxative.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 1 to 2 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over | teaspoon of dried herb and
infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Commission EF. recommends 1.5 g dried herb per cup
of water as tea three times a day.

Violae tricoloris herba, in Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals

Vitex agnus-castus L.

Vitex

Verbenaceae

Other Names: Chaste tree, chasteberry, monk’s pepper
Part Used: Fruit (berry)

Constituents: Iridoid glycosides (aucubin and agnuside);
labdane diterpenes (otundifuran, vitexilactone); flavo-
noids (casticin, vitexin, isovitexin, kaempferol); essential

MATERIA MEDICA @ 595

oil (0.4% to 0.7%), with bornyl acetate, 1,8-cineole,
limonene, and a-and B-pinene?*?

Actions: Hormonal normalizer, uterine tonic, galactagogue

Indications: Vitex has the effect of stimulating and nor-
malizing pituitary gland function, especially as it relates
to relative progesterone levels. Vitex may be called an am-
photeric remedy, as it can produce apparently opposite ef-
fects, although in truth it is simply normalizing.

The term amphoteric comes from chemistry, in which
it is used to indicate the ability of a chemical to react as
either an acid or an alkali. The word itself is derived from
Greek roots meaning “partly one and partly the other.” In
the context of herbal actions, amphoteric implies that ap-
parently opposite effects may be observed, but the overall
result is a normalizing effect. For instance, vitex has a rep-
utation for being both an aphrodisiac and an anaphro-
disiac! In effect, the herb will generally facilitate the most
appropriate action required to normalize function, no
matter what aspect of function is out of balance.

The most important therapeutic application for vitex
comes from its ability to normalize the activity of female
sex hormones. It is thus indicated for dysmenorrhea, pre-
menstrual syndrome (PMS), and other disorders related
to hormone function. It is especially beneficial during
menopause. Similarly, it may help the body regain a nat-
ural balance after discontinuation of oral contraceptives.

The precise mechanisms of action of vitex and its ac-
tive constituents have not been established. Laboratory
research suggests that the herb acts on the anterior pitu-
itary gland via a dopaminergic mechanism.2*> This leads
to a reduction in release of the hormone prolactin, which
in turn enhances corpus luteum development and corrects
any relative progesterone deficiency. It is important to
note that the effect of vitex on progesterone levels is indi-
rect, as it works through the complexities of endocrine
homeostasis rather than by directly stimulating proges-
terone release. However, the herb is thought to act on the
pituitary-hypothalamic axis, rather than directly on the
ovaries.

Vitex not only eases symptoms of PMS, but also, over
time, may actually cure the disorder, PMS has been linked
to abnormally high levels of estrogen, and vitex has
proved especially helpful for cases in which symptoms
tend to disappear when menstruation begins. Positive re-
sults may be perceived as early as the second menstrual
cycle, but permanent improvement may take up to one
year or longer.

Vitex is also effective for irregular menstruation,
especially when related to endometriosis. In addition,

----- PAGE 620 -----
S9€ @ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BoDy SYSTEM

because progesterone production declines at menopause,
vitex may reduce some of the undesirable symptoms asso-
ciated with “the change.” Several studies indicate that
vitex can help control acne in teenagers, both young
women and men. The herb is also useful for stabilizing
the menstrual cycle after withdrawal from progesterone-
containing birth control pills. It may help with fibroid
cysts that occur in smooth muscle tissue or in subserous
areas, but is less likely to help with submucous cysts.

For women who are trying to get pregnant, vitex may
effectively regulate the ovulatory cycle. Clinical research
shows that vitex may start correcting imbalances after
about 10 days, but for full benefit, it should be taken for
three cycles or longer. Studies have documented that vitex
has a galactagogue action, but chemical analysis of the
breast milk revealed no changes in composition.?** This
may seem surprising, as the proposed mechanism of ac-
tion of vitex involves a reduction of prolactin release.
However, it is simply a good example of how the actual
activity of a plant is more complex than what is demon-
strated in specific laboratory tests.

Safety Considerations: Commission E lists no drug in-
teractions for vitex. However, there is a theoretical possi-
bility that the herb may interact with dopamine antago-
nists and dopamine-receptor-blocking agents.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2.5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of berries and in-
fuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

Commission E recommends a daily dose of aqueous-
alcoholic extracts corresponding to 30 to 40 mg of the
herb. Alternatively, it recommends 175 mg/day of a 20:1
standardized fruit extract containing 0.5% agnuside.
According to Commission E, health benefits are seen
after 3 to 6 weeks of use; most women continue treatment
for 3 to 6 months.

Chaste tree, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

Zanthoxylum americanum Mill.
Prickly Ash

Rutaceae

Parts Used: Bark, berry

Constituents: Alkaloids, coumarins, resin, tannins,
volatile oil?®>

Actions: Stimulant (circulatory), tonic, alterative, carmi-
native, diaphoretic, antirheumatic, hepatic

Indications: Prickly ash may be used in similar ways to

cayenne, although its action is slower. It is appropriate for
many chronic problems, such as rheumatism and skin dis-
eases, and its stimulating actions upon the lymphatic sys-
tem, circulation, and mucous membranes give it a role in
the holistic treatment of many specific conditions.

Any sign of poor circulation calls for prickly ash, in-
cluding chilblains, leg cramps, varicose veins, and varicose
ulcers. Externally, it may be applied as a stimulating lini-
ment for rheumatism and fibrositis.

Priest and Priest described prickly ash as a

... positive diffusive stimulant—induces free arterial/
capillary circulation, restores vascular tone. It is a general
stimulant for relaxed and feeble conditions and atonic di-
gestive states. An excellent tonic and alterative for conva-
lescence and the elderly.

They gave the following specific indications: chronic
rheumatic conditions, neurasthenia and poor circulation,
gastric distension, eructations and flatulence, and loss of
sensitivity in injured nerves.

Safety Considerations: Theoretically, prickly ash is con-
traindicated for patients on anticoagulant therapy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 2 to 4 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 60%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 1 to 2 teaspoons of herb and in-
fuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk three
times a day.

The BHP recommends 1 to 2 g dried bark or 2 to 5 ml
tincture three times a day (1:5 in 45%).

Prickly Ash, Northern, and Prickly Ash, Southern, in Herbal
Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care Professionals

Zea mays L.
Cornsilk
Poaceae

Part Used: Stigma from female flower (fine soft threads
4 to 8 inches long)

Constituents: Saponins; allantoin; sterols (especially
B-sitosterol and stigmasterol); hordenine (an alkaloid);
miscellaneous: vitamins C and K, cryptoxanthin, antho-
cyanins, plant acids**¢

Actions: Diuretic, demulcent, anti-inflammatory, tonic

Indications: As a soothing diuretic, cornsilk is beneficial
for any irritation of the urinary system. It is used for renal
problems in children and, combined with other herbs, as
a urinary demulcent for cystitis, urethritis, prostatitis, and
similar conditions.

Ellingwood recommended cornsilk for catarrhal cysti-

----- PAGE 621 -----
tis, lithiasis (stones), bladder irritation, gonorrhea, all
catarrhal conditions of the urinary passages, and dropsy
(edema) due to heart disease.

Safety Considerations: No side effects or drug interac-
tions have been reported.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dosage is 5 to 10 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 25%). For an infusion, pour 1
cup of boiling water over 2 to 4 teaspoons of dried herb
and infuse for 10 to 15 minutes. This should be drunk
three times a day.

Dosage recommended in the BHC is 2 to 8 g dried
herb, 5 to 15 ml tincture (1:5 in 25%), or 4 to 8 ml fluid
extract (1:1 in 25%) three times daily.

Corn Silk, in Herbal Medicines: A Guide for Health-Care
Professionals

Zingiber officinale Roscoe
Ginger

Zingiberaceae

Part Used: Rhizome

Constituents: Volatile oil (1% to 3%, occasionally more),
primarily containing the sesquiterpenes zingiberene and
B-bisabolene; oleoresin (4% to 10%), containing gin-
gerols, gingerdiols, gingerdiones, dihydrogingerdiones,
shogaols; lipids (6% to 8%)?”

Actions: Stimulant, carminative, antispasmodic, rubefa-
cient, diaphoretic, emmenagogue

Indications: The best-known therapeutic application
of this spice is as a treatment for motion sickness, a use
well documented in the research literature. Ginger also
effectively stimulates peripheral circulation, making it ef-
fective for bad circulation, chilblains, and cramps. In
feverish conditions, ginger acts as a useful diaphoretic,
promoting perspiration. As a gargle, it helps relieve sore
throats. Externally, it is the base of many treatments for
fibrositis and muscle sprains.

Ginger has been used around the world as an aro-
matic carminative and pungent appetite stimulant. In
India and other countries with hot and humid climates,
ginger is eaten daily and is a well-known remedy for di-
gestive problems. It is popular not only for its flavor, but
also because its antioxidant and antimicrobial properties
help to preserve food, an essential action in such climates.

Research has documented a wide range of activities
for ginger. Clinical studies have shown that the herb is ef-
fective as a prophylactic against seasickness.?5859 Animal
studies have suggested that it has hypoglycemic, hypoten-
sive, hypertensive, antihypercholesterolemic, cholagogic,

MATERIA MEDICA 597

and stomachic properties.” Human pharmacological
studies have shown that ginger causes a reduction in plate-
let aggregation.’6! Ginger demonstrates anti-inflammatory
effects in rheumatoid arthritis due to a dual inhibition of
cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase.’® It has also shown an
ability to inhibit the actions of prostaglandins.”®

Safety Considerations: Ginger may influence bleeding
times and immunological parameters because it inhibits
thromboxane synthase and acts as a prostacyclin agonist.
However, a clinical study demonstrated no differences in
bleeding times between treatment and placebo groups.?**
Large doses (12 to 14 g) may enhance the effects of anti-
coagulant drugs. According to Commission E, ginger
should not be used to alleviate the morning sickness of
pregnancy.’® However, there is a well-established tradi-
tion of such use. Traditional Chinese medicine tells us
not to use more than 2 g of dried ginger daily during
pregnancy.

Preparations and Dosage: Tincture dose is 1.5 to 5 ml
three times a day (1:5 in 40%).To make an infusion, pour
1 cup of boiling water over 1 teaspoon of fresh root and
infuse for 5 minutes. Drink whenever needed. Fluid ex-
tract dosage is 0.25 to | ml three times a day (1:1 in 40%).

Ginger, in Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy

References
1, Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th edition, revised by Williamson EM and
Evans FJ. Essex, UK: C. W. Daniel Co., 1988.
2. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal
Plants. Paris: Lavoisier Publishing, 1995.
3. Bisset, ed. Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1994.
4, Newall C, Anderson L, Phillipson J. Herbal Medicines: A
Guide for Health-Care Professionals. London: The
Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.
5. Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Austin, TX: American Botanical Council, 2003.
6. Ibid.
7. Bisler H, Pfeifer R, Kluken N, Pauschinger P. Effects of
horse-chestnut seed extract on transcapillary filtration in

chronic venous insufficiency. Deutsche Medizinische
Wachenschrift 1986; 111(35):1321-9.

8. Pittler MH, Ernst E. Horse chestnut seed extract for
chronic venous insufficiency. Archives of Dermatology
1998; 134: 1356-60.

9. Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

----- PAGE 622 -----
598

10.
11,

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.
24,
25.

26.

27.

<@ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY Bopy SYSTEM

Thid.

Patrascu V, et al. Rezultate terapeutice favorabile in por-
firia cutanata cu Agrimonia eupatoria. Dermato-venerolo-
gia 1984; 29:153-7.

Petkov V. Bulgarian traditional medicine: A source of
ideas for phytopharmacological investigations. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 1986; 15:12 1-32.

Chakarski I, et al. Clinical study of a herb combination
consisting of Agrimonia eupatoria, Hypericum perfora-
tum, Plantago major, Mentha piperita, Matricaria
chamomila for the treatment of patients with chronic
gastroduodenitis. Probl Vatr Med 1982; 10:78-84.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Bordia A, Joshi HK, Sanadhya YK, Bhy N. Effect of es-
sential oil of garlic on serum fibrinolytic activity in pa-
tients with coronary artery disease. Atherosclerosis 1978;
28:155-9.

German K, Kumar U, Blackford HN. Garlic and the
risk of TURP bleeding. British Journal of Urology 1995;
76:518.

Burnham BE. Garlic as a possible risk of postoperative
bleeding. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery 1995; 95(1):
213.

Wren RC. Potters New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Tomodo M, et al. Hypoglycaemic activity of twenty
plant mucilages and three modified products. Planta
Medica 1987; 53:812.

Recio MC, et al. Antimicrobial activity of selected plants
employed in the Spanish Mediterranean area, part II.
Phytotherapy Research 1989; 3:77-80.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Gijbels MJM, et al. Phthalides in roots of Apium grave-

olens, A. graveolens var. rapaceum, Bifora testiculata,
and Petroselinum crispum var. tuberosum. Fitoterapia
1985; 56:17-23.

Kar A, Jain SR. Investigations on the antibacterial activ-
ity of some Indian indigenous aromatic plants. Flavour
Industry 1971 Feb.

Berkley SF, et al. Dermatitis in grocery workers associ-
ated with high natural concentrations of furano-
coumarins in celery. Annals of Internal Medicine 1986;
105:351-5.

28.

29.

31.

32.

33.

34,

35,

36.

37.
38.
39,

40.

41.

42.
43.

45.

46.

Chaudhary SK, et al. Increased furocoumarin content of
celery during storage. Journal of Agricultural and Food
Chemistry 1985; 33:1153-7.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

. Bever BO, Zahnd GR. Plants with oral hypoglycaemic

action. Quarterly Journal of Crude Drug. Research 1979;
17:139-96,

Schulte KE, et al. Polyacetylenes in burdock root.
Arzneimittel-Forschung 1967; 17:829-33.

Morita K, et al. Chemical nature of a desmutagenic fac-
tor from burdock (A. Lappa L.). Agricultural and
Biological Chemistry 1985; 49:925-32.

Morita K, et al. Desmutagenic factor isolated from bur-
dock (Arctium lappa L.). Mutation Research 1984;
129:25-31,

Dombradi CA, Foldeak S. Anti-tumor activity of A.
lappa ext. Tumori 1966; 52:173-5.

Tsujita J, et al. Comparison of protective activity of di-
etary fiber against the toxicities of various food colors in
rats. Nutrition Reports International 1979; 20:635—42.
Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Rao VSN, Menezes Ams, Gadelha MGT. Antifertility
screening of some indigenous plants of Brasil. Fitoterapia
1988; 59:17-20.

Pinto-Scognamiglio W. Connaissances actuelles sur l’ac-
tivité pharmacodynamique de la thuyone, aromitisant
naturel d’un emploi etendu. Bollettino Chimico
Parmaceutico 1967; 106:292-300,

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Costello CH, Butler CL. The estrogenic and uterine-
stimulating activity of Asclepius tuberosa. Journal of
American Pharmaceutical Association Science Education
1949; 39:233-7.

Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 1999.

[No authors listed] Astragalus membranaceus.
Monograph. Alternative Medicine Review 2003 Feb,
8(1):72-7.

Chang HM, But PPH. Pharmacology and Applications of
Chinese Materia Medica, vol. 2. Hong Kong: World
Scientific, 1987.

----- PAGE 623 -----
47

48.

49.

50.
$1.
52.
53.
54.
55.

56.
57.

58.

59.

60.

61,

62.
63.

64.

65.

Chu, et al. Fractioned extract of Astragalus membrana-
ceous, a Chinese medicinal herb, potentiates LAK cell
cytotoxicity generated by a low dose of recombinant in-
terleukin-2. Journal of Clinical and Laboratory Immunology
1988; 26:183-7,

Zhang, et al. Hepatoprotective effects of Astragalus root.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 1990; 30:149-54.

DeSmet PAGM, D’Arcy PF. Drug interactions with
herbal and other non-orthodox remedies. In: D’Arcy PF,
McElnay JC, Welling PG, eds. Mechanisms of Drug
Interactions. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1996.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Tid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Boucard-Maitre Y, et al. Cytotoxic and antiturnoral ac-
tivity of Calendula officinalis extracts. Pharmazie 1988;
43:220.

Kioucek-Popova E, et al. Influence of the physiological
regeneration and epithelization using fractions isolated
from Calendula officinalis. Acta Physiologica et
Pharmacologica Bulgarica 1982; 8:63-7.

Manolov P, Boyadzhiev Tsv, Nokolov P. Antitumorigenic
effect of preparations of Calendula officinalis on
Crocker sarcoma 180. Eksperimentalna Meditsin
Morfalogiia 1964; 3:41-5

Avramova S, Portarska F, Apostolova B, et al. Marigold
(of Calendula officinalis L.) Source of new products for
the cosmetic industry. Medical Biology Information 1988;
4:28-32.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Bernstein JE, Parish LC, Rapaport M, et al. Effects of

topically applied capsaicin on moderate and severe psori-
asis vulgaris. Journal of the American Academy of
Dermatology 1986; 15:504—7.

Scheffler NM, Sheitel PL, Lipton MN. Treatment of
painful diabetic neuropathy with capsaicin 0.075 per-
cent. Journal of the American Podiatric Medical Association
1991; 81(6):288-93.

Partsch G, Matucci-Cerinic M. Effect of capsaicin on
the release of substance P from rheumatoid arthritis and

66.

67.
68.
69.
70.
71,
72.
73.

74,

75.

76.

77.

78,

79.

80.

81.

82.
83,

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

MATERIA MEDICA @ 599

osteoarthritis synoviocytes in vitro. Annals of the
Rheumatic Diseases 1990; 49(8):65-73.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Liske E. Therapeutic efficacy and safety of Cimicifuga
racemosa for gynecological disorders. Advances in
Therapy 1998; 15:45-53.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Tariq M, et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of
Commiphora molmol. Agents and Actions 1986; 17:381-2.
Al-Awadi FM, et al. On the mechanism of the hypogly-
caemic effect of a plant extract. Diabetologia 1985;
28:432-4.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Vichkanova SA, et al. Chemotherapeutic properties of
plumbagin. In: Aizenman BE, Fitontsidy Mater
Soveshch, eds. Kiev: Naukova Dumka, 6th edition,
1969, 1972; 183-5.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Austin, TX: American Botanical Council, 2003.

Stoll A, Renz J, Brack A. Helvetica Chimica Acta 1950;
33:1877-93.

Samochowiec E, Urbanska L, Manka W, et al.
Wiadomosci Parazytologiczne 1979; 25:77-81.

Facino RM, Carini M, Aldini G, et al. Echinacoside and
caffeoyl conjugates protect collagen from free
radicalinduced degradation: potential use of Echinacea
extracts in the prevention of skin photodamage. Planta
Medica 1995; 61(6):510-4.

Bauer R, Wagner H. Echinacea species as potential im-
munostimulatory drugs. In: Farnsworth NR, et al., eds.
Economic and Medicinal Plant Research, vol. 5. London:
Academic Press, 1991.

----- PAGE 624 -----
60C

89

90.

91.
92.

93.

94.

95.
96.

97.

98.

99.

100.
101.
102.

103.

104,
103.

106.

107.

108.
109.
110.
111.
112.

<@ TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

. Melchart D, Linde K, Worku E, et al.
Immunomodulation with Echinacea—a systematic re-
view of controlled clinical trials. Phytomedicine 1994;
1:245-54.

Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
McCaleb R, Leigh E, Morien K. The Encyclopedia of
Popular Herbs. Roseville, CA: Prima Health, 1999.

Fugh-Berman A. Herb-drug interactions. Lancet 2000;
335:134-8.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Evans WC. Pharmacognosy, 13th ed. London: Baillere
Tindall, 1989.

European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy.
ESCOP Monographs on the Medicinal Uses of Plant Drugs.
Exeter, UK: ESCOP, 1997, 1999.

World Health Organization. WHO Monographs on
Selected Medicinal Plants, vol. 1. Geneva: WHO, 1999.
Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Shaparenko, et al. On use of medicinal plants for treat-

ment of patients with chronic suppurative otitis. Zhurnal

ushnykh, nosovykh i gorlovykh boleznei (fournal of Otology,
Rhinology, and Laryngologie) 1979; 39:48-51,

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Wagner H. Immunostimulants from Medicinal Plants.
In: Chang HM, et al. Advances in Chinese Medicinal
Materials Research. Singapore: World Scientific, 1985;
159-70.

Wagner H, et al. Immunostimulating polysaccharides
(heteroglycans) of higher plants. Arzneimittel-Forschung
1985; 35:1069.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

DeSmet PAGM, et al. Kelp in herbal medicines: hyper-

113.

114.

115.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

124.

125.
126.

127.

128.

129,

21.

22.

23,

30.
131,
132.
33.

34,

35.

thyroidism. Nedertands Tidschrift voor Geneeskunde 1990,
134:1058-9.

Norman JA, et al. Human intake of arsenic and iodine
from seaweed-based food supplements and health foods
available in the UK. Food Additives and Contaminants
1987; 5:103-9.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Tbid.

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Kriegistein J. Neuroprotective properties of Ginkgo
biloba constituents. Zeit, Phytother 1994; 15:92-6.

Kleijnen J, Knipschild P. Ginkgo biloba. Lancet 1992;
1136-9.

Ibid. Ginkgo biloba for cerebral insufficiency. British
Fournal of Clinical Pharmacology 1992; 34:352-8.

Rosenblatt M, Mindel J. Spontaneous hyphema associ-
ated with ingestion of Ginkgo biloba extract. The New
England Journal of Medicine 1997; 336(15):1108.

Sikora R, Sohn M, Deutz FJ, et al. Ginkgo biloba ex-
tract in the therapy of erectile dysfunction. The Journal
of Urology 1989; 141:188A.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Paolini M, Pozzetti L, Sapone A, Cantelli-Forti G.
Effect of licorice and glycyrrhizin on murine liver CYP-
dependent monooxygenases. Life Sciences 1998;

62(6):57 1-82.

Pompei R, Flore O, Marccialis MA, et al. Glycyrrhizic
acid inhibits virus growth and inactivates virus particles.
Nature 1979 Oct 25; 281(5733):689-90.

World Health Organization. WHO Monographs on
Selected Medicinal Plants, vol. 1. Geneva: WHO, 1999.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.
Tid.
Tbid.

European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy.
ESCOP Monographs on the Medicinal Uses of Plant Drugs.
Exeter, UK: ESCOP, 1997, 1999.

Wren RC. Porter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Wohlfart R, et al. The sedative-hypnotic principle of

----- PAGE 625 -----
136,

137.

138.
139.

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.
149.
150.

151.
152.

153.

154.

hops. Communication: Pharmacology of 2-methyl-3-
butea-2-ol. Planta Medica 1983; 48:120-3.

Chakarski I, et al. Clinical study of a herb combination
consisting of Humulus lupulus, Cichorium intybus,
Mentha piperita in patients with chronic calculous and
non-calculous cholecystitis. Probl Vatr Med 1982,
10:65-9.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. Hydrastis canadensis, Berberis
vulgaris, Berberis aquifolium and other berberine-
containing plants. In: Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Seattle: John Bastyr College Publications, 1985.

Mills S, Bone K. Princtples and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Harrer G, Schulz V. On the clinical investigation of the
antidepressant effectiveness of Hypericum.
Nervenheilkunde 1993 Oct; 12:271-3.

Muller WE, Rolli M, Schafer C, Hafner U. Effects of
hypericum extract (LI 160) in biochemical models of an-
tidepressant activity. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997;
30(suppl):102-7.

Siegers CP, Biel S, Wilhem KP. Zur Frage der
Phototoxiztat von Hypericum. Nervenbeilkunde 1993;
12:320-2.

James JS. Hypericin. AIDS Treatment News 1992 Feb;
146:14.

Siegers CP, Biel S, Wilhelm KP. Nervenheilkunde 1993;
12:320-2.

Roby CA, Anderson GD, Kantor Ga, et al. St. John’s
wort: Effect on CYP3A4 activity. Clinical Pharmacology
and Therapeutics 2000; 67:451-7.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Markkanen T, et al. Antiherpetic agent from juniper tree
Juniperus communis), its purification, identification,
and testing in primary human amnion cell cultures.
Drugs under Experimental and Clinical Research 1981;
7:691-7,

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

155.
156.

157.

158.
159.
160.
161.
162.
163.
164.

165.
166.
167.

168.
169.

170.

171.

172.
173.
174.
175.
176.
177.
178.
179.

180.

181,

182.
183.

MaTeRIA MEDICA .@ 601

Ibid.

Kong YC, et al. Isolation of the uterotonic principle
from Leonurus sibirica, the Chinese motherwort.
American Journal of Chinese Medicine 1976, 4:373-82.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Sullivan JB, et al. Pennyroyal oil poisoning and hepato-
toxicity. The Journal of the American Medical Association
1979; 1242:2873.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Todd RG, ed. Martindale: The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 25th
ed. London: Pharmaceutical Press, 1967.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Borgia M, et al. Pharmacological activity of an herb ex-

tract: A controlled clinical study. Current Therapeutic
Research 198 1; 29; 525-36,

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Kinzler E, Kromer J, Lehmann E. Effect of a special
kava extract in patients with anxiety-, tension-, and exci-
tation states of non-psychotic genesis. Double-blind

study with placebos over 4 weeks. Arzneimittel-Forschung
1991; 41:584-8,

----- PAGE 626 -----
602

184.

185.

186.

187.

188.

189.
190.
191.
192.
193.
194.
195.

196.

197.

198.
199.

200.

201.
202.
203.
204.
205.
206.
207.
208.

209.

< TREATMENT APPROACHES BY BODY SYSTEM

Volz HP, Kieser M. Kava-kava extract WS 1490 versus
placebo in anxiety disorders, a randomized placebo-con-
trolled 25-week outpatient trial. Pharmacopsychiatry 1997;
30:1-5.

Jamieson DD, Duffield PH. The antinocioceptive ac-
tions of kava components in mice. Clinical and
Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology 1990,
17:495-507.

Keller F Klohs MW. A review of the chemistry and
pharmacology of the constituents of Piper methysticum.
Lhoydia 1963; 26:1-15.

Schelosky L, Raffauf C, Jendroska K, et al. Kava and
dopamine antagonism. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry 1995; 58(5):639-40.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Pilcher JM, et al. The action of “female remedies” on

intact uteri of animals. Surgery, Gynecology, & Obstetrics
1918; 18:97-9,

Martin ML, et al. Pharmacological effects of lactones
isolated from Pulsatilla alpina subsp. apiffolia. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 1988; 24:185-91.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

World Health Organization. WHO Monographs on
Selected Medicinal Plants, vol. 1. Geneva: WHO, 1999.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.

Vivian B, Tal H, Inna K. The effect of Sambucol, a black
elderberry-based, natural product, on the production of
human cytokines: I. Inflammatory cytokines. Exropean
Cytokine Network 2001 Apr; 12(2):290.

Serkedjieva J, et al. Antiviral activity of the infusion

210.

211.

212.

219.
220.

221.

222.

223.

224.
225.
226.
227.
228.
229.
230.
231.

(SHS174) from flowers of Sambucus nigra L., aerial
parts of Hypericum perforatum L., and roots of
Saponaria officinalis L. against influenza and herpes sim-
plex viruses. Phytotherapy Research 1990; 4:97.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Godowski KC. Antimicrobial action of sanguinarine.
The Journal of Clinical Dentistry 1989; 1:96-101.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

- Ibid.

Wolfson P, Hoffmann DL. An investigation into the ef-
ficacy of Scutellaria lateriflora in healthy volunteers.
Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine 2003
Mar-Apr; 9(2):74-8.

. Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and

Preparations, 8th ed.

. Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
. Rhodes L, Prinika RL, Berman C, et al. Comparison of

finasteride (Proscar), a 5a-reductase inhibitor, and vari-
ous commercial plant extracts in vitro and in vivo Sa-
reductase inhibition. The Prostate 1993; 22:43-51.
Caaroj C, Raynaud JP, Koch G, et al. Comparison of
phytotherapy (Permixon) with finasteride in the treat-
ment of benign prostate hyperplasia: a randomized in-
ternational study of 1,098 patients. The Prostate 1996;
29:23140.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.

McCaleb R, Leigh E, Morien K. The Encyclopedia of
Popular Herbs. Roseville, CA: Prima Health, 1999.
Palasciano G, Portincasa P, Palmieri V, et al. The effect
of silymarin on plasma levels of malon-dialdehyde in pa-
tients receiving long-term treatment with psychotropic
drugs. Current Therapeutic Research 1994; 55:537-45.

Fintelmann V. Toxic metabolic liver damage and its
treatment. Zeitschrift fur Phytotherapie 1986; (3):65-73.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Bisset, ed. Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals.

Racz-Kotilla, et al. The action of Taraxacum officinale
extracts on the body weight and diuresis of laboratory
animals. Planta Medica 1974; 26:212-7.

----- PAGE 627 -----
232.

233.
234.

235.
236.
237.
238.
239.
240.
241.

242.

243.

244.

245.

246.
247,
248.
249.

250.

Vogel G. Natural substances with effects on the liver. In:

Wagner H, Wolff P, eds. New Natural Products and Plant
Drugs with Pharmacological, Biological or Therapeutic
Activity. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1977.

Bisset, ed. Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Chrubasik, et al. Evidence for antirheumatic effective-
ness of Herba Urtica dioicae in acute arthritis: a pilot
study. Phytomedicine 1997; 4(2):105-8.

Oliver-Bever B, Zahland GR. Plants with oral hypogly-
caemic activity. Quarterly Journal of Crude Drug Research
1979; 17:139-96,

Sokeland J, Albrecht J. A combination of Sabal and
Urtica extract vs. finasteride in BPH. Urologie A 1997;
36(4):327-33.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.

Wren RC. Potter's New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Ibid.

Bisset, ed. Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

251.
252.
253.

254,

255.

256.

257.

258.

259.

260.

261.

262.

263.

264.
265.
266.

Materia MEDICA 2 503

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Mills S, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy:
Modern Herbal Medicine.

Amann W. Amenorrhoe. Gfinstige wirkung von Agnus
castus (Agnolyt®) auf amenorrhoea. Z Allg Med 1982;
58:228-31.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed.

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs.
Grontved A, et al. Ginger root against seasickness. A
controlled trial on the open sea. Acta Oto-laryngologica
1988; 105:45-9.

Mowrey DB, Clayson DE. Motion sickness, ginger, and
psychophysics. Lancet 1982 Mar 20; 1(8273):655-7.
Newall, C, Anderson L, Phillipson J. Herbal Medicines: A
Guide for Health-Care Professionals.

Srivastava KC. Effect of onion and ginger consumption
on platelet thromboxane production in humans.
Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes, and Essential Fatty Acids 1989,
35;183-5.

Srivastava K, et al. Ginger and rheumatic disorders.
Medical Hypotheses 1989; 29:25-8.

Lumb AB. Effect of ginger on human platelet function.
Thrombosis and Haemostasis 1994; 71:110-1,

Ibid.

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide io Herbs.
Bensky D, Gamble A. Chinese Herbal Medicine Materia
Medica. Seattle: Eastland Press, 1986.

----- PAGE 628 -----
Appendix |

Fan

GLOSSARY

abortifacient: Induces abortion or miscarriage.

abscess: A localized collection of pus and liquefied tissue in a
cavity.

absolute: A highly concentrated viscous, semisolid, or solid per-
fume material, usually obtained by alcohol extraction from
the concrete.

acetylcholine: A neurotransmitter. Its effects include cardiac
inhibition and increase in blood vessel diameter.

achlorhydria: Absence of hydrochloric acid in the stomach.

acid: A compound producing hydrogen ions in aqueous solu-
tion. Acidic refers to a pH below 7.0.

acidosis: Abnormal state of reduced alkalinity of blood and
tissues.

acrid: Leaving a burning sensation in the mouth.

ACTH: See adrenocorticotropic hormone.

acupressure: Manual application of pressure at points where
acupuncture needles would be inserted.

acupuncture: Chinese practice that involves insertion of nee-
dles into body at specific points along meridians to treat
disease and reduce pain.

acute: Designating disease with rapid onset, severe symptoms,
and brief duration; opposite of chronic.

acute abdomen: Emergency condition caused by damage to
one or more abdominal organs that results in intense pain
and shock.

adaptogen: An herb that increases resistance and resilience to
stress, enabling the body to avoid reaching collapse because
it can adapt around the problem.

adenoma: An ordinarily benign (nonmalignant) tumor of skin
tissue.

Addison’s disease: Condition marked by weakness, low blood
pressure, and dark pigmentation due to inadequate hor-
mone secretion by adrenal glands.

adenitis: Regional inflammation of gland or lymph node.

adenocarcinoma: Malignant epithelial tumor in glandular
pattern.

ADH: See antidiuretic hormone.

adhesion: Union by fibrous connective tissue of two normally
separate parts.

adipose: Fat in connective tissue.

adjuvant: Any substance that enhances the immune-stimulating
properties of an antigen or the pharmacological effect of a
drug.

adjuvant chemotherapy: One or more anticancer drugs used in
combination with surgery or radiation therapy as part of
the treatment of cancer. Adjuvant usually means “in addi-
tion to” initial treatment.

604

administration: This term refers to how a drug is taken.

adrenaline: Hormone secreted by the adrenal gland, which
produces the “fight-or-flight” response. Also called
epinephrine.

adrenergic: Compound that acts like e
epinephrine.

adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH): Polypeptide secreted
by anterior pituitary that stimulates the adrenal cortex to
secrete cortisol.

adverse drug reaction (ADR): Defined by the WHO as “any
response to a drug which is noxious and unintended, and
which occurs at doses used in man for prophylaxis, diagno-
sis, or therapy.”

aerophagy: Swallowing of air.

aflatoxin: A toxic chemical produced by the Aspergillus flavus
and A. parasiticus molds.

agar: Polysaccharide derived from seaweed, used as culture
medium for microorganisms; gelatinous natural laxative.

agglutinin: Substance, especially antibody, that causes bacteria,
blood cells, and antigens to clump.

agonist: A drug that both binds to receptors and has an intrin-
sic effect.

agranulocytosis: Acute illness caused by chemicals or drug re-
action in which certain white blood cells disappear, causing
rapid, massive infection.

ague: Malaria; general malaise marked by fever.

AIDS: Acquired immune deficiency syndrome; severe weaken-
ing or destruction of body’s immune system by human im-
munodeficiency virus.

AIDS-related complex arc: Chronic enlargement of lymph
nodes and persistent fever caused by AIDS virus.

albumin: Most abundant protein found in blood plasma.

albuminuria: Presence of the protein albumin in urine.

aldosterone: A hormone secreted by the zona glomerulosa of
the adrenal gland, which causes the retention of sodium
and the secretion of potassium.

alga: Unicellular organism distinguished from plants by having
no true root stem.

alkaline phosphatase: A blood enzyme measurement that indi-
cates the health of the liver.

alkaline: Solution having a pH above 7.0.

alkaloids: A large, varied group of nitrogen-containing com-
pounds found in plants. Often alkaline, they react with
acids to form soluble salts, many of which are physiologi-
cally active.

alkalosis: Abnormal state of increased alkalinity of blood and
tissues.

pinephrine or nor-

----- PAGE 629 -----
allelochemicals: Chemicals involved in interspecific
communication.

allelopathy: Chemical interaction between species at all levels
of complexity, from microorganisms to higher plants, inex-
tricably interwoven into ecological phenomena.

allergen: Any substance that comes into contact with body tis-
sue (by skin absorption, ingestion, or inhalation) and causes
a specific reaction within the bloodstream.

allergy: Hypersensitivity to a particular substance or antigen,
such as pollen, fur, feathers, mold, dust, drugs, dyes, cos-
metics, or food, causing characteristic symptoms when en-
countered, ingested, or inhaled.

alliaceous: Garlic- or onionlike.

allogenic transplant: Transfer of bone marrow from one per-
son to another.

alopecia: Absence of hair from an area where it normally grows,
especially progressive hair loss in men; baldness.

alterative: Herbs that gradually restore proper functioning of the
body, increasing health and vitality. Some alteratives support
natural waste elimination via the kidneys, liver, lungs, or skin.
Others stimulate digestive function or are antimicrobial.

Alzheimer’s disease: Progressive dementia and brain degeneration.

amebiasis: Infection with or disease caused by an amoeba.

amebic dysentery: Severe dysentery caused by protozoan
amoebas.

amenorrhea: Absence or cessation of menstruation due to a
congenital defect, hormonal deficiency, hypothalamus dis-
order, or emotional problem.

amino acid: Any of 25 organic acids containing an amino group
that link into polypeptide chains to form proteins.

amoebicidal: A substance with the power to destroy amoebas.

amphoteric: Having the ability to act as either an acid or a base.

amylase: Enzyme that breaks down starch into disaccharides.

anabolism: Constructive metabolism in which food is changed
into living tissue.

analgesic: A substance that reduces the sensation of pain.

analog (analogue): A chemical compound with a structure sim-
ilar to that of another but differing from it in respect to a
certain component; it may have a similar or opposite action
metabolically.

anaphrodisiac: Reduces sexual desire.

anaphylaxis: Acute, allergic reaction to a substance to which a
person has been previously sensitized, resulting in faintness,
palpitations, loss of color, difficulty in breathing, and shock.

androgen: Any substance that produces masculinization, such
as testosterone.

anemia: Reduced hemoglobin in blood, causing fatigue, breath-
lessness, and pallor.

anesthetic: Agent that diminishes or abolishes sensation and
can produce unconsciousness.

aneurysm: Balloonlike swelling of an arterial wall.

angina: Feeling of suffocation; chest pain.

angina pectoris: A suffocating pain (angina) of the chest (pec-
toris). Angina is a result of the oxygen demands of the heart
not being met.

angiosperm: Flowering plant.

angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE): ACE converts an-
giotensin I to a biologically active form, angiotensin II.
ACE inhibitors are used to combat hypertension.

GLossary @ 605

annual: Plant with life cycle of one year or season.

anodyne: Substance that soothes or relieves pain.

anodynia: Absence of pain.

anorexia: Loss of appetite.

anorexia nervosa: Extreme loss of appetite, especially in ado-
lescent females, causing severe weight loss and starvation.

anoxia: Condition in which body tissues receive inadequate
oxygen.

anorexiant: A drug or substance that leads to anorexia or di-
minished appetite; appetite suppressant.

antacid: A substance that neutralizes acid.

antagonism: The joint effect of two or more drugs such that
the combined effect is less than the sum of the effects pro-
duced by each agent separately. The agonist is the agent
producing the effect that is diminished by the administra-
tion of the antagonist.

antagonist: A drug that impedes the action of another chemical
substance in the body.

anthelmintic: A vermifuge, destroying or expelling intestinal
worms.

anther: Part of the stamen that produces and releases pollen.

anthocyanidin: A particular class of flavonoids that gives plants,
fruits, and flowers colors ranging from red to blue.

anthraquinone: Glycoside compound that produces dyes and
purgatives.

antianemic: An agent that combats anemia.

antiarthritic: An agent that combats arthritis.

antibacterial: A substance that stops or checks the growth of
bacteria.

antibiotic: A drug that kills microorganisms.

antibody: Protein manufactured by lymphocytes that reacts
with a specific antigen to fight invasion as the principal
component of immunity.

anticatarrhal: Anticatarrhals help the body remove excess
mucus, whether in the sinus area or in other parts of the
body.

anticoagulant: Agent that prevents blood from clotting.

anticonvulsant: Helps arrest or prevent convulsions.

antidepressant: Helps alleviate depression.

antidiarrheal: Efficacious against diarrhea.

antidiuretic hormone: ADH; peptide hormone synthesized in
the hypothalamus and released from the posterior pituitary,
causing retention of more water in body.

antidote: A substance that counteracts the effects of a poison.

antiemetic: An agent that reduces the incidence and severity of
nausea or vomiting.

antifungal: A substance that inhibits the growth or multiplica-
tion of fungi.

antigen: Any substance or microorganism that, when intro-
duced into the body, causes the formation of antibodies
against it.

antihemorrhagic: An agent that prevents or combats hemor-
rhage or bleeding.

antihepatotoxic; Protects liver cells from chemical damage.

antihistamine: A chemical that blocks action of histamine.

antihypertensive: Blood pressure-lowering effect.

anti-inflammatory: Soothes inflammations or reduces the in-
flammation of the tissue directly.

----- PAGE 630 -----
60€ @ GLOSSARY

antilithic: Prevents the formation of a calculus or stone.

antimicrobial: Antimicrobials help the body destroy or resist
pathogenic microorganisms. They help the body strengthen
its own resistance to infective organisms and throw off the
illness.

antineuralgic: Relieves or reduces nerve pain.

antioxidant: A compound that prevents free radical or oxidative
damage.

antiphlogistic: Checks or counteracts inflammation.

antipruritic: Relieves sensation of itching or prevents its
occurrence,

antiputrescent: An agent that prevents and combats decay or
putrefaction.

antipyretic: Reduces fever; see also febrifuge.

antiretroviral: A substance that stops or suppresses the activity
of a retrovirus such as HIV.

antirheumatic: Helps prevent and relieve rheumatism.

antisclerotic: Helps prevent the hardening of tissue.

antiscorbutic: A remedy for scurvy.

antiseborrheic: Helps control the production of sebum, the
oily secretion from sweat glands.

antiseptic: Destroys and prevents the development of microbes.

antispasmodic: Substance that relieves smooth muscle spasms.

antitoxic: An antidote or treatment that counteracts the effects
of poison.

antitumor: A substance that prevents or is effective against
tumors.

antitussive: Substance that reduces coughing, especially one
that affects activity in the brain’s cough center and de-
presses’ respiration.

antiviral: Substance that inhibits the growth of a virus.

anxiety: An unpleasant emotional state ranging from mild un-
ease to intense fear.

aperient: A mild laxative.

aperitif: Stimulant of the appetite.

aphonia: Loss of voice.

aphrodisiac: Increases or stimulates sexual desire.

apnea: Temporary cessation of breathing.

apoplexy: Sudden loss of consciousness, a stroke, or sudden se-
vere hemorrhage.

appendicitis: Acute inflammation of vermiform appendix.

application: Medication, remedy, or antiseptic placed externally
on body part, as in a compress.

arbovirus: RNA-containing virus that can cause disease when
transmitted from animals to humans by insects.

ARC: AIDS-related complex.

aril: The husk or membrane covering the seed of a plant.

aromatherapy: The therapeutic use of essential oils.

aromatic: A substance with a strong aroma or smell.

arrhythmia: Irregularity or deviation from normal rhythm or
force of heartbeat.

arteriole: Microscopic blood vessel that connects the smallest
arteries with the capillary beds. Arterioles together with
the smaller atteries make up the resistance vessels.

arteriosclerosis: Deposit of cholesterol on artery walls; hard-
ening of the arteries.

artery: A blood vessel that carries oxygen-rich blood away from
the heart.

arthritis: Inflammation of joints.

asbestosis: A lung disease caused by inhalation of asbestos
fibers, sometimes leading to lung cancer.

asepsis: Complete absence of disease-causing bacteria, viruses,
fungi, and microorganisms.

aspergillosis: A disease caused by a fungus. It can cause le-
sions of the skin, ear, orbit, nasal sinuses, lungs, and some-
times the bones, meninges, heart, kidneys, or spleen.
Symptoms include fever, chills, difficulty breathing, and
coughing up blood. If the infection reaches the brain, it
may cause dementia.

assay: A test.

asthenia: See debility.

asthma: Paroxysmal attacks of bronchial spasms that cause dif-
ficulty in breathing, often hereditary; bronchial asthma.

astigmatism: Distortion of visual images due to failure of the
retina to focus light.

asymptomatic: Showing no evidence of a disease.

asystole: Absence of contraction (systole). Asystole is when the
heart has stopped beating.

ataxia: Shaky movements and unsteady gait when brain fails to
regulate posture or direction of limb movements.

atherogenic: Having the capacity to start or accelerate the pro-
cess of atherogenesis or the formation of lipid deposits in
the arteries.

atheroma: Degeneration of artery walls due to fatty plaques and
scar tissue; common form of arteriosclerosis, atherosclerosis.

atherosclerosis: A process in which fatty substances (choles-
terol and triglycerides) are deposited in the walls of
medium to large arteries, eventually leading to blockage of
the artery.

atony: Lessening or lack of muscular tone or tension.

atopy: A predisposition to various allergic conditions including
eczema and asthma.

atrial fibrillation: Rapid irregular twitchings of the wall of an
atrium (chamber) of the heart.

atrium: One of the upper chambers of the heart. Blood return-
ing to the heart is stored in the atria before being ejected
into the ventricles.

arthralgia: Severe joint pain.

atrophy: Wasting away of normally developed organ or tissue
due to degeneration of cells.

attrition: Normal wearing away of surface of teeth.

autoimmune: Designating a disorder of the body's defense
mechanism in which antibodies are produced against the
body’s own tissue, treating it as a foreign substance.

autoimmune disease: Disorder that permits destruction of tis-
sue by the body’s own antibodies.

autologous: Derived from the same individual or organism.

autonomic: Occurring involuntarily, controlled by the auto-
nomic nervous system.

axil: Upper angle between a stem and leaf or bract.

axillary: In the armpit area.

axon: The long, filamentous part of a neuron (nerve cell) that
carries nerve impulses away from the cell.

ayurveda: A highly developed system of therapeutics devel-
oped in the Hindu and Buddhist cultures of the Indian
subcontinent.

----- PAGE 631 -----
B lymphocyte (B cell): One of the immune system cell types;
B cells fight infection primarily by making antibodies.
bacteremia: Presence of bacteria in blood, indicating infection.
bactericidal: An agent that destroys bacteria (a type of microbe

or organism).

bacteriostat: Substance that retards growth of bacteria.

balm: Fragrant ointment or aromatic oil with medicinal value.

balsam: A resinous semisolid mass or viscous liquid exuded from
a plant. A “true” balsam is characterized by its high content
of benzoic acid, benzoates, cinnamic acid, or cinnamates.

baroreceptor: Neural receptor sensitive to pressure and rate of
change in pressure; stretch receptor; found in the aortic
arch and carotid sinuses.

basal metabolic rate: The rate of metabolism when the body is
at rest.

basal cell carcinoma: Common, usually curable, slow-growing
malignant tumor on the skin.

basal rosette: Leaves radiating directly from the crown of the
root.

baseline: The first or starting measurement in a study. New
measurements of blood values are compared to this starting
value.

basophil: A type of white blood cell that is involved in allergic
reactions.

bed-wetting: See enuresis.

Bell’s palsy: Paralysis of muscles on one side of the face and the
inability to close eye, sometimes with loss of taste and ex-
cess sensitivity to noise.

benign: Consisting of a localized mass of nonmalignant special-
ized cells within connective tissue that do not invade and
destroy tissue or spread throughout body.

berry: Small, fleshy fruit or dry seed or kernel of various plants.

beta-blocker: Drug that decreases heart activity by affecting re-
ceptors of the sympathetic nervous system,

beta cells: The cells in the pancreas, which manufacture insulin.

biennial: Plant with two-year life cycle in which the vegetative
first-year growth is followed by fruiting and dying during
second year.

bile: Greenish liver secretion that is stored in the gallbladder
until released to emulsify fats in the small intestine.

bile salts: Steroid molecules in bile that promote solubilization
and digestion of fats.

bilirubin: The breakdown product of the hemoglobin molecule
of red blood cells.

bilirubinemia: Excess bile pigment in blood that causes jaundice.

binomial: Standard scientific name for an organism in Latin.

bioavailability: The amount of drug that is available to the
target tissue after administration; this may not be 100%
due to degradation or alteration before reaching the tar-
get tissue.

biopsy: A diagnostic test in which tissue or cells are removed
from the body for examination under a microscope.

biopharmaceutics: The science and study of the ways in which the
pharmaceutical formulation of administered agents can influ-
ence their pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic behavior.

biotransformation: Chemical alteration of an agent that occurs
by virtue of the sojourn of the agent in a biological system.
Pharmacodynamics involves the chemical effects of a drug
on the body; biotransformation involves the chemical effect

Gossary 607

of the body ona drug. “Biotransformation” and “detoxica-
tion” are not synonyms: The product of a biotransforma-
tion may be more, not less, biologically active, or potent,
than the starting material.

biotranslocation: The movement of chemicals through biolog-
ical organisms.

bitters: Herbs with a bitter taste.

blade: Broad, expanded part of a leaf

bleeding time: The time required for the cessation of bleeding
from a small skin puncture as a result of platelet disinte-
gration and blood vessel constriction. Ranges from 1 to 4
minutes.

blennorrhagia: Heavy discharge of mucus, especially from the
urethra.

blepharitis: Inflammation, scaling, and crusting of eyelids.

blister: External swelling that contains watery fluid and blood
or pus, caused by friction.

blocking antibody: Antibody whose production is induced by
cancer cells or tissue transplants and that blocks the killing
of those cells by cytotoxic T cells.

blood count: Measurement of the number of red cells, white
cells, and platelets in a sample of blood.

blood pressure: The force exerted by blood as it is pumped by
the heart and presses against and attempts to stretch blood
vessels.

blood poisoning: Prolonged invasion of the bloodstream by
pathogenic bacteria due to infectious disease or skin le-
sions; bacteremia; septicemia; toxemia.

blood-brain barrier: Group of anatomical barriers and trans-
port systems that tightly control types of substances enter-
ing the extracellular space of the brain.

boil: Tender, inflamed, pustulant area of skin, usually due to
staphylococcus infection; furuncle.

bolus: Single, large mass of a substance.

bone marrow: The inner core of bone that produces blood
cells.

botany: Branch of biology dealing with life, structure, growth,
and classification of plants.

bract: Leaflike structure growing below or encircling a flower
cluster or flower.

bradycardia: Slowing of the heart rate to under 50 beats per
minute.

bradykinin: Peptide vasodilator that increases capillary perme-
ability and probably stimulates pain receptors.

bromeliad: Member of the Pineapple family of plants, usually epi-
phytic, with stiff, leathery leaves and spikes of bright flowers.

bronchial asthma: See asthma.

bronchitis: Inflammation of the walls of the bronchi in the lungs
due to virus or bacteria, causing coughing and production of
sputum.

bronchodilator: Substance that relaxes bronchial muscle to
open air passages to the lungs.

bronchospasm: Muscular contraction that narrows the bronchi
and causes difficulty especially in exhalation.

bruit: Any abnormal sound or murmur heard with a stethoscope.

bryophyte: Any member of the division of nonvascular plants,
including mosses and liverworts.

bubo: Swollen and inflamed lymph node in armpit or groin.

bulb: Dormant underground bud stage of some plants.

----- PAGE 632 -----
6C8 <= GLOSSARY

bulimia: Psychogenic syndrome of overeating followed by
vomiting.

bunion: Swelling of the joint between the big toe and the first
metatarsal.

bursa: A sac or pouch that contains a special fluid that lubricates
joints.

bursitis: Inflammation of a bursa.

cachexia: Weight loss, weakness, and debility associated with
chronic disease.

calcinosis: Abnormal deposit of calcium salts in tissue.

calcitonin: Peptide hormone secreted by the thyroid that reduces
excess of calcium in the blood by depositing it in bone.

calculus: Pebblelike mass, such as gallstone or kidney stone,
formed within the body; hard tartar layer formed on teeth

ry plaque.

callus: Hard thickening of an area of skin undergoing rubbing,

on hands or feet; mass of tissue forming around fractured

bone ends.

calorie: A unit of heat. A nutritional calorie is the amount of

heat necessary to raise 1 kg of water one degree C.

calyx: The sepals or outer layer of floral leaves.

cambium: Layer of formative cells beneath the bark of a tree.

cancer: General term for more than 100 diseases characterized

by abnormal and uncontrolled growth of cells.

cancrum: Ulceration of the lip or mouth; canker.

candidiasis: Yeastlike fungus infection in the mouth and moist
areas of the body; see aso thrush.

canker: See cancrum.

capsule: A dry fruit, opening when ripe, composed of more
than one carpel.

carbohydrate: Sugars and starches.

carbuncle: Staphylococcus infection of the skin that causes
boils with multiple drainage channels.

carcinogen: Any agent or substance capable of causing cancer.

carcinogenesis: The development of cancer caused by the ac-
tions of certain chemicals, viruses, and unknown factors on
primarily normal cells.

carcinoma: Cancer in epithelium lining skin or internal organs.

cardiac output: Volume of blood pumped by either ventricle
per minute,

cardiac remedy: An herbal remedy that has a beneficial action
on the heart. Some of the remedies in this group are pow-
erful cardioactive agents such as foxglove; others are gentler,
safer herbs such as hawthorn and motherwort.

cardiac arrest: Abrupt cessation of heartbeat, causing loss of
pulse, consciousness, and breathing.

cardiac stenosis: Abnormal narrowing of a heart valve.

cardiomyopathy: Chronic viral, congenital, or other disorder
that affects heart muscle and causes heart failure, arrhyth-
mias, or embolisms.

cardiopulmonary: Pertaining to the heart and lungs.

cardiotonic: A compound that tones and strengthens the heart.

carditis: Inflammation of the heart.

caries: Decay of bone tissue, especially tooth; cavity.

carminative: Plants rich in aromatic volatile oils that stimulate
the digestive system to work properly and with ease, sooth-
ing the gut wall, reducing any inflammation, easing griping
pains, and helping the removal of gas from the digestive tract.

carotene: Fat-soluble plant pigments. Some carotenes can be
converted into vitamin A by the body.

cartilage: A type of connective tissue that acts as a shock ab-
sorber at joint interfaces.

carpal tunnel syndrome: Compression of the median nerve
entering the palm of the hand that causes pain and numb-
ing in the middle and index fingers.

castor oil: Unpleasant-tasting, irritant laxative or cathartic.

catalyst: A chemical that increases the rate of a chemical reac-
tion without itself being consumed.

cataract: Opacity of eye lens that causes blurred vision, espe-
cially in the elderly.

catarrh: Excessive secretion of thick phlegm or mucus by the
mucous membrane of the nose.

catecholamines: The chemically similar neurotransmitters
dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine.

cathartic: A substance that stimulates the movement of the
bowels, more powerful than a laxative.

catheter: A device that allows drugs to be given on an ongoing
basis.

ceiling: The maximum biological effect that can be induced in
a tissue by a given drug, regardless of how large a dose is
administered.

cell-mediated immunity: Specific immune response mediated
by cytotoxic T lymphocytes.

cephalalgia: See headache.

cephalic: Remedy for disorders of the head; referring or di-
rected toward the head.

cerebral hemorrhage: Bleeding from the cerebral artery into
brain tissue.

cerebral; Pertaining to the largest part of the brain, the cerebrum.

chelating agent: An organic compound capable of binding
metals.

chemoreceptor: A molecular structure on the surface of a cell
that is sensitive to chemical substances, such as epinephrine,
released by nerve cells.

chemotaxis: Movement or response of cells to chemicals.

chemotherapy: Drug treatment of parasitic or neoplastic dis-
ease in which the drug has a selective effect on the invading
cells or organisms.

chemotype: The same botanical species occurring in other
forms due to different conditions of growth, such as cli-
mate, soil, and altitude.

Cheyne-Stokes respiration: Cyclical slowing of breathing to
cessation, then speeding up to peak.

chilblain: Red, round, itchy swelling of skin on fingers or toes
due to exposure to cold.

chiropractic: Treatment method using manipulation of the
muscular and skeletal systems, especially the spine.

chlamydia: Sexually transmitted, viruslike microorganism caus-
ing conjunctivitis, urethritis, and cervicitis.

chlorophyll: Pigment in chloroplast, needed for photosynthesis.

chloroplast: Membrane-bound organelle that is the site of pho-
tosynthesis.

cholagogue: A compound that stimulates the contraction of the
gallbladder.

cholecystitis: Inflammation of the gallbladder.

cholecystokinetic: Agent that stimulates the contraction of the
gallbladder.

----- PAGE 633 -----
cholecystokinin (CCK): A peptide hormone secreted by the
small intestine.

cholelithiasis: Presence of gallstones.

choleretic: Aids excretion of bile by the liver, so there is a
greater flow of bile.

cholestasis: The stagnation of bile within the liver.

cholesterol: Steroid molecule that is a precursor of steroid hor-
mones and bile salts, a component of plasma membranes,
and present in fat and blood.

cholinergic: Pertaining to the parasympathetic portion of the
autonomic nervous system and the release of acetylcholine
as a transmitter substance.

chorionic: Referring to the chorion or membrane enclosing the
fetus.

chromatography: Separation of chemical compounds.

chronic: Long term or frequently recurring.

chronic fatigue syndrome: Persistent, extreme exhaustion and
weakness due to unknown causes.

chronotropic effect: An effect that changes the heart rate (ie.,
the time between P-waves).

chyme: Solution of partially digested food in the lumen of the
stomach and intestines.

cicatrisant: An agent that promotes healing by the formation of
scar tissue.

cicatrix: See scar.

cirrhosis: Progressive liver condition from various causes.

claudication: Cramping pain from inadequate blood supply to
muscle.

climacteric: Physical and emotional changes as sexual maturity
gives way to cessation of reproductive function in females
and testosterone decrease in males.

clot: Soft, thickened lump formed in liquid, especially blood.

clinical therapeutic index: An index of relative safety or rela-
tive effectiveness that cannot be defined explicitly and
uniquely, although it is presumed that the same quantifiable
and precise criteria of efficacy and safety will be used in
comparing drugs of similar kinds.

clinical trial: The systematic investigation of the effects of ma-
terials or methods, according to a formal study plan and
generally in a human population with a particular disease or
class of diseases.

club moss: Any of various small, non-seed-bearing vascular
plants with conelike, spore-bearing structures on top of
stems.

clubbing: Thickening of tissue at the base of a fingernail or toe-
nail, especially enlargement of a fingertip.

CNS: Central nervous system.

coccus: Spherical bacterium.

coenzyme: Nonprotein organic molecule that temporarily joins
with an enzyme during reaction, is not consumed in reac-
tion, and can be reused until degraded; cofactor.

cold sore: Small swelling or eruption of skin around lips that
dries to leave a crusty patch; fever blister.

colic: Pain due to contraction of the involuntary muscles of the
abdominal organs.

colitis: Any inflammation of the colon, causing diarrhea and
lower abdominal pain.

collagen: Extremely strong fibrous protein that functions as
a structural element in connective tissue, tendons, and
ligaments.

Glossary 2 609

collagen disease: A disease characterized by changes in the
makeup of connective tissue: lupus, rheumatic fever,
rheumatoid arthritis, and scleroderma.

colloid: An extremely fine particle suspended in a surrounding
medium.

collyrium: Medicated solution used to bathe eyes.

coma: Prolonged state of deep unconsciousness from which pa-
tient cannot be roused.

comedo: Blackhead.

comparison trial: A trial in which experimental drugs are tested
against each other or against an approved drug.

complement: Set of enzymes in the bloodstream that work with
antibodies to attack foreign cells and bacteria.

complete blood count (CBC): Series of tests including cell
counts, hematocrit, hemoglobin, and cell volume mea-
surement.

compliance: The extent to which a patient agrees to and fol-
lows a prescribed treatment regimen.

compress: Moistened pad of folded cloth, often medicated, ap-
plied with heat, cold, or pressure to soothe a body part.

concrete: A concentrated, waxy, solid or semisolid perfume ma-
terial prepared from previously live plant matter, usually
using a hydrocarbon type of solvent.

cone: Reproductive structure of certain nonflowering plants
with overlapping scales or bracts containing pollen, ovules,
or spores.

congestion: Accumulation of blood within an organ; clogging
of the upper respiratory system with mucus.

congestive heart failure: Inability of the heart to adequately
supply blood to body tissue, often due to weakening of car-
diac muscle, causing body swelling and shortness of
breath.

conifer: Cone-bearing gymnosperm, usually with narrow,
needlelike or small, scalelike leaves.

conjunctivitis: Inflammation of mucous membrane covering
front of eye, often with discharge of pus; pinkeye.

connective tissue: The type of tissue that performs the func-
tion of providing support, structure, and cellular cement to
the body.

constipation: Infrequent, difficult, often painful bowel move-
ments with hard feces; irregularity.

contagious: A disease that can be transferred from one person
to another by direct contact.

contraceptive: Medication or device to prevent conception.

continuous infusion: Uninterrupted introduction of fluid
other than blood into a vein.

contractility: Refers to the strength of heart muscle contrac-
tion. This is controlled by the autonomic nervous system.
The sympathetic nervous system increases and the para-
sympathetic nervous system decreases the strength of a
contraction.

controlled trial: Trial in which one group gets the experimen-
tal drug and another group gets either a placebo or an ap-
proved drug therapy.

contusion: Surface injury in which skin is not broken; bruise.

convulsion: Involuntary muscle contraction that causes con-
torted movements of body and limbs.

corm: Underground stem base that acts as a reproductive
structure.

corn: Area of hard or thickened skin on or between the toes.

----- PAGE 634 -----
61€ <= GLOSSARY

corolla: The petals of a flower considered as a whole.

coronary: Of or pertaining to arteries of the heart.

coronary heart disease: Serious condition affecting the coro-
nary arteries.

coronary insufficiency: The right and left coronary arteries
supply blood to the heart. Flow is considered insufficient if
it cannot meet the needs of the heart.

corpus luteum: The remains of the egg follicle after ovulation.

cortical: Involving external layers of brain.

corticosteroid drugs: A group of drugs similar to natural corti-
costeroid hormones that are used predominantly in the treat-
ment of inflammation and to suppress the immune system.

corticosteroid hormones: A group of hormones produced by
the adrenal glands that control the body’s use of nutrients
and the excretion of salts and water in the urine.

cortisol: A steroid hormone secreted by the adrenal cortex that
regulates organic metabolism by converting fats and pro-
teins to glucose.

corymb: Flat-topped or convex cluster of flowers in which the
outer flowers open first.

cotyledon: First or second leaf of a seedling.

cough: Violent exhalation of irritant particles or congestive
mucus from the respiratory system; tussis.

counterirritant: An application to the skin that relieves deep-
seated pain, usually applied in the form of heat; see also
rubefacient.

cramp: Prolonged painful contraction or spasm of muscle.

creatinine: A protein found in muscles and blood and excreted
by the kidneys in the urine. The level of creatinine in the
blood and urine provides a measure of kidney function.

crepitation: Soft crackling sound heard in the lungs through a
stethoscope; rale.

crepitus: Crackling sound made by grating of bone on bone or
on cartilage, especially in an arthritic joint.

CRH: Corticotropin-releasing hormone.

crick: Painful muscle spasm or cramp in neck or upper back.

crossover experiment: Each subject receives the test prepara-
tion at least once, and every test preparation is administered
to every subject. At successive experimental sessions each
preparation is “crossed over” from one subject to another.

Cushing’s disease: Syndrome due to excess corticosteroid hor-
mone, causing weight gain, excess body hair, and high
blood pressure.

cutaneous: Pertaining to the skin.

cuticle: Waxy layer on the outer surface of plants.

cyanosis: Bluish discoloration of skin and mucous membranes
due to inadequate oxygenation.

cycad: Any of the order of gymnosperms intermediate between
ferns and palms, often with a thick, columnar trunk
crowned by large, tough, pinnate leaves.

cyme: Inflorescence in which the primary axis bears a single
central or terminal flower that blooms first.

cyst: An abnormal lump or swelling, filled with fluid or semi-
solid material, in any body organ or tissue.

cytokine: Protein produced by white blood cells that acts as a
chemical messenger between cells. CD8 (T-suppressor) cells
release a cytokine that appears to block HIV replication in in-
fected cells, at least until the advanced stage of HIV disease.

cytokinin: Plant hormone that promotes cell division.

cytomegalovirus: A virus in the herpes family that causes en-
largement of epithelial cells and mononucleosis-like disease.

cytotoxic: Toxic to all cells.

cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL): A lymphocyte that is able to
kill foreign cells that have been marked for destruction by
the immune system.

cytotoxin: Substance that has a toxic effect on certain cells, used
against some tumors.

debility: Weakness, lack of tone.

deciduous: Any plant that sheds all its leaves once each year.

decoction: An herbal preparation in which the plant material
(usually hard or woody) is boiled in water and reduced to
make a concentrated extract.

decongestant: Substance used to reduce nasal mucus produc-
tion and swelling.

deficiency disease: Any disease, such as beriberi, caused by nu-
tritional deficiency.

dehiscence: Splitting open of a wound.

dehydration: Deficiency or loss of water in body tissues marked
by thirst, nausea, and exhaustion.

delirium: Acute mental disorder due to organic brain disease,
causing hallucinations, disorientation, and extreme excitation.

dementia: Senility; loss of mental function.

demineralization: Loss of minerals from the bone.

demulcent: An herb rich in mucilage that soothes and protects
irritated or inflamed tissue.

deodorant: Corrects, masks, or removes unpleasant odors.

dependence: A somatic state that develops after chronic ad-
ministration of certain drugs; this state is characterized by
the necessity to continue administration of the drug in
order to avoid the appearance of uncomfortable or danger-
ous (withdrawal) symptoms.

depressant: Drug that lowers nervous or functional activity;
sedative.

depurative: Helps combat impurity in the blood and organs.

dermal: Pertaining to the skin.

dermatitis: Skin inflammation.

detumescence: Reduction or subsidence of swelling.

diabetes: Diabetes mellitus.

dialysis: A technique using sophisticated machinery to remove
waste products from the blood and excess fluid from the
body in the treatment of kidney failure.

diaphoretic: Promotes perspiration, enabling the skin to elimi-
nate waste from the body, thus helping the body ensure a
clean and harmonious inner environment.

diarrhea: Frequent bowel evacuation, especially of soft or liquid
feces.

diastole: Period of the cardiac cycle in which ventricles are not
contracting.

diastolic pressure: Minimum blood pressure during cardiac
cycle.

dicot: See dicotyledon.

dicotyledon: Angiosperm having two seed leaves or cotyledons;
dicot.

digestion: Process of breaking down large particles and high-
molecular-weight substances into small molecules.

digestive: Substance that promotes or aids the digestion of
food.

----- PAGE 635 -----
diphtheria: Acute, highly contagious bacterial infection of the
throat that can cause death from respiratory obstruction or
carditis.

disinfectant: Cleansing agent that destroys bacteria and other
microorganisms, used on surfaces and surgical tools.

disintegration time: The time required for a tablet to break up
into granules of specified size (or smaller), under carefully
specified test conditions.

dissolution time: The time required for a given amount (or
fraction) of drug to be released into solution from a solid
dosage form.

diuretic: Increases the production and elimination of urine.

diverticulum: Saclike out-pouching of the wall of the colon.

diverticulitis: Colonic diverticulosis with inflammation.

diverticulosis: Condition characterized by the existence of di-
verticular sacs at weak points in the walls of the alimentary
tract, especially the intestine.

dizziness: Feeling off balance, unstable, confused, as though
whirling in place.

dopamine: A catecholamine neurotransmitter, precursor of
epinephrine and norepinephrine.

dorsal: Pertaining to the back.

dormancy: Period of time in which growth ceases.

dosage form: The physical state in which a drug is dispensed
for use.

dose: The quantity of drug, or dosage form, administered to a
subject at a given time.

double-blind study: A way of controlling against experimental
bias by ensuring that neither the researcher nor the subject
knows when an active agent or a placebo is being used.

douche: Introduction of water and/or a cleansing agent into
the vagina with the aid of a bag with tubing and a nozzle
attached.

dressing: Protective or healing material applied externally to a
wound or a diseased body part.

dromo: Refers to speed.

dromotropic effect: A change in the amount of time it takes
the heart to complete one beat.

dropsy: Excess of fluid in the tissues.

drug: Substance that affects the structure or functional pro-
cesses of an organism, especially to prevent or treat diseases
ot relieve symptoms.

drupe: A fleshy fruit, with one or more seeds, each surrounded
by a stony layer.

dysentery: Infection of the intestinal tract that causes severe di-
arrhea mixed with blood and mucus.

dysfunction: Abnormal function.

dysmenorrhea: Painful, difficult menstruation.

dyspepsia: Digestive disorder with abdominal pain and gas after
eating, sometimes with nausea and vomiting; indigestion.

dysplasia: Any abnormality of growth.

dyspnea: Labored or difficult breathing; breathlessness.

dystrophy: Organ or muscle disorder caused by insufficient
nourishment or a hereditary disorder.

ecchymosis: Bluish black mark on skin from release of blood
into tissues, usually due to injury; black-and-blue mark.
eclampsia: Convuisions, especially due to toxemia during

pregnancy.

GLOSSARY @ 611

ectopic pregnancy: State in which a fertilized egg implants at a
site other than the uterus.

edema: Excessive accumulation of fluid in tissues; dropsy.

ED50: Median effective dose.

electrocardiogram (ECG): Machine that measures and
records the activity of the heart.

electroencephalogram (EEG): Machine that measures and
records brain waves.

electrolyte: Substance that ionizes in solution and conducts
electric current.

electuary: Medication mixed with honey.

elimination diet: A diet that eliminates allergic foods.

elimination half-life: The time it takes for the body to elimi-
nate or break down half of a dose of a pharmacologic agent.

elixir: Substance that contains alcohol or glycerin, used as solu-
tion for bitter or nauseating drugs.

elliptical: Shaped like an ellipse, or regular curve.

embolism: Obstruction of an artery by a lodged blood clot, fat,
ait, or foreign body carried by circulating blood.

embolus: Mass of matter that obstructs blood flow.

emesis: Vomiting; vomited matter,

emetic: Substance that induces vomiting.

emmenagogue: Stimulates menstrual flow and activity.

emollient: Soothes and softens external tissue.

empyema: Accumulation of pus in a body cavity, especially the
pleural cavity.

emulsification: Maintenance of lipid droplets in solution.

emulsify: The dispersement of large globules into smaller, uni-
formly distributed particles.

endemic: Disease that is constantly present in a particular re-
gion but generally under control.

endocarditis: Inflammation and damage to the heart cavity lin-
ing due to bacterial infection or rheumatic fever.

endocrine gland: Ductless organ that synthesizes hormones
and releases them directly into the bloodstream.

endocrine system: All ductless glands in the body.

endocrinology: Study of the endocrine glands and hormones.

endometrium: The mucous membrane lining the uterus.

endometriosis: A condition in which tissue similar to that
normally lining the uterus is found outside of the uterus,
usually the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and other pelvic
structures.

endorphin: Neurotransmitter that exhibits painkilling activity.

enervation: Weakness, lack of energy.

engorgement: Congestion of a part of tissues, or fullness (as in
the breasts).

enteric-coated: A way of coating a tablet or capsule to ensure
that it does not dissolve in the stomach and so can reach the
intestinal tract.

enuresis: Involuntary urination, especially at night, usually
functional in nature; bed-wetting.

enzyme: Complex protein that is produced by living cells and
catalyzes specific biochemical reactions.

eosinophil: A type of white blood cell, called a granulocyte, that
can digest microorganisms.

epidemiology: Study of causes and control of epidemics.

epilepsy: One of various brain disorders that cause recurrent,
sudden convulsive attacks.

----- PAGE 636 -----
612 @ GLOSSARY

epinephrine: Hormone released by the adrenal medulla that ele-
vates blood sugar and initiates the fight-or-flight response;
adrenaline.

epiphyte: Nonparasitic plant growing upon another plant for
support.

epistaxis: Bleeding from the nose.

erysipelas: A skin infection from streptococcus bacteria that
causes inflammation, swelling, and fever.

erythema: A superficial redness of the skin due to excess of
blood.

erythrocyte: A red blood cell whose primary function is to
carry oxygen to cells.

erythropoiesis: Formation of erythrocytes.

erythropoietin: Hormone secreted mainly by the kidneys that
stimulates erythrocyte production.

essential fatty acid (EFA): A fatty acid that the body cannot
manufacture, e.g. linoleic and linolenic acids.

essential oil: A volatile oil obtained from the leaves, stem,
flower, or other part of plants, usually carrying the odor
characteristic of the plant.

estrogen: Any of several steroid hormones produced chiefly by
the ovaries and responsible for promoting estrus and the
development and maintenance of female secondary sex
characteristics.

etiology: Science of causes and origins of diseases.

evergreen: Plant that maintains functional green foliage
throughout year.

excretion: The elimination of waste products from a cell, tissue,
or the entire body.

exfoliant: A product or ingredient whose purpose is to remove
unwanted tissue or waste products from the skin and other
body surfaces.

exfoliate: To shed cells from the epithelium layer of the skin or
mucosa.

exocrine gland: A gland that secretes through a duct.

exophthalmic goiter: Enlargement of the thyroid gland ac-
companied by protrusion of the eyeballs from their orbits.

expectorant: Soothes bronchial spasm and loosens mucous se-
cretions, helping dry, irritating coughs.

extracellular: The space outside the cell, composed of fluid.

exudate: Escaping fluid or semifluid material that oozes from a
space that may contain serum, pus, and cellular debris.

eyewash: Medicinal solution that soothes eyes.

fatty acid: Organic compound whose carbon chain ends in a
carboxyl group.

febrifuge: Substance that relieves or reduces fever.

feces: Digestive waste products.

feedback inhibition: Mechanism that maintains constant secre-
tion of a product by exerting inhibitory control.

fern: Nonflowering, vascular plant having roots, stems, and
fronds and reproducing by spores instead of seeds.

fever: Rise in body temperature above normal 98.6 degrees.

fibrillation: Rapid, uncontrolled irregular twitching of heart
muscle.

fibroblastic: Pertaining to fibroblasts, or connective tissue
cells.

fibrocystic changes: Formation of benign cysts of various sizes
in the breast.

fibrosis: Thickening and scarring of connective tissue due to in-
jury or inflammation.

first-degree burn: Reddening of the outer layer of skin.

first pass effect: The biotransformation and/or excretion of a
drug by hepatic, including biliary, mechanisms following
absorption of the drug from the gastrointestinal tract, be-
fore the drug gains access to the systemic circulation.

fissure: Crack in membrane lining.

fistula: Abnormal passage that leads from an abscess or cavity
to the skin or to another abscess or cavity, caused by dis-
ease or injury.

fixative: A material that slows down the rate of evaporation of
the more volatile components in a perfume composition.

fixed oil: A name given to vegetable oils obtained from plants
that, in contradistinction to essential oils, are fatty, dense,
and nonvolatile, such as olive and sweet almond oils.

flatulence: Expulsion of intestinal gas through mouth by belch-
ing or through anus by passing flatus.

flatus: Intestinal gas.

flavonoid: Plant pigment that exerts a wide variety of physio-
logical effects in the human body.

floret: Small flower; one of a number of individual flowers
comprising the head of a composite plant.

flowering plant: Any angiosperm that produces flowers, fruit,
and seeds in an enclosed ovary.

foliage: Leaves of plant or tree.

follicle: Saclike structure that forms inside an ovary when an
egg is produced.

free radical: Highly reactive molecule that can bind to and de-
stroy cellular compounds,

frond: Fern or palm foliage.

fructose: Yellowish to white, crystalline, water-soluble sugar
found in many fruits.

fruit: Mature ovary of a flowering plant, sometimes edible.

functional cyst: A benign cyst that forms on an ovary and usu-
ally resolves on its own without treatment.

fungicidal: Prevents and combats fungal infection.

fungus: Unicellular or filamentous organism, formerly classi-
fied with plants.

furuncle: Boil.

galactagogue: Increases secretion of milk.

gallstone: Hard mass of bile pigments, cholesterol, and calcium
salts in the gallbladder.

gamma globulin: The part of blood serum that contains anti-
bodies, used in temporary prevention of infectious diseases.

gargle: Antiseptic, often medicated, liquid used to rinse mouth
and throat; mouthwash.

gastrin: Digestive system hormone that stimulates hydrochloric
acid release by stomach and secretion of digestive enzyme
by pancreas.

genus: Category of closely related species ranking below family
and above species.

germicidal: Destroys germs or microorganisms such as bacteria.

germinate: Sprout and start to grow from spore or seed.

gingivitis: Inflammation of gums, sometimes with bleeding.

glaucous: Covered with a fine white, often waxy film that rubs
off.

glioma: Cancer of nerve tissue.

----- PAGE 637 -----
glomerular filtration rate (GFR): Milliliters of plasma per
minute filtered through the kidney.

glomerulonephritis: Potentially fatal streptococcal infection of
the kidney.

glucagon: Pancreatic hormone that increases blood glucose
levels.

glucocorticoid: Adrenal cortex hormone that affects salt and
water metabolism and stimulates conversion of noncarbo-
hydrates to carbohydrates.

glucose: A monosaccharide that is found in the blood and is one
of the body’s primary energy sources.

glutamic acid: An amino acid that may be a brain neurotrans-
mitter.

gluten: One of the proteins in wheat and certain other grains
that gives dough its tough, elastic character.

glycerin: See glycerol.

glycerol: Syrupy liquid prepared by hydrolysis of fats and oils
for use as a skin lotion.

glycogen: White polysaccharide sugar, derived from glucose, that
is the principal form in which carbohydrate is stored in tissue.

glycoprotein: Carbohydrate-protein complex.

glycoside: Plant chemical that consists of molecules made up of
two sections, one of which is a sugar.

glytosuria: Excretion of excess sugar in urine, as in diabetes.

goblet cell: A goblet-shaped cell that secretes mucus.

goiter: Swollen neck due to an enlarged thyroid gland.

gonadotropin: A hormone that promotes gonad (sex gland)
growth and function.

granulocyte: A cell type of the immune system filled with gran-
ules of toxic chemicals that enable it to digest micro-
organisms. Basophils, neutrophils, and eosonophils are ex-
amples of granulocytes.

granuloma: Nodule of connective tissue and capillaries associ-
ated with tuberculosis, syphilis, or nonorganic foreign
bodies.

ground substance: The thick, gel-like material in which the
cells, fibers, and blood capillaries of cartilage, bone, and
connective tissue are embedded.

gum: A class of carbohydrates that swell in the presence of
water and increase the thickness of water-based products.

gymnosperm: Member of the division of seed plants having
ovules on open scales, especially cones.

half-life: The time required for the decay of half a sample of a
radioactive substance; may also apply to pharinacologic
agents.

hallucinogenic: Causes visions or delusions.

hay fever: Common, usually seasonal allergy to plant pollen
that causes sneezing, runny nose, and watery eyes.

HDL: High-density lipoprotein.

headache: Pain within the skull, commonly due to stress or fa-
tigue; cephalalgia.

heart failure: Inadequate pumping of the heart ventricles due
to coronary thrombosis, hypertension, or arrhythmia; con-
gestive heart failure.

heart murmur: Blowing or swishing noise produced by blood
passing through a defective heart valve.

heartburn: Pain rising from abdomen to throat, often accom-
panied by bitter fluid in the mouth; pyrosis.

heartwood: The central portion of a tree trunk.

Giossary @. 613

helper T cell: White blood cell that helps in the immune re-
sponse.

hematocrit: The percentage of packed red blood cells in a given
volume of blood. Normal ranges: women 37-43%, men
43-49%,

hematuria: Blood in the urine.

hemorrhage: Outflow of blood from a ruptured blood vessel,
especially internal bleeding.

hemorrhoid: An enlarged vein in the anus wall, especially due
to prolonged constipation or diarrhea, characterized by fis-
sure, painful swelling, and bleeding; piles.

hemostatic: A substance that checks bleeding.

heparin: Natural anticoagulant produced by liver cells as a
polysaccharide.

hepatic: Pertaining to the liver.

hepatitis: Inflammation of the liver, due to a virus transmitted
by food or drink (infectious hepatitis), blood on a needle, or
transfusion (serum hepatitis), causing fever and jaundice.

hepatomegaly: Enlargement of the liver.

herbaceous: Nonwoody.

hernia: Protrusion of tissue or an organ outside the cavity it
normally occupies, especially in the lower abdomen, due to
physical strain or coughing.

herniated disk: Slipped disk.

Herpes: Herpes simplex; small viral blisters on the skin.

Herpes simplex: Virus in the herpes family; non-venereal blis-
ters on mucous membranes that can cause conjunctivitis,
vaginal inflammation, or cold sores; herpes.

Herpes zoster: Virus in the herpes family characterized by
vesicles, often with severe pain along distribution of nerve;
shingles.

hiccup: Characteristic sound made by abrupt involuntary low-
ering of the diaphragm and closing of the upper end of the
trachea.

high-density lipoprotein (HDL): Lipid-protein aggregate
with a low proportion of lipid or cholesterol that removes
cholesterol from arteries.

histamine: Amine derived from the amino acid histidine that is
released in allergic reaction, causing dilation of the blood
vessels.

HIV: Human immunodeficiency virus.

homeostasis: Maintenance of constant internal environment.

hormone: A secretion of an endocrine gland that controls and
regulates functions in other parts of the body.

humoral: Immunity defense against disease by antibodies in
body fluids.

hybrid: A plant originating by fertilization of one species or
subspecies by another.

hydrocarbon: Compound containing only hydrogen and carbon.

hydrocele: Accumulation of watery fluid, especially about the
testis.

hydrochloric acid: Acid secreted by stomach during digestion.

hyperglycemia: High blood sugar level.

hypergonadotropic: Increased production of gonad-stimulat-
ing hormone from the anterior pituitary gland.

hyperlipidemic: Elevation of cholesterol and triglycerides in
the blood.

hyperpigmentation: Abnormally increased pigmentation.

hypersecretion: Excessive secretion.

hypersensitivity: Allergic reaction.

----- PAGE 638 -----
614 @ GLOSSARY

hypertension: High blood pressure.

hypertensive: A substance that causes a rise in blood pressure.

hyperthermia: Exceptionally high body temperature of 105 de-
grees F or above; fever induced as treatment.

hyperthyroidism: Overactivity of the thyroid gland that causes
rapid heartbeat, sweating, tremors, weight loss, and anxiety.

hypertrophy: Increase in size of tissue or organ due to enlarge-
ment of cells.

hyperventilation: Abnormally rapid breathing that lowers car-
bon dioxide concentration in the blood.

hypnotic: A drug that produces a state clinically identical to
sleep by means of action in the central nervous system.

hypochlorhydria: Insufficient gastric acid output.

hypochondria: Obsession with real and imagined physical
ailments.

hypoglycemia: Low blood sugar.

hypoglycemic: Plant remedy that lowers abnormally elevated
blood sugar.

hypogonadism: Below normal gonad (sex gland) function.

hypokalemia: Low potassium levels in the blood.

hypotension: Low blood pressure.

hypotensive: Plant remedy that lowers abnormally elevated
blood pressure.

hypothalamus: An area of the forebrain that regulates pituitary
gland secretion, among many other functions.

hypothyroidism: Subnormal thyroid gland activity that can
lead to cretinism if present at birth.

hypoxia: An inadequate supply of oxygen.

iatrogenic: Meaning literally “physician produced,” the term
can be applied to any medical condition, disease, or other
adverse occurrence that results from medical treatment.

idiopathic: Of unknown cause.

Ig: See immunoglobulin.

immune response: Body's defense reaction through dual
modes of antibody and cellular response.

immunity: Ability of the body to recognize and neutralize for-
eign matter, either natural or acquired.

immunoglobulin (Ig): Any of five classes of antibodies: Igg,
Igm, Iga, and Igf.

immunodeficiency: A condition resulting from a defective im-
mune system.

immunomodulator: Substance hoped to strengthen the im-
mune system and help the body fight off opportunistic in-
fections or other diseases. Not necessarily used to stimulate
the immune system.

immunostimulant: A plant that stimulates some aspect of im-
mune system functioning.

impairment: Damage to or weakening of body part or function.

in vitro: Latin for “in glass.” An artificial environment created
outside a living organism, used to study a disease or process.

in vivo: Latin for “in life.” Study conducted within a living
organism—e.g., animal or human study,

inborn immunity: Congenital resistance to a specific disease.

incidence: The number of new cases of a disease that occur dur-
ing a given period (usually years) in a defined population.

inclusion/exclusion criteria: The medical or other reasons
why a person may or may not be allowed to enter a clinical
trial.

incontinence: Involuntary passage or leakage of urine.

incubation period: Time between entry of disease organisms
into the body and onset of disease symptoms.

infarction: Death of tissue due to oxygen deprivation.

infestation: Attack on body by parasitic microorganism.

inflorescence: Flowering structure above the last stem leaves
(including bracts and flowers).

infusion: An herbal remedy prepared by steeping the plant ma-
terial in water.

inorganic: In chemistry, the term refers to compounds that do
not contain carbon.

inotropic effect: Jno- is a prefix that refers to muscle. Inotropic
effects are ones that change the strength of contraction of
the heart muscle.

insomnia: Inability to fall asleep or to remain asleep.

insulin: Pancreatic hormone that regulates blood sugar level.

interferon: Substance produced by infected cells that inhibits
specific viral growth.

interleukin: A natural blood substance that helps immune sys-
tem cells to communicate.

intestinal malabsorption: A condition in which the nutrients
found in food are not absorbed by the body.

intrinsic activity: The property of a drug that determines
the amount of biological effect produced per unit of drug-
receptor complex formed.

investigational new drug (IND): A drug allowed by the FDA
to be used in clinical trials but not approved for commer-
cial marketing.

irreversible: Impossible to halt or reverse by treatment.

irritable bowel syndrome: Recurrent chronic abdominal pain
with constipation and/or diatrhea caused by abnormal con-
tractions of colon muscles; spastic colon.

irritant: A substance that produces redness, itching, swelling, or
blisters on the skin.

ischemia: Reduced blood supply to an organ or tissue.

jaundice: A condition caused by elevation of bilirubin in the
body and characterized by yellowing of the skin.

keratin: An insoluble protein found in hair, skin, and nails.

kidney stone: Hard, pebblelike mass in kidney that causes pain
and blood in urine; nephrolithiasis; renal calculus.

killer T cells: A class of immune system cells that function to
kill cancer- and virus-infected cells; see aso natural killer cells.

kinin: Vasodilatory polypeptide.

laceration: Tear in flesh, especially with irregular edges.

lactase: An enzyme that breaks down lactose into the monosac-
charides glucose and galactose.

lactose: One of the sugars present in milk. It is a disaccharide.

lanceolate: Lance-shaped, oval, and pointed at both ends (usu-
ally a leaf shape).

laparoscopy: A surgical procedure in which a slender, light-
transmitting telescope is used to view the pelvic organs.

larvicidal: An agent that prevents and kills larvae.

laryngitis: Inflammation of the larynx and vocal cords.

latency: The period when an organism is in the body but is not
producing any ill effects.

laxative: Stimulating bowel movements.

----- PAGE 639 -----
LDL: See low-density lipoprotein.

lecithin: Phospholipid in nerve tissue and blood.

legume: A fruit consisting of one carpel, opening on one side,
such as a pea.

lenticel: Spongy area of bark on a woody plant that allows ex-
change of gases between the stem and the atmosphere.

lesion: Any localized, abnormal change in tissue formation.

lethargy: A feeling of tiredness, drowsiness, or lack of energy.

leukocyte: White biood cell.

leucocytosis: An increase in the number of white blood cells
above the normal limit.

leucoplakia: A precancerous lesion usually seen in the mouth
that is characterized by a white patch.

leukemia: Overproduction of abnormal white blood cells by
bone marrow and other blood-forming organs.

leukocytosis: Abnormal level in number of white blood cells,
usually due to infection.

leukopenia: Reduction in number of white blood cells to below
normal level.

leukotriene: Inflammatory compound produced when oxygen
interacts with polyunsaturated fatty acids.

lichen: Fungus in symbiotic union with an alga.

lignin: Organic substance that serves as a binder for cellulose
fibers in wood.

ligulet: A narrow projection from the top of a leaf sheath in
grasses.

lipase: A fat-splitting enzyme.

lipid: A fat, phospholipid, steroid, or prostaglandin.

lipolytic: Causing lipolysis, the chemical disintegration or split-
ting of fats.

lipoprotein: A molecule combining protein and lipid.

lipotropic: Promoting the flow of lipids to and from the liver.

liverwort: Any of various small, flat bryophytes, usually on logs,
rocks, or soil in moist areas.

lotion: An emollient emulsion, usually of the water-in-oil type.

low-density lipoprotein (LDL): Protein-lipid aggregate that is
a major cholesterol carrier in plasma.

lubricant: A greasy substance applied to reduce friction on a
body surface.

lumen: Cavity within a tubular structure.

lumpectomy: Surgery to remove only the abnormal breast.

lycopod: See club moss.

lymph: Colorless fluid derived from blood and carried in special
ducts of lymphatic vessels.

lymphadenopathy: Swollen, firm, and possibly tender lymph
glands.

lymphatic: Pertaining to the lymph system.

lymphocyte: A type of white blood cell found primarily in
lymph nodes.

lymphoid tissue: Connective tissue containing lymphocytes.

lymphoma: A malignant tumor of lymph nodes that is not
Hodgkin’s disease.

macerate: Soak until soft.

macrophage: A large immune system cell that roams through
the blood looking for foreign matter.

macule: Discoloration or thickening of skin in contrast to the
surrounding area.

malabsorption: Impaired absorption of nutrients.

GLossaRY -@ 615

malaise: General sense of being unwell, often accompanied by
physical discomfort and weakness.

malignant: A term used to describe a condition that tends to
worsen and eventually causes death.

malnutrition: Insufficient food consumption to satisfy bodily
needs over a prolonged period.

mammogram: An X-ray of the breast.

manipulation: As a therapy, the skillful use of the hands to
move a part of the body or a specific joint or muscle.

mast cell: A cell found in many tissues of the body that con-
tributes greatly to allergic and inflammatory processes by
secreting histamine and other inflammatory chemicals.

mastectomy: Surgical removal of the breast.

mastitis: Inflammation of breasts due to bacterial infection.

measles: Highly infectious viral epidemic disease, mainly in
children, that causes high fever and elevated pink rash;
rubeola.

melanoma: Malignant tumor of melanin-forming cells.

memory cells: T cells that have been exposed to specific anti-
gens and are able thereafter to proliferate upon repeat ex-
posure to the same antigens.

menstruation: The discharge of blood and tissue from the
uterus that occurs when an egg is not fertilized.

metabolic rate: Level of energy expenditure.

metabolism: A collective term for all the chemical processes
that take place in the body.

metabolite: A product of a chemical reaction.

metastasis: Spread of a malignant tumor far from its site of ori-
gin, usually through the vascular system.

microflora: The microbial inhabitants of a particular region—
e.g., the colon.

microorganism: Any living organism too small to be viewed by
the unaided eye, including bacteria, viruses, protists, and
some algae and fungi.

migraine: Recurrent, intense headache, often accompanied by
blurred vision and vomiting, caused by contraction and di-
lation of arteries in the brain.

mineralocorticoid steroid: A salt-retaining hormone of the
adrenal cortex.

miscible: The ability of a gas or liquid to mix uniformly with
another gas or liquid.

mitogenic: An agent that effects cell division.

mold: Multicellular filamentous fungus.

mole: Flat or raised area of brown pigment in the skin.

monoclonal: Genetically engineered antibodies specific for one
particular antigen,

monocotyledon: An angiosperm having only one seed leaf;
cotyledon.

monosaccharide: A simple one-unit sugar such as fructose or
glucose.

moss: Any of various small bryophytes without true stems re-
producing by spores and growing in velvety clusters in
moist areas on rocks, trees, and the ground.

motor: Designating muscular activity stimulated by impulses
from the central nervous system.

mouthwash: Gargle.

moxa: A dried herb (usually mugwort) burnt on or above the
skin to stimulate an acupuncture point or to serve as a
counterirritant.

----- PAGE 640 -----
61€ @ GLOSSARY

mucilage: A substance containing gelatinous constituents that
are demulcent.

mucin: A protein that forms mucus when mixed with water.

mucolytic: Dissolving or breaking down mucus.

mucosa: See mucous membrane.

mucous membrane: Mucus-secreting membrane lining body
cavities and canals connecting with external air.

mucus: Viscid watery lubricating solution secreted by mucous
membranes.

muscle relaxer: Depressant or tranquilizer that acts to relieve
tension in muscles.

mutagen: External agent that increases mutation rate in cells.

myalgia: Pain in one or more muscles.

mycelium: Mass of threadlike tubes forming the vegetative
parts of a fungus.

mycorrhiza: Close symbiosis between the mycelia of certain
fungi and the root cells of some vascular plants.

mycosis: Fungus infection.

mycotoxin: Toxin from yeasts and fungi.

myelin sheath: A white fatty substance that surrounds nerve
cells and aids in nerve impulse transmission.

myeloma: Malignancy of bone marrow.

myelosuppression: The suppression of bone marrow activity,
which can cause anemia.

narcotic: A substance that induces sleep; intoxicating or poi-
sonous in large doses.

natural immunity: Inborn lack of susceptibility to a specific
disease.

natural killer cells (NK cells): Large immune system cells that
attack and destroy infected and cancer-causing cells.

naturopathy; Treatment of disease that employs no surgery or
synthetic drugs.

nausea: Feeling that one is about to vomit.

necrosis: Death of cells in an organ or tissue.

nectary: Organ of a plant that secretes nectar.

neoplasia: Tumor formation, characterized by a progressive,
abnormal replication of cells.

neoplasm: New tumor caused by uncontrolled reproduction of
abnormal cells.

nephritis: Inflammation of the kidney; Bright’s disease.

nephrotoxic: Poisonous to the kidneys.

nervine: Relaxants that ease anxiety and tension by soothing
both body and mind.

neuralgia: A stabbing pain along a nerve pathway.

neurasthenia: Nervous exhaustion.

neuritis: Inflammation of nerves; neuropathy.

neuron: Functional unit of a nerve, including cell body, axon,
and dendrites.

neuropathy: Any abnormal, degenerative or inflammatory state
of the peripheral nervous system.

neurotransmitter: A substance that modifies or transmits nerve
impulses.

neutropenia: A low number of neutrophils in the blood.

nitric oxide (NO): A potent vasodilator released by endothelial
cells to signal smooth muscle cells to relax.

NK cells: See Natural killer cells,

nocturia: The disturbance of a person’s sleep at night by the
need to pags urine.

nonvascular: Plant bryophyte nut dry, single-seeded fruit of
various trees and shrubs consisting of kernel enclosed in
hard or tough shell.

obovate: Refers to leaf shape; oval, but broader toward the apex.

occlusion: Closing or obstruction of a hollow organ or body part.

oedema: See edema.

oestrogen: See estrogen.

off label: A drug prescribed for conditions other than those in-
dicated on the label.

ointment: Substance used to soothe or heal skin; salve; unguent.

oleo gum resin: A natural exudation from trees and plants that
consists mainly of essential oil, gum, and resin.

oleoresin: A natural resinous exudation from plants; an aro-
matic liquid preparation extracted from botanical matter
using solvents.

olfaction: The sense of smell.

open trial: A drug trial is “open” when doctors and participants
know which drug is being administered. See a/so double-
blind study.

opiate: Derivative of opium that depresses the central nervous
system, relieves pain, and induces sleep.

opportunistic: Designating disease or infection occurring only
under certain conditions, as when the immune system is
impaired.

organ: Collection of tissues joined in a structural unit to serve a
common function.

organic disorder: Disorder associated with physiological
changes in the structure of an organ or tissue.

organic: In the chemical sense, refers to all compounds con-
taining carbon.

osteoarthritis: Joint cartilage disease that causes pain and im-
paired joint function and occurs in later life, due to overuse
of a joint or as a complication of rheumatoid arthritis.

osteopathy: Treatment of disease by manipulation and massage
of the musculoskeletal system.

osteoporosis: Loss of bony matrix that causes brittle bones due
to injury, infection, or old age.

OTC (over the counter): Medication available without a doc-
tor’s prescription.

ovate: Egg-shaped.

ovulation: The release of an egg from one of the ovaries.

oxytocic: An agent that stimulates labor contractions.

pack: Folded, moistened, often medicated pad of cotton or
cloth applied to the body or inserted into a cavity.

palisade cell: Chloroplast-containing cell just below the surface
ofa leaf.

palliative: Medicine that relieves symptoms but does not cure
disease.

palmate: With three or more leaflets, nerves, or lobes radiating
from a central point.

palpitation: Abnormally rapid or violent heartbeat, especially
due to fear, exertion, neurosis, or arrhythmia.

panacea: A cure-all.

pandemic: Epidemic disease that spreads to different countries
over a large region.

panicle: Loose, diversely branching flower clusters.

pappus: The calyx in a composite flower having feathery hairs,
scales, or bristles.

----- PAGE 641 -----
Herps BY LATIN AND COMMON NaMES .@ 633

COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL
Guaiacum Guaiacum officinale Lemon Citrus limon
Guarana Paullinia cupana Lemon balm Melissa officinalis
Guggul Commiphora mukul Lemongrass Cymbopogon citratus
Gum arabic Acacia senegal Lemon verbena Aloysia triphylla
Gumweed Grindelia camporum, G. squarrosa Lesser celandine Ranunculus ficaria
Gutta-percha Palaquium gutta Licorice Glycyrrhiza glabra
Life everlasting Antennaria dioica
Hawthorn Crataegus laevigata, C. monogyna Life root Packera aurea
Heartsease Viola tricolor Lily ofthe valley Convallaria majalis
Hedge mustard Sisymbrium officinale Lime Citrus aurantifolia
Hemlock, poison Conium maculatum Linden Tika cordata, T. europaea,
Hemp agrimony Eupatorium cannabinum T. platyphyllos
Hemp, Indian Apocynum cannabinum Lobelia Lobelia inflata
Henbane Hyoscyamus niger Lomatium Lomatium dissectum
Henna Lawsonia inermis Loosestrife, purple Lythrum salicaria
Holly Tex aquifolium Lucerne Medicago sativa
Honeysuckle Lonicera spp. Lungwort Pulmonaria officinalis
Hops Humulus lupulus
Horehound Marrubium vulgare Ma huang Ephedra sinica
Horse chestnut Aesculus bippocastanum Madagascar periwinkle Catharanthus roseus
Horsemint Monarda punctata Madonna lily Lilium candidum
Horseradish Armoracia rusticana Magnolia Magnolia officinalis
Horsetail Equisetum arvense Maidenhair fern Adiantum capillus-veneris
Houndstongue Cynoglossum officinale Male fern Dryopteris filix-mas
Houseleek. Sempervivum tectorum Mallow Malva sylvestris
Hydrangea Hydrangea arborescens Mandrake, American Podophyllum peltatum
Hyssop Hyssopus officinalis Manna Fraxinus ornus
Marigold Calendula officinalis
celand moss Cetraria islandica Marijuana Cannabis sativa
pecac, American Euphorbia ipecacuanha Marjoram Origanum majorana
Ipecacuanha Cephaelis ipecacuanha Marshmallow Althaea officinalis
rish moss Chondrus crispus Mastic Pistacia lentiscus
ly Hedera helix Maté Tlex paraguariensis
Mayapple Podophyllum peltatum
Jaborandi Pilocarpus jaborandi Mayweed Anthemis cotula
Jacob’s ladder Polemonium caeruleum Meadowsweet Filipendula ulmaria
Jalap Ipomoea purga Mexican scammony root Ipomoea orizabensis
Jamaica dogwood Piscidia erythrina Mezereon Daphne mezereum
Jambul Syzygium cumini Milk thistle Silybum marianum
Jasmine Jasminum grandiflorum Milkweed Asclepias syriaca
Jequerity Abrus precatorius Mistletoe Viscum album
Jewelweed Impatiens capensis Monkshood Aconitum napellus
Jimsonweed Datura stramonium Motherwort Leonurus cardiaca
Joe pye Eupatorium purpureum Mountain ash Sorbus aucuparia
Jujube Ziziphus juyuba Mountain grape Mabonia aquifolium
Juniper Juniperus communis Mouse ear Hieracium pilosella
Mugwort Artemisia vulgaris
Kava kava Piper methysticum Muira puama Liriosma ovata
Kinnikinnick Arctostaphylos uva-ursi Mulberry Morus alba
Knapweed, black Centaurea nigra Mullein Verbascum thapsus
Kola Cola vera Muskseed Abelmoschus moschatus

Kudzu

Labrador tea
Lady’s bedstraw
Lady’s mantle
Lady’s slipper
Larkspur
Laurel
Lavender

Pueraria montana vat. lobata

Ledum groenlandicum
Galium verum
Alchemilla vulgaris
Cypripedium calceolus
Consolida regalis
Laurus nobilis
Lavandula spp.

Mustard, black
Mustard, white
Myrrh

Myrtle
Nasturtium

Neem

Nettle

Brassica nigra

Sinapsis alba

Commiphora molnol,
C. myrrha

Myrtus communis

Tropaeolum majus
Azadiracta indica
Urtica dioica

----- PAGE 642 -----
634 <@ HERBS BY LATIN AND COMMON NAMES

COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL
Night-blooming cereus Selenicereus grandiflorus Quaking aspen Populus tremuloides
Nutmeg Myristica fragrans Quassia Quassia amara
Nux vomica Strychnos nux-vomica Queen’s delight Stillingia sylvatica
Quince Cydonia oblonga
Oak Quercus robur, Q. alba Quinine Cinchona spp.
Oats, oatstraw Avena sativa
Olive Olea europaea Ragwort Senecio jacobaea
Onion Allium cepa Raspberry Rubus idaeus
Opium poppy Papaver somniferum Red clover Trifolium pratense
Orange, bitter Citrus aurantium vat. amara Red maple Acer rubrum
Orange, sweet Citrus sinensis Red poppy Papaver rhoeas
Oregano Origanum vulgare Red root Ceanothus americanus
Oregon grape Mahonia aquifolium Rehmannia Rebmannia glutinosa
Orris Iris germanica Reishi Ganoderma lucidum
Osha Ligusticum porteri Restharrow Ononsis spinosa
Rhatany Krameria triandra
Pacific yew Taxus brevifolia Rhubarb, Chinese Rheum officinale, R. palmatuin
Papaya Carica papaya Rice Oryza sativa
Paraguay tea Ilex paraguariensis Rosemary Rosmarinus officinalis
Parsley Petroselinum crispum Rubber Hevea spp.
Partridgeberry Mitchella repens Rue Ruta graveolens
Pasqueflower Pulsatilla vulgaris Rupturewort Herniaria glabra
Passionflower Passiflora incarnata
Patchouli Pogostemon cablin Safflower Carthamus tinctorius
Pau d’arco Tabebuia avellanedae Saffron Crocus sativus
Peach Prunus persica Sage, garden Salvia officinalis
Peanut Arachis hypogaea Sage, red Salvia officinalis var. rubia
Pellitory of the wall Parietaria officinalis Sandalwood Santalum album
Pennyroyal Mentha pulegium Sanicle Sanicula europaea
Pennyroyal, American Hedeoma pulegioides Sarsaparilla Smilax spp. 7
Peony Paeonia officinalis Sassafras Sassafras albidum
Pepper, black Piper nigrum Savin Juniperus sabina

Peppermint
Periwinkle

* Persimmon, American
Peru balsam

Peyote
Pill-bearing spurge
Pink root
Pitcher plant
Plantain

Pleurisy root
Plum

Poison hemlock
Poke

Polypody root
Pomegranate
Poplar, white
Prickly ash
Primrose
Psyllium
Pumpkin
Purging buckthorn
Purple loosestrife
Pussytoes
Pygeum
Pyrethrum

Mentha x piperita
Vinca major, V. minor
Diospyros virginiana
Myroxylon balsamum
var. pereirae
Lophophora williamsii
Euphorbia pilulifera
Spigelia marilandica
Sarracenia purpurea
Plantago major
Asclepias tuberosa
Prunus domestica
Conium maculatum
Phytolacca americana
Polypodium virginianum
Punica granatum
Populus alba
Zanthoxylum americanum
Primula vulgaris
Plantago ovata
Cucurbita pepo
Rhamnus cathartica
Lythrum salicaria
Antennaria dioica
Prunus africana
Chrysanthemum cinerariifolium

Savory, summer
Savory, winter
Saw palmetto
Scammony
Scarlet pimpernel
Schizandra
Scurvygrass

Sea holly
Self-heal

Senna

Sesame

Sheep sorrel
Shepherd’s purse
Shiitake
Siberian ginseng
Silverweed
Skullcap

Skunk cabbage
Slippery elm
Smartweed
Smooth sumac
Snakeroot, Seneca
Sneezeweed
Soap bark
Soapwort
Solomon’s seal

Satureja hortensis
Satureja montana
Serenoa repens
Convolvulus scammonia
Anagallis arvensis
Schisandra chinensis
Cochlearia officinalis
Eryngium maritimum
Prunella vulgaris
Senna alexandrina
Sesamum orientale
Rumex acetosella
Capsella bursa-pastoris
Lentinus edodes
Eleutherococeus senticosus
Potentilla anserina
Scutellaria lateriflora
Symplocarpus foetidus
Ubnus rubra
Polygonum hydropiper
Rhus glabra
Polygala senega
Achillea ptarmica
Quillaja saponaria
Saponaria officinalis
Polygonatum biflorum,
P. multiflorum

----- PAGE 643 -----
Heras By LATIN AND COMMON NaMES «> = 635

COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL COMMON NAME LATIN BINOMIAL
Sorrel Rumex acetosa Usnea Usnea spp.
Southernwood Artemisia abrotanum

Soy Glycine max Valerian Valeriana officinalis
Spearmint Mentha spicata Vanilla Vanilla planifolia
Speedwell Veronica officinalis Vervain Verbena officinalis
Spikenard, American Aralia racemosa Vetiver Vetiveria zizantoides
Squill Urginea maritima Virginia snakeroot Aristolochia serpentaria
St. John’s wort Hypericum perforatum Vitex Vites agnus-castus
Star anise Iicium verum

Stavesacre Delphinium staphisagria Wahoo Euonymus atropurpureus
Stinking iris Tris foetidissima Walnut, English Juglans regia
Stoneroot Collinsonia canadensis Watercress Rorippa nasturtium-aquaticum
Storax Liquidambar orientalis Water mint Mentha aquatica
Strawberry Fragaria vesca Wheat Triticum aestivum
Strychnine tree Strychnos nux-vomica White bryony Bryonia alba
Sugarcane Saccharum officinarum White hellebore Veratrum album
Sundew Drosera rotundifolia White water lily Nymphaea odorata
Sunflower Helianthus annuus Wild cherry Prunus serotina

Sweet annie Artemisia annua Wild cucumber Ecballium elaterium
Sweet cicely Myrrhis odorata Wild ginger Asarum canadense
Sweet flag Acorus calamus Wild indigo Baptisia tinctoria
Sweetgale Mpyrica gale Wild lettuce Lactuca virosa

Sweet sumac
Sweet vernalgrass
Sweet violet

Tamarack
Tamarin¢e
Tansy
Tapioca
Tarragon
Tea

Tea tree
Thorn apple
Thuja
Thyme
Tobacco
Tolu balsam

Tonka bean
Tragacanth

Tree of heaven
True unicorn root
Tuliptree

Turkey corn
Turmeric

Rhus aromatica
Anthoxanthum odoratum
Viola odorata

Larix laricina
Tamarindus indica
Tanacetum vulgare
Manihot esculenta
Artemisia dracunculus
Camellia sinensis
Melaleuca alternifolia
Datura stramonium
Thuja occidentalis
Thymus vulgaris
Nicotiana tabacum
Myroxylon balsamum
var. balsamum
Dipteryx odorata
Astragalus gummifer
Ailanthus altissima
Aletris farinosa
Liviodendron tulipifera
Dicentra canadensis
Curcuma longa

Wild yam
Willow
Wintergreen
Witch hazel
Wood betony
Woodruff, sweet
Wood sorrel
‘Wormseed
Wormwood
Woundwort

Yarrow

Yellow dock
Yellow flag
Yellow jasmine
Yellow root
Yerba mansa
Yerba santa
Yew, English
Yew, Pacific
Yohimbe

Zedoary

Dioscorea villosa

Salix alba, S. cinereas
Gaultheria procumbens
Hamamelis virginiana
Stachys betonica, S. officinalis
Galium odoratum

Oxalis acetosella
Chenopodium ambrosioides
Artemisia absinthium
Stachys palustris

Achillea milléfolium
Rumex crispus

Tris pseudacorus
Gelsemium sempervirens
Xanthorhiza apiifolia
Anemopsis californica
Ertodictyon californicum
Taxus baccata

Taxus brevifolia
Pausinystalia yohimbe

Curcuma zedoaria

----- PAGE 644 -----
Appendix 4

oa

PHARMACY TERMS

LATIN TERM COMMON TRANSLATION LATIN TERM
ABBREVIATION
ad ad to, up to
ad libitum ad lib. at pleasure emulsum
adde add add (thou) et
agita agit shake, stir ex modo
alternis boris alt. h. every other hour ‘prescripto
ana a.a, or aa ofeach
ante a. before fac, fiat, fiant
ante cibum a.c. before food, before meals
ante meridien am. morning flos
aqua aq. water folium
aqua ad aq. ad. water up to
aqua dist. aq. dest; distilled water
auris aur.; a ear granum
auris dexter ad. right ear guttae
auris laevus a.l. left ear
auris sinister as. left ear bora
auris utro au. each ear bora somni
auristillae aurist eardrops
a.tc. around the clock
injectio
bis b. twice
bis in die bid. twice a day
brachium brach. the arm laevus
linimentum
capsula caps a capsule liquor
chartulae charts powders
cibus cib.; c. food
collunarium collun a nose wash minimum
collutorium collut. a mouthwash misce
collyrium collyr. an eyewash
compositus comp. compound
congius cong.; C. gallon
cum core. with
cum cibus c.c. with food; with meals
nocte
dentur d. give (thou); let be given naristillae
dentur tales doses d.t.d. give of such doses nebule
dexter d. right non repetatur
diebus alternis dieb. alt. every other day
dilutus dil. dilute, diluted octarius
disp. dispense oculentum
div. divide oculus
DW distilled water oculus dexter
oculus laevus
oculus sinister

636

COMMON TRANSLATION
ABBREVIATION
elix. elixir
emuls. emulsion
et and
e.m.p. as directed, in the manner
prescribed

fi; ft. let it be made; make
fi; fl. fluid

flower
fol. leaf.
g; G.; gm. gram
gr. grain
git. a drop
h at the hour of
hs. at bedtime
im. intramuscular
inj. injection
iv. IV intravenous
L left
lin. liniment
liq. a solution
lot. lotion
min; Mx minum
m.;M mix
meg microgram
mEq. milliequivalent
mg milligram
ml milliliter
n. at night
narist. nasal drops
neb. a spray
non.rep. do not repeat
oO. pint
occulent. eye ointment
0. eye
o.d. right eye
ol. left eye
o.s. left eye

----- PAGE 645 -----
LATIN TERM COMMON TRANSLATION
ABBREVIATION

oculus utro ou. both eyes, each eye

omni mane om. every morning

‘parti affectae p.a.a. to be applied to affected
applicandus part

‘per os p-o. by mouth

‘post cibum p.c. after meals

pr per rectum

pro re nata p.rn. as needed

pulvis pulv. powder

quater in die quid. four times a day

quaque q- each, every

quaque die qd. every day

quaque hora q-h. every hour

quantum qs. a sufficient quantity
sufficiat

quantum q.s. ad a sufficient quantity to make
sufficiat ad

radix rad. root

LATIN TERM

secundum artem

Semen
semis
signa
Sine

Si opus sit

statim
Suppositorum
syrupus
tabella

ter in die

trochiscus
tussis

ungentum
ut dictum

COMMON
ABBREVIATION

S.a.

PHARMACY TERMS «>

TRANSLATION

according to the art

S.C.; subc; subq subcutaneously

semen
ss

Sig.

s

8.0.5.
sol.
stat.
supp.
syr.

tab.
tbsp.
tid.
tinc.; tr.
troche
tuss.

ung.
ut dict.; u.d.

seed

one half
write, label
without

if necessary
solution
immediately
suppository
syrup

tablet
tablespoonful
three times a day
tincture

lozenge

a cough

an ointment
as directed

637

----- PAGE 646 -----
Appendix 5

MN

WEIGHT AND MEASURE CONVERSIONS

MINIMS MILLILITERS FLUID DRAMS MILLILITERS FLUID OUNCES MILLILITERS
1 0.06 1 37 1 2957
2 on 2 339 2 5957
5 031 3 1109 5 14787
10 0.62 4 1479 7 20701
5 092 5 18.48 0 295.23
20 1B 6 2218 2 354.88
30 185 7 25.88 4 414.02
40 246 8 (Ifl. oz) 2957 6 (pt) 4B
50 3.08 32 (I qt) 946.33
60 (Ifl. dr) 370 28 (1 gal) 378532

Apothecaries— Metric Weight Conversion

GRAINS GRAMS DRAMS GRAMS OUNCES GRAMS
~ 0.032 1 3,888 ] 31103
1 0.065 2 17% 2 62.207
Wa 0.097 (01) 3 11.664 3 93310
2 012 4 15,552 4 124414
5 030 5 19.440 5 155.517
10 0.65 6 3328 6 186.621
5 100 7 71216 7 274
20 130 8 (loz) 31103 8 248.828
30 2.00 9 279931
10 311.035
R 33.242

638

----- PAGE 647 -----
Appendix 6

SN

HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES

here is a great need for herbalists to be well informed

about the diversity of information and approaches

within their field of interest. For the purpose of this
appendix, I have grouped a wide range of activities under the
category “Herbalist,” even though the members of these vari-
ous groups may not agree with me. There are forms of phy-
totherapy that embrace both the folk healers and those using a
developed medical system. There are herbal approaches based
within the Western biomedical model, as well as Oriental prac-
tices, such as traditional Chinese medicine and ayurveda.
Pharmacognosists, phytopharmacologists, and ethnobotanists
also fit within the herbal categorization, as do those involved in
the various aspects of the herbal products industry.

Herbal information germane to the various subgroupings
within the herbal field exists but is often unknown to those in
different segments of this wide-ranging field. There is a great
need to expand the usual sources of information and build
bridges between these enclaves of interest. Unfortunately,
there are many issues of mutual comprehension, as language
often blocks communication in medicine. Nuances of vocabu-
lary disparities can mask fundamental agreements of ideas and
approach. Likewise, lack of clarity often obscures important
differences in both principle and technique. Within the field,
there is often a dogmatic attachment to words and specific for-
mulations of belief, opinion, and theory, It is important that
modalities that have their foundations outside the biomedical
model not be ignored or discounted because they exemplify a
different belief system, as they represent an enrichment of pos-
sibilities, not a challenge to the status quo.

‘The material that follows focuses on the information re-
sources that relate to Western herbalism. I hope that herbalists
familiar with the other cultural forms of herbalism, such as
ayurveda and TCM, will create similar guides in the future.

LIBRARIES

Libraries are an astonishing resource as long as the herbalist
knows how to use them and—sometimes more important—how
to relate to librarians! A range of specialized libraries are de-
scribed by subject area in directories such as:

639

Subject Collections, Lee Ash, R.R. Bowker Co., Sth. ed., 1978.
Directory of Special Libraries and Information Centers, Gale
Research Co.

Of all the specialized libraries, the Lloyd Library is of
paramount interest.

Lloyd Library, 917 Plum Street, Cincinnati, OH 45202,
(513) 721-3707, wwwlloydlibrary.org

The Lloyd Library has one of the finest collections of the liter-
ature of botany and pharmacy in the United States, specializing
in plant chemistry, pharmacognosy, medicinal plants, and Eclec-
tic medicine. It houses the accumulated libraries of all the
Eclectic medical schools, as well as a vast collection of Eclectic
case history files. This cornucopia of Eclectic knowledge is a
unique and irreplaceable resource. To quote Michael Moore, di-
rector of the Southwest School of Botanical Medicine, the library
contains “the writings of a discipline of medicine that survived
for a century that was famous (or infamous) for its vast plant ma-
teria medica that treated the patient and NOT the pathology, a
sophisticated model of vitalist healing every bit as usable as tra-
ditional Chinese medicine and ayurvedic medicine.”

The library boasts one of the world’s largest and most com-
plete collections of pharmacopoeias, formularies, and dispen-
satories. The periodicals collection includes many rare journals
hard to obtain elsewhere, and often in complete, unbroken sets.
The library also supports the scientific research of natural prod-
ucts through joint publication of the Journal of Natural Products
(Lloydia) with the American Society of Pharmacognosy. Much
information from the library is distributed by mail or provided
over the phone.

The Dewey Decimal and Library of Congress
Classification Systems

Both the Dewey Decimal and Library of Congress classification
systems facilitate access to the wealth of books published in the
English language that are relevant to the multidisciplinary in-
terests of phytotherapy.

The Dewey Decimal System
The Dewey Decimal System of Classification, used in most
local and school libraries, has the advantage of a limited number

----- PAGE 648 -----
640 @ HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES

of general categories and short call numbers. The system is
based on ten classes of subject (000-999), which are then further
subdivided. Below are examples of the listings found under the
categories Herb, Botanical Science, and Medical Sciences.

Herb
Herb gardens 635.7
agriculture 635.7
commercial processing 663.96
Herb teas 641.357
cooking with 641.657
home preparation 641.877
Herbaceous flowering plants $82.13
Herbaceous plants 582.12
Herbaceous shrubs $82.14
Herbaceous vines $82.14
Herbals
Pharmacognosy 615.321
Herbariums $80.742

$80 Botanical Science

581.6 Economic botany
581.61 Beneficial plants
581.63 Edible and medicinal plants
581.64 Plants of industrial & technological value
581.65 Deleterious plants
581.67 Allergenic plants
581.69 Poisonous plants
610 Medical Sciences
615.1 Drugs (materia medica)
615.11 | Pharmacopoeias
615.12 Dispensatories
615.13 Formularies
615.3 Organic drugs
615.32 Drugs of plant origin
615.321 Pharmacognosy
615.53 General therapeutic systems, including Eclectic,
botanic medicine, and ayurveda
615.535 Naturopathy
615.8 Specific therapies and kinds of therapies
615.88 Empirical and historical remedies
615.882 Folk medicine

615.886 Patent medicines

The Library of Congress (LC) classification

The Library of Congress, or LC, classification consists of sepa-
rate, mutually exclusive, special classifications. The arrange-
ment roughly follows groupings of social sciences, humanities,
and natural and physical sciences. It divides the references into
20 large classes and an additional class for general works. Each

main class has a synopsis that also serves as a guide. Resulting
order is from the general to the specific, from the theoretical to
the practical. Listed below are the letters and titles of the main
classes.

A—General Works

B—Philosophy. Psychology. Religion
C—Auxiliary Sciences of History
D—History: General and Old World
E—History: America

F—History: America
G—Geography. Anthropology. Recreation
H—Social Sciences

J—Political Science

K—Law

L—Education

M—Music and Books on Music
N—Fine Arts

P—Language and Literature
Q—Science

R—Medicine

S—Agriculture

T—Technology

U—Military Science

V—Naval Science

Z—Library Science

In place of standard subdivisions, each class may incorpo-
rate divisions for literary form and geography. Terminology may
be explicit, exact, scientific, or popular, depending on the situa-
tion. Subdivisions in the LC system are arranged roughly on a
historical basis, and the notation is mixed, combining capital let-
ters and numerals. More combinations, and thus greater speci-
ficity, is possible, yet excessively long notations do not occur. As
examples, consider some herbally relevant subcategories in
Science and in Medicine:

Class Q SCIENCE

QD 1-999 Chemistry

QH 1-705.5 Biology (General)

Qk 1-989 Botany

QP 1-981 Physiology

Class R MEDICINE

RM 1-950 Therapeutics. Pharmacology

RS 1441 Pharmacy and Materia Medica

RV. 1-431 Botanic, Thomsonian, and Eclectic medicine
RX 1-681 Homeopathy

RZ 201-999 — Other systems of medicine

Subject headings used by the LC system under which in-
formation concerning medicinal plants and their therapeutic ap-
plication in medicine may be found include:

----- PAGE 649 -----
Materia Medica RS 153-441
Medicinal Plants QK 99, RS 164
Herbal Teas RM 666
Herbs—Therapeutic Use RA 1250
Pharmacognosy RS 160-167
Economic Botany QH 705-705.5

National Library of Medicine (NML) Classification
The National Library of Medicine classification covers the field
of medicine and related sciences. It is a system of mixed nota-
tion patterned after the Library of Congress (LC) classification
where alphabetical letters that denote broad subject categories
are further subdivided by numbers. The NLM classification uti-
lizes schedules QS-QZ and W-WZ, permanently excluded
from the LC classification. An outline of the National Library
of Medicine classification can be found on the Web at:
wwwef.nlm.nih.gov/class/OutlineofNLMClassificationSchedule.
hunl.

The Index to the NLM classification consists primarily of
Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), a set of terms or subject
headings that are arranged in both an alphabetic and a hierar-
chical structure to permit searching at various levels of speci-
ficity from narrower to broader. There are almost 19,000 main
headings in MeSH and nearly 800 specialized descriptors, called
Qualifiers.

Index entries are updated annually to reflect additions and
changes to the vocabulary. A few of the significant herbal head-
ings are as follows:

Dispensatories, formularies, etc. QV 740
Drugs, Chinese Herbal QV 766
Ethnobotany GN 476.73
Ethnopharmacology QV 752
Herbal medicine WB 925
Materia medica QV 760
Medicine, Chinese Traditional WB 50
Medicine, Herbal WB 925
Medicine, Traditional WB 50
Pharmacognosy QV 752
Pharmacopoeias QV 738
Phytotherapy WB 925
Plant Extracts QV 766
Plant Preparations QV 766-770
Plants, Edible QK 98.5
Plants, Medicinal QV 766-770

The MeSH thesaurus is used for indexing articles for the
MEDLINE database. Each reference is associated with a set of
MeSH terms that describe the content of the item. Similarly, a
retrieval query is formed using MeSH terms to find items on a
desired topic.

HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES .@ 641

A number of terms directly relevant to herbal medicine are
found in the MeSH thesaurus. The following are the most use-
ful, with the number of citations found (June 2003):

Drugs, Chinese Herbal 8,554
Medicine, Herbal 3,820
Phytotherapy 7,516
Plant Extracts 39,068
Plants, Medicinal 35,774

However, there is an undefined amount of overlap. The sum
of all the citations from the above list is 94,732. If a Boolean
search is done using all the search terms but excluding duplicates,
a total of 68,202 is found. This represents a truly impressive body
of knowledge. A further search done to ascertain how many of
these citations were human studies found 26,558 papers.

It is interesting to note the exponential increase in citations
listed for these herbal MeSH terms over the time frame covered
in the yearly database.

Year 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2003

Number 6,804 12,896 17501 23,510 31,798 42,649 58,698 68,202

of citations
70000
40000

a)

2

on)

¢ 50000 +

y

es

a

5 40000 5

F

¢ 30000 4

ec

v

2

*% 20000 7

[

GO 10000 -

a a el
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Year

As impressive as the MeSH thesaurus is, it has some limita-
tions when approached herbally. For the phytotherapist it is
often non-MeSH words that are used for finding a particular
reference. However, because only a few genus names are as-
signed as MeSH terms, any herb discussed in a research paper
can be accessed via its genus name.

----- PAGE 650 -----
642 <= HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES

PEER-REVIEW JOURNALS AND
PROFESSIONAL NEWSLETTERS

A number of peer-review journals specialize in either phy-
totherapy itself or studies of medicinal plants. The primary ones
published in English are:
Alternative and Complementary Therapies
www.liebertpub.com/
Alternative Medicine Review
www.thorne.com/alternative/alter_main.html
Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine
www.alternative-therapies.com/at/login/index.jsp
American Journal of Botany
www.amjbot.org/
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
www.ajcn.org/

Economic Botany
www.econbot.org/
European Phytojournal
www.ex.ac.uk/phytonet/phytojournal/index.htm
Fitoterapia
www.elsevier.nl/locate/fitote
Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine
www.liebertpub.com/ACM/default] asp
Journal of Ethnopharmacology
http://sciencedirect.com/science/journal/03788742
Journal of Natural Products (Lloydia)
http://pubs.acs.org/journals/jnprdf/index.html
Journal of Naturopathic Medicine
www.healthy.net/library/journals/naturopathic/
Pharmaceutical Biology (fournal of Pharmacognosy)
www.szp.swets.nl/szp/frameset.htm?url=% 2Fszp%2Fjourn
als%2Fpb.htm
Natural Product Reports
www.rsc.org/is/journals/current/npr/nprpub.htm
Phytochemistry
www.elsevier.com:80/inca/publications/store/2/7/3/
Phytomedicine
www.urbanfischer.de/journals/frame_template.htm?/jour-
nals/phytomed/phytmed.htm
Phytotherapy Research
www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/095 1-41 8X/
Planta Medica
www.thieme.de/plantamedica/
Professional bodies and phytotherapy associations often pub-
lish excellent, highly relevant, although not peer-reviewed, jour-
nals and newsletters. Ones of note published in English include:

American Herb Association Quarterly
www.ahaherb.com/

Australian Journal of Medical Herbalism
www.nhaa.org.au/journal.htm!

The British Journal of Phytotherapy
(no Web address available)

HerbalGram
www.herbalgram.org/herbalgram/

Medical Herbalism
www.medherb.com

Townsend Letter for Doctors & Patients
www.tldp.com/

OUT-OF-PRINT BOOKS

As many of the primary source books are out of print, it is nec-
essary to use the services of book-search specialists. Most book-
stores can do a nationwide search but it is often more effective
to go directly to the specialized search agency. The Antiquarian
Booksellers Association of America publishes the Bookmman’s
Weekly, the leading guide to services and books offered. There
are a few antiquarian-book dealers that specialize in herbals and
Eclectic material. One of these is Herbalist & Alchemist Books,
run by one of America’s foremost phytotherapists, David
Winston. It publishes a twice-yearly catalog of books and jour-
nals relating to herbalism, Eclectic medicine, economic botany,
pre-1920 pharmacy, ethnobotany, and natural products chemistry.

Herbalist & Alchemist Books, PO Box 553, Broadway, NJ 08808,
(908) 689-9020.

ONLINE DATABASES

Before personal computers, creating bibliographies and finding
reference material relevant to phytotherapy meant spending
many hours in the library working through volumes of printed
indexes and card catalogs, writing down each citation, finding
the document, and then photocopying it. Online database re-
trieval now allows the herbal researcher access to millions of
articles at the touch of a keyboard. Two databases of primary
importance to herbalism are NAPRALERT and MEDLINE,
although other useful sites are included as well.

AGRICOLA (Agriculture Online Access)
www.nalusda.gov/general_info/agricola/agricola.html

A bibliographic database containing selective worldwide cover-
age of agriculture and related fields from 1970 to the present.
AGRICOLA is the locator and bibliographic access and control
system of the National Agricultural Library collections and also
includes records from other cooperating institutions. Records
contain bibliographic information, geographic terms, GenBank
Numbers, chemical names, and CAS Registry Numbers.
Abstracts are available for some records.

BIOSIS

www.biosis.org.
A bibliographic database covering worldwide literature on all
biological and biomedical topics. The database includes the
printed Biological Abstracts (1969-present); Biological
Abstracts/RRM (Reports, Review, Meetings), 1980-present;
and the BioResearch Index (1969-79). Records contain bibli-

----- PAGE 651 -----
ographic data, keywords, and Biosystematic and Concept Codes.
CAS Registry Numbers and chemical names are present for
substances appearing in the title and keyword fields.

Chemical Abstracts
www.cas.org

The premier indexing source for chemical, biochemical, and
chemical engineering literature, covering over 12,000 journals
and conferences, as well as technical reports, dissertations,
books, and patents. There are two parts: weekly abstracts issues
arranged by topics and cumulative semiannual indexes using
chemical name, formula, subject, and author.

Medicinal Plants of Native America Database (MPNADB)
herb.umd.umich.edu/

The Medicinal Plants of Native America Database, based on the

book of the same name, contains data on the medicinal uses of

2,147 species by 123 different Native American peoples. The

database was created by Dr. Daniel E. Moerman, and the site is

a resource of the National Agricultural Library.

NAPRALERT (Natural Products Alert)
www.cas.org/ONLINE/DBSS/napralertss.htm]

The largest and most comprehensive computerized database cov-
ering medicinal plants is NAPRALERT, established by Professor
Norman Farnsworth and colleagues at the University of Illinois at
Chicago. NAPRALERT also covers the world’s literature on the
chemistry and pharmacology of secondary metabolites derived
from natural sources. From this, a wide range of printouts can be
prepared providing, for example, ethnomedical, pharmacological,
and phytochemical profiles for any given plant, animal, or
microbe. The database is maintained by the Program for
Collaborative Research in the Pharmaceutical Sciences, College
of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago. Combined, the
articles contain information on more than 87,000 chemicals and
more than 38,000 plant and animal species and include more than
426,000 records on biological activity associated with those
species. For subscription information, call (312) 996-2246.

Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases
www.ars-grin.gov/duke/

Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases is a directory to
various USDA plant databases. The site consists of four major
areas: the Phytochemco Database, related browsable databases
(listed below), documents, and additional resources. The
Phytochemco Database can be searched in a variety of ways. For
example, a search can list reported constituents of a specific
plant, identify constituents within a specific activity, list all
plants known to contain a specific chemical, and identify chem-
icals with a specific lethal dose value. Ethnobotany searches give
ethnobotanical uses for a plant or plants with a particular eth-
nobotanical use. All the database references will yield reference
citations. Other related databases accessible through the Phyto-

HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES .e- 643

chemical and Ethnobotanical Databases are Ecosys (ecological
ranges), Ethnobot DB (worldwide plant uses), Foodplant DB
(Native American food plants), MPNADB (medicinal plants of
Native America), and Phytochem DB (plant chemicals).

The National Library of Medicine
www.nlm.nih.gov

The National Library of Medicine (NLM) is the world’s largest
medical library. The library collects materials in all areas of
biomedicine and health care, as well as works on biomedical as-
pects of technology, the humanities, and the physical, life, and
social sciences. For over 100 years, the library has published the
Index Medicus, a monthly subject/author guide to articles in
3,400 journals. This information (and much more) is now avail-
able in the database MEDLINE, the major online component
of PubMed (see below), freely accessible via the World Wide
Web. A number of additional databases provided by the NLM,
including one covering clinical trials, are listed here below.

MEDLINE (Medical Literature, Analysis, and Retrieval
System Online)
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi

MEDLINE is the NLM'’s premier bibliographic database, con-
taining citations and author abstracts from more than 4,600
biomedical journals published in the United States and 70 other
countries. It lists over 12 million citations dating back to the
mid-1960s. Coverage is worldwide, but most records are from
English-language sources or have English abstracts. Citations
prior to the mid-1960s can be found in NLM’s OLDMED-
LINE database. Almost 2,000 completed references are added
daily. MEDLINE is available on the Internet through the
PubMed URL and can be searched free of charge. No registra-
tion is required.

PubMed
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fegi

Provides free access to MEDLINE and more, including selected
life sciences journals not in MEDLINE. PubMed was developed
by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)
at the NLM. Entrez is the text-based search and retrieval system
used at NCBI for all major databases including PubMed,
Nucleotide, Protein Sequences, Protein Structures, Complete
Genomes, and Taxonomy. LinkOut provides access to full-text
articles at journal Web sites and other related Web resources.

ClinicalTrials

www.clinicaltrials.gov/
This Web site of the NLM provides current information for pa-
tients and the general public about clinical research studies.

DIRLINE
dirline.nlm.nih.gow/
The NLM’s directory of health organizations. An online database

----- PAGE 652 -----
644 @ HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES

containing location and information about other resources con-
cerned with health and biomedicine, including organizations,

research resources, projects, and databases.

ADDITIONAL SITES
Herbalists
The Southwest School of Botanical Medicine/ Michael
Moore

www.swsbm.com/HOMEPAGE/HomePage.html
A cornucopia of herbal wisdom and information. Michael Moore
is to be commended for making his wealth of phytotherapeutic ex-
perience and insights so readily available. His site also houses on-
line versions of many Eclectic and Thomsonian texts, which are
essential reading for any medical herbalist. A brief overview of the
site’s sections will illustrate its importance:

Medicinal Plant Photographs by genus
Texts and Manuals by Michael Moore
Eclectic Medicine, Materia Medica and Pharmacy—classic
texts, including:
American Materia Medica, Therapeutics and Pharmacognosy
www.swsbm.com/Ellingwoods/Ellingwoods.html
The Eclectic Materia Medica, Pharmacology and Therapeutics
www,.swsbm.com/FelterMM/Felters.html
Eclectic and Pharmaceutical Journals—classic texts
Herbology and Herb Growing—classic texts
Thomsonian Medicine—classic texts

Ethnobotany and Traditional Plant Uses—classic texts
Medicinal Plants: Research, Resources, FAQs, Regional
Plant Checklists

Henriette’s Herbal Homepage
ibiblio.org/herbmed/index-htm!

Another treasure trove of relevant material, offered by Henriette

Kress, an herbalist in Finland.

Howie Brounstein’s Homepage
www.teleport.com/~howieb/howie.html

Jonathan Treasure’s Herbal Bookworm
www.herbological.com

Medical Herbalism/Paul Bergner

www.medherb.com

Robyn Klein’s Recommended Reading

www.rrreading.com

Rosemary Gladstar’s Sagemountain

www.sagemountain.com

Christopher Hobbs Virtual Herbal
www.christopherhobbs.com

Directories/Links/Databases
Library of Congress World Wide Web

marvel.loc.gov/

WWW Virtual Library
vlib.org/

Internet Directory for Botany: economic botany,
ethnobotany
www.botany.net/IDB/subject/botecon.html
Open Directory: Science, Biology, Botany, Ethnobotany
dmoz.org/Science/Biology/Botany/Ethnobotany/

Excite Directory: Science, Biology, Botany, Ethnobotany
www.excite.co.uk/directory/Science/Biology/Botany/
Ethnobotany

Open Directory: Health, Alternative, Herbs
dmoz.org/Health/Alternative/Herbs/

Excite Directory: Health, Alternative, Herb
www.excite.co.uk/directory/Health/Alternative/Herbs
Omni
omni.ac.uk/browse/mesh/detail/G002 5 125L0025125.html

Food & Drug Administration (FDA)
www.fda.gov/fdahomepage.html

Martindale’s Bio & Medical Databases
www.sci.lib.uci.edu/~martindale/RefDatabaseBio. html

NIH Office of Dietary Supplements
dietary-supplements.info.nih.gow/

NIH Web Search
search.info.nih.gov/

Phytonet
www.exeter.ac.uk/phytonet/welcome.html

Phytopharmacognosy

www.mdx.ac.uk/www/pharm/

Materia Medicas
A Modern Herbal (Mrs. Grieve)
www.botanical.com/botanical/mgmh/mgmh.html

HealthWorld Online

www.healthy.net/

HerbMed
www.herbmed.org/

King’s American Dispensatory
www.ibiblio.org/herbmed/eclectic/kings/intro.htm]

----- PAGE 653 -----
The Raintree Tropical Plant Database
www.rain-tree.com/plants.htm

The TCM Herbal Database
www.rmhiherbal.org/ai/pharintro.html

Associations
American Association of Naturopathic Physicians
www.naturopathic.org/

American Association of Oriental Medicine
www.aaom.org/

American Botanical Council
www.herbalgram.org/

American Herb Product Association
www.ahpa.org/

American Herbal Pharmacopoeia
www.herbal-ahp.org/

American Herbalists Guild
www.americanherbalistsguild.com/

British Herbal Medical Association
www.ex.ac.uk/phytonet/bhma.html

European Scientific Co-operative on Phytotherapy
(ESCOP)

www.ex.ac.uk/phytonet/escop.html
Gesellschaft fiir Phytotherapie e.V.
www.phytotherapy.org/
Herb Research Foundation

www.herbs.org/

National Centre for Complementary and Alternative
Medicine
alumed.od.nih.gov/

HERBAL INFORMATION SOURCES 645

National Herbalists Association of Australia
www.nhaa.org.au/

National Institute of Medical Herbalists

www.nimh.org.uk/

New Zealand Association of Medical Herbalists
nzamh.org.nz/

The European Herbal Practitioners Association
www.users.globalnet.co.uk/~ehpa

The Ontario Herbalists Association

www.herbalists.on.ca/

United Plant Savers
www.plantsavers.org/

Phytochemicals
Phytochemistry Tutorials

www. friedli.com/herbs/phytochem/phyto_tutorial.html

The Phytochemistry of Herbs

www.herbalchem.net/

Chemfinder

chemfinder.cambridgesoft.com/

Taxomony
Integrated Taxonomic Information System

www.itis.usda.gov/index. html

Missouri Botanical Garden
www.mobot.org/

PLANTS Database (USDA)

plants.usda.gov/

GRIN Taxonomy
www.ars-grin.gov/npgs/tax/

----- PAGE 654 -----
Appendix 7

Kingdom Plantae
Division Phaeophycophyta (brown algae: 1,500 species)
Class Phaeophyceae
Order Fucales
Family Fucaceae
Genus Fucus vesiculosus—bladderwrack
Division Rhodophycota (red algae: 4,000 species)
Class Rhodophyceae
Order Gigartinales
Family Gigartinaceae
Genus/Species Chondrus crispus
Division Bryophyta (mosses)
Subdivision Musci
Class Sphagnopsida
Subclass Sphagnidae
Order Sphagnales
Family Sphagnaceae
Genus Sphagnum L. (336 spp.)
Division Equisetophyta
Class Equisetopsida
Order Equisetales (1 family)
Family Equisetaceae (1 genus)
Genus Equisetum (32 spp.)
Species E. arvense L.—horsetail
Division Lycopodiophyta
Class Lycopsida
Order Lycopodiales
Family Lycopodiaceae (4-14 genera, 350-400 spp.)
Genus Lycopodium (200 spp.)
Species L. clavatum L.—club moss
Division Pteridophyta
Class Filicopsida
Order Polypodiales (28 families)
Family Dryopteridaceae (60-78 genera, 3,000-3,500 spp.)
Genus Dryopteris (150 spp.)
Species Dryopteris filix-mas L.—male fern
Division Ginkgophyta
Class Ginkgoopsida
Order Ginkgoales (1 family)
Family Ginkgoaceae (1 genus)
Genus Ginkgo (1 sp.)
Species Ginkgo biloba L.—ginkgo
Division Coniferophyta (gymnosperms)
Class Pinopsida
Order Taxales
Family Taxaceae (5 genera, 17-20 spp.)
Genus Taxus (8 spp.)
Species Taxus brevifolia Nutt—Pacific yew

rane

TAXONOMY HIERARCHY

646

Order Pinales (4 families)
Family Pinaceae (9-12 genera, 210 spp.)
Genus Abies (50 spp.)
Species Abies balsamea—balsam fir
Family Cupressaceae (28 genera, 120 spp.)
Genus Juniperus (60 spp.)
Species Juniperus communis L.—common juniper
Genus Thuja (5 spp.)
Species Thuja occidentalis L.—arborvitae
Division Gnetophyta
Class Gnetopsida (3 orders)
Order Ephedrales (1 family)
Family Ephedraceae (1 genus, 40 spp.)
Genus Ephedra (40 spp.)
Species Ephedra sinica Stapf—ma huang
Division Magnoliophyta (angiosperms, flowering plants)
(250,000 spp.)
Class Magnoliopsida
Subclass Magnoliidae (8 orders)
Order Magnoliales (10 families)
Family Magnoliaceae (7-12 genera, 220 spp.)
Genus Magnolia (180 spp.)
Species Magnolia x soulangiana Soul.-Bod.—
Chinese magnolia, Hou Pu
Family Myristicaceae (18 genera, 300 spp.)
Genus Myristica (120 spp.)
Species Myristica:fragrans Houtt—nutmeg
Order Laurales (8 families)
Family Monimiaceae (30 genera)
Genus Peumus (1 sp.)
Species Peumus boldus Molina—boldo
Family Lauraceae (30-50 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Cinnamomum (200 spp.)
Species Cinnamomum camphora (L.) J. Pres|—
camphor
Genus Laurus (2 spp.)
Species Laurus nobilis L—sweet bay
Genus Sassafras (3 spp.)
Species Sassafras albidum (Nutt.) Nees—sassatras
Order Piperales (3 families)
Family Piperaceae (10 genera, 1,400-2,000 spp.)
Genus Piper (1,000 spp.)
Species Piper betel L._-betel pepper
Species Piper cubeba L. f—cubeb
Species Piper methysticum G. Forst—kava kava
Species Piper nigrum L.—black pepper

----- PAGE 655 -----
Order Aristolochiales (3 families)
Family Aristolochiaceae (8-10 genera, 600 spp.)
Genus Aristolochia L. (500 spp.)
Species Aristolochia reticulata Jacq.—birthwort
Order Illiciales (2 families)
Family Schisandraceae (2 genera, 47 spp.)
Genus Schisandra (25 spp.)
Species Schisandra chinensis—schizandra
Order Papaverales (9 families)
Family Papaveraceae (26 genera, 300 spp.)
Genus Papaver (100 spp.)
Species Papaver somniferum L.—opium poppy
Genus Chelidonium (2 spp.)
Species Chelidonium majus L.—celandine
Genus Sanguinaria (1 sp.)
Species Sanguinaria canadensis L—bloodroot
Genus Eschscholzia (10 spp.)
Species Eschscholzia californica Cham.---
California poppy
Family Fumariaceae (£6 genera, 55 spp.)
Genus Fumaria (425 spp.)
Species Fumaria officinalis L.—fumitory
Order Ranunculales (8 families)
Family Ranunculaceae (50-52 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Aconitum (100 spp.)
Species Aconitum napellus L.—aconite, monkshood
Genus Pulsatilla (7 spp.)
Species Pulsatilla vulgaris (L.) P. Mill—pasqueflower
Genus Cimicifuga (15 spp.)
Species Cimicifuga racemosa (L.) Nutt.—black
cohosh
Genus Coptis (10 spp.)
Species Coptis trifolia (L.) Salisb—goldthread
Genus Ranunculus (400 spp.)
Species Ranunculus ficaria L.—lesser celandine
Genus Hydrastis (2 spp.)
Species Hydrastis canadensis L.—goldenseal
Family Berberidaceae (16-18 genera, 600 spp.)
Genus Berberis (450 spp.)
Species Berberis vulgaris L.—barberry
Genus Mahonia (12 spp.)
Species Mahonia aquifolium (Pursh) Nutt—Oregon
grape
Genus Caulophyllum (2 spp.)
Species Caulophylum thalictroides (L..) Michx.—
blue cohosh
Genus Podophyllum L. (2 spp.)
Species Podophyllum peltatum L.—mayapple
Subclass Rosidae (18 orders)
Order Rosales (24 families)
Family Hydrangeaceae (17 genera, 170 spp.)
Genus Hydrangea (23 spp.)
Species Hydrangea arborescens L.—wild hydrangea
Family Rosaceae (100 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Agrimonia (15 spp.)
Species Agrimonia eupatoria L._—agrimony
Genus Crataegus (200 spp.)
Species Crataegus laevigata (Poir.) DC.—smooth
hawthorn
Genus Filipendula (10 spp.)
Species Filipendula ulmaria (L.) Maxim.—
meadowsweet

"TAXONOMY HIERARCHY @ 647

Genus Prunus (430 spp.)
Species Prunus serotina Ehrh.—black cherry
Genus Rubus L. (250 spp.)
Species Rubus idaeus L.—common red raspberry
Order Fabales (19 families)
Family Fabaceae (590-800 genera, 14,000-20,000 spp.)
Genus Astragalus (1000 spp.)
Species Astragalus membranaceus—astragalus
Genus Baptisia (30-35 spp.)
Species Baptisia tinctoria (L.) Venten.—wild indigo
Genus Cyamopsis (3 spp.)
Species Cyamopsis tetragonoloba (L.) Taubert—guar
Genus Galega (6-8 spp.)
Species Galega officinalis L—goat’s rue
Genus Glycine (4 spp.)
Species Glycine max (L.) Merr.—soybean
Genus Medicago (100 spp.)
Species Medicago sativa L.—alfalfa
Genus Melilotus (25 spp.)
Species Melilotus officinalis (L.) Lam.—sweet
clover
Genus Myroxylon (2 spp.)
Species Myroxylon balsamum (L.) Harms—
balsam of Tolu
Genus Trifolium (300 spp.)
Species Trifolium pratense L.—red clover
Genus Trigonella (100 spp.)
Species Trigonella foenum-graecum L.—fenugreek
Genus Acacia (750-800 spp.)
Species Acacia catechu (L. f.) Willd.—black catechu
Order Myrtales (14 families)
Family Myrtaceae (140 genera, 3,000 spp.)
Genus Eucalyptus (600 spp.)
Species Eucalyptus globulus Labill—eucalyptus
Genus Pimenta (4 spp.)
Species Pimenta dioica (L.) Merr.—allspice
Genus Syzygium (400-500 spp.)
Species Syzygium aromaticum (L.) Skeels—clove
Family Onagraceae (16-17 genera, 645 spp.)
Genus Oenothera (80 spp.)
Species Ocenothera biennis L.—evening primrose
Order Santalales (10 families)
Family Viscaceae (8 genera, 350 spp.)
Genus Viscum (60-70 spp.)
Species Viscum album L.—European mistletoe
Order Celastrales (13 families)
Family Celastraceae (50-85 genera, 800 spp.)
Genus Euonymmus (176 spp.)
Species Exonymus atropurpurea Jacq.—wahoo
Genus Catha (1 sp.)
Species Catha edulis (Vahl) Forssk. ex Endl.—khat
Family Aquifoliaceae (4 genera, 200-400 spp.)
Genus Tex (399 spp.)
Species Lex aquifolium L.—English holly
Species Mex paraguariensis St.-Hil.—mate
Order Euphorbiales (4 families)
Family Euphorbiaceae (310-320 genera, 7,500 spp.)
Genus Euphorbia (2,000 spp.)
Species Euphorbia pilulifera Engelm.—pill-bearing
spurge
Genus Ricinus (1 sp.)
Species Ricinus communis L.—castor bean

----- PAGE 656 -----
648 @ TAXONOMY HIERARCHY

Order Rhamunales (3 families)
Family Rhamnaceae (50-55 genera, 900 spp.)
Genus Ceanothus (55 spp.)
Species Ceanothus americanus L—red root
Genus Rhamnus (110 spp.)
Species Rhamnus cathartica L_—buckthorn
Genus Ziziphus (100 spp.)
Species Ziziphus jujuba (L.) Karst—jujube
Order Linales (5 familes)
Family Erythroxylaceae (4 genera, 200 spp.)
Genus Erythroxylum (7 spp.)
Species Erythroxylum coca Lam.—coca
Family Linaceae (19 genera, 290 spp.)
Genus Linum (230 spp.)
Species Linum usitatissimum L.—flax
Order Polygalales (7 families)
Family Polygalaceae (12-19 genera, 750 spp.)
Genus Polygala (600 spp.)
Species Polygala senega L.—Seneca snakeroot
Family Krameriaceae (1 genus)
Genus Krameria (17 spp.)
Species Krameria triandra L.—rhatany
Order Sapindales (15 families)
Family Sapindaceae (134-140 genera, 1,500 spp.)
Genus Paullinia L. (180 spp.)
Species Paullinia cupana L. Kunth—guarana
Family Hippocastanaceae (2 genera, 16 spp.)
Genus Aesculus L. (13 spp.)
Species Aesculus hippocastanum L.—horse chestnut
Family Burseraceae (16-20 genera, 600 spp.)
Genus Boswellia (24 spp.)
Species Boswellia sacra Flueck.—frankincense
Genus Commiphora (185 spp.)
Species Commiphora molmol Jacq.—myrrh
Family Anacardiaceae (60-70 genera, 600 spp.)
Genus Rhus L. (250 spp.)
Species Rhus aromatica Ait—fragrant sumac
Family Rutaceae (150-158 genera, 900-1,500 spp.)
Genus Agathosma (134 spp.)
Species Agathosma betulina (Bergius) Pill—buchu
Genus Citrus (16 spp.)
Species Citrus limetta Risso—bitter orange
Genus Pilocarpus (22 spp.)
Species Pilocarpus jaborandi Holmes—jaborandi
Genus Ruta (40 spp.)
Species Ruta graveolens L.—rue
Genus Zanthoxylum (30 spp.)
Species Zanthoxylum americanum Mill.—prickly ash
Family Zygophyllaceae (25 genera, 240 spp.)
Genus Guaiacum (6 spp.)
Species Guaiacum sanctum L.—lignum-vitae
Genus Larrea 3-4 spp.)
Species Larrea tridentata (Sesse & Moc. ex DC.)
Cov.—chaparral
Order Geraniales (6 families)
Family Geraniaceae (11 genera, 750 spp.)
Genus Geranium (400 spp.)
Species Geranium maculatum L.—American cranesbill

Order Apiales (7 families)
Family Araliaceae (47-70 genera, 700 spp.)
Genus Panax (8 spp.)
Species Panax ginseng C. Mey—Korean ginseng
Species Panax quinquefolius L—American ginseng
Genus Eleutherococcus (50 spp.)
Species Eleutherococcus senticosus (Rupr. et Maxim.}—
Siberian ginseng
Genus Aralia L. (25 spp.)
Species Aralia racemosa L.—American spikenard
Genus Hedera (15 spp.)
Species Hedera helix L.—English ivy
Family Apiaceae (Umbelliferae) (428 genera, 3,000 spp.)
Genus Ammi L. (10 spp.)
Species Ammi visnaga L. Lam.—khella
Genus Anethum (2 spp.)
Species Anethum graveolens L.—dill
Genus Angelica (80 spp.)
Species Angelica archangelica L.—angelica
Species Angelica sinensis (Oliv.) Diels—dong quai
Genus Apium (1 sp.)
Species Apium graveolens L.—celery
Genus Bupleurum (100 spp.)
Species Bupleurum falcatum L.—bupleuram
Genus Carum (30 spp.)
Species Carum carvi L.—caraway
Genus Centella (100 spp.)
Species Centella asiatica (L.) Urban—gotu cola
Genus Conium (4 spp.)
Species Conitum maculatum L.—poison hemlock
Genus Daucus (60 spp.)
Species Daucus carota L.—wild carrot
Genus Ferula (100+ spp.)
Species Ferula assa-foetida L.—asafetida
Species Ferula gummosa Boiss —galbanum
Genus Foeniculum (5 spp.)
Species Foenienlum vulgare Mill—fennel
Genus Lomatium (70 spp.)
Species Lomatium dissectum (Nutt.) Mathias &
Constance—lomatium
Genus Petroselinum (5 spp.)
Species Petroselinum crispum (Mill.) Nyman ex
A.W. Hill—parsley
Genus Pimpinella (150 spp.)
Species Pimpinella anisum L.—aniseed
Subclass Asteridae (11 orders)
Order Asterales (1 family)
Family Asteraceae (Compositae) (1,300-1,540 genera,
20,000-23,000 spp.)
Genus Achillea (200 spp.)
Species Achillea millefolium L.—yarrow
Genus Arctium (5 spp.)
Species Arctium lappa L.—burdock
Genus Arnica (32 spp.)
Species Arnica montana L.—arnica
Genus Artemisia (400 spp.)
Species Artemisia absinthium L.—wormwood
Species Artemisia annua L.—sweet annie
Species Artemisia dracunculus L.—tarragon
Genus Culendula (30 spp.)
Species Calendula officinalis L.—marigold

----- PAGE 657 -----
Genus Cnicus (1 sp.)
Species Cnicus benedictus L.—blessed thistle
Genus Cynara (11 spp.)
Species Cynara scolymus L.—globe artichoke
Genus Echmacea (3 spp.)
Species Echinacea purpurea (L.) Moench—purple
coneflower
Genus Eupatorium (1,200 spp.)
Species Eupatorium perfoliatum L.—boneset
Species Expatorium purpureum L.—ijoe pye weed
Genus Grindelia (50-60 spp.)
Species Grindelia camporum Greene—asthma weed
Genus [rula (200 spp.)
Species Inula belenium L.—elecampane
Genus Lactuca (100 spp.)
Species Lactuca virosa L.—wild lettuce
Genus Matricaria (40 spp.)
Species Matricaria recutita L—German chamomile
Genus Silybum (2 spp.)
Species Silybum marianum L. Gaertn.—milk thistle
Genus Tanacetum (60 spp.)
Species Tanacetum parthenium 1. Schultz-Bip.—
feverfew
Species Tanacetum vulgare L.—tansy
Genus Taraxacum (60 spp.)
Species Teraxacum officinale G.H. Weber ex
Wigg.—dandelion
Genus Tussilago (1 sp.)
Species Tussilago farfara L.—coltsfoot
Order Campanulales (7 families)
Family Campanulaceae (70-84 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Lobelia L. (300 spp.)
Species Lobelia inflata L.—Indian tobacco
Order Dipsacales (4 families)
Family Caprifoliaceae (13-15 genera, 450 spp.)
Genus Lonicera (200 spp.)
Species Lonicera caprifolium L.—honeysuckle
Genus Sambucus (40 spp.)
Species Sambucus nigra L—European elder
Genus Viburnum (200 spp.)
Species Viburnum opulus L.—cramp bark
Species Viburnum prunifolium L.—blackhaw
Family Valerianaceae (13 genera, 360 spp.)
Genus Valeriana (200 spp.)
Species Valeriana officinalis L.—valerian
Order Gentianales (7 families)
Family Loganiaceae (20 genera, 500 spp.)
Genus Gelsemium (2 spp.)
Species Gelsemium sempervirens (L.) St.-Hil.—
yellow jasmine
Family Gentianaceae (75-76 genera, 1,000 spp.)
Genus Gentiana (400 spp.)
Species Gentiana lutea L.—yellow gentian
Family Apocynaceae (168-200 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Strophanthus (40 spp.)
Species Strophanthus kombe Oliver—strophanthus
Genus Rauvolfia (100 spp.)
Species Ratvolfia serpentina (L.) Benth. ex Kurz—
snakeroot
Genus Vinca (5 spp.)
Species Vinca major L.—periwinkle

‘TAXONOMY HIERARCHY .@ 649

Family Asclepiadaceae (315 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Asclepias (120 spp.)
Species Asclepias tuberosa L—pleurisy root
Order Lamiales (4 families)
Family Boraginaceae (110-131 genera, 2,400 spp.)
Genus Borago (3 spp.)
Species Borago officinalis L—borage
Genus Pulmonaria (10 spp.)
Species Pulmonaria officinalis L._—lungwort
Genus Symphytum (25 spp.)
Species Symphytum officinale L—common comfrey
Family Verbenaceae (86-100 genera, 2,600 spp.)
Genus Verbena (250 spp.)
Species Verbena officinalis L._—vervain
Genus Vitex (270 spp.)
Species Vitex agnus-castus L.—chasteberry
Family Lamiaceae (Labiatae) (200-212 genera,
3,200 spp.)
Genus Collinsonia (5 spp.)
Species Collinsoma canadensis L.—stoneroot
Genus Lavandula (28 spp.)
Species Lavandula angustifolia Mill—English
lavender
Genus Leonurus (14 spp.)
Species Leonurus cardiaca L._—motherwort
Genus Lycopus (4 spp.)
Species Lycopus virginicus L._—bugleweed
Genus Marrubium (40 spp.)
Species Marrubium vulgare L.—horehound
Genus Mentha (25 spp.)
Species Mentha x piperita L.—peppermint
Species Mentha pulegium L.—pennyroyal
Species Mentha spicata L.—spearmint
Genus Nepeta (250 spp.)
Species Nepeta cataria L.—camnip
Genus Prunella (7 spp.)
Species Prunella vulgaris L.—self-heal
Genus Rosmarinus (3 spp.)
Species Rosmarinus officinalis L._—rosemary
Genus Scutellaria (300 spp.)
Species Scutellaria lateriflora L.—blue skullcap
Genus Thymus (300 spp.)
Species Thymus vulgaris L—garden thyme
Order Plantaginales (1 family)
Family Plantaginaceae (3 genera, 250 spp.)
Genus Plantago (200+ spp.)
Species Plantago major L.—broadleaf plantain
Species Plantago ovata L.—psyllium seed
Order Rubiales (2 families)
Family Rubiaceae (450-606 genera, 6,500 spp.)
Genus Cephaelis (100 spp.)
Species Cephaelis ipecacuanha (Brot.) Tassac—ipecac
Genus Cinchona (40 spp.)
Species Cinchona officinalis L.—quinine
Genus Coffea (40 spp.)
Species Coffea arabica L.—Arabian coffee
Genus Galiwm (400 spp.)
Species Galinm aparine L.—cleavers
Genus Mitchella (2 spp.)
Species Mitchella repens L.—partridgeberry

----- PAGE 658 -----
650 @ TAXONOMY HIERARCHY

Order Scrophulariales (13 families)
Family Oleaceae (24-30 genera, 600 spp.)
Genus Chionanthus (3-4 spp.)
Species Chionanthus virginicus L.—fringetree
Genus Ligustrum (50 spp.)
Species Ligustrum lucidum Ait. f—tee privet
Family Scrophulariaceae (190-275 genera, 4,000 spp.)
Genus Bacopa (60 spp.)
Species Bacopa monnicri (L.) Pennell—water hyssop
Genus Chelone (5-6 spp.)
Species Chelone glabra L.—balmony
Genus Scrophularia (300 spp.)
Species Scrophularia nodosa L.—figwort
Genus Verbascum (306 spp.)
Species Verbascum thapsus L—mullein
Genus Digitalis (30 spp.)
Species Digitalis purpurea L._—foxglove
Order Solanales (8 families)
Family Menyanthaceae (5 genera, 33 spp.)
Genus Menyanthes (1 sp.)
Species Menyanthes trifoliata L.—buckbean, bogbean
Family Solanaceae (85-96 genera, 2,800 spp.)
Genus Atropa (4 spp.)
Species Atropa belladonna L.—belladonna
Genus Capsicum (50 spp.)
Species Capsicum annuum L.—cayenne pepper
Genus Datura (10 spp.)
Species Datura stramonium L.—jimsonweed
Genus Hyoseyamus (20 spp.)
Species Hyoscyamus niger L.—black henbane
Genus Nicotiana (66 spp.)
Species Nicotiana tabacum L.—tobacco
Genus Solanum (1,700 spp.)
Species Solanum dulcamara L.—bittersweet
Genus Withania (10 spp.)
Species Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal—withania
Subclass Caryophyllidae
Order Caryophyllales (13 families)
Family Cactaceae (50-150 genera, 1,500-2,000 spp.)
Genus Lophophora (30 spp.)
Species Lophophora williamsii (Lem. ex Salm-Dyck)
Coult.—peyote
Genus Selenicereus (25 spp.)
Species Selenicereus grandiflorus (L.) Britt. & Rose—
night-blooming cereus
Family Caryophyllaceae (66-75 genera, 2,000 spp.)
Genus Saponaria (30 spp.)
Species Saponaria officinalis L_—soapwort
Genus Stellaria (120 spp.)
Species Stellaria media (L.) Vill—chickweed
Family Chenopodiaceae (100-113 genera, 1,500 spp.)
Genus Chenopodium (150 spp.)
Species Chenopodium ambrosioides L.—wormseed
Genus Spinacia (3-4 spp.)
Species Spinacia oleracea L.—spinach
Family Phytolaccaceae (15-19 genera, 125 spp.)
Genus Phytolacca L. (35 spp.)
Species Phytolacca americana L.—pokeweed
Order Polygonales (1 family)
Family Polygonaceae (30-49 genera, 1,000 spp.)
Genus Polygonum (150 spp.)
Species Polygonum bistorta L.—bistort

Genus Rheum (50 spp.)
Species Rheum officinale Baill.—rhubarb
Species Rheum palmatum L.—Chinese rhubarb
Genus Rumex (180 spp.)
Species Rumex acetosella L.—sheep sorrel
Species Rumex crispus L.—yellow dock
Subclass Dilleniidae (13 orders)
Order Capparales (5 families)
Family Brassicaceae (Cruciferae) (350-381 genera,
3,000 spp.)
Genus Armoracia (3 spp.)
Species Armoracia rusticana PG. Gaertn., B. Mey.
& Scherb.—horseradish
Genus Capsella (5 spp.)
Species Capsella bursa-pastoris (L.) Medik—
shepherd’s purse
Order Ebenales (5 families)
Family Styracaceae (10-1 | genera, 150 spp.)
Genus Styrax (100 spp.)
Species Styrax benzoin Dryand.—styrax
Order Ericales (8 families)
Family Ericaceae (116-125 genera, 3,500 spp.)
Genus Arctostaphylos (71 spp.)
Species Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng.—
bearberry
Genus Gaultheria (210 spp.)
Species Gaultheria procumbens L.—wintergreen
Order Malvales (5 families)
Family Malvaceae (100-119 genera, 1,500 spp.)
Genus Althaea (12 spp.)
Species Althaea officinalis L_—marshmallow
Family Tiliaceae (50-53 genera, 450 spp.)
Genus Tilia (50 spp.)
Species Tilia x europaea L—European linden
Family Sterculiaceae (65-67 genera, 10,900 spp.)
Genus Cog (110-125 spp.)
Species Cola nitida (Vent.) A. Chev.—kola
Genus Theobroma (30 spp.)
Species Theobroma cacao L.—cacao
Order Nepenthales (2 families)
Family Droseraceae (4 genera, 103 spp.)
Genus Drosera (100 spp.)
Species Drosera rotundifolia L._—round-leaf sundew
Order Primulales (3 families)
Family Primulaceae (23-30 genera, 1,000 spp.)
Genus Primula (500 spp.)
Species Primula veris L._—cowslip
Order Salicales (1 family)
Family Salicaceae (2 genera, 350 spp.)
Genus Populus (35 spp.)
Species Populus tremuloides Michx.—quaking aspen
Genus Salix (300 spp.)
Species Salix alba L._—white willow
Order Theales (18 families)
Family Clusiaceae (47-50 genera, 1,200 spp.)
Genus Garcinia (200 spp.)
Species Garcinia indica (Thouars) Choisy—garcinia
Genus Hypericum (400 spp.)
Species Hypericum perforatum L.—St. John’s wort
Family Theaceae (40 genera, 600 spp.)
Genus Camellia (82 spp.)
Species Camellia sinensis L.O. Kuntze—tea

----- PAGE 659 -----
Order Violales (24 families)
Family Violaceae (16-20 genera, 800 spp.)
Genus Viola (500 spp.)
Species Viola odorata L—sweet violet
Species Viola tricolor L.—heartsease
Family Turneraceae (8-10 genera, 100 spp.)
Genus Tirnera (60 spp.)
Species Turnera diffusa Willd. ex J.A. Schultes—
damiana
Family Passifloraceae (16-17 genera, 650 spp.)
Genus Passiflora (400-500 spp.)
Species Passiflora incarnata L.—passionflower
Subclass Hamamelidae
Order Hamamelidales (5 families)
Family Hamamelidaceae (26-29 genera, 100 spp.)
Genus Hamamelis (6 spp.)
Species Hamamelis virginiana L.—witch hazel
Order Fagales (3 families)
Family Betulaceae (6 genera, 120-170 spp.)
Genus Betula (60 spp)
Species Betula pendula Roth—white birch
Family Fagaceae (7 genera, 800-1,000 spp.)
Genus Castanea (12 spp.)
Species Castanea sativa Mill—sweet chestnut
Genus Quercus (450 spp.)
Species Quercus alba L.—white oak
Order Juglandales (1 family)
Family Juglandaceae (8 genera, 60 spp.)
Genus Juglans (20 spp.)
Species Fuglans cinerea L.—butternut
Order Myricales (1 family)
Family Myricaceae (3 genera, 60 spp.)
Genus Myrica (50 spp.)
Species Myrica cerifera L.—bayberry
Order Urticales (6 families)
Family Ulmaceae (15 genera, 150 spp.)
Genus Ulmus (45 spp.)
Species Ulmus rubra Muhl.—slippery elm
Family Cannabaceae (2 genera, 5 spp.)
Genus Cannabis (3 spp.)
Species Cannabis sativa L.—marijuana
Genus Humulus (2 spp.)
Species Humutus hupulus L—hops
Family Urticaceae (45-48 genera, 700-1,000 spp.)
Genus Parietaria (2 spp.)
Species Parietaria officinalis L_—pellitory
Genus Urtica (50 spp.)
Species Urtica dioica L.—stinging nettle
Class Liliopsida—monocotyledons
Subclass Arecidae (6 families)
Order Arales (3 families)
Family Acoraceae (105-110 genera, 1,800-2,450 spp.)
Genus Acorus (2 spp.)
Species Acorus calamus L.—calamus, sweet flag

‘TAXONOMY HIERARCHY & 651

Order Arecales (1 family)
Family Arecaceae (Palmae) (200-202 genera, 2,700-
3,000 spp.)
Genus Areca (50 spp.)
Species Areca catechu L.—betel palm
Genus Serenoa (1 sp.)
Species Serenoa repens (Bartr.) Small—saw palmetto
Subclass Commelinidae
Order Cyperales (2 families)
Family Poaceae (Gramineae) (651-657 genera, 10,000 spp.)
Genus Avena (50 spp.)
Species Avena sativa L. oats
Genus Zea (1 sp.)
Species Zea mays L.—cornsilk
Subclass Liliidae
Order Liliales (15 families)
Family Liliaceae (270 genera, 4,000 spp.)
Genus Aletris (10 spp.)
Species Aletris farinosa L._—false unicorn root
Genus Allium (450 spp.)
Species Allium cepa L.—garden onion
Species Allium sativum L.—cultivated garlic
Genus Colchicum (65 spp.)
Species Colchicum autumnale L.—autumn crocus
Genus Convallaria (1 sp.)
Species Convallaria majalis L.—lily of the valley
Genus Trillium (30 spp.)
Species Trillium erectum L,—beth root, trillium
Family Dioscoreaceae (5-9 genera, 620 spp.)
Genus Dioscorea (600 spp.)
Species Dioscorea villosa L.—wild yam
Family Iridaceae (60-88 genera, 1,500 spp.)
Genus Iris (300 spp.)
Species Iris versicolor L_—blue tlag
Subclass Zingiberidae
Order Zingiberales (8 families)
Family Zingiberaceae (45-50 genera, 1,000 spp.)
Genus Curcuma (5 spp.)
Species Curcuma longa L.—turmeric
Genus Zingiber (90 spp.)
Species Zingiber officinale Roscoe—ginger

Sources
Greuter, et al., eds. Laternational Code of Botanical Nomenclature

(Tokyo Code). Regnum Vegetabile No. 131. Konigstein,
Germany: Koeltz Scientific Books, 1994.

Stearn, WT: Botanical Latin. Newton-Abbot, UK: David &

Charles, 1992.

Trehane, et al. International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated

Plants. Wimborne, UK: Quarterjack Publishing, 1995.

----- PAGE 660 -----
BIBLIOGRAPHY

BD

History

Griggs B. Green Pharmacy: The History and Evolution of Western
Herbal Medicine. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press, 1997.

Haller JS. Medical Protestants: The Eclectics in American Medicine.
Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1994.

Wood M. The Magic Staff! The Vitalist Tradition in Western
Medicine. Berkeley: North Atlantic Books, 1992.

Eclectic Textbooks

Ellingwood F. American Materia Medica, Therapeutics & Pharma-
cognosy. 1898. Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Pub-
lications, 1983.

Felter and Lloyd. King’s American Dispensatory, vols. | and 2, 1892.
Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical Publications, 1983.

Felter, HW. The Eclectic Materia Medica, Pharmacology &
Therapeutics. 1922. Reprint, Sandy, OR: Eclectic Medical
Publications, 1983.

Modern Herbals

Bisset, ed. Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals. Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press, 1994,

Blumenthal M, et al. The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs. Austin,
TX: American Botanical Council, 2003.

Foster S, Hobbs C..A Field Guide to Western Medicinal Plants and
Herbs. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 2002.

Grieve M. A Modern Herbal, vols. I and II, New York: Dover
Publications, 1971.

Hobbs C. Medicinal Mushrooms: An Exploration of Tradition,
Healing, and Culture. Summertown, TN: Botanica Press, 2003.

Lewis WH, Elvin-Lewis M. Medical Botany. New York: J. Wiley,
2003.

McCaleb RS, Leigh E, Morien K. The Encyclopedia of Popular
Herbs, Roseville, CA: Prima Publishing, 2000.

Moore M. Medicinal Plants of the Desert and Canyon West. Santa
Fe: Museum of New Mexico Press, 1989.

. Medicinal Plants of the Mountain West, Santa Fe: Museum

of New Mexico Press, 2003.

. Medicinal Plants of the Pacific West. Santa Fe: Red Crane
Books, 1993.

Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal Medicines: A
Guide for Health-Care Professionals. London: Pharmaceutical
Press, 1996.

Tyler VE. The Honest Herbal: A Sensible Guide to the Use of Herbs
and Related Remedies. New York: Haworth Herbal Press,
2002.

Wren RC. Potter’s New Cyclopedia af Botanical Drugs and
Preparations, 8th ed. Essex, UK: C. W. Daniel Co., 1988.

652

Modern Herbal Medicine Making

Green J. The Herbal Medicine Maker’s Handbook: A Home Manual.
Freedom, CA: Crossing Press, 2000.

Hobbs C. Handmade Herbal Medicines: Recipes for Potions, Elixirs,
and Salves. Loveland, CO: Interweave Press, 1998.

Phytotherapy

Bove M. An Encyclopedia of Natural Healing for Children and
Infants. Chicago: Keats, 2001.

Brown D. Herbal Prescriptions for Better Health. Rocklin, CA:
Prima Publishing, 1996.

Gladstar R. Family Herbal: A Guide to Living Life with Energy,
Health, and Vitality. Pownal, VT: Storey Books, 2001.

. Herbal Healing for Women. New York: Simon &

Schuster, 1993.

. Rosemary Gladstar’s Herbal Remedies for Children’s Health.
Pownal, VT: Storey Books, 1999,

Green J. Male Herbal: Health Care for Men & Boys. Freedom,
CA: Crossing Press, 1991.

Hobbs C. Natural Therapy for Your Liver: Herbs and Other
Natural Remedies for a Healthy Liver. New York: Avery,
2002.

Hoffmann D. The Complete Wustrated Holistic Herbal: A Safe and
Practical Guide to Making and Using Herbal Remedies.
London: Thorsons, 2001.

. An Elder’s Herbal. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts Press,
1993.

—.. Holistic Herbal. London: Thorsons, 2002.

——. The Information Sourcebook of Herbal Medicine. Freedom,
CA: Crossing Press, 1994.

. Successful Stress Control. Rochester, VT: Healing Arts
Press, 1991.

Hudson T. Women’s Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine. Los Angeles:
Lowell House; Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1999.

Keville K, Green M. Aromatherapy: A Complete Guide to the
Healing Art. Freedom, CA: Grossing Press, 1995.

Kuhn MA, Winston D. Herbal Therapy and Supplements: A
Scientific and Traditional Approach, Philadelphia: Lippincott,
2000.

McIntyre A. The Complete Woman's Herbal: A Manual of Healing
Herbs and Nutrition for Personal Well-Being and Family Care.
New York: H. Holt, 1995.

McKenna DJ. Botanical Medicines: The Desk Reference for Major
Herbal Supplements. New York: Haworth Herbal Press, 2002.

McQuade Crawford A. The Herbal Menopause Book. Freedom,
CA: The Crossing Press, 1996.

Mills $, Bone K. Principles and Practice of Phytotherapy: Modern
Herbal Medicine. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

----- PAGE 661 -----
Moore M. Herbs for the Urinary Tract. New Canaan, CT: Keats
Publishing, 1998.

Pizzorno JE, Murray MT. The Textbook of Natural Medicine.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1999.

Weiss RE. Herbal Medicine. Stuttgart; New York: Thieme, 2000.

Winston D. Saw Palmetto for Men and Women. Pownal, VT:
Storey Books, 1999.

Wood, M. The Book of Herbal Wasdom: Using Plants as Medicine.
Berkeley: North Atlantic Books, 1997.

Yance DR. Herbal Medicine, Healing and Cancer. Los Angeles:
Keats Publishing, 1999.

Pharmacognosy
Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants.
Hampshire, UK: Intercept, 1999.

Evans WC. Trease and Evans’ Pharmacognosy, 13th ed. London:
Baillere Tindall, 1989.

Phytochemistry

Cody V, Middleton E, Harborne JB: Plant Flavonoids in Biology
and Medicine. New York: Liss, 1986.

Colegate S, Molyneux R. Bioactive Natural Products: Detection,
Isolation and Structural Determination. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, 1993.

Glasby JS. Encyclopaedia of the Terpenoids. New York: Wiley,
1982.

. Eneyclopedia of the Alkaloids. New York: Plenum
Publishing, 1983.

Harborne JB. Introduction to Ecological Biochemistry. London, San
Diego: Academic Press, 1988.

Harborne JB, Baxter H. Phytochemical Dictionary: A Handbook of
Bioactive Compounds from Plants. London; Washington, DC:
Taylor & Francis, 1993.

Harborne JB, Mabry TJ, Mabry H. The Flavonoids. London:
Chapman & Fall, 1982.

Mann J, Davidson RS, Hobbs JB, et al. Natural Products: Their
Chemistry and Biological Significance. New York: Wiley, 1994.

Mann J. Secondary Metabolism. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1987.

Roberts ME, Wink M. Alkaloids: Biochemistry, Ecology, and
Medicinal Applications. New York: Plenum Press, 1998.
Schultes RE, Hofmann A. The Botany and Chemistry of

Hallucinogens, Springfield, TL: Charles C. Thomas, 1980.

Wagner H, Bladt S. Plant Drug Analysis: A Thin Layer

Chromatography Atlas. Berlin, New York: Springer, 1996.

Phytopharmacology

Boik J. Cancer and Natural Medicine: A Textbook of Basic Science
and Clinical Research. Princeton, MN: Oregon Medical
Press, 1996.

Der Marderosian A, Liberti L. Natural Product Medicine: A
Scientific Guide to Foods, Drugs, Cosmetics. Philadelphia: G. F.
Stickley, 1988.

Chu CK, Cutler HG. Natural Products as Antiviral Agents. New
York: Plenum Press, 1992.

BIBLIOGRAPHY .@ 653

Hartwell JL. Plants Used Against Cancer: A Survey. Lawrence,
KS: Quarterman Publications, 1984.

Hudson JB. Antiviral Compounds from Plants. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, 1990.

Mou-Tuan Huang, et al. Food Phytochemicals for Cancer
Prevention, vols. 1 and 2. Washington, DC: American
Chemical Society, 1994.

Williamson EM, Okpako DT, Evans FJ. Selection, Preparation,
and Pharmacological Evaluation of Plant Material. Chichester;
New York: J. Wiley, 1996.

Pharmacopoeias

Blumenthal M, et al. The Complete German Commission E
Monographs: Therapeutic Guide to Herbal Medicines. Austin,
TX: American Botanical Council; Boston: Integrative
Medicine Communications, 1998.

Boyle, W. Official Herbs: Botanical Substances in the United States
Pharmacopoeias, 1820-1990. East Palestine, Ohio: Buckeye
Naturopathic Press, 1991.

Bradley, Peter. British Herbal Compendium. Bournemouth, UK:
British Herbal Medicine Association, 1992.

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia. Bournemouth, UK: British Herbal
Medicine Association, 1983.

British Pharmaceutical Codex. London: Pharmaceutical Press,
1911.

British Pharmacopoeia. London: Gonstable & Co. Ltd., 1932.

United States Pharmacopeia, 11th ed. Easton, PA: The United
States Pharmacopoeial Convention, 1936.

Wood HC, Osol A. The Dispensatory of the United States of
America, 23rd ed. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1943,

Phytopharmacy

List PH, Schmidt PC. Phytopharmaceutical Technology. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1989.

Osol A, ed. Remington's Pharmaceutical Sciences, 15th ed. Easton,
PA: Mack, 1975.

Wijesekera, ed. The Medicinal Plant Industry. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, 1991.

Toxicology

Brinker F. Herb Contraindications and Drug Interactions. Sandy,
OR: Eclectic Medical Publications, 2001.

DeSmet P, et al. Adverse Effects of Herbal Drug, vols. 1-3. New
York: Springer-Verlag, 1992-97,

Harborne JB, et al. Dictionary of Plant Toxins. Chichester; New
York: J. Wiley, 1996.

McGuffin M, et al. American Herbal Products Association’s Botanical
Safety Handbook. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1997.

Ethnobotany

Akerele O, Heywood V, Synge H. Conservation of Medicinal
Plants. New York; Cambridge University Press, 1991.

Akerele O, Kawaguchi Y, eds. Natural Resources and Human
Health—Plants of Medicinal and Nutritional Value:
Proceedings of the 1st WHO Symposium on Plants and Health
for All. Amsterdam; New York: Elsevier, 1992.

----- PAGE 662 -----
654 @ BIBLIOGRAPHY

Balick MJ, Cox PA. Plants, People, and Culture: The Science of
Ethnobotany. New York: Scientific American Library, 1996.

Balick MJ, Elisabetsky E, Laird SA. Medicinal Resources of the
Tropical, Forest: Biodiversity and Its Importance to Human
Health, New York: Columbia University Press, 1996.

Cotton CM. Ethnobotany: Principles and Applications. New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1996.

Jones Ti With Bitter Herbs They Shall Eat It: The Origins of
Human Diet and Medicine. Tucson: University of Arizona
Press, 1996.

Martin GJ. Ethnobotany: A Methods Manual. New York:
Chapman & Hall, 1995.

Schultes R, Raffauf R. The Healing Forest: Medicinal and Toxic
Plants of the Northwest Amazonia. Portland, OR: Dios-
corides Press, 1990.

Schultes RE, Hofmann A, Ratsch C. Plants of the Gods: Their
Sacred, Healing, and Hallucinogenic Powers. Rochester, VT:
Healing Arts Press, 2001.

Schultes RE, von Reis S. Ethnobotany: Evolution of a Discipline.
Portland, OR: Dioscorides Press, 1995.

Walter KS, Gillett HJ, eds. [UCN Red List of Threatened Plants.
Gland, Switzerland; Cambridge, UK: International Union
for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources, 1998.

----- PAGE 663 -----
Numbers in bold indicate a
Materia Medica entry.

Abies alba, 63-64

abrasions, 541

abrin, 206

Abrus precatorius, 206

abscesses, 526, 591

absorption, 145

absinthiin, 70

absinthin, 70

Acacia catechu, 497

acacia gum, 51

Acacia senegal, 51

Acanthopanax senticosus, 545

Acanthopanax sessiliflorum, 484

ACE Inhibitors, 172-173

acetylcholine (ACh), 138

acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, 138

acetylene, 59

Achillea millefolium, 33, 395, 454,
486, 488, 491, 493, 497, 499,
501, 507, 509, 514, 516, 520,
523-524

achillin, 68, 70

Achyranthes bidentata, 395

acne, 438, 552, 595

Acocanthera, 169

aconitine, 130

Aconitum napellus, 130

Acorus calamus, 94,395

Acorus gramineus, 395

actions, 483-521

acute bronchitis,323-326

acute myelocytic leukemia, 132

acylglycerols, 58

adaptogen, 242, 345, 351,
483-484, 545

Addison's disease, 466

Adenium, 169

adenoids, 552

Adenostyles alliariae, 321

adenylate cyclase, 137

adhesion molecule-1 (CAM-1), 158

Adiantum pedatum, 28, 395

administration, 145, 217

Adonis, 169

ADP-receptor agonists, 174

adrenal cortex, 465

renal medulla, 465

adrenaline, 465

adrenocorticotropic hormone

(ACTH), 76, 346, 465

adsorption chromatography, 22

adulteration, 211

adverse drug reports (ADRs), 187

adzuki bean, 107

aescin, 79

Aesculus glabra, 524

ry

INDEX

Aesculus hippocastanum, 488, 497,
501, 524

affective disorders, 354

affinin, 59

aflatoxins, 212

after pains, 402

agar, 52

Agaricus blazei, 44, 153

agaropectin, 53

agarose, 52

Agathosma betulina, 395, 454, 507,
524

Agathosma crenulata, 395

Agathosma serratifolia, 395

Agave sisalana, 81

aglycone, 41, 48

agonist, 139

AGRICOLA (Agriculture Online
Access), 642

Agrimonia eupatoria, 497, 507,
514, 525

agrimoniin, 114

agrimony. See Agrimonia eupatoria

Agropyron repens, 546

air hunger, 322

air swallowing, 262

ajoene, 174

alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 24

alanine transaminase (ALT), 178

alantolactone, 70

alarm reaction, 346

Albizzia julibrissin, 395, 484

Alchemilla arvensis, 488

Alchemilla vulgaris, 525

alcohol-water preparations, 223

aldehyde, 39

aldosterone, 375, 465

Aletris farinosa, 393

Alexandrian senna, 582

alfalfa, 78, 165, 302

alizarin, 96

alkaloids, 120-133, 152

alkamides, 59

alkanet, 96

Alkanna tinctoria, 96, 203, 395

alkannin, 96

alkyl sulfides, 176

alkylcatechols, 58

allamandin, 67

allantoin, 586

allelopathic, 68

allergies, 546

allicin, 39, 60, 174

alliin, 60, 174

alliinase, 60

Allium cepa, 516

Allium sativum, 293, 445, 456,
462, 464, 484, 486, 491, 501,
502, 512, 516, 520, $26

Allium ursinum, 172

allocrytopine, 125

allomones, 68

Allomyces, 68

allopathy, 11

alloxan, 179

Aloe ferox, 98, 395

Aloe perryi, 98, 395

Aloe vera, 98, 394, 514

aloe. See Aloe vera

aloe-emodin, 98

alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), 56

Alstonia spp., 127

alterative, 243, 431, 484-485

Althaea officinalis, 51, 240, 486,
488, 506, 512, 526

alveoli, 316

Amanita citrina, 127

Amanita muscaria, 129, 242

Amanita phalloides, 23, 177, 205, 584

Amanita toxins, 205

amanitin, 205

amatoxins, 205

Ambrosia spp., 70

ambrosin, 70

Amelanchier ovalis, 172

amenorrhea, 386

American cranesbill, 553

American dogwoods, 207

American ginseng, 28

Ames test, 24

amino sugars, 43

aminotransferase, 24

Ammi vimmaga, 96, 171, 340

amoebic dysentery, 537

Amorphophallus spp., 47

amygdalin, 50

anabasine, 122

Anacardium occidentale, 208, 464

analgesic, 345, 410, 517

anaphylactic reaction, 446

anatomic barriers, 147

androgens, 141, 439

Andrographis paniculata, 395

androstenedione, 84

androtex, 84

Anemone nemorosa, 70, 199

anemonin, 70

Anemopsis californica, 28

anesthesia, 447

anethol, 152

anethole, 94

Anethum graveolens, 34, 63, 488,
494, 502, 527

aneurysm, 304

Angelica archangelica, 395, 488,
493, 494, 502, 520, 527

Angelica dahurica, 135

Angelica japonica, 96

Angelica sinensis, 15, 395, 442

angelica. See Angelica archangelica

655

angelicin, 96, 210

angel's trumpets, 122

angina pectoris, 310, $42, 945

angiogenesis, 164

angiotensin converting enzyme
(ACE), 172

angiotensin, 172

animal testing, 195

aniseed. See Piszpinella anisum

ankylosing spondylitis, 411

annonaine, 125

Anopheles, 459

anorexia nervosa, 363, 527, 540

antacids, 273

antagonist, 139

anthelmintic, 78

anthochlor, 100, 106

anthocyanidin, 106

anthraquinone, 48, 97, 201

Anthriscus cerefolium, 395

Antiaris, 169

Antiaropsis, 169

antibiotic therapy, recuperation
after, 451

anticarcinogens, 164

anticatarrhal, 243, 485-487

antidepressant, 345

antidiuretic hormone, 375

antiexudative actions, 524

antifungal herbs, 456

antihepatotoxic, 175

anti-inflammatory, 158-159, 243,
247, 487-490

antimicrobial, 243, 247, 450,
489-493

antioxidants, 165-168

antirheumatic, 409, 493-494

Antirrbinum spp., 106

antispasmodic, 243, 248, 345,
386, 494-496

antitumor activity, 457

antiviral agents, 164-165

anxiety, 347-348, 557-568, 572,
582, 585, $92

Aphanes arvensis, 383

aphthous ulcers, 267-268, 578, 580

apigenin, 106

Apium graveolens, 395, 464, 488,
493, 494, 502, 507, 514, 528

Apocynum, 169

apoenzyme, 136

apoptosis, 163

appetite, 537, 558, 560, 566, 571

arabic acid, 52

arabinogalactans, 46

arabinose, 42

arachidic acid, 95

arachidonic acid metabolites, 155,
174

Araha californica, 395

----- PAGE 664 -----
656 @ INDEX

Aralia elata, 484

Arvalia manshurica, 484

Aralia nudicaulis, 74, 395

Aralia racemosa, 28, 74, 395

Aralia schmidtit, 484

arbor vitae, 588

arbutin, 48, 92

Arctium lappa, 423, 433, 458,
464, 484, 493, 507, 528

Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, 395, 454,
486, 491, 493, 497, 507, 529

Aretotis, 71

arecoline, 122

Arisaema japonicum, 395

Aristolochia clematitis, 152, 395

Aristolochia contorta, 395

Aristolochia debilis, 395

Aristolochia serpentaria, 28, 395

Armoracia lapathifolia, 514

Armoracia rusticana, 50, 493, 520

Arnica montana, 395, 493, 529

arnica. See Arnica montana

aromatherapy, 10, 306

aromoline, 126

artecanin, 370

Artemia salina, 23

Artemisia abrotanum, 394, 491,
499, 509, 520

Artemisia absinthium, 394, 452,
491, 493, 499, 502, 509, 514,
520, $30

Artemisia annua, 62, 70, 395, 459

Artemisia capillaris, 395

Artemisia douglasiana, 395

Artemisia judaica, 70

Artemisia lactiflora, 395

Artemisia scoparia, 395

Artemisia vulgaris, 395, 462, 493,
494, 499, 509, 515, 517, 520,
531

artemisinin, 62, 70, 459

arterial plaques, 307

arteriosclerosis, 303, 307-309, 589

arthritis, 411-418, 528, $36, 557,
561, 575, 587, 588, 595

Arum maculatum, 128

Arundo donax, 128

asafoetida, 152

B-asarone, 94

Alsarum canadense, 395

Asarum europaeum, 395

Asarum heteropides, 395

Asarum sieboldii, 395

ascaridole, 571

Aselepias asperula, 395

Asclepias spp., 34, 169

Asclepias tuberosa, 395, 488, 512, 531

ascorbic acid, 167

ash values, 21

Asian mint, 325

Asparagus officinalis, 78, 105

"asparagus, 78, 105

aspartate aminotransferase (AST),
24

aspartate transaminase (AST), 178

aspergillic acid, 131

asperuloside, 66, 67

Asterina pectinifera, 23

asthma, 330-334, 546, 554, 555,
560, 363, 374, 575, 586, 589,
390, 593

astragaloside III, 82

Astragalus gumimifer, 52

Astragalus membranaceus, 443, 532

astragalus. See Astragalus mem-
branaceus.

astringent, 243, 248, 496-498

atherosclerosis, 307

athlete’s foot, 456, 566

atopic dermatitis, 56

atrial natriuretic factor, 375

Atropa belladonna, 122, 373

atropine, 123

attar of rose, 64

attention deficit disorder, 479

aucubigenin, 67

aucubin, 66, 67

Auricularia auricula, 44, 153

aurones, 100, 106

autoimmune arthritic diseases, 421

autoimmune diseases, 446

autumn crocus, 394, 426

Avena sativa, 464-465, 506, 532

avenacin, 80

ayurveda, 10, 242

Azadirachta indica, \05

B vitamins, 299

B.R.AT. diet, 267

babchi, 106

baccatin JJ, 162

Bach flower remedies, 10, 333

bacteriuria, 379

baicalein, 158

Ballota nigra, 373 517, 533

balm of gilead. See Populus candicans

balmony. See Chelone glabra

balneotherapy, 431

balsam of peru, 228

balsam of tolu, 228

balsams, 87

bananas, 170

Banisteriopsis caapi, 128

Baptisia tinetoria, 153, 395, 445, 452,
484, 486, 491, 504, 914, 533

barbaloin, 98

barberry. See Berberis vulgaris

barley water, 378

Barosma betulina, 524

baths (balneotherapy), 228, 431

bayberry. See Myrica cerifera

bearberry. See Arctostaphylos uva-ursi

bed-wetting, 529, 547, 589

belladonna, 122

bellidifolin, 99

Bellis perennis, $12

benefit-to-risk ratio, 195

benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH),
138, 583, 591, 406-407, 546

benzaldehyde, 65

benzodiazepines, 172, 361

benzofurans, 93

benzoquinones, 96

benzyl alcohol, 210

benzyl salicylate, 210

berbamine, 125

berberine, 125

Berberis aquifolium, 564

Berberis vulgaris, 394, 499, 504,
514, 534

berberrubine, 126

bergamot, 95° 325

bergaprten, 95, 210

bervulcine, 126

betadinin, 100

betel nuts, 202

Beth root, 28, 81, 384

Betonica spp., 34

betonicine, 122

Betula alba, 534

Betula pendula, 78

Betula spp., 366, 488, 493

bezafibrate, 171

Bidens chilensi, 176

Bidens pilosa, 176

bidesmosidic saponins, 74

Bifidobacteria, 43

biflavonoids, 108

binomial, Latin, 32

bioassays, 23

bioavailability, 146

biochanin A, 106, 143

biological response modifiers,

109, 162

biomedical model, 241

BIOSIS, 642

biotransformation, 148

biotransmutation, 14

birch. See Berula alba

birthwort, 152

biting stonecrop, 242

bitter almonds, 50

bitter melon, 85

bitter principle, 67

bitter rubberweed, 70

bitter sneezeweed, 70

bitter, 243, 410, 498-501

black cohosh. See Cimicifuga

racemosa

black currant seed oil, 56

black haw. See Viburnum pruni-

folium

black horehound. See Ballota nigra

black mustard. See Brassica nigra

black root. See Leptandra virginica

black walnut, 68

blackberry. See Rubus villosa

blackhead, 438

bladderwrack. See Fucus vesiculosus

blepharitis, $50-551

blood-brain barrier, 147

bloodroot. See Sanguinaria
canadensis

ue flag. See Iris versicolor

ue gum, 547

bocconine, 125

body mass index (BMI), 297

body system affinities, 485

bogbean. See Menyanthes trifoliata

boils, 455, 526, 541, 544, 576, 591

boldine, 126

boldo. See Peumus boldus

boneset. See Eupatorium perfoliatum

Borago officinalis, 56, 395, 488, 517

Bordetella pertussi, 329

borneo camphor, 64

borneol, 64

bornyl acetate, 64

Boswellia serrata, 86

Bowiea, 169

bowman’s capsule, 375

bracken fern, 50

bradykinin, 155

Brassica hirta, 50

Brassica juncea, 30

Brassica nigra, 50, 416, 534

‘@ oleracea var. capitata, 50, 200

ict campestris, 200

jc napus, 201

Brassica oleracea var. gemmifera, 39

Brassica spp.. $20, 493

Brayera anthehnintica, \\4

breast milk, 151, 402-403, 552

brine shrimp lethality test, 23

omen

British Herbal Pharmacopoeia
(BHP), 216

British Pharmacopoeia (BP), 20

British Pharmacopoeial Codex
(BPC), 20

broad bean, 59

bronchi, 316

bronchiectasis, 581

bronchioles, 316

bronchitic asthma, 526

bronchius, 321, 526, 527, 534-539,
544, 546, 551, 555, 560,
563-569, 572-575, $81-595

bronchodilating effects, 332

brucellosis, 541

Brugmansia spp., 122

bruises, 529, 535, 556, 559, 580

bryonolic acid, 163

bryophytes, 31

buchu. See Agathosma betulina

buckbean, 568

buckeye, 524

buckthorn, 97, 394

bufadienolides, 83

bufanolides, 169

Bufo vulgaris, 127

bufotenine, 127

Bugleweed. See Lycopus virginicus

Bupleurum chinense, 81

Bupleurum falcatum, 78, 81

burdock. See Arctium lappa

burns, 535, 959

Bursera microphylla, 28, 175

burseran, 175

bursitis, 412, 427

butcher’s broom, 81, 83

butterbur, 330

butternut, 394

button mushrooms, 44

butyric acid, 55

cabbage white butterfly, 50

cabbage, 50

cacao, 123

cadmium, 213

cafestol, 72

caffeic acid, 94

caffeine, 124

cajeputol, 66

calamus root, 94

calcium channel blockers, 172

Calendula officinalis, 433, 445, 458,
488, 491, 509, 534

calendula. See Calendula officinalis

California poppy. See Eschscholzia
californica

Calotropis, 169

Caltha palustris, 70, 199

Camellia sinensis, 124, 497, 317

campesterol, 143

camphor, 65, 86

Camptotheca acuminata, \30

camptothecin, 130

canadine, 125

cananga oil, 210

cancer, 159-164, 446, 456-460

Candida albicans, 544

canin, 370

Cannabis sativa, 56, 93

capillary fragility, 76

capric acid, 55

caproic acid, 55

caprylic acid, 55

caprylic alcohol, 60

capsanthin, 85

----- PAGE 665 -----
Capsella bursa-pastoris, 395, 488,
497, 535

Capsicum annuum, 302, 417, 452,
464, 486, 491, 493, 501, 520, 536

capsules, 227

caraway. See Carum carvi

carbohydrases, 137

carbohydrates, 41-53, 114

[beta]-carboline alkaloids, 128

carbon tetrachloride, 24

carbuncle, 455

carcinogenicity, 159

cardenolides, 83, 169

cardiac asthma, 321

cardiac glycosides, 168, 200

cardiac remedies, 243, 291, 501-502

cardioactive, 169, 291

cardiotonic, 169, 291

cardiovascular system, 168-174,
291-315

Carica, 50

Carissa, 169

carminative, 243, 249, 502-503

carnosol, 72

carob gum, 179

carotene, 85

carotenoids, 85, 168

carrageen, 51

Carthamus tinetorms, 395

cartilage, 419

Carum carvi, 63, 452, 491, 494,
502, 520, 537

carvacrol, 65

carvone, 65

f-caryophyllene, 68

Casatela emoryi, 28

Cascara sagrada, 201, 265, 394, 514

cashew, 208

cassava, 200

Castilla, 169

castor bean, 153, 206

castor oil, 266

catalase, 166, 137

catalysis, 136

catarrh, 533, 538, 555, 560, 568, 572

catarrhal deafness, 580

catechin, 108

Catha edulis, 128, 170

Catharanthus roseus, 127, 160, 179,
241

cathine, 128

cathinone, 170

catnip. See Nepeta cataria

Caulophyllum thalictroides, 395,
488, 493, 509, 516

causality, 195

cayenne. See Capsicum annuum

celandine, 394

celery seed. See Apium graveolens

cell adhesion molecules, 158

cell arrest, 161, 163

cell cycle, 160

cell membrane, 146

cellulose, 44

cembrane, 71

Centaurium erythraea, 499, 514, $37

centaury. See Centaurium erythraea

centipedes, 50

cephaeline, 126

Cephaelis acuminata, 126

Cephaelis ipecacuanha, 394, 512,
520, 537

Cephatocereus senilis, 208

Cephalotaxus harringtonia, C. for-
tunei, and C. hamensis, 132

cephalotoxine, 131

cepharanthine, 125

Ceratonia siliqua, 179

Cerbera, 169

cerebral insufficiency, 554

cerebroprotection, 554

cerotinic acid, 58

ceruloplasmin, 168

Cetraria islandica, 486, 488, 506,
512, 537

cetyl alcohol, 58

chaconine, 131

chalcones, 100, 106

Chamaecyparis thyoides, 199

Chamaelirium luteum, 28, 384

Chamaemelum nobile, 274, 350,

395, 517

chamazulene, 68

chamomile lawn, 350

chamomile. See Chamaemelum

nobile

Changium smyrnoides, 395

haparral, 113

haparro, 28

hasteberry, 595

haulmoogra oil, 57

haulmoogric acid, 57

Cheiranthus, 169

Chelidonium majus, 394, 504, 520

Chelone glabra, 504, 514, $38

Chemical Abstracts, 643

chemotaxonomy, 22

chemotherapeutic agents,

161-164

chemotypes, 63

Chenopodium quinoa, 78

cherries, 427

chest pain, 321

Chiang Mai Declaration, 26

chicken pox, 373

chickweed. See Stellaria media

chicory, 45, 71

chilblains, 534, 536, 547, 580,

596, 598

children, 473-482

Chimapbila umbellata, 28

Chinese figwort, 67

Chinese rhubarb, 394

Chinese white flower oil, 325

Chionanthus virginicus, 484, 504,
514, 538

chitin, 44

cholagogue, 283, 503-505

cholecystitis, 287-288, 563

cholestasis, 283

cholesterol, 84, 170-171, 300-302

chondrocalcinosis, 426

chondroitin sulfate, 44, 414

Chondrus crispus, 51, 486, 488,

506, 512, $39

christmas rose, 70

chromatography, 22

chromophore, 85

chronic bronchitis, 326-329, 526,

545

chronic catarrh, 554, 560

Chrysanthemum parthennum, 587

chrysin, 135

Cicer arietinum, 484

Cichorium intybus, 45,71

Creuta virosa, 59

cicutoxin, 59

Cimmicifuga racemosa, 395, 464,
484, 488, 493, 494, 509, 516,
517, 539

e090

°

cimicifugin, 96

cimicifugoside, 82

Cinchona calisaya, 395

Cinchona cuprea, 94

Cinchona ledgeriana, 395

Cinchona officinalis, 130, 395

Cinchona pubescens, 395

1,8-cineole, 66

cinnamate monomer, 112

cinnamic acids, 94

cinnamic alcohol, 210

Cinnamomum camphora, 65, 86, 395

Cinnamomum cassia, 395

Cinnamomum glanduliferum, 94

Cinnamomum spp., 502

Cinnamonnim verum, 395

cinnamon, 94

circulatory stimulants, 410

cirrhosis, 193, 286-287, 554

cisplatin, 178

Cistus clusii, 172

citronella, 64

citronellal, 65

Citrus aurantium ssp. bergamia,
64, 95, 325

Citrus aurantium var. amara, 63-64

Citrus nardus, 64

Citrus reticulata, 170

Cladonia spp., 93

Claviceps purpurea, 120, 204

cleavers. See Galium aparine

Clematis manshurica, 74

clematoside C, 74

clerodane, 71

climacteric, 390

Clitocybe, 129

cloves, 114

Cnicus benedictus, 395

coca, 123

cocaine, 123

cocoa plant, 124

codeine, 126

Codonoposts pilosula, 484

Codonopsis spp., 74

Codonopsis tangshen, 443

coenzyme Qjy, 167, 298

Coffea arabica, 72, 94, 124, 395,
317

coffee bean oil, 72

coffee, 124

Cola acuminata, 395, 507, 540

Cola nitida, 395

Cola vera, 497, 517, 520

cola, See Cola acuminata

colchicine, 131, 426

Colchicum autumnale, 131, 394,
426

coleonol, 72

Coleus forskoblit, 137, 170, 293,
332, 501

Cohc, 475-476, 527, 536-538,
542, 543, 551, 555, 561,
566-569

colitis, 59, 276, 525, 526, 558,
569, 594

collagen-receptor antagonists, 174

Collinsonia canadensis, 507, 541

colloidal oatmeal, 371, 373

colon, 276

colony-stimulating factors (CSF),
162

colophony, 86

coltsfoot. See Tussilago farfara

columba root, 73

columbarnine, 126

INDEX @ 657

columbin, 73

column chromatography, 22

comedone, 439

comfrey. See Symphytum officinale

comminution, 217

Commiphora madagascariensis, 395

Commiphora molmol, 395, 445,
452, 456, 491, $41

Commiphora mukul, 84,171, 293,
395

common cold, 227, 336

complement, 155

compound, 40

compresses, 232, 431

Concanavalia ensiformis, 206

concanavalin A, 206

condensed tannins, 114

conducting zone, 320

condurango. See Marsdenia
reichenbachii

conformational change, 40, 140

congestive heart failure (CHF),
309, 542

coniine, 122

Conium maculatum, 94, 122

conjunctivitis, 550, $52, 558, 566

connective tissue diseases, 411

conserved names, 33

constipation, 263-266, 476-477,
549, 563, 564, 571, 577, 578,
581, 582

contact dermatitis, 432

contact urticaria, 206

contraindications, 186, 191~192

convalescence, bitter tonics for, 339

Convallaria majalis, 81, 169, 394,
501, 507

convallatoxin, 83

Convolvulus arvensis, 210

Copaifera, 68

co-pigments, 100

Coptis chinensis, 125, 395

Coptis grovnlandica, 395

Coptis spp., 28

Coptis teeta, 125

Coptis trifolia, 125

Corchorus, 169

cordial, 291

Cordyceps sinensis, 158, 446

Cordyceps subsessilis, 446

Coriandrum sativum, 64, 452, 491

coriolus mushroom, 44, 153

Coriolus versicolor, 44, 153

cornsilk. See Zea mays

Cornus spp., 207

coronary artery disease, 307, 542

coronary heart disease (CHD),
300, 307

Coronilla, 169

corticosteroids, 141

Corydalis yanhusuo, 395

corytuberine, 126, 135

Costus spp., 82

cotton, 68, 394

couch grass. See Elymus repens

cough, 321, 526, 539, 551, 555,
560, 565, 574, 586, 589-590

coughwort, 590

coumarin, 96, 179

coumarins, 95, 174, 200

coumestans, 106, 143

coumestrol, 143

COX-1, 157

COX-2, 157

Cradle Cap, 481

----- PAGE 666 -----
658 @ INDEX

cramp bark. See Viburnum opulus

cramping, 592, 598

cranberry juice, 381

cranesbili. See Geranium maculatum

Crataegus laevigata, 16, 292, 462,
488, 501, 507, 516, $42

creams, 432 .

crocin, 163

Crocus sativus, 395

crohn’s disease, 262, 279

Crotolaria, 189

croton oil, 72

crown-gall tumor bioassay, 23

cruciferous vegetables, 50, 164, 459

cryptopleurine, 131

Cryptostegia, 169

cucurbitacins, 80

Cullen corylifolia, 395

Cuphea balsamona, 395

Curcuma aromatica, 94, 395

Curcuma domestica, 395

Curcuma longa, 94, 302, 395, 514

Curcuma xanthorrhiza, 94

Curcuma zedoaria, 395

curcumin, 94

Curcurbita pepo, 507

curcurbitacin E, 80

cutaneous porphyria, 525

Gyamopsis tetragonolobus, 52, 179

cyanidin, 106, 114

cyanogenic glycosides, 50, 199

cyanohydrin, 50

Cyathula officinalis, 395

cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP), 111, 137, 138, 141, 170

cyclic guanosine monophosphate
(cGMP), 141

cyclolignan, 113

cyclooxygenase inhibitors, 159

cyclooxygenase pathway, 157

cyclopentanodihydropyran, 66

cyclosporine, 446

Cydonia oblonga, 51

Cymbopogon citratus, 64, 395

Cymbopogon martini, 64

Cynara scolymus, 45, 504, 514

Cynoglossum officinale, 203

CYP Ag, 559

Cypripedium spp., 28, 384

cystitis, 246, 379-381, 524-529,
542, 546, 550, 552, 561, 570,
585, 590, 595

Cytisus scoparius, 170, 394, 501,
507

cytochrome Paso enzymes, 50, 149

cytokines, 156, 162-163

cytokinesis, 160

cytosol binding sites, 143

cytotoxic agent, 160, 457

cytotoxic alkaloids, 160

cytotoxicity-based bioassays, 24

Daemonorops draco, 86

Dahlia spp., 106

daidzein, 106, 143

Dalbergia monetaria, 162
damiana, 86

dan shen, 311, 484

danaid butterflies, 188
dandelion. See Taraxacum officinale
date palm, 83

Datura stramonium, 122

Daucus carota, 395, 494, 507, 542
dead sea, 438

deadly nightshade, 122

leaminases, 137
death cap mushroom, 23, 177
debility, 532, 539
lecarboxylases, 137
lecoctions, 221
leep immune activation, 443
legenerative joint disease, 411
lehydration, 266
jehydrogenases, 136
delphinidin, 114
delphinine, 205
Delphinium, 130
delronin, 82
lemulcent, 243, 505-506
Demyelination, 194
leoxy-D-ribose, 43
deoxysugars, 43
lepression, 354-355, 530-532,
540, 545, 559, 562, 567, 572,
577, 582, 592
depsidones, 165
dermatitis, 432
allergic contact, 206
dermatophytes, 455
Derris elliptica, 107
derris root, 107
desensitization, 151
desoxycorticosterone, 465
detoxification, 446
devil’s claw. See Harpagophytum
procumben
Dewey Decimal system, 639-640
dextrans, 45
D-galactosamine, 43
D-glucosamine, 43
diabetes mellitus, 463, 536, 539, 552
diabetic acidosis, 322
diabetic neuropathy, 536
Dianella longifolia, 165
Dianthus spp., 106
diaper rash, 480
diaphoretic, 243
diarrhea, 266-267, 477, 525, 535,
537, 550, 553, 556, 566, 569,
574-578, 589, 594
diaryl heptanoids, 159
diathermy (deep-heat therapy), 428
dibenzylbutyrolatones, 173
dicarboxylic acid, 198
Dicentra canadensis, 28
dicoumarol, 201
Dieffenbachia spp., 198
diepoxylignan, 113
dietary fats, 302
dietary fiber, 259, 265
differentiation, 161, 163
digestive system, 258-290
digitalin, 83
Digitalis lanata, 83
Digitalis orientalis, 83
Digitalis purpurea, 36
digoxin, 83, 168
dihydrochalcones, 107
dihydroflavonols, 108
dihydroguaiaretic acid, 113
dihydropyridines, 172
dihydrotestosterone (DHT), 138,
407
di-indolymethane, 459
dill. See Anethum graveolens
dimethyl tryptamine (DMT), 128
Dionaea muscipula, 28
dioscin, 82
Dioscorea villosa, 281, 423, 466,
488, 493, 494, 504, 514, 543

diosgenin, 82

Diospyros kaki, 85

Dipteryx odorata, 95

disaccharide, 41, 43

iterpenes, 174

iterpenoid alkaloids, 130-131, 205

iterpenoids, 72

Diuretic, 243, 249, 410, 506-508

iverticulitis, 280-281, 543

Divisions, 31

d-mannuronic acid, 51

DNA-interactive agents, 161

locetaxel, 162

dong qui, 15

dosage form, 217

lose, 194-195, 252

dose-response assessment, 197

double-blind studies, 18

douches, 229

lown regulation, 139

Dracunculus vulgaris, 128

dragon’s blood, 86

drawing ointments, 526

droge, 134

drop, 253

Drosera rotundifolia, 494, 512, 543

drug absorption, 469

drug distribution, 146, 151, 469

rug, 134

dry preparations, 227

Dryobalanops aromatica, 64

Dryopteris filix-mas, 92, 394-395

dual inhibitors, 159

duodenal ulcers, 272, 535, 553

dwarf pine needle oil, 325

dyer’s broom, 106

dysentery, 553

dysmenorrhea, 386-388, 539, 543,
561, 568, 569, 576, 593, 595

dyspepsia, 536-538, 553, 566,
568, 589

dyspnea, 321

dysuria, 378

earache, 576

ecdysone, 83

Echinacea purpurea, 544

Echinacea angustifolia, 544

Echinacea pallida, 544

Echinacea spp., 36, 445, 452, 484,
486, 491, 544

echinacea. See Echinacea spp.

Echinopanax elatus, 484

eczema, 432, 528, 552, 558, 560,
564, 575, 581, 590, 591, 594

edema, 154, 309, 379

effective dose (ED), 194

effectors, 36, 237

eicosanoids, 56, 155, 259

eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 56

elder. See Sambucus nigra

elderly, 467-472

elecampane. See Inula helenium

Elephant tree, 28

Elettaria cardamomum, 494, 502,
520

Eleuthero. See Eleutherococcus
Senticosus

Eleutherococcus senticosus, 465, 516,
545

elimination, 150-151, 469

elixirs (elixiria), 225

ellagic acid, 114

ellagitannins, 114

Elymus repens, 454, 506, 546

emetine, 126

emmenagogue, 243, 384, 509-511

emodin, 98

emphysema, 334, 560, 581, 590

emulsions (emulsiones), 225

endocrine system, 461-466

endometriosis, 387, 404-405

endometrium, 404

endoplasmic reticula, 148

endothelial leukocyte adhesion
molecule-1 (ELAM-1), 158

enemas, 229

English yew, 162

enoki, 44, 153

Entamoeba hystolytica, 126

enteric coatings, 227, 277

Enterobius vermiculari, 526

enterodiol, 113

enterohepatic cycle, 150

enterolactone, 113, 143

entheogen, 121

enuresis, 377

enzymes, 136-139

Ephedra distachya, 395

Ephedra equisetina, 128, 395

Ephedra gerardiana, 128, 395

Ephedra intermedia, 395

Ephedra sinica,128, 332, 340, 395,
546

Ephedra. See Ephedra sinica

ephedrine, 546

epicatechin, 114

epimerases, 137

epinephrine, 465

Epipactis gigantea, 28

episiotomy, 402

epistaxis, 302, 523, 594

epoxygenases, 155

epoxylignan, 113

Epstein-Barr virus, 286

Equisetum arvense, 14,497, 507, 547

Equisetum hyemale, 395

E. equisetina, 546

Eremophila latrobei, 165

ergot alkaloids, 127

ergot fungus, 120

eriocitrin, 107

eriodictyol, 107

Eriodictyon californicum, 28, 86

Eryngium maritimum, 507

Eryngium planum, 330

Erysimum, 169

erythema, 154

erythropoietic protoporphyria, 85

Erythroxylum coca, 123

Escherichia coli, 379

Eschscholzia californica, 34, 395,
494, 515, 517, 547

esophagitis, 269-271

essential fatty acids (EFAs), 55, 259

essential hypertension, 542

essiac, 14

esterases, 137

estrogen receptors, 142

estrogens, 141, 142

ethylene, 59

etoposide, 113, 161

eucalyptol, 66

Eucalyptus globulus, 66, 502, 547

eucalyptus. See Eucalyptus globulus

Excommia ulmoides, 173, 484

eudesmanolides, 70

eukaryote, 31

Euonymus atropurpureus, 169, 504,
514, 548

----- PAGE 667 -----
eupacunin, 70

eupahyssopin, 192

Eupatorium cannabinum, 203

Eupatorium hyssopifolinm, 152

Eupatorium lancifolium, 70

Eupatorium perfoliatum, 336, 486,
493, 499, 504, 507. 520, 549

Eupatorium purpureum, 395, 464,
493, 507, 520, 549

Euphorbia australis, 165

Euphorbia pilulifera, 332, 464

Euphrasia officinalis, 67, 550

Eupbrasia spp., 486, 497

European angelica, 527

European mandrake, 122

European mistletoe, 164

European pharmacopoeia (EP), 20

evening primrose, 56

Evernia spp., 93

exclusion diet, 421

excretion, 150

exhaustion reaction, 346

exocytosis, 159

exophthalmos, 462

expectorant essential oils, 326

expectorant, 244, 320, 511-513

external remedies, 228, 416

extraction, 217

eyebright. See Euphrasia officinalis

Fagopyrum esculentum, 516

falearindiol, 159

false unicorn root, 384

Families, 31

Fasciola hepatica, 70

fatty acids, 54-57

fecal bulk, 265

fennel. See Foeniculum vulgare

fenugreek, 51, 302

ferredoxin, 168

ferritin, 168

Feruta assa-foetida, 152, 395

Ferula rubricaulis, 395

Ferula spp., 96

ferulic acid, 152

fetidine, 125

fever, 523, 527, 531-534, 549, 550,
567, 568, $75, 579, $93, 598

feverfew. See Tanacetum parthenium

fiber elasticity, 20

fiber, 260-261

fibrocystic breast disease, 405-406

fibroid cysts, 595

fibromyalgia, 411

fibrositis, 559

ficine, 131

Ficus pantoniana, 131

field buttercup, 70

fight-or-flight, 346

figwort. See Serophularia nodosa

Filipendula ulmaria, 36, 186, 488,
493, 497, 550

fimbriae, 381

fire ant, 66

first-pass effect, 145

Flammutlina velutipes, 44, 153

flatulence, 262-263, 527, $42,
$51, 553, $68-571, 585

flavan-3,4-diols, 107

flavan-3-ols, 108

flavanones, 107

flavolignans, 108, 584

flavones, 101

flavonoids, 100-112, 152, 167,
170, 174

flavonols, 101

flavus, 100

flaxseed oil, 57

Flexner report, 187

fluid extracts (fluid extracta), 224

fly agaric mushroom, 129, 242

foal’s foot, 590

Foeniculum vulgare, 488, 494, 502,
514, $20, 551

foinentations, 431

food intolerances, 267

food sensitivities, 333

forget-me-not, 124

formononetin, 106, 143

formulation criteria, 252

forskolin, 73, 137, 170, 175

Forsythia suspensa, 396

Fougquieria splendens, 396

foxglove, 36

frankincense, 86

Fraxinus excelsior, 150

free radicals, 166

French paradox, 99

frequency, 377-378

friar’s balsam, 228

fringetree. See Chionanthus virginicus

Fritillaria cirrbosa, 396

Fritillaria thunbergii, 396

fructans, 45

fructose, 263

Fucus vesiculosus, 396, 462, 493,
520, 551

fulvoplumierin, 67

fumarases, 137

Fumaria officinalis, 127, 433, 484,
504, 514, 551

fumitory. See Fumaria officinalis

functional dyspepsia, 275-276

fungal infections, 455, 535, 566

Fungi, 31

fungicide, 79

furanocoumarins, 95, 210

furanofurans, 173

furfural, 65

furocoumarins, 95, 201

furosemide, 587

jaundice, 387

furuncles, 455

G protein, 140

galactogogues, 402

galactomannans, 179

galactose, 43

Galega officinalis, 464, 552

Galium aparine, 36, 67, 433, 458,
484, 488, 507, 514, 552

Galium odorata, 67, 95

gallbladder inflammation, 533, 538

gallbladder surgery, 447

gallic acid, 92, 114

gallotannins, 114

gallstones, 533, 538, 571

gamma linolenic acid (GLA), 56,
390

ganoderan B, 179

Ganoderma lucidum, 44, 46, 153,
443

Garcinia mangostana, 135

gargles (gargarisma), 231

garlic. See Allium sativum

gas chromatography (GC), 22

gas chromatography-mass
spectrometry (GC-MS), 22

gastric and duodenal ulcers, 272,
535, 566, 586, 591

gastritis, 271, 526, 538, 539, 550,
555, 591

gastroesophageal reflux disease
(GERD), 269-271, 322

Gaultheria procumbens, 366, 488,
493, 502

Gelidium amansii, 52

gelserine, 127, 204

Gelsemium sempervirens, 204, 371,
517

general adaptation syndrome
(GAS), 346, 465

genin, 41

Genista tinctoria, 106, 396

genistein, 106, 143

genital warts, 113

gentian. See Gentiana lutea

Gentiana lutea, 452, 491, 499, 504,
509, 514, 520, 553

gentianose, 43

gentiopicrin, 66, 67

gentiopicroside, 67

gentisein, 99

Genus, 31

geraniol, 210, 641

Geranium maculatum, 486, 488,
497, 553

geranylgeraniol, 73

germacranolides, 70

German chamomile, See
Matricaria recutita

gestational hypertension, 400

gibberellane, 71

ginger. See Zingiber officinale

gingivitis, 268, 533, 541, 544, 580

ginkgetin, 108

Ginkgo biloba, 293, 462, 471, S01, 553

Ginkgo. See Ginkgo biloba

ginkgolide A, 73, 175

ginseng. See Panax ginseng

ginsenoside Re, 49

ginsenoside Re, 82

ginsenoside Rf, 82

ginsenoside Rg, 83

glandular fever, 541

laziovine, 125

iotoxins, 175

lobe artichoke, 45

Jobe flower, 70

Jochids, 206

lossitis, 580

glucans, 45, 153

Jucobrassicin, 50

ucocapparin, $0

lucomannans, 47

lucosamine sulfate, 414

lucosinolates, 50, 200, 459

lucuronyl transferase, 149

lutathione peroxidase, 166

Jurathione, 166

lurathione-s-transferase, 149

lycans, 44

Glycine max, 78

lycoalkaloids, 131

lycolipids, 43, 47

glycoproteins, 43, 47

glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), 46,

47, 414

glycosides, 41, 48, 199

glycosphingolipid, 146

glycosuria, 463

glycyrrhetinic acid, 80

Glyorrhiza echinata, 396

Glycyrrhiza glabra, 396, 466, 488,
494, 506, 512, 554

9a_99 99 99 0G 96 99 99 OG G9 OGG 09 OG 99 09 09

0909

INDEX 659

Ghorrhiza uralensis, 396

glycyrrhizin, 80

goat's milk, 329

goat's rue, See Galega officinalis

goiter, 551

goitrogenic glycosides, 200

goldenrod. See Solidago virgaurea

goldenseal. See Hydrastis canadensis

goldthread, 28

gorse, 85

Gossypium herbaceum, 394

Gossypium hirsutum, 68, 201, 396

gossypol, 68, 201

gout, 411, 426, 528, 534, 542,
550, 556, 579

gracillin, 82

grapes, 99

gravel root. See Eupatorium
purpureum

Graves’ disease, 462

Grevillea robusta, 208

Grifola frondosa, 44, 153

grifolan, 153

Grindelia camporum, 512, 555

Grindelia squarrosa, 555

grindelic acid, 73

ground substance, 47

guaiac. See Guaiacum officinale

guaiacol, 92

guaiaconic acid, 86

Guaiacum officinale, 68, 86, 423,
484, 489, 493, 556

guaianolides, 70

guaiazulene, 68

guar gum, 52, 179

guarana, 124

guava, 179

guggul, 84, 293, 301

guggulsterone Z, 84, 171

gum arabic, 51

gum resins, 87

gums, 50

gumweed. See Grindelia squarrosa

gut-associated lymphoid tissue
(GALT), 154

gypsywort, 563

Hamamelis virginiana, 489, 497, 556

Hamilton Anxiety Scale, 572

harmaline, 128

harman, 128

Harpagophytum procumbens, 67,
419, 423, 489, 493, 557

harpagoside, 67

harringtonine, 132

awthorn. See Crataegus laevigata

hay fever, 339-340, 580

hazard, 197

head lice, 566

eadache, 364-367, 539, 557, 562,
568, 572, 576, 577, $79, 585

healing crisis, 447

eart failure, 309

heart palpitations, 562

heartburn, 550

heartsease. See Viola tricolor

heberden’s nodes, 419

Hedeoma pulegioides, 396

helenalin, 152

elenin, 70

Helenium amarum, 70

Helianthus tuberosus, 45

Helicobacter pylori, 272

Heliopsis longipes, 59

Heliotropium spp., 203

----- PAGE 668 -----
660 @ INDEX

Heliotropium, 189

hellebore, 81

Helleborus niger, 70, 81, 169, 199

helonias root, 28

hematuria, 378-379, 594

Hemophilus influenzae, 322

hemoptysis, 321

hemorrhoids, 289-290, 524, 553,
556, 574, 577

hemp, 56

henbane, 122

henna, 97

hepatic cancer, 193

hepatic, 244, 513-515

Hepatica nobilis, 396

hepatitis A, 285

hepatitis B, 285

hepatitis C, 285

hepatitis D, 285

hepatitis, chronic, 283-284

hepatoprotection, 175, 282

hepatoprotective properties, test-
ing for, 23

hepatotoxicity, 193

heptane, 59

Heracleum spp., 96

herb quality, 19

herb toxicity, 198-213

herb, definition of, 7

herbal marketplace, 15

herbal traditions, 17

Herbalist & Alchemist Books, 642

Herniara glabra, 78

Herniara hirsuta, 78

Herpes progenitalis, 566

Herpes simplex, 116, 555, 566,
567, 580

Herpes zoster, 373

hesperidin, 14

heteropolysaccharide, 41, 45

hexahydroxydiphenic acid, 114

hexobarbital sleeping time, 24

hexoses, 42

hiatus hernia, 274, 586

Hieracium pilosella, 512

high-density lipoprotein (HDL),
300

high-fiber diet, 260

high-performance liquid chro-
matography (HPLC), 22

himematsutake, 44, 153

Hirschsprung’s disease, 476

histamine, 155

Hodgkin's disease, 127

herbal medicine, a model of
236-256

holistic medicine, 6

holly mahonia, 564

holoenzyme, 136

homocysteine, 299

homopolymer, 44

homopolysaccharide, 41, 44

Hoppea dichotoma, 484

hops. See Hummulus lupulus

hordenine, 170

Hordeum vulgare, 396

horehound. See Marrubium vulgare

hormonal! modulators, 445

hormonal normalizers, 385, 509

hormone-responsive elements, 139

hormones, classification of, 141

horse chestnut. See Aesculus hip-
pocastanum

horsehoof, 590

horseradish, 50

horsetail. See Equisetum arvense

hot flash, 390, 539

huitlacoche, 44, 153

human cytomegalovirus
(HCMV), 164

human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), 116, 165

human papilloma virus (HPV), 113

humulene, 68

Humuulus lupulus, 462, 494, 502,

515, 517, 557

Huperzia serrata, 138

huperzine A, 138

hyaluronic acid, 46

Hydnocarpus wightiana, 57

Hydrangea arborescens, 383, 557

hydrangea. See Hydrangea arborescens

hydrastine, 126

Hydrastis canadensis, 464, 394, 452,

458, 484, 486, 489, 491, 499,

504, 509, 512, 514, 558

rydrogen cyanide, 50

hydrogen peroxide, 166

hydrolases, 137

hydrolysis, 40

hydrolyzable tannins, 114

hydroquinone, 93

hydroxychloroquine, 413

hydroxycitronellal, 210

4-hydroxycoumarin, 200

hydroxycoumarins, 95

4-hydroxytamoxifen, 143

5-hydroxytryptamine, 155

hymenoxon, 70

Hymenoxys odorata, 70

hyoscyamine, 123

Hyoscyamus niger, 122

hypercalciuria, 382

hyperforin, 99

hyperglycemia, 463

ypericin, 99

Hypericum perforatum, 286, 462,
465, 489, 491, 494, 517, 559

hyperlipidemia, 170, 296

ryperoxaluria, 382

hyperpigmentation, 209

hypersensitivity reactions, 193, 445

hypertension, 171, 302-306, 523,
545, 585, 589, 593

yperthyroidism, 462

hyperuricemia, 426

hypnotic, 345, 515-516

hypocalcemia, 198

hypochlorous acid (HOC), 166

hypoglycemic agents, 178-180

hypoglycemics, 464

hypokalemia, 555

hypotensive agents, 171-173, 244

hypotensive, 516-517

ypothyroidism, 461

hypoxia, 554

hyssop. See Hyssopus officinalis

Hyssopus officinalis, 396, 486, 489,
494, 509, 512, 514, 517, 559

iceland moss. See Cetraria islandica
Hex paraguariensis, 124

immune system, 441-460
immunoadjuvants, 152, 443
immunocompromise, 446
immunodeficiency diseases, 445
immunomodulation, 442
immunomodulators, 77, 152, 244
immunopotentiators, 442
immunoregulation, 443, 446

immunostimulants, 77, 442

immunostimulating complexes
(ISCOMs), 77

imperatorin, 210

impetigo, 481-482, 566

impotence, 554

incompatibility, 232

incontinence, 377, 547

Index Medicus, 643

indigestion, 275, 477, 525, 530,

557, 592

indole alkaloids, 127-130, 204

indole, 127-128

indole-3-carbinol, 50, 459

indole-3-glucosinolate, 50

inducible cyclooxygenase, 157

infection, 450-455, 530, 544

inflammation, 154-159

inflammatory bowel disease

(IBD), 279

influenza, 338-343, 526, 527,
531, 534, 944, 549, 567, 568,
569, 580, 585, 589, 592

infusa, 219-220

inhalants (vapors), 231

Inocybe, 129

insomnia, 355-361, 547, 557, 561,
562, 565. 567, 570, 572, 576,
592

Insulin-Dependent Diabetes
Mellitus (DDM), 463

integrins, 158

intellectual imperialism, 15

interferon, 158, 163, 532

interleukin 1 (IL1), 156

interleukins, 153, 162

intermittent claudication, 311

International Code of Botanical
Nomenclature (CBN), 32

intestinal flora, 265

intrahepatic cholestasis, 193

intrauterine device UD), 387

Inula helenium, 45,70, 396, 452, 486,
491, 497, 512, 514, 520, 560

Inula japonica, 70

inulicin, 70

inulin, 45

Investigational New Drug
Application (IND), 12

ipecacuanha. See Cephaelis
ipecacuanha

Ipomoea batatas, 85

Ipomoea purga, 86

Ipomoea tricolor, 204

Trido myrmex, 66

iridodial, 66

iridoids, 66-67

Tris versicolor, 396, 455, 458, 484,
493, 504, 507, 514, 560

Iris virginica, 396

irish moss. See Chondrus crispus

iron, sources of, 399

irritable bowel syndrome, 246,
276-279

isoalantolactone, 70

isoboldine, 126

isobutyl amides, 59

isochondrodendrine, 125

isocorydine, 126, 135

isoenzymes, 157

isoflavanones, 106

isoflavans, 106

isoflavones, 143

isoflavonoids, 106

isomerases, 137

isomers, 40
isoprene, 59, 62
isoprenoids, 62
isoquinoline alkaloids, 125-127,
205
isorhamnetin, 105
isotentrandine, 126
isotetrandine, 126
isothebaine, 135
isothiocyanate, 50, 200
isovaleric acid, 55

jack bean, 206

jalap, 86

Jamaica dogwood. See Piscidia
erythrina

jambul, 179

japanese elecampane, 70

Japanese oil of camphor, 65

Jasmine absolute, 210

Jasminum spp., 128

Jateorhiza palnata, 73

Jatrorrhizine, 126

jaundice, 283, 533, 538, 548, 563,
578, 587

Jerusalem artichoke, 45

jimson weed, 122

Joe pye, 549

joint capsule, 419

judaicin, 70

Fuglans cinerea, 394, 462, 504

Juglans nigra, 97

juglone, 97

Juices (succi), 226

juniper. See Juniperus communis

luniperus communis, 396, 454, 491,

493, 502, 507, 520, 561

Juniperus monosperma, 396

Juniperus osteosperma, 396

Juniperus oxycedrus, 396

Juniperus sabina

Juniperus virginiana, 396

kadsurenone, 159, 175

kaempferol, 103

kallidin, 155

kanamycin, 545

Kartoum senna, 582

kaurane, 71

kava dermopathy, 572

kava kava, See Piper methysticum

kavalactones, 572

kelp. See Fucus vesiculosus

khar, 128, 170

khella, 96

khellin, 171, 175

kidney stones, 382, 542, 546, 550,
570

Kingdoms, 31

kininogens, 155

kinins, 155

kinnikinnick, 529

koebner phenomena, 435

kola. See Cola acuminata

konjac flour, 47

Koplik’s spots, 474

kousso, 114

Krameria triandra, 269

kudzu, 106

kumatekenin, 77

labdane, 71

lack of appetite, 553
lactoferrin, 168
lactose, 43, 263

----- PAGE 669 -----
Lactuca serriola, 71

Lactuca virosa, 71, 494, 515, $17, 561

lactucarium, 561

lactucin, 71

lady’s mantle. See Akcbemulla vulgaris

lady's slipper, 28, 384

laetrile, 50

Lamium spp., 67

lanatoside C, 168

lapachol, 97

laparoscopy, 404

larch arabinogalactan, 46

Larix occidentalis, 46

Larrea spp., 34, 113

Larrea tridentata, 436, 455, 458,
484

laryngitis, 341-342, 536, 541,
544, 569, $72, 574, $75, $77,
580, 585, 589

athyrane, 71

atrorrhizine, 125

Laurencia spp., 60

lauric acid, $5

Lavandula angustifolia, 489, 494,

509, 517, 561

Lavandula latifolia, 64

lavender essential oil, 210, 417

lavender. See Lavandula angustifolia

lawsone, 97

Lawsonia inermis, 97

laxative, 244, 263

lead, 213

Lecanora spp., 93

lectins, 153, 164, 206

leg cramps, 596

leg ulcers, 524

Leishmania spp., 533

lemon Balm. See Melissa officinalis

lemongrass, 64

lentinan, 153

Lentinus edodes, 44, 443, 153

Leonurus cardiaca, 344, 396, 494,
501, 502, 509, 514-517, 562

Leonurus heterophyllus, 396

Leonurus sibiricus, 396

L-ephedrine, 128, 170

lepidoptera, 83

leprosy, 57

Leptandra virginica, 396, $04, 514,
562

Lespedeza capitata, 172

lethal dose (LD), 194

lettuce opium, 561

leucoanthocyanin, 100

leukopenia, $32

leukorrhea, 533, 553, 569

leukotriene B, (LTB,), 57

leukotrienes, 155

Leuzea carthamoides, 484

Levisticum officinale, 396

libraries, 639

Library of Congress (LC),
640-641

lice, 572

licoflavonol, 77

licorice. See Glycyrrhiza glabra

licoricone, 77

L-iduronic acid, 46

life events, 298

ligand, 40

ligand-receptor complex, 139

ligases, 137

lignanolide, 113

lignans, 112-114, 143, 175

Ligusticum chuanxiong, 396

Ligusticum porteri, 28, 34, 324,
342, 396, 452, 491

Ligustrum lucidum, 302, 443

Lilium lancifolium, 85

Lilium pumilum, 85

ily-of-the-valley, 81, 394

lime blossom, 589

Limnanthes, 50

jimonene, 63

jimonin, 84

imonoids, 84

jinalool, 64

linctuses (lincti), 226

linden. See Tilia platyphyllos

iniments, 231

Linnaean system of classification,
32

jinoleic, 56

inolenic, 56

inseed oil, 57

Linum usitatissimum, 57,73, 506

ipid peroxide, 166

ipids, 54-61, 166

ipopolysaccharides, 54

ipoprotein, $4

ipoxins, 155

5-lipoxygenase inhibitors, 159

jipoxygenase pathway, 157

Liquidambar orientalis, 228

ithospermic acid, 93

Lithospermum: officinale, 93, 203

liver enzyme levels, 24

liver fluke, 70

liver, 175-178

liverworts, 31

Lloyd Library, 639

Lobelia inflata, 122, 394, 396, 417,
494, 512, 517, 563

Lobelia nicotinaefolia and L. bass-
teri, 122

Lobelia sipbilitica, 396

lobelia. See Lobelia inflata

lobeline, 122, 563

Lomatium dissectum, 28, 396

Lophophora williamsti, 28, 128, 464

lotions, 432

low-density lipoprotein (LDL), 300

low-fiber diet, 280

lozenges (trochisci), 228

lumbago, 536

lupeol, 198

upine alkaloids, 130

Lupinus spp., 130

lutein, 168

luteolin, 106

lyases, 137

Lycium barbarum, 396

Lycium chinense, 176, 396

lycopene, 85, 168

Lycopersicon esculentum, 85, 129, 205

lycopodium alkaloids, 130

Lycopodium powder, 432

Lycopodium spp., 130

Lycopus americanus, 396, $63

Lycopus europaeus, 396, 463, 494,
497, 501, 563

Lycopus virginicus, 396, 463, 563

lymphadenitis, $33, 552

lymphatic drainage, 147

lymphokine-activated killer
(LAK), 153

lymphosarcoma, 127

lysergic acid, 127

Ma huang, See Ephedra sinica

maceration, 218

macrocyclic retronecine diester,
189, 202

Madagascar periwinkle, 127, 160,
241

madder root, 96

magnoflorine, 126, 135

Magnolia officinalis, 396

Mahonia aquifolium, 396, 433,
484, 493, 504, 514, 564

Mabonia nervosa, 396

Mahonia repens, 396

Maidenhair fern, 28

maitake, 44, 153

malabsorption, 280

malaria, 459

male fern, 92, 394

maltose, 43

Matva sylvestris, 489, 506

mandarin orange, 170

Mandragora officinarum, 122

Mangifera indica, 208

mango, 99

mangostin, 135

Manihot esculenta, 200

manoalide, 159

Mansonia, 169

marc, 218

margin of safety (MOS), 195

marrubiin, 73

Marrubium vulgare, 396, 499, 509,
512, 520, 564

Marsdenia condurango, 520, 565

Marsdenia reichenbachii, 565

marsh marigold, 70, 199

marshmallow. See Althaea officinalis

mastalgia, 56

mastic, 86

mastitis, 403

matairesinol, 113

mate, 124

Matricaria recutita, 274 489, 494a,
499, 502, 509, 515, 517, 565

matricin, 68, 71

mayapple, 28, 113, 161, 394

meadowsweet. See Filipendula
ulmaria

measles, 474

mecambrine, 125

mediators of inflammation, 155-158

Medicago sativa, 78, 165, 302

Medical Subject Headings, 641

medicinal fungi, 193

Medicinal Plants of Native
America Database, 643

mediterranean diet, 57

MEDLINE, 6%3

Melaleuca alternifolia, 439, 566

Melaleuca leucadendron and other
Melaleuca spp., 66

melancholia, 354

melilot, 95

melilotoside, 201

Melilotus spp., 95

Melissa officinalis, 494, 501, 502,
504, 514, 517, 567

melting point, 20

membrane structure, 146

Menabea, 169

meniere’s disease, 372

meninges, 364

meningitis, 474

menopausal depression, 566

menopause, 390-393, 539, 559, $95

menorrhagia, 525, 553, 594

INDEX .@ 661

menstruation, irregular, 386

menstruum, 217

Mentha arvensis var. piperascens, 325

Mentha crispa, 211

Mentha piperita, 486, 489, 491,
494, 502, 509, 520, 568

Mentha pulegium, 394, 494, 502,
509, 568

Mentha spicata, 65

menthofuran, 172

menthol, 64

Menyanthes trifoliata, 67, 419, 423,
484, 489, 493, 514, 568

mescaline, 128

MeSH terms, 641

metastasis, 16]

methoxycitronellal, 210

methylcanadine, 170

metrorrhagia, $25, $53, 594

microbial contamination, 21

microbial toxins, 211

microfibril, 45

microtubules, 162

migraine, 367-371, 540, $66, $72,
589

milk thistle. See Silybum marianum

millipedes, 50

mineralocorticoids, 465

minor flavonoids, 107

miscellaneous alkaloids, 131

Mitchella repens, 509, 568

mitosis, 160

moisture content, 21

molds, 31

molluscicide, 78

Momordica charantia, 85a, 179

Monarda clinopodia, 396

Monarda didyma, 396

Monarda fistulosa, 396

Monarda pectinata, 396

Monarda punctata, 66, 396

Monera, 31

monk's pepper, 595

monoamine oxidase (MAO)
inhibition, 559

monodesmosidic saponins, 74

monoepoxylignans, 113

monohydroxy-(e)-icosatetraenoic
acids (HETE), 57

monomycin, 545

monosaccharide, 41, 42, 63-66

Montanoa tomentosa, 74

morning glory, 204

morning sickness, 397

morphine, 127

Morus alba, 464

mosses, 31

mother tincture, 1]

motherwort. See Leonurus cardiaca

moths, 50

motion sickness, 123, 373, $33,
566, 568, 598

mountain grape, 564

mouth ulcers, 533, 541

mouthwashes, 23]

M-phase drugs, 160

mucilages, 50-51, 226

mucopolysaccharides, 47

mucous colitis, 277

Mucuna pruriens, 128

mucus production, 341

mugwort. See Artemisia vulgaris

mullein. See Verbascum: thapsus

mumps, 474-475, 572

Musa spp., 129, 170

----- PAGE 670 -----
662 = INDEX

muscarine, 129

muscle-relaxant compress, 353

musculoskeletal system, 408-429

mutagen, 193

mutagenesis, 193

mutases, 137

myalgia, 417, 591

Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 93, 96

mycopolysaccharides, 44, 153, 162

mycotoxins, 131, 212

myocardial infarction, 303, 542

Myosotis scorpioides, 124

Myrica cerifera, 493, 497, 520, 569

myristic acid, 55

Myristica fragrans, 64, 94, 396

Myristica officinalis, 394

myristicin, 94

myrosinase, 50, 200

Myroxylon balsamum var. balsa-
mum, 87, 512

Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae,
87, 228, 452, 491

myrrh. See Commiphora molmol

myxedema, 461

N,N-dimethyltryptamine, 128

N-acetylgalactosamine, 46, 146

N-acetylglucosamine, 46, 146

N-acetylneuraminic acid, 46, 146

N-acetyltransferase, 149

N-methyltyramine, 170

naphthoquinones, 97

NAPRALERT, 643

Narcissus spp., 34

Nardostachys jatamansi, 396

naringenin, 107

naringin, 107

nasal catarrh, 546, 550

Nasturtium officinale, 396

National Cancer Institute (NCI),
24

National Formulary (NF), 20

National Library of Medicine
(NLM), 641, 643

Native American Church, 121

natural aspirin, 366

natural progesterone, 543

natural resin, 86

naturopathic medicine, principles
of, 16

nausea, 478, 533, 550

necine base, 124, 202

necrosis, 163

Nectandra rigida, 175

nectandrins, 175

neem, 105

Nelumbo nucifera, 179

neoflavonoids, 106

neohesperidin, 107

neolignans, 112

neoquassin, 85

Nepeta cataria, 66, 396, 494, 569

nepetalactone, 66

Nerium oleander, 81, 169

nervine, 244, 345, 917-519

nervous system, 344-374

nettle. See Urtica dioica

neuralgia, 539, 559, 566, 567, 570,
572, 585

neuritis, 371-37

neuroendocrine, 461

neurological pain, 539

Nicotiana tabacum, 122

nicotine, 122

nifedipine, 172

night blooming cereus, 170

nitric oxide (NO), 141, 153, 196

nocturia, 377

nodule, 433

nonacosone, 59

noncompliance, 473

non-insulin dependent diabetes
mellitus (NIDDM), 463

nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs), 111, 190,
272, 412

nonsteroidal cardioactive con-
stituents, 169

normalizers, 36, 237

nortriterpenoids, 84

nosebleed, 303, 535

nosodes, 11

nucleases, 137

nutmeg, 64, 94, 394

NYHA class II cardiac insuffi-
ciency, 295

Nympbaea spp., 33

oak. See Quercus rubra
oats. See Avena sativa
obaberine, 125
obanegine, 126
obstructive bronchitis, 327
ochratoxins, 212
Ocimum. sanctum, 484
octadecyl alcohol, 58
octanol, 60
Ocnanthe aquatica, 64
Oenothera biennis, 56
Official Formulae
Aqua Cinnamomi conc. BPC
1911 (Concentrated
Cinnamon Water), 227
Balneum Sinapis BPC 1911
(Mustard Bath), 229
Compound Fig Elixir BP 1980,
225
Concentrated Compound
Gentian Infusion BP 1980, 220
Decoctum Lappae BPC 1911
(Decoction of Burdock), 222
Decoctum Tussilaginis BPC
1911 (Decoction of
Coltsfoot), 222
Emulsio Olei Amygdalae BPC
1911 (Almond Oil Emulsion),
225
Enema Ulmi Fulvae BPC 1911
(Enema of Slippery Elm), 230
Extractum Anthemidis
Liquidum BPC 1934 (Liquid
Extract of Chamomile), 225
Gargarisma Myrrhea BPC 1911
(Myrrh Gargle), 231
Infusum Pruni Virginianae BPC
1911 (Infusion of Virginian
Prune), 220
Linctus Ipecacuanhae BPC 1923
(Linctus of [pecacuanha), 226
Linimentum Arnicae BPC 1911
(Liniment of Arnica), 231
Mucilago Acaciae BPC 1911
(Mucilage of Acacia), 226
Nebula Benzoini Composita
BPC 1911 (Composition
Benzoin Inhalation), 232
Oxymel Marrubii BPC 1911
(Oxymel of Horehound), 226
Senna Liquid Extract BP 1980,
225

Syrupus Althaeae BPC 1911
(Syrup of Althaea), 225
Succus Taraxaci BPC 1911
Juice of Dandelion), 226
Trochisci Altheae BPC 1911
(Althaea Lozenges), 228
Vapor Eucalapti et Mentholis
Compositus BPC 1911
(Compound Eucalyptus and
menthol inhalation), 231

official standards, 20

oil of bergamot, 64

oil of cajeput, 66

oil of copaiba, 68

oil of coriander, 64

oil of eucalyptus, 66

oil of spearmint, 65

ointments, 230, 432

Olea europaea, 464, 491

oleander, 81

oleoresins, 86

oligomeric proanthocyanidins
(OPCs), 112, 295

oligomeric procyanidins (OPCs),
114

oligosaccharide, 41, 43

omega-3 EFAs, 36, 171, 259

omega-6 EFAs, 56, 259

onjunctivitis, 551

online databases, 642

Ononis, 78

opium poppy, 36, 365

optical isomerism, 40, 63

Opuntia ficus-indica, 179, 207

orange flowers, 64

orange lily, 85

oregano oil, 65

Oregon grape. See Mahonia
aquifolium

organized drugs, 30

organoleptic evaluation, 20

organosulphur derivatives, 174

Origanum majorana, 491

Origanum vulgare, 65

Ornithogalum, 169

orthopnea, 322

osha, 28, 324, 342

osmotic agents, 265

osteoarthritis, 418-422, 539, 568,
591

osteoporosis, 392, 424-425

Otitis Media, 478-479

ouabain, 168

ovarian pain, 343

overactive thyroid, 563

oviposition stimulant, 188

oxalic acid, 14, 198

Oxalobacter formigens, 198

oxazoles, 131

oxidases, 136

oxidation, 40

oxidative stress, 166

oxidoreductases, 136

oxyacanthine, 125

oxyberberine, 126

oxymels, 226

Pachycarpus, 169

paclitaxel, 62, 132

Paeonia spp., 33

Paeonia suffruticosa, 396

pain perception, 364

pain relievers, 410

palmarosa oil, 64

palmatine, 126

palmitic acid, 55

palmitoleic, 56

palpitations, 563

Panax ginseng, 15, 442, 464, 570

Panax notoginseng, 76, 158, 396

Panax quinguefolius, 28, 570

Panax spp., 465, 520

panaxans, 180

panaxatriol saponins, 76

Papaver somniferum, 36, 365

papaverine, 554

papule, 438

paradoxical reactions, 469

paramunity, 442

parathyroid hormone, 375

Parietaria diffusa, 383, 570

Parietaria judaica, 507

Parkinson’s disease, 123, 570

Parmelia spp., 93

parsley. See Petroselinum crispum

parthenolide, 71, 370

partition chromatography, 22

partridgeberry. See Mitchella repen

pasqueflower. See Pulsatilla
vulgaris

Passiflora incarnata, 494, 515-517,
570

passionflower. See Passiflora
incarnata

pastes, 432

pastilles (pastilli), 228

pau d’arco, 97

Paullinia cupana, 124, 517

Pausinystalia yohimbe, 129

p-coumaric acid, 94

pectins, 47

peer review journals, 19, 642

Peganum harmala, 128

pellitory of the wall. See Parietaria
diffusa

pelvic inflammatory disease
(PID), 387

penicillamine, 413

pennyroyal. See Mentha pulegium

pentadecylcatechols (PDCs), 208

pentoses, 42

Peppermint. See Mentha x piperita

peptic ulcers, 272-273, 526, 550,

555, 558

peptidases, 137

percolation, 218

percutaneous absorption, 326

perimenopause, 539

perineal tears, 402

periodontal disease, 268-269

peripheral arterial occlusive

disease, 311, 554

Periploca, 169

periwinkle. See Vinca minor

peroxidases, 137

persimmon, 13, 85

pertussis, 329— 330

Peru balsam, 87, 228

Petasites spp., 123

petite mal, 560, 582

Petroselinum crispum, 396, 454, 493,
494, 502, 507, 509, 516, 571

Peumus boldus, 504, 507, 914, 571

peyote cactus, 28, 121, 128

Pfaffia paniculata, 239

pH, 40

phalloidine, 584

phallotoxins, 205

pharmaceutical Latin, 217

pharmacodynamics, 134-144, 152,
192

----- PAGE 671 -----
pharmacognosy, 19, 134

pharmacokinetics, 134, 144-152,
192

pharmacology, 134-185

pharmacy, 134

pharyngitis, 541, 574, 577, 580, 585

phase I, 148

phase I, 50, 149

Phaseolus coccineus, 106

§-phellandrine, 64

Phellodendron amurense, 126, 396

Phellodendron chinense, 396

phellopterin, 135

phenalkylamines, 170

phenol, 90

phenolic acids, 92

phenolics, 40, 152

phenylalkylamines, 170, 172

phenylpropanoids, 94

pheromones, 68

Philodendron spp., 198

phlebitis, 524, 530

phloretin, 108, 143

Phoenix dactylifera, 83

phorbol ester, 72

phosphatidylcholine, 146

phosphatidylinositol, 146

phosphodiesterase inhibitors, 170

phospholipids, 146

phosphomutases, 137

photodermatitis, 527

photosensitivity, 95, 209, 528, 559,
571

Phyla, 31

Phyllanthus emblica, 302

Physicians of Myddfai, 241

phytane, 71

phytoalexins, 68

Phytochemical and Ethno-
botanical Databases, 643

phytoecdysones, 83

phytoestrogen, 140-144, 425

phytohemagglutinins, 153, 206

phytol, 73

Phytolacca americana, 153, 394, 455,
458, 484, 493, 509, 515, 572

phytophotodermatitis, 209

phytosterols, 83, 143

Picea, 64

Picrasma excelsa, 85, 396

Picrorrhiza kurroa, 285-286

Pieris rapae, 50

pill-bearing spurge, 332

pills, 227

Pilocarpus jaborandi, 396

Pilocarpus microphyllus, 396

Pilocarpus pennatifolius, 396

pilosebaceous follicles, 438

Pimpinella anisum, 396, 452, 491,
494, 502, 512, $72

pimpinellin, 210

pine bark, 13

pine needle oil, 64

Pinellia ternata, 396

a-pinene, 64

Pinguicula vulgaris, 330

Pink root, 28

Pinus heterophylla, 59

Pinus palustris, 64

Pinus pinaster, 59, 64

Pinus pumilio, 325

Pinus sylvestris, 64, 83

pinworm, 526, 530

Piper amalago, 59

Piper angustifolium, 94

Piper futukadsura, 175

Piper methysticum, 494, 517, 573

piperidine alkaloids, 122, 204

piperidine, 122

pipsissewa, 28

Piptadenia peregrina, 128

Piptadenia spp., 127

piscicide, 78

Piscidia erytbrina, 371, 494, 515,
517, 872

pitcher plant, 122

Pittosporum phylliraeoides, 165

placebo-controlled study, 18

plant exudates, 85

plant pigmentation, 100

Plantae, 31

Plantago lanceolata, 574

Plantago major, 433, 489, 491, 497,
573

Plantago ovata, 52

plantain. See Plantago major

planteose, 43

plasma binding, 469

Plasmodium falciparum, 130, 459

Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax,
and P. ovale, 70

platelet function, 173

platelet-activating factor (PAF)
antagonists, 174

platelet-activating factor (PAF),
195, 173, 554

pleurisy root. See Asclepias tuberosa

pleurisy, 527, 931

plumbagin, 97

Plumbago europaea, 97

p-methoxy!-8-phenethylamine, 170

PMS-A, 389

PMS-C, 389

PMS-D, 389

PMS-H, 389

pneumonia, 931

podagra, 426

podofilox, 113

podophyllotoxin, 113, 161

Podophyllum hexandrum, 161, 396

Podophyllum peltatum, 28, 113, 161,
394

poison hemlock, 122

poison ivy dermatitis, $55

poison ivy, 58, 208, 555

poison oak, 8, 58, 208

poisonous plants, 198

poke. See Phytolacca americana

poliovirus type 1, 164

pollution standards index (PSD), 318

polyacetylenes, 59

Polygala senega, 74, 396, 512, 520,
574

Polygonum bistorta, 497

polymorphism, 150

polypeptides, 205

polyphenols, 90-119, 167

polysaccharide, 41, 44, 153

pomegranate, 114

Populus balsamifera var. balsam-
ifera, 433, 452

Populus candicans, 512, 575

Populus tremuloides, 150, 366, 489,
493, 575

poria, 44, 153

Portulaca oleracea, 170, 396

post-bronchitis recovery, 326

postmastectomy pain, 536

postoperative recovery, 447

postpartum depression, 402

postpartum, 402-403
pot marigold, 534
Potentilla spp., 106
poultice, 232, 432
powders, 432
prebiotic, 43
precatory bean, 206
pregnancy, 393-403
premarrubiin, 73
premenstrual syndrome, 388-390,
582, 595
prepared resin, 86
Prescriptions
acne, 439
acute bronchitis, 325
amenorrhea, 386, 387
angina pectoris, 311
anorexia nervosa, 363
antispasmodic rub, 418, 428
aphthous ulcers, 267
asthma associated with eczema,
333
asthma, 332
atherosclerosis, 308
barley water, 378
benign prostatic hypertrophy,
407
benzodiazepine withdrawal, 362
boils, 455
chamomile steam inhalation, 337
cholecystitis, 288
chronic bronchitis with debility,
327
chronic bronchitis wich infection,
328
chronic recurrent bronchitis
with dyspnea, 328
chronic recurrent bronchitis
with severe congestion, 328
cirrhosis, 287
common cold, 337
congestive heart failure, 310
constipation, 266
cough, a basic tea, 322
cough, 2 simple elixir, 322
cough, acute dry, 324
cystitis and irritable bowel syn-
drome, 250
cystitis infusion, 381
cystitis with pain and discomfort,

cystitis, 380

depression, 355

diaper rash ointment, 480

diarrhea, 267

diverticulitis, 281

dysmenorrhea associated with
pelvic lesions, 388

dysmenorrhea, 387

dyspnea, 332

dysuria, 378

eczema associated with asthma,
434

eczema, 433, 434

edema, 379

emphysema, 334

endometriosis, 404

essential oil inhalation, 326

expectoration, to promote, 324,
325

eyebright eyewash, 474

fibrocystic breast disease, 405

footbath, 337

gallstones, 289

gastritis, 271

INDEX .@ 663

GERD, 270

gout, 426

hay fever, 340

headache relief, 367

hematuria, 378

hemorrhoids, 289

hepatitis, 284

hiatus hernia, 274

hormone levels, a supportive
prescription to normalize, 389

hypertension with associated
headache, 305

hypertension with bronchitis, 306

hypertension with debility, 305

hypertension with indigestion, 305

hypertension with palpitations,

305

hypertension with premenstrual

syndrome, 306

hypertension with stress, 305

hypertension, 304

hyperthyroidism, 463

impetigo, 482

indigestion, 275

indigestion, tea for children, 477

influenza, 339

insomnia associated with de-
pression, 360

insomnia associated with hyper-
tension and headache, 360

insomnia associated with hyper-
thyroidism, 463

insomnia associated with indi-
gestion, 359

insomnia associated with
menopausal problems, 359

insomnia blend, 361

insomnia, 359

irritable bowel syndrome, 254,
278

jaundice, 283

kidney stones, 383

laryngitis, 342

licorice Jollipops, 478

liniment, stimulating, 420

menopause symptoms, 393

migraine associated with stress
and hypertension, 370

migraine, 370

migraine, a cooling compress
for, 371

miscarriage, 397

morning sickness, 373, 398

mumps, 475

muscle-relaxant compress, 353

myalgia, 418

neuritis, 371

osteoarthritis, 254, 420

osteoporosis, 425

otitis media, 479

peptic ulcer, 273

peripheral arterial disease, 312

pertussis and other paroxysmal
coughs, 330

PMS, 254, 340, 389

prostatius, 454

psoriasis and hypertension, 437

psoriasis, 254

psoriasis, unresponsive, 254,
437

pyorrhea, 269

relaxing antidepressant essential
oil, 361

rheumatoid arthritis, 423

shingles, 373

----- PAGE 672 -----
664 @ INDEX

sinusitis, 341
sleep and pain relief, 423
sleep pillow, 360
St. John’s wort oil, 420
steam inhalation, 325, 337, 341
stress associated muscle tension,
353
stress with indigestion and pal-
pitations, 353
stress, 352
tendinitis or bursitis, 428
tension headaches, 367
tinnitus, 372
tonsilitis, 343
ulcerative colitis, 279
urinary frequency associated
with infection, 378
uterine fibroids, 403
varicose vein lotion, 313
varicose veins, 313
Prestonia amazonica, 128
prickly ash. See Zenthoxylum
americanum
prickly pear, 179, 207
primarane, 71
primary metabolites, 37
primary screening bioassays, 23
Primula spp., 76
Primula veris, 512
proanthocyanidins, 13, 114
procyanidin, 114
prodecdysone B, 83
prodelphinidin, 114
progestins, 141
prokaryote, 31
prolactin, 141, 595
propionibacterium acne, 439
1-propylmethyldisulphide, 174
prostacyclin, $7, 157
prostaglandins, 97, 155
prostatitis, 454, 524, $42, 546, 596
protease inhibition, 165
protein kinase C activators, 174
proteinases, 137
proteins, 115
proteoglycans, 46-47
proteolytic cleavage, 165
Proteus vulgaris, 527, 545
Protista, 31
protoanemonin, 70, 199
prunasin, 50
Prunus dulcis var. amara, 50
Prunus persica, 396
Prunus serotina, 50, 494, 497, 512,
$75
pseudoephedrine, 546
pseudogout, 426
pseudoguaianolides, 70
pseudohypericin, 98
Pseudomelanosis coli, 265
Pseudomonas aeruginos, 526
Psidium gujava, 179
Psilocybe mexicana, 129
Psilocybe spp., 120
psilocybin, 129
Psoralea corylifolia, 106
Psoralea spp., 96
psoralen, 96, 209-210
psoriasis, 254
psoriatic arthritis, 412, 435
Psorospermin, 99
psychoneuroimmunology, 441
psyllium seed, 52
Psyllium spp., 33
Preridium aquilinum, 50

pterocarpans, 107, 210

Prerocaulon sphacelatum, 165

PubMed, 643

Pueraria lobata, 106, 176

Pulmonaria officinalis, 512

pulmonaries, 321

Pulsatilla vulgaris, 455, 484, 509,
517, 576

pulsatilla. See Pudsatilla vulgaris

Punica granatum, 114

purging buckthorn, 394

purine alkaloids, 124-125

purine-rich foods, 426

purines, 160

purslane, 170

PUVA, 96, 527

pycnogenols, 13, 114

pyelitis, 529, 570

pyorrhea, 268, 533, 541, 544

pyranocoumarins, 95

pyrazines, 131

pyrethrins, 62

pyridine alkaloids, 204

pyrimidines, 160

pyrrolidine alkaloids, 122

pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs), 123-
124, 188, 202-203, 321, 586

pyuria, 379

quaking aspen. See Populus tremu-
loides

Quassia amara, 85, 396

quassinoids, 84

queen's delight, 394

quercetin, 14, 104-105

Quercus rubra, 577

Quercus spp., 497

Quillaja saponaria, 79

quillaja, 79

quince, $1

quinine, 130

quinoa, 78

quinoline alkaloids, 130

uinolizidine alkaloids, 130-131,
204

uinones, 96

RLCE,, 428

radicles, 9

raffinose, 43, 263

Ramalina spp., 93

ranunculin, 70, 199

ranunculosiues, 70, 199

Ranunculus acris, 70, 199

raphides, 198

raspberry leaf, 393

Rauvolfia serpentina, 129, 304

Rauvolfia vomitoria, 129

reactive airway disease (RAD), 330

reactive oxygen species (ROS), 166

receptors, 139-140

recurrent aphthous stomatitis
(RAS), 267

red algae, 51

red clover. See Trifolium pratense

Red List of Threatened Plants, 27

red raspberry. See Rubus idaeus

red sage. See Salvia officinalis var.
rubia

5-a-reductase, 407, 583

$-a-reductasé Inhibition, 138

reishi, 44, 153

relaxation techniques, 349-350

REM (rapid eye movement), 356

renin-angiotensin system, 172

reproductive system, 384-407

reserpine, 129

resins, 85

resistance stage, 346

respiratory catarrh, 526

respiratory centers, 316

respiratory system, 316-343

restless legs syndrome, 428

resveratrol, 99

reticulum cell sarcoma, 127

retinoids, 85

retronecine monoester, 189, 202

reverse transcriptase, 115

Reye’s syndrome, 474

Ry value., 21, 22

Rhamnus cathartica, 97, 394

Rhammnus frangula, 97, 394

Rbhamnus purshiana, 201, 265, 394,
462, 514, 520

thatany, 269

rhein, 98

Rheum officinale, 396, 577

Rheum pabnatum, 394, 497, 577

Rheum tanguticum, 396

rheumatism, 411, 417, 534, 542,

550, 551, 556, 562, 572, 575,

579, 580, 587, 594, 595-596

rheumatoid arthritis, 421, 539,

543, 556, 568, 575, 584

rheumatoid factor (RF), 421

rheumatoid nodules, 422

rhizotomoi, 9

Rhodiola rosea, 169, 484

rhubarb. See Rheum palmatum

Rhus verniciflua, 208

Ribes nigrum, 56

ribose, 42

ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase,
137

ribwort plantain, 574

Ricin, 206

Ricinus communis, 153, 206, 266, 396

ringworm, 456, 526, 558, 566, 588

risk factors, 197, 293-298

risk, 16, 197

Roman chamomile, 350

Rosa centifolia, 64

Rosa damascena, 64

rosemary. See Rosmarinus officinalis

rosin, 86

Rosmarinus officinalis, 396, 452,
491, 493, 494, 497, 501, 504,
509, 520, 577

Ross river virus (RRV), 164

rotenoids, 107

rotenone, 107

roundworm, 530

rubefacient, 244, 410

rubeola, 474

Rubia tinctorum, 96

rubisco, 137

rubratoxins, 212

Rubus idaeus, 393, 497, 509, 578

Rubus villosus, 497

tue. See Ruta graveolens

Rumex crispus, 433, 458, 462, 484,
493, 504, 514, 578

ruscogenin, 83

ruscoside, $3

Ruscus aculeatus, 81, 83

Russian comfrey, 124

Ruta graveolens, 394, 491, 499,
$09, 520, 579

rutabagas, 85

rutin, 48, 105

Ryania speciosa, 130
ryanodine, 130

saccharide, 41

sacred lotus, 179

safety guidelines, 190

safety, 16, 186

saffron, 163

sagebrushes, 68

saikosaponin A, 81

salicin, 48, 92-93

salicylates, 36, 92, 366

Salix alba, 579

Salix spp., 489, 493

Salmonella typhimurium, 24

salpingitis, 387

salt, 306

salves, 432

Salvia apiana, 28

Salvia divinorum, 72

Salvia miltiorrbiza, 72, 311

Salvia officinalis var. rubia, 396,
486, 489, 491, 494, 497, 502,
504, 509, 580

salvinorin A, 72

Sambucus nigra, 486, 489, 494,
507, 512, 580

sandalwood oil, 210, 325

Sanguinaria canadensis, 170, 394,
458, 484, 512, 520, 581

sanguinarine, 127, 170

Santalum album, 325

santolin, 70

a-santonin, 62

sapogenin, 74

Saponaria officinalis, 580

saponin glycosides, 49, 200

saponins, 74-83

Sarracenia flava, 122

sarsaparilla. See Srzilax spp.

sassafras, 417

Sassafras albidum, 417

saturated fatty acids, 54

Sauromatum guttatum, 128

saw palmetto, See Serenoa repens

scabies, 572

Scaevola spinescens, 165

scarlet runner bean, 106

Schisandra chinensis, 113, 443, 484

schisandrin, 113

Schistosoma, 96

schistosomiasis, 96

schizandra. See Schisandra chinensis

schizophyllan, 153

Schizophyllum commune, 44, 153

sciatica, 539, 559

scientific method, 17

sclerotan, 153

Sclerotina sclerotiorium, 44, 153

scopalamine, 123, 373

Scotch broom, 394

Scotch pine, 83

screening programs, 20

Scrophularia buergeriana, 67

Scrophularia nodosa, 433, 458, 484,
$01, 581

Scutellaria baicalensis, 158

Scutellaria lateriflora, 465, 494,
515-517, 582

Scutellaria rivularis, 176

sea holly, 330

sea urchin assay, 23

sebaceous glands, 438

seborrheic dermatitis, 481

secoiridoids, 66

----- PAGE 673 -----
secologanin, 127

secondary messenger, 140

secondary metabolites, 37

secotanapartholide a, 370

Sedum acre, 242

selection criteria, 237~240

Selenicereus grandiforus, 170

Semecarpus anacardium, 163, 208

sempervirine, 127, 204

Seneca snakeroot See Polygala senega

Senecio spp., 123, 189

senecionine, 189, 202

senegin II, 81

Senna alexandrina, 394, 462, 520,
582

Senna obtusifolia, 396

Senna tora, 396

senna. See Senna alexandrina

sennoside A, 48, 98

septicemia, 544

Serenoa repens, 507, $83

serotonin, 129, 155

serpentine receptors, 140

Serratula spp., 33

sertraline, 559

serum bilirubin, 178

sesquiterpene immunostimulants,
152

sesquiterpene lactones, 70, 174,
199, 370

sesquiterpenes, 67

sex hormone binding globulin
(SHBG), 143

shepherd’s purse. See Capsella
bursa-pastoris

shift work, 357

Shigella, 545

shiitake, 44, 153

shingles, 373, 536, 571

sialic acid, 146

siam benzoin resin, 228

siberian ginseng. See
Eleutherococcus senticosus

side effects, 146

silicon, 14

silk tree, 484

silybin, 108, 114

Silybum marianum, 177, 282, 514,
584

silychristin, 114

silymarin, 108, 177, 584

B-sitosterol, 84, 143

syrup, 225

sinalbin, 50

Sinapsis nigra, 534

sinigrin, 90

sinusitis, 340-341, 541, 546, 550,
558, 580

sisal, 81

Sjogren’s syndrome, 56, 422

skatole, 129

skin conductance, 350

skin, 430-440

Skulleap. See Scutellaria lateriflora

skunk cabbage. See Symplocarpus
foetidus

sleep pillows, 360

slime molds, 31

slippery elm. See Ubnus rubra

Smilax spp., 433, 484, 493, 584

soapwort roor, 580

solanidine, 205

solanine, 131, 205

solanum-type alkaloids, 131

Solidago canadensis, 78, 211

Solidago gigantea, 78, 211

Solidago virgaurea, 78, 150, 486,
489, 497, 585

solubility, 20

sorbitol, 263

Sorghum, 200

southernwood, 394

soy, 78

sparteine, 130, 170

Spartium junceum, 204

spastic colon, 277

Species, 31

specific gravity, 20

specific remedies, 383

sperm count, 142

spermicide, 78

sphingomyelin, 146

Spigelia marilaandica, 28

spike lavender, 64

spikenard, 28, 74

Spinacia oleracea, 464

spindle tree. See Euonymus
atropurpureus

spindle, 160

Spiraea, 130

spirolaurenone, 60

spironolactone amiloride, 555

sprains, 530

spray solutions (nebulae), 231

sputum, 320

squalene, 74

squill, 81, 169

St. John’s wort oil, 420

St. John’s wort. See Hypericum

ratum

St. Mary’s thistle, 984

Stachys betonica, 517, 585

Stachys officinalis, 122, 515

Stachys sylvatica, 122

Staphylococcus aureus, $27

starch, 44

starfish, 23

stearic acid, 55

steatosis, 193

Stellaria media, 36, 431, 433, 489,
585

Sterculia urens, 51

sterculia, 51

stereoisomer, 40

steroid alkaloids, 74, 131, 205

steroid glycosides, 49, 74

steroid saponins, 81

Stevia rebaudiana, 74

stevioside, 62, 74

stigmasterol, 84, 143

stilbenoids, 99

Stillingia sylvatica, 394, 458, 484

stimulant 345, 519-521

stomatitis, 580

stoneroot See Collinsonia canadensis

storax, 228

stream orchid, 28

Streptococcus pneumoniae, 322

stress, 345-354, 483, 532, 545,
562, 570

stressors, 545

stretch marks, 400

striae, 400

stroke, 303

Strophanthus kombe, 81, 169

structure-activity relationship, 40

Styrax tonkinensis, 228

subspecies, 32

substance P, 536

sucrose, 43

sulfhydryl compounds, 166

sulfotransferase, 149

suma, 239

sunburn, 559

sundew. See Drosera rotundifolia

sunflower, 68

supercritical CO, extraction, 217

superoxide dismutase (SOD), 156,
166

suppotories, 230

surface immune activation, 444

sweet annie, 70

sweet bugle, 563

sweet potato, 85

sweet violet. See Viola odorata

sweet woodruff, 67, 95

swelling index, 21

Swertia spp., 99

swollen glands, 552

symphytine, 124

Symphytum officinale, 188, 396,
489, 497, 506, 512, 586

Symphytum x uplandicum, 124

S. orientale, 124

Symplocarpus foetidus, 34, 60, 494,
512, 586

synephrine, 170

synovial fluid, 419

syrups and elixirs, 225

systemic lupus erythematosus, 411

Syaygium aromaticum, 68, 114,
452, 491

Syaygium cumini, 179

Tabebuia spp., 97

tablets, 227

tachycardia, 562

tachyphylaxis, 151

tacrine, 138

Tanacetum cinerariifolium, 62

Tanacetum parihenium, 369-370,
396, 423, 493-494, 509, 587

Tanacetum vulgare, 66, 396, 499,
509, 520, 530

tangeretin, 14

tannins, 114-117, 201

tansy oil, 66, 530

tansy, 394

Taraxacum officinale, 45, 464, 493,
499, 504, 507, 514, 587

taxane, 72

taxifoline, 113

taxine A, 131

taxoids, 162

taxol, 62, 132

Taxus baccata, 132, 162

Taxus brevifolia, 132

Taxus spp., 131

tea tree. See Melaleuca alternifolia

teething, 566

temporomandibular joint, 372

tendinitis, 412, 427

teniposide, 113, 161

tenulin, 70, 152

teonanacatl, 129

teratogenicity, 193

terebinth, 62

terpenes, 62-89, 152, 199

terpinene-4-ol, 439

tertbutylhydroxyanisole (BEA),
168

tertbutylhydroxytoluene (BHT),
168

A®-tetrahydrocannabinol, 93

tetrahydrofurans, 173

INDEX wa 665

tetraterpenoids, 85

tetroses, 42

Theobroma cacao, 123-134

theobromine, 124

theophylline, 124

therapeutic index (TI), 195

therapeutic systems, 241

Thevetia, 169

thin layer chromatography
(TLQ), 22

thioglucosidase, 50, 200

thiols, 166

threatened miscarriage, 397, 593

threshold effect, 195

thrombosis, 523

thromboxane-receptor antago-

nists, 174

thromboxanes, 155

thrush, 588

Thuja occidentalis, 66, 394, 436,

445, 458, 512, 530, 588

thuja. See Thuja occidentalis

thujone, 66, 199, 530

thujyl alcohol, 66

thyme. See Thymus vulgaris

thymol, 66

Thymus vulgaris, 452, 486, 491,

494, 502, 509, 512, 589

thyroid gland, 461

ti tree. See Melaleuca alternifolia

tiger lily, 85

tigliane, 72

Tilia argentea, 211

Tilia platyphyllos, 293, 489, 494,
501, 507, $09, 515-517, $89

tinctures (tincturae), 223

Tinea barbae, 456

Tinea capitis, 456

Tinea corporis, 456

Tinea cruris, 456

Tinea pedis, 456

Tinnevelly senna, 582

tinnitus, 372-373, 539, 554, 587

Tinospora cordifolia, 484

tliacorine, 125

toad venom, 83

tobacco, 122, 261, 318, 963

tocopherols, 168

tolbutamide, 179

tolu balsam, 87

Tolypocladium inflatum, 446

tonic, 244

tonka bean, 95

tonsillitis, 342-343, 533, 544,
552, 572, 577, 580, $89

tophi, 426

topoisomerase II inhibitors, 161

topoisomerase II, 143

topologic state, 161

toxic dose (TD), 194

toxicity, 16, 186, 192

Texicodendron diversilobum, 8

Toxicodendron radicans, 208

Toxicodendron rydbergdii, 208

Toxicodendron diversilobum, 208

Toxicodendron toxicarium, 208

‘Toxicodendron vernix, 208

toxicology, 192-198

trachea, 316

tracheitis, 572

tracheobronchitis, 324

traditional Chinese medicine, 10,
242

traditional healing systems, 241

Traditional Medicine Program, 25

----- PAGE 674 -----
666 @ INDEX

tragacanth, 52

transacetylases, 137

transaminases, 137

transcription, 139

transferases, 137

transferrin, 168

transglycosidases, 137

translocases, 147

transmembrane ion channel,
140-141

transphosphorylases, 137

tree of heaven, 68

tree-hugging, 350

Tremella fuciformis, 44, 153

tremella, 44

triacylglycerols, 58

Trichocereus pachanoi, 128

trichomes, 70

trichomonal vaginitis, 544, 566

Trichomonas vaginalis, 544

Trichophyton, 455

Trichopus zeylanicus, 484

Trichosanthes kirilowii, 396

trichothecenes, 212

tridesmosidic saponins, 74

Trifolium pratense, 396, 433, 458,
484, 494, 517, 590

trigeminal neuralgia, 536

Trigonella foenum-graecum, 51, 302,
396, 464, 489, 494, 509, 516

Trillium erectum, 28, 81, 384
Trillium pendulum, 384

trimester, first, 397

trimester, second, 400

trimester, third, 400

trisaccharide, 43

triterpene glycosides, 74

triterpenoid saponins, 79

Trollius europaeus, 70, 199

Tropacolum majus, 50, 509

tropane alkaloids, 122-123, 204

tropane, 123

tryptophan, 127

tuberculosis bacterium, 93

tuberculosis, 560

tubotoxin, 107

tubulin-interactions, 162

tumor necrosis factor (TNF),
153, 157, 162

turkey corn, 28

turmeric, 94, 302

Turnera diffusa vax. apbrodisiaca,
86, 494, 517

turpentine, 58

Tussilago farfara, 51, 396, 486,
489, 494, 506, 512, 590

tyramine, 170

tyrosine kinase receptors, 141

ubiquinone, 167

ulcerative colitis, 56, 279-280, 586
Ulex spp., 85

Ubmus rubra, 51, 506, 591
umbelliferone, 96

unani medicine, 10, 242

Uncasia cuneifolia, 70

United Plant Savers, 28

United States Pharmacopoeia
(USP), 20

unorganized drugs, 30

unsaturated fatty acids, 54

upper respiratory system,
335-343, 555

Urechites, 169

uremia, 322

urethral syndrome, 380

urethritis, 524, 526 546, 550, 585,
596

Urginea maritima, 81, 169, 501,
S12

uric acid, 426

urinary calculus, 381-383, 526

urinary incontinence, 525

urinary system, 375- 383

uronic acid, 50

uroshiol JIT, 58

Urtica dioica, 36, 419, 433, 458,
484, 493, 516, 591

Urtica ferox, 206

Unrtica gigas, 206

urticaria, 206, 566

urushiol, 58, 208

Usnea spp., 93, 445, 452, 491

usnic acid, 93

Ustilago maydis, 44, 153

uterine astringents, 385, 510

uterine demulcents, 385, 510

uterine fibroids, 403

uterine tonics, 385, 509

uva-ursi. See Arctostaphylos uva-ursi

Vaccinium macrocarpon, 381

Vaccinium myrtillus, 464

vaginitis, 452

Valencia oranges, 84

valepotriates, 66

valerenic acid, 67

valerian. See Valeriana officinalis

Valeriana officinalis, 462, 494, 502,
509, 515-517, 592

validity, 18

valtrate, 66

Vanilla planifolia, 93

vanillin, 93

varicella zoster, 373

varicose ulcers, 586, 596

varicose veins, 312, 526, 556, 559,
596

varieties, 32

vascular permeability, 524

vascular plants, 31

vascular tonics, 292

vasculitis, 422

vasoactive amines, 155, 378

Vedic tradition, 242

veno-occlusive syndrome, 203

venous insufficiency, 76, 524

venus’ fly trap, 28

verapamil, 172

veratramine, 131

veratrum-type alkaloids, 131

Verbascum thapsus, 417, 489, 494,
497 506, 512, 592

Verbena hastata, 396

Verbena officinalis, 396, 494, 509,
512, 515-517, 592

verbenalin, 67

Vernonia amygdalina, 179

Vernonia noveboracensis, 33

Veronicastrum virginicum, 562

verruculotoxin, 131

vertigo, 539, 554, 566

vervain. See Verbena officinalis

very low density lipoprotein
(VLDL), 171, 300

Vetiveria zizanoides, 396

Viburnum odoratissimum, 170

Viburnum opulus, 489, 493, 494,
509, 516, 517, 593

Viburnum prunifolium, 489, 494,
509, 516, 517, 593

Vicia faba, 59

Vigna angularis, 107

vinblastine, 129

vinca alkaloids, 162

Vinca major, 497

Vinca minor, 594

vincristine, 129

Viola odorata, 458, 512, 594

Viola tricolor, 433, 595

viral hepatitis, 285-286, 584

viral replication, 165

Virginia snakeroot, 28

Viscum album, 153, 164, 394, 458,
516

visnadin, 172

vitamin A, 168

vitamin C, 167

vitamin D, 425

vitamin E, 168

vitamin F, 54

Vitex agnus-castus, 396, 509, 595

vitex. See Vitex agnus-castus

vitiligo, 95

Vins vinifera, 99

vomiting, 533, 538

vulcracine, 126

vulnerary, 244

wahoo. See Euonymus atropurpureus

Wales, 241

warfarin, 201

warts, 588

water bugle, 563

water fennel, 64

water hemlock, 59

water-based preparations, 219

waters (aqua), 227

waxes, 58

wellness, 17

western hemlock, 588

western larch, 46

wheezing, 321

white cedar oil, 66, 530

white cedar, 588

white hellebore, 131
Veratrum album, 131

white horehound, 564

white mustard, 416, 534

white sage, 28

white willow. See Salix alba

whitehead, 438

whooping cough, 329, 526, 537,
544, 555, 561, 565, 572, 575,
586, 589, 590

wild carrot. See Daucus carota

wild cherry. See Prunus serotina

wild fig, 131

wild indigo. See Baptisia tinctoria

wild lettuce. See Lactuca virosa

wild sarsaparilla, 74

wild yam. See Dioscorea villosa

wind flower, 576

wintergreen, 366

witch hazel. See Hamamelis vir-
giniana

Withania somnifera, 396, 465

withenolide, 84

Wolfporia cocos, 44, 153

wood anemone, 70

wood betony. See Stachys betonica

wood ear, 44, 153

World Health Organization
(WHO), 6, 25
World Health Organization
definition of health, 258

wormwood oil, 199

wormwood. See Artemisia
absinthium

wound healing, 586

wounds, $41

wyerone, 59

xanthones, 99
xanthophylls, 85
xanthotoxin, 210
xenoestrogens, 142
xylose, 42
Xysmalobium, 169

yarrow. See Achillea milléfolinm
yeasts, 31

yellow dock. See Rumex crispus
yerba mansa, 28

yerba santa, 28, 86
ylang-ylang oil, 210

yohimbe bark, 129
yohimbine, 129

yoni powder, 453

Yucca spp., 81

Zanthoxylum americanum, 396,
493, 501, 514, 520, 596

Zanthoxylum bungeanum, 397

Zanthoxylum clava-herculis, 397

Zanthoxylum schinifolium, 397

Zanthoxylum simulans, 397

Zea mays, 489, 506, 507, 596

B-zearalenol, 143

zearalenone, 143, 212

Zingiber officinale, 373, 397 493,
494, 501, 502, 509, 520, 597

zingiberene, 69

Ziziphus spinosa, 397

zoapatanol, 74

zoapatle tree, 74

----- PAGE 675 -----

