
----- PAGE 1 -----
Pry MeN RAL
| MEDICINE MAKERS

RP BPOK

such of The M

a? “illustrated by Aina Green”

----- PAGE 2 -----
THE HERBAL
MepIcine-Maker’s HANDBOOK

A Home Manuat

James Green, Herbalist

Illustrated by Ajana Green

I
ie

----- PAGE 3 -----
Disclaimer: The nutritional information, recipes, and instructions contained within this
book are in no way intended as a substitute for medical counseling. Please do not
attempt self-treatment of a medical problem without consulting a qualified health
practitioner. The author and publisher expressly disclaim any and all liability for any
claims, damages, losses, judgments, expenses, costs, or injuries resulting from any
products offered in this book by participating companies and their employees or
agents. Nor does the inclusion of any resource group or company listed within this
book constitute an endorsement or guarantee of quality by the author or publisher.

Text copyright © 2000 by James Green
Interior author photo copyright © 2002 by Carolyn Staub

All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Crossing Press, an imprint of the
Crown Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York.
www.crownpublishing.com

www.tenspeed.com

Crossing Press and the Crossing Press colophon are registered trademarks of Random
House, Inc.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Green, James, 1940-
The herbal medicine-maker’s handbook: a home manual / by James Green.
p.cm.
1. Materia medica, Vegetable—Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Traditional medicine—
Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3. Herbals—Handbooks, manuals, ete. I. Title.

RS164.G674 2000
615'.321-de21 00-030708

eISBN: 978-0-307-77946-5
Illustrations by Ajana Green

v3.1

----- PAGE 4 -----
AcknowLeDGMENTs

I want to express my deepest gratitude to Ajana, graphic artist and
illustrator, for gracing this book with your wonderfully creative
imagination and extraordinary talent. Your aesthetic spirit, wit, and
creative excellence generously conveyed by the illustrations lying
within these pages openly reflect a uniquely brilliant consciousness
I find intrinsic to your generation.... Speaking of which, I sincerely
thank you too, James Snow, for your regard and friendship. Your
clever mind and discerning herbalist’s eye have enhanced this
herbal and spared me litters of technical chagrin. I also wish to
extend my gratitude to Dave Broach for your good-natured
willingness to manifest the cover photo with your patience, your
Hasselblad, and the singular touch of your light, and shutter skills.
And while I’m on this roll, thank you Elaine Gill and skilled staff
members of The Crossing Press. Your support, your fluid spirit of
co-creating, and your confidence in my work as an herbalist and
writer leave little wonder in my mind why your catalogs repertoire
of publications is bursting with the works of so many excellent
authors. This is not to say that we didn’t have to get down and dirty
while tussling with a few differences of opinion, the aftermath of
which found a number of Ajana’s most splendid illustrations
adorning the cutting room floor, alas never to be seen by the
reader’s eyes; and that is the tragic component of this story.
However, the ending is of course a happy one, for all who enjoy
entering aesthetic realms of exquisite fantasy can visit Ajana’s
captivating Web site at <www.ajana-art.com > and experience the
beautiful sanctums of her talent and creative vision. Please note,
dear reader, this is not one of those commonplace commercial
plugs; this is a dad’s fervent praise of his daughter’s superb talent
and fascinating mind ... big difference, big, big difference. Go check
it out ... you'll come back delighted.

----- PAGE 5 -----
For
Bre and Ajana,
my gifted daughters
and artful companions

We dance our madness;
we dance our joy.
Oh precious ones, the fun has just begun.
Wild music is in the air;
there’s beauty flowing everywhere.

----- PAGE 6 -----
‘Tasie or Contents

Cover

Title Page

Copyright

Acknowledgments

Dedication

Protocur: A Word Before the Medicine Show

1 A Field Trip
2 A Few Herbs Are All You Need
3 Gardening and Harvesting, Drying, Garbling, and Storing
4 Kitchen Pharmacy Equipment
5 The Extraction Process
6 Solvents
7 Forms of Herbal Medicine
8 Infusion
9 Decoction

10 Distillation of Hydrosols

11 Flower Essences

12 Tincturing by Maceration

13 Tincturing by Percolation

14 Wine Infusion

15 Vinegar Infusion

16 Glycerin Infusion

17 Oil Infusion

18 Ointment, Salves, & Balms

19 Lotions & Creams

20 Suppositories and Boluses

21 Herb Jellos

----- PAGE 7 -----
22 Syrups, Honeys, Oxymels, and Electuaries

23 Baths for Water Therapy

24 Poultices and Fomentations

25 Complementary Techniques, Terms, and Other
Considerations

26 A Perspective on Medicine

APPENDICES
‘A—The United Plant Savers List of “At-Risk Medicinal Plants”
B—Welcome to the Garden
C—Eight Principles of Excellent Medicine-Making
D—Extract Information Chart
E—Harvesting Information Chart
FFirst Aid for Poisoning by Alkaloids

REFERENCES

RESOURCES

----- PAGE 8 -----


----- PAGE 9 -----
Protocur,

A WORD BEFORE THE MEDICINE SHOW

“The day you decide to appreciate yourself is the day you begin to dance.”
—T. ELDER SACHS

Herbal medicine-making is much like dancing;
it’s easy, it’s natural, and it’s undeniably
elightful. To say the least, it is a lucid
xpression of one’s distinct character. If you have
ever worked with medicinal plants or made
erbal medicines for yourself, you will have to
ike my word for this. However, as you
xperiment with the procedures suggested in this
anual, I promise that during some private
joment, maybe when “shaking your tinctures”
1 while “garbling” some dreamy Mugwort, you
will find yourself thinking, “Hey, that Green guy was right. This is
more damn fun! I think I might even go dancing tonight!” And like
dancing, once you find the rhythm of the music and begin moving
your body with it, you’ll never want to stop.

The ever-engaging green-melodies of herbal medicine-making are
sung by the seductive voices of your neighboring leaves, roots,
barks, rhizomes, flowers, and seeds, while the rhythm you move to
is composed entirely within yourself, by the cadence of your
creative enjoyment. You'll find yourself swinging to the pleasures of
simple fun, personal independence, and a renewed connection with
Earth’s natural beauty and perpetual abundance. And that’s feelin’
good, which is the essence of health. The making is the taking of
herbal medicine.

Keep in mind that herbs, the principal ingredients in homemade
herbal medicines, are basically free once you learn how to correctly
harvest them for yourself (which we will cover in Chapter Three).

----- PAGE 10 -----
Therefore, I can assure you that herbal medicine-making performed
in the home-kitchen is not only simple and fun, it is universally
affordable. This makes perfect sense, for the art and empirical
science of Herbalism were engendered eons ago by the wit and
enduring ingenuity of some remarkably intelligent, resourceful, and
visionary people—our ancestors. This is our cultural heritage.

Herbalism is one of those people’s things. It is indigenous to all
communities of our globe, which is why it thrives so harmoniously
in our homes. To manifest high-quality, health-pumping herbal
preparations, you can take this plant lore in hand, make your own
preparations, and thereby liberate yourself, your family, your
community, and your monetary resources from dependence on
others. Why pay others to frolic in the luscious gardens of Earth,
picking flowers and enjoying themselves making herbal products?
You can do all that frolicking, immersing yourself in wondrous
herbal beauty, and uplifting your mind and spirit. Making your own
herbal medicine both enhances your happiness and boosts your
immune system. And the herbal preparations you make can be
every bit as excellent as those you bring home from the store.
Actually they will be better, profoundly better; this I can also
promise you. Ralph Waldo Emerson, another born-again herbalist,
expressed similar feelings, “When I go into my garden with a spade,
and dig a bed, I feel such an exhilaration and health that I discover
that I have been defrauding myself all this time in letting others do
for me what I should have been doing with my own hands.” I
always suspected that Waldo was in the garden.

Another word, if I may; then we'll get on with the medicine
show. For much of my life, I have focused my attention on health,
herbs, foods, gardens, and making plant medicine. They are my
passion, and I feel passionately about them. As such, tendrils of my
feelings and opinions will undoubtedly intertwine with the rhetoric
of this manual. Knowing the inevitability of this, 1 want to restate
(with some minor alterations) a passage from the prologue of my
other book, The Male Herbal. I haven’t evoked a better way than I
did therein to say to you what I want to say here. Being the
sedulous Sagittarian that I am. I’m accomplished at quoting mv own

----- PAGE 11 -----
thoughts, as references anyway.

So, “When an individual goes public, publishing a book
discussing his experiences, beliefs, and opinions, especially in the
realms of health and personal power, it is important to give the
reader a self-disclosure of one’s bias. Currently, in this Western
culture of ours, the fact that what I have written has been published
tends to display me as an authority. In light of this strange cultural
phenomenon, I wish to supply the discriminating reader and herbal
learner with appropriately insightful information to help him or
her question this authority. Nothing that I say is presented by me as
the Truth! I am merely disclosing my current truth. The printed
voice of this book will share my knowledge, observations, and
opinions based on my experiences, punctuated by what wisdom I
have gathered. Every individual has a share of wisdom to pass
around. As your mind travels through the landscape of ideas I
design and construct for you in this herbal manual, please do not
slip into a passive state of observation. In the light of your life
experiences, measure and question my opinions and conclusions. I
accept the risk of being proven wrong. If the fervor of my
expression of these opinions ascends a street orator’s platform for a
paragraph or two, allow me the social blunder; it’s just an
idiosyncrasy of my particular humanness. Do not fault me for my
passion. Rather, make note of any disagreements you may have, get
back to me, and point out the possible errors of my current beliefs.
This way we can interact and communicate as co-seekers and
creators, and as co-members of a species that obviously has much to
discover about itself and about the transcendent universe in which it
thrives.

“We are, with one another, co-creating a most magnificent and
fascinating age. And our current creation is so very splendid
precisely because each of us contributes a unique perspective. The
term ‘expert’ is derived from the verbal root per meaning to try, to
risk, to press forward. All of us do that with every new thought and
experience we create. Living a life qualifies each of us as an expert.
We don’t have to agree with each other for things to work, merely
appreciate one another and eniov our differences. I can live with

----- PAGE 12 -----
the fact that some people will always think of authors as experts, as
long as it is duly noted that the universal characteristic of experts is
that they normally disagree with one another.”

I’m almost finished here....

As we proceed through this handbook, I will not be giving you
long lists of things to get. I will give you short lists of equipment
and resources that will be completely adequate to get you started. I
encourage you to trust your innovative cunning to guide you further
in a suitable expansion of your assemblage, deciding for yourself
what you will need to best support your particular style and
evolving techniques. Learn the elementary principles, then unfold
in your own way.

I’m not going to include innumerable, point by point, watch-me-
do-it illustrations either. With a few (adroitly placed) drawings, this
handbook will get you started in splendid fashion; it will give you
cardinal processes as practical allies that point the way and
encourage you to embark dauntlessly on your journey. Your
imagination and intrinsic abilities will usher you on from there.
Herbal medicine-making is more engaging this way, and you will
beget astonishingly clever ideas. Remember, Herbalism is a human
response to plants, and this response ever dwells alive and well
within each of us. I ask you to relate to the learning of the overall
process of making herbal medicine more like the way you might
relate to creating art or reading a novel, rather than the way you
might relate to viewing a movie or a TV program that leaves little
if anything to your imagination. Like a Zen painter (don’t I wish), I
will create some empty space suggesting forms and ideas which
your creative imagination can fill in as we proceed. This way we
co-create while experiencing the ripening fruits of this medicine
show. (There are some instances, however, when I will tend to go
on and on; kind of like I am now.) We know that young children
enjoy themselves for a significantly longer time and experience far
more quality time when given simple pine cones, small rocks,
colorful ribbons, and randomly shaped blocks of wood to play with
than they do when given complex, perfectly molded, and fully
complete tovs. The opportunity to pour their own vision into the

----- PAGE 13 -----
empty spaces of the unfinished picture presented by their elemental
toys ignites the fertile fires of their imagination, giving them the joy
of unleashed creative pleasure. The subtle suggestions stimulated by
these rudimentary building units become their most entertaining
playmates and beneficial teachers. Likewise, children soon become
bored with toys that leave little to their innovative imagination; and
so it is with adult human beings, for we are all avid creators and we
all love to play.

As the medicine show proceeds from stage to stage in your home,
create an herbal pharmacy that you tailor to your lifestyle; develop
and refine your medicine-making techniques to suit yourself; and
make notes that clearly record your experiences for future
reference. Rely on the ideas in this handbook merely as starting
places that will give you solid ground on which to place your feet,
then leap high into your creative, innovative nature. Students
become skilled in the basics under the guidance of an experienced
teacher, but they become masters only after leaving the teacher and
exploring areas into which the teacher had not ventured.

Have fun, don’t hesitate. I appreciate your life.

----- PAGE 14 -----


----- PAGE 15 -----
CHAPTER 1

A FIELD TRIP

Let’s begin our immersion into the mosaic of ideas and techniques
that describe herbal medicine-making by first harvesting a wild
plant and making an herbal extract: a Dandelion tincture.

We'll begin this green medicine journey outside your dwelling
place—where the wild plants are. Herbal medicine lives outdoors,
where nature spirits arouse our enchantment, and our vitality is

----- PAGE 16 -----
naturally quickened. With your involvement and, I hope, a freshly
awakened passion, you'll initiate your apprenticeship by
experiencing the elation of harvesting a wild plant and, with it,
creating a simple herbal medicine of excellent quality. So, if you
are not already outdoors reading these words, please, weather
permitting, step outside with me and we’ll find Taraxacum
officinale, a most notorious wild plant...

This is the plant that herbalists, children, and poets call
Dandelion.

Many other people call it a weed and treat it rather rudely.

Let us refer to it as a wild medicinal plant and perceive the
extract we’re about to make with it as an herbal tonic. Our
intention is to connect with a plant spirit and with its alliance
create a nutritional preparation that is easy to assimilate and can be
depended upon to help our digestion, our liver, and our kidneys to
feel good. Then, while this first-born extract is macerating (soaking)
in its menstruum (solvent), we’ll proceed through the following
chapters of this handbook and peruse the rest of the medicine-
making ideas that await our attention.

----- PAGE 17 -----
Dandelion

Common Dandelion (botanical name, Taraxacum officinale)
grows just about everywhere. It should be fairly simple for you to
discover this flowering ally. It is usually denoted by one or more
bright yellow floral asterisks randomly displayed in urban lawns, in
grazed fields, or along neighborhood footpaths.

Dandelions are one of the most common medicinal herbs that
live with us in our neighborhoods. In fact, every year petrochemical
companies reap additional millions from the urban community by
manufacturing and marketing a myriad of designer poisons devised
specifically to alienate and destroy these wily turfgangsters. In
contrast, communities in China eagerly harvest and eat young
Dandelion greens to enrich their diets. along with Purslane

----- PAGE 18 -----
(Portulaca oleracea), and Kudzu (Pueraria lobata), which are two
more “weeds” we tend to curse in this culture. The people of our
southern communities could control the rampant spread of Kudzu
vine through their countrysides by eating it; it’s a superb cardiac
tonic, and it controls alcohol craving—if one wants to; if not, Kudzu
curbs headache and hangovers.

Dandelion’s species name, officinale, means “used in the office or
the workshop.” This indicates that historically Dandelion was (and
of course still is) used medicinally. Dandelion’s genus name,
Taraxacum, is derived from the Greek taraxis, meaning disorder,
and akas, a remedy, further echoing our ancestors’ traditional
esteem for this herb. Keep in mind that there are other plants that,
at casual glance, look similar to a Dandelion. Fear not, though,
there are no toxic or poisonous lookalikes in this country, and it is
very easy to identify the official Taraxacum. Therefore, as I describe
to you the true Dandelion, please pay attention to detail (the third
tule of good herbal medicine-making).

There are three true Dandelion species found in
the U.S.: Taraxacum officinale, common
Dandelion, andT. laevigatum, a red-seeded
specimen, both of which grow in disturbed soils
throughout the temperate regions of the U.S. The
third species, T. ceratophorum, is found in
meadows and other moist places in the
mountains throughout the boreal zone, south, and
at high altitudes.

The Dandelion has a single golden-yellow flower head sitting on
top of each individual flower stalk. This flower head can grow up
to 2 inches wide. These flowers open with the rising of the morning
sun and close down in the evening. They can appear almost any
time of the year, but mainly you find them from April to November
in meadows, pastures, gardens, along the roadsides, and inevitably,
within the rigid boundarv lines of all manicured lawns. Dandelion’s

----- PAGE 19 -----
impetuous blossoming is Nature’s never-ending reminder that
diversity is favored, and therefore rules. The plant’s graceful green
stalks are round, smooth, brittle, and hollow. They grow from 2 to
18 inches tall, and have no other stalks branching off them. Each
Dandelion stalk is straight and unjointed (no stalks branching off it),
growing individually and separately out of a base having a rosette
crown of numerous bright green leaves. These flower stalks often
appear to be growing directly out of the ground. Dandelion never
grows a central stalk. If the plant you are looking at has a tall stalk
that is bearing leaves and flowers, it’s not a Dandelion. However,
there can be a number of flower stalks rising from the center of
each Dandelion plant. Each stalk, as I have mentioned, holds up
only one bright yellow flower head, or one flower bud, or possibly
a single gossamer sphere of plumed seeds. The mature flower can
transform into this globular seed head (faerie’s afro) overnight. The
lobes or edges of the long, lance-shaped Dandelion leaves have
deeply serrated, unevenly pointed teeth (Dent-de-lion, lion’s tooth
in Old French). These pliable leaves are 3 to 12 inches long, 1/2 to
2 1/2 inches wide. The top surfaces, the undersides, and the
midribs of Dandelion’s leaves are bald and feel quite smooth to the
touch. They are not hairy, warty, or prickly like some Dandelion
lookalikes. When you dig a Dandelion up from the ground, with
profound respect and deep gratitude (the first rule of good herbal
medicine-making), you'll find its root to be thick and brittle, having
a thin beige skin on the outside and sap-filled, milky-white
vegetable flesh within. This is commonly called a_ taproot.
Dandelion’s taproot can be branching, and it can grow up to 10
inches long. All parts of the Dandelion plant, when either broken or
wounded, will bleed a bitter-tasting milky-white sap. You'll find
this juice to be a little sweeter in the spring plants.

“Down with lawns; up with herbs.”

—Ryan Drum

Once you have found some Dandelions, harvest an entire plant

----- PAGE 20 -----
including the root, leaves, buds, blossoms, and seed heads, if there
are any. If a portion of the root breaks off and remains in the
ground, great! This root piece will regenerate and produce a new
plant—yet another vegetable contribution to Earth’s dynamic
theater of perpetual abundance.

Now that you have properly identified and graciously harvested
this plant, offer gratitude once again for its life. Consider leaving an
offering, like a strand of your hair, a prayer, a song, a story,
whatever; plant spirits are known to be deeply touched by simple
gestures of appreciation. Wash all the soil off the plant, and bring it
home to your kitchen. If the Dandelion plants you find are small,
you might want to harvest six or seven of them.

If you are unable to locate any living Dandelions in the
neighborhood, or if you suspect the plants that are there have been
sprayed or are too close to the road and might be coated with
odious residues of auto exhaust, the next best thing for you to do is
harvest organically grown or wildcrafted, freshly dried (dehydrated)
Dandelion from an herb or natural food store. Purchase an ounce of
the highest quality Dandelion root you can find and an ounce of
Dandelion leaf. Make sure the dried root material is a deep rich
brown color and has a full bitter flavor when you chew on a piece.
Make sure the dried leaf material shows a rich green color and also
has a discernible bitter flavor. This leaf, dried properly, should
definitely not be brown. If it is brown, don’t bother with it. It’s no
good; shop somewhere else.

Now, lay your fresh medicinal plant(s) on your kitchen
countertop. Cut the root and other parts into small pieces. How
small? As small as your patience and enthusiasm permit. The
smaller the better, because more surface area is exposed. If you are
using dried plant materials, crush or grind them into small pieces,
using a small coffee bean grinder or a mortar and pestle (See
Chapter Four, “Kitchen Pharmacy Equipment”). Place these tiny
pieces in ajar with a tight-fitting lid. Use a pint- or quart-size jar
depending on the amount of plant material. Pour 100-proof vodka
into the jar, filling it to the top of the plant material. If you are
working with fresh plant material. at this point vou might pour the

----- PAGE 21 -----
plant with its menstruum into a blender and liquefy it to expose
more surface area to the solvent. Wipe the top ridge of the jar,
cleaning off any stuff that might be clinging to it. Put a piece of wax
paper over the opening as a gasket, and screw down the jar lid.
Tighten it firmly. Shake your tincture energetically. Now, take a
moment to look at it. Admire it for a while, because it is indeed
precious. It is your plant medicine, the enchanted doorway through
which you just entered the enthralling world of Herbalism. Label
the container appropriately. On this label include the name of the
herb, the part of the herb used, (i.e., Dandelion root and top,
Taraxacum officinale) and the date that will arrive fourteen days
from the date you are preparing this extract. This date you write on
the label is the day your tincture will be ready for you to separate
the saturated liquid (the tincture extract) from the then-depleted
plant material (the marc). During those fourteen days, at least once,
even better two or three times a day, affectionately and vigorously
shake your tincture (the “sixth” rule of good medicine-making) with
your mind focused on your appreciation of the plant and your
intention for its use. This is an important routine to attend to, for it
maintains the extraction energy of the menstruum at a more
efficient rate, and it permeates the maturing medicine with your
mindful attention and the healing power of your personal energy.

After a minimum of fourteen days and nights, separate the spent
plant material from the liquid extract. A simple method for doing
this is to line a large hand-held strainer with a square-shaped piece
of cotton muslin cloth (undyed and preferably unbleached cotton
muslin), large enough to hang about an inch or two over the edges
of the strainer.

Place the muslin-lined strainer into a glass or stainless steel
receptacle, and slowly and carefully pour your entire extract into
this straining apparatus. Allow all the liquid to flow through the
cloth. After the liquid has finished flowing through the cloth, join
together all four corners of the cloth and hold them above the plant
material. Grasp them firmly together with one hand, and with the
other hand grasp the ball of plant material and twist it and squeeze
it to press out the rest of the liquid thoroughly. Remove as much of

----- PAGE 22 -----
the liquid as possible from the depleted plant fiber (the marc).
After doing this to your satisfaction, you can discard the marc into
the compost.

Now, pour this herbal extract into a bottle that can be tightly
capped (brown amber glass bottles are the most ideal) and store it
in a cool, dark location. This alcohol/water extract will keep for
many years. (A solution like this requires a minimum of 18-20
percent of the total volume of the liquid to be ethyl alcohol in
order for the alcohol to adequately preserve it. Pure 100-proof
vodka is 50 percent ethyl alcohol, and even when diluted by the
juices of this fresh plant will render sufficient preservative action.)

You have handcrafted an herbal medicine; your initiation is
complete—welcome to the swiftly growing community of
independent lay-herbalists. To conclude this exercise, I would like
to also applaud the co-creator of your handcrafted tincture by
summarizing for you the personal and ecological health-promoting
gifts of the wild Dandelion.

Strainer Lined with Muslin

----- PAGE 23 -----
Squeezing the Liquid Out

An Earth-enriching co-habitant of almost every community,
Dandelion promotes healthy local turf everywhere it grows, unless
it is foolishly poisoned to death. The particular design of
Dandelion’s root system breaks up soil in a unique manner which
greatly enhances the condition of any garden soil. In fact Dandelion
and its sister compositae, Chamomile, another soil-conditioning
plant, have been referred to in farming cultures as “the soil
doctors.” Dandelion’s randomly scattered flowers relieve rampant
urban-lawn monotony. Its vibrant yellow blossoms are aesthetically
and emotionally uplifting. For those who like to play and even
giggle the way you did when you were a babe, Dandelion’s mature
seed heads are a joyous toy which entice bustling human beings to
pause, pick, and blow off its downy hairdo into passing air currents,
watching the seeds eject dramatically, scattering in random
directions, then parachuting serenely to the ground. I pursue this
whimsical ritual as eagerly today as I did when I was a small child,
and the spontaneous affair with these little blowballs remains as
delightful as it always was.

The predominant use of herbs to beautify your
home and health becomes fully affordable as you

----- PAGE 24 -----
learn to harvest your own plants and create your
own elixirs.

When used to affect our body directly, common Dandelion is one
of the finest foods and medicines found in the herbalist’s materia
medica. Young springtime Dandelion leaves have a pleasantly bitter
aromatic flavor. They blend well with other fresh salad plants, and
they carry with them a rich load of bitters and micro-nutrients,
especially the minerals potassium and calcium, and vitamins A and
C. Eating Dandelion greens and other bitters prior to meals is
invaluable for stimulating one’s appetite, digestion, and
assimilation. Regular use of Dandelion extracts often relieves the
uncomfortable maladies commonly experienced in the upper and
lower digestive tract such as poor digestion, gas, nausea, and
constipation.

In general, Dandelion carries substances that stimulate the
function of many glands and organs, especially the kidneys and
liver. It has a tonic affect on the kidneys and encourages kidney
function with its diuretic action, while at the same time it increases
the body’s potassium content, rather than depleting it as other
diuretics commonly do. Dandelion is an excellent substance to
employ for prevention and treatment of biliary problems. It is a
liver and gallbladder tonic that stimulates the healthy discharge and
flow of bile. When taken over a period of 4 to 6 weeks, it can work
as an efficient preventive agent for those individuals who have a
constitutional disposition to form gallstones.

Following are some specific indications and an adult dosage for
using the whole-plant Dandelion tincture you are presently making
(see Chapter Twenty-Five, “Dosage,” to help determine
corresponding children’s dosages).

For physical comfort take 30 to 50 drops of tincture 3 to 4 times
daily to:

© relieve intestinal gas and poor digestion that is due to
insufficient bile

----- PAGE 25 -----
© relieve constipation that is due to sluggish liver activity

e help eliminate skin eruptions that are due to sluggish liver
activity

© relieve difficulty in urinating and/or water retention

© use as a blood purifier to treat chronic auto-toxemia which
is contributing to rheumatism, arthritis, and/or skin
eruptions

The dosage I have suggested is low for this particular herb, for
Dandelion is safe, gentle, and shows no toxicity. Some herbalists
recommend 150 to 300 drops (approx. 5 to 10 ml) of Dandelion
tincture three times a day as a basic adult dosage. However, it is
prudent to begin with a low dosage regardless of the herb you
consider using. Dosages can always be increased after observing
your reaction to a new substance. To gain the full benefit of
Dandelion when employing it as a tonic, it is often best to continue
its use for at least one month up to a year, depending on the
individual’s response and needs. A second year of use can be
beneficial and appropriate for some individuals. For the bodies of
these folks, Dandelion is good food.

This act of nourishing yourself with herbs is fully affordable now
that you are harvesting your own herbs and learning to make
tinctures and other extracts for yourself. Remember, like the mind,
the body appreciates and responds most favorably to variety
(diversity). Don’t take any food or herbal remedy every day. Take
the remedy for 6 days a week with a random day off; do this for
three to four weeks, then take a few days off, and so on. And when
using Dandelion, it is quite appropriate to change the delivery
vehicle by preparing this tonic herb as an herbal tea (a decoction).
Drink it with the tincture, or alternate a dose (1 cup) of tea with a
dose of tincture, or use Dandelion tea in place of Dandelion tincture
altogether, drinking a cupful twice a day.

So, now you have an herbal tincture in the making, and you
know how to store and use this specific health-supporting herbal
tonic once the extraction process is completed. Meanwhile, during
the following hours when you are not eating, dreaming. working.

----- PAGE 26 -----
playing, or shaking your tincture, we can explore more ideas
concerning the home practice of Herbalism and consider other
forms of herbal extracts you can make.

----- PAGE 27 -----


----- PAGE 28 -----
It’s a jungle garden out there; roots and flowers are everywhere.
That’s why this leafy turquoise planet is so dear to the hearts of
herbalists. Here we enjoy an unending variety of plants and animals
to embrace as our allies and teachers. But for an enthusiastic student
herbalist, who has just entered through some unassuming personal
gate into the vast forest of Herbalism. sorting out Earth’s immense

----- PAGE 29 -----
herbal diversity can be somewhat bewildering.

Question: How many herbs should I know to be an effectual
herbalist?

Answer: 30 ... well, maybe 35 ... and probably a fungus as well.

How’s that for an assertive air of authority? Someone has to act
like he or she knows the answer to that question. ’ll reference the
source of this authority shortly.

Certainly, most herbalists I know strongly recommend that a
student limit his or her studies to “a few select herbs.” Get to know
them well by learning to identify them, experience growing them
when possible, communicate with them, discern when, where, and
how best to harvest them, make medicine with them, touch, taste,
smell, and use them. The energies of thirty to thirty-five herbs will
enchant you and keep you sufficiently busy for the following year
or two. Distinguished individuals from the remaining myriad of
herbs that dwell on Earth will, one by one, as situations arise,
attract your attention and attach themselves to your initial
repertory.

So, the subsequent question arises: “Which few select herbs
should I choose?”

Well, the most important principle to guide you in this very
personal selection is to embrace any and all plants that you are
intuitively attracted to: those that touch your spirit in an
exceptionally deep and personal way. These are relationships that
you never want to ignore. A second reliable criterion is to select
herbs that grow near you and can be found thriving in the bioregion
you inhabit, or in closely neighboring bio-regions. The plants you
select should be fairly easy to acquire and always of excellent
quality. Flirt with the currently fashionable and exotic imports, by
all means, but don’t become dependent on their availability.

Most herb students commence their studies by gleaning
information found in popular herb books, and the number of herbs
discussed in today’s herbal literature can be overwhelming. At least,
Ihave found this to be the experience of many students before they
connected with a teacher or attended an herb school. So, if I may
assist vou with some specific suggestions. I will give vou an historic

----- PAGE 30 -----
and authoritative list of plants that you might consider as you
orchestrate your first line of green allies, or you can at least refer to
this list as a model for choosing a comparable group of plants that
live in your area.

The authoritative history: In the late 1980s the California School
of Herbal Studies (CSHS) was co-directed by six herbalists: Tim
Blakley, David Hoffmann, Amanda McQuade Crawford, Mindy
Green, Gina Banghart, and myself. We decided that, in order to
align our individual classes throughout the year, it would be helpful
for all of us to focus on the personalities, actions, and indications of
a central core of tonic and therapeutic plants. As an initial step to
develop this group of medicinals, each of us agreed to provide a list
of thirty favored plants that we felt could be relied upon to supply
an herbalist with pretty much any and all the herbal actions and
uplifting virtues required to provide good health care in a home
and community. The succeeding task of grafting our lists together
and then pruning the aggregation back to thirty plants proved to be
an interesting journey of forbearance and compromise; the results
of that saga attest to the fact that, on a rare occasion, even experts
can come to an agreement, or at least cross-pollinate their opinions.
The hybrid list we ultimately compiled and felt reasonably good
about included the following thirty plants.

CSHS List or 30 Heras

Blackberry (Rubus villosus)

*Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa)
Calendula (Calendula officinalis)
Cayenne (Capsicum annuum)
Chamomile, German (Matricaria recutita)
Cleavers (Galium aperine)

Comfrey (Symphytum officinale)

----- PAGE 31 -----
Crampbark (Viburnum opulus)
Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)
*Echinacea (Echinacea purpurea)
Elder (Sambucus nigra)

Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare)

Ginger (Zingiber officinale)
*Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)
Gumweed (Grindelia spp.)
Hawthorn (Crataegus oxyacanthus)
Marshmallow (Althaea officinalis)
Mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris)
Mullein (Verbascum spp.)

Nettle (Urtica spp.)

Peppermint (Mentha piperita)
*Pipsissewa (Chimaphilla umbellata)
Plantain (Plantago lanceolata or P. major)
St. John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum)
Scullcap (Scutellaria spp.)

Valerian (Valeriana officinalis)

Vitex (Vitex agnus-castus)

Willow (Salix alba)

Yarrow (Achillea millefolium)
Yellow Dock (Rumex crispus)

I have asterisked the plants which are broadly
used in commerce and which, due to over-harvest,
loss of habitat, or by the nature of their innate
rareness or sensitivity are either at risk or have
significantly declined in numbers within their

----- PAGE 32 -----
current range. Use substitute plants when possible
(see the discussion on this page).

Yes, I know; where’s Milk Thistle, where’s Sage, where’s Usnea,
where’s.... Undeniably, this list screams out the names of countless
time-honored herbs that have not been included, and I must say
(using this opportunity to get in a “last word”), the herbs that
would be at the top of the list of thirty (if anybody would have
listened to me) are listed below.

Green's Lonc-Awarrep

EnmeuisHMENTS

Burdock (Arctium lappa)

Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba)

Oat (wild: Avena fatua, cultivated: Avena sativa)
Saw Palmetto (Serenoa serrulata)

Siberian Ginseng (Eleuthrococcus senticosus)

And then there’s Reishi mushroom (Ganoderma

lucidum), a fungus, and.... Well, you can
appreciate the problem we faced.

Please note that most of the thirty plants on the CSHS list grow in
abundance in the northern California region where our school is
located, but as you may also notice, love transcends all rules and
common sense, and some of our most favored plants that made it
onto the list don’t normally grow here. Ginger thrives in moist
tropical regions; Goldenseal and Black Cohosh live in moist and
shady Eastern hardwood forests; Echinacea lives in the open plains
of the Midwest; and Pipsissewa, although it lives in Pacific
Northwest forests, grows very slowly, and therefore, even if

----- PAGE 33 -----
harvested correctly does not recover rapidly. With the recently
ballooning popularity of herbal medicine in this country, these five
plants have all become highly sought-after medicindis, and while
Ginger is abundantly cultivated and therefore not threatened by its
popularity, the other four plants are not yet being adequately
cultivated and are being plucked from their relatively small native
stands at far too rapid a rate. They are simply being over-harvested
from their native environment in order to supply the soaring
commercial demands of people living in the other bio-regions of
the U.S. as well as in Canada and many countries overseas.

The survival of these four plants is currently at great risk, and
therefore humans need to find substitutes whenever possible
(preferably plants that grow in our own backyard bio-regions) until
these plants can be cultivated adequately to supply our commercial
demands. As you can see, since the time we developed our CSHS
list of thirty herbs, herbalists and other plant people have become
quite alert to the fact that a number of important medicinal plants
(in addition to the four on our list) are currently extremely harvest-
sensitive. So, with deep regard for all these plants, I offer the
following suggestions and ask you to heed them:

In general, regarding the four at-risk plants that appear on the
above list of thirty:

© Please become familiar with United Plant Savers’ (UpS) list
of “at-risk” medicinal plants and avoid using them until we
can escort them back to their natural state of abundance.
(See Appendix A for this list as well as an introduction to
the work of UpS.)

Use Black Cohosh sparingly, only when it is specifically
indicated (see indications, this page) and when there is no
substitute available. In this regard, for those living in the
Pacific Northwest region, there is our Baneberry (Actea
rubra), a close relative of Black Cohosh, that can be
harvested and prepared as a reliable substitute. The root of
Baneberry offers nearly all the same actions as Black
Cohosh root. Yes, the berries of Baneberry are toxic. but its

----- PAGE 34 -----
root is not (that’s why we don’t call it Baneroot). In fact, in
the early 1900s batches of Black Cohosh were often
adulterated by mixing Baneberry root with the Cohosh.
When taken as a tincture, Baneberry root bestows the same
anti-inflammatory, sedative, and anti-spasmodic action for
relieving the vast array of dull aching pains as does Black
Cohosh. For a multitude of reasons, but specifically for
invaluable insight into the use of this plant as an important
substitute for the endangered Black Cohosh, I suggest and
highly recommend that you consult Medicinal Plants of the
Pacific West, researched and written by herbalist Michael
Moore.

In place of Pipsissewa when treating urinary tract
inflammation, substitute Uva Ursi (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi)
for its excellent diuretic, antiseptic, and astringent
properties. Prepare it as a cold infusion to eliminate the
extraction of most of its condensed tannins that can be
irritating to some folks, and combine this with
Marshmallow root to help soothe and protect any irritated
tissue.

When utilizing Goldenseal to employ its berberine alkaloid
component, use it only when the plant’s overall specific
indications are absolutely required (see indications, this
page); otherwise use other berberine-containing plants such
as Barberry (Berberis vulgaris), or Oregon Grape (Mahonia
aquifolium), or at least dilute Goldenseal whenever using it:
mixing 1 part Goldenseal to 4 parts Barberry or Oregon
Grape root. When you feel you must use Goldenseal
undiluted, use a reduced dosage, for, when it is truly the
specific plant to use, a small dose is wholly adequate.

Use only organically cultivated Echinacea. Avoid using wild
Echinacea or any commercial products that use wildcrafted
or wild-harvested Echinacea in their ingredients. Three
species of Echinacea are used commercially: E. purpurea, E.
angustifolia, and E. pallida. Echinacea purpurea is easily
and presently cultivated. whereas the other two species are

----- PAGE 35 -----
more difficult to grow and therefore not so widely
cultivated. Due to overaggressive wildcrafting, the native
stands of all three of these species of Echinacea are
disap pearing rapidly.

Goldenseal, Black Cohosh, Echinacea, and
Pipsissewa are four plant allies that are due a
collective show of human appreciation and
currently require our concerted acts of tender
loving care. Discontinuing the wild harvesting of
these plants while using other herbs as
appropriate substitutes will give these generous
medicinals time to repopulate their natural
habitats and will give herb growers time and
resources to develop their skills in cultivating
these herbs for commercial use. Merci.

In addition to the drama of innumerable heartbreaking
revelations of personal love affairs with certain herbs, there was a
rational method to the madness that was conjured up as we six
herbalists compiled the above CSHS list of thirty herbs. Along with
seeking plants that grow well in our climatic zone, we looked very
closely at the actions (also referred to as therapeutic or medicinal
properties) of these plants, and we made sure our final group of
herbs embraced all the actions that we know are essential and
therefore necessary in a well-endowed herbal pharmacy.

Pertaining to these actions, the science of Herbalism, like all
therapeutic sciences, has its particular language. The nutritional and
medicinal actions of each herb in our materia medica constitute the
fundamental vocabulary of the language of Herbalism. Knowledge
of the actions (the biochemical energetics) of each plant and the
plant’s spontaneous affinity for various systems of the body is basic
to successfully employing herbs in health maintenance, disease
prevention, and curative self-care.

----- PAGE 36 -----
Understanding the inherent energetics of each plant that one uses
gives insight and increased autonomy in personal and family health
care. It is too limiting to think or ask, “What herb do I take for ...”
or “What herb will cure my....” This approach stems from the
“magic bullet” (one drug for one disease) myth conjured by
pharmaceutical drug marketing. Herbs are more clever and
practical than that. Each herb can do many things and have more
than one effect on the human body and mind. The therapeutic
actions and the unique blend of organic nutrients of each herb have
a natural affinity for a variety of tissues, organs, and systems of the
body. Supervised by the body’s cellular intelligence which attracts
to itself whatever is needed for toning and healing, these actions are
contributed by the herb to the appropriate systems for preventing
and/or curing a wide variety of conditions.

The art of herbal therapeutics is brought into play as one blends
single nutritional and medicinal plants together into a compound
formula, creating a uniquely synergistic quality that can support
health, and when necessary stimulate or modify the body’s self-
healing vital energy.

Therefore, it is exceedingly useful to understand the terms and
concepts that describe these herbal actions. There are hundreds of
different actions that have been defined through the ages. However,
for our purposes, only about 40 of these need be considered. It’s
important to recognize these terms and learn their definitions; I
assure you it is time well spent. Reading through the upcoming list
of herbs will prove the practicality of this suggestion and afford you
ample practice.

Using this “herbal actions” measure is a reliable technique to
help you select your own group of core plants with which to work.
When one applies it to the group of herbs selected for our CSHS list
of thirty herbs, it can be seen that the actions we felt were essential
are well represented. I will review this for you in the following
section. Along with this, I will include a brief discussion of the
actions of each of the thirty (+5) herbs and the fungus; I will also
suggest the most effective vehicles for administering them by using
infusion. decoction. tincture (and glvcerite). oil infusion, salve.

----- PAGE 37 -----
syrup, lotion, poultice, fomentation, and bolus/suppository.

As we progress through this handbook, exploring diverse
techniques of medicine-making, I will use this list of thirty-five
medicinal plants and a medicinal fungus as a reference and focus on
specific information for extracting them in the various menstra we
discuss.

I offer these lists and accompanying notations to you as a
practical foundation for your personal home pharmacy, but I
encourage you to modify the group of herbs to align with your

intuitive preferences and, depending on where you live, to better fit

the native medicinal plant population of your particular bio-region.
Observe the actions and specific indications of the plants in this
group and match them as best you can.

40 Herpa Actions to Know

Adaptogen—An action concept unique to herbal therapeutics.
Adaptogenic or hormonal modulating action increases the
body’s resistance and endurance to a wide variety of adverse
influences from physical, chemical, and biological stressors,
assisting the body’s ability to cope and adapt.

Alterative—Gradually restores health and vitality to the body
by helping the body assimilate nutrients, eliminate waste, and
restore proper function.

Anodyne, analgesic—Relieves pain when administered orally
or externally.

Antacid—Neutralizes excess acid in the stomach and intestinal
tract.

Anticatarrhal—Counteracts the build-up of excess mucus and
inflammation in sinus or other upper respiratory parts.

Antidepressant—Helps relieve or prevent depressed states of

----- PAGE 38 -----
mind.
Anti-emetic—Relieves nausea and vomiting.

Anti-inflammatory—Combats extensive or  too-painful
occurrence of inflammation. A degree of inflammation is a
necessary process in healing.

Anti-microbial (anti-bacterial, anti-viral)}—Helps the body’s
immune system destroy or resist the proliferation of
pathogenic micro-organisms.

Anti-oxidant—Protects the body against free radical damage
(free radicals are highly reactive compounds that bind to and
destroy other molecules).

Antiseptic—Prevents or eliminates sepsis (infectious destructive
condition of tissue).

Antispasmodic—Prevents or eases spasms or cramping in the
body.

Aperient—A gentle stimulant to digestion, having a very mild
laxative action.

Aphrodisiac—Increases sexual excitement and desire (libido).

Astringent—Contracts, firms, and strengthens body tissues by
precipitating proteins, and can reduce excess secretions and
discharge.

Bitter—Stimulates the normal secretion of digestive juices,
benefiting digestion. This stimulating action helps counteract
physical and, to a certain extent, emotional depression.

Carminative—Rich in aromatic volatile oils having a sweet,
spicy or fragrant aroma which can lend a pleasant flavor to
other herbs, excite peristalsis, promote the expulsion of gas,
and soothe the stomach, supporting healthy digestion.

Cholagogue—Promotes the discharge and flow of bile from the

----- PAGE 39 -----
gallbladder (gogue = to flow).

Counter-irritant (revulsive)—Induces local irritation of skin,
drawing blood and other materials to the surface from deeper
tissues, relieving congestion and inflammation.

Demulcent—Mucilaginous herbs which relax, soothe, and
protect tissue.

Derivative—Draws blood and other fluids from one part of the
body to relieve congestion in another.

Diaphoretic—Induces increased perspiration, dilates
capillaries, increasing elimination through the skin.

Diuretic—Increases the flow of urine.
Emmenagogue—Increases menstrual flow.
Emollient—Applied to the skin to soften, soothe, and protect.

Expectorant—Supports the respiratory system by assisting it to
remove excess mucus.

Febrifuge—Assists the body to reduce fever.
Galactagogue—Increases the flow of mother’s milk.
Hemostatic—Arrests bleeding.

Hepatic—Strengthens and tones the liver, stimulating its
secretory function.

Hypnotic—Has a powerful relaxant and sedative action and
helps to induce sleep.

Hypotensive—Reduces elevated blood pressure.

Immune stimulant—Helps stimulate immune response and
deal with infections.

Laxative—Promotes evacuation of the bowels.

Lymphatic—Support the health and activity of the lymphatic

----- PAGE 40 -----
system.
Nervine—Affects the nervous system; having either a relaxing,
stimulating, and/or tonic effect, depending on the herb used.

Refrigerant—Cooling agents which lower body temperature
and relieve thirst.

Rubefacient—Generates a localized increase in blood flow
when applied to the skin. Often used to warm the skin and
ease the pain and swelling of joints.

Sedative—Calms the nervous system by reducing stress and
nervous irritation throughout the body.

Sialagogue—Promotes the flow of saliva.

Stimulant—Warms the body, quickens circulation, and breaks
up obstructions and congestion.

Stomachic—Stimulative tonic to the stomach.

Styptic—Reduces or stops external bleeding by astringent
action.

Tonic—Stimulates nutrition by improving assimilation which
improves systemic tone, giving increased vigor and strength to
the tissues of body organs.

Vasodilator—Expands blood vessels, allowing increased
circulation.

Vulnerary—Assists the body to heal wounds. This action is
used externally.

It is most useful to recognize and understand the
terms that describe herbal actions. These simple
concepts constitute a major portion of the
vocabulary of herbal knowledge.

----- PAGE 41 -----
ACTIONS AND INDICATIONS FOR THE CSHS LIST OF 30 HERBS

Blackberry (Bramble) is astringent, especially for the
gastrointestinal tract. It allays excessive fluid loss from diarrhea, and
when medical intervention is not available may save lives.
Hemostatic—it stops bleeding of the gastrointestinal tract.

Black Cohosh (an at-risk plant, seek organically cultivated or
employ substitutes when possible) is antispasmodic, anti-
inflammatory, and analgesic and is most useful for its ability to
reduce dull aching pain just about anywhere in the body. Along
with this generalized effect, Black Cohosh has a specific affinity for
the reproductive organs. It relieves the aching pains in the
reproductive tract of males, but is most often used as a regulator of
female imbalances. As an emmenagogue, it is used for relief of
painful menstruation, but is also very effective for relieving
suppressed menstruation. This, along with the fact that its effects
are often long-lasting, suggests that it has a generalized tonic effect
on the uterus and most likely on the male reproductive organs as
well. This plant is widely used for the treatment of rheumatism and
neuralgia and all cases characterized by that kind of pain known as
rheumatic, dull, tensive, and intermittent. Black Cohosh is nervine,
hypotensive, having a powerful influence over the nervous system
as it appears to have a sedating effect on the perception of pain.

When using Baneberry root (Actea rubra), which is recommended
as a substitute for Black Cohosh for relieving pain, use a reduced
dosage, as noted in the latter part of Chapter Twelve, “Tincturing
by Maceration.”

Calendula (Marigold) is anti-inflammatory, vulnerary, lymphatic,
anti-microbial, and anti-fungal. It is unsurpassed for treating local
skin problems that are due to infection, and for treating wounds,
burns, bruises, or strains due to physical damage. It is excellent for
internal digestive inflammation and ulceration. Calendula is
antispasmodic. lymphatic. and emmenagogue for normalizing the

----- PAGE 42 -----
menstrual process, and cholagogue for aiding in the relief of a
gallbladder problem and its accompanying digestive complaints;
hepatic.

Cayenne (Capsicum) is a general tonic, but it’s also quite specific to
the circulatory and digestive systems. It is the most useful of the
systemic stimulants, strengthening the heart, arteries, capillaries,
blood flow, peripheral circulation, and nerves. It helps in
conditions of debility, especially of the elderly, and wards off colds
and catarrh. It is also carminative, and sialagogue. Applied
externally, it is rubefacient and is most useful for cold hands and
feet (sprinkled in socks), and problems like rheumatic pains and
lumbago, and for hoarseness as a gargle; anti-microbial and an
ouchful! but very effective styptic (s & m variety).

Chamomile is anti-inflammatory and pain-relieving for a wide
range of conditions along the entire digestive tract; antispasmodic
for easing muscle cramps; nervine. Chamomile is probably the most
widely used relaxing nervine tonic. It is also used to relieve mental
stress and tension. It is carminative and a mild bitter.

Cleavers is lymphatic; a lymphatic cleanser which relieves
lymphatic swelling, particularly where there is an acute “hot”
inflammation; itis a cooling diuretic that soothes an irritable
urinary tract; tonic, and alterative.

Comfrey (Knitbone) is vulnerary and demulcent, having
unparalleled wound, ulcer, and fracture healing action. It is anti-
inflammatory and soothing to dry inflamed digestive tract;
astringent, able to allay hemorrhaging wherever it occurs; and
expectorant as an age-old remedy for dry irritable coughs,
especially when accompanied by blood streaked mucus.

Comfrey has been praised throughout history as a premier
healing plant used extensively in folkloric Herbalism internally and
externally for the repair of innumerable body wounds and illnesses.
However. in the past few vears reductionist science has proclaimed

----- PAGE 43 -----
Comfrey (in particular, the root and the early spring leaves) to be
the possessor and conveyer of certain toxic components called
pyrrolizidine alkaloids which are said to cause damage to the liver
of human beings. Many herbalists have accepted this as truth and a
number of us have not. Therefore, in order to provide full
disclosure in this printed manual concerning the use of Comfrey, I
feel it prudent to inform the reader of this debate and give current
standard precautions: It is recommended that pregnant women,
young children, and persons with manifest liver disease avoid the
consumption of Comfrey (external use is no problem). Others are
advised to use Comfrey root and leaf on a short-term basis and
preferably avoid the use of the spring leaf, but instead use the leaf
that appears on the latter (second) growth of the year. There are
available in the marketplace pyrrolizidine-free Comfrey tinctures in
which the suspect alkaloids have been removed.

Crampbark is an antispasmodic that relieves voluntary and
involuntary muscular spasm of the entire pelvic viscera, bladder,
womb (anti-abortive), ovaries, and the limbs; it allays convulsions,
asthma, thigh and back pain, and it’s an anti-inflammatory and
nervine, helping to restore sympathetic/parasympathetic balance.
Its astringent action helps allay excessive blood loss in menstruation
and especially in menopause; emmenagogue.

Dandelion (also see Chapter One, “A Field Trip”) has many healing
actions. The root is a general tonic and an effective liver tonic,
hepatic, which acts to “cool” (detoxify) the liver; its cholagogue
action decongests the gallbladder by increasing bile flow; and its
choleretic action promotes bile production. It is anti-rheumatic, as it
stimulates cell metabolism in the body, assisting the body to dump
metabolic waste into the blood to be cleansed by the liver. It is
alterative, relieving skin disorders and degenerative joint disorders,
lowering blood cholesterol. It is a mild laxative, bitter. The leaf is a
safe, highly effective diuretic, the best natural source of potassium
which avoids potassium depletion, so common with the use of
other diuretics; bitter. Young leaves can be eaten raw in salads; they

----- PAGE 44 -----
are best mixed with other salad greens and tossed with a favorite
salad dressing.

Echinacea (an at-risk plant, use only organically cultivated) is an
immune stimulant, assisting the body to resist infection more
efficiently; it is anti-microbial and increases cellular resistance to
virus, and activates the macrophages that destroy both cancerous
cells and pathogens; it is anti-catarrhal and alterative.

“When you settle a share of land, first plant an
Elder tree, then make your home there.”

—T. Exper Sacus

Elder, Black, if I recall correctly, stood at the top of each of our
CSHS lists, being nearly a complete pharmacy by itself. Elder’s
leaves used externally are vulnerary and emollient. When used
internally the leaves are purgative, expectorant, diuretic, and
diaphoretic. Its flowers prepared as a cold infusion are diuretic,
alterative, and cooling; as a warm infusion the flowers are
diaphoretic and gently stimulating. Its berries are diaphoretic,
diuretic, aperient, and when fresh they make good juice and jam.
Elder is the reliable home remedy for cold, flu, fever, skin
eruptions, sprains, bruises, wounds, hayfever, sinusitis, tension,
constipation, rheumatic discomfort, and so on. Look this plant up in
a variety of sources; probably no single herbal tells Elder’s complete
story.

Fennel is carminative, relieving flatulence and colic, and stimulating
digestion and appetite. It is very helpful in improving the flavor of
other herbs. Combined with Catnip (Nepeta cataria), it makes the
best child’s remedy for fever, colic, and general restlessness; it is
anti-spasmodic, having a calming effect on coughs and bronchial
disorders, and anti-inflammatory as a compress and eye wash for
infected eyes and inflamed eyelids, and galactogogue.

----- PAGE 45 -----
Ginger is a diffusive stimulant that is warming by increasing
peripheral circulation; an emergency remedy whenever immediate
stimulation is needed, a master herb for relieving nausea and
motion sickness; an anodyne in gastric and intestinal pain; a
carminative and anti-spasmodic in the digestive tract; diaphoretic
for promoting perspiration in feverish conditions; anti-
inflammatory particularly useful in rheumatic conditions that
benefit from heat; anti-microbial; rubefacient; and a reliable
emmenagogue.

Goldenseal (an at-risk plant; use cultivated Goldenseal or substitute
with other berberine-containing plants or other plants that offer
similar actions) is hepatic, cholagogue, a bitter digestive stimulant,
and a primary anti-microbial for acute infection. It is an invaluable
tonic stimulant for over-relaxed, profusely secreting mucous
membranes having a wide effect on the respiratory, digestive, and
genito-urinary systems, and it has an anti-catarrhal effect, especially
in sinus conditions. It is astringent and emmenagogue.

Gumweed is a relaxing expectorant, which relaxes the smooth
muscles. It is antispasmodic and hypotensive, useful for treatment of
asthmatic and bronchial conditions, especially when accompanied
by rapid heartbeat and nervous response.

Hawthorn is a heart tonic of the first order which maintains the
heart in a healthy condition. It directly effects the cells of the heart
muscle, enhancing both activity and nutrition. It is a specific remedy
in most cardiac disease and facilitates a gentle but long-term
sustained effect on degenerative, age-related changes in the entire
cardiovascular system; astringent. It is hypotensive and diuretic.

Marshmallow, due to its abundance of mucilage, is emollient when
used in salves for external use. Used internally, it is a soothing
demulcent indicated for inflamed and irritated states of mucous
membranes. The root is used to treat all inflammatory conditions of
the gastrointestinal tract. including the mouth, gastritis, peptic

----- PAGE 46 -----
ulcers, colitis, etc. The leaves are diuretic, expectorant, and anti-
inflammatory, and are used to relieve dryness of lungs and a
burning or irritated urinary tract; its abundant mucopolysaccharides
mildly stimulate the body’s immune function.

Mugwort is a bitter tonic and foremost digestive stimulant. It is anti-
oxidant, which helps in the metabolism of rancid fats and protects
the liver from damage from free radicals. It is cholagogue, giving a
general stimulating effect on bile flow, helping to remove liver
congestion, especially for those who have eaten (rancid) oily food.
As a nervine tonic, it eases tension, and is antidepressant, as it aids
in depression, particularly when this is due to liver congestion, a
virus, and/or a sedentary lifestyle; it is emmenagogue.

Mullein is expectorant, an extremely beneficial respiratory remedy
that tones the mucous membranes, reduces inflammation, and
stimulates fluid production, thus facilitating expectoration. It is also
demulcent, diuretic, nervine, anti-spasmodic, alterative, astringent,
anodyne, vulnerary, and anti-inflammatory. The oil infusion of the
fresh flowers is particularly effective for soothing and healing any
inflamed surface and easing ear problems (pain). As a fomentation
of leaves it is excellent for local application to any inflamed parts.

Nettle leaf is a spring tonic and a general alterative detoxifying
agent which clears out waste products, strengthens the mucosa of
the urinary, digestive, and respiratory systems, and when taken
fresh works against the allergic response to hayfever. It prevents
uric acid build-up in joints and is extremely helpful in cases of
gout, rheumatism, and arthritis. It is an astringent, which is useful
for relieving excessive discharge and bleeding, and is diuretic and
hypotensive. Nettle root is tonic for the genito-urinary system. It is a
good prostate tonic and quite helpful for benign prostatic
enlargement. It is an excellent potherb cooked like spinach or any
other fresh greens.

Peppermint is one of humanity’s favorite and most uplifting flavors.

----- PAGE 47 -----
It is carminative and anti-spasmodic, having a relaxing effect on the
muscles of the digestive system; it combats flatulence and stimulates
bile and the flow of digestive juices. It is carminative, diaphoretic,
and anti-emetic. As a mild anesthetic to the stomach lining, it often
allays feelings of nausea. It is nervine, and anti-microbial. This plant
(combined with Elder and Yarrow) is a traditional treatment for
fevers, colds, and influenza and thereby has saved countless lives
throughout the ages.

Pipsissewa (an at-risk plant, well substituted for by using an Uva
Ursi and Marshmallow combination) Therefore,Uva_ Ursi
(Bearberry) is diuretic; it has a specific antiseptic and astringent
effect upon the membranes of the urinary system, which it can be
relied upon to soothe and tone. With its anti-microbial action, it is
wonderfully effective for treating bladder infection, gravel, or a
stone in the kidney. It is helpful to blend this plant with
Marshmallow root to increase the soothing and protectant
demulcent action.

Plantain is a magnificent weed that grows everywhere and is readily
available throughout the year. It is vulnerary, expectorant,
demulcent, anti-inflammatory, astringent, diuretic, and anti-
microbial, having excellent healing properties. It is a gentle
expectorant that will soothe inflamed and painful membranes, ideal
for coughs and bronchitis. Its astringency aids in diarrhea,
hemorrhoids, and bladder inflammation where there is bleeding. It
relieves inflammation of the skin and intestinal tract. It is a valuable
treatment for diseases of the blood and glandular conditions. It is a
traditional cure taken internally, and as a poultice for treating the
stings and bites of snakes, spiders, and insects, and as a dressing for
cuts, wounds, and bruises.

St. John’s Wort is nervine. Taken internally, it has a sedative and
pain-relieving effect appropriate for treating neuralgia, anxiety, and
tension, and any irritable and anxious effects of menopausal
changes. As an anti-depressant. it is highly recommended for

----- PAGE 48 -----
treatment of melancholia or “the blues.” As an astringent, it is used
externally as an oil or salve. It is a valuable healing vulnerary and
anti-inflammatory remedy for nerve injuries, muscular bruises,
painful wounds, swelling, varicose veins, and mild burns.

Scullcap is a nerve tonic, having a mild sedative, anti-spasmodic
edge. It is especially appropriate as a primary nervous system tonic
and relaxant for stalwart individuals who have fiery emotions that
promote nerve and muscle tension. This plant is also used
specifically in the treatment of seizure, hysterical states, and
epilepsy, as well as for general muscular and nervous irritability
and tension. It is also well used where there is nervous disorder that
develops twitching, tremors, restlessness, or irregular muscular
action. As a cardiac relaxant, it is useful in sedating heart
imbalances caused by overactive nerves; bitter.

Valerian is primarily a nervine tonic. It is helpful to know Valerian
has a stimulating, warming nature which does not work well for
those who tend to have too great a blood flow to the brain, and too
great a nerve force already. Rather, Valerian, having a warming and
stimulating effect on the body, is a remedy used better for a
nervousness and irritability that comes secondarily to deficiency. It
is best used in people with poor blood circulation in general, but
particularly poor circulation to the brain and nervous centers. It is
well used for anxiety, despondency, and nervousness in individuals
whose face and skin look pale and lifeless, and the skin and body is
cool. It is a particularly useful remedy when there is intestinal
tension leading to gas, cramps, constipation, or irritable bowel type
conditions. For a tonic effect, it should be taken as a fresh plant
extract. This plant is also hypotensive and is used as a relaxing
remedy in hypertension and stress-related heart problems. As a
hypnotic it is well known to improve sleep quality, especially
amongst those who consider themselves to be poor sleepers.
Besides its wonderful relaxing effects, Valerian is also anti-
spasmodic and emmenagogue. It is a suitable remedy for excessive
caffeine intake.

----- PAGE 49 -----
Vitex (Chasteberry) is a uterine tonic which stimulates and
normalizes pituitary gland functions, especially its progesterone-
stimulating function, and therefore acts to normalize the activity of
female sex hormones. This is the basis for its use in everything from
PMS and recovery from taking birth control pills, to dysmenorrhea
and menopause. It is used to stabilize the ovulation cycle. It is well
used to help reduce the undesirable symptoms of menopause and is
helpful in irregular menstruation, especially if accompanied by
endometriosis. It helps relieve hormonally related constipation, and
can assist in the control of acne in teenagers.

Willow is an ancient analgesic remedy used for its pain-relieving,
anti-inflammatory effects. In various forms, it has been employed to
relieve the discomforts of headache, cold, flu, fever, gout, and the
aches and pains of all description.

Yarrow is one of the best of the diaphoretic herbs, making it a
standard remedy for reducing fever. It is used for treating
hypertension. This action is attributed to its vaso-dilating and
diuretic properties. As a tonic, this herb’s main uses are as an
astringent, anti-septic, anti-inflammatory, antispasmodic, and a
diuretic remedy for the genito-urinary system. It is used as an
astringent, anti-inflammatory, and bitter tonic in the gastrointestinal
system, where it can help normalize irritated and inflamed states of
the digestive tract, as its volatile oils contain similar anti-
inflammatory constituents as Chamomile. Its astringent, hemostatic,
and anti-inflammatory properties also make this plant useful for
intestinal bleeding, hemorrhoids with bloody discharge, uterine
hemorrhage, profuse, protracted menstruation, and leucorrhea. It is
also quite effective in relieving menstrual cramps. Used externally,
it is styptic and a wound-healing vulnerary.

Yellow Dock is a hepatic liver stimulant and laxative. As a laxative,
its activity lies somewhere between the bile stimulants (Dandelion,
Oregon Grape) and the more strongly laxative anthraquinone group
(Bitter Aloe, Senna, Buckthorn). Its combination of liver-cleansing

----- PAGE 50 -----
properties and laxative effect seems to assist the body in dealing
with the metabolic wastes often associated with a low-fiber, high-
fat, and meat diet. As a cholagogue, it stimulates the flow of bile
and has a therapeutic effect on jaundice when this is due to
congestion. Yellow Dock is a wonderful alterative for treating oily
and exudative skin conditions. It seems to work through the liver
and bowel to help remove metabolic wastes from the blood. By
improving the liver’s ability to metabolize wastes and fats it takes
the burden off of secondary pathways of elimination, such as the
skin.

Gobo is a young and tender Burdock root
commonly used in Japanese cuisine and available
in many local produce sections.

GREEN’S 5 ADDITIONAL HERBS AND THE FUNGUS

Burdock is a “deep food” and alterative that moves the body to a
state of well-nourished health, promotes the healing of wounds, and
removes the indicators of system imbalance such as low energy,
ulcers, skin conditions, and dandruff. As a diuretic and alterative, it
works through the liver and kidneys to protect against the build-up
of waste products and is considered to be one of the best tonic
correctives of skin disorders. Burdock is a classic remedy for skin
conditions which result in dry, scaly skin and cutaneous eruptions
(eczema, psoriasis, dermatitis, boils, carbuncles, sties), as well as
also being helpful in relieving rheumatism and gout. As a mild
bitter that stimulates digestive juices and bile secretion, it aids
appetite and digestion and is well used in anorexia. Externally, it is
an exceptional fomentation or poultice to promote the healing of
wounds and ulcers, especially when also taken internally on a
regular basis.

Oat spirit is the commuter’s green angel. She

----- PAGE 51 -----
graciously feeds the nervous system of those who
overwork themselves, function on nervous energy
(and caffeine), are chronically under stress, simply
burned out, and possibly a bit depressed by it all.

Ginkgo is first and foremost a vasodilator. It improves circulation to
the brain and periphery and has a normalizing action on the
vascular system, making it important in all conditions stemming
from poor circulation. It improves circulation to all poorly
nourished areas. It enhances memory by improving nerve cell
transmission and brain metabolism by increasing the utilization of
oxygen and glucose. As a brain tonic, free-radical scavenger, and
anti-oxidant, it helps prevent cardiovascular damage and counters
the general effects of aging.

Oat is one of the best nerve tonics for feeding the depleted nervous
system of those who overwork and undernourish themselves, or for
those who function on nervous energy (or caffeine) for too long
without replenishing their reserves. Oat is specific for the individual
who is chronically under stress and is simply burned out. Its anti-
depressive activity is specific for nervous exhaustion and debility
when associated with depression. It is a nutritive that is well used
for convalescence following any prostrating disease and/or nervous
breakdown. Externally, it is demulcent and vulnerary, making a
soothing bath for use in neuralgia and irritated skin conditions.

Saw Palmetto is a nutritive tonic whose influence is directed toward
the entire reproductive apparatus. It works cleverly as a remedial
tonic that stimulates the nutrition of the nerve centers upon and
through which it operates. For the male, this action focuses
particularly on the prostate gland, which it keeps in a state of
wellness. For an enlarged prostate gland and accompanying
diminished sexual drive, it is remarkably therapeutic, as it reduces
the size of the gland and quickly relieves the other disorders that
commonly occur with this condition’s symptoms (i.e.. dribbling

----- PAGE 52 -----
urine, slow initiation of urination, incomplete bladder evacuation).
In females, this plant is beneficial for treating ovarian enlargement,
weakened sexual drive, and with continual use its nourishing
components can help develop small underdeveloped mammary
glands. As a diuretic, antiseptic, and tonic it is a valuable remedy in
treating any infection of the genito-urinary system. As a nutritive
endocrine agent, it is safely used to give a boost to the male sex
hormones and has been reported to reverse sterility in woman
where there is no organic disease or injured tissue. This berry tastes
to me like rancid soap, so I find it is most palatable when taken in
capsule form. For those whose nature will do well with the actions
and flavor of Licorice, this herb does a decent job of covering Saw
Palmetto’s controversial flavor.

Siberian Ginseng is a classic adaptogen in that when taken
consistently it produces a state of non-specific stress resistance. It
helps modify the underlying imbalance caused by stressors,
regardless of the specific nature of the stressor (chemical, physical,
psychological, etc.). In order for an herb to be classified as an
adaptogen, not only must it help one deal with “stress,” but it
cannot cause an imbalance in physiological functions; it must
basically be harmless and should help normalize functions,
regardless of whether they are underactive or overactive.

Siberian Ginseng’s adaptogenic qualities have been shown to
improve generalized resistance to infectious diseases, to lessen
muscular fatigue, to help balance hypertension, and to reduce
damage from radiation. Although its effect on the adrenal cortex
gives it wide-ranging uses, it seems to have a special affinity for the
circulatory system. It has been shown to balance both high and low
blood pressure, reduce serum cholesterol levels, and relieve anginal
pain.

The wide-ranging effects of Siberian Ginseng can be traced largely
to its ability to have positive effect on the general adaptation
syndrome. When confronted with long-term stress, the original
response known as the “alarm reaction” is less severe; the resistance
phase (i.e.. when you are coping with a stress) is prolonged. and

----- PAGE 53 -----
the exhaustive stage that can follow long-term stress is better
handled. All in all, Siberian Ginseng allows one to better handle a
tougher work load, emotional and chemical stressors, living in
congested cities, and the general frazzle of living in our twenty-first
century civilization.

Reishi (Ganoderma lucidum) is a remarkably beneficial fungus for
the human body. First of all, it is a primary supporter of the
immune system, as it is believed to enhance white blood cell
production, stimulate macrophage (scavenger cells of the immune
system) activity, help protect against cancer, and work against
viruses. It is shown to modify the body’s allergic response. Reishi
also provides cardiovascular protection by helping to lower
excessively high blood pressure. It helps lower cholesterol while it
increases the ratio of HDL (good cholesterol) to the LDL (not so
good) cholesterol. At the same time, it inhibits platelet dysfunction
(platelets are components of blood that promote clotting). In
addition to all this, Reishi is a liver protective against damaging
agents, and it seems to have a calming and strengthening effect on
the nervous system, as it is mildly adaptogenic and antioxidant by
protecting the body against free radicals. That’s an herbal ally, my
friends!

Heras to Avo

in PreGNancy

Barberry (which I suggested using as a substitute
for Goldenseal)

Black Cohosh (except for the last month of
pregnancy) and its substitute Baneberry (see
this page)

Cayenne (use sparingly)

Comfrey

----- PAGE 54 -----
Ginger (use very sparingly)
Goldenseal
Mugwort

Oregon Grape (which I suggested using as a
substitute for Goldenseal)

Yarrow

SuGcrsten MetHops oF Extraction

=
macnn :
ose [e . . ele
=| | _
Catendula Pal ° ole le « |e o
Cayenne | * * ele .
=
cuit : :
= we] [sf [efel
oe Hi A
a a : :
ig es Seite
re : * Tos.

----- PAGE 55 -----


----- PAGE 56 -----


----- PAGE 57 -----
IRYI

i i
GARBLING
AND STORING

I find gardening to be the most companionable and fulfilling of all
my herbal experiences. I am wholly, entirely, and utterly convinced
that the power of gardening to promote healing and sustain
wellness goes far beyond that of any other form of medicine, herbal
or otherwise. In fact, with certain individuals I’ve noted that
gardening is the only herbal remedy whose antidepressant action

----- PAGE 58 -----
truly uplifts their spirit and successfully relieves their depression.
Having discovered it, gardening has become the only medicine path
they steadfastly rely on.

Collecting and planting seeds, touching the Earth, relating to
plants, and caring for them as you attune to the flow of the seasons,
simply feels good. All phases of gardening touch my being in a
spiritual, mental, emotional, and physical way. It always fills my
heart and mind with delicious anticipation, which stimulates the
vital flow of any human being’s life force.

In the concluding chapter of The Male Herbal, I asked these
questions regarding Western culture: “Where are all the old men?
Where have they gone? What are they doing? Where have the seeds
of male maturity fallen?” A few years have passed since then, and
during that time I’ve located a vast number of these male elders;
they’re in the garden (with Waldo). That’s why we don’t hear much
from them. They’ve withdrawn from much of society’s commotion
and chatter, and they’re busy talking with plants. They’ve become
active greenmen, and their primary dialogue has transcended to one
of quiet words, the language fulfilled human beings use to
commune with plant spirit. These elders are well and doing fine,
living their wisdom. I’ve been noticing these days an ever-increasing
number of younger men hanging out in gardens, as well.

But I don’t figure that you picked up this book in search of a
gardening manual, so I will get on with other information—even
though my gardening manual would simply say: “Just put your
hands, some roots, and some seeds into the receptive earth and
grow something.” I will, however, place some medicine gardening
documents in the back of this book as Appendix B, and they'll be
there for you when you seek them.

The innate joy of being with plants is reflected in the spontaneous
uplifting of our human spirit as we commingle with our vegetable
allies. Conscientious herbal medicine-making is a transformative
process that materializes this communion, expressing it in the forms
of nourishing plant concoctions and subtle energetic elixirs, and
most importantly as sustained. thriving plant communities.

----- PAGE 59 -----
In my travels as an herbalist, the experience of harvesting
medicinal plants has become the most intimate and compassionate
portion of this communion. As I harvest a plant being, I put forth
my desire to make medicine, and in turn plant spirits acquiesce to
my request for the aid of their embodied nutrients and aesthetic
healing vibration. I strive to receive these gifts with gratitude, and
feel the sacred circle of giving sanction our union. That is a very
good feeling, a feeling of health. In my practice as an herbalist, I
deeply revere this mutually conscious act of alliance.

It is my belief that plants have manifested as one of this planet’s
foremost expressions of love. The clear vibration of love that
radiates from plants is one of the fullest expressions of
unconditional love that I witness. Harvesting is a way of calling
forth and receiving this love. It has become a sacred act in my
practice, one that I try to participate in wholeheartedly with
grateful consciousness and clear communication of my intent.

I recommend herbal medicine-makers involve themselves in this
segment of medicine-making with clear purpose in mind and inner
commemoration in heart. Plant spirits will respond likewise. They
are highly conscious. They are of the same spiritual essence we are.
They adore us, and they communicate this to us with every
vibration of their pure positive energy. Plants are responsive allies
and trustworthy companions, and when we ask them to make
medicine with us, we will do well to approach them with mutual
regard, care, and intelligence.

Herbal medicine-making is the dynamic synapse that lays the
roadway between harvesting plants and consuming plant
preparations. Therefore, the ritual-process of harvesting is the very
foundation of preparing and potentizing these medicines for our
use. Intimate attention to the details of our harvest process is the
rite that allows the medicine-maker to contact and communicate
with the spirit of the plant and imbue this plant spirit in his or her
food and medicine. If we choose to devalue this act by ignoring or
disregarding the presence of plant spirit, we carry off the physical
remnants of the plant, but lose access to the most vital healing
power of the herb. And with this same heedless thrust. we can

----- PAGE 60 -----
damage the sustaining stability and beauty of our environment. I try
to bear this in mind whenever I participate in the circle of giving as
the harvester of another being. This holds for all Earthly harvests—
plant, animal, and mineral.

Certainly, the science and technology we employ to prepare our
herbal preparations are important factors in bringing forth high-
quality herbal medicines, and the main body of this handbook
offers guidelines for these techniques. But as author of this work I
must allege, as I repeat, these are not the most crucial factors. The
harvest is. Therein lies the art and soul of excellent medicine-
making.

In my opinion the harvesting of a plant is the
most critical element in the process of making
truly fine herbal medicine.

A clear compassionate intent for one’s use of a harvest, coupled
with an animated connection with the plant (one that embraces a
sincere regard for the continual welfare of the plant’s community),
is what draws forth the spirit of plants to accompany one’s
medicine. This “plant spirit” is the “active ingredient” in herbal
preparations that medical pharmaceutical science and many
commercial herbal industries are so desperately seeking. The active
ingredient of herbal medicine, the one that truly supports human
health and healing, is not scientifically captured in high-tech
wonder-labs, mysteriously contained and transformed by stainless
steel vessels and bubbling glass beakers. It is simply embraced in
the woodlands, meadows, seashores, and in the domestic gardens
where plants and plant communities live. It is conveyed by a green
spirit, whoever she or he might be, wherever she or he might work.

“Life begins the day you start a garden.”

— A. CHINESE PROVERB

----- PAGE 61 -----
TWO RITUALS

Following are two focusing rituals you might find useful.

These rituals are clearly not intended to impress the plants, and
they are not ordained to flip on some sort of magic switch; plants
are already our allies, and the magic Nature surrounds us with all
the time, where everything imaginable is possible, is always on.
These rituals are for you. To receive what you want, you merely
have to tap into natural enchantment in a nonresistant fashion.
Ritual helps you allow yourself to function at an altered state of
knowing and receptivity. In ritual you focus precisely on what you
want and hold your attention on the vibrations you choose to
harmonize with—at present, the vibration of plant spirit.

The first procedure is a ritualized method for allowing yourself to
communicate with plants and receive them as personal allies. The
second is a ritual that aligns the pace of your physical and mental
energy with the energy of the plant entities you wish to harvest.
Both rituals can help you focus on your intent and align your spirit
in a relationship with a plant, a relationship that allows you to
carry the spirit of the plant along with your harvest of its physical
being. If either one or both rituals appeal to you, adopt them, or
modify them to suit your nature. If they’re not your style, create
your own way. These are merely my means to an end; there are
innumerable other ways to woo plant spirit. Seduction is a highly
personal adventure. Ritual is a partner helping create the energy of
a dance; you are the drummer.

Id like to slip a note in here to readers who live in cities’ densely
populated neighborhoods or other areas where intentional gardens
are not apparent and open spaces are often inaccessible. Plant spirit
resides in each and every plant. Regardless of the size of the
metropolis you inhabit or the thickness of its concrete complexion,
you can spot wild plants growing throughout its brittle surface.
There’s simply no holding them down. Walk the streets and check it
out; healthy plants are rising through the city grid. You'll see them
standing in anonymous cement cracks and poking out of the narrow
seams where building walls reach down and touch adioining

----- PAGE 62 -----
sidewalks. You can find plants growing all along streetside curbs
and down adjacent alleyways; and, their green spirit lounges as
communities of weeds at the edges of asphalt parking lots. Arriving
with the wind, the seeds of diverse plants abound in pretty much
every patch of city dirt. When you start looking, you find Earth’s
plants hanging out all over town. Even the most plant-resistant
environments host their bands of outlaw weeds. Actually plant
spirit, in one form or another, envelops the entire city—every city.
Boundless numbers of fertile seeds lie under city streets and beneath
each metropolitan structure. The precious seeds and spores of
Earth’s ancient forests, jungles, grasslands, and wetlands reside
peacefully in the soils below the urban hubbub, patiently biding
their time, prepared to reemerge whenever opportunities arise. Left
unattended, as our current civilizations move on to other things,
cities will quickly become wild gardens again—it’s inevitable.
Humanity in its expansive exuberance has mowed down the forests
for the time being but certainly has not eliminated them from
Earth’s timeless demeanor. We tend to credit ourselves with abilities
on this orbiting garden we do not truly possess. We are Earth’s
hyperactive children; she loves us and lets us play, but we’re not
running her show. Not really. So for now, there may not be a
sufficient amount of plants growing on urban turf to harvest, but
there are always plenty to relate to and commune with, and, like
other plants, they respond to us. Acknowledge plant spirit that
greets you on the street. Respond to its communication. It’s a silent
language, remember; other humans won’t hear you. Reach out and
touch plants too, rubbing their leaves between your fingers and
smelling their green aromas. Other folks won’t pay much attention
to this gesture either. And if I might add a P.S. to this note, the
plants you encounter on your streets are noteworthy candidates to
adopt as urban allies. Their vibrations are as clear and uplifting as
those of plants growing in gardens and country wilds. If you feel a
green companion touch your spirit, plant its image in your mind
and heart. Let it grow in there too and enjoy the connection; the
plant’s companionable spirit will always be there for you to access.
Cities are rarely lonely places for those who speak with the plants.

----- PAGE 63 -----
We are Earth’s hyperactive children; she loves us
and lets us play, but we’re not running her show.

“The greatest gift of the garden is the restoration
of the five senses.”

—Hanna Rion

A Riva. or Communion

To begin with, let me suggest that there are plants out there
fully prepared and eager to communicate with you. They offer
no resistance whatsoever to the adventure of communicating
with a receptive human being. Over 99 percent of our (human)
being is a vibrational communicator. Under 1 percent is a
verbal communicator even with other human beings, so plants
and animals being virtually 100 percent vibrational
communicators are very similar to you and me in their
vibrational offering. They are quite able and entirely
compatible to communicate with us, and vice versa.

Go outside and look around in the garden or wander
through the forest, the hillsides, the seashore, or along a
country roadway. Note the plants that attract you most
(vibrational communication). Note the ones that you have
always enjoyed looking at, the plant entities that whenever
you are near them you can’t (and never want to) keep your
eyes off. You feel pleasantly uplifted whenever you are near
them (vibrational communication). These are the plants that
are already your visual lovers; and believe me, if you’re that
attracted to them, they are appreciating you just as much
(vibrational communication). So, these are the vegetable folks

----- PAGE 64 -----
to start intentionally communicating with. A mutual,
vibrational connection has already been established without a
word having been spoken. You have entered the green.

At a time when your insides are smiling, like one of my
friends once said, “At a time when you're just feeling happy
for no particular reason,” go sit with one of these plants;
initiate enchantment. You will feel a mutual attraction
touching some undomesticated, wild part of yourself. Be still
and take the opportunity to listen to the sounds of Nature that
surround you. Be still for as long as it takes to reunite with
your deep sense of well-being. In this mutual state of
consciousness plants will further respond to you. Smell the
scents that are flowing around and into you. Feel everything
breathing in rhythm, connecting you with Nature’s intelligent
beauty. Feel your absolute freedom and that of all other beings
present. Touch the plant. It is vibrating in its place of absolute
well-being, as are you. Feel the plant’s leaf. Let your sight
drink its colors. Touch the ethereal softness of its flower’s
petals. Let it experience your vitality and gentleness. These are
the “initial words” of your communication.

Be open to all possibilities. Be open to your feelings and
your visions. Dissolve any sensual separation you might feel
with the plant by letting all intellectual objectivity flow away
with the breeze. Instead, focus on yourself sitting with the
plant, and within this subjective passion let your spirit mingle
and blend with the plant’s spirit.

Ask the plant to give you its name. Dismiss all you think you
know or might have been taught about the plant; instead,
allow its name to come to you. Keep the name silent within
you, like the name of a clandestine lover.

Ask the plant for its song. Every plant has a song. It may give
it to you to sing or to recite as poetry (or for the time being it
may give you a portion of its song as a simple word for use as

----- PAGE 65 -----
a mantra to focus on in meditation for later realization of the
plant’s power). You may also receive an image or a nature
symbol to draw or paint or weave or sculpt. Songs and visual
images are given to you for your personal medicine-use of the
plant. Keep them intimate; hold their energy and knowledge in
your heart and mind. These gifts are the ultimate harvest.

After giving you its name and song, the plant may give you
other gifts by telling you what it will do for you as a medicine
ally. Later, share these gifts with others if you wish, but don’t
exclaim them as universal truth. These are truths shared
between you and the plant; they have been given specifically
to you. It is your medicine.

Extend visions of well-being to the plant and to its
community. They are your allies and you can always speak to
them of that which you want.

Once you have communicated with a plant entity, briefly or
at length, having received its name and any gifts it extends to
you, continue through the succeeding days and nights to
visualize and meditate on the plant’s image and energy. You
may be given more during these meditative states or during
sleep in a dream. Expect this. It has been a long time since
most of us have made ourselves available for intentional
conversation with plant spirits. There is much to be
communicated between plant and human species, and it is a
joy for both to do so.

Later, go dancing. Dance to the rhythm of the drummers and
the shakers; close your eyes and visualize and feel the energy
of this plant. Dance this energy; like attracts like. In this state
of consciousness, other nature spirits can come to you as you
dance, or later that evening.

Remember, plants participate in very active night lives. Enter
your garden during the evening hours and hang out with them
in the quiet moonlight. Experience the magnificent nocturnal

----- PAGE 66 -----
energy that the garden residents emanate ... a very good time
to exchange a few silent “words” and frolic in your garden’s
lunacy.

Summer Serenade for Carolyn

“Night cricket can sing you through a lonely eve;
night cricket will sing you to the morning light.”

—T. Exper Sacus

A Swere Harvest Riva,

Harvest at ease, in rhythm and focus.

Sit for a while with the plants you want to harvest. Treat
yourself to the splendor of their beauty; enjoy the well-being
you share.

Seek out the grandmother plant, the elder of the community.
Focus on this plant and yourself together. Place intimate
energy around the two of you by visualizing warm light
surrounding you or by shaking a rattle and feeling a field of
cohesive energy encircle you (nature spirits and human babies
love the sound vibrations of rattles ... remember?).

Be still in body and energy. Slow down your pace of thought
and action with a ceremonial offering to the grandmother and
her clan. This adjusts your normal human pace to better align
your energy with the energy of the plants. Just sit with the
stillness and empty your mind. Meditate. Tune to your inner
hearing. Plant spirit speaks to these ears.

Communicate clearly your harvest intent and clarify to the
plant and again to yourself the purpose of the medicine you

----- PAGE 67 -----
wish to prepare.

Ask permission to harvest, asking when to harvest, where,
how, and how much. Plants, when listened to, inform you how
best to harvest and receive their gifts.

At this point, it is possible that you might sense a “no”
answer. Honor this. Not all of a plant’s medicine energy is
contained or accessed merely in its physical body. Be content
for the moment to harvest plant communion and
companionship. Come back again later or visit another
community and extend another request.

When you feel permission to harvest, harvest softly. Impact
the plant community and the ecosystem minimally. You only
need enough herb for the year. Upon feeling a sense of
permission, you will have strongly connected with the plant
and infused your harvest with its spirit. As you work through
the harvesting action, maintain communication with the
individual plants you are taking, and sustain focus on your
intended uses. Genius is focus.

As a conclusion to your harvest, express your gratitude to the
plant community. Grandmother will be smiling and you will
know it.

As you are leaving, pause for a moment and look back at the
plant community. Ask yourself if you harvested softly. Does it
show that you were there? How much does it show? Be with
your feelings about this. Learn from them; they are your truth.
A novice’s mistake of effecting an over-enthusiastic harvest is
always forgivable; but it is a teaching to be valued and taken to
heart. Visualize the healing energy of the medicines you are
about to make with the plants given to you by this community
and bid farewell.

Return to your home and process your harvest immediately.

Go dancing that evening. Dance the energy and character of

----- PAGE 68 -----
the plant spirit you harvested. Dance with your plant allies.
Dance your happiness and your gratitude. A plant person’s life
is an expression of joy and companionship.

HARVESTING EQUIPMENT

There is paraphernalia necessary for the harvester. The minimum
equipment required for an impassioned harvester is merely a pair
of hands and some means for getting them to the plants; a healthy
pair of feet is adequate for that job. But I am a stickler for taking
meticulous care of all tools and equipment; therefore, I strongly
recommend protective coverings for your hands and feet. Sandals
and bare fingers are a pleasure to use for harvesting Red Clover or
Calendula blossoms on a warm summer day, but high-top gumboots
(a.k.a. duck boots, galoshes, Wellingtons) and gloves will be deeply
appreciated when harvesting Stinging Nettles on a soggy river bank
in early spring, or for trekking across a sloshy forest floor in search
of Skunk Cabbage. A tough canvas jacket will keep you snug and
protect your arms and torso from spiny stalks as you walk through
forests and pull roots like those of Oplopanax horridum from the
ground, or when you dig Blackberry roots from the earth in the
spring or fall. A lightweight, long-sleeved cotton shirt worn during
hot sunny days of harvesting will greatly assist your body to retain
water and avoid dehydration. A variety of favorite hats protect
harvesters from a hot sun, as well as from cold, rain, and the end
products of bird peristalsis.

I suggest you purchase the best-quality equipment you can
possibly afford. High-quality tools serve you better, are safer to use,
and if taken care of will last significantly longer. The key phrase
here is, if taken care of. Attention to details like keeping hands,
feet, head, and torso protected and healthy; keeping blades sharp,
not pushing any tool past its limits, wiping tools dry after use,
cleaning and oiling them regularly, and storing them in dry places
out of direct sunlight will assure vou a functional. co-independent

----- PAGE 69 -----
relationship with your harvesting equipment. It appears to me that
inanimate objects have sensitive spirits too, and like animate
objects they respond positively to any regard and attention you give
them. All in all, pampered, high-quality equipment ends up being
less expensive, safer, and more enjoyable to use.

In addition to body-protecting paraphernalia, you will need
equipment and tools with which to cut, whittle, scrape, dig, and
carry stuff in. Pruning shears, a knife, a trowel, and paper bags will
do.

In my experience, the best pruning shears are Felco® brand. The
makers of these cutters offer a gratifying variety of ergonomic styles
for both left-handers and right-handers, and for hand sizes of men
and women. Be keenly aware when using shears that they are
known to bite the hand not holding them.

Eourment

Gumboots

Gloves

Canvas Jacket

Long-Sleeved Shirt

Pruning Shears

Pocket Knife

Trowel and a Hori Hori
Paper Bags

Sturdy Basket with a Large Handle
Water Bottle

Plant Guide

Harvesting Information Chart
Lavendar Essential Oil

I also retain the services of a qualified pocketknife at all times.

----- PAGE 70 -----
one whose blade will lock open during use. (It’s a painful slice of
life when a foldable knife blade suddenly closes down on one’s
fingers.) I carry this little tool to help me deal with those
spontaneous odd jobs that inevitably arise during harvesting and
gardening and for innumerable supplementary tasks such as
removing soil from under fingernails, cutting large bars of
chocolate, fending off bears, unwrapping Valentine gifts, and so
forth. A companion pocketknife is an essential tool for an
independent being. I’m not talking about a clunky foreign army
version that includes fold-out dishware and a car port, just a slim,
little, pocket-friendly, one- or two- blade item. I guarantee you will
use it throughout your medicine-making (and other) journeys—
repeatedly. When someone asks me what gift to get for someone
else, man or woman, I suggest buying him or her a cool little
pocketknife (they’re trippy to shop for). But of course the superb
suggestion is usually ignored and wanders off unappreciated.

My best trowel is made of beefy aluminum; its handle and blade
are molded as a single piece, having a very sturdy shaft that doesn’t
bend no matter how high the fervor of my determination escalates
while digging. I also rely on a hori hori, which is a brilliantly
designed Japanese root digging tool that is virtually indestructible.
No one said digging roots was effortless, even with the plant’s
permission, so be equipped.

The best paper bags to use are large, heavy-duty, recycled ones.
Avoid using plastic bags; they retain heat and moisture and quickly
compost (before you can get them home) the fresh herbs they
contain.

A basket is also practical, especially one designed with a large
stiff handle that arches over the top of the basket. You can stick
your arm through the handle and retain the use of both hands for
picking and placing the plant parts into the conveniently positioned
basket hanging on your arm. This is most practical when you need
to reach up to harvest Hawthorn berries or Elder blossoms or when
you are perched in a tree reaching out precariously to collect other
precious arboreal pickings.

In order to take good care of vourself. vou will also need a full

----- PAGE 71 -----
water bottle. Get a quart-size bottle, maybe two of them, as a pint
of water is seldom enough. Put a fresh sprig of Mint, Lemon Balm,
Lemon Verbena, or a slice of Lime in the drinking water. Never go
harvesting without taking water. The arid shadow of dehydration
lurks in nearly every ecosystem. Drink lots of water while
harvesting and gardening. It’s the medicine-maker’s field tonic, and
plants are indulgent water-drinking buddies.

Amidst your enchanted wonderings, you will happen upon many
intriguing plants in the field. If you are a person who likes to give a
name to them, carry a plant identification guide with you. Search
bookstores for pocket guides that speak clearly to your intellect,
ones that focus on the locations you frequent. However, when the
sight of a particular plant stops you in your tracks, I suggest first
sitting and asking the plant itself for its name. Then, following this
private conversation, consult your identification guide, key out the
plant, and note the names others have given it. Practice plant
communion first, then practice using your plant key. You also have
the botanical-poet’s inalienable right to give the plant any
“common” name you choose. I strongly suggest you revel in
exercising this right. It’s fun, intimate, and highly creative. Utilize
all opportunities to beckon and inspire your inner poet.

Some individuals like to keep a record of their harvesting
experiences. In Appendix E, I have given you a sample of the
Harvesting Information Chart we recommend using at the California
School of Herbal Studies for documenting the details of harvest that
pertain to plants we process for our use. This form is offered
merely as a sample guide. Format your own design to suit your
particular interests.

First aid equipment obligatory for the harvesting tasks that await
you can be summarized in three words—Lavender essential oil. I
mean, you shouldn’t be jeopardizing your life and limb out there in
herb-land, but frequently you do put your skin at risk. What with
biting and sucking critters, abrading surfaces, scraping and
puncturing stickers and thorns, bumps, nicks, cuts, pruning shear
bites, I tell you, it can be itchy and irritating out there. And what
one needs most when a cutaneous crisis occurs is an inexpensive.

----- PAGE 72 -----
soothing (anti-inflammatory), cleansing (disinfectant) accessory, that
smells great. This would be a 15 ml bottle of pure Lavender
essential oil. Slather it on any and all offended skin.

ECOLOGICAL HARVESTING PROTOCOL

Ecological harvesting protocol is founded on the knowledge,
experience, intent, and actions of human beings who hold in their
hearts and minds a deep respect for plant communities. These
people I recognize as “plant persons,” the green herbalists. When in
the field, a green herbalist realizes that he or she is a visitor, a guest
in quest of great gifts. This field persona emits respect and
gratitude, and monitors one’s harvesting technique in such manner
that the plant community is honored and can continue to thrive.
Because the relationship between the green herbalist and the plant
community is such that, season to season, the number and health of
the plants will have been sustained or increased, the herbalist will
be welcomed back for the next harvest and the one following that,
as will his or her children, apprentices, companions, and so on for
generations to follow.

Please peruse the “Eight Principles of Excellent Medicine-Making”
found in Appendix C offered for your contemplation.

The primary principles of gathering wild medicinal plants are
discussed below.

Harvest Apunpance Onty

Gather solely in those prime areas that you find abounding with
plants of the same species. Try not to harvest the same stand year
after year. Never harvest or disturb threatened or endangered
plants. Plant them instead. Seek them out and sing to them. You
don’t have to sing out loud. If you have a singing voice like mine
it’s probably better that you don’t. Plants hear a silent song (and
often prefer it). I know this sounds a bit corny, but I find it true in
my experience. Let your songs tell the plants (and wild animals)

----- PAGE 73 -----
how beautiful they are and how deeply you appreciate them.
Communicate to them how much you want them to remain here
with us on Earth. Visualize their well-being and focus on that
vision. Let the wild beings hear what’s in your heart, the heart of
their ally. The positive vision and songs of a singer whose passion is
connected to the source of abundance can singleheartedly turn any
tide from depletion to plenty.

As you gather plants, please assume the responsibility to learn
which plants, if any, are currently on threatened and endangered
lists in the areas you harvest. Keep in mind that a plant can be
abundant in one state and at the same time rare and in great need
of protection and assistance in the next state. Check with your local
herbarium, botanical garden, wildflower groups, native plant
society, or the United Plant Savers (UpS) list of “at-risk” plants (see
Appendix A).

When digging roots, refill the holes, whether deep or shallow.
Whenever possible, replant a section of any budding rhizomes or
any root crowns that you can separate from the roots you harvest.
Scatter the mature seeds of these root-medicine plants around the
area whenever you can. Attempt to leave the area looking as
undisturbed as it did upon your arrival. If possible, make the area
look even better. Often you will find someone’s discarded trash
lying around (they probably figure their high school janitor will get
it later); please pick it up and cart it out. You certainly have my
sincere gratitude for doing this. And please keep in mind at all
times that wild (and frequently garden) plant stands also provide
food for the local wildlife. Human debris left lying around can
entrap and injure or kill wild fauna in the most unimaginably
torturous ways.

You don’t need a lot of plant material to make
enough herbal medicine for the year.

Practice AND Promote Damace Contro

----- PAGE 74 -----
Be aware of your impact on the plant communities that you are
making contact with; make it negligible. Notice the impact of your
footwear and your passage on the terrain. Be aware of simple
erosion factors.

Hard-soled shoes are the most damaging to delicate hillside
ecosystems. It is easy to damage the fragile environment of a rocky
hillside or a wet stream bed by treading on them thoughtlessly.

When harvesting the foliage of bushes or trees, pick from the
borders of the plants, leaving the central core of the plant to
regenerate itself outward.

When harvesting a hillside, begin at the bottom and work your
way up the slope. Leave all the plants growing at the top of the
hill. These are the community members, often referred to as the
grandparent plants, that send their replenishing seed downhill and
also protect young plants. You have to love grandparents of all
species. An annual Grandparents’ Day would do well in this
country; it could be our first interspecies holiday.

Garner Onty From Heatray Prants anp Communities

Plants that appear to be in poor health or are being successfully
harassed by gnawing and sucking insects are probably growing on
the extreme peripheral border of their preferred growing conditions
and are struggling to survive. These are not appropriate individuals
to harvest. However, they may be harbingers of a_ thriving
community lying nearby. Or they may be the only specimen in that
area. Regardless, nod to them appreciatively and continue on.

As a general rule, don’t harvest the first plants of any species you
find in an area, whether weak or strong. Let these pioneering
individuals alone to stake their claim and proliferate as they can.
Even when you do come upon an appropriate size community of
healthy plants pick from the more central portions and let the
plants living on outer borders remain undiminished to tend to their
venture to extend the community outward. This is especially
essential when harvesting plants like St. John’s Wort. which

----- PAGE 75 -----
propagates itself primarily by casting its seeds and experiences a
massively increased harvest due to a sudden rush of popularity. This
has transformed its commercial reputation from one of a “noxious
weed” to that of a “quick antidote” for human depression—foolish
notions as those are.

Remove no more than 10 percent of a native plant community or
20 percent of a naturalized plant community; better yet, leave no
particularly noticeable evidence you were there. Leave enough
leaves, fruit, seeds, and/or flowers on the plants for them to
continue to prosper healthy and strong. I repeat, you don’t need a
lot of plant material to make enough herbal medicine for the year.
And you don’t want more than a year’s supply, because like
gardening the act of going out into the fields and forests of nature
each year and harvesting is itself one of the most healthful active
ingredients in herbal medicine.

Harvest in Unpou.urep Areas

It is best not to harvest downwind from any pollution, or on or near
roadsides coated with auto exhaust residue, or any place that has
been sprayed with herbicides or pesticides. In other words, harvest
50-100 yards away from public roads. I suggest not harvesting
downstream from any mining or chemically laden agricultural
business. The chemical runoff there is often vicious. Seriously
reconsider any impulse to harvest around parking lots, public
parks, fertilized lawns, and any other potentially sprayed or
fumigated areas.

Avoid harvesting beneath high voltage power lines. These high-
tension electric wires must trigger mutations. Yes, it’s possible these
mutations might prove superior to the normal plants of the species,
but the deranging agitation my car radio broadcasts when I drive it
near high voltage lines makes me wonder about the organic static
occurring within the tissues of those hapless plants growing beneath
them. No need to stress these plant communities further by
harvesting them. Human nervous systems (those similar to mine

----- PAGE 76 -----
anyway) don’t do well beneath high-voltage lines either.

Consider initiating your own privately unpolluted growing areas.
May I suggest if you have a lawn, that you quit chemicalizing it (if
you have been), then quit mowing it for a while. About the time
your neighbors start hassling you to cut the weeds, you will discover
a volunteer pharmacy of plant medicines growing right outside
your house. Tell your neighbors you're participating in a science
project. That'll stall them for a couple weeks. Then place neat little
rock borders around the medicinal plants you identify and tell your
neighbors you’re landscaping. That'll give you a few more weeks
before they notify the county officials. You might consider altering
your landscape design to include cultivated medicinal plants that
harmonize with the wild volunteers. There is a myriad of wild and
cultivated herbal alternatives to standardized urban lawns. (See
Appendix B.)

Ger Permission

Private landowners in the U.S. and Canada love to fence themselves
in and become resident ogres. North America is pregnant with
chain link fences, rails, and real estate boundaries. If you are
seeking to harvest “noxious weeds” such as Stinging Nettles,
Dandelions, or St. John’s Wort, I have found that, when asked, land
owners often say, “Hell yah, take all you want; get those damn
things out of here!” So you do them the favor and they love you for
it. They think you're a little odd and a bit eccentric, but there is no
problem. Indulge yourself in being odd now and then; it stirs the
pot. However, when you seek to harvest someone’s Eucalyptus,
Black Walnut, or Hawthorn trees, then you might have to be a little
more persuasive. But get permission. It improves the vibe. If you
seek to harvest plants on Bureau of Land Management (BLM) land,
you are required to obtain a free-use permit, which is obtainable,
for a small fee of course. This is a permit to collect only small
amounts of vegetation. (If you’re a lumber company, for about the
same fee vou can log the entire forest.) The U.S. Forest Service and

----- PAGE 77 -----
the BLM also enforce the following regulations: no picking in or
near campgrounds or picnic areas; no picking any plants closer than
200 feet from trails; and no picking any plants on roadsides.

It becomes a win-win situation once we learn to harvest in a style
that allows the ecology to recover. If you see that someone else,
whether human or animal, has already harvested a plant
community, leave it alone and move on. When you dig a root, in
most cases you take the life of the plant. This is appropriate, life
eats life; it is part of the circle of giving; but give sacred honor to
the giver. Cultivate gratefulness in your heart for the plant’s offering
to your life. Prepare and dispense root medicines with this
heightened appreciation. With the above acts of regard you
perpetuate abundance. The EcoHerbalist’s Fieldbook, written by
Gregory Tilford, is an extraordinary work that will help you harvest
with mindful heart. (See Resources.)

Waar to Harvest anp WHEN

A seasoned herbalist does not gather the various parts of plants
used to make herbal medicines randomly, or at just any time of the
year. There is a specific time in Earth’s solar and lunar cycles when
an herb will yield its best “medicine.” Herbalists for thousands of
years have recorded information concerning the proper time to pick
various herbs. And of course, being experts, they don’t always agree
with each other. However, most do agree that during specific
periods of the plant’s yearly growth and daily life cycle the
medicinal constituents are more fully developed and abundant in
certain parts of the plant than they are in others.

Plants are conveniently divided, for the purposes of the herbalist,
into the roots (and/or rhizomes), stem, inner and outer bark, leaves,
buds, flowers, saps and pitches, fruits, and seeds. These different
parts require different procedures for collection, drying, and
preservation.

Roots

----- PAGE 78 -----
Roots of biennial plants should be dug in the fall of the first year or
in the very early spring of the second year (they die in the fall of
the second year as the plant goes to seed). Perennial plants should
be dug late in the fall after the aerial parts have died back and the
sap has returned underground, or dig them very early in the spring
when the energy of the plant is still most active in the root. If you
dig them in the spring, do so immediately after the plant first
appears above the ground, before too much of the sap and vital
focus of the plant ascend from the root to manifest stem and leaf. In
general, perennial roots should not be gathered until after two or
three years’ growth, and in some cases the root should be allowed
three to seven years to develop full maturity. Roots of annual plants
are best dug immediately before the time of flowering. However,
annual plant roots are seldom used as medicines. For herbal
medicine-makers who are attentive to lunar as well as solar
influences, dig roots on the new moon.

Fleshy or succulent roots should be cut previous to drying to
expose a large surface area to the air. Cutting roots transversely or
longitudinally is more a matter of which you enjoy doing more;
however, I find that if before dehydrating them you cut roots
transversely in small sections, they are easier to grind into powder
later, especially those roots which are quite woody or fibrous. Root-
thizomes like Oregon Grape become very hard and woody when
dry, so they are best cut into very short sections while undried.
Smaller, more fibrous roots are best left whole.

If you are not using a root immediately to prepare a fresh,
undried plant extract, it is important that the root or other parts of
the plant be thoroughly dried. Whereas it is normally adequate to
dry most plants in a heat of about 100° F., in the case of Dandelion,
Burdock, and other succulent roots, apply a heat of about 150°, and
thoroughly dry them in order to destroy the eggs that may have
been deposited by insects. Neglecting this precaution may lead to
the rapid deterioration of the root by some very contented critters
to the dismay of a very discontented herbalist—not a pretty sight.

The smaller and more fibrous roots like those found with some
species of Echinacea and Valerian do better with less heat in drving.

----- PAGE 79 -----
As soon as these roots are dry, they should be placed in airtight
containers (especially roots which contain aromatic essential oils, in
order to best preserve these volatile components). It is best to use
these roots within a year, for their components, unlike those of
other roots, don’t survive storage for long periods of time.

Stems

Stems of herbaceous plants are best gathered after leaves appear
prior to flowering, unless the flowers are to be used along with the
stem as one does with Hyssop and California Poppy. Harvest any
aerial parts of a plant on or near a full moon.

Barks

Whenever possible, take any bark you wish to harvest from small
branches or from pruned branches. Some authorities recommend
gathering the bark of trees in the spring when the inner bark is
transferring the heaviest concentration of water, nutrients, and
medicinal components from the roots to the leaves, but I have
mixed feelings about this. I feel better harvesting the bark in the
fall. The mellow autumn return of the plant’s sap to the roots
doesn’t seem to bleed out of a wound so copiously as it does during
the spring when the sap bursts forth from its winter hibernation and
rises fervently to feed new leaves and flowers. Ask the tree. Barks of
shrubs are best harvested in the spring. At this time, the bark can be
more easily separated from the wood. Of course, never ring a plant
by stripping the bark completely around its girth. This will kill it.
Incisions should be limited to one-quarter or less of the limb’s
circumference. It is generally the inner bark that is used for making
medicine, so the epidermal outer bark is removed and the inner
bark dried. With some plants such as Devil’s Club (Oplopanax
horridus), the whole bark of the root and lower portion of the stalk
is used for medicine. This is an example of a plant that is very
aromatic and high in essential oil. and its root bark must be dried

----- PAGE 80 -----
and stored immediately to retain these volatile components. For
some plants like Oregon Grape (Berberis aquifolium), the whole
bark of the underground rhizome is harvested. Lunar-observant
harvesters usually take plant bark during the three-quarter waning
moon. If you ask, “Does that include root barks?” I’d have to say,
“That’s a good question; you'll have to get the answer from the
plant.”

We create win-win experiences when we learn to
harvest in a style that allows plant communities
to recover and thrive ... our hearts and herbal
pharmacies thrive as well.

Leaves

Leaves should be gathered when fully developed before the flower
blossoms develop, and certainly before the leaves have begun to
wither and fall. Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) and Artichoke (Cynara
scolymus) leaves are exceptions. Ginkgo leaves are best picked as
they are turning yellow, while they are still on the tree and
predominantly green (at least that is what the experts currently
believe). Artichoke leaves are picked in both the spring and the fall,
then blended, each season’s leaves presenting a little different
action than the other. These work well in combination.

Harvest leaves after the morning dew has dissipated and prior to
the more intense heat of the day. The heat of the midday sun
temporarily wilts the energy of many plants. If you notice that the
leaves of plants you wish to harvest are flagging from the heat,
refrain from harvesting them until the early evening when they
perk up again.

Herbs high in essential oils or resins such as Rosemary,
Eucalyptus, Peppermint, and Calendula should be picked in the
morning after the dew dries, during the hottest part of the year
when their oils and resins are most prominently developed.

Leaves of biennial plants are best picked in the spring of the

----- PAGE 81 -----
second year. In the first year biennials develop their root system
most extensively; in the spring of the second year, the juice shoots
up into the stalks and leaves on its way to ultimately create the
plant’s flowers and seeds. So, gather the leaves as the sap is
transiting through them. After the appearance of flowers, the leaves
begin to lose their activity. The juices are now preoccupied with
the development of the fruit and seeds.

The leaves of plants in the Labiaceae (mint) family (currently
called Lamiaceae by professional botanists) are more aromatic as
they approach the flowering tops, and the upper ones are
frequently gathered with the tops.

Flowers

Flowers are gathered just before they are fully developed. The scent
is more lively at this seductive stage and the color more vivid than
when the blossom is fully expanded. Once the blossom is fully open
and has successfully attracted a pollinating insect or has been
brushed by a pollen-laden breeze, the recently fertilized ovary
continues to grow at the expense of the accessory flower organs.
Choose a clear, dry morning after the dew has dissipated to harvest
flowers. Don’t wash flowers and buds. Shake them to remove
insects or debris. If you plan to dry tender, delicate blossoms, it is
preferable to dry them in the shade without artificial heat.

Saps and Pitches

Take these plant secretions in late winter or early spring. They are
usually flowing from a recent wound or have dried on the plant
after seeping from a past wound; so before, during, and on
completion of this harvest, give the tree a hug, as it can probably
use it.

Fruits

----- PAGE 82 -----
Fleshy fruits which are to be used to make exquisite juices,
flavoring syrups, cordials and elixirs are best plucked when they are
close to, but not quite ripe. Blackberries, Mulberries, Raspberries,
and Strawberries express a less glutinous and therefore more
agreeable juice when not perfectly ripe. The vegetable acids at this
stage are not yet completely transformed into sugar, rendering their
aroma fresher and stronger.

Seeds

Seeds are the least perishable portion of the plant. Therefore, they
can be and should be collected when they are perfectly ripe. They
require very little, if any, drying. One just needs to make sure the
seeds are not wet from dew or rain or any other external watering
when they are put into storage.

The Herb

This term generally refers to the whole plant, including the leaves,
stems, foliage, and sometimes the root, and all the parts of the plant
are used together (i.e, Scullcap, California Poppy, Cleaver,
Chickweed). The herb should be gathered when it is freshly in
flower. If the flower is not to be included, the herb should be
collected before the flowers appear, but after the foliage has
appeared. Most plants that have thick and branching stalks or stems
should be deprived of these before drying them or before using
them fresh undried.

DRYING HERBS

After you harvest an herb, the next task is to prolong its potency.
The most efficient way to accomplish this is to eat it on the spot, or
soon thereafter, in which case the fresh plant’s potency will merge
with your own. This is a choice technique to indulge when
harvesting palatable plants like Miner’s Lettuce, Chickweed.

----- PAGE 83 -----
Mullein flowers, and Nasturtium blossoms, or wild berries. You can
also choose to brew a fresh plant tea. However, if you intend to
postpone consumption until a later date, you must select other
procedures for preserving and storing your harvest. Dehydrating
(drying) plants, when done correctly, is a simple, excellent method
for maintaining plant part potencies.

Your goal and the mark of success in drying plants is to end up
with herbs that closely resemble the living plant in color, aroma,
taste, and texture. But, in order to achieve this, the drying procedure
must follow as soon after harvesting as possible. Trust me,
procrastination quickly teaches the wisdom of this counsel. But go
ahead, catch a movie that evening instead of tending to the St.
John’s Wort you spent the afternoon harvesting. Go canoeing and
leave your bag of fresh Nettles sitting around for a couple days. I
have. That’s how I learned what I know (of course the movie was
yet another Hollywood travesty, but the canoeing was an excellent
adventure and the local Nettle community most forgiving of my
negligence—it even showed me a slew of its other luscious patches
along the river’s banks).

There are a couple things to keep in mind when drying herbs. If
herbs are dried too quickly by using too much heat, they roast and
lose their potency. When herbs are dried too slowly, they can mold
and/or self-destruct by enzymatic actions, which also seriously
impoverishes their quality.

Overheating is the reason you often see commercial grade Red
Clover blossoms looking pale or brown in natural food store jars,
and Lavender blossoms, normally brilliant blue-violet on the stalk,
looking languid and gray within this same community of jars. Dried
properly, Red Clover blossoms are vibrant, pinkish red; Lavender
blossoms are a deep velvety lavender.

Once succulent herbs are fully dried there is no
longer enough water available in the vegetable
tissues to support microorganism _ lifestyles;
therefore the potency of one’s precious harvest is

----- PAGE 84 -----
greatly prolonged and herbalists are very happy.

Careless mishandling, in addition to improper heating, is another
reason you find numerous specimens of brownish green and hay-
colored dried leaves and stems in stores instead of the diversity of
vivid green colors you see in wild and domestic herb gardens. As I
mentioned above, a collection of properly handled and correctly
dried herbs will elicit the same diversity and sensual inspiration as
the garden’s collection of juicy green hues. Excessive age (even
though almost any herb will “lose it” over time in storage) is
usually the reason commercial grade Calendula blossoms often
resemble leftover pieces of used Kleenex tissue you pull from the
pocket of an overcoat not worn since the previous winter. Freshly
dehydrated Calendula blossoms dried properly display the same
bright yellows and intense oranges that they radiate while standing
fresh in the garden. I could go on and on describing more examples
of the inferior quality of commercial-grade bulk herbs found on
many (though not all) store shelves, but I’ll spare you the tedium; I
get miffed thinking about it anyway. Ailing folks buy these
exhausted plant materials, and of course, eventually conclude that
herbs don’t work. What can you expect? It’s like giving wilted
flowers to a friend to say you're sorry. Got to do better than that.
The abundance of these examples prompts me to say, “Once you
properly harvest and dry your own herbs and experience their rich
color, aroma, taste, and vitality, you will seldom be satisfied with
any dried herbs you find in a store.” How many restaurants have
you found that truly serve scrumptious “home-cooked meals?” It
doesn’t happen.

So, I have a few suggestions that will help you successfully
preserve your freshly harvested medicinal herbs and savory spices:

+ Herbs dry excellently in warm, shaded, well-ventilated areas.
Circulating dry air is essential. Never dry them in sunlight. With
tender, sensitive plants that you have harvested, the searing
intensitv of direct sunlight takes degenerating liberties often too

----- PAGE 85 -----
hideous to describe. Suffice it to “say, direct sunlight rapidly
depreciates good herb.

+ Prior to drying them, handle fresh green plants with a gentle touch
and process them as soon as possible. Many freshly picked green-
plant parts (Plantain leaves being a prime example) need to be
handled like fragile glass, for any bruising of these leaves will make
the plant turn brownish green upon drying due to the stimulation
(by bruising) and quickening (by heating) of enzyme activity.

+ Protect your drying herbs at night from the evening’s moist air.
The water in this air can rehydrate the drying herb and ignite
enzymatic action and can soon transform your harvest into that
brownish green vegetable carrion color I spoke of earlier. The
positive side of this experience is that these herbs are still suitable
for composting. And compost is good, just less heartbreaking when
made with kitchen waste and grass clippings.

+ Stuffing a paper bag full with fresh herb greens and/or blossoms
will often in a short time ignite the composting syndrome. So,
while transporting, place collections of freshly picked plant parts in
a cool and shady location and get them back out of the bag and
arranged in bundles for hanging or placed onto drying racks as soon
as possible. Don’t put this off. Don’t even think of “processing”
(washing, garbling, slicing) as a next step after “harvesting.” It is not
the next step; it is the second half—the completion—of the
harvesting act. The two experiences are one. Allow as minimal a
time interval as possible to occur between accomplishing both
halves.

Keep in mind that, with most herbs, it is quick and easy to harvest a
large quantity, but it usually takes considerably longer to process
these pickings. Profuse picking followed by procrastination (or
processing fatigue) is a notorious terminator of vast quantities of
potentially good-quality dried herb. For the sake of the plant
communities and to prevent vour own disappointment. try not to

----- PAGE 86 -----
over-harvest, and be determined to complete your day’s work. The
reward is great.

+ Plants are dry enough to be placed in storage only when all of the
parts are brittle. All parts must snap crisply when bent. So, in most
cases, when the stem and all thicker portions of plant pieces are
crisp and brittle, the herb is dry enough to be placed into a storage
container. Cut large roots to see if the centers are completely dry. If
any moisture remains in any portion of a plant, mold, rot, and
enzyme attacks will have their way with it during storage.

+ Stored herbs should be re-inspected occasionally. Dried herbs are
immensely efficient at finding and absorbing any moisture that is
lingering in storage containers. Check your stashes monthly, and if
the herbs don’t feel as crisp as they did before, dry them again. It
doesn’t take much time or effort to give them a desiccating booster.

Hanaine Bunpues anp Dryine Racks

Shaded, dry heat with good air circulation creates the optimal
condition for dehydrating fresh herbs. Any and all ingenious devises
that create these conditions are encouraged, and if successful,
applauded. The optimal air temperature to use for drying ranges
from 85 to a 100° F. (30 to 40° C.), depending on the plant and the
part being dried. When using drying-rack type contrivances, it is
best that the warm air circulates below as well as above the drying
plant parts. If you choose to bundle or string your herbs and hang
them to dry, the air needs to circulate freely around them. This
circulating heat carries away the plant’s moisture. If the warm air
that comes in contact with the moist plant parts can’t move on, but
instead lingers around the plant (incubating and _ stimulating
trouble), the plant parts will either mold, have an enzyme attack, or
rot, none of which leaves you with pleasant memories. Woodland
bare-bottom encounters with poison oak and poison ivy and
desiccating mishaps are notorious villains in herbal horror stories.
Bundling herbs and hanging them in a shaded location amidst

----- PAGE 87 -----
circulating warm air is a simple, inexpensive method to dry plants.
Use rubber bands for bindings; as plants dehydrate, they shrink and
often fall out of twine bindings. Don’t make the bundles too large,
because the plants located in the center of the bundle might be cut
off from the air flow, leading to mold, enzyme attack, rot. Dry or
drying flower heads that are laden with seed can be bundled
together, the heads stuck in a paper bag and secured, and the
bundles hung up or shaken, letting the seeds dislodge from the
heads and collect at the bottom of the bag.

Stringing herbs on a twine or heavy thread (clothesline-like)
works for drying smaller harvests or when drying more delicate
plants that are relatively light in weight. This bundling method
allows each plant to adequately touch the passing air currents.

Bundling Herbs for Drying

----- PAGE 88 -----
Bundling Technique for Collecting Herb Seed

Sheet Technique for Drying Herbs

Laying plants out on sheets in the shade is another method for
drying. I have never been too thrilled by this experience, because
you have to find tall grass to lav the sheet on so air can circulate

----- PAGE 89 -----
below as much as possible, or you need to find four corner posts to
tie the sheet corners to, and all in all it has always been kind of a
pain to contrive. So I haven’t used this method very often, only as a
last resort. Therefore, I am obviously not an expert in this process.
But I am sure there are many folks out there who love to dry plants
using a sheet, dish towel, scarf, or tablecloth; the possibilities are
endless. Avoid using sheets of newspaper, however. Save these for
toilet training puppies and for nesting gerbils. The printer’s ink on
newspapers can pollute the drying plants. It has polluted many fine
minds as well.

Drying racks are my preferred contraption for dehydrating herbs.
These are a series of shelves of screen network (old window screens
work well) stacked in layers at suitable distances from each other,
and placed in large, well-ventilated housings. Upon these racks the
herbs are carefully arranged so as to overlap as little as possible,
and allowed to remain subject to the desiccating action of the air
circulating below as well as above until completely dried. Avoid
using wire screens. The metal tends to react with certain
components of fresh plants. Use nylon screen instead. Actually, we
use stainless steel screen on some of our drying racks. What can I
say, give ’em a little time and “experts” will disagree with their
own selves too.

Stacked Screens for Drying Herbs

----- PAGE 90 -----
Dehydrator Used for Drying Herbs

Commercial (or homemade) dehydrators are readily available. At
one time I owned and used three wooden ones, one large one that
stood on our kitchen pantry floor, and two small ones that hung out
on our countertops. I’m a high energy enthusiast (“excessive” is
probably a more accurate term) and often require more drying
space than others normally do. Ordinarily one dehydrator is
sufficient for home use.

If you choose to use a dehydrator, I strongly suggest you locate it
in or near the kitchen (lab). Make it a convenient and ready-to-use
tool. Don’t store it under a bunch of stuff in a cluttered hall closet
that defies even the most courageous family member to enter.
Relate to your dehydrator as an essential, active appliance, like the
refrigerator, the stove, or the espresso maker. Give it a permanent
location in the active zone of the kitchen. This will be quite
practical and inspiring, encouraging you to become a prolific lay
herbalist. Each time you locate a medicinal plant near your home (a
Dandelion here, a Plantain there, a California Poppy, a cutting or
two of your neighbor’s neglected Rosemary bush, a Mullein leaf,
some fresh garden Thyme, autumn leaves from the Ginkgo tree that
stands down the road, and so on), you can readily harvest and dry
it, and place it in a storage jar for future use. In a short time you
can accumulate a year’s supply of medicines and spices derived
from neighborhood flora. You can do the same, of course, with any
garden plants and fruits that come your way. I’ve even dehydrated
leftover soup (soup leathers), an interesting challenge for the

----- PAGE 91 -----
creative “excessive.”

It’s best not to use ovens or microwaves to dry your plants. You
court disaster. There are too many gut-wrenching stories of people’s
impulsive cravings for chocolate chip cookies and preheating ovens
to 375° F. just after someone else in the household had carefully
laid his or her herbs in the oven to dry by the gentle heat of the
pilot light. And drying fresh herb in a microwave oven is about as
compatible as tank maneuvers on a golf green.

As soon as they are thoroughly dry, herbs should be processed
and prepared for storage. Dried herb that is ignored and left lying
or hanging around uncovered collects dust and cobwebs, and loses
its vital luster. Break down bundles, garble with timely fervor, strip
leaves, flowers, needles and/or berries from stems; do in general
what you need to do in order to separate out the usable parts of the
herb at hand. That’s what “garbling” is all about. Discard the
discolored, dead leaves and extraneous twigs, etc., as compost. It is
best to wait until after the herb has been dried to do all this
stripping and cutting. Mauling fresh herb, even gently, prior to
drying, frequently leads to discoloration due to damaging of plant
tissue. After the plant tissues are dehydrated, however, this no
longer poses a problem.

Pant Press Dryinc

Pressing a plant for no other reason than that it is irresistibly
beautiful, or for preserving a specimen to be identified later, can be
facilitated by using a field press book. This tool is simple to
construct and well worth the effort. Take time to make a good-
quality one. It will serve you well for many years, and can someday
transform itself into a prized and practical heirloom. Grandchildren
seldom ever forget the joy of collecting wildflowers with grandma
and grandpa and putting them in the press book. Your
grandchildren will probably want to keep your old press book after
you decide to move on to the Elysian fields to pick more flowers.
The plant pressings that vou make are suitable to arrange and

----- PAGE 92 -----
display in a home herbarium, a herbal scrapbook, a seasonal plant
diary (call it what you will), or mounted on handcrafted greeting
cards, arranged as inspired flower pictures, or used to embellish
lampshades, whatever. I find that herbal medicine is equally as
effective when gazed upon as art, or walked through in a garden, or
taken as a tea. Healing plant spirit can reside happily in all three.

A simple plant press is composed of three things: rigid wooden
board, absorbent paper, and maintained pressure.

To construct a field press book, first place on the floor a 3/8-inch
thick piece of 10-inch x 16-inch plywood (1/4-inch thick plywood
is too flimsy and 1/2-inch plywood is unnecessarily heavy and
bulky). Upon the plywood, stack three pieces of folded newspaper
(this can be a piece of corrugated cardboard instead), two layers of
paper towel or other white paper, three more pieces of newspaper
or cardboard, two more pieces of paper towel and so on, until you
have created a significant little pile. On top of this place a second
piece of 3/8-inch plywood (cut to the same dimensions as the piece
on the bottom). The plant specimen you collect are placed in
between each two pieces of paper towel.

VELCRO

S

Homemade Plant Press Book

After inserting your plants in this pile, lay three bricks or heavy
rocks on the pile to supply the pressure. In a short time the plants
will flatten out, the paper towels will absorb moisture, and the
warm location vou keep this press in will assist the drving process.

----- PAGE 93 -----
Give it a couple of weeks. Then check the plants, but very carefully.
They are now a thin, fragile commodity. Nine out of ten times, you
will be totally delighted by the results. However, things do happen
that are often hard to talk about, but you'll cope, and it will all
translate into meaningful experiences that you will learn from.
That’s Herbalism. Jot down some timely memoirs in the spiral
notebook that I will soon be discussing. These notes will remind
you what to do differently next time. It’s good to make a mistake; it
means you're courageously pushing your limits by pursuing creative
new adventures, but it’s dumb to make the same mistake twice. I
can attest to that; I can even attest to doing it three times.

To streamline this press book, so you can carry it with you on
hikes and plants walks, you can trade in the bricks for 4 feet of
Velcro® and 34 inches of 1—inch wide cotton strap. You can see
how and where to affix them in the illustration on this page. The
Velcro binds tightly together the two boards (and everything in
between). Place your plants in between the paper towels as
described above, but this time instead of laying bricks on the pile,
kneel on the pile using your body weight to supply the pressure,
and while kneeling wrap the bristly part of both Velcro straps
around and affix them to the furry parts. You can get up now. The
Velcro will sustain the memory of your body weight (could the
space age exist without duct tape and Velcro?).

I suggest embellishing this basic field press book with cotton
strap handgrips affixed to the boards (as illustrated) and a spiral
bound notebook that has been stapled to one of the rigid boards
which gives you a field desktop on which to write in the notebook.
The pages of this notebook are useful for scribbling field notes and
writing plant spirit-inspired lines of poetry. The 1-inch cotton
straps stapled to the outside of both boards form handles with
which to carry the whole works—a curious woodland briefcase for
carting leaves and flowers.

GARBLING HERBS

----- PAGE 94 -----
Garbling is an exercise in the high art of paying attention to detail.
Alertness to the details of harvesting and medicine-making is one of
a herbalist’s most creative and prosperity-promoting allies. Garbling
(the word can be found the dictionary; I didn’t make it up), when
done correctly, is a meticulous, self-satisfying chore (a Virgo turn-
on), the object of which is to remove all excess stems and twigs,
impurities and adulterants, and decayed and deteriorated portions
of the plant, which not only mar appearance but are apt to
contaminate the usable portions. One also removes any small fauna
found crawling on the goods. They were probably minding their
own business, harvesting the plant for their personal agenda before
you muscled in. Be kind by setting them free; they were also most
likely participating in the plant’s pollination conspiracy.

Garbling is an unsung backstage activity akin to the kneading of
bread, the curing of firewood, proofreading manuscripts, and the
arduous pulling of taffy. Mindful garbling transforms good-quality
herb into great-quality herb and great-quality herb into primo herb.
All superior-quality herb, by definition, is always meticulously
garbled. Garbling makes herbal things better. It is appropriately
undertaken anytime before, during, and after the drying process.
Garbling herb is well performed in solitude, where it provides a
prime opportunity to simultaneously garble one’s attitude and
beliefs about life. Yet I find it equally pleasant when performed in
an intimate community atmosphere, wherein it attracts uplifting
companionship and leisurely conversation. Its pace is similar to that
of quilting and whittling, walking with little children, basket
weaving, and chopping the fruits and vegetables at a potluck
dinner.

STORING HERBS

Light, heat, moisture, and exposure to air deteriorate dried
botanicals. Store your dried herbs in airtight, light-shielding, dry
containers that will keep out insects and rodents. I prefer to use
canning jars or clean recycled jars (especially the amber brown jars)

----- PAGE 95 -----
that have wide mouths and tight-fitting lids. Coffee cans also make
good containers, and, in some short-term situations, paper or plastic
bags are appropriate containers. Do whatever you have to do to
store these herb-filled containers in a cool, dark place.

Laseuinc Heras ror Srorace

Label each container clearly including the name you use for the
plant, the location of the harvest, and the date. (As I mentioned
elsewhere, stored herbs can reabsorb moisture in time. Inspect your
dried herb stashes routinely and re-dry them as necessary.) It is a
reasonable idea to also note the general uses and dosage of the
ingredients. This is a good method to refresh not only your memory
of the herb’s virtues but also a subtle way to pique the interest of
casual onlookers. They in turn go out and buy books like this.

When using jars as containers, it is prudent to secure the labels to
the jars instead of to the lids. Jar lids are openly polygamous and
have no qualms whatsoever about being affixed to any fitting jar
that comes along. I’ve been shocked by this conduct a number of
times. If this simple precaution is taken, mislabeling jar contents
can be almost entirely prevented.

Like fresh plants, dried herbs are organic entities that have
various and differing tenures of stability. You seldom find a plant
that retains its full potency indefinitely. Therefore, although there
are exceptions, the generally accepted rules for storage time of
herbs are as follows:

+ Leaves, green parts, and flowers, up to one year
+ Roots, seeds, and barks, two to three years

+ Broken, crushed, or powdered herbs lose their value more rapidly
than whole, uncut herbs.

Enjoy your garden pharmacy; garble passionately;

----- PAGE 96 -----
keep an eye on those jar lids.

BUYING HERBS

First of all, ask to speak to the herbalist on staff. If there is no
herbalist working at the store, act astonished (they'll get the
message); then do your own sleuthing. Ask where the herbs came
from. Are they organically cultivated or wildcrafted, who grew
them or who harvested them? Are any of the species they offer for
sale threatened, and if so were they harvested consciously, etc., etc.
You get the idea (refer to Rule #1 in “Rules (Proposed) of Medicine
Making,” Chapter Twenty-Five). Encourage the herb merchant to
buy from green-conscious suppliers. You’ll probably find that many
do, and they’ll appreciate and respect you for inquiring. Those that
don’t buy from green-conscious sources may learn something from
you.

Now check the store’s herb stock. If the dried herbs displayed on
the shelves are contained in clear glass jars sitting in direct sunlight,
shop elsewhere; that’s inexcusable. If the herbs on the shelves all
look about the same color, they’re probably “commercial grade”
herb and not good quality. Shop elsewhere (refer to Rule #2 in
“Rules (Proposed) of Medicine Making,” Chapter Twenty-Five).
Varieties of herbs as they are growing and co-mingling in the
garden or in the wilds naturally show a diverse array of colors and
shades of green. They will continue to show a similar diversity of
color when properly harvested, dried, and displayed in jars.

If the herb store passes the above examination, proceed to the
taste and smell tests. Upon removing the lid from a jar of herb, you
should smell a fine herbal aroma, and when a tiniest pinch of the
dried herb is placed upon your tongue and slowly chewed and/or
sucked on, it should provide a distinct flavor. Not necessary a
yummy one, but a significant one. Good herb has color, aroma, and
flavor. If all seems harmonious to your senses and to your inquiry,
shop in this store. They probably have good herb to sell you; settle
for nothing less (remember Rule #2).

----- PAGE 97 -----


----- PAGE 98 -----
BitabaMe Ver shave Vey aVevey at stave

The Western symbols of medical power, knowledge, and
competency standardized in mass consciousness by nineteenth and
twentieth century “scientific” fanfare are the images used
extensively by marketers in today’s medical/pharmaceutical
industry to communicate their perspective that all things are made
better by the science and the high-tech industry. These same
nouveau-archetype symbols are being adopted by much of today’s
herbal products industry to suggest that they also produce (herbal)
commodities that the common person—who does not have access
to the company’s advanced technology and special (scientific)
knowledge—can’t match. During the past five years, my mailbox
has found itself stuffed with full-color, high-gloss, printed literature
picturing multi-story, sprawling “modern facilities,” full of towering
stainless steel vats sitting on polished linoleum floors, peopled by
white-coated lab technicians peering through microscopes,
operating computerized analysis equipment, and holding intricately
designed lab-ware, testing and analyzing sterile beakers filled with
colored herbal liquids and aseptic herbal powders. This attempt to
impress “the mailing list” with the company’s mysteriously
advanced abilitv to produce herbal medicine is all about herbal

----- PAGE 99 -----
marketing.

Mind you, there are some excellent herb companies active in the
marketplace run by skilled herbalists whose intent is to make high-
quality herbal products and a good living while also empowering
their customers. These folks provide premium-quality products
while evoking a marketing atmosphere of integrity and sound
herbal education. I praise and honor these folks. However, the
rising trend for many competing companies is to rampantly display
medical cliché symbols accompanied by comparative charts that
applaud their brand’s self-extolled “superior delivery systems,” their
“clinically tested,” “fast-active,” “full-spectrum” this and “power-
herb,” “doctor-approved,” “standardized” that. Please realize that
the commercially correct terms and symbols being used reflect
marketing strategies employed in general to overawe consumers
and specifically to enhance sales; they are “business as usual.” So, in
face of all this, I’m strongly suggesting you not allow yourself to
become overwhelmed or disempowered by the marketers’ razzie
dazzle. None of this glossy-slick corporate propaganda really has
anything to do with you, your health, or Herbalism.

The home-tech environment of your cottage kitchen is where
Herbalism lives. Herbalism thrives in the lay communities and
hand-tended gardens of self-reliant plant people who cherish and
practice their independence. Let the herbal marketers rave on, but
know it is in your home that you can access and create for yourself
the finest, most effective herbal products. In the simple
environment of your domestic dwelling, you can fully empower
yourself with experiences of functional herbal knowledge and
competency; and all you need to help you do this is some basic
knowledge and your own juicy kitchen-lab, supplied with the
following equipment.

JARS AND BOTTLES

Jars are used to hold, blend, shake, seal, and store herbal stuff.
Quart-size and pint-size canning iars are excellent. especially

----- PAGE 100 -----
because their lids are easily renewed. Acquire a couple gallon-size
glass jars, along with a diversity of miscellaneous-sized jars that
reside and function in your kitchen-lab’s container tribe.

Bottles are used for holding dried herbs and finished extracts.
Amber glass bottles are the best to use, for they provide a shade-
like shield to filter out damaging light that can deteriorate herbal
material during storage.

If I may interject a suggestion here: Herbalism at its best
embraces theater, and I recommend that, whenever possible, you
consider doing things a little differently when you package and
present your herbal wares. As a budding herbalist, don’t accept false
limitations. To do so only betrays your human potential. Break
from the ordinary; as you collect common bottles for practical use,
seek wild, colorful, whimsically shaped bottles and other types of
bizarre containers as well. Use these to house and transport your
herbal preparations. Render your herbal craft unique and
fascinating. Why not? It’s all part of the enthusiasm and charisma of
an herbal medicine show. Remember, when you make medicines at
home and distribute your own herbal products to family and
friends, you don’t have the FDA (forever dull administration)
editing your labels, monitoring your moves, or standardizing your
panache. Herbalism thrives freely in the home—you can be as
elaborate, outrageous, and nonconforming as you want. Package as
you will. Have fun, give your herbal medicines a magical air. They
will entertain and entice, manifesting ancillary wonders in a special
way.

RUBBER SPATULAS

Wide ones and narrow ones to help get every bit of herbal material
out of any and all sized containers. It’s akin to garbling and a
gesture of respect. These healing, nourishing substances are too
precious to waste.

----- PAGE 101 -----
ELECTRIC COFFEE GRINDER

These post-Edison mortar and pestles provide a high-rpm
pulverizing blade. Electric coffee grinders are relatively inexpensive
tools that are excellent to use for powdering small portions of dried
herb. Keep in mind that these are designed to be coffee bean
grinding machines. They powder most herbs in good fashion, but
they are not built to grind exceptionally hard materials, and they
burn out when pushed too far. One has to be discriminating,
somewhat gentle, and patient while using them; hardly as patient,
however, as one has to be when using a pre-Edison mortar and
pestle to grind and powder herbs.

MORTAR AND PESTLE

These are used more for creating atmosphere now that herbalists
have electric grinders to do their pulverizing and powdering deeds.
The most useful mortars and pestles are those that an herbalist can
use to help prepare materials for further grinding in their electric
grinder; these are the mortar and pestles designed specifically for
contusion. They are made of brass, iron, or bell-metal which ideally
has been molded into a deep, slender design. These tools can be
used to pulverize roots, barks, and other tough woody materials by
smashing down on them with the metal pestle. The narrow
diameter and exaggerated depth of these devices help prevent the
plant materials from flying out of the container when impacted by
the pestle. A cover of stiff leather a little larger in diameter than the
rim of the mortar is a further deterrent. This leather collar allows
the pestle’s free movement in the process of contusion.

I recommend that you attain an archetypal, white porcelain
Wedgwood mortar and pestle to display on a prominent shelf or
countertop. These were designed for the more gentle act of
trituration, which you will perform at times (see “Trituration,”
Chapter Twenty-Five), rather than contusion. This classic symbol
visually connects an herbalist’s spirit to the grand heritage of the

----- PAGE 102 -----
Galenic art and science of herbal medicine-making.

Deep contusion mortar and pestle with the leather collar

MEASURING CUPS AND/OR GRADUATED CYLINDERS

I find it practical to rely on plastic graduated cylinders. If you have
any klutziness in you at all, or if you suspect you might have some
questionable glass karma, the glass ones are too risky to use on a
daily basis. I possess some beautiful Pyrex® glass cylinders that sit
handsomely in my lab. They’re an inspiration to behold; but I do
most of my work using three plastic measuring cylinders (100 ml,
250 ml, and 500 ml sizes). In my case, it’s definitely the klutz
factor. And in the herb school lab we use plastic exclusively. Our
lab floor is made of cement; and glass measuring devices disappear
faster than Kleenex in a hayfever ward.

----- PAGE 103 -----
LID GRIPS

You'll need three of these to help you loosen jar lids that you
previously tightened and allowed to sit around for a while.
Inevitably, you will find it extremely difficult to remove the lid
when you want to get back inside the jar. (This doesn’t seem to
occur as often when one employs a small kitchen-witch to reside
inside or nearby the pharmacy area of the home.) When this
situation does occur, however, what you do is put one lid grip on
each side of the jar and place this between your thighs (I’m being
serious here), and use the third grip to take hold of the lid. Squeeze
your legs tightly against the jar sides and grimace as you firmly
grasp and twist the obstinate lid counterclockwise. The lid will
loosen. If it doesn’t, repeat the above and add some light profanity.
You might want to make the grimace a little more intense too. This
always works for me. Using this ritual, ’'ve never been denied entry
into a jar of macerating herb.

STIRRING DEVICES

I recommend acquiring a 12- to 14-inch long by 1/2-inch diameter
piece of wooden dowel, some 12-inch long wooden spoons, strong
wooden chopsticks, and other stirring things that have some heft
and can work well to mix and blend dense, mushy concoctions. In a
short time, you will discover and adopt a favorite stick as your
stirring companion. This relationship will thrive for years in a sea
of activity and mutual appreciation.

STRAINERS

These are absolutely necessary to help separate depleted marcs
from saturated menstruums. Acquire a variety of sizes and meshes. I
use 4-inch diameter and 6-inch diameter strainers most often, but I

----- PAGE 104 -----
often find that both smaller and larger ones are more helpful for
specific jobs. At some point release the funds for one of those
svelte, stainless steel, probably European-made, overpriced strainers
that you can find in gourmet kitchen supply stores. The very fine
mesh they provide is most useful for specific filtering tasks that will
arise. The equally overpriced gold mesh coffee filters are useful too.
You'll enjoy acquiring these tools, one by one, as you need them.
Sieves and flour sifters of various-sized mesh also assist one to
produce uniform-grade powders when powdering dried herb (see
“Powdering,” Chapter Twenty-Five).

DOUBLE BOILER AND A FLAME SPREADER

These are most useful for creating gentle-heat water baths and for
modifying the heat coming off a stove-top burner. This equipment
is useful for low heat extraction processes (i.e., preparing an oil
infusion by using the digestion method).

FUNNELS

These are obviously used to get liquids (or dried herbs) into a
container through a small opening without also scattering the
material around the floor and countertop. I keep a variety of
different sized—very small to quite large—standard funnels
available for use, along with a wide-throated funnel device
designed to help fill canning jars. I also bought a large plastic
gasoline funnel at an auto supply store. It has a deep holding basket
which is about 12 inches in diameter and a long funnel tube which
I cut off about 1 1/2 inches from where it attaches to the basket.
This now gives me a 3-inch diameter opening coming out of the
basket. This modified device serves as a perfect funnel for
transferring large amounts of dried bulk herb from paper or plastic
bags into storage jars, which is also what I use the canning funnel
for when relocating smaller quantities of dried herb.

----- PAGE 105 -----
MIXING BOWLS

These will be useful for a wide variety of purposes. I hold
passionate affection for a 20-inch diameter wooden bowl that I
found at a yard sale. I use it predominantly, even when it is
obviously too big, just because it is so big—and wooden. I also
recommend thin-gauge stainless steel bowls (they usually sell as sets
of three concentric, differing diameters). They are available at just
about every hardware store and kitchen supply section in town.
Large bowls are useful for garbling fresh and dried herbs, for
blending and rubbing dried herb compounds, for devising water
baths, and for making adequate amounts of chocolate chip cookie
dough when needed. I avoid putting oily stuff, like a cube of butter
and chocolate chips, in my (great big) wooden bowl—it makes the
wood permanently sticky, which complicates things when working
with dry, powdery plant materials.

SCALES

Get yourself a metric scale. You can buy cheap, funky ones at
kitchen supply and department stores, but the problem with these
is that they normally don’t register very accurately on the light end
of the scale (where you will probably be doing much of your
work), and they usually come with an absurdly small holding
container that is not very practical when one is attempting to weigh
unruly, bulky botanicals. So, I suggest that in time you buy a triple
beam scale that is accurate down to a gram weight and can
counterbalance a substantially sized holding basket. You'll
appreciate this expenditure, and you'll enjoy your affluence. Pottery
and ceramic supply stores sell triple beam scales. There are electric
(battery-powered) scales also available in kitchen supply stores.
They are accurate, cheaper than triple beams, and useful when
working on the road.

----- PAGE 106 -----
Celebrate the New Age—go metric.

POURING DEVICES

Glass percolator coffee pot bottoms are my favorite and most
sought after device to use for pouring herbal liquids. I get pushier
than the teens in line for fake IDs when I see one of these well-
spouted containers sitting as yet unclaimed in a yard sale or at a
flea market. These glass sculptures were obviously designed by
folks who knew what is required to pour blissfully with carefree
confidence. The vast majority of spouted measuring cups and other
spouted apparatus sold in stores today are obviously designed by
the same folks who put together computer software manuals; they
(the manuals and the pouring spouts) are ineffectual, having
virtually nothing whatsoever to do with anyone else’s reality. I
suggest you hunt around for containers that have functional pouring
spouts; shun and discard those that don’t. Herbal extracts are too
precious to squander as spillage and drip-page, and one’s temper is
too painful to lose on a routine basis.

TURKEY BASTER

These are useful for decanting fresh-plant oil infusions and will be
discussed further in the oil infusion chapter (vegan basting syringes
are available at health food stores).

FILTER PAPERS

Purchase the unbleached basket style that are used for making
coffee. Place these in a wire mesh strainer to hold them while you
pour your extract through to filter out any unwanted particulate.
You may want to strengthen these filters by using two at a time.
Avoid the “cone style” filter papers, which are glued on the bottom
and side. The glue might be soluble in certain solutions.

----- PAGE 107 -----
COTTON MUSLIN CLOTH

Locate a tough, unbleached cotton muslin in a fabric store. Be sure
to launder it before using to rid it of the sizing found in most new
cloth fabric. Muslin is used for pressing out the marc either by hand
or with a mechanical press.

CALCULATOR

This is useful for doing the math when formulating a menstruum
for weight/volume extraction. Pencil and paper work quite well for
this too.

YOGURT THERMOMETER

This is used to monitor the temperature during the digesting
process of extraction. Yogurt thermometers hover comfortably
around the 100° F. zone, which is ideal for preparing oil infusions.

LABELING MATERIALS

Use whatever materials you require to create and affix labels that
conform to your personal standards of aesthetics and whimsy, and
the instruments to write essential information upon these engaging
tags. Indelible inks are recommended.

PAPER TOWELS

The immediate availability of paper towels on demand is essential
in order to maintain any semblance of sanity while making oil
infusions and while pouring salves. In spite of what I said in the
Prologue, this is a truth.

----- PAGE 108 -----
SPONGES AND RAGS

Have on hand a large collection of sponges and rags for spill
control and general cleanup. A natal moon in the constellation of
Virgo dictated this suggestion; and this is merely a suggestion.
Impetuous, disorderly, hang-loose, rumpled herbal medicine-
making is good too.

And at some point along your acquisition journey, you may want
to acquire the following.

DEHYDRATOR

In the long run, this is probably the most important tool a domestic
herbalist will obtain, and it is worth the expense to buy one that
has a fine-tuned temperature control. I recommend that once you
acquire a dehydrator, you give it a prominent place in the active
area of your kitchen-lab. Each time you come across a wild plant
that is harvestable, you can take it home and place it in the
dehydrator, dry it, and in a hassle-free, short time add it to your
annual stash of that particular plant-medicine. Dandelion,
Chickweed, Plantain, Calendula blossoms, Red Clover blossoms,
Cornsilk, and so forth can be accumulated relatively effortlessly this
way, and by autumn you will have acquired a substantial, high-
quality herbal pharmacy in your home. Inevitably, within a couple
of solar cycles, buying herbs from a store will have become merely
a vaguely disturbing memory.

BLENDER/JUICER

Get the original Vita-Mix® 3600 Plus stainless steel model which
has a 72-ounce stainless steel container (some containers come with
a spigot, some don’t; they both work). I have found these in yard
sales, used-stuff stores, and flea markets; and some folks have
acauired theirs by putting up wanted signs at large health food

----- PAGE 109 -----
stores. These machines will probably be showing up more
frequently now that the Vita-Mix corporation is marketing its newly
designed polycarbonate container. The previous 3600 Plus Vita-Mix
model, which is all stainless steel except for the plastic “two-piece
Action Dome” that attaches to the top of the container, costs about
$300 to $400 when purchased new. I’ve found them used and in
excellent shape for $20, $60, and $150 Canadian in British
Columbia; however, for the work this tool does, it is worth the
$300. This is the best domestic designed machine I’ve found for
powdering herbs and for blending fresh-plant extracts. It is a
powerful, versatile, and very durable product that is well worth its
cost to an inspired medicine-maker. We use these machines in the
California School of Herbal Studies lab, where they have served
many productive, but not always gentle, herb students over the past
20 years. The new model juicers that Vita-Mix now manufactures
have “space—age material” plastic containers (which I’m told will
also fit the older 3600 model motor base); I don’t know, however,
how well these will hold up to the beating of grinding herbs. The
all-stainless steel machines used to come with a five-year warranty.
(Actually, way back, they used to have a lifetime warranty.) But this
most recent model comes with only a one-year warranty. I guess the
space-age material is still in its experimental stage.

YOGURT MAKER

This is well designed for macerating small quantities of oil infusions
at a low heat.

CROCK POT

This would be a superb warming (digestion) vessel for making oil
infusions if it would maintain a heat of 100° F. But in my
experience these cooking devices do not go lower than 150° F.,
which in mv opinion (others will disagree) is too high a

----- PAGE 110 -----
temperature for making good oil infusions. Perhaps one could
employ a clever electrician to somehow derange a crock pot’s
rheostat, so it will consent to remain around 100° F.; this would
then be a superb tool for this purpose.

FOOD PROCESSOR

This is not a priority, but if you have one or can easily acquire one,
it is an excellent tool for mincing fresh garlic and other non-woody,
fresh plant parts in preparation for extraction.

----- PAGE 111 -----


----- PAGE 112 -----
One can imagine how the first sparks of our vast herbal heritage
were ignited. The inaugural attempts at the extraction of herbal
properties were probably made soon after our deep ancestors
discovered that certain plant materials were useful as food for
nourishment, agents for altering consciousness, and medicines to
alleviate physical and mental discomfort. Herbs collected for these

----- PAGE 113 -----
purposes soon dried out, and it is logical to assume that our
ancestral foreherbalists made attempts to restore the succulent
qualities of these plants by steeping them in water. From this act, it
was a simple step to discover that soaking plants in certain liquids
dissolved the therapeutic powers of the plants and allowed their
use in a more convenient, less cumbersome, and often more
palatable form.

Applying heat was probably the subsequent step in the evolution
of more specialized methods of soaking (macerating) with water.
Therein the fundamental extraction processes of warm infusion,
decoction, and digestion were devised. Later, the superior
preservative properties and in some circumstances the superior
solvent properties of vinegar and wine were recognized. Thus
followed in natural progression the rudimental development of
herbal extraction and medicine-making by human beings on this
planet. It all germinated and evolved within the domestic arena of
our common ancestors.

Concentrated ethyl alcohol was not available to the ancient
herbalists as a solvent/preservative for maceration until after the
twelfth century, when it was derived by the distillation of wine. It is
not clear exactly when this happened, but by the sixteenth century
alcohol-based tinctures and “quintessences” were attaining
widespread use.

With the inflation of western reductionist science in the
eighteenth and nineteenth century, paralleled by the pursuit of
“rational” drug therapy in the allopathic medical arena, the
processes of extraction and the isolation of plants’ so-called “active
ingredients” commanded the focus of a burgeoning pharmaceutical
industry. The herbalist’s inclination to summon and commune with
the spiritual essence of a plant conjoined with a ceremony of
appreciating the full array of the plant’s physical and non-physical
nature receded, along with the sightings of faeries and unicorns,
into myth, magic, and “folkloric fancy.”

Concurrently, the common practice of medicine-making in the
home and the layman’s practice of self-medicating with simple
plant preparations declined to near extinction. As commercialized

----- PAGE 114 -----
pharmaceutical technology evolved through this era in concert with
allopathic medical theory and practice, the development of ever
more technologically complex methods of extraction such as
percolation, diacolation, mulcolation, and evacolation were
devised.

This development of ever more complex systems of extraction
has been a highly creative adventure in the world of pharmacy, and
this has served the purpose of many. But all and all, for those
individuals who are once again inclined to focus on the profound
subtle energy of the plant more than on the technologies of physical
extraction, no advancement beyond the fundamental rituals that
derive infusions, decoctions, concentrates, and tinctures is required.
Undeniably, extraction techniques that are more technologically
elaborate or complex than these have provided many an
adventurous herbalist with inspired enjoyment and the pleasure of
satisfying their technological curiosity. Obviously, these laboratory
furtherances have also allowed medical industries to produce plant-
derived pharmaceutical drugs and herbal industries to manufacture
standardized quasi-drugs. However, the potent simplicities of the
fundamental extraction processes we will pursue in this home
manual require no further complexity to serve the purposes of a
conscientious lay herbalist. The simple alchemical acts of infusing,
decocting, digesting, tincturing, and compounding medicinal plants
are as sublime, complete, and transformative today as they were
when our ancestors originally devised them.

Regardless of the technology employed, the intent and joy of the
medicine-maker coupled with the consciousness of the harvester’s
relationship with the plant remains the truly empowering heart and
the salient spirit of Herbalism and herbal medicine-making.
Uncomplicated, ardent medicine-making is as fundamental to the
art and science of Herbalism as simple passionate cooking is to the
art and science of nutrition. High technology has never increased
the nutritional power of good food, simply prepared.

EXTRACTION

----- PAGE 115 -----
The purpose for extraction is to draw out an herb’s unique
organization of chemical components along with its distinctive
energetic virtues, and render these organic idiosyncrasies into a
form that is more easily absorbable, possibly more concentrated,
more palatable, and more convenient to administer than the
original unprocessed form of the plant.

Maceration, or soaking a plant in a solvent, is performed to draw
into a liquid solution the soluble constituents of the plant and to
separate this solution from the insoluble residue or the marc. This
liquid extract can be dispensed directly as is, or it can be readily
incorporated into other delivery vehicles by mixing it with honeys,
syrups, waxes, foods, and so on.

Alcohol, water-alcohol, and to some extent glycerin extracts offer
the lay herbalist an added benefit of a greatly prolonged
preservative action.

Extraction allows us to have our herbs for a long
time and makes it easier for us to eat them too.

Waar Goes on Durine tHe Extraction Process

When a freshly harvested plant is dried, the moisture present in the
tissues evaporates. The walls of the cells and the ducts shrink, and
at the same time the substances inside the cells previously held in
solution by the water crystallize or dry to a solid amorphous mass.
Later, when this dehydrated plant is immersed in a water (aqueous)
or water-alcohol (hydro-alcoholic) menstruum, the above process is
reversed. In this instance, the menstruum is absorbed, causing the
cells to swell and break, leading to direct contact with the
menstruum and the soluble materials inside the cells go back into
solution.

In the case of dried plants whose tissues are relatively soft or
spongy, such as Burdock root or Nettle root, this process takes place
comparatively fast: however. when a plant material is hard or

----- PAGE 116 -----
callous, such as dried WildYam, Stone Root, Oregon Grape root, or
Turmeric, much more time is required. Before the tissues of these
plants can absorb a sufficient amount of menstruum, they must be
broken up into fine pieces in order to expose their softer internal
tissues to the action of the solvent. This is also required when
extracting many seeds and leaves. Designed to shed water in nature,
the walls of the outer (ectodermal) layers of these particular plant
parts are impervious to water, but the walls of their inner
(mesodermal and endodermal) cells are permeable and readily
permit a solvent to diffuse through them and to dissolve the soluble
portion of their contents. Therefore, the outer layer of cells of most
leaves and seeds must be broken down like the hard tissues of
plants mentioned above.

Regardless of the materials of which the cell walls of any plant
part are constructed, the passing of the soluble constituents through
the walls can be a slow process, but it can be quickened by
increasing the surface area of the plant before extraction is begun.
Again, this is accomplished (sometimes easily, sometimes not) by
powdering the dried plant. This not only greatly increases the area
that can be exposed to the solvent, but also causes many of the
ectodermal surface cells to be broken, so that the menstruum can
come in direct contact with the cells’ contents. The application of
heat will also hasten the process of passing a plant’s soluble
constituents through the cell walls, and this is what the specialized
maceration processes of hot infusion, decoction, and digestion are
all about (we’ll discuss those soon). It may be necessary in some
circumstances, however, to avoid high temperatures during an
extraction process. Heat will destroy enzymes which are sometimes
desired; it will drive off volatile components, such as essential oils;
it will coagulate plant proteins which can impede the extraction
process; and it can dissolve out too much of the gums and proteins.

In extraction of dehydrated plant material by maceration, the
dried plant material is normally powdered before applying a
menstruum. The powdered plant is then allowed to remain in
contact with a relatively large volume of menstruum until the
extractive matter is distributed uniformlv throughout the liquid. The

----- PAGE 117 -----
saturated liquid is then poured off (decanted) and the marc
(insoluble pulp) pressed or squeezed to procure any remaining
liquid.

When percolation is used as the extraction process, a column of
menstruum is allowed to flow down through a body of uniformly
packed powdered herb carrying the extractant along with it as it
exits the percolator cone, leaving behind the fully exhausted marc.

If instead, fresh undried plant material is being extracted by
maceration, the menstruum is poured onto the plant and the entire
mixture is pulverized in a blending machine (like an herbal
smoothie) for an adequate time to break down the cell walls and
expose them to the solvent action of the menstruum, or the fresh
plant material can be simply chopped and macerated in pure ethyl
alcohol, which acts to dehydrate the plant, drawing the plant juices
and their chemical constituents into solution (more about these
techniques later).

Before we get into a discussion of plant constituents and their
main solvents, I would like to circumvent those details and give you
an overview of what I consider the most efficient extraction
technique for making superlative herbal medicine.

Again I stress, make detailed notes for yourself.
Refer to the sample Extract Information Form for
medicine-making notes found in Appendix D.
Modify this sample form to suit your own unique
style and method of experimentation. Making
herbal medicine is a very personal and sensual art
and craft; don’t hesitate to be adventurous and
possibly blow it on occasion, just be sure you
make notes. Ultimately, your experience, which is
a creative integration of your successes and your
mistakes, is your best teacher and finest trainer.
Enjoy the plants, savor your extracts, and prize
your notes.

----- PAGE 118 -----
Tue Sensuat Approacs To Successrut TINcTURING AND

Orer Merxons or Herpat Exrracrion

1. The most important step. Acquire organically cultivated or
ethically wildcrafted, meticulously garbled, high-quality herb
that flaunts rich color, a deep aroma, and vivid flavor, because,
please take out your stone notebook and etch the following:
“My herbal extracts can never be any better than the quality of
the herbs I begin with.” (the 2nd rule of good herbal medicine-
making).

2. Prepare the most suitable and efficient menstruum you can
based on your previous experience and your knowledge of the
plant properties. This information will be discussed in the
following chapter. Remember to make detailed notes about the
menstruums you formulate (the 4th rule of good medicine-
making).

3. Make your tincture or other form of extract. (Refer to
Chapters Eight through Seventeen.)

4. Now, use your common senses. Smell your finished extract,
draw some of it into a glass dropper (pipette) and observe
closely its color, put a drop or two of it on your tongue and
taste it ... Mmm! Or maybe, Yuck! (“Yuck!” is not necessarily
bad, but merely intense or surprisingly unusual.) If your settled
extract does not remain cloudy (at first most extracts appear
cloudy before suspended sediment settles out), and it smells
and tastes like the plant it was derived from, you’ve
formulated a good menstruum for the herb at hand.

5. Dispense your herbal preparation. If it performs as you want
it to, you’ve made a good extract; you have your herbal

----- PAGE 119 -----
tonic/medicine. If you’re not totally pleased, next time (and
maybe the time after that) modify your menstruum until you
are pleased; we’ve all done this many times; experience is the
story of one’s venture into the unknown.

----- PAGE 120 -----


----- PAGE 121 -----
MENSTRUUM MENU—7 LIQUIDS TO USE AS SOLVENTS

There are seven liquids readily available to us which we will
discuss for use as menstrua in this manual. They are water, wine,
vinegar, ethyl alcohol, alcohol-water mixture. oil, and glycerin, vour

----- PAGE 122 -----
basic community “potluck” components.

These seven menstrua are common kitchen supplies (except
maybe the glycerin) that are abundant, easy to acquire, safe to use,
and for our purposes, excellent solvents for making liquid extracts
and herbal medicine in a home lab. In fact, most of these seven
liquids are the principal solvents the pharmaceutical and herb
industry professionals use as their primary menstrua (so much for
that proprietary “scientific” mystery). There are many other
menstrua used by these industries also, such as acetone, chloroform,
methyl alcohol, denatured alcohol, amylic alcohol, acetic ether,
sulfuric ether, hexane, and carbon disulfide. In my belief system,
bodily contact with these particular solvents is neither safe nor
pleasant. They are quite irritating to the healthy flow of a human
being’s life force, and in my opinion the complexity of their by-
products renders them a forbidding conundrum for use in creating
kindly internal and external herbal preparations. Sufficient to say
for this manual, further discussion of these toxic substances draws to
a close here. The original liquid seven, however, will receive a
predominance of our focus, for they in the hands of the herbalist
are the prime shakers and movers of the act of herbal extraction. As
an introduction, I will make a cursory overview of them, then give
more specifics in the following pages.

Water

Water is a universal element. One of the most important products
of nature, its presence or absence plays a major role in the
economy of our planet. Water is more or less involved in almost all
the changes that take place in inorganic matter, and it is
quintessential to the growth and existence of all living beings,
whether animal or vegetable. Chemically, water is extraordinarily
talented, ingenious in its field, very stable, and predictable, and
therefore a most versatile and reliable tool. Water, being immensely
abundant, is an inexpensive ingredient. The only controversy
limiting the free use of water in the current adolescent stage of our

----- PAGE 123 -----
civilization is that we have to clean most of our water before we
can consume it. Water’s indefatigable solvent action has dissolved
and is holding in solution much of our culture’s discarded debris,
slowly decomposing this litter (for water is fortunately not a
preservative—except for soft contacts and pet fish) and depositing
its elements back into the earth for the use of ongoing generative
cycles. When we learn to stop making such large messes (and we
are learning) and figure out how to clean up our neighborhoods,
our ground water will become suitable again for extemporaneous
use. Meanwhile, we often need to purify water by using assorted
filtering and distillation techniques. This increases the cost of a
gallon of water for consumption from when it was once abundantly
free to currently around the average U.S. price of a gallon of
gasoline. But aside from this pollution confusion, water is the best
solvent we have. Its basic nature is absolutely consistent and
reliable. We have used it from the very dawn of simple Homo
sapiens’ pharmacy, and its use as a primary menstruum has
remained unchallenged on into the current alchemical shenanigans
practiced within the labyrinths of today’s high-tech pharmacy and
commercial herbal product manufacturing.

A.coHoL

Alcohol is the second most relied upon menstruum for most
medicine-makers. It too is stable (at plus or minus room
temperature) and is also reliably consistent in its actions as a
solvent and preservative. As a solvent, it is so predictable that it is
relied upon in pharmacy both for what it will eagerly dissolve as
well as for what it definitely won’t dissolve. And whereas we can
depend on the fact that water acts the opposite of a preservative,
medicine-makers know that alcohol is probably the best
preservative. Aside from human party animals, not many life forms
or enzymes can thrive for long when immersed in a volume of
alcohol or even in diluted alcohol, and therefore changes due to
disintegration and decomposition are greatly slowed down: shelf

----- PAGE 124 -----
life is significantly increased.

Set the tone for the new millenium, be a lay
herbalist. Water, spirits, wine, vinegar and oil,
culinary and medicinal herbs, common kitchen
equipment, and one’s unleashed passion are the
shakers and movers of herbal medicine-
making ... that’s all one needs to cook as a
community herbalist.

Wine ann Vinecar

The next two common menstrua that we will discuss, which have in
other eras been eagerly employed by medicine-makers, are wine
and vinegar. Both of these liquids do what water does, for H2O is
primarily what they are, but their total chemistry includes a couple
of embellishments to their water body. Wine boasts of a mild touch
of stimulating alcohol, and vinegar a little touch of sour-tasting acid.
The amount of these “touches” from batch to batch is variable and
therefore to a small degree inconsistent in different lots of these
products. These variations are mostly determined by the nature of
the vegetation used for production and the specific manufacturing
process. The presence of the alcohol in wine and the acetic acid in
vinegar supply a degree of preservation action to the waters of
these liquids and also add a little different “bite” to their water-like
solvent action. The inherent natures of wine and vinegar, however,
also carry with them some other “uncontrollable” vegetable matter
which during shelf time can begin to change their nature, affecting
the chemistry and the preservation of the herbal components that
have been dissolved in the extracts. The results are that the overall
blend of these “variables,” “uncontrollables,” and “inconsistencies”
renders these two menstrua less reliable in relation to sustaining
long-range permanence. This is a feature which has greatly
disturbed some medicine-makers in the past, especially those whose
commercial preparations, and the marketabilitv of such. demanded

----- PAGE 125 -----
control, permanence, and a great deal of solvency predictability.
This preoccupation with predictability, control, and permanence is
orchestrated principally by the intensity and toxicity of the
particular medicines they are manufacturing, whereas smaller
quantities of gentler more benign medicinal and culinary
preparations (which is what we will be making) don’t demand such
rigidity.

There is the story of two nineteenth century pharmacists, Lea and
Perrins, who concocted an herbal digestive blend using a vinegar
base menstruum. When completed, this infusion of Tamarind bean
and other highly flavorful herbs turned out quite disgusting to the
senses. Frustrated by the venture, the two men decided to trash the
whole thing, but instead for whatever reasons some of it sat
forgotten in their lab cellar. During this unpremeditated aging
period the vinegar’s inherent variables and inconsistencies, to the
formulators’ eventual surprise and delight, evolved the juice to a
succulent compound solution that is well known today as
Worcestershire sauce (the men obviously kept good notes during
preparation for possible future reference). Wine and vinegar
menstrua will receive considerable attention in later chapters of this
manual.

Mixture or Water anp ALcoHOL

The next menstruum we will discuss is simply a mixture (in
infinitely varying proportions) of the big two, water and alcohol.
These proportions are determined by the nature of the components
of the particular herb being extracted. This type of menstruum is
also referred to as an aqueous-alcoholic menstruum, or other terms
to that effect.

Ou. anv Guycerin

The final two menstrua we explore are oil and glycerin. They are to
me the chemical jesters of the show, sort of like Bozo and his pet

----- PAGE 126 -----
bear. They are sweet, slow, and warm and seem to function in their
own peculiar world. They are fun to play with, both commanding
patience, heightened concentration (especially by those active
members of Virgos Anonymous), and a light-hearted tolerance from
the medicine-maker while she or he is working with these
performers. The nature of the ensuing products derived from the
actions of these two solvents are also pleasant, playful, soft, and
comfort-enhancing companions to one’s life, such as lip balms,
body lotions, soothing therapeutic oils, pain-relieving, wax-
removing ear oils, and balmy unguents.

Oil is a sensually unctuous solvent for the components of many
herbs as well as itself, being a mild, protective component that
carries herbal virtues to the skin quite comfortably. Oil carries these
nutritional and therapeutic virtues to the outer skin of one’s body as
medicinal oils, ear drops, salves, and lotions, and to the inner skins
as nourishing foods when swallowed by the upper end of the
digestive tube, and as mildly coaxing boluses and suppositories
when deposited in the lower end. As we all know by common
experience, oil refuses to mix with water, and in like fashion it
won’t mix with alcohol. Fortunately, however, it does mix well
with paper towels during and after spills, runovers, and other
extemporaneously lubricious emergencies.

Glycerin is the sweet-tasting component of fats and oils. Most
commercial vegetable glycerin is made available to us as a coconut
oil by-product of the soap industry. After being initially derived
from oil, glycerin will no longer mix with it; it’s one of those odd
generation gap things. At the same time, glycerin is a chemical
cousin to alcohol, and an eager playmate with water. In direct
contrast to oil, glycerin will mix quite willingly with both water
and alcohol. Glycerin is the major component in any menstruum
used to form glycerites. Glycerites are alcohol-free, sugar-free,
sweet-tasting extracts popular with children, parents, and those who
refuse to taste anything herbal unless it is sweetened.

Glycerin is often included as a small portion of an aqueous
alcohol menstruum to modify the magnetic relationship that exists
in nature between alkaloids and tannins whenever these two meet

----- PAGE 127 -----
up in a liquid solution. The presence of glycerin generates a sort of
love triangle, the inevitable results of which the tannins and the
alkaloids practice ignoring each other, while the glycerin and
tannins go off by themselves to be alone. This liberates the
alkaloids to do what they pharmacologically do best without being
distracted and ultimately precipitated by the amorous action of
unfettered tannins. Further details of this soap will be disclosed
later.

So, throw any, all, or an appropriate combination of the above
seven liquids into a cauldron along with a harvest of wild and
vibrant herbs and we have the initial makings of a fascinating,
sensual, and colorful show—an Herbal Medicine Show.

SOLVENT ACTIONS OF MENSTRUA

Water

Water, the global menstruum that is forever dissolving the surface of
our planet, has likewise, from time immemorial, been used by
human beings as a solvent to enhance their lives. Water is called the
universal solvent, for it has a more extensive range as a solvent than
any other known liquid. It is also the cheapest and most abundant
solvent available, and is therefore used in the extraction of plant
essences whenever the advantage of using it outweighs any
disadvantages.

Cold water is a good solvent for plant constituents, such as sugars,
proteins, albuminous bodies, gums, mucilaginous substances, pectin,
tannins or plant astringents, plant acids, coloring matter, many
mineral salts, many glycosides, some alkaloids, most all alkaloidal
salts, and, to a slight degree, a hint of essential oils.

Hot or boiling water causes plant tissues to swell and in so doing
bursts the cells. This hot water then dissolves starches and
disintegrates and extracts other vegetable tissues hardly affected by
cold water. Heating a water menstruum permits the more rapid
solution of a plant’s soluble matter. but a frequently encountered

----- PAGE 128 -----
disadvantage inherent with this phenomenon is that the heating
process extracts substances which later separate out from the
solution upon cooling. These precipitated substances can manifest
as sinister-looking scum or foreboding foams and other frightening
apparitions that float on the top of a solution or settle in strange
ways at the bottom of the container. Although aesthetically
disturbing to some, these precipitates are harmless unless you plan
to store the liquid for a while, in which case they provide food for
microorganisms. If you intend to use this tea to make a syrup, or
are keeping it to use later for whatever reason, strain it as soon as it
cools.

Plant tissues are made up of associations of complex bodies. As
the extraction of these plant constituents with water is initiated, the
sugars, gums, plant acids, mineral salts, and coloring matter, which
are the most readily soluble constituents, dissolve first. The solution
of these different substances in water produces a different
menstruum which is now capable of dissolving constituents that
were previously insoluble in pure water. As this phenomenon
progresses, the ongoing compositions act as new extracting
mediums one after another, with water no longer being the sole
menstruum.

All this action instigated by bringing pure water to a boil evolves
liquids of differing solvent capabilities than that of simple cold
water, and in this way it is found that water solutions of plant
constituents may produce important menstrua that are uniquely
different from water alone. This is quite important to understand,
because it gives the ultimate solvency power of simple water and
the classic preparations that employ only water as a menstruum
(teas) the regard they merit. As a result of these idiosyncrasies of a
water menstruum, water may ultimately be made to dissolve water-
insoluble substances that from their characters, at first assumption,
would appear not to be soluble at all in a simple water menstruum.
One finds that water may become a solvent for particles of such
constituents as resins, oils, glucosides, and other plant constituents
that, in a purified condition (isolated from the fully intact organic
chemistry of the plant). are insoluble or nearlv so in pure water.

----- PAGE 129 -----
With this insight, water infusions and decoctions can be recognized
(reinstated in home pharmacy) and relied upon as equally powerful
or in many instances more powerful extraction processes as those
processes that include alcohol and other solvents in the menstruum.

Ive always felt that the humble cup of herb tea is a more overall
potent and effective delivery system of herbal medicine than the
most superlative power-products released by all our commercial
herb industry. Chinese herbalists decocting their often severe-tasting
herbal stews have been relying quite successfully on the potent
alchemy of this simple aqueous delivery system for centuries.

There is a universal disadvantage, however, in using water by
itself as a solvent. As one can affirm from experiencing the forces of
nature, the conservation of status quo is not the work of water on
the surface of this dynamic planet. Water is not one to preserve a
static condition of any substance or being; and this salient
characteristic is reflected by an herbal preparation when using
water as a sole menstruum. Except in its own frozen state or glacial
form, water is not at all a preservative. On the contrary, its presence
stimulates change and is a prime mover in the perpetual
transmutation of forms (and aqueous solutions). Therein, true to its
fine nature, the greatest disadvantage in the use of water as a
menstruum is that it is not a preservative. In fact, water in its
passionate promotion of change is a near antithesis to a
preservative. Its remarkable solvency extracts large amounts of
diverse substances, while its tissue penetration excites plant
enzymes (although these organic catalysts are usually destroyed by
high temperature), and the resulting solution of plant constituents
makes up a fertile soup that can be an excellent media for
enzymatic action and the growth of molds, yeast, and bacteria.
These opportunistic organisms, in their spontaneous feeding
frenzies, radically alter the state of the extract, and this alteration is
usually not on the side of sensory aesthetics or palatability. So one
is required to either consume a water extract within a day or two,
freeze it, or add another substance that can interfere with
destructive enzymatic fervor and insidious multiplication of
microorganisms; and that is what some of the following liquids do.

----- PAGE 130 -----
Erxyt Atcoxo.

Alcohol is more selective in its extraction action, and therefore does
not have as wide a solubility range as water. Ethyl alcohol is a good
general solvent for extracting resins, balsams, camphors (most of
these three are thrown out of solution by diluting them with water),
essential oils, alkaloids and natural alkaloidal salts, glycosides,
organic acids, chlorophyll, most coloring matter, nearly all the acrid
and bitter constituents of a plant, un-crystallized, amorphous
vegetable sugars, and one fixed oil: castor oil. Some sugars,
proteins, gums, mucilaginous substances, and albuminous bodies
are, however, capable of being mixed with dilute alcohol (a
mixture of 50 percent water, 50 percent ethyl alcohol).

Alcohol refuses, however, to abstract gums, mucilaginous
substances, starch, albuminous materials, or many mineral
compounds, and it does not dissolve any appreciable amount of
crystallized cane sugar.

In addition to its selective solvent properties, alcohol paralyzes
enzymes, and at the same time prevents the growth of yeast, molds,
other fungi, and most bacteria; so alcohol solutions seldom if ever
ferment or putrefy. As a consequence of these reliable preservative
properties, alcohol more or less diluted has long been employed as
a solvent in the making of tinctures, fluid extracts (which are
merely concentrated tinctures), and solid extracts. Though not
preferred by some people, alcohol as a preservative is efficient and
often necessary for the following reasons:

1. To eliminate microbial activity and preserve preparations almost
indefinitely

2. To inactivate enzymes which are destructive to alkaloids and
glycosides

3. To control destructive chemical decomposition of glycosides and
saponins due to the presence of water

----- PAGE 131 -----
Alcohol mixes well with water (and glycerin) in all proportions.
As you will find in your medicine-making experiences, alcohol
equals water in importance as a solvent for many active plant
substances, many that water, especially cold water, does not readily
dissolve. It is also a uniquely important agent for the very fact that
(for manipulative pharmacy) it adamantly excludes many other
plant substances which water does dissolve, such as albuminous
matter (plant protein), plant starches, gums, and mucilaginous
materials. This is sometimes referred to as alcohol’s “negative
strength.” These plant components (which often refuse to be filtered
out in certain solutions) when present in a solution will sometimes
act as unsightly (opalescent, cloudy, gummy, jelly-like, ropy, or
syrupy) solution disturbers as well as provide food for microbes.

Mix an appropriate amount of alcohol into an existing extract
being “disturbed” by these components, and they will be thrown
back out of the solution. They can then be removed, leaving the
extract looking far more attractive. To illustrate this banishment of
an offending component (in this instance slimy mucilage by
alcohol) from an herbal solution, make a strong water infusion of
Comfrey root, and when it is cool, pour some into a small
container, add to it a substantial quantity of pure 190-proof ethyl
alcohol, and therein you will behold the outcast. Add more water to
this, thereby diluting the alcohol, and the mucilage will dissolve
back into solution.

For those individuals who are concerned about
the presence of alcohol in an herbal preparation,
the following calculations based on a tincture
containing 60 percent alcohol (most tinctures
contain less) are given for your guidance:

+ A daily nutritional dosage: For adults, 20 drops
3 times a day equals about 1/30th of an ounce of
alcohol spread over 24 hours.

----- PAGE 132 -----
+ An acute dosage: For adults, 20 drops per hour
for approximately 12 hours equals about 1/7th of
an ounce of alcohol spread over the day.

Children are usually given 1/2 to 1/4 of this adult
dosage.

Often, however, the mucilaginous component of an herb is
exactly what one wants to draw into solution. This is true in
preparations of some of our most nourishing and therapeutic plants
such as Comfrey, Marshmallow, Slippery Elm, and Cinnamon. But if
one wishes to preserve an extract of these mucilaginous plants for
any length of time, be well advised to use some alcohol as either a
part of the extracting menstruum or as a later addition. Eighteen to
20 percent ethyl alcohol will be adequate, and usually this is not a
sufficient amount to cause an eviction of the above-mentioned
components.

Safe Storage of Ethyl Alcohol

+ Keep alcohol packaged in bottles out of the sun and away from
heat. I prefer to use high-density polyethylene (HDPE) plastic
bottles; glass bottles full of liquid heat up faster and break too
easily, and in this instance, are a most costly break.

+ Keep container tightly closed to prevent leakage and evaporation.
+ The boiling point of pure ethyl alcohol is 173° F.

+ Be aware that alcohol containers can be hazardous when empty,
for they retain residual vapor that is extremely flammable. Allow
recently emptied containers to sit outdoors with the lid removed, so
the contents will evaporate and dissipate completely.

+ Alcohol is a flammable liquid.

+ Spills: If a spill has not ignited use water sprav to disperse the

----- PAGE 133 -----
vapors and to dilute the spill to anonflammable mixture. —

+ Fire-fighting procedure: Use dry chemical or carbon dioxide.
Water may be ineffective, but should be used to keep the fire-
exposed containers cool.

+ Avoid prolonged inhalation of vapor.

Axconot-WarTER

Alcohol-water mixtures possess few, if any, of the disadvantages
exhibited by water alone in the extraction and preservation of plant
components. The blending of alcohol with water seems to be a
consummate marriage for both extraction maneuvers in the lab and
social merriment in the recreational arena. Some plant constituents
are nearly as soluble in an alcohol-water menstruum as they are in
strong alcohol, and in some cases the alcohol content of the
menstruum can be as low as 25 percent. I recommend you strive for
maximum extraction using a minimum percent of alcohol, keeping
in mind that 15 to 20 percent alcohol by volume—of the end
product—is probably the lowest alcohol content you can contrive
that will preserve the extract for any length of time.

In pharmacy a mixture of 50 percent ethyl alcohol and 50
percent water is commonly referred to as dilute alcohol.

Vinecar

I am referring here to the use of apple cider vinegar or any other
plant vinegar such as plum vinegar, rice vinegar, wine vinegar,
balsamic vinegar, etc.

Vinegar is a sour liquid on account of its acetic acid content. It
has valuable properties as a solvent as well as a preservative. As a
solvent it provides a service that aids in the fixing and extraction of
certain alkaloids and other water-soluble plant components, and it
can be substituted for alcohol in the preparation of extracts,

----- PAGE 134 -----
although this is not a common practice today. Medicinal vinegars
await their renaissance in practical lay Herbalism, and it is intended
that this particular manual will hasten that coming.

Vinegar’s action as a preservative is considered to be excellent,
though inferior to dilute alcohol, and for this reason pure vinegar
preparations are said to be more liable to change than tinctures. In
certain custom-prepared menstrua, vinegar is commonly added as 5
percent to 10 percent of an alcohol-based menstruum to adjust the
pH when that is advantageous (i.e., for making extracts of Lobelia,
Black Walnut, Goldenseal, Ephedra, etc.)

In the late 1800s medicine-makers felt that the state of solution of
some plant components was at its best when vinegar was employed
as the menstruum, at least as far as the medicinal action of these
extracted components was concerned. This was particularly the case
when the activity of the medicine depended on the presence of one
or more alkaloids. A raw free-base alkaloid is often difficult to
bring into solution, but by uniting it with the acetic acid of vinegar
a free base alkaloid forms an alkaloidal salt. Alkaloid salts are
readily soluble in water; therefore, they may be more perfectly
extracted in vinegar than by other menstrua.

However, the fact that vinegar contains inherent vegetable matter
renders it liable to decomposition, and therefore these preparations
are best made in small quantities and renewed at shorter intervals
(annually) than alcohol-containing preparations. One can always, if
desired, add a little alcohol to vinegar solutions to extend their
preservation even further; this generates a medicine that is well
preserved, and still greatly reduces the use of alcohol.

In chemistry, vinegar is generally classed among the derivatives of
alcohol, as it is produced by the oxidation of alcoholic liquids,
especially hard apple cider and wine. Vinegar is a very dilute
solution of acetic acid containing what the pharmaceutical texts
refer to as foreign matters. Why these matters are considered foreign
I’m not quite sure, since they are inherent to and an actual part of
what makes up whole vinegar itself. In the late 1800s the U.S.
Pharmacopoeia’s official description of vinegar is the same as mine.
The Pharmacopoeia defined vinegar as “impure diluted acetic acid

----- PAGE 135 -----
prepared by fermentation.” A clue emerges as to the “foreign”
mystery as it becomes clear that pharmaceutical activists focus
solely on the action of the acetic acid in vinegar and not on the
wholeness of vinegar itself; obviously, they are not at all impressed
with or care about the fact that this wholeness gives vinegar its own
inherent nutritional and medicinal virtues. Over time, vinegar fell
into disfavor by pharmacists because not only was its acetic acid
content found to be too variable, it was also relatively expensive
and was said to be possessed by organic impurities (foreigners).
Pharmacy eventually replaced vinegar with a much cheaper, more
controllable product called acetic acid, nearly pure acetic acid
prepared from wood by destructive fermentation and purification.
Pure acetic acid is cheap, free from impurities, and unvarying in its
intensity. In high pharmacy it is diluted to present a 6 percent
acetic acid content (actually, 5.7 to 6.3 are allowable parameters—I
guess even perfection has its slack side).

In light of all this, however, I think that the obsession with an
acetic acid content that is exactly 6 percent (+ or—.3 percent) is a
bit anal, and I, in addition to being comfortable with a little acidic
variance, am rather fond of the synergy of many botanical
impurities (even though they might lead to a faster change in a
solution). I still prefer to use “crude” vinegar; I feel more
comfortable with its vulgar character and variable acidity.

However, it is wholly understandable why vinegar fell into
disfavor with the medical pharmacy establishment, for it is in the
business of dissolving very heavy duty plant alkaloids and other
intense and often highly toxic components into preparations,
making the therapeutic use of the resulting drugs (as well as the
survival of their patients) extremely dose specific. Responsible
allopathic medical practitioners needed to be entirely sure of the
strength of the extract, which in this case depended on the action of
the acidic acid in the menstruum. So allopathic doctors did not
discard vinegar because it was a poor solvent, but because it was
(expensive and) relatively uncontrollable as almost all natural
plant-derived things are. This is one reason why mainstream
Western allopathic medicine does not use botanical medicines any

----- PAGE 136 -----
longer. It has replaced these with chemical medicines and
synthetically derived plant components. These are highly
controllable and unvarying. Moreover, there are no longer any
foreign, impure matters to contend with that might shorten the
stability of the products.

For those of us, however, who are not dealing in toxic materials
and don’t need an indeterminately long shelf life for our
medicinals, vinegar remains an excellent solvent. We can revive its
use because we are preparing tonics and therapeutic agents derived
from gentler plants that are not dose critical. These plants may be
extracted very well and are adequately preserved by vinegar and
wine solvents.

It is important to realize that during the same era in our medical
history, when the medical establishment made its decision to deal
primarily with toxic botanical and non-botanical substances as their
materia medica, the lay population concurrently surrendered its
health and disease care to these same medical professionals and
proceeded to lose their knowledge of self-medication using
medicinal plants and stopped preparing herbal remedies as their
grandparents and ancestors had done. We all lost touch with this
(folk) technology of independence. As time passed, high-proof ethyl
alcohol became the mainstream pharmacy’s solvent of choice rather
than wines, vinegar, and glycerin to a large extent. In the 1960s,
when we saw the revival of homemade herbal preparations and
self-medication, herbalists began to make their plant concoctions
available in stores. They used ethyl alcohol (and water) as their
primary menstruum probably because of the powerful influence of
mainstream pharmacy and a desire for long shelf life. I don’t think
herbalists disregarded wines and vinegar as viable menstrua because
they weren’t good solvents and preservatives, but because they
weren't as “strong” as alcohol, and therefore not the best menstrua
to use for competitive commercial adventures. Glycerin, considered
a “stronger” solvent and preservative than either wine or vinegar,
has enjoyed a quicker revival in the modern herbal medicine-
making world (maybe not as a star performer, but certainly as a
popular supporting actor). So, although many herbalists today have

----- PAGE 137 -----
experimented with and enjoyed making medicinal herbal wines
and vinegars, not many have taken them very seriously. I think a
greatly elevated regard for these (potentially homegrown) menstrua
will transpire once we change our attitude to one that is based on
experience rather than on the mainstream U.S. pharmaceutical
history and literature. There is much to learn and appreciate about
these excellent natural menstrua.

Lay herbalists (you and I) are in the process of reviving the
foundations of Herbalism in our homeland. We have only just
begun; we are relearning the language of Herbalism. Like
aboriginal youths who return to their native homelands from the
cities, it will take time to revive our traditional living skills. The
language of Herbalism is unique among other medical languages. Its
grammar and syntax are derived from the understanding and uses of
Nature’s organic phenomena. We can embrace this common
language in our homes and communities as we focus on the
wholeness and individual life cycles of local medicinal plants,
redevelop our herbcraft, and recall how wonderful it is to dance
barefooted in the green world.

Vinegar and wines are made from plants that can grow in most
any garden, and their organic nature in turn can render remarkably
efficient menstrua for us to use for making healthful foods, herbal
tonics, and reliable medicines—at home. When you grow medicinal
plants in your garden and also learn to use the wild plants that
grow near your home, you don’t need to preserve herbal extracts
for years on end. These plants come to you anew every year, so you
can make fresh extracts seasonally. You only need to preserve these
for a relatively short time. This is a different rhythm of perception
we can move to, a cyclic, seasonal rhythm that is unending.
Herbalism encourages us to relax into a healthful sense of well-
being with a deep awareness of Nature’s nourishing, perpetual
abundance.

Glycerin is not a carbohydrate and contains no
sugar. Taken internally it is slowly absorbed into

----- PAGE 138 -----
the bloodstream, then slowly metabolized by the
liver. Due to this slow process, glycerin does not
cause any appreciable blood sugar imbalances.

Guycerin

Glycerin (a.k.a. glycerine) is the sweet fraction of a fixed oil. It is
found in all true fats (except cholesterol, which is a fat containing
no glycerin) and oils, of both vegetable and animal origin. Glycerin
was discovered in the late 1700s and came into use in medicine and
pharmacy in the mid-1800s. It is produced through a remarkably
complex process that decomposes fats in a large digester. After
several hours of a bizarre relationship between the fat, the water,
and 150 pounds of steam pressure involving constant agitation, the
fat’s glycerin fraction is ultimately separated from its fatty acids.
The glycerin is distilled out, purified, condensed, and collected for
use. Much of the vegetable glycerin available to us is derived from
coconut oil. There are also glycerin products derived from animal
fat and synthetically contrived from trichlorpropane, which is a
petroleum product. Investigate your sources.

Chemically, glycerin belongs to the class of alcohol, and is termed
glycerol or glyceric alcohol. However it is a tri-atomic alcohol and
contains no ethyl alcohol or methyl alcohol which are di-atomic
alcohols having dramatically different characteristics. Glycerin is not
a carbohydrate and contains no sugar. Taken internally it is slowly
absorbed into the bloodstream, then slowly metabolized by the
liver. Due to this slow process, glycerin does not cause any
appreciable blood sugar imbalances. Glycerin is a valuable solvent
and preservative agent in medicine-making. Some authorities say it
is second only to alcohol in these respects, having a solvent power
about half the strength of pure ethyl alcohol. This would make it an
excellent choice as a solvent for herbs and roots that respond well
to a menstruum having a lower solvent power. In my experience, I
find its range of solvency less extensive than either water or alcohol.
The beauty of glvcerin is that it is capable of mixing with both

----- PAGE 139 -----
water and/or alcohol, so its qualities can be easily combined with
both. Glycerin is clear, odorless, has an agreeable sweet flavor, a
thick, syrupy, stable consistency, produces a sensation of warmth to
the skin and tongue, remains stable when heated, is antibacterial,
and will extract a variety of constituents that make it useful in cases
where neither water nor alcohol are appropriate. It is a notable
substitute for alcohol in the menstrua of extracts given to alcohol-
intolerant individuals. It can be used to prepare children’s tonics or
to use with plants that have relatively large amounts of ligneous
(woody) fiber; water expands these gummy and/or glutinous
materials far more than glycerin does—which is often an
objectionable occurrence. Glycerin abstracts and holds tannates (it is
said to have the capacity to absorb nearly its own weight of tannic
acid), and therefore is exceptionally effective when incorporated as
a portion of a menstruum for herbs containing tannins, as it
reduces, if not eliminates, the precipitating action in a solution
where tannins contact alkaloids, a condition which can greatly
interfere with the activity of the alkaloids. In many respects,
glycerin resembles water as a menstruum more than it does alcohol.
Glycerin will not dissolve or mix with resins or fixed oils, so it is
not suitable for resinous or oily herb extracts. And although it is a
good solvent for a few alkaloids, it is generally inferior to water,
vinegar, and alcohol for extracting most alkaloidal structures.
Glycerin does not extract volatile oils very efficiently, but it readily
mixes with them and preserves them for a short time. When diluted
with water or aromatic hydrosols (see Chapter Ten), glycerin is
demulcent and emollient, lubricating, soothing, and protecting to
the skin and mucous membranes. When used undiluted, it acts as an
irritant that arouses activity. Glycerin readily absorbs water from the
air and is useful for keeping substances moist. It does not ferment
or evaporate at ordinary temperatures, but it does vaporize readily
from a water solution at 212° F. Glycerin, when undiluted, boils at
329° F.

Woe

----- PAGE 140 -----
Wine as a menstruum can produce some delightful herbal infusions,
as its solvent action is akin to an alcohol-water menstruum.
Macerating herbs in wine is a highly creative arena in which to
experiment. However, due to wine’s naturally low alcohol content,
a saturated wine extract might not hold up against the process of
deterioration over an extended period of time unless more alcohol
is added to ensure its stability, especially during warm weather.

At one time, there were several medicated wines and two natural
wines considered official medicines in this country (meaning they
were recognized in the official U.S. Pharmacopoeia and later in the
National Formulary). Some of these medicated wines, such as
Antimony wine and Colchicinum wine, were in fact very potent
allopathic medicines, an improper dose of the later being fatal. But
in time wines lost favor, due to the fact that it was found
impossible to formulate tests whereby spurious wines could be
positively recognized and distinguished from the pure ones.
However, this is no longer an issue for us today with the vast array
of legitimate local wineries currently in action.

Traditionally, white wines were preferred as menstrua for
making medicinal wines because of their small proportion of
tannins (sherry was the strongest white wine and therefore the most
frequently used, and port was the most frequently used red wine).
In the case of red wines, the skin of the grape is allowed to remain
with the expressed juice during fermentation, and the astringent
dark coloring-matter in the skin contains large amounts of tannin.
This can be a problem when infusing herbs that are high in sought-
after alkaloids because, as previously noted, tannins precipitate and
therein pull out of solution these alkaloidal components. Official
wine menstrua were required to contain 16 percent to 24 percent
alcohol (which wine does not contain naturally), so these wines
were fortified with pure grape brandy, which sounds to me like the
makings of good medicine.

On

----- PAGE 141 -----
There are two kinds of oil, fixed oil and volatile. However, volatile
oils (a.k.a. essential oils, aromatic oils) are not really oils at all.
They are only referred to as oils because they blend with oil quite
readily and they react with water much like fixed oils do.
Chemically volatile oils have next to nothing in common with fixed
oils, lacking both fatty acids and glycerin. They are referred to as
“volatile” because, unlike fixed oils, they evaporate readily when
exposed to air. We'll focus on volatile oils and their complementary
aromatic hydrosols in Chapter Ten and continue this section with a
discussion of the unctuous (smooth, slippery, and greasy) oils.

Broadly categorizing, there are actually three
kinds of oil. In addition to the aromatic essential
oils and the vegetable- and animal-derived fixed
oils there are the mineral oils (and paraffin wax).
Mineral oils are a mixture of liquid hydrocarbons
obtained from petroleum, and they may be highly
volatile or non-volatile.

Fixed oils are obtained from both the vegetable and the animal
kingdom and are often called fatty oils, as chemically they are fats.
They are more or less smooth and greasy to the touch, and leave a
permanent grease spot when in liquid condition and dropped on
paper. They vary greatly in their point of congelation, olive oil
becoming solid at a little above 32° F., whereas flaxseed oil can
remain fluid at 4° below zero. Pure fixed oils have little taste or
smell. They are lighter than water, and they do not evaporate
easily; however, they do boil at about 600° F. and at this
temperature are converted into vapor. Heated in open air,
especially with the aid of a wick, fixed oils do take fire and burn
with a bright and sooty flame. These oils are insoluble in water, but
are capable of being mixed with water by the assistance of a
mucilage, forming mixtures which are called emulsions (see
Chapter Nineteen, “Lotions & Creams”). Fixed oils comprise most of
the oils in common use such as Olive. Almond, Sesame. cod liver,

----- PAGE 142 -----
and Castor oil (and mineral oils).

It is not commonly realized that fixed oils, especially when used
as warm/hot infusions and decoctions, are good solvents for
abstracting resins, oleo-resins, essential oils, and flavonoids.

Chemically, in most cases, fixed oils consist primarily of three
substances which are considered the three elementary parts of fat:
olein, stearin, and palmitin. Olein is the liquid portion of fat, and
stearin and palmitin are both solid portions; hence, the consistency
of fixed oils and fats is due to the relative proportion of these
substances. Thus, Almond oil, being composed principally of olein,
is always liquid at ordinary temperatures, while butter, tallow, and
lard, being largely stearin, are solid. Fixed oils are decomposed in
the intestine by the digestive juices into fatty acids and glycerin and
sometimes monoglycerides.

If you are so inclined, do not let these lists of
plant constituents overwhelm you or put you off.
They are important only when you care about
them, and they are equally unimportant if you
don’t care. So, I include them in our discussions
for the benefit of those individuals who are
interested. Feel free to ignore them, for they are
specialized information, not crucial information.
Later, if you decide to focus on them for any
purpose, they are here for you as a reference.

Decomposition and the resulting rancidity of fats and oils are due
to exposure to heat, air, moisture, and/or light. This change is
believed due to the presence of animal and vegetable tissue,
protein, and other albuminous or mucilaginous compound
substances which cause fermentation, induce decomposition,
liberate the fatty acids, and produce volatile, odorous acids.
Rancidity is noticeable by the oil giving a sharp, unpleasant taste
and odor. The presence of water in a fatty oil favors the production

----- PAGE 143 -----
of rancidity.

While you select and prepare your menstrua, keep in mind,
regardless of which solvent or combination of solvents you choose,
the “emptier” a solvent is, the more effective it will be as an
extractant. In other words, a solvent that is not already floating a
bunch of dissolved minerals within its liquid volume obviously has
more room within itself to dissolve and hold the components of an
herb that has been mixed with it. Likewise, once a solvent has
dissolved components of the herb and brought them into solution, it
is no longer as active because in this state it is more saturated and
less hungry (although it might now dissolve components it couldn’t
when it was pure). Therefore, for example, soft water (which by
definition is empty of dissolved mineral content—that’s why it’s still
soft) is overall more active in dissolving an herb than hard water
(which is relatively full of dissolved mineral). Theoretically,
distilled water is completely empty of dissolved minerals and is
therefore a hungry, most powerful solvent, ready and eager to
dissolve any water-soluble thing it can get its lusty molecules up
against. Rainwater is the soft water I most like to use. It’s more wild
and whimsical than distilled water, but it’s not always there for you
when you need it. I’ll talk more about the dynamics of active and
saturated menstrua when I discuss “circulatory displacement” in the
chapter on infusions (which will clearly illustrate why it’s prudent
to “shake your tinctures”).

PRINCIPLE CONSTITUENTS OF PLANTS AND THEIR SOLVENTS

When speaking the language of the pharmacologist, these principal
constituents are often called the “active ingredients” of the plant, or
the isolated plant chemicals that have a salient, definable
physiological activity on the body. If an individual has developed
the insight to focus on the activity of the whole plant as a remedy
within a wholistic framework for assisting a person to heal, specific
knowledge of these ingredients is not of great importance.
However. to formulate an efficient menstruum for making a plant

----- PAGE 144 -----
extract, there is value in gaining a general knowledge of these
constituents and an understanding of the specific menstrua in which
they are probably soluble and insoluble. More whole, intact, and
aesthetic herbal medicines can be prepared with this awareness.

When considering the solubility of individual constituents found
in a particular herb, please remain aware that the solubility and
insolubility of the various components I am about to outline for you
come from data created in the reductionist science lab. This
information was derived from each constituent in its isolated form,
totally separated from the organic organization of the whole living
plant. Due to this, Western science is often unable to explain why
and how plant remedies work. Scientific method routinely inhibits
a true understanding of the action of whole herbs or their
individual constituents because the unique organization of the
entire plant is rarely, if ever, tested. So when a plant constituent is
said, for example, to be insoluble in water, this might not be and
very likely isn’t entirely true when that constituent is functioning in
the dynamic context of the whole plant. Science is profoundly
humbled by what actually goes on within the brilliant flesh of a
whole herb. Therefore, in your study of plant constituents, beware
of attempting to understand any medicinal plant by reducing it to
its so-called “active ingredients.” Again, the whole of the plant is
the true reference, the one which one’s whole body is most
biologically familiar with.

Now, to assist you in formulating a suitable menstruum for your
plant extracts, the following discussion of plant constituents and
their solubility is given as a guide to help you make an educated
guess as to what solvent or combination of solvents you will
ultimately find to be your best menstruum for a particular plant.
This discussion is not the final word, for to my knowledge no one,
regardless of his or her credentials, knows the final word in any
area of Herbalism.

Alkaloids

----- PAGE 145 -----
Alkaloids are organic bodies, derived chiefly from plants in which
they are believed to exist in combination with organic acids,
forming salts (a safer, more soluble form of the alkaloid). These
alkaloidal salts are usually well-defined, colorless, odorless,
crystalline, and soluble. Some are not colorless; for example, the
bitter-tasting berberine in Goldenseal and Oregon Grape is yellow.
Alkaloids may be unstable when heated. Most pure alkaloids are
bitter, slightly alkaline, soluble in ether and chloroform, and often
less readily in alcohol. In water they are comparatively insoluble.
On the other hand, the solubility of the alkaloidal salts usually
follow an opposite pattern: they are freely soluble in water and
somewhat soluble in alcohol. The ready solubility of the salts of
alkaloids have caused them to be preferred to the alkaloids
themselves for therapeutic uses. For preparation of extracts with the
highest levels of alkaloids, water/vinegar/alcohol menstrua having
a 35 percent water, to 10 percent vinegar, to 55 percent alcohol
content are recommended.

All the important alkaloids have profound physiological and
pharmacological effects on the body, and some on the mind; many
of them are the most poisonous plant substances known.

The chemical composition of alkaloids is not fully understood.
All of them, however, contain nitrogen, which is a sort of “so what”
bit of information to me, but all the other books mention this fact,
so I thought I probably should too.

Please keep in mind, that while alkaloids and
their salts have distinctive therapeutic properties
of their own, they do not fully nor exactly
represent the action of the whole plant from
which they are derived.

Please keep in mind, that while alkaloids and their salts have
distinctive therapeutic properties of their own, they do not fully nor
exactly represent the action of the whole plant from which they are
derived.

----- PAGE 146 -----
The names of alkaloids end in ine, such as morphine, caffeine,
cocaine, and quinine. Nicotine, which is found in tobacco, is a true
alkaloid. It is very similar to the alkaloids cicutine and coniine that
are found in the seeds and root of Hemlock, a plant which can
cause progressive paralysis of the nervous system and death.
Nicotine is also quite similar to lobeline, an alkaloid found in
Lobelia, which can help people stop smoking.

Balsams (Balsama)

Balsams are resins or oleoresins containing large proportions of
benzoic acid, cinnamic acid, or esters of these acids. Balsams are
soluble in alcohol and insoluble in water. In plants, balsams are a
combination of resins and essential oils (see “Oleoresins”).
Examples: Tolu balsam, Peru balsam, and Benzoin.

Bitter compounds

Physiologically, all bitters have a bitter flavor. This flavor stimulates
the body into reflex action and sets the glands (especially of the
digestive system) to work producing their various effects. In certain
plants, the bitter principle prepares the way for the other active
ingredients. In Hops, for example, a sedative is combined with the
bitter substance. Most bitter compounds are soluble in water and,
on the whole, soluble in alcohol. Optimal amounts of bitters are
derived with menstrua having 30 percent to 60 percent alcohol.
Other examples of bitter herbs: Wormwood, Dandelion, Mugwort,
Feverfew, Gentian, and Globe Artichoke.

Camphors (Camphorae)

Physically and chemically, camphors are closely related to volatile
oils. They constitute one of the elements of many of the volatile
oils, and may be separated from them by subjecting the oils to a
cooling process (for example. menthol from Peppermint oil).

----- PAGE 147 -----
Camphors at ordinary temperatures are (mostly) solid bodies, but
may be easily melted. They are soluble in alcohol, insoluble in
water. Examples: menthol and camphor—from Camphor Tree
wood (Cinnamomum camphora).

Essential oils, volatile oils

These components are volatile and aromatic at low temperatures.
Essential oils are very soluble in alcohol, soluble in fixed oils and
glycerin, very slightly soluble in cold water, and they are vaporized
by boiling water. They form the basis of the various medicinal
waters and hydrosols (see “Oils and fats”).

Enzymes

Enzymes are organic catalysts produced by animal and vegetable
cells. An enzyme usually acts to break down or build up the
molecules of one substance or group, since it is specific for a
particular linkage. They are soluble in water, and insoluble in
alcohol. Enzymes are rendered inactive in alcoholic solutions and
are destroyed by high temperature. The addition of alcohol to a
fresh plant extract containing glycosides prevents the destruction of
the glycosides by enzymes.

Flavonoids

Flavonoids are a widely distributed group of plant constituents
based on two phenolic rings. Because of their structure they are all
anti-oxidants and are fundamental to all colors other than green in
plants. Flavonoids are soluble in water, in alcohol, and in fixed oils.

Glycosides

Glycosides are organic plant principles which play an important
role in the plant’s protective. regulatory. and sanitarv functions.

----- PAGE 148 -----
They are a compound that contains a sugar part attached to a non-
sugar part called the aglycone [sugar + aglycone = glycoside].
When the sugar part is glucose, the substance may be called a
glucoside. Glycosides vary greatly in solubility, but nearly all are
soluble in alcohol. Optimal amounts of glycosides are derived with
menstrua having 30 percent to 60 percent alcohol. Glycosides are
usually of a neutral character until hydrolyzed (reacting with water)
in metabolism, at which point they become active. In plants,
glycosides are frequently associated with alkaloids, and in many
instances they are said to constitute the “active ingredient” of a
plant medicine. Glycoside compounds can be broken apart by
enzymatic action which can continue after a plant is harvested
unless the plant is dehydrated or preserved in alcohol while fresh.
Glycosides are distinguished from alkaloids by the ending in.
Examples: hypericin—which is also soluble in fixed oil (St. John’s
Wort), arbutin (Uva Ursi), glycyrrhizin (Licorice root), aloin (Aloes)
and salicin (Willow).

Gums (Gummata)

Gums are contained in great abundance in vegetation. They are
exudates that are soluble in water, forming a mucilaginous liquid,
or softening to form a jelly-like adhesive mass or paste. All softened
forms are emollient or demulcent, and have a soothing, lubricating,
and often nutritional quality. The dry concrete (unsoftened) state of
this substance is more specifically referred to as a gum. Gums are
insoluble in alcohol. When gums are undesirable in a preparation, a
solvent such as alcohol is selected so it will inhibit solution of the
gummy constituents. (This is an example of employing alcohol’s
“negative strength.”) Examples: Acacia, Tragacanth.

Gum-resins (Gummi-resinae)

Gum-resins are milky exudates composed of (1) a gum or gums
partly or wholly soluble in water and (2) a resin or resins soluble in

----- PAGE 149 -----
alcohol. When triturated and admixed with water, gum-resins yield
emulsions, the gum constituent more or less dissolving while the
resin is mechanically suspended in the solution. Examples: Myrrh,
Asafoetida.

Mucilages

Mucilages (like gums) are expressly soluble in water (they are best
extracted in cold water) and insoluble in alcohol. Extraction of
mucilaginous constituents must be done with as low an alcohol
content as possible. Prove this principle to yourself sometime
(intentionally rather than accidentally) by attempting to make a
fresh plant Comfrey extract using 190-proof ethyl alcohol. Or, even
more entertaining, blend a liquid Comfrey extract with a high
alcohol content tincture—herbal escargot! You can salvage the
results by adding sufficient water.

Oils (Olea) and fats

Oils are fluid substances, and fats are solid or semisolid bodies, both
having a greasy or unctuous feel. Oils are of two types: nonvolatile
and volatile.

Non-volatile or fixed oils (Olea pinguia) are organic substances of
a semisolid or solid consistency, readily soluble in chloroform and
ether, in volatile oils, or other fats. Fixed oils are insoluble in water
or glycerin. More than a small amount of fixed oil in a plant tissue
will greatly reduce the solvent action of an alcohol or water
menstruum. Heated in the presence of alkalis, fixed oils form soaps;
an important by-product is glycerin, a tri-atomic alcohol. Glycerin is
an excellent extractant and preservative component of a fixed oil.
Examples of fixed vegetable oils: Peanut oil, Olive oil, and Castor
oil.

Volatile or essential oils (Olea volatilia) are aromatic, flammable
liquids obtained predominantly by steam distillation and to a lesser
extent by expression (pressing). They are soluble in alcohol and in

----- PAGE 150 -----
fixed oils; some essential oils are very slightly soluble in water.
Essential oils are volatile, oxidizing, and evaporating upon exposure
to air. Not all plants produce essential oils. Pure essential oils are
the materia medica of aromatherapy (see “Essential oils”).
Examples: Lavender, Jasmine, Orange blossom, Rose, Thyme, and
Patchouli oils.

Oleoresins (Oleoresinae)

Resins often occur in more or less homogeneous mixtures with
volatile oils; these mixtures are known as oleoresins. They are
soluble in alcohol and fixed oils, and insoluble in water (see
“Balsams”). Example: Turpentine from conifers.

Proteins

Albumin is a class of protein found in many vegetable tissues and
fluids as well as in animal tissues. Albumin is soluble in water,
insoluble in alcohol, and is coagulated by heat. Those individuals
who believe that a plant’s medicinal action is due solely to its so-
called “active” principles regard these proteins along with other
“inactive” substances (gums, etc.) to be inert, mostly useless, and, all
in all, a bother, merely causing unsightly cloudy solutions and
ultimate putrefaction of the preparation. Other experts disagree and
revere the synergism of the natural organization of the whole plant
as the active component. To avoid extraction or to remove proteins
from a preparation, one can:

+ Use 190-proof absolute alcohol as a menstruum;

+ Precipitate the dissolved proteins from a water extraction by
adding alcohol afterwards; or

+ Coagulate and precipitate the albumin with heat by either boiling
the plant as part of the extraction process, or by boiling the
completed water extract and filtering the solution.

----- PAGE 151 -----
Resins (Resinae)

Resins are non-volatile excretions or secretions of very indefinite
composition, and are chiefly oxidation products of essential oils.
Resins are soluble in alcohol, fixed oils, and essential oils, and
insoluble in water. Resins will melt at a temperature near to that of
boiling water. Examples: Myrrh, Frankincense.

Saponins

Saponins are plant components that possess the unique
characteristic of foaming when shaken with water, even when very
dilute. They have the ability to hold finely divided fatty and
resinous substances in perfect suspension in aqueous mixtures,
producing emulsions of great stability. This is what a soap does that
helps remove oil from hands and cleans greasy dishware. Internally,
many saponins have direct medicinal effects such as those found in
Ginseng, Horse Chestnut, Licorice, and Wild Yam. Other saponins
are quite toxic (sapotoxins). With few exceptions, saponins are
readily soluble in water and also soluble in dilute alcohol.

Starches

Starches are one of the most important derivatives of plant cells.
They are insoluble in ordinary solvents, but swell in boiling water
to form a peculiar jelly-like or mucilaginous paste (starch paste).
Examples: Cornstarch, Arrowroot, Tapioca.

Sugars (Sacchara)

In their most basic form, simple sugars present themselves as single
sugar units and are commonly referred to in science-lingo (not so
simply) as monosaccharides. Saccharide comes from the Greek
word sakcharon, which means sugar (around and around goes the
scientific name game). These sugars have a sweet taste, are soluble

----- PAGE 152 -----
in water, and soluble in dilute alcohol. Two to ten (or so) sugar
units linked together are called oligosaccharides. A huge number of
sugars linked together are referred to as polysaccharides.
Polysaccharides don’t taste sweet and are not very soluble. They are
high molecular weight compounds found in almost all living tissue.
They make up the skeletal substances in the cell walls of higher
plants (i.e., cellulose), the food reservoirs (i.e., starches), or the
protective substances (i.e., exudate gums or sap).

Gaw’s Sweer Sucar-FiieD Formuta

ror Our Lives

CO, + H,0 (in the presence of chlorophyll and light) =
CH,O + Oy

I’ve been told this should actually be, 6 CO, + 6 H,O =
CeH120¢ (glucose) + 6 O, but I’m sorry, to me that’s just not
as poetic. So, in other words: Animal out-breath combined
with pure water within the precious chlorophyll-full bodies of
our herbs, in the presence of sunlight, yields food-full
carbohydrates and free oxygen for animal in-breaths. Amen.

“Absolute alcohol” (100 percent ethyl alcohol) is
hard to produce and maintain because when
subjected to the atmosphere it quickly absorbs 5
percent water (absolute glycerin does the same
thing). Therefore, when I use the term “absolute
alcohol,” I am really referring to the 95 percent
ethyl alcohol/5 percent water mix that is
commonly used by herbal manufacturers.

----- PAGE 153 -----
When in doubt, use “dilute alcohol” as a
menstruum.

Tannins

Tannins are non-nitrogenous bodies that have an astringent taste
and action on body proteins, rendering a protective layer on the
mucous membranes and skin. They strike a blue-black or a green-
black color with ferric (iron) salts. Widely distributed, especially in
barks and leaves, most tannins form precipitates with alkaloids,
albumin (protein), and many metallic salts, particularly iron salts.
For this reason, they are of special interest to medicine-makers who
would avoid the preparation of unsightly mixtures (for example,
combinations of Goldenseal with Oak or Anemopsis) or of
dangerous alkaloidal precipitates. Powerful alkaloids, thus
precipitated, would be apt to be taken in the last doses of a bottle
of medicine in which there had been a failure to “shake the bottle
before using.” The inclusion of glycerin in an extracting menstruum
for a tannin-containing plant will bind the tannins, so they will not
readily precipitate any accompanying alkaloids. Tannins are very
soluble in water, soluble in glycerin, and somewhat soluble in
alcohol. One can achieve an excellent “tannin tincture” using a
menstruum of merely 20 percent alcohol, 80 percent water.

Waxes (Cerae)

Waxes are compounds of fatty acids with certain alcohols. They
differ from fats in that they contain no glycerin. They melt when
heated and are brittle at low temperatures. They come in varying
degrees of solidity. Examples: beeswax, Carnuba wax.

SUMMARY

Since most medicinal plants are made up of representatives from
several of the above-mentioned constituents. categorized as either

----- PAGE 154 -----
active or ballast substances, the extraction agents should not be
geared solely to any individual substance. Alcohol concentrations of
40 percent (sometimes less) to 60 percent (sometimes more) are
customarily utilized, according to the official instructions given in
most pharmacopoeia. Therefore, venturing resolutely into the risky
arena of publicly stating a personal opinion in current herbal
literature, I offer the following, experience-based summation of that
which has gone before ... to beginning students of herbal medicine-
making who are faced with the task and awesome responsibility of
formulating a suitable water-alcohol base menstruum for making an
extract, I boldly suggest: when in doubt, use “dilute alcohol” as a
menstruum. This is a very practical solution. There is sufficient
amount of both water and alcohol to adequately dissolve the
components of any plant and there is enough alcohol to preserve
most any solution. One hundred-proof vodka is a dilute alcohol
(approximately 50 percent absolute ethyl alcohol, 50 percent
water) which is available at any liquor store for your use, whereas
190-proof grain ethyl alcohol is not so readily available.

For our purposes, merely divide the proof number (found on all
commercial alcoholic beverage labels) by 2 to determine the
percentage of absolute ethyl alcohol by volume contained in the
product. An 80-proof vodka or gin, for example, is (approximately)
40 percent absolute ethyl alcohol, 60 percent other liquid; a 150-
proof rum is (approximately) 75 percent absolute ethyl alcohol, 25
percent other liquid.

----- PAGE 155 -----


----- PAGE 156 -----
Herbal medicines can be prepared in different forms or “vehicles.”
These preparations are designed for efficient delivery of herbal
actions and nutrients to the body and mind, and, if they are to be
stored any length of time, for efficiency of preservation. It is not
convenient to administer Saw Palmetto or Uva Ursi, for instance, in
the form of berries and leaves. respectively. It would be a

----- PAGE 157 -----
disagreeable task for an individual, an ailing person in particular, to
chew these crude forms of the plant remedies. And likewise, it
would be difficult for this person to obtain in this way the full
nutritional and medicinal activity of these herbs. However, a water-
alcohol tincture of Saw Palmetto berries or a cold water infusion of
Uva Ursi leaves represents pretty much the true pharmacological
activity of the herbs because the therapeutic and nutritional
principles are held in solution, are easily administered (although in
this case it doesn’t do much to improve the flavor of the Palmetto
berries), and ultimately assimilated, while the indigestible parts
have been separated out and removed.

Some forms of herbal medicine are designed to be taken orally;
others are prepared in forms suitable for topical application either
directly onto the skin, in the ear, as an eye wash, or inserted
vaginally or rectally. Some of these vehicles require a menstruum
for the development of their unique design, others don’t. Following
is a working outline of these various vehicles that will give you an
overall view of the major players in the theater of herbal pharmacy.
Detailed instruction and supplementary information about the
preparation and use of these herbal delivery vehicles is the subject
of the following chapters.

HERBAL PREPARATIONS TAKEN ORALLY

PREPARATIONS USING A MENSTRUUM

Water-based menstruum

© Infusions, teas (one can also use fruit juice as a water-base
menstruum)
Hot infusions
Cold infusions

© Decoctions

Concentrates

© Jellos

e

----- PAGE 158 -----
© Hydrosols
© Flower essences

Alcohol-based menstruum

e Tinctures (maceration)

Folk method
Weight/volume method

e Tinctures (percolation)

e Fluid extracts (1:1 w/v extracts)
Wine-based menstruum

© Wine infusions
Vinegar-based menstruum

© Vinegar infusions
Glycerin-based menstruum

© Glycerites
Oil-based menstruum

© Oil infusions
Sugar or honey-based menstruum

© Syrups

© Oxymels

e Electuaries (honeys, confections)
PREPARATIONS NOT USING A MENSTRUUM

 Succus (expressed plant juice)

© Capsules
© Pills (tablets)

----- PAGE 159 -----
° Powders
© Lozenges (troches)

HERBAL PREPARATIONS FOR TOPICAL APPLICATION
i.e., Skin, vaginal mucosa, or rectal mucosa

Liniments

Lotions and creams
Hydrosols

Flower essences
Medicinal oils and salves
Ointments and balms
Suppositories, boluses
Fomentations (a.k.a. compresses or hot packs)
Poultices

Baths

Full body bath

Sitz bath

Foot and hand baths

Eye washes

® Douches

eoereecececeee

Parrs or Pranrs Emprovep As Hersat Mepicines

PLANT PART EXAMPLE
Barks (Cortices) Willow, Crampbark
Bulbs (Bulbi) Garlic, Onion
Cellular

Hairs Cotton

----- PAGE 160 -----
Piths (Loose spongy tissue)
Spores (Primitive reproductive
bodies)

Glands

Excrescences (An abnormal
outgrowth)

Corms (Cormi; a short, bulblike,

underground, upright stem
having a few scale-like leaves)

Flowers (Flores)

Fruits (Fructi)

Fruiting bodies of fungi Herbs
(Herba)

Juices (Succus; the fluid portion

of a plant)

Leaf and leaflets (Folia et
Foliola)

Lichen (Thallus; a composite
organism consisting of a fungus

Sassafras pith
Lycopodium

Lupulin (from the strobiles
of the Hop)

Nutgall (highest source of
tannic acid)

Trillium

Calendula, Chamomile,
Hawthorn, Elder, Clove
buds, Gumweed

Cayenne, Vitex, Elder berry,
Hawthorn berry, Saw
Palmetto, Fennel

Reishi, Maitake, Turkey Tail

St. John’s Wort, Yarrow,
Scullcap, Nettle,
Peppermint, Mugwort
Cleavers, Plantain,
Wheatgrass

Comfrey, Mullein, Ginkgo,

----- PAGE 161 -----
living symbiotically with an
algae)

Rhizomes (Rhizomata; an
underground root-like stem)

Roots (Radices)

Seeds (Semina)

Thallus (A plant body showing
no differentiation into distinct

members, as stem, leaves, roots,

etc.)

Tubers (Tubera; a short, fleshy,
usually underground stem or
shoot)

Woods (Ligna)

Uva Ursi, Plantain Usnea

Ginger, Wild Yam,
Goldenseal, Black Cohosh,
Valerian

Echinacea, Burdock, Yellow
Dock, Comfrey, Dandelion,
Marshmallow, Siberian
Ginseng

Burdock, Echinacea,
Psyllium, Chia, Flax
(Linseed), Nettle

Kelp, Dulse

Aconite, Devil’s Claw,
Western Peony

Quassia, Sandalwood

----- PAGE 162 -----


----- PAGE 163 -----
CHAPTER &

From the inception of herbal pharmacy, herbal traditions
throughout the world have favored the simple infusion and
decoction of medicinal plants as their predominant form of
extraction. Only within this last 100 years has there been an
emphasis on making concentrated alcohol and/or glycerin solvent
tinctures and other highly concentrated fractional extracts. This

----- PAGE 164 -----
compulsion has followed in the footsteps of those Western scientific
interests who sought to isolate and concentrate pharmaceutically
“active” constituents. Mainstream pharmacy secured its livelihood
by catering to these flourishing medical practitioners who chose to
rely on the drug qualities of botanicals. In current mainstream
medical pharmacy (mimicked by today’s predominant herbal mass
marketing), these concentrated alcohol extracts continue to be
considered more sophisticated; therefore, they are aggressively
marketed as more potent.

After experiencing the energy of a wide variety of differently
prepared extracts, it is my sense that our culture’s current obsession
with so-called “pharmaceutically active ingredients” has erroneously
(and I suspect naively) disregarded as superfluous the remaining so-
called “inactive” or “passive” components. The urgency and
consistency with which twentieth (and now twenty-first) century
medical pharmacists and herbal product marketers have acted to
isolate and concentrate the “active” components as a method to
establish increased “potency” in their products has heedlessly
eliminated vast amounts of each medicinal plant’s complementary
“ballast,” or so-called “inert” components.

In my opinion, these “inert” constituents—common residents in
infusions and decoctions—are carriers of a plant’s “tonic” mineral
stash which a human body requires for successful digestion,
assimilation, elimination, repair, toning, and overall health
maintenance. And equally important (in fact, profoundly essential
to physical health), many of these “passive” components, especially
the non-digestible ones that slide into our colon untouched by our
erosive stomach secretions, supply food for multi-millions of
beneficial microorganisms that dwell in our gut. These
microorganisms have been recently termed “pro-biotics,” for they
are the good-guy germs that live (and ideally are thriving) in our
digestive tract.

Microbiologists have observed many nutrients taken into the
human body as food are not used by the body, but instead appear
to be eaten by friendly bacteria that live in colonies lining the
human intestine. The formidable presence in our gastrointestinal

----- PAGE 165 -----
tract of these beneficial organisms is essential for our physical well-
being, because they participate in the chemistry of digestion and
prevent non-beneficial pathogenic organisms from capitalizing on
any opportunities to establish colonies in our digestive tube. The
pathogens are so overwhelmingly outnumbered that they can’t
secure any intestinal real estate to colonize as home. In other words,
the “inactive” constituents of a plant make up the fodder that feeds
the pro-biotic organisms which render healthy digestion possible
and constitute the substrata of the geography of our entire physical
immune system. With this information, it requires little imagination
to speculate that the “inactive,” “inert” ingredients in whole herbs
are also used as food for these bacteria in the GI tract, and this
allows these microorganisms to assist the body to assimilate the
nutritional components along with the “active” components of the
herb.

Stemming from this insight, I contend that the Chinese style of
low heat, slow decoction, and to a lesser extent our own culture’s
historic use of infusion-pots (see illustrations, this page), yield
medicinal-tonic extracts that are overall superior to other methods
of extraction. These simple techniques supply us with extracts that
deliver not only the pharmacologically active components of an
herb, but their nutritive components as well, along with the fodder
that is used by beneficial intestinal flora to help us digest and
assimilate all of this. And subsequently, these same flora, well-fed,
go about their life cycle, thrive, and therein lay the primal
groundwork for our physical immune system. In other words,
except for those folks who prefer to use herbs simplistically as
drugs rather than as herbal tonic foods and medicines, I fail to see
how we (in spite of the revered evolution of technologically
sophisticated alternative forms of extraction) have improved much
on (unfiltered) herbal tea (or capsules of powdered truly whole
herb) as a potent tonic beverage and plant medicine—I rest my
rant.

A properly prepared herbal infusion or decoction is not merely a
cup of tea. These extraction processes are quick, efficient methods
for preparing and administering an easily assimilated herbal

----- PAGE 166 -----
tonic/medicine/food, and they help supply water for keeping the
body properly hydrated, as well as provide appropriate materials
for abundant pro-biotic proliferation.

The term infusion is derived from the Latin infundere, meaning
to pour in. An infusion is a liquid preparation made by treating
fresh or dehydrated vegetable substances with either hot or cold
water to extract the medicinal and nutritional principles. Herbalists
also use other fluid menstruums for preparing infusions, such as
vinegar, dilute glycerin, wine, juice, etc.

Infusions can be made in three ways:

 Maceration (soaking a properly ground or chopped herb in
a menstruum until it is thoroughly penetrated and the
soluble portions softened and dissolved)

© Digestion (maceration subjected to moderate continual heat
below boiling temperature, the heat quickening the solvent
powers of the menstruum)

* Percolation

Because infusions are generally extemporaneous preparations, and
are frequently needed immediately, the process of maceration is the
most simple, practical, and usually preferred method. In this
chapter I will discuss primarily the maceration method of preparing
herbal infusions.

By definition, herbal infusions represent the solvent action of
boiled water (or in some instances, cold water) on herbs for a given
time period. This period of time varies according to the degree of
ex-tractability of the principles to be dissolved. During the infusion
process, the herb is not subjected to boiling, although it is common
to pour boiling water over the plant material. The infusion process
is particularly suitable for substances with a light structure and
comparatively soft tissue easily exhausted of their principles, such
as flowers, most leaves, soft stems, and some roots. This process of
extraction is also most suitable for those plant tissues containing
volatile or other principles which would be dissipated or injured by
boiling. such as Chamomile and Red Clover blossoms, Peppermint

----- PAGE 167 -----
leaves, or Valerian root. Because the constituents of many of the
plants that are normally infused are volatile, infusions should
always be conducted in closed vessels.

HERB PREPARATION

Herbs are best prepared for extraction with water as a menstruum
by cutting them into thin slices or grinding to a coarse powder,
especially harder parts you want to infuse (like volatile roots such
as Valerian which, unlike most roots, should not be boiled as a
decoction). In this form, they can be easily permeated by the liquid.
If you are wanting to separate all undissolved particles (pro-biotic
fodder) from the final infusion (which I do not recommend, but
some folks insist on relating only to clear liquids), the use of fine
powders should be avoided for they are difficult to remove. Fresh,
undried herbs should be cut into small pieces and/or bruised.
Flowers can be infused whole.

WATER

Clear soft water, rainwater, or distilled water are best for making
infusions. Hard or limestone water from springs or wells are often
unfit, for they are apt to foster precipitation. While the common
practice of using hot water has time-saving advantages, in some
cases, depending on the herbalist’s preference and intent, it can be
inefficient. This is because (for those insisting on clear liquid) many
inert components in an herb are dissolved by the hot water, and as
the infusion cools, these components separate out in a finely
divided condition. When one wants to, it is often difficult to remove
them even by filtration. This mainly affects the appearance and
preservation of the infusion. However, infusions are usually used
directly, and one doesn’t normally intend to preserve them for very
long. Of the inert components found in plants, starch is extracted by
hot water and albumin (plant protein) by cold water. while gum,

----- PAGE 168 -----
sugar, and other extractives are dissolved by both. When infusions
are made with boiling water, starch and other principles are often
taken up, and their presence over time disposes to acidity or
moldiness. Hot water also coagulates plant albumin, which can
materially impair the extraction process. In these instances, cold
water infusions would be preferable. In light of this phenomenon,
plant materials that are high in albumin, such as most roots and
barks, are ordinarily decocted rather than infused. Decoctions are
initiated using cold water, which is then slowly heated as a means
to circumvent problems stemming from the coagulation of albumin;
but we’ll discuss all this in Chapter Nine, “Decoction.”
Consider selecting cold water for the menstruum when:

© The herb contains a valuable volatile constituent (i.e.,
essential oil, frequently found in blossoms and leaves). As
beverage teas, however, we all use hot water for making
Peppermint, Chamomile, Lemon Balm, and the like.

© The desirable principles are readily soluble in water of
ordinary temperature (such as Slippery Elm bark,
Marshmallow root) or would be deteriorated by high
temperatures (such as Wild Cherry bark).

© The herb contains a constituent that is not desired and not
readily dissolved by cold water (such as the safrol in
Sassafras root bark or the tannins in Uva Ursi).

CONTAINERS

The most suitable vessels for infusions are made of glazed
earthenware, porcelain, or glass. Tinned iron, aluminum, or
metallic vessels are unsuited for infusions, and are particularly
objectionable when the herb contains tannin, gallic acid, or an
astringent constituent.

The vessel to be used should be warmed before the infusion
process, so it does not chill the hot liquid menstruum.

An infusion-pot with a design that retains the herb within the top

----- PAGE 169 -----
section of the solvent, similar to one of the accompanying
illustrations, is best suited for preparing an herbal infusion.

The advantage of these designs is that the material is efficiently
exhausted by circulatory displacement. Circulatory displacement
occurs as the molecules of the liquid menstruum in direct contact
with the herb become charged with the soluble ingredients of the
herb and acquire an increased specific gravity. As each charged
molecule sinks to the bottom of the pot, its place is taken by an
unattached molecule (the unsaturated “empty” portion of the
menstruum), which has risen to the top to further extract the
remaining soluble ingredients in the herb. The herb is therefore
constantly subjected to the solvent power of the least impregnated
portion of the menstruum, and this circulation goes on until all of
the soluble matter is extracted or the menstruum becomes fully
saturated.

You can demonstrate the process of circulatory displacement for
yourself if you take a clear glass jar (a pint to a quart size) and fill
it with hot water; then lay a tea bag (preferably a dark-colored tea,
so the process will be most visible) on the very top of the water
and keep it there by tightening down the lid of the jar onto the
string close to the bag. Now leave the jar untouched and observe
the extracted constituents as they descend to the bottom of the jar,
displacing the less dense unattached water molecules. Eventually
the entire menstruum will be equally impregnated with the
extracted herbal constituents. Provided there is sufficient water in
the jar, the herb in the bag will become depleted of its soluble
constituents which have gone into solution.

----- PAGE 170 -----
Alsop’s Infusion Jar

5

Infusion Pitcher

il

Squire’s Infusion Mug

----- PAGE 171 -----
[P

aig

la
SSS,

Homemade Infusion Mug

Whenever using a tea bag or a tea ball, suspend the herb-filled
apparatus in the upper part of the menstruum in order to take full
advantage of the principles of circulatory displacement (stirring is
never required). This is particularly important when using cold
water menstrua, as there are no heat currents to help promote the
infusion.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

Infusions should not be made in large quantities unless it is for
immediate use. They are generally difficult to preserve because the
herbal principles extracted by the water begin to decompose fairly
quickly. Infusions soon spoil if special precautions are not taken to
preserve them. Ideally, they should be used within a 12-hour period
with about a 24-hour maximum limit, if stored in a very cool place.

It will help to keep in mind that a pint is
approximately equivalent to 500 ml, a quart is
approximately equivalent to a liter (1000 ml), a

----- PAGE 172 -----
fluid ounce is approximately equivalent to 30 ml,
and an ounce is approximately equivalent to 30
Gm.

DOSAGE

Dosage varies according to type of herb(s) and the size, age, and
condition of the person drinking the infusion. Normally, the
recommended adult dosage is one cupful three times a day. When
an individual appears to have a kidney condition that does not
readily allow adequate urine production, or when there is evidence
of extreme weakness, a reduced dosage is usually recommended.

METHODS OF PREPARATION

The U.S. has distinguished itself as the only major country on
planet Earth that has not officially adopted the metric system as its
conventional system of weights and measures. (By god, no one is
going to tell us what to do!) Outside of our scientific community,
we (and also the people of Burma) still embrace an archaic
measuring system that originally disgorged out of the egocentrism
of a long line of ancient French monarchs, and our esteemed
leaders apparently lack the presence of mind or more likely the
political courage to seriously suggest that we modernize ourselves.
Hear me out now; I’m not suggesting we throw away our current
system, that would be too much like throwing away one’s treasured
old toy (or newest electronic device). No way! I’m simply
suggesting that we make ourselves bi-scale (teach metric in schools)
and learn to measure reasonably well in both systems. Therefore, in
the spirit of this suggestion, I will try to make the measurements
referred to in this manual as user-friendly as possible for us
avoirdupois devotees, and us metric geeks. (It’s tough, though; I
grew up avoirdupois.) Please see Chapter Twelve, “Tincturing by
Maceration.” and Chapter Twenty-Five. the section “Weights and

----- PAGE 173 -----
Measures,” for further discussion of this voluminous controversy.

The method of preparation that follows is based on standard
measurements and procedures directed by official pharmacy
manuals for preparing herbal infusions. It is a clear illustration for
explaining how to make an infusion. This method produces 500 ml
(1 pint) of tea which if consumed in its entirety delivers the activity
of 25 Gm (1 ounce) of dried herb. However, one would normally
not be directed to drink 500 ml of this tea in one day but perhaps
90 ml (3 fluid ounces) of tea 3x a day which would deliver the
activity of 13 to 14 Gm (approximately 1/2 ounce) of dried herb
for the daily dose. Most herbalists today tend to make their
infusions and decoctions more dilute, recommending for example
3-5 Gm of dried herb in 250 ml (approximately 1 cup) of water 3x
a day. This delivers the activity of 9 to 15 Gm of dried herb (and
more liquid than the official method does) for the daily dose. Bear
in mind that the amount of liquid used to prepare a medicinal tea
is not so important, the weight of herb used is. (It is this latter
method I will be referring to when giving recommended dosages in
the final section of this chapter.)

Hor Inrusion

Unless otherwise appropriate, hot infusions are made of 1 part
coarsely ground herb (2 parts if using fresh undried herb) to 20
parts of boiling water (or other hot menstruum), or, for
example, 25 Gm (1 oz.) of herb [50 Gm (2 oz.) of chopped
fresh herb] to 500 ml (1 pint) of boiling water.

1. Put the herb into a suitable vessel (with a lid). (It is not
essential but preferable to pre-warm the vessel or enclose the
herb in a suitable container to employ the circulatory
displacement technique discussed above.)

----- PAGE 174 -----
2. Pour boiling water upon the herb.

3. Stir well (do not stir if using the circulatory displacement
technique).

4. Cover the vessel tightly, and let it stand for 20 to 30 minutes
in a warm place.

5. Strain and, if possible, press out the marc (pulp). It is
obvious that bulky herbs and flowers (i.e., Chamomile, Red
Clover blossoms, Mullein leaves) will retain a considerable
proportion of the extract, and this will be lost if the marc is
not pressed.

6. Add enough hot water (pour it through the pressed marc) to
make the infusion measure 500 ml (1 pint).

Cox Infusion

Cold infusions are made using 1 part of herb to 20 parts of
water, or 25 Gm (1 ounce) of coarsely ground herb to 500 ml
(1 pint) of cold water. (Depending on the quality of the herb, a
small amount of Slippery Elm bark or Marshmallow root can
provide an abundance of mucilaginous slime—experiment
with this.)

1. Put the herb into the water and let it remain overnight at
room temperature. With cold infusion it is recommended that
the herb be contained in a small cotton pouch, suspended in
the water overnight, and squeezed out when the infusion
process is completed.

2. Strain, and press the marc.

----- PAGE 175 -----
3. If necessary, add enough cold water to make the infusion
measure 500 ml (1 pint).

Bitter herbs do not require quite as large a
quantity of crude herb as other herbs do, and only
a pinch of a very intense herb like Cayenne is
needed for an effective infusion (use more if you
like the heat wave).

The properties of Goldenseal root are not soluble
enough in water to be efficiently prepared as a
tea.

Heras on THE “35 Herps AnD A Funcus” List

Tuat Are Wet Preparep As AN Inrusion

Including a recommended dosage—ex. 3-5 Gm (grams) dry
herb. This amount would be infused in approximately 1 cup
water.

As recommended in Chapter Four, “Kitchen Pharmacy
Equipment,” it’s best to obtain a scale that measures gram
weight. Using this scale, you can easily prepare the following
recommended dosages; it is impractical and maddening to
attempt to measure these as fractions of ounces or portions of a
spoonful.

HOT INFUSION
Cayenne A pinch to a tolerable amount

Chamomile 3-5 Gm: 3x a day

----- PAGE 176 -----
Cleavers 3-5 Gm:

2-4 Gm:
Comfrey leaf

3x a day or as needed

2x a day (See discussion of

Comfrey in Chapter Two.)

Dandelion leaf 3-5 Gm:
Elder flower &

2-5 Gm:
berry
Fennel, crushed

2-4 Gm:
seed
Ginger, dry 2-3 Gm:
Ginkgo 2-4 Gm:

Goldenseal leaf, dry 1-3 Gm:

Hawthorn leaf,

2-5 Gm:
flower, & berry
Mugwort 2-3 Gm:
Mullein leaf 3-5 Gm:
Nettle herb 3-5 Gm:
Oat spikelets and

3-5 Gm:
straw
Peppermint 3-5 Gm:
Plantain 2-5 Gm:
St. John’s Wort 3-5 Gm:
Saw Palmetto

2-5 Gm:

berries

3x a day

3x a day

3x a day

fresh a few slices
3x a day
3x a day

3x a day

3x a day
to 4x a day

: 3x a day

3x a day

: 3x a day

3x a day

: 3x a day

3x a day

----- PAGE 177 -----
mee p tke

dried

Valerian

Yarrow

COLD INFUSION
Burdock root
Chamomile

Cleavers
Comfrey root

Crampbark
Marshmallow root
Mugwort

Nettle root or
whole herb

Peppermint
Uva Ursi

Slippery Elm*

2-5 Gm:

2-5 Gm:

2-5 Gm

3-5 Gm:

3-5 Gm:

3-5 Gm:

2-4 Gm:

3x a day

3x a day

: 3x a day

: 3x a day

3x a day

: 3x a day or as needed

3x a day (See discussion of

Comfrey in Chapter Two.)

3-5 Gm:
3-5 Gm:
2-3 Gm:

2-5 Gm:

3-5 Gm:
2-4 Gm:
2-5 Gm:

up to 4x a day
3x a day
3x a day

3x a day

3x a day
3x a day
3x a day

*Slippery Elm has to be included in this section for it is such

an important and commonly prepared cold infusion.

----- PAGE 178 -----


----- PAGE 179 -----
ECOCTION

Decoctions are liquid preparations made by boiling either fresh or
dehydrated herbal substances with water or other fluids. Along with
infusions, decoctions are a standard method for preparing medicinal
teas. Decoction is also the chief method used to extract herbal
constituents for use as fomentations, syrups, and enemas.

Decoction. from the Latin decoquere. meaning to boil down or

----- PAGE 180 -----
away, is normally reserved for herbs that will not yield their active
virtues at a lower temperature and for situations in which no loss of
volatile principles need be feared (for example, with Fenugreek
seed, Astragalus, Sarsaparilla, or Licorice). The object of preparing
decoctions is to secure, in aqueous solution, the soluble active
principles of herbs that are hard and woody and have a close, dense
texture. Their tissues are softened more readily by boiling than by
merely steeping in hot water, and are not injured by heat. This
would be especially hard, ligneous, wood-like herbs such as most
roots, barks, and some seeds.

Herbs whose activity depends on resinous constituents (like
Gumweed and Yerba Santa), or herbs that contain substances liable
to be changed into insoluble and inert materials under boiling heat
(like Marshmallow and Slippery Elm), should never be subjected to
decoction. Likewise, herbs containing volatile principles should
never be subjected to decoction (i.e., Valerian root, Peppermint,
Fennel).

Incompound decoctions where several herbs are employed
together, it is probably best to add different types of herbs at
different points in the process. The hard, ligneous herbal
ingredients that need to be boiled for extended periods should be
added first, while the herbs which more readily yield all their
virtues should be added toward the end of the process. The
aromatic herbs, or those containing volatile oils, should be added
after the decoction has been removed from the heat, so that the
volatile oils will not evaporate. A decoction that includes aromatic
herbs should be kept closely covered until it has cooled down.

HERB PREPARATION

The herbs to be decocted should be cut or ground, the degree of
fineness depending upon the nature of the tissue. Woody, ligneous
herbs may be reduced to a moderately fine powder and/or soaked
in cold water for 12 hours before bringing the water to a boil.
Leaves, however. and other parts of the herb that consist mainly of

----- PAGE 181 -----
loose parenchyma (pulpy or pithy portions) are better used in the
form of a moderately coarse or very coarse powder. When fresh
undried herbs are used in a decoction, the roots should be cut into
very thin slices, barks and woods should be shaved down to small
pieces, seeds lightly crushed, and leaves and whole herbs only
moderately cut.

WATER

Clear, naturally soft water, rainwater, or distilled water should be
used in making decoctions, since hard or limestone water from
springs or wells is often apt to cause precipitation.

CONTAINER

Glazed earthenware, porcelain, or glass vessels are the best choices
for preparing decoctions, as they will bear the heat of boiling water
if heated gradually. Iron vessels are not well suited because the
tannin of astringent herbs will react with the iron, causing
discoloration.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

Decoctions are intended for immediate use—ideally within a 24-
hour period, with about a 72-hour maximum limit if stored in a
very cool place. As with infusions, the difficulty in preserving
decoctions arises from the decomposition of the starches and the
mucilaginous and albuminous principles that have been extracted
by the water and retained in the preparation. Except when
demanded for immediate use, decoctions should not be made in
large quantities.

DOSAGE

----- PAGE 182 -----
As always, the proper dosage depends on the age, body weight, and
temperament of the individual. In general, give a wineglass to a
cupful of liquid three times a day.

METHODS OF PREPARATION

[Restated (minus the accompanying preliminary rant) from Chapter
Eight, “Infusions”]

The method of preparation that follows is based on standard
measurements and procedures directed by official pharmacy
manuals for preparing herbal infusions. It is a clear illustration for
explaining how to make a decoction. This method produces 500 ml
(1 pint) of tea which, if consumed in its entirety, delivers the
activity of 25 Gm (1 ounce) of dried herb. However, one would
normally not be directed to drink 500 ml of this tea in one day, but
perhaps 90 ml (3 fluid ounces) of tea 3x a day which would deliver
the activity of 13 to 14 Gm (approximately 1/2 ounce) of dried
herb for the daily dose. Most herbalists today tend to make their
infusions and decoctions more dilute, recommending, for example,
3-5 Gm of dried herb in 250 ml (approximately 1 cup) of water 3x
a day. This delivers the activity of 9 to 15 Gm of dried herb (and
more liquid than the official method does) for the daily dose. Bear
in mind that the amount of liquid used to prepare a medicinal tea
is not so important, the weight of herb used is. (It is this latter
method I will be referring to when giving recommended dosages in
the final section of this chapter.)

The amount of liquid used to prepare a medicinal
tea is not so important, the weight of herb used
is.

Decocrion

----- PAGE 183 -----
If the strength of the decoction is not otherwise directed:

1. Place 25 Gm of herb (approximately 1 ounce) into a
suitable vessel with a cover. (Use half to three quarters this
amount of herb if you want a weaker decoction.)

2. Pour upon it 500 ml (approximately 1 pint) of cold water. It
is important to begin the process with cold water in order to
ensure the complete extraction of all soluble principles from
the herb by the gradually heated water. The albuminous matter
is subsequently extracted out of the cells and slowly coagulated
outside the herb as the heat is increased to near the boiling
point. If the herb is immersed in boiling water, the albumen
contained in cells will possibly coagulate at once and can
interfere significantly with the extraction of the other
constituents.

3. If time allows, let the herb macerate—soak—a few hours
prior to heating.

4. Cover the container well and bring the ingredients slowly to
a boil.

5. Decrease the heat and simmer it for approximately 10 to 15
minutes. The harder the material, the longer the simmering
time of extraction needed. If not specified, this extraction time
must be determined by observation, common sense, and
experience.

6. After decoction, press the herb hard to make sure all the
solution is removed from the marc (the remaining undissolved
pulp).

7. Allow the pressed decoction to cool to a temperature below
104° E (40° C.), and strain the liquid. If you wish, after it cools,

----- PAGE 184 -----
this decoction can be further strained using a filter paper. By
then, principles which are soluble only in hot water are mostly
precipitated and, if desired, generally can be removed without
weakening the medicinal value of the preparation. However,
even with this precaution, the strained liquid may become
unsightly due to further deposition of matter that is soluble
only in hot water or by the development of apotheme (the
dark deposit which sometimes appears in vegetable infusions
and decoctions once exposed to air). None of this matter is
harmful to drink (some would even contend that it is highly
beneficial—see previous chapter). It just looks disagreeable to
some folks, however, and it is kind to cater to the consumer’s
aesthetic preference.

8. Pour enough water through the marc to return the volume of
water to 500 ml.

A. HISTORIC METHOD OF DECOCTION, ADAPTED FROM Kinc’s

American Dispensatory, 1898.
Decoctum Taraxaci—Decocrion or DanpeLion

Slice and bruise 1 oz. of dried dandelion root, and
boil it in 1 pint of distilled water for 10 minutes.
Strain, and pour upon the residue in the strainer
enough distilled water to make the finished
product measure 1 pint. A little orange peel
added at the end of the boiling period is said to
increase its usefulness. This preparation does not
keep well and must be freshly prepared.

----- PAGE 185 -----
Heres on THE 35 “Heras and A Funcus” List

Twat Are Weu Preparep py Decocrion

Including a recommended dosage—ex. 3-5 Gm (grams) dry
herb. This amount would be decocted in approximately 1 cup
(250 ml) water.

As recommended in Chapter Four, “Kitchen Pharmacy
Equipment,” it’s best to obtain a scale that measures gram
weight. Using this scale, you can easily prepare the following
recommended dosages.

Blackberry root
2-5 Gm: 2-4x a day

bark

Black Cohosh root 1-3 Gm: 3x a day

Burdock seeds 2-5 Gm: 3x a day

Comfrey root 2-3 Gm: 3x a day
(See discussion of Comfrey in Chapter
Two.)

Crampbark 2-5 Gm: up to 4x a day
2-6 Gm: 3x a day

Dandelion root (King’s decocts for 10 min.; I decoct it 30
min.)

Echinacea root 2-5 Gm: 3x a day

Ginger fresh slices,

dry

Mullein root 3-5 Gm: up to 4x a day
3-6 Gm: 3x a day

-3 Gm in warm water

Daishi

----- PAGE 186 -----
aioe .
(Decoct 45 minutes.)

Siberian Ginseng 2-4 Gm: 3x a day
Willow bark 2-10 Gm: 3x a day
Yellow Dock root 1-3 Gm: 3x a day

----- PAGE 187 -----


----- PAGE 188 -----
CHAPTER 10

|. DISTILLATION 8
OF HYDROSOLS

Oil and water aren’t miscible, this fact being the inspiration for one
of our culture’s most popular clichés. And while the accuracy of this
statement is experienced time after time by most of us in our daily
lives, there is a particular situation in which an aromatic volatile oil
and water reach out to one another and create a dramatic bond. I
know! I know volatile oils aren’t really oils—give me some slack:

----- PAGE 189 -----
I’m taking a little license here. The story of this chemical cohesion
is a phyto-aqueous enactment of Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet,
wherein the youthful opposites of two ego-immiscible families fall
deeply in love and give themselves wholeheartedly to one another
within the heat of a steaming social environment. But unlike
Shakespeare’s grand finale, wherein Romeo and Juliet choose to
leave their uncompromising world and continue their romance in
the nonphysical realms, oil and water sustain their affair in an
ethereal oneness on this physical plane as a delightfully aesthetic
anomaly, and this aromatic coupling is what aromatherapists refer
to as a hydrosol or a hydrolate.

A true hydrosol is a particularly pleasant offspring of the steam
distillation of aromatic plants. The initial introduction and coupling
of water and oil occurs in a heated vessel wherein water as steam
ascends, carrying with it volatile oil molecules dissolved from the
plant material. The two components of this vaporous blend sustain
an ardent embrace until they enter a cooling process, whereupon
the oil soluble components separate out once again from the water.
However an abiding remembrance of the torrid union forever
lingers as the departing aromatic molecules pass on an intimate
part of their qualities to the water, and this amiable water
maintains a subtly delicious memory of the passionate intimacy of
the distillation process being indelibly transformed into an aromatic
hydrosol. Therein, simple steam distillation of certain organic
material results in the production of two complementary liquid
assets: an aromatic volatile oil and a true aromatic hydrosol.

Most volatile oils are derived from plants in which they exist
ready formed. Upon completion of the distillation process the
distillate is usually milky, and on standing separates, with most of
the oil rising to the top, while the water (hydrosol) continues
charged to saturation with the oil. Except for Rose water and
Orange blossom water, throughout the history of volatile oil
production, most hydrosols were disposed of as waste. Only in very
recent times have these fascinating waters been valued as carriers of
a rarefied form of the volatile oils, coexisting in combination with
many mild and soothing water-soluble components of the plant that

----- PAGE 190 -----
are not present in volatile oils. And whereas most volatile oils
contain bitter substances and some harsh components which if not
adequately diluted before application can cause irritation to the
inner and outer skin of the body, the complementary hydrosol
simply does not. Instead, these lotions present soothing, anti-
inflammatory acids and other compounds that gratify the skin, and
these agents are exclusive to the singular nature of aromatic
hydrosols.

Hydrosols are applied directly to the skin or taken internally, as
their flavor is far milder than that of volatile oils; and hydrosols are
much safer to drink, provided they have not been derived from a
toxic plant. Hydrosols make excellent base waters for preparing
syrups, lotions, fomentations, culinary exotica, etc. When applied to
the skin, hydrosols are mildly astringent and highly effective tonics
to be used daily. Not only are they not drying to the skin, but they
pleasantly counteract the drying effects of natural atmospheric
conditions, as well as the adverse conditions contrived by rampant
household, office, and in-flight air-conditioning technology.
Hydrosols are used as skin toners or added to other ingredients to
form compound lotions and hydrating masks. Hydrosols comfort
and nourish ultra-sensitive and/or inflamed skin where other agents
might be too strong. Many hydrosols are good for use on normal
and oily complexions, and on acne skin, and most are suitable for
moisturizing dry skin.

It is important to understand the contrast between true aromatic
hydrosols and commercial products labeled as “flower waters,”
“floral waters,” etc. Whereas hydrosols are a direct product of the
distillation process (a process which gives birth to complementary
sisters, a gentle aromatic water and a more acute volatile oil),
flower waters are generally fragrant liquids made by adding
aromatic volatile oil(s) to distilled water. These waters will not
contain the same hydrophilic (water fond) compounds as hydrosols,
and though often erotically aromatic (if that kind of behavior is
allowed on retail shelves), they are less effective as anti-
inflammatory, moisturizing agents.

In order to accumulate any appreciable quantity of volatile oil.

----- PAGE 191 -----
one must gather and manipulate an enormous amount of plant
material. This is one reason most volatile oils (essential oils) are so
costly. Volatile oils are a particularly precious component of the
plant: the plant manufactures only a diminutive amount of this
substance, granting only a small yield to the anticipative distiller.
However, with a relatively small amount of plant material, one can
readily produce a sufficient quantity of aromatic hydrosol for home
use. Once you contrive and assemble a still and get it functioning,
you will be able to feed it adequately from humble garden harvests
and make an abundance of a variety of hydrosols for yourself and
others. I used to grow a few plants of Catnip (Nepeta cataria) in my
yard, and by distilling their leaves, make enough Catnip hydrosol to
put just about every cat in the neighborhood into deep kitty stupor;
they loved it, couldn’t get enough. Alice’s Cheshire Cat is no longer
the only feline that can grin and fade away. And likewise, a Lemon
Verbena (Aloysia triphylla) hydrosol originating from the same
garden was (is) a human olfactory dream come true.

Another joy inherent in distilling hydrosols is that
it requires only a small amount of aromatic plant
material to produce a sufficient amount of this
holy water to annoint one’s home and body
throughout the year.

STORAGE AND PRESERVATION
Refrigerate your hydrosols. Store them in sterilized, tightly capped
bottles.
METHOD OF PREPARATION
As pointed out previously, hydrosols are a product of steam

distillation. Distillation is a process involving the conversion of a
liquid into a vapor subsequently condensed back to liquid form (the

----- PAGE 192 -----
distillate). This is exemplified at its simplest when steam from a
kettle becomes deposited as drops of distilled water on a surface.
Distillation is used to separate liquids (for our purposes, water and
volatile oils) from non-soluble solids (plant material). It’s
apparently an age-old process utilized by the early experimentalist
Aristotle (this man must have never slept), who mentioned that
pure water is made by evaporation of sea water.

>to.

‘a ae

SS

Homemade Still

The apparatus needed to perform this operation is a still or retort
in which a liquid is heated, a condenser to cool the vapor, and a
receiver to collect the distillate. This simple apparatus is sufficient
to separate volatile liquids from non-volatile materials, which is
what we will be doing here. The pieces of equipment used for
distillation in a lab are commonly made of glass and connected
with corks, rubber bungs, or ground glass joints. This equipment
can be purchased from a laboratory supply house (for megabucks).
However, one can contrive a variety of ingenious homemade
contraptions. I am going to share an example of this down-home

----- PAGE 193 -----
technology with you forthwith. It may not qualify as “ingenious,”
but it is assuredly illustrative and unquestionably loveable.

Equipment

This is a severely simple still that you can put together using
kitchen paraphernalia. Subsequently, if you get hooked on
distillation, you will undoubtedly want to contrive, acquire, and
assemble a more sophisticated apparatus. The rustic design
illustrated in this chapter works reasonably well, belonging to the
same league as the funky skateboards I used to build as a kid by
separating the two halves of the old metal-wheeled roller skates
and nailing them to the front and back of the bottom of a 2 x 6
piece of wood; they got me down the road ... eventually. And
damn it, this still will get you some aromatic hydrosol!

The Still

The still is a common enameled 20.4 L (21.5 quart) canning pot
that is designed to can fruit and vegetables. It’s normally dark blue
or black with white flecks all over it. It can be purchased in most
department stores.

The Condenser

The condenser is the lid of the canning pot placed upside down on
the pot. At the appropriate time, a mass of ice is placed on top of
this.

The Receiver

The receiver is a bowl that is placed inside the pot. It, in turn, is
sitting on a metal veggie steamer basket which has had its center
post removed and is standing in the center of the pot. This elevates
the receiver bowl. so that it is not jostled around by the rumbling

----- PAGE 194 -----
action of the boiling water and herbs during distillation.

To Maxe an Aromatic Hyprosot

1. Clean all the equipment.
2. Place approximately 3 liters (3 quarts) of water in the pot.

3. With the water, mix approximately 200 Gm (10 oz. or so) of
the selected plant or the parts of the plant containing volatile
oil. When appropriate, it is certainly okay to use more plant
material than suggested here; follow your judgment; weigh it
out and make notes.

4. Let this macerate for a couple hours.

5. Remove the center post from the metal veggie steamer
basket and stand the steamer, spread fully opened, in the
center of the pot.

6. Place the receiver bowl on the center of the steamer.
7. Put the lid right side up on the pot.
8. Put all this on the heat and bring it to a boil; keep watching!

9. As soon as the water begins to simmer, turn the lid upside
down on the pot.

10. Lay a thick plastic bag full of ice on the lid. (This way,
when the ice melts, the ensuing bag of water can be easily
removed and dealt with.) This step is semi-optional; the steam
will condense on the condenser lid without using the ice, but
the hydrosol seems to have a little more “something” when

----- PAGE 195 -----
you cool the lid with ice.

11. Adjust the heat to a moderate level. Keep the heat just high
enough to maintain the vaporization of the liquids.

12. Inside the pot, the water/aromatic oil vapor will rise to the
cooler lid, condense back to liquid, flow down to the low
point of the lid, and drip into the receiver which will collect
the hydrosol and volatile oil. Beware of steam whenever lifting
the lid of the pot. Escaping steam enjoys hot-licking
unsuspecting finger skin.

13. Place a wetted filter paper in a funnel.
14. Place the funnel into a jar or bottle that has a lid.

15. When the hydrosol is cool, pour it through the filter paper.
The hydrosol will pass through; if any appreciable volatile oil
is present, it will collect in the bottom of the filter paper cone.
You can collect this volatile oil with a dropper bottle pipette.

16. Cap the jar and refrigerate.

For best results, harvest the plant to be used at
the time of year and the time of the day when it
is highest in volatile oils.

Using this system, as the steam makes it to the
lid, much of it escapes out of the pot. Most of the
volatile oil probably escapes with this portion of
the vapor. When you use a more sophisticated
still that is sealed, you avoid this loss of vapor
and the volatile oil ends up floating on top of the
hydrosol which has been deposited in the receiver

----- PAGE 196 -----
vessel. In other words, don’t expect to collect
much volatile oil using this method. Aromatic
hydrosol, however, you will get, and I suspect you
will be delighted with it. You will probably want
to make more, and soon you will probably want
to upgrade your still ... journeying ever nearer
and nearer to the megabuck equipment
zone ... and no telling where this might lead you.
Follow your fascination and enjoyment, all will
be well and available to you.

Heras on THE “35 Herps AnD A Funcus” List

Tuat Are Wet Preparep As Hyprosois

Chamomile
Elder blossoms
Fennel
Peppermint
Yarrow

Other common garden plants that present excellent hydrosols
are:

Catnip (for the meowmaster)
Lavender
Lemon balm

Lemon verbena

----- PAGE 197 -----
Orange blossoms
Rosemary
Rose petals

And, of course, experiment with other aromatic plants.

----- PAGE 198 -----


----- PAGE 199 -----
In Chapter Three, in the section on harvesting, I suggested that the
Earth’s plants are a perpetual source of unconditional love. That
probably came over a little schmaltzy to some readers, and, at risk
of losing any fragments of cool-’n-macho status that might remain in
my account, I must avow that conclusion once again in this chapter,
with a further assertion that this love is most luminously expressed
by a plant’s flowers—sensual. uplifting communication with

----- PAGE 200 -----
members of the animal kingdom is a flower’s essence. And as
herbal medicine-makers, we can bring this pure positive energy
into solution—a most subtle aqueous solution.

It has been my recurrent experience and observation that floral
vibrations that have been infused in water that is sitting on the
Earth in a clear glass bowl, floating blossoms in the warm sunlight
of a clear blue sky, can profoundly affect the subtle disposition of
an ailing (or even more promising, a pre-ailing) being. Like a music
master’s hand tuning the eager strings of a perfect Stradivarius, the
pristine clarity of a flower’s uplifting vibrations adjusts the tone of
one’s thoughts and respondent feelings, bringing them back in
harmony with the richness of one’s true nature. When our thoughts
and feelings are in line with our spirit’s unique path, we resume
our journey as a vital creator of a prosperous, healthful, joyous life
—the intrinsic dynamics of a human being’s essence.

The life work of Dr. Edward Bach (1886-1936) pioneered
understanding of the subtle energy and actions of flower essence
medicine. Dr. Bach created a bouquet of subtle, water-infused floral
essences, each of which embraced and treated a being’s subtle
nonphysical nature, ultimately relieving manifested physical
symptoms. More importantly, the essences helped individuals
establish ease in their life, thereby preventing unpleasant physical
manifestations entirely. Edward Bach’s vision was to develop a
system of herbal medicine that anyone, when feeling out of sorts,
could use to diagnose and prepare his or her own medicines, and
treat himself or herself, thereby allaying illness before its physical
symptoms are made manifest. In a short period of seven years, Dr.
Bach succeeded brilliantly, and developed a system of herbal
therapeutics the core of which is pure simplicity. I’m convinced that
the principles underlying this and other forms of subtle energetic
medicine will guide the practical course of mainstream medicine
and the art of self-medicating in the very near future.

One can illustrate Dr. Bach’s insight and technique for treating an
individual whose illness has progressed to the manifestation of
physical symptoms by reprinting a short quotation taken from his
book, The Twelve Healers and Other Remedies: “Take no notice of
the disease. Think onlv of the outlook on life of the one in distress.

----- PAGE 201 -----
The same disease may have different effects [varying states of mind
or moods] on different people; it is these effects that need
treatment, because they guide to the real cause ... as one becomes
well by gaining increased happiness and interest in life, the disease
goes, having been cast off by the increase in health. Health and
disease are caused by how we think, how we feel within ourselves.
Health and disease are the consolidation of mental attitude.”

This chapter explains how to prepare a flower essence infusion
for one’s personal use. At the end of the chapter, I will list the 38
essences, the flowers of herbs, trees, and bushes, and the one non-
flower essence (Rock Water) that Dr. Bach included in his original
materia medica. I have arranged them in the diagnostic fashion I
use them. Therefore, at the conclusion of this list, you will find a
bibliography of books that can be used to study others’ insights and
their systems for using flower essences to alleviate and prevent
human as well as plant and animal illness.

METHODS OF PREPARATION

There are three stages in the preparation of flower essence infusions
before a dose is administered to an individual: the first preparation
is what I will refer to as the Mother Essence; the second is the Stock
Water; and the third is the Medicine Water.

There are two basic methods for preparing the Mother Essence:
the sun method, used for flowers that bloom during the late spring,
summer, and early autumn when the sun is often overhead, full and
hot, and the boiling method, used for the flowers and twigs of
plants that bloom at times other than when the sun is at the most
intense phases of its solar cycle.

Wildflowers growing in their natural habitat rather than
cultivated flowers are preferable (with the exception of Cerato,
Olive, and Vine found in Dr. Bach’s materia medica).

Each individual essence should be made with blossoms gathered
from as many different plants of the same kind as possible.

----- PAGE 202 -----
ABOUT THE EQUIPMENT

When preparing flower essences by either the sun method or the
boiling method, all equipment to be used must be first sterilized by
placing it in a container of cold water, slowly heating it, and gently
boiling it for 20 minutes, then carefully drying it and wrapping it in
a clean cloth. Dr. Bach felt it was important to tend to these details.

Preparine THE Morner Essence py THe Sun Merxop

Equipment

+ One thin-gauge, plain glass bowl, approximately 8 fl. oz. (Do
not use an etched, cut glass, or otherwise ornate bowl or a
Pyrex type oven glass bowl.)

+ A quart jar with a lid to carry water to the flower site
+ A 30 ml (1 0z.), amber dropper bottle with a glass pipette
Method

1. When the dropper bottle and pipette have cooled from the
sterilizing process, fill half the bottle with brandy (or half fill
many bottles with brandy; you will be creating a relatively
large amount of Mother Essence), cap it tightly, and label it
with the name of the flower to be prepared. Note on the label
that this is the Mother Essence. Dr. Bach preferred to use
brandy as a preservative, considering it a purer and more
natural agent than rectified spirit.

2. Decide beforehand which plant community you are going to
harvest, and choose a perfectly sunny morning when there are
no clouds in the sky that might obscure the sun’s light, therein
immersing the bowl and its contents in the most animated

----- PAGE 203 -----
energy of Earth’s crystal clear air element.

3. Take your bowl, jar, and dropper bottle and arrive at the
site a little before 9 a.m. (Pick the flowers at about 9 a.m.,so they
are floating in place as the sun is gaining intensity during the
hours between 9 and noon. By 9 a.m. the flowers will be freshly
opened in full bloom, and most airborne, pollen-spreading
creatures will have not yet arrived.)

4. Sit with the flowers for a few minutes and focus on your
intent; honor and extend gratitude to the plant community.
You'll probably be feeling pretty good right now; you couldn’t
be in a better place than you are at this moment.

5. Place the bowl on the ground near the flowering plants,
thereby connecting the subtle essence to the stabilizing energy
of the Earth element. Choose a location for the bowl that is
well away from trees, bushes, tall grasses, fences—anything
that might cast a shadow over the bowl of basking flowers as
the sunlight brushes across the Earth’s surface.

6. Fill the bowl to the brim with the water you transported in
the jar, or water from a clear stream, if one is nearby. Empty
any unused water from the jar. Do not drink from this jar; it
needs to remain sterile, as it will be used again later.

6. Pick some leaves, preferably from the plant you are
preparing, or from some broadleaf plant, and place them on
the palm of your hand. A Mullein leaf or one of similar
dimensions is ideal.

8. Select the most perfect blossoms and carefully pick the
flower heads just below the calyx (the external, usually green
part of the flower that attaches to the stem) from as many
plants or bushes of the same kind as possible. Let the flowers
fall onto the leaf in your hand.

----- PAGE 204 -----
9. Quickly, carry the flowers to the bowl and float them on the
surface of the water, thereon uniting everything with the
fertile, receptive energy of the water element. Continue this
process until the surface of the water is thickly covered.
Overlap the flowers, but make sure each flower touches the
water. (Throughout this process avoid casting your shadow
over the bowl and avoid touching the water with your fingers.
Eliminate the human vibrations as much as possible from the
flower vibrations in the subtle infusion.)

10. Leave the bowl in full sunshine for 3 to 4 hours to absorb
the resplendent energy of the fire element.

11. After about 4 hours, there will be slight signs of the petals
fading, giving evidence that their subtle properties (vibrations)
have been transmitted to the water. With a stalk from the plant
you are preparing, or with a rigid portion of grass, lift the
flower heads from the water. Do not touch the water with your
fingers. The water will be crystal clear and full with minute,
vibrant bubbles. Many herbalists confess to feelings of elation
at this point.

12. Pour this Mother Essence into the jar that has been
previously emptied, and from this fill the remaining half of the
labeled dropper bottle (or as many bottles as you wish to
prepare with this mother load). Cap it tightly.

Simply, one first prepares a Mother Essence from
wildflowers by using either the sun method or the
boiling method; from this essence one prepares
the Stock Water; from this one prepares a
Medicine Water; from which one takes daily
doses.

----- PAGE 205 -----
Preparing tHe Moruer Essence py tHe Boning Meron
Equipment
+ One 4-quart enamel pot and lid
+ 2 quart jars
+ A 1-ounce, amber dropper bottle with a glass pipette
+ A funnel
+ 2 or 3 pieces of filter paper

Method

1. Sterilize the jars, funnel, and dropper bottle in the enamel
pot. When this equipment has cooled from the sterilizing
process, half fill the dropper bottle with brandy, cap it tightly,
and label it with the name of the flower to be prepared. Note
that this is the Mother Essence.

2. A sunny morning is chosen whenever possible. For the same
reasons you chose 9 a.m. for the sun method, gather the
flowers and twigs at that time.

3. Decide beforehand which plant community you are going to
harvest and take the enamel pot, covered with its lid to keep
out any dust and debris, to the location. Sit with the flowers
and focus on your intent; communicate with the plant
community.

4. Fill the pot about 3/4 full with flowering sprays, including
the leaves, buds, and twigs. Also gather two extra twigs of the
same species of plant. These will be used later.

5. Place the lid on the pot. grab the extra two twigs and the

----- PAGE 206 -----
pot filled with flowering sprays, and quickly return home.

6. Upon returning home, cover the plant parts with
approximately a quart of cold water. Use rainwater, stream
water, pure well water, bottled spring water, or, if nothing else
is available, tap water that has been allowed to sit in an open
container overnight. (Dr. Bach didn’t like the energy of distilled
water; he referred to it as “dead water.” If you want to use
distilled water, let it first sit in a clear glass bottle in the
sunlight for a day. This should resurrect it.)

7. Place the pot uncovered over heat, and bring the water to a
gentle boil. If necessary, press the flowers beneath the water
with one of the twigs you brought home with you to prevent
touching the water with your fingers.

8. Boil the plants over low heat for 1/2 hour.

9. At the end of a half hour, remove the pot from the heat and
set it outdoors to cool.

10. When it is cold, remove all the twigs, leaves, and flowers,
using one or both of the extra twigs as tools to help you. Do
not touch the water with your fingers.

11. Cover the pot with its lid and allow the water to stand long
enough for any sediment to settle to the bottom of the pot.

12. Line the funnel with a filter paper and place this in one of
the two empty jars.

13. Fill the other jar carefully with the flower water from the
pot. Pour slowly not to disturb the sediment.

14. Pour the liquid from this jar into the filtered funnel that is
sitting in the first jar. This will take a while. Often, there is
much sediment and you may need to filter the liquid twice.

----- PAGE 207 -----
15. From this filtered water, fill the remaining half of the
labeled dropper bottle containing the brandy.

16. Cap tightly.

Preparinc THE Srock WaTER

This is the second stage in the preparation of a flower essence
infusion. Later, from this Stock Water, a person’s Medicine
Water is prepared.

To prepare a Stock Water from a Mother Essence which has
been prepared by either the sun method or the boiling
method:

1. Sterilize and dry a 1-0z. amber dropper bottle.

2. Label it with the name of the flower essence. Note that this
is the Stock Water.

3. Fill the bottle with brandy.
4. Add merely 2 drops from the Mother Essence bottle.

5. Cap it tightly and succuss it (shake it vigorously) for a few
moments.

Preparine THE Mepicine Water

This is the third stage in the preparation of the flower essence,
and it is from this one the individual takes the doses suitable
for a human, an animal, or a plant.

----- PAGE 208 -----
1. Determine which essence or combination of essences an
individual requires. (Using 2 or 3 in combination is ideal, and
from my experience, I recommend using no more than 5 at a
time.)

2. Into a sterilized dropper bottle, put 2 drops from the Stock
Water of a selected essence, or 2 drops from each of the
essences selected for use in combination (making a compound
essence).

3. Add a teaspoonful of brandy as a preservative to inhibit the
water from going cloudy.

4. Fill the bottle with water.
5. Cap it tightly and succuss it.

6. Label with the flower(s) name and note it as a Medicine
Water. Include the recommended dosage.

DOSAGE

Focus on the positive aspects for taking the flower essence(s);
clarify and focus on your intent; visualize the experiences of joy and
health you are reviving.

A dose is 4 drops. Taking more than 4 drops per dose does not
increase the benefit.

Hold the dose in the mouth for a few moments before
swallowing to gain the full effect of the flower essence(s).

Normally, an individual takes four doses a day: one first thing in
the morning, one last thing before retiring at night, and two more
times during the day, ideally before meals.

When necessary, doses can be given more frequently, every 15 or
30 minutes, and then hourly until the individual feels uplifted and
more at ease within.

Tf it is difficult to take the doses each time. nlace 16 drons of the

----- PAGE 209 -----
Medicine Water into a glass or thermos of water or juice each
morning and take frequent small sips throughout the day.

Anima. Dosace

Flower essences can be used for pets large or small displaying
emotional perplexities, farm animals, wild fauna, or plants who
have experienced a trauma or shock of any nature.

+ Horses and other large animals: Put 8 drops of an essence (from
the Medicine Water) into a bucket of water or 4 drops onto fruit or
a piece of bread that they will eat.

+ Dog- and cat-size animals: Put 4 drops of any essence (from the
Medicine Water) into the food or drinking water. The essences can
be put onto paws or directly into the mouth if the animal agrees.

+ Or apply essences to beaks, snouts, noses, muzzles, on plumage,
on scales, on tails, on Prancer, on Dancer..., behind ears, or into the
fish bowl.

+ Administer doses 4 times daily.

Pant Dosaces

+ Place 16 to 20 drops of an essence or combination of essences in a
gallon watering can full of water and water the plant’s soil.

+ Put 8 to 10 drops of the same essences in a spray bottle and spray
the plant’s foliage.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

The Mother Essences and the Stock Waters, when prepared as
directed above, will retain their strength indefinitely. If they are
kept for several years, a slight sediment may form at the bottom of
the bottle: this is not harmful. Sometimes. over a lengthy period of

----- PAGE 210 -----
time, the rubber bulb on the dropper top will soften and lose its
tone; it should be replaced with a new sterilized one.

When using the boiling method a large quantity of sediment may
form. This should be filtered twice. Then, even though you have
filtered the liquid a couple of times, after some months more
sediment may form again at the bottom of the Mother Essence
bottle; this should be re-filtered and rebottled.

The Medicine Water will be preserved quite adequately during
the relatively short time it is used by the individual.

It is best to sterilize the bottle each time it is refilled.

SELECTING AND USING FLOWER ESSENCES

My approach to manifesting anything, whether it is health,
friendship, stuff, travel, whatever, is to focus my attention on what
it is I want, rather than on the absence of it, and I give very little
thought to what I don’t want or to anything that doesn’t feel good
to me. Therefore, when I use flower essences to assist other people
to enhance their life processes, I ask him or her to get in touch with
how they want to feel within themselves. I ask them to identify
what feels most like their true nature, to envision their most desired
self-concept, to ascertain who they truly are and what they want to
express.

To assist this process, I have arranged the following list of Dr.
Bach’s particular flower essences by homogeneous positive aspects
of personality. I have assembled word pictures individuals can use
to help form a clear vision of what they feel defines their nature
most closely and how they want to function. I note the
corresponding flower essence whose vibration resonates most
closely to this inspiration. I also include the related “shadows” of
that nature, those traits no longer wanted, and those contrary states
of mind and moods one can slip into that cast a shadow over inner
light and joy. But clouds can merely hide the sun for a while. The
light is the enduring reality that is soon revealed with the gently
effective assistance of flower vibrations. I trust this will be of
assistance to those who are attracted to using this subtle and

----- PAGE 211 -----
remarkably effective vehicle of herbal medicine. 7

Tue Heaury-Aucnine Posrrive Aspects or Dr. Bacu’s 38 Fiower Essences

ONE’S TRUE NATURE FLOWER ESSENCE, SHADOW

. + Tortured
+ lam a genuine
mental state

optimist,
+ Carefree veneer,
cheerful, and .
+ Hides
carefree
symptoms and
-ITama
woes, never
peacemaker at . . .
Agrimony discussing
heart . . .
. (Agrimonia problems with
+I make light of .
. eupatoria or others
discomforts .
. odorata) + Distressed by
+ Thave a fine
quarrels
sense of humor .
+ Worries

that I express
+ Restlessness

freely and db
joyfully without cause’ y
churning
pretense
thoughts
+ I participate in
life with true
joy, beyond
worry or fear + Apprehension,

slam inexplicable

----- PAGE 212 -----
adventurous
and enjoy the
journey of my
creative path
without regard
of difficulty or
danger

+ Lam fearlessly
in touch with
well-being
slama
tolerant,
lenient, and
understanding
of others

+ [have strong
convictions with
high ideals
+Isee the good
in all, and with
unconditional
love I
appreciate the
paths others

choose for

themselves

Aspen
(Poluus

tremula)

Beech
(Fagus
sylvatica)

+ Fears by day or|
night for no
known reason

+ Fear
accompanied by
sweating &

trembling

+ Intolerant

+ Critical of
others

+ Lonely

+ Lacks humility
and sympathy

+ Annoyed

+ Taskmaster

+ Must have
precious and

order

+ Timid

----- PAGE 213 -----
RADE ONENESS

+ Weak-willed

individual .
+ Servile doormat
+ I mix well
. + Too persuaded
with others
. Centaury by others and by
wherein I know . .
(Centaurium convention
my true self and oa.
umbellatum) “Vitality is
set my own
sapped by
tone

. overdoing favors
+ I serve wisely .
. for admired
and quietly
others

+ Tam intuitive
and in touch
with the wise

+ Doubts own
guidance of my

. ability
own inner-
. + Tends to
being
Cerato imitate
-lTama .
. (Ceratostigma + Lacks
visionary and . . .
. willmottiana, confidence in
hold definite .
we Plumbago) own judgment
opinions

+ Seeks advice
+ Confidently, I

stick to my own

from one and all

. + Talkative
desires and

decisions once

I’ve made them

+ Fear of losing

control of mind

tem alos

----- PAGE 214 -----
A ONE OO
quiet, and
courageous

+ Thold a strong
mental focus on
the positive

aspects of life

+lam keenly
observant and
most
appreciative of
contrast

+I focus my
attention in the
present where
my creative
power lies
+lTreap
knowledge of
self from every
observation and
experience

+I change my
creative mental
focus quickly

and easily

Cherry Plum
(Prunus

cerasifera)

Chestnut Bud
(Aesculus
hippocastanum,
White or Horse
Chestnut Bud)

and reason

+ Desperation

+ Violent
impulses

+ Suicidal

+ Fear of insanity]
or doing fearful

things

+ Repeats
mistakes due to
lack of
observation

+ Impatient

+ Habitual
negative thought
+ Tries to forget
the past

+ Slow to learn
how one’s own
thoughts and
beliefs are that
which creates all
unwanted

experiences

----- PAGE 215 -----
+ Lappreciate
others, and I
enjoy their
diversity

+ Tallow and
encourage
others to be
who and as they
are

+My
unconditional
love is generous
and caring

+ Linspire
others with
warmth and
gentleness

+ Tam selfless in
my care for
others

+ My mind is
sensitive to
inspiration

+ Lhave a lively,
passionate
interest in all
things

Chicory
(Chicorium
intybus,

Wild Succory)

+ Bossy

+ Overpossessive
of others

+ Directs affairs
of others

+ Fussy

+ Argumentative
+ Greedy

+ Interferes by
nagging and
criticizing

+ Martyr

+ Self-pity

+ Domineering

+ Intolerant

+ Discontent

+ Fretful

+ Dreamy hope
of a better future|
+ Uses
impractical
thoughts to
escape from

world

----- PAGE 216 -----
+ Tam master of
my own
thoughts and set
my tone in life
+Tam full of
appreciation for
life

+ Thave zestful
desires and a
wonderfully
creative
imagination

+I travel my
inner
dimensions well
+ T maintain
complete
control of
thought

+ Isee things in
correct
perspective and
proportion

+ I'm broad-
minded

+ Trealize that

any physical

Clematis
(Clematis vitalba,
Traveler’s

Joy)

Crab Apple
(Malus

pumila)

+ Diminished
vision and desire|
+ Lack of passion|
and vitality

+ Apathetic

+ Exhaustion

+ Homesickness

+ Lack of interest!
in present
circumstances

+ Indifference

+ Led and
influenced
because thoughts}

are elsewhere

+ Feelings of
uncleanliness
+ Despair

+ Disgust

+ Despondency
+ Congestion
+ Self-hatred

+ Mental
obsession and
concern with
trivia

+ Finicky

----- PAGE 217 -----
disorder is due
to internal

disharmony

+ Thave
unshakable
conviction

+ I’m confident,
responsible, and
reliable

+ Thave
powerful
creative focus
-T'm self-
assured, and my
abilities are
generally
directed toward
the well-being
of others

+ Lhave faith in
my ability to
attract what I
want

+ No obstacle is
too great or any

task too big to

Elm

(Ulmus procera,
English

or Common
Elm)

fussiness
+ The cleanser

essence

+ Overstriving foy
perfection

+ Temporary
feelings of
inadequacy

+ Feelings of
failure

+ Exhausted by
overwhelming
feelings of

responsibility

+ Reduced desire
+ Discouraged by
setbacks
+ Skeptic

----- PAGE 218 -----
be undertaken
with conviction
that it can be
accomplished

+ Lintegrate
contrast to give
me clarity of
desire

+ [have strong
ability to holda
vision and to
appreciate and
enjoy the
journey to its
fulfillment

+ Tam a bearer
of the light in

darkness

+ [have positive
faith that my
visions will be
realized

-Tam
uninfluenced by
statistics,
judgments,

opinions, or

Gentian
(Gentiana
amarella,
Felwort

or Autumn
Gentian)

Gorse
(Ulex europaeus,
Whin

or Common

+ Doubt
+ Discouragement
+ Deflated by
delay

+ Negative
outlook

+ Deep
depression due
to a known caus¢
+ Dark
melancholia

+ Attracts
negativity due to
negative state of

mind

+ Loss of heart

+ Diminished
vision and desire|
+ Hopelessness

+ Despair

+ Given up

+ Negative
attitude

+ Dark

----- PAGE 219 -----
advice of others
+ Tam certain I
can overcome
all obstacles to
realize my
desires

+lam an
uplifter who is
genuinely
interested in
others

+ 1am caring,
understanding,
and helpful

+ With tolerant
good humor I
radiate well-

being

+Iam deeply
connected to
my inner joy

+ Tlove others
and myself

+ T recognize
and appreciate

the achievement

Af mthnen

Furze)

Heather

(Calluna vulgaris,
Ling

or Scotch
Heather)

Holly

melancholy

+ Resigned

+ Lack of
ambition or
interest due to
hopelessness

+ Rapid incessant
talk

+ Always
bringing any
conversation to
themselves

+ Saps vitality of
others by
excessive self-
centeredness

+ Shunned and

avoided

+ Hatred, envy,
jealousy, or
suspicion of
another's
abilities and
success

+ Intolerant

+ For the active,

intense, extrovert

----- PAGE 220 -----
eee
+Ican give
without need of
return

+ Lam loving,
tolerant, and
happy, and I
rejoice in
others’ well-

being and joy

+Tam fully
alive in the
present, the
place of my
creative power
+ luse my past
and present
experiences to
assist in forming
clear visions to
prepare my
future
experiences

+ Tretain the

lessons taught

In tha nant

(Ilex

aquifolium)

Honeysuckle
(Lonicera

caprifolium)

type who wants
to open his or
her heart—for
whom very man
essences are
indicated—this
will help identify
the exact
essences that are
best

+ Dwells upon
thoughts of the
past and holds a
pessimistic
outlook both for
the present and
the future

+ Loss of interest
in the present
due to
homesickness or
chronic nostalgia]

+ Regretful

+ Stagnation that

----- PAGE 221 -----
ae pals
letting the
experiences

pass from mind

+ Tam certain of
my abilities and
strengths even
in the fact of
overwhelming
tasks

+ My mind is
alert

+Tam able to
call up reserves
of strength for
mental and
physical
fortification in
moments of
self-doubt

+ Fatigue passes
as I become
interested in
normal

activities

Hornbeam
(Carpinus
betulus)

diminishes vital,

creative life force

+ Weariness of
the mind

+ Doubt of
strength

+ Suffers fatigue
through dislike
of work that one
is doing

+ Monday
morning or
morning-after
feeling

+ Disinclined to
face future or
even daily
routine

+ Mental and
physical
exhaustion whic!
often passes
when mental
focus is taken off|
of self

----- PAGE 222 -----
+ Lam patient
and efficient
-Tam
spontaneous
and quick in
mind and action
+Iam gentle
and sympathetic
toward others,
understanding
and tolerant
with those
slower than me
+I feel very
capable,
decisive, and
intuitive

+ Lwork well

alone and with

others and I

enjoy doing Impatiens
both (Impatiens

+ I plunge into glandulifera,
life, taking Policeman’s
risks, and ’m Helmet) Larch

(Latrix

Anaidvnd

+ Impatient and
irritable with
those who are
slower

+ Active and
nervous

* Quick flaring
and subsiding
anger

+ Mental tension,
manifesting as
muscular tension|
and pain

+ Injury through
bad temper or
own
impetuousness
+ Exhaustion
from frustrating
nervous effort
when things are
moving too
slowly

+ Lack of

confidence in sel

----- PAGE 223 -----
pete eee A
results

+ Inever think
that, “I can’t”
-ITama
powerful
intentional
creator of my
own
experiences
-Tam
determined and
confident

+ Tuse any
experience of
failure as a tool
for a clearer,
more focused
vision and
stronger

determination

+ T face all
contrast, trials,
and difficulties
with

equanimity,

——et

-

and abilities

+ Anticipation of
failure

+ Despondency
due to failure to
even try

+ Seldom
attempts
anything due to
self-assurance of
inevitable failure|
+ Convinced can’
do as well as
others

+ Wistful feeling
of inferiority,
though lacking
jealousy or envy

of others’ success|

+ Fear and
anxiety of a
known origin
+ Mental

emotional focus

----- PAGE 224 -----
eto am
humor

+ I deal with life
with wise
anticipation,
spontaneity,
and enthusiasm
+ With
understanding,
intuition, and
knowledge I
work fluidly
with the
universal law of
attraction

+ Thave an
inner serenity
and knowing
which nothing
can shake or
destroy

+ ITset my own
tone in all
situations
coming from an

inner stability

and

Mimulus
(Mimulus guttatus,
Monkey

Flower)

Mustard
(Sinapis arvensis,
Wild Mustard

on that which
one does not
want

+ Shy and
retiring, prone t
hide anxieties

+ Deterred by
chronic fears
such as fear of
dark, injury,
poverty, etc.,
which retards the
joy of freely

creating

+ Experience of al
black depression|
almost a
hopeless,
despairing
melancholia
which suddenly
closes down
upon one

without apparent

cause or reason;

----- PAGE 225 -----
oo or Charlock)
to my joy,
freedom, and
overall well-
being

+ In every
moment I am
keenly aware of
the harmony
that abounds
throughout all
+ I persevere in
face of all
contrast and
difficulties
without loss of
faith or
slackening of
confidence

+ Tm keenly
aware that the
visions and

mental focus of

one’s creative Oak
energy are far (Quercus
more effective robur)
for

it can lift just as
suddenly of its
own accord

+ A gloominess
which from out
of the blue
temporarily shuts
down all one’s

joy and pleasure

+ Ceaseless in
efforts even
when depleted
+ Disappointed,
despairing, and
discontent with
self when
unceasing effort
fails

+ Can suffer
breakdown due
to enduring too

much strain of

responsibility

----- PAGE 226 -----
enti eee
than action
alone

+ Joyfully I
inspire others
+Lam helpful
to others while
always
remaining in
harmony with
myself

+ T maintain
interest in life
and peace of
mind even
when required
to be inactive
+I depend fully
on my inner-self
+ Tunderstand
that mental
visualization is
a far superior
channel of
creative power
and healing

than action

Olive
(Olea

europaea)

+ Reliable,
dependable, and
loves to help
others;
characteristically
taking on too
much

responsibility

+ Depleted

+ Complete
exhaustion of
mind and body
due to long-
endured stress or|
illness

+ Suffered a long
time under
adverse
conditions

+ Lack of effort
due to lack of
vitality

+ Feels no

pleasure in life

----- PAGE 227 -----
+ Tattract
happiness and
pleasure in
spite of
temporary

weariness

+ Lacknowledge
my mistakes,
but do not
dwell on them

+ ITsee what I
want by
observing the
contrasting
experiences of
what I do not
want; and then I
focus on a fresh,
positive vision
-Tam
compassionate

+ Lappreciate
myself and
others

+ Linspire and

welt nthaen

Pine
(Pinus sylvestris,
Scots Pine)

+ Fear of losing
friends and
support

+ The
convalescence

essence

+ Self-
condemning

+ Never content
with
achievements

+ Blames self for
own and others’
mistakes and for
everything that
goes wrong

+ Overworks and
stresses self to
“improve” and
become “better”
+ Feels guilt and
despondency

+ Has high ideals

----- PAGE 228 -----
‘pee ny
. and does one’s
helping them to

. best, but is too
thrive

humble and
+ Thave great 1 .
apologetic,
perseverance pores
which disallows

+ Luse “failures” oa
. creative life force
to increase my .
to flower easily

passion and
through self

desire to
manifest my
visions

+ I broadcast

thoughts of

well-being to

all + Excessive fear
+lam keenly and anxiety for
aware of the others
well-being that + Worries and
abounds, and I anticipates

see others in troubles for
their natural others

state of health Red Chestnut + Over-protective|
and wellness (Aesculus of another
+Tam a true carnea) + Negative
uplifter and mental visions
healer with regards to

+Tam able to others

----- PAGE 229 -----
remain calm,
mentally and
physically in
any emergency,
peaceful and
assuring to

others

+Iam a calming
and soothing
individual even
in the most
terrifying
conditions

+ With courage,
Ican rise to
emergencies in
an instant

+I can assume a
selfless state of
mind in
moments to
focus on
another’s well-
being

+ [have no fear
of death, and I

am willing to

Rock Rose
(Helianthemum

nummularium)

+ Foresees
trouble and
broadcasts fear

and anxiety

+ When panic
and extreme
fright are
experienced,
placing the
vibrations of
terror in the
atmosphere

+ Extreme fear
caused by facing
an unexpected o:
unfamiliar
experience or by|
any fear induced
by a terrifying
sight or
nightmare

+ Whenever great

fear or panic is

----- PAGE 230 -----
risk my life to experienced
aid others

+ Lhave high

ideals and a

flexible,

creative mind

+ Inflexible mind
+ Inflexible,
prideful opinion:

+ Tam readil;
y about religion,

open to ee
. politics, or
changing my
. reform
beliefs when . co
. + Mind and life ig

convinced of a

. ruled by
higher truth .

. cherished
I’m not easily .
theories

influenced by
the beliefs of

others, because

+ Hard master on|

self (yet not on

. others)
Iknow I will .
+ Enjoys

find greater, .

Rock Water suppressing one
deeper truths .

(H20, Healing s own faults
from the .
ooo well or stream + Strict in way of|
inspiration of a

water) living, cannot
my own
. deflect from
internal

. ideals, forcing
connection to

life

+ My experience

self to live up to

them

+ Self-denial, a

----- PAGE 231 -----
DED DS
and growth
uplifts and
encourages
others to trust
and respond to
their inner
guidance and to
follow their
own unique
path

+ 1am open-
minded, quick
to make a
decision and
prompt to act
on it

+Tam calm and
determined

+ Tam attentive
and responsive
to my inner
guidance, and
therefore, I set
my own tone
+Ikeep my

poise and

hal

Scleranthus
(Scleranthus

annuus,

martyr to ideals
+ Self-dominatio:
+ Does not
understand that
such practices as
diets are the
result, not the
cause, of

spiritual growth

+ Indecision,
lacking ability to]
make up mind

+ Swayed
between two
things

+ Experience
swings between
joy and sadness,
energy or apathy}
pessimism or
optimism, clarity)
and confusion

+ Unable to

concentrate due

----- PAGE 232 -----
OE ES
The annual

Knawel)

all conditions

+ Lobserve
contrast, and
from this I
make clear
decisions of
what I want

+ My clear
visions come
forth from these
decisions and
give me great
ability to
manifest my
desires

+ All shock has
been
neutralized, and
my mental and
physical
recuperation
has been
accelerated

+ All is well Star of Bethlehem
-lTam (Ornithogalum.

comforted and umbellatum)

uae
changing of min:
+ Conversation
jumps from
subject to subject
+ Erratic body
functions
(symptoms come|
and go, pulse,
pain,
temperature are
here and there)

+ Magpie mind,
full of bits and

pieces

+ Emotional or
physical illness
due to residual
shock from a
current or past
experience or
accident

+ All shock has
an effect; this

effect can

----- PAGE 233 -----
soothed of all
my mental and
physical pains
and sorrows

+ [have strength
and quick
recovery in
spite of shock

+ Thave full
control of my
emotions

+ [know all is
well in the
midst of the
intensity of any
experience

+ In light of
intense contrast,
I learn clearly
what I desire,
and I can focus
on the uplifting
thoughts of
what I want to

change in my

experiences

Sweet Chestnut
(Castanea sativa,
the edible Spanish
chestnut)

manifest at some|
point even after
the incident has
been forgotten

+ Useful for
nonresponsive
folks

+ Acute hopeless
despair

+ Feelings that
one has reached
the limit of one s
endurance

+ Focus on
feelings of great
anguish

+ Suicidal state o
mind

+ Intense feelings!
of abandonment
and the void of
inner darkness

+ “Lonely dark
night of the soul’

+ Over-effort,

----- PAGE 234 -----
OEE NOOO
wise person
+Ikeep my
mind fluid

+ T know that all
persons have a
right to their
opinions, and I
will listen to
them open-
mindedly

+ [have strong
ideals, but I do
not impose
them on others
+ 1am inspired,
enthusiastic,
and
knowledgeable
+ My mind is
alert and full of
interest

+ I know that by
feeling good
and flowing
creative
thought, rather

than he

Vervain
(Verbena

officinalis)

stress, and
tension

+ Lives on nerves.
resulting in
breakdown

+ Fanatic
reformer,
convert, and/or
martyr

+ Imposing will
on others

+ Over-
enthusiastic,
high-strung,
fretful and fussy
+ Impatient,
tense, and
anxious

+ Takes on too
much, leaving n
time to relax and
enjoy life

+ Depleted
mental and
physical vitality
through overuse
of effort and

----- PAGE 235 -----
eee EY eee
action, great
things are
accomplished
effortlessly and

harmoniously

+ Tam a natural
teacher and
leader

+ Tam wise,
loving, and
understanding
+Tam able to
organize and
delegate power
and service with
no need to
dominate
+Lenjoy
helping others
to know
themselves and Vine
to find their
path in life

(Vitis vinifera,
Grape vine)
+Ican inspire

others with my

tinchaleanhla

strong will

+ Strict, violent
temperament

+ Over-aggressive|
and persistent

+ Argumentative

+ Tendency to
crave power and|
dominate others
+ Rides
roughshod over
the opinions of
others

+ Makes no
attempt to
convert others,
but instead is
demanding and
dominating,
often hard and
cruel without
compassion

+ Loses interest ii

----- PAGE 236 -----
ON OO
those that cannot,
confidence and .
be dominated
+ Rigid, inflexible

attitude which

certainty
+ Tam efficient,

certain, and . .
we manifests in
ambitious, a .
extreme tension
quick thinker . ce oe
with stiff, rigid
who can be hysical pai
ical pain,
depended upon Physica’ P

. and disability

in an

emergency to

direct others

with confidence

+ In direct

response to my

inner guidance, + Swayed by a
Iemploy stronger or more
constancy and dominating
determination personality or
as I pursue my forceful

beliefs and circumstance
carry out my + Inspired course
life work is altered by

+ Conventions some link with
that might the past, family
impede my self- tie, habit, or

fulfillment are other outside

----- PAGE 237 -----
easily ignored
-Tam
unaffected by
adverse
circumstances
I'm neither
hindered nor
discouraged by
the opinions or
ridicule of
others

+ Tam a creative
pioneer

+I change my
beliefs and
habits fluidly as
I feel
appropriate
+Tam a free
individual, and
I offer no
resistance to my
inspiration

+ [have great
gentleness and
poise

-ITama

Walnut

(Juglans regia)

influence

+A “link
breaker” from
any influence
from the past or
circumstances of
the present

+ An ally for
advancing stages
of maturity
(teething,
puberty,
menopause) or
for big life-
change decisions
for taking any
step forward and|
breaking
conventions,
leaving all old

limits and habits

----- PAGE 238 -----
tranquil, + Feeling of

objective, superiority to
sympathetic, others

and practical + Proud and aloo
counselor + Disdainful and
+ Tam self- condescending,
reliant and which can
dignified manifest as
+*ITaman mental rigidity
example of Water Violet and physical
integration and (Hottonia stiffness and
confidence to palustris) tension

others + Disapproving o
+I do not others, though
interfere with tolerant and

the affairs of never interfering
others nor do I + Bears grief and
tolerate sorrows in
interference in silence

my affairs + Prefers to be

+ Icreate a alone when ill
serene

environment for
myself and

others

+ Thave a quiet .
+ Persistent

and nnles mind

----- PAGE 239 -----
ee OO II IIAD
undisturbed by
outside
influences

+ 1am at peace
with myself and
with the world
+ From the
serenity of my
mind comes the
solutions to my
problems

+ [have a strong
ability to direct
my thoughts
where I want
them

+ [have learned
to control
thought and
imagination and
put them to my
conscious

creative use

+ 1am energetic,

talented, and

ahla ta dn

White Chestnut
(Aesculus
hippocastanum,
Horse

Chestnut)

mental
arguments and
conversations
with self,
reoccurring like
a stuck record

+ Worries racing
around and
around in the
mind

+ Tortured mind
+ Insomnia

+ Seeks to escape|
thoughts and get
back into the
world

+ Overactive
mentality results
in depression
and fatigue

+ Headaches due
to chronic over-

anxious thoughts|

+ Undecided as
to what to do
with life

----- PAGE 240 -----
aVa— ee
things well

+ [have definite
ambitions and
focus

+ I know just
what I want to
do with my life
+ Ido what I
want to do, and
I let nothing
interfere with
my purpose

+ My life is
filled with
feelings of
usefulness and
happiness

+ My heart is
open to joy and
freedom and
growth

+ Thave the
ability to do
many things
well, and I am

successful and

Wild Oat
(Bromus ramosus,
Hairy or

Wood Brome-

grass)

+ General but
unclear ideas of
what is wanted

+ Despondent
and dissatisfied
due to feelings
that life is
passing by

+ Frustrated and
unhappy due to
a tendency to
drift into
uncongenial
environments
and occupations
+ Indefinite due
to so many ideas|
and ambitions

+ For those weak.
introverted,
despondent type
of persons from
whom very mam
essences are
indicated—this
will help identify

the exact

----- PAGE 241 -----
venom hee a

undertakings

+ Thave a lively
interest in all
happenings,
both in my life
and in the lives
of others

+ My very
interest and
vitality attract
excellent
conditions into
my life, so I
enjoy
happiness, good
health,
prosperity,
growth, and
friendship
+Taccept and
appreciate life
with good
humor, and I

respond to my

Wild Rose
(Rosa canina, Dog
Rose)

essences that are
best

+ Resignation to
illness,
uncongenial
work,
debilitating
relationships,
and/or toa
monotonous life
+ Diminished
desire

+ Makes little
effort to heal,
improve life, or
to envision and
enjoy the
abundant
pleasures of life
+ Feels one
“might as well
get used to it”
and “learn to live
with it all”
+ Observes

conditions and

surrenders to

----- PAGE 242 -----
inner-being’s
constant
guidance and
wisdom

+ Trealize and
fully exercise
my power to
create all my

life experiences

+ Tenjoy my
sense of humor
and well-being
+ T know that all
my experiences
proceed from
my thoughts

+ What is outer
is a clear
reflection of the
sum of my
thoughts and
beliefs

-Tam

Willow

oe (Salix vitellina,
optimistic about |
Yellow Willow or

them without
realizing that
they have create
them

+ Weary, lack
vitality, and are
dull companions|
+ Not depressed,
but resigned to
their apathy and
colorless life

+ Resentment and
bitterness

+ Self-
disempowermen}
by blaming all
one’s self for
whatever
misfortune or
adversity is being
experienced

+ Lack of
appreciation

+ Feels life is
unjust

+ Begrudging and|

eananthel nf all

----- PAGE 243 -----
Ahh roe A ——— aa

Golden Osier)

am the master good fortunes
of my own fate and success of
+Lam fully self- others
empowered, for + Sulking and

I blame no one gloomy

else for my + Pessimistic
experiences + Takes without
+ With my giving

offerings I + Stuck in feeling}
attract unto me of discontent;

+ Lappreciate loath to admit
my life and the any

lives of others improvement

Sources of Other Perspectives

1

N

w

a

. The Collected Writings of Edward Bach, ed. Julian Barnard,

Flower Remedy Programme, 1987, P.O. Box 65, Hereford, HR2
oUW, Great Britain.

. Handbook of the Bach Flower Remedies, Dr. Philip M.

Chancellor, Keats Publishing, Inc., 1980.

. The Medical Discoveries of Edward Bach, Physician, Nora

Weeks, C.W. Daniel Company, Ltd., London, 1973.

. The Bach Flower Remedies Illustration & Preparation, Nora

Weeks and Victor Bullen, C.W. Daniel Company, Ltd., London,
1976.

. Heal Thyself Edward Bach, C.W. Daniel Company, Ltd., London,

1973.

. The Twelve Healers. Edward Bach. C.W. Daniel Company. Ltd..

----- PAGE 244 -----
N

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

London 1973.

. The Bach Remedies Repertory, F.J. Wheeler, C.W. Daniel

Company, Ltd., London, 1970.

. The Original Writings of Edward Bach, J. Howard and J.

Ramsell, The Dr. Edward Bach Healing Trust and Centre, Mount
Vernon, Sotwell, Wallingford, Oxon., OX10 OPZ, England, 1990.

. Questions & Answers Clarifying the Basic Principles and

Standards of the Bach Flower Remedies, J. Ramsell and N.
Murray, The Dr. Edward Bach Healing Trust and Centre, Mount
Vernon, Sotwell, Wallingford, Oxon., OX10 OPZ, England, 1986.
Bach Flower Therapy: Theory & Practice, Mechthild Scheffer,
Torsons Publishers, Inc., 1987.

Flower Essences: Reordering Our Understanding and Approach
to Illness and Health, Machaelle Small-Wright, 1988.

Flower Essence Repertory, Patricia Kaminski & Richard Katz,
The Flower Essence Society, P.O. Box 459, Nevada City, CA
95959, 1994.

Choosing Flower Essences: An Assessment Guide, Patricia
Kaminski, The Flower Essence Society.

Alaskan Flower Essence Project, P.O. Box 1369, Homer, Alaska
99603-1369.

Healing with Australian Flowers, Va’sudeva Barnao, Living
Essences, P.O. Box 355, Scarborough, Western Australia, 6019,
1988.

----- PAGE 245 -----


----- PAGE 246 -----
Herbal tinctures are alcoholic or water-alcohol solutions prepared
from fresh or dried botanicals. It is believed by many that alcohol is
a better solvent than water for extracting plant constituents and that
a mixture of alcohol and water will dissolve nearly all the desired
constituents of a plant, while at the same time acting as a highly
efficient preservative. The term tincture commonly refers to these

----- PAGE 247 -----
alcohol preparations, but it is also used to refer to preparations that
are vinegar, wine, or glycerin based. The glycerin-based tinctures
are more often referred to, however, as glycerites or glycerates.

All official tinctures (as determined by an official U.S.
Pharmacopoeia) are made with an alcohol and water solution or
pure alcohol, the majority of herbal tinctures containing around 60
percent alcohol. The official definition of a tincture is stated to be a
solution that contains at least 45 percent alcohol and has an
herb/menstruum ratio of at least 1:4. Of course these ratios can
always vary and this definition is supplied more as a means to
distinguish concentrated infusions and decoctions which are
sometimes preserved using up to 25 percent alcohol, and “fluid
extracts,” which usually have an herb to menstruum ratio of 1:1.

Aside from those plants that require dehydration such as Pleurisy
root (Asclepias tuberosa) or Wild Yam (Dioscorea villosa), and
those that require a year or more of aging to develop their full
therapeutic potential such as Cascara Sagrada (Rhamnus purshiana)
and its relatives, the therapeutic potency of tinctures made from
fresh “green” herbs and roots are thought of by some individuals to
be stronger than those of dry plant equivalents. Even though I tend
to prefer fresh plant preparations, I can’t hold to a generalization
like that, but it is interesting that homeopathic mother tinctures of
herbs are almost always made from the fresh plant, since the dry
plant products provide less satisfactory potencies.

There are two fundamental processes for tincturing an herb:
maceration and percolation. Maceration requires no expensive or
unusual equipment or complex procedures, whereas percolation
usually does. And of course each method has its pros and cons, but
then all things being relative, what doesn’t? We will discuss the
maceration method in this chapter and deal with percolation (and
the pros and cons of each) in Chapter Thirteen.

There are two basic methods for making a tincture by
maceration; one requires measurements, the other doesn’t. The first
method we will discuss is simple and very effective. I will refer to it
as the “folk method.” It requires no measuring and is good for
general use. The fact there is no measuring of substances, however.

----- PAGE 248 -----
makes it somewhat vague as to the resultant “tincture strength.”
Tincture strength refers to the amount of herb that has been
concentrated into a given measure of solution.

When one prepares a tincture that will be dispensed by others, it
is important to state on the label the tincture strength of the
preparation, so it can be dispensed in appropriate and accurate
doses. In order to prepare these tinctures for professional use (or as
required by the FDA for all tinctures sold in commerce), use the
method I will refer to as the “weight to volume (w/v) method.” In
this method the weight of the herb and the volume of the
menstruum are measured and noted in order to produce a specific
tincture strength.

The metric system of measure is most convenient for this purpose
because it offers us a working 1 to 1 relationship between a weight
of a solid material with a volume of a liquid. The avoirdupois
system of weight and measure that we normally use in the U.S.
doesn’t readily supply us this convenience.

Simply put, one cubic centimeter of water weighs one gram. For
our practical purposes, we can allow that this holds true for all the
liquids (water, alcohol, wine, vinegar, glycerin) we use to formulate
our menstrua. This is a relationship we can access in our weight to
volume (w/v) method of making tinctures. The relationship of
plant material to menstruum is known as the weight (of herb) to
volume (of menstruum) ratio of the tincture, or the tincture
strength. The most commonly found tincture strengths used in
commerce and in mainstream medicine are 1:5 and 1:10 for dry
plant preparations and 1:2 for fresh plant preparations. There is a
historical precedent for this phenomenon.

In September of 1902 in Brussels, Belgium, a “Conference
Internationale pour l’Unification de la Formule des Medicaments
Heroiques” was held. This gathering brought together delegates
from nearly every “civilized” country. The purpose of this body was
to formulate standards for potent remedies which would be
adopted by the various pharmacopoeias of the world, and therefore
secure the principal object of an international pharmacopoeia. The
protocol agreed upon at this conference was adopted and made

----- PAGE 249 -----
official in the U.S. Pharmacopoeia VIII (1906) and has remained as
a standard. Conforming in principle to the standards recommended
by the International Protocol adopted at Brussels in 1902, these are
the ratios of herbs to menstrua:

Ideally, a 1:5 tincture of dried herb delivers the
action of 20 Gm of herb for each 100 ml of
tincture taken; a 1:10 tincture delivers the action
of 10 grams of dried herb; while a 1:2 tincture of
fresh plants carries the action of 50 grams of fresh
herb with each 100 ml of tincture taken.

+ Tinctures of dried non-toxic botanicals represent the activity of 20
Gm of dried herb in each 100 cc of tincture (a 20% or 1:5 w/v
tincture).

+ Tinctures of dried toxic or intense botanicals represent the activity
of 10 Gm of dried herb in each 100 cc of tincture (often called a
10% or 1:10 w/v tincture).

+ Tinctures of fresh undried plants are made to represent the activity
of 50 Gm of fresh herb in each 100 cc (a 50% or 1:2 w/v tincture).
Pure, undiluted (190-proof) ethyl alcohol is used for the fresh plant
menstruum.

In other words, if you take 100 cc (which is equivalent to 100 ml)
of a 1:5 tincture of dried Stinging Nettle into your body,
theoretically, you receive the same activity as if you ate 20 Gm of
the dried herb. Or if you take 100 ml of a 1:2 tincture of fresh
Nettle, theoretically, you are receiving the same activity as if you
ate 50 Gm of fresh Nettle (you might want to steam those fresh
Nettles first).

Of course these international standards, though excellent, are not
sacrosanct and a lay herbalist can make his or her tinctures in any
strength desired. I usually make my dried Nettle extract at 1:4, mv

----- PAGE 250 -----
fresh St. John’s Wort at 1:1.5, and my fresh Mullein flowers at a 1:1.
I often start out using the suggested standards, but frequently alter
them as I prepare successive batches. My current preferences have
evolved based on my experience with these plant extracts. View all
these processes and standards as principles to use as initial guides,
but ultimately do adjust them according to your own preferences.

It is important to note that, provided one is using good-quality
herb, both methods, the folk and the w/v, make high-quality
tinctures. Neither method is superior to the other (that statement
will draw some debate); the choice is merely a matter of the
medicine-maker’s needs and preferences. Some folks like to
measure ingredients when cooking, some don’t. We will discuss
both methods for preparing tinctures in this chapter.

Regardless of which method you choose for making tinctures,
remember that maceration is floating time, when the alluring
qualities of the liquids have their way with the herbal solids; the
waters and alcohols of the menstruum gently coax the essence of
the plants into solution. This is a time of quiescence as the earth,
air, fire, and water elements of the herb surrender themselves to the
receptive liquid of the menstruum. Inevitably, however, this
relationship will fall into deep slumber as we are all prone to do
within the delicious wetness of a tranquil bath. So, it is the task of
an attentive medicine-maker to shake his or her tinctures routinely,
thereby re-arousing the active part of the extraction process.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE
Store all tinctures in airtight, light-resistant containers and avoid
exposure to direct sunlight and excessive heat.
DOSAGE

Tinctures are normally more concentrated than either infusions or
decoctions and therefore stronger. The dosage to be taken can be

----- PAGE 251 -----
much smaller. The dosage again depends on the herb at hand.
When I use a mild tonic herb such as Nettle, Dandelion, or
Hawthorn, I will take up to five droppersful in a glass of water 2 to
3 times a day. When taking a more intense herb, such as Echinacea
or Chaparral, I take anywhere from 10 to 25 drops, 3 to 4 times a
day. With Cayenne, sometimes 1 drop is plenty.

SUMMARY

Since most medicinal plants are made up of representatives from
various types of constituents, categorized as either active or ballast
substances, the extraction agents should not be geared solely to any
individual substance. When extracting dehydrated plant material,
alcohol concentrations of 40 percent (sometimes less) to 60 percent
(sometimes more) are customarily utilized, according to the official
instructions given in most pharmacopoeia. This range of alcohol to
water varies widely among experienced herbalists. Therefore, as I
suggested in a previous chapter, when formulating a menstruum for
conducting an herbal extraction process of dried plant material,

When in doubt as to a suitable menstruum, choose “dilute
alcohol” as a solvent.

Tivcrurinc sy Using tHe Fork Metuop

Tincturing dry plant material

1. Grind dried herb to a moderately coarse powder (mcp).
2. Place the powder into a large jar that can be tightly closed.
3. Add prepared menstruum (see this page.)

4. Stir the mixture well, so that all of the herb is wet.

----- PAGE 252 -----
5. Add sufficient menstruum to the wet herb so that about 1/4
inch of extra menstruum sits atop the herb; if the herb is
floating, 1/4 inch below the herb.

6. Cap jar tightly.”

7. Check the jar after 12 hours. If the herb has absorbed the
menstruum, add a sufficient amount of menstruum to re-
establish the 1/4 inch of extra liquid.

8. Shake the tincture frequently for 14 days, then let it sit
another day.

9. Pour off (decant) the clear tincture from the top, press the
remaining wet pulp, and combine these two liquids (see
methods for decanting and pressing in Chapter Twenty-Five).

10. Filter if desired.
11. Bottle, tightly cap, and label.

Tincturing fresh plant material when using 190-proof alcohol

1. Chop the fresh plant into small pieces and stuff them into a
canning jar, filling it to the top. Pack the herb into the jar very
tightly. Get as much into the jar as you can, especially when
working with a light herb.

2. Add 190-proof ethyl alcohol, filling the jar to the top. Make
sure all the herb is covered by the alcohol.

3. Cap jar tightly.”
4. Agitate the tincture frequently for 14 days.

5. Decant the liquid, press the remaining wet pulp, and
combine these two liquids.

----- PAGE 253 -----
6. Filter if desired.
7. Bottle, tightly cap, and label.

Tincturing fresh plant material when using diluted alcohol
(less than 190-proof)

1. Chop the fresh plant into small pieces and stuff them very
tightly into a canning jar, filling it to the top.

2. Add menstruum (see below), filling the jar to the top. (See
Preparing the Menstruum below.)

3. Pour the entire ingredients (herb and menstruum) into a
Vita-Mix or some other suitable blender and blend it like a
smoothie. (You will have to make a large enough batch, so that
the volume of menstruum required is sufficient to completely
cover the blender blades.)

4. Pour the liquefied ingredients into a jar and cap tightly.”

5. Agitate tincture frequently for 14 days, then let it sit another
day.

6. Decant, press, and filter.
7. Bottle, tightly cap, and label.

Preparing the menstruum

The nature of the folk method is simplicity. This means using
what is commonly at hand and readily available. The easiest
menstruum to obtain is probably a commercial 80-proof or
100-proof vodka. Eighty-proof vodka is (approximately) 40
percent alcohol by volume; 100 proof is (approximately) 50
percent alcohol by volume. Twenty to 30 percent alcohol is

----- PAGE 254 -----
sufficient to preserve a tincture. Therefore, when making a
dried plant preparation, 80-proof vodka is adequate. When
making a fresh plant preparation, which always incorporates
the juices of the plant (which dilute the menstruum), maybe
100-proof vodka is more judicious (as noted above, 190-proof
would be the most efficient).

Of course, one can always prepare a custom-made
menstruum (as discussed in the next section on weight to
volume method) and use it as a menstruum for this folk
method. Make notes on your decision and on the results that
manifest.

Tincrurinc Usine tHe Weicur to Vorume Meron

Tincturing dry plant material

1. Powder and weigh dried plant and place the powder into a
large jar that can be tightly closed.

2. Prepare custom menstruum (see this page).

3. Be sure to mix together all the liquids of the menstruum
thoroughly in a separate container before adding them to the
powdered plant material.

4. Add the menstruum to the powdered herb.

5. Stir well, making sure all of the powdered herb is wet.
(After stirring the herb and menstruum together, some plant
parts—usually the seeds, barks, or roots—will be very wet,
showing a considerable amount of liquid, while some other
parts—certain leaves, flowers—will appear merely dampened
by the menstruum. Do not be concerned about either extreme

----- PAGE 255 -----
condition. Leave them as they are and continue with the
following steps.)

6. Cap jar tightly.

7. Shake tincture frequently for 14 days, then let it sit another
day.

8. Decant, press, and filter.
9. Bottle, cap tightly, and label.

Tincturing fresh plant material
VARIATION 1

1. Chop and weigh the plant and place it in a large jar.
2. Prepare custom menstruum (see this page).

3. If you chose not to use an undiluted (absolute) 190-proof
ethyl alcohol menstruum, be sure to mix together all the
liquids of the menstruum thoroughly in a separate container
before adding them to the plant material.

4. Add the menstruum to the herb.
5. Cap jar tightly.

6. Shake the tincture frequently for 14 days, then let it sit
another day.

7. Decant the tincture, press the remaining wet pulp, and
combine the two liquids.

8. Filter if desired.

9. Bottle, cap tightly, and label.

----- PAGE 256 -----
VARIATION 2

1. Chop the plant into small pieces and place them into a Vita-
Mix or some other suitable blender.

2. Prepare custom menstruum (see below).

3. Cover the herb with menstruum and blend it like a
smoothie. (You will have to use enough of the menstruum to
cover the blender blades.) Use as much of the measured
menstruum as you can to make the mixture churn actively in
the blender. (In some instances, you may not be able to fit in
all the menstruum during this blending stage.)

4. Pour the liquefied ingredients into a jar and cap tightly. Be
sure you have added all the measured menstruum to the herb
at some point during or after the blending process, in order to
maintain the intended weight to volume proportion.

5. Shake the tincture frequently for 14 days, then let it sit
another day.

6. Decant, press, and filter.
7. Bottle, cap tightly, and label.

Preparing the custom weight to volume menstruum
Two problems need to be addressed in preparing a custom
weight to volume (w/v) menstruum: (1) determining the total
volume of menstruum needed for the quantity of herb at hand;
and (2) determining the “correct” (based on your judgment)
combination and proportion of solvents within the menstruum.

To Determine the Total Volume of Menstruum
Example 1: To determine the total volume of menstruum

----- PAGE 257 -----
required to make a 1:5 w/v tincture (also called a 20 percent
tincture) of 400 Gm of powdered dried herb, simply multiply
the weight of the herb by 5 (400 x 5 = 2000). This tells you
that you need to prepare (a volume of) 2000 ml of menstruum
to add to (the weight) 400 Gm of herb to give you a tincture
strength of 1:5.

Example 2: To determine the total volume of menstruum
required to make a 1:10 w/v (10 percent tincture) from 260
Gm of powdered dried herb, multiply 260 by 10 = 2600. You
will need to prepare a volume of 2600 ml of menstruum for
the weight of 260 Gm of herb.

Example 3: To determine the total volume of menstruum
required to make a 1:2 w/v (50 percent tincture) from 215 Gm
of fresh undried herb, multiply 215 by 2 = 430. You will need
to prepare a volume of 430 ml of menstruum for the weight of
215 Gm of fresh herb.

When tincturing a fresh plant, one ordinarily makes a 1:2
w/v (50 percent tincture) and usually, but not necessarily
always, uses a menstruum of pure 190-proof ethyl alcohol
(according to the standards recommended by the International
Protocol adopted at Brussels in 1902).

To Determine the Proportion of Solvents in the Menstruum

WHEN TINCTURING DRIED PLANT MATERIAL,

This step requires some simple research. You need to look up
the unique characteristics of the plant to become acquainted
with its salient organic constituents (to later determine overall
how much is water soluble and how much is alcohol soluble).
As you involve yourself in the art and science of Herbalism,
you will accrue a good working library of herbal references.
Refer to these herbals to give you a list of the constituents

----- PAGE 258 -----
found in commonly used herbs. (See Resources at the end of
this book for references.) Also learn to trust your senses to give
you a plant’s constituent picture. Does it taste bitter (bitters) or
sour (acids), is it astringent (tannins) or demulcent (mucilage),
is it aromatic (volatile oils), etc.?

Using the list of constituents and their prime solvents given
to you in Chapter Six, you can begin to get a sense of the
proportions of water to alcohol that might be best used to
bring most of the properties of this plant into solution. This
will also prove helpful to determine if the plant contains
tannins that would be well managed by the addition of some
10 percent glycerin in the menstruum. If the plant is high in
alkaloids, you might want to add 5 to 10 percent vinegar to
help convert these free alkaloids into alkaloidal salts which are
far more soluble in water and alcohol.

The results of this research will give you a good foundation
for a well-educated guess as to the best initial menstruum to
formulate. There is no one right answer; there is, however, the
“correct” answer for your requirements and preferences. Make
your first batches small; make notes on your decisions and the
results of these decisions; and continue to modify your
menstruum until you have developed the one you like best
(see “The Sensual Approach to Successful Tincturing and Other
Methods of Herbal Extraction” in Chapter Five). The joy of
good herbal medicine-making evolves with the willingness to
experiment and the delight of discovery.

Ultimately, it’s your decision as to what is the best
menstruum for your herbal tincture. A good principle to follow
when formulating a menstruum for dried plant material is to
make the proportion of water as large as possible while still
efficiently dissolving all soluble matter and not endangering
the permanency of the preparation. One special advantage of
this, beside the obvious economic one (alcohol is expensive), is

----- PAGE 259 -----
that such tinctures may be added in small proportions to teas,
baths, and other aqueous preparations without causing serious
precipitation.

Ween Tincrurinc Fresh Prant Mareriat

Use the same method to determine total volume of menstruum
for a quantity of the fresh herb as you would for a dry,
powdered herb. The major difference here is that when
tincturing a fresh plant one ordinarily makes a 1:2 w/v (50
percent tincture) and most often uses a menstruum of
undiluted 190-proof ethyl alcohol (according to the standards
recommended by the International Protocol adopted at
Brussels in 1902).

Example: Find the volume of menstruum required to make a
1:2 w/v (50% tincture) from 454 Gm of fresh herb. Multiply
454 by 2 = 908. You will need to prepare a volume of 908 ml
of menstruum for the weight of 454 Gm of fresh herb.

Whenever using more than one single solvent for
your menstruum, be sure to mix together all the
liquids of the menstruum thoroughly in a separate
container before adding them to the plant
material.

Note: Most pharmacopoeias, having adopted the standards of the
1902 International Protocol, hold to using a menstruum of pure
190-proof (95 percent ethyl) alcohol for tincturing fresh plants. This
standard was established by pharmacists based on the theory that
ethyl alcohol, when in contact with the fresh plant tissue for an
adequate length of time, dehydrates the tissue and in so doing
draws into solution all plant constituents that are dissolved in the
plant juice. This leaves behind merely the cellulose and other

----- PAGE 260 -----
insoluble tissues to be discarded. Some herbalists feel it is
unnecessary to blend or shake these macerating mixtures because
this dehydration process occurs automatically and completely
without the need for any other action. Obviously if one chooses not
to blend or shake a tincture of this nature, every part of the plant
material must be immersed in the pure alcohol for the extraction
process to act upon the entire mass.

Keep in mind if you use 100-proof vodka (or any diluted ethyl
alcohol), you need to blend the fresh herb with the menstruum and
shake the macerating tincture regularly.

Hess ON THE “35 HERBS AND A FUNGUS” List THAT
Are Wett PREPARED As A TINCTURE

‘See the "Des section in Chapter Twenty-Five for clelting dosages for chien.

PLANT PART WEIGHTTO — XOFALCOHOL ADULT DOSAGE
VOLUME. INMENSTRUUM
lack Cohosh Ges shiree/00t 12 10% S-2:mk:3x aday
ey 198 15 60-80% 5-2 mk: Sx aday
Buneberry dey root 15 70-80% 10-20 dropscup to xa day?
Burdock fesh rot 12 100% 24 mS a dey
dry oot 15 40-60% 24 mk: 3x a day
seed 15 0% 1-2 mi Seay
Calendula eth dowers 12 100% 1-2 mk axa day
dry dower, 15 60-80% 12m Saxaday_
Cayenne ey fei 1S.0r 1:10 80-95% 1-8 droge
Cleavers fish whole plane 1s. 100% 2eo 4 mide day
(Crampbarle dry bark ry 50-60% 2-3 mikup to dx a day
Dandelion eth root, 12 100% ‘810 15 mi d-4x a day
dry oor 15 3596-659 80 15 ml Ste a day
Echinacea fesh root 12 100% 1-3 mkup toca diy
dry plant oot 15 50-7596 123 mkup 0 5x3 dy
Fennel ‘rushed ced 13 0% 2-4 min warm water a8
ceded
Ginger fh roe 12 100% 2-4 ml in warm water a
dry oot 1 0% ceded
Ginkgo. leaves 15 55-70% 2-3 mi 3xadyy
Goldenseal eth oot 12 10006 a /5% vinegar __S-2mkup to 3x diy
dry ror and/or laf us G-759e1e/Stevnejae 5-2 up te Ia day
Gamweed eth Bowering tops 12 10096 1-2 mk dx a diy
dey tops 15 65-80% 1-2 mk dx aday
Hawthora fiesh eat ower bernie 12. 100% 1-3 mi Seadiy
ay 15 40-70% 13 mi 3eady
Mugwore dey bet 15 000%, ‘5-2 wh: 3x day
Malin fie Bowers ut 100% 2-3 miup w 4xa dy
ary 15. 50-60% 23 mkup w tea dey
Nettle fet heb 12 10096 1-3 mk 3xadiy
dey herb ot root i 40-50% 1-3 mi 3e adv
On fees “ueripe milky "seed 1:1.75 0% 120-759 2-5 mup w 4x a dry
Peppermint dry herb 1 006 1-3 mi Sead?
Plantain es he 12 100% 2-3 mb: 3x aay

‘Se John’s Wort fresh Gowering tops 12 100% 1-3 mi 3x aday

----- PAGE 261 -----
HERBS ON THE “35 HERBS AND A FunGus” List
Tuat Are Wext Preparep As A TINCTURE, continued

PLANT PART WEIGHT TO OF ALCOHOL ADULT DOSAGE
VOLUME IN MENSTRUUM
‘Saw Palmetto fresh berries 12 80-100%
15 60-80% 205 ml:3xa

Sculleap fresh herb 1.75 oF 1:2 100% 1-3 ml: 3x a day

recently dried 15 45-60% 1-3 ml: 3x a day
Siberian Ginseng’ powdered root 135 60% 2-4 ml: up to 4x a day
Uva Ursi leaf 15 50-65% 1-3 mb: 3x a day
Vitex berries 14/15 45-65% 1-2 mb: 3x a day
Valerian fresh root 1:1.5 oF 1:2 _ 100%
Yarrow fresh flowering plant 12 100% I:

dry 45 40-60% 1-3 ml: 3x a day
Yellow Dock —_ fresh root, 12 90% ale./10% glycerin

dry 15 40-50% /10% glycerin

1. (Aatea Ruiba) used 28 a sbstirute for Black Cohosh
12. As per Michael Moore, Medicinal Plants ofthe Pai West

13 Excellent flavoring agent

4. Very difficult to find authentic herb best to buy the authentic extract. Otherwise use powdered root.

* It is important to clean and wipe off the rim of the jar thoroughly before placing the
lid on the jar and tightening it down. It is even advisable after wiping the rim to place
a piece of waxed paper between the rim and the lid of the jar as a gasket. This assures
that a tight seal will be made preventing the loss of any menstruum that can occur due
to constant shaking of the liquid contents. You will know if there has been any leakage
by the discovery of narrow streams of extract appearing on the outside surface of the
jar.

----- PAGE 262 -----


----- PAGE 263 -----
CHAPTER 13

There is a perennial debate amongst herbal medicine-makers and
herbal extract manufacturers as to the superiority and practicality of
percolation versus that of maceration. We probably won’t resolve
the issue in this chapter, but as you will see, we'll definitely
grapple with the question. Maceration (extracting soluble
constituents by simply soaking them in a solvent) is one of the

----- PAGE 264 -----
oldest methods of extraction known to human medicine-makers.
Percolation is a process having a relatively late introduction into
Western pharmacy, but which quickly caught the fancy and blazing
fervor of professional pharmacists and erudite herbalists. It is a
process of extracting the soluble constituents of an herb by the slow
passage of a solvent (mainly, but not entirely, due to the pull of
gravity) through a column of dried powdered plant which has been
packed in a special form of apparatus known as a percolator.
Percolation is sometimes called displacement, because the solvent
after becoming charged with the soluble part of the herb is
displaced by fresh portions of the solvent liquid.

The question of which of these methods of extraction is the
better, I guess, is best answered by stating that each has advantages
and disadvantages over the other.

The percolation process can be found advantageous because:

+ It offers a means of making a tincture in 24 hours (when in a huge
rush, as little as 3 or 4 hours), whereas maceration ordinarily takes
10 to 14 days, sometimes longer.

+ It is easier and faster to prepare more highly concentrated dry
plant tinctures (1:2, 1:3) and fluid extracts (1:1).

+ The soluble constituents of an herb can be removed and collected
more completely by percolation than by the soaking, pressing, and
filtration processes used in maceration. (However, this assertion
probably incites more heated debate than the creation vs. big bang
and evolution contest.)

+ The liquid left in the residue (marc) and discarded after
completion of a successful percolation is pure menstruum, which is
a bit bothersome, but at least all the plant’s constituents dissolved
in the proceeding percolate and have been collected in there
entirety for use. In maceration, the liquid left in the residue is a
finished full-strength tincture, which is never completely removed,
and that is even more irksome.

----- PAGE 265 -----
+ One does not have to press the marc. Maceration requires pressing
in order to remove as much of the saturated solvent (tincture) as
possible from the marc. With more highly concentrated tinctures
(1:3. 1:4), 20 to 25 percent of the extract can remain in the mark if
it is not pressed thoroughly, and, even when pressed thoroughly,
some of the tincture (regardless of its w/v concentration) is always
lost to the marc.

+ Well-made, efficient presses, when available, can be expensive
(percolation requires no pressing).

+ Percolation offers a fascinating challenge and carries a discerning
air of status for those who can do it consistently, like those few
surfers who can ride the big ones—the mountain riders. Actually,
percolation’s not quite as demanding as riding a 40-foot wave.

Maceration is more advantageous in the following circumstances:

+ For the extraction of plants containing large amounts of gum or
mucilage which swell considerably when moistened. Percolation is
only suited for the extraction of close-grained plant materials which
swell only a small amount.

+ For the extraction of fresh undried plant material.

+ For the extraction of plant materials that contain a high
proportion of resins and gum-resins. Neither highly resinous or
gum-resinous plant materials nor fresh plant materials can be
extracted by the percolation method. Due to the physical nature of
these materials, they cannot normally be packed properly to allow
an effective flow of menstruum essential for efficient percolation.

+ For the making of glycerates or the use of menstrua containing
glycerin.
Other practical advantages that are inherent in maceration:

+ The process of maceration is decidedly more simple. requiring less

----- PAGE 266 -----
aptitude, dexterity, and judgment in conducting it, and it requires
little or no practice.

+ It is uniform, always done in the same way.

+ The results are quite predictable in that all of the derived tincture
will be of uniform strength.

+ It requires less constant attention during the process (just shake it
once or twice a day). This is quite significant when dealing with
large quantities.

+ The apparatus required is less complicated and more easily
acquired.

+ It works every time, and it produces excellent tinctures.

With regard to our immediate situation, wherein we are
communicating solely by illustrations and written word, percolation
evokes a significant problem because to learn and develop a
semblance of success in this process of extraction, physical
demonstration and hands-on practice are usually needed. However,
after some deliberation, I decided to pursue this introductory
discussion and instruction in the performance of the percolation
method for the benefit of those who have heard of it and wonder
what the heck it’s all about; for those who are fascinated by the
fabrication and manipulation of apparatus; for those feral spirits
who will take to the challenge of an untutored attempt; and for
those who have previously experienced the making of a tincture by
percolation, but can use a mental review. Ergo...

PERCOLATION

Equipment

----- PAGE 267 -----
You need a percolator cone. This can be a relatively costly
Pyrex® glass cone purchased from a lab equipment supply
house, or it can be a clear glass funnel, or a homemade device
manufactured by removing the bottom of a glass (don’t use a
plastic bottle) 1-liter Crystal Geyser® or Calistoga®-like water
bottle (which is what most of us do). This is done by using a
glass cutter. The idea, design, and popularization of this
homemade percolator is directly attributable to the practical
brilliance of Mr. Michael Moore, herbalist and director of the
Southwest School of Botanical Medicine in Arizona. The
transmogrified water bottle will sit upside down in a wide-
mouthed Mason® canning jar and the screw cap of the bottle
is used to control the rate of drip from—what has now been
converted to—the bottom of the bottle. For percolating smaller
batches of tincture, a Perrier® bottle is better used, as its
diameter is narrower, allowing a small amount of herb to
create a longer column of powdered herb for the menstruum
to percolate through. This can often make for better extraction.
Use a narrow-mouth Mason jar with the Perrier bottle.

You also need a packing rod. This can be any device having
a broad, flat end that can be used to tamp down the powdered
herb while packing it into the cone. A 10” length of 3/4” to 1”
diameter wooden doweling sawed off squarely at the end
works well.

In addition to some of the kitchen pharmacy equipment I
have recommended in Chapter Four, you will also need:

+ unbleached filter paper
+a small container that can be closed airtight
+ plastic bags and rubber bands

+ a small weight like a quartz crystal or a rock that is fairly

----- PAGE 268 -----
impervious to liquids

+ a couple of 1-quart canning jars (when using the homemade
type percolator)

+ well-dried plant material
+ alcohol and water

For a detailed description of the “technical” approach to
percolation, you can read Remington’s Practice of Pharmacy or
Remington’s Pharmaceutical Sciences. The following method is
a variation of the “lay” method popularized by Michael Moore,
who wheeled onto the campus of our herb school one
afternoon and started cutting the bottoms off of a bunch of
glass Perrier bottles. At the time, we weren’t exactly sure why.

Standard Percolation Cones

----- PAGE 269 -----
Homemade Percolator

Packing Rods

Herb Preparation

You will need to grind and sift your dried plant material to
allow for smooth easy extraction. A coarse #20 powder will
do (see “Powdering,” Chapter Twenty-Five). The nature of the
plant being percolated is the prime factor as to how finely it
should be powdered in order to be efficiently extracted by

----- PAGE 270 -----
percolation. National Formularies direct anywhere from #20
to #60 powders depending on the herb, with #30 and #40
seeming to be the most often directed. Vary the fineness of the
powder you use as you experiment with each herb. This is
why, over the long run, note-taking is so helpful. Run the
powder through your sifter and remove all chunks and clumps,
leaving a uniformly textured powder. When making a tincture
by percolation, the evenness of the texture of the powder is
probably as important as how finely it is powdered.

Preparation of the Menstruum

Suppose you have decided to prepare a tincture at 1:5
weight/volume in a 60 percent alcohol menstruum:

1. Weigh the freshly ground herb. Let’s say you have 180 Gm.

2. I'll be referring back to this step at the latter part of the
process. Pack the herb into a measuring cup to determine the
compressed volume that the herb fills. Let’s say it is 300 ml
(10 0z). This is approximately the volume of menstruum that
will be retained by the marc and discarded along with the
marc at the completion of this percolation. This amount varies
depending on the herb being used. At the end of this process it
may be found some plant material retains more liquid than
this estimate, some may be less; when finished with the
percolation, one should make note of the actual amount
retained by this herb for the next time it is percolated.
Therefore, that amount of (estimated) menstruum (300 ml)
must be added to the full volume of menstruum that is
required to produce a 1:5 w/v tincture (which in this example
will be 900 ml—5 x 180). So, you will need to prepare 1200
ml (300 ml + 900 ml) total volume of menstruum for this
percolation (See details for calculating a w/v menstruum in
Chapter Twelve).

----- PAGE 271 -----
3. Prepare 1200 ml of 60%:40% menstruum, 60% (720 ml) of
190-proof ethyl alcohol, 40% (480 ml) of distilled water.

4. Mix the alcohol and water together, and set it aside in a
closed container.

Moistening the Herb

This is a preliminary moistening that is done before the herb is
packed into the cone. It allows the dampened powder to swell
upon absorbing the liquid. Some plant powders, if dampened
and packed in the cone before swelling occurs, can expand to
such a degree that the cone ends up being packed too tightly to
allow the liquid that is added later to flow down through it.

1. Add approximately 200 ml of menstruum to the 180 Gm of
powdered herb and mix it thoroughly. (This is about 2/3 to
3/4 of the 300 ml volume calculated-in Step 2, on this page—
to saturate the marc. Remember, we are only dampening the
powder at this time, not yet saturating it). Make the
consistency such that you can pinch some of the moist powder
between your fingers, and it will hold together. Precaution:
Moisten the herb slowly; if it is not moist enough you can
always add more liquid. However, if it gets too moist, the ball
game’s over, maceration wins.

2. Place the moistened powder into a container that can be
tightly sealed to prevent evaporation and let it sit for 1 hour to
over night, depending on your time urgency.

----- PAGE 272 -----
Diameter of Cut Paper

Packing the Cone

1. First cut two round pieces of coffee filter paper. Make their
diameters roughly equivalent to the inside top opening of the
cone.

2. Make a cone out of one of the papers by folding it into fours
(in half twice) then opening it up to form the cone.

----- PAGE 273 -----
Making the Cone

3. Pack this paper coffee filter cone with some of the moist
powder. (Pack it lightly at this point.)

4. Slide the filled paper cone down into the neck of the glass
percolator cone. You may need to use a chopstick to get it in
place. (If you experience some difficulty, relax and hang in
there, you'll get it.) Once it is in place, make sure the paper
cone is adhering to the glass and is sealed completely around
the circumference.

Packing the Filter Paper Cone and Positioning It in Glass Cone
5. Now that the packed paper cone is in place, gradually add
more of the moist powder (about 1/3 of what is left to pack)

on top of this first batch, and tamp it down evenly with the
packing rod.

6. Now put in the second 1/3 of the powder and tamp it down
a little harder and evenly.

7. Follow this with the final 1/3 of the herb. Each successive

----- PAGE 274 -----
portion being pressed a little more firmly than the proceeding
portion. Compress and compact the column of powder very
evenly. When this is done correctly, the packing will look
uniform from the top to the bottom of the cone. It will not
look like three separate layers.

8. Be sure the top surface of the final layer is flat and level.
This is the judgment portion of the operation that will take
some practice. If the column is packed too hard, the
menstruum that is poured on later will not flow at all. If it is
packed too loosely, the herb will redistribute itself as the
menstruum flows through it, creating fissures that disturb the
flow of the menstruum, causing an incomplete extraction. If
the column is not packed evenly throughout the width and
depth of the cone, the flow will descend unevenly, causing an
incomplete extraction. Packing the percolator so that the best
results will be realized is a skill that is acquired only by the
experience of trial and error.

9. Lay the second round piece of filter paper on top of the
packed herb, and on top of this put the quartz crystal or the
rock to weigh the paper down. This is done to protect the top
stratum of the packed powder when the rest of the menstruum
is being poured in.

Adding Some More of the Menstruum

1. Remove the bottle cap from the bottom of the cone so air
can escape as the body of solvent descends. If this is not done,
when more menstruum is poured on, air will bubble up
through the herb instead and mutilate the packing job.

2. Set the packed percolator down into the wide-mouth Mason
jar, making sure the top surface of the powder is level,
horizontal, parallel, perpendicular to vertical, straight across,

----- PAGE 275 -----
ete.

3. Slowly pour the menstruum onto the column of herb. The
menstruum should progress slowly and evenly down the herb
column throughout each successive layer of the moistened
herb. If it does this successfully, this is when the fat lady sings;
this is when you get your wings—or not (till the next time).

4. When the menstruum reaches the bottom of the percolator,
the herb is saturated and the menstruum will begin to drip out
of the bottom. Gently pick up the bottle and replace and
tighten the cap to completely stop the flow of liquid. Place the
cone back into the Mason jar.

5. Be sure to leave a layer of an inch or more of menstruum
sitting on top of the packed herb. This layer must be
maintained throughout the entire percolation until the last
portion of the menstruum has been added. If instead, the
column of powder is exposed to air, the air at once enters the
powder; then when more liquid is poured on, the air must
escape and forces its way to the surface disarranging the well-
packed powder (bummer).

----- PAGE 276 -----
Properly Packed and Imperfect Packed Cones

Let me attempt to illustrate this more clearly for you with the
following comparison. Visualize, if you will, a soiled and
sweaty, battle-worn soldier who, after having just survived the
most gruesome combat episode of a high-budget, Dolby sound,
war film (or if you prefer, just moments after the hottest love
scene in motion picture memory) lying back and taking a long,
slow, deeply satisfying drag on a svelte, name-brand cigarette.
Now, zoom in for a close-up shot of the cigarette’s burning
end. See it glowing brightly as the fire moves gracefully and
evenly down the cigarette’s chemical-laden, nicotine-enhanced,
firm and uniformly packed cylindrical shaft? That’s the move
we want the menstruum to make on the powdered herb as the
solvent flows deftly down a firm, uniformly packed, percolator
column. Now, compare that picture to a scene wherein a small
group of colorfully clad people are sitting in a circle
drumming, talking, and laughing amongst themselves while
one of them takes a lengthy toke on a rather hastily assembled
home-rolled unit. See the fire sputter and crackle unruly as it
speeds down one side of the unevenly packed cylinder leaving
the rest of the paper and its herbal contents, for the time being
untouched. That’s the kind of movement you don’t want to see
the menstruum make. Get the picture? Maybe you have to be
there. But I’m confident a significant number of readers can
relate to the experiences and appreciate my analogies.

The Maceration Period

1. Having made sure that a one- or more-inch layer of
menstruum covers the top of the moist powder, so no air gets
into the column, cover the cone with a plastic bag and secure it
with a rubber band.

----- PAGE 277 -----
2. At this point, the herb is left to macerate for at least 12, but
preferably 24 to 48 hours.

Percolation, the Dripping Period

1. After the period of maceration is completed, remove the
plastic bag and loosen the bottle cap. Allow the menstruum,
carrying with it the extractive (this is called the percolate), to
drip slowly into the Mason jar(s). In fact, the volume of 900 ml
will require two Mason jars. While dripping, before the
accumulating tincture reaches the cap of the percolator, slowly
lift the cone and set it in a second jar to continue dripping.
The drip rate should be approximately 1 drop each 3 seconds
(20 drops per minute). The rate of flow can be adjusted by
tightening or further loosening the cap.

2. Continue to add fresh menstruum until it all drips through.
This can take up to two hours and sometimes longer. The
actual drip rate will depend on the constituents of the herb,
the firmness of the packing, the tightness of the cap, and the
nature of the menstruum used. The higher the menstruum’s
alcohol content, the easier it passes through the herb.

3. When the percolation has finished, there will be
approximately 900 ml of tincture in the Mason jar(s) and
approximately 300 ml of menstruum remaining in the marc, to
do with as you will. The first time you “do” the herb at hand,
you may or may not end up with 900 ml of tincture because
the “300 ml” of extra menstruum you added in Step 2, on this
page, at the very beginning of this procedure may not have
been an accurate estimation due to the nature of the herb and
the nature (alcohol water proportion) of the menstruum. If the
percolate proves to be more or less than 900 ml, so be it. It
won’t be off by more than a few milliliters. Make a note and
adjust the amounts the next time you do this herb. Each herb

----- PAGE 278 -----
will be different.

SUMMARY

For a successful percolation, one that extracts all the constituents
from the entire column of powdered herb, the dampened herb has
to be packed uniformly firm (but not too firm) throughout the
entire length and width of the glass column (this takes some
practice and judgment) and the menstruum must be poured onto
the packed powder ever so gingerly, so it will flow slowly, evenly,
and regularly throughout each successive horizontal layer to the
next. The menstruum must not scoot down one side of the column
in a narrow trail leaving the remainder of the powder untouched,
for this will result in an incomplete extraction. If this does happen
(and it does!), or if you packed the column too firmly and nothing
happens (in extreme circumstances, it can take up to an hour for
the dripping to start, so don’t throw it out too soon), just dump
everything (all the herb and all the menstruum) into a jar and
simply macerate it instead (a point for maceration). You'll end up
with a fine tincture having a 1:5 (plus the extra menstruum, in this
case, +300 ml) tincture strength. Or if while pouring the latter
portions of menstruum into the cone, you see that the flow isn’t
going well, withhold 300 ml of the menstruum; now when you
dump everything into the maceration mode, you will have a 1:5
strength tincture and 300 ml of high-proof cocktail to drown your
tears in.

If any or all of my explanations, illustrations, and candid
analogies remain unclear to you, I’m not too surprised. Percolation
is difficult to put in words; but I tried. You might want to reread the
final point I made in the beginning of this chapter on this page. But
certainly persevere; take the challenge—inevitably glorious success
awaits you. It could be worse; you could be trying to toilet train a
thirsty puppy. So practice packing, and pouring, and dripping by
using inexpensive powdered Fennel seed or like material and
relatively inexpensive 80-proof vodka. Powdered seeds pack easier

----- PAGE 279 -----
than most leaf or flower material, which tend to be a little spongier
when packed, and many roots, which tend to contain a relatively
large amount of albumen and are, therefore, a little more difficult
to begin with. Better yet, find a bulk Chai tea blend (like the one
discussed in Chapter Twenty-Two for making a Chai syrup), and
use plain water as the menstruum. Percolation is a method
commonly used in pharmacy to make aqueous infusions. This will
give you good practice having little financial risk and will render a
delicious Chai tea beverage with which to celebrate your successes,
or toast the lessons of your mishaps. Pure water is more difficult to
flow through a packed cone than pure alcohol or alcohol/water
mixtures; so once you successfully percolate using pure water, you
can flow and drip any menstruum thereafter. Obviously, hold off on
percolating ultra-precious Black Cohosh, or Goldenseal, etc. (or
using relatively expensive high-alcoholic menstruums) until you’ve
got the process mastered.

A final indication as to how successfully you exhausted the plant
material, thereby rendering a full-bodied extract, is reflected by the
taste of the last drops of the percolate. If these final drops have
merely a faint flavor, you can assume that you extracted nearly all
the constituents from the plant material. If these drops are,
however, highly flavorful, there is probably a major portion of the
constituents still remaining in the marc. Do something different next
time. Pack the cone a little more firmly to slow down the flow of
solvent and extend the extraction time, or use a finer powder for
this particular plant, or slow down the drip rate by keeping the cap
tighter. Enjoy the challenge! Be fortified by your failures; celebrate
your success.

DOSAGE

Dosage varies according to type of herb(s) used and the size, age,
and condition of the individual. Refer to the suggested adult dosages
found at the end of Chapter Twelve, “Tinkering by Maceration.”
Also see the “Dosage” section in Chapter Twenty-Five for

----- PAGE 280 -----
calculating dosages for children.

Heras on THE “35 Heras anv A Funcus” List

Tuat Are Wet Preparep py PeRcoLaTion

To help determine a good menstruum formula, refer to the
suggested range of percent of absolute alcohol for dried plant
tinctures found at the end of Chapter Twelve, “Tincturing by
Maceration.”

These are inexpensive and abundant—
Fennel, Nettle, . .
. good practice plants for developing your
and Peppermint . .
percolation dexterity.

Blackb. This is usually better used as an astringent
ack ber!
a infusion or decoction, however.

Black Cohosh

Burdock

Cayenne

Crampbark

Dandelion
This is best used as a fresh plant tincture,

Echinacea but if you are using very recently dried
root it can be well percolated.

Fennel

Ginger

----- PAGE 281 -----
Ginkgo

Goldenseal

It is difficult to find reliable, authentic
Siberian Ginseng dried herb; for this reason, it is probably
better to buy a reputable imported extract.

This is usually better used as a cold infused

Uva Ursi
tea.
Valerian
Vitex
Willow This is usually better used as a tea.
It is a little tricky to render this plant into
Yarrow

a uniform powder.

Yellow Dock

----- PAGE 282 -----


----- PAGE 283 -----
The history of the human race abounds in grapes and finds
humanity romping merrily through the history of wine. Arabian
physicians, as well as Hippocrates, Galen, and Pliny, heartily
acclaimed the medicinal virtues of wine, and modern medical
science is heard singing its praise as well, consistently finding it an
active agent in disease prevention.

----- PAGE 284 -----
Throughout the history of herbal medicine-making, wine was
commonly employed as a menstruum to coax into solution the
virtues of several plants, and the preparations formed were called
vinous tinctures or medicated wines. In the U.S. and Britain, the
wines most often used for menstrua were the official wine sherry,
together with port, madeira, teneriffe, and claret.

Our ancestors found certain advantages in the use of wine as a
pharmaceutical menstruum: it dissolves substances normally
considered insoluble in water, and, to a large extent, resists their
tendency to spontaneous change. At the same time, wine is less a
stimulant than rectified or proof spirit, both from its smaller
proportion of alcohol and from the modified state in which the
alcohol exists in wine’s composition.

Medicated wines are one of the oldest class of Galenic
preparations. They are hydro-alcoholic solutions made from various
plants and employing white (sherry) or red (port) wine as the
principal solvent or menstruum. In 1906, the official U.S.
Pharmacopoeia VIII recognized red wine, white wine, and 8
medicated wines. In 1916, the National Formulary IV included
formulas for 15 wines, all of which were made with sherry, but
none have been official in later editions.

Herbal or medicinal wines are tinctures in which the menstruum
is wine. The solvent power of wines on herb material depends
primarily on the water and alcohol they contain. The acid that wine
usually contains serves in some instances to increase its solvent
power. The absence of uniformity in the proportion of alcohol to
water in commercial wines renders the preparations made with
them of unequal strength. The availability of other preparations
such as tinctures and fluid extracts, which can render a more
standardized strength (at a precision which can seldom be attained
when wine is used), and the legal restrictions affecting the use of
wines during the period of national prohibition, accounted for the
decline in popularity of medicinal wines and their eventual
deletion from official compendia. However, in spite of the
heightened degree of pharmaceutical precision attainable from
mixtures of grain alcohol and water. and the applauded

----- PAGE 285 -----
preservative action of these high-alcohol content extracts, to me
they are somehow less consonant with the human body than
medicinal wines, and for my nature they often vibrate a bit
too ... medical. Herbal wines come across more as flavorsome foods
and genial tonics. In contrast to the use of grain alcohol extracts, the
employment of which often stems from a rather solemn, clinical,
and renovating perspective, herbal wines seem to have a more
festive relationship with the human mind and body. In my
experience, the spirit of imbibing an herbal wine lends itself more
to the mental and spiritual celebration of health and wellness.

As discussed later in the vinegar monologue (Chapter Fifteen),
hyper-extractants and perpetual-preservatives served the
medical/pharmaceutical establishments well in the manufacturing
and marketing of their uniform strength, high potency, heroic
products, but we lay herbalists need not rely so heavily on these
qualities as we create a home pharmacy of herbal tonics. Because
we have made ourselves more independent and can recreate our
herbal preparations annually if we wish, they don’t have to last
“forever” on a shelf. And our handmade meds need not always
present a precise strength or be pharmacologically mega-potent to
touch our health. In addition to their abundant herbal actions, they
provide other components in their overall tonifying therapeutic
effect not found in the use of commercial products. Inherent in their
handmade character are the seasonal joys we experience by nature
of going outdoors into the wilds, along a pathway, and into the
garden, seeking, visiting, and harvesting moderate amounts of our
herbal allies and creating our own premium products. The
handmade nature of our herbal preparations supplies us a
considerably broader spectrum and more wholistic emplacement of
health-enhancing therapeutic actions. So, for all herbal medicine-
makers who agree with my meanderings, wine shines once again as
a welcome solvent/preservative for common use.

THE UNIQUE RELATIONSHIP OF WINE WITH THE HUMAN
BODY, MIND, AND SPIRIT

----- PAGE 286 -----
It would be a sober error to conclude that a given quantity of wine
is equivalent to an equal quantity of water containing a like
percentage of distilled grain alcohol. The peculiar effects of a true
wine depend upon its ethereal and saline elements, such as its
volatile oils, sugar, or acids, which modify materially those effects
that would be produced by its alcohol alone. The grape-derived,
naturally occurring accessory components of pure wine help the
body metabolize and eliminate the wine’s alcohol more gracefully,
excreting it more benignly. Whereas purified alcohol is blunt in its
nature, seeming to bump and bruise the organs and the brain as it
transits through the body. Understand, of course, that any alcoholic
liquid, be it grain alcohol or fine wine taken in excess on a regular
basis, may bump, bruise, and break livers, careers, and families.

In various circles, discussion swings back and forth on the benefits
and evils of imbibing alcohol of any nature. Traditionally it was
believed that the physiological actions of wine on the human
experience afforded many benefits. It was held that genuine
unadulterated wine is essentially a stimulant of the nervous and
circulatory systems, but its mode of stimulation is quite unlike that
of other alcohol. In moderate proportions, wine increases activity
and freedom of action, quickens and brightens the intellect and
imagination, warms the feelings, invigorates the digestive powers,
and it diffuses a cordial satisfaction throughout the whole being. No
wonder Bacchus has always been humanity’s most favored god.

In contrast, the action of distilled alcohol tends to benumb the
faculties even while stimulating them, so that subjectively and
objectively they seem to be struggling under a brute force; the
exhilaration they produce is usually fierce and maudlin and they
often leave in their wake a dull and torpid feeling. Quality wine,
when taken in excess (which occasionally happens), affects the
body less harshly (though harshly none the less) than distilled
alcohol; the latter leads to complications with the liver, heart, and
kidneys, while the former engenders gout, gravel, and nervous
affections.

Wine. especially when used medicinally. needs to be of premium

----- PAGE 287 -----
quality, and fortunately the California wine industry (and I assume
other regions of the U.S.) is providing some excellent quality
beverage and vinum menstrua for our humble domestic use.

During convalescence from fatigue or disease, wine taken in
moderation with food is uplifting and can be an agreeable aid to
recovery. It can also be of significant assistance in chronic
conditions which waste the strength by profuse discharges, or by
pain, or by inducing an anemic condition. In all of these cases, red
wine seems to be more helpful than white. Sparkling wines have
been used to help allay seasickness and other motion sickness.

The primary properties of pure wine are stimulant and
antispasmodic. In convalescence from prolonged fever and the
sinking of one’s vitality, wine is potentially one of the finest
remedies. In some convulsive and spasmodic conditions, wine,
liberally imbibed, can be quite useful. There is evidence that one
glass of red wine a day is beneficial.

THE NATURE AND VARIETY OF WINE

Wine is characterized as a spirituous liquid, the result of the
fermentation of grape juice (the fruit of numerous varieties of Vitis
vinifera), containing natural coloring matter and other substances,
either combined or intimately blended with the spirit. All wine’s
other qualities vary with the nature of each particular wine.

The “spirit,” the intoxicating ingredient in all wine, is alcohol;
hence their relative strength depends upon the quantity of this
substance entering into their composition. Wine’s other ingredients,
aside from water and alcohol, are sugar, gum, extractive, coloring
matter, tannic, malic and carbonic acids, bitartrate of potassium
(tartar), tartrate of lime, aenanthic ether, and volatile oils. The
volatile oil is reportedly the cause of the delicate flavor and aroma
of wine, which is called the “bouquet.” The constituents on this list
are not necessarily present in every wine. Thus sugar is present in
sweet wines, tannic acid in rough wines, and carbonic acid in
effervescent wines. The different kinds of wine derive their various

----- PAGE 288 -----
qualities from their mode of fermentation, the nature of the grape,
the soil, and climate in which it may have grown. Following is a
brief review of those wines that were commonly used in pharmacy
for making medicated wines.

‘Suerry

Sherry (Vinum Xericum, from Xeres, Spain) is of a deep amber
color, and when good, possesses a dry aromatic flavor and fragrance
without any acidity. It ranks among the stronger white wines and
contains between 15 and 20 percent by measure of alcohol. The
U.S. and British pharmacopoeias at one time agreed on indicating it
as the official wine. This was due to the fact that this wine, along
with port wine, are the two varieties of wine most nearly
resembling pure alcohol in their operation. When sherry was
official, it was often made to order by dealers and could in these
instances, by the addition of brandy, range from 20 to 35 percent of
alcohol. This wine, when of good quality and being free from all
acid, is the recommended one to use whenever the stomach is
delicate or has a tendency to acid indigestion.

Porr

Port (Vinum Portense, from Portugal) is of a deep-purple color, and
when young is a rough, strong, and slightly sweet wine. When kept
a certain length of time in bottles, it deposits a considerable portion
of its astringent matter, loses the greater part of its sweetness,
acquires more flavor, and retains its strength. If kept too long, it
deposits the whole of its astringent and coloring matter and
becomes deteriorated. Port is not considered a natural wine due to
the practice of adding to it considerable quantities of brandy, which
causes its heating quality to the palate. This makes it the strongest
of the wines in common use, and its alcoholic strength can be raised
to 30 or 40 percent (keep in mind when choosing a menstruum
that this is 60 to 80 proof). Port can be useful in cases of deep

----- PAGE 289 -----
debility, especially when there is also a condition of loose bowels
and inflammation. This wine can act as a tonic stimulant increasing
the strength of all functions, digestion in particular. A white port is
available to us as well. I have not yet used it, but I assume it is free
of the astringency compulsions found in red port. White port
contains 18 to 20 percent alcohol.

Mapeira

Madeira is the strongest of the white wines in use. It is a slightly
acid wine and when of proper age and in good condition has a rich,
nutty, aromatic flavor. As it occurs on the market, however, it is of
variable quality because less care is taken in its manufacture now
than formerly, and it is subject to adulteration after importation. It
is 6 to 7 percent alcohol, unless fortified. Nutritionally, this is the
most generous of the white wines and is particularly adapted to the
purpose of reviving weakened constitutions and of abetting the
declination of vitality in old age. The slight acidity of Madeira may
disagree with some stomachs, and, as with all acidic wines, this
makes it contraindicated for those who tend to gout.

Carer

Claret is also a red wine and from its moderate strength is ranked as
a light wine. It has a deep purple color and, when good, a delicate
taste in which the vinous flavor is blended with slight acidity and
astringency. It is 12 to 17 percent alcohol. This wine is much less
heating than port, and is useful as an aperient and diuretic.

A favored herb—say Damiana (Turnera
aphrodisiaca), for example, infused in a fine wine
with some mildly mischievous spices and a few
plump raisins touches one’s amorous spirit and
feelings of well-being in a very special way.

----- PAGE 290 -----
Sparkuinc Wines

Sparkling wines, such as Champagne, are more or less sweet (but
can be dry), charged with carbonic acid, bottled before fermentation
is completed, and before the grape sugar is all converted into
alcohol. Alcohol content is 12 percent.

Appts Ciner

Apple cider is 5 to 10 percent alcohol. This is a nutritious wine
carrying with it the apple’s unique spectrum of nutrients.

Meap

Mead is a wine made from honey. This is a fascinating beverage
having a rich history of enhancing merriment while festively
benumbing medieval maidens and raucous warriors. Spawned by
honey bees—our planet’s most brilliant herbalists—mead is a
particularly appropriate menstruum for making herbal extracts.
This fermented flower nectar is 9 to 11 percent alcohol.

METHODS OF PREPARATION

Medicated wines are relatively low alcohol content tinctures
prepared usually by maceration, in which the menstruum is wine.
They have the advantage over water-based infusions and decoctions
since they are much more permanent preparations.

Wine infusions lend very well to the folk method of extraction,
but are also perfectly suited for the weight/volume method. (See
Chapter Twelve for details on these two methods of tincturing.)

DOSAGE

In general. the dose when taking a medicated wine is a

----- PAGE 291 -----
tablespoonful to a wineglassful, two or three times a day.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

In the choice of a wine to use as a menstruum, the purest and most
generous in alcohol should be selected. Sherry, port, madeira, and
teneriffe were preferred by the official pharmacopoeias; sherry and
port having the highest alcohol content.

Medicated wines are liable to undergo a change with time, and
hence it is best that they be made:

+ in small quantities
+ without heat

+ and kept in well-capped bottles, in a cool dark place like other
fine wines

To Prepare A

Mepicarep Wine

1. Reduce the dried herb to a moderately coarse
powder.

2. Combine with pure undiluted wine of your
choice (see above list of recommended wines).

3. Macerate for fourteen days; shaking the
mixture frequently.

4. Strain.

5. Pour into a sterilized bottle, cap, and store in a
cool location.

----- PAGE 292 -----
Compounp Wine or Comrrey

A classic medicated wine recipe. Restorative Wine Bitters.

1. Take one ounce each of dried Comfrey leaf, Solomon’s Seal
(Polygonatum biflorum), if available, and Spikenard (Aralia
racemosa or A. californica). Reduce them to a moderately
coarse powder and add 1/2 oz. each of Chamomile flowers,
Gentian, Columbo (Frasera Carolinensis, has a Gentian-like
action, include if available), and Cardamom seeds, powdered.

2. Cover these with boiling water, and let them sit in a covered
vessel for 24 hours, then add two quarts of sherry wine. Let
this mixture of herbs and wine macerate for fourteen days;
express and strain. Bottle, cap, and store the wine bitters in a
cold place. (Modify the measurements to suit your needs.)

This classic wine-infusion Comfrey compound was used
traditionally as a tonic for females to help remedy “female
complaints.” I might add that it also serves males to help
remedy female complaints. Take a tablespoonful to a
wineglassful, two to three times a day.

Granp Marnier Domesrigué

250 ml primo-quality brandy

I sumptuous organic orange

2/3 cup granulated sugar

I wide mouth 1/2 gallon clear glass jar with a metal lid

(make four holes in the lid so that string can pass through them)

----- PAGE 293 -----
Some string

4 wooden toothpicks
1. Pour the brandy into the jar.
2. Pour the sugar into the brandy—Do not stir this mixture.

3. Push the toothpicks into the orange, one in each of four
sides.

4. Affix string to the toothpicks and secure the string to the lid
so that when the lid is placed onto the jar, the orange will be
suspended 1 to 2 inches above the surface of the brandy (see
illustration on the following page).

5. Gently (so as not to jostle the brandy/sugar mixture) lower
the orange, which is attached to the lid by hanging in its
toothpick/string cradle, down into the jar and tighten the lid.

6. Let this stand wherever it is going to be completely
undisturbed for 10 days.

7. Once a day, however, without lifting the jar, rotate the jar
one complete rotation. (This is the touch of marnier magic;
perform it with appropriate inner ceremony while holding a
deep in-breath.) Do not, at any point, jostle or shake the
brandy/sugar mixture. The alcohol will slowly vaporize. This
vaporous menstruum will rise and condense on the orange
peel. As it clings to the peel, it will extract the orange’s volatile
oils and drip back into the pool of sweet brandy below, being
one of the most subtly dramatic herbal extractions you will
ever witness.

8. On day 11, remove the orange and stir in any undissolved
sugar.

----- PAGE 294 -----
9. Sip some Grande Marnier.
10. Sip some more Grande Marnier.

11. Bottle and store for further sipping on all special occasions.

Orange Suspension Jar

Next time you prepare this elixir, modify it by doing things a
little differently; poke some coffee beans or clove buds into the
orange peel, or use a mandarin orange, work in an herb or
two, use a different brandy or a different sugar, or all of the
above, whatever. You'll love this one; it’s totally eccentric—the
Addams family would smile fondly upon its antics.

----- PAGE 295 -----


----- PAGE 296 -----
A bottle of vinegar can be found in nearly every household. It sits
on a shelf ready for use in salad dressings, as taste enhancement for
diverse recipes, for pickling, or as a springtime window cleaning
agent; but it is hardly ever employed in modern domestic cuisine
for its nutritional and medicinal properties. Vinegar’s inherent
abundance of nutritional components has been all but forgotten

----- PAGE 297 -----
along with that of sauerkraut, yogurt, miso, and other fermented
foods.

In the early nineteen hundreds, appreciation of vinegar’s
nutritional/medicinal properties entered the dark ages in tandem
with medicinal herbs, but, unlike herbs, full appreciation of
vinegar’s medicinal virtues is still to be revived. When one looks
closely at the inherent constituents of apple cider vinegar, its
health-enhancing properties are rather astounding. Vinegar,
commonly a derivative of apples or grapes (grapes being the
foundation of wine vinegar), contains, in addition to sugar, starch,
gluten, and gum, all the fruit’s inherent mineral salts, most
especially potassium, which play a major role in human
metabolism, respiration, blood conditioning, and nervous system
vitalization. Used topically as a facial cleanser and tonic, cosmetic
vinegar infusions have a timeless reputation for being plant-wise
women’s favored potion for retaining the youth and beauty of their
hair and skin. All these vinegars, cosmetic, medicated, or culinary,
are easily made.

An in-depth study of the medicinal properties of apple cider
vinegar lies in the pages of a little book titled Folk Medicine,
written by D.C. Jarvis, M.D. This once-renowned doctor’s discussion
and guide to the folk medicine practices of Vermonters illustrates
common (palate-pleasing) uses of apple cider vinegar, honey, kelp,
and other plant foods for sustaining health; the book documents
culinary Herbalism at its folkloric best.

So many of the menstrua (oil, wine, vinegar) that were used by
mankind throughout the history of Herbalism, but fell out of
fashion in mainstream pharmacy because they wouldn’t preserve
medicinal extracts indefinitely, are nonetheless excellent for our
domestic use as solvents and preservatives. These are inexpensive,
nutritious, aromatic, and pleasant-tasting components we can make
for ourselves at home, if so inclined. As we reestablish our
experiences as medicine-making lay herbalists, it is a good idea
(having a rich folkloric precedent) to embrace vinegar in the
creative expansion of our contemporary solvent journeys.

The medical/pharmaceutical administrators who made the

----- PAGE 298 -----
decisions to eliminate the use of vinegar (and wine) as an official
menstruum in mainstream pharmacy, replacing their use with
distilled alcohol and harsh solvent-preservatives, had their own
good reasons for doing so. Within the medical crises intervention
and heroic disease-care arena in which these doctors participate,
these decisions were appropriate. But we lay herbalists are not
attempting to make SWAT-drugs, and we are not assembling
products designed to sit for an indeterminate amount of time in a
medical dispensary (or on health food store shelves) waiting for
someone to eventually come along and use them. Instead, we are
making preparations that will be used in our homes and
community within a year or two, and we are preparing extracts that
are to be used as therapeutic agents and tonics which are
formulated to promote health and prevent disease by nipping
illness in the bud; these do not include highly toxic, acutely dose-
specific substances. The herbs used for our purposes are nourishing,
not dangerous, and in most cases yield their properties very well to
a vinegar menstruum and to a wine menstruum. These two benign
solvent-preservatives can adequately infuse our favorite herbs and
conserve the herbal products we prepare for our domestic
purposes. Bear in mind medicated vinegar has been an important
player in official literature throughout medical history. The
pharmacopoeias of many countries have included the Four Thieves
Vinegar as an official medicine. This renowned compound is
composed of vinegar infusions of a wide variety of medicinal plants
—Calamus, Camphor, Cinnamon, Clove, Garlic, Nutmeg,
Peppermint, Rosemary, Rue, Sage, and Wormwood, to name some
that are included in this medical preparation. These plants possess
diverse components which have all been successfully (and
“officially”) extracted using a simple vinegar menstruum.

When deciding on a menstruum to use for your herbal extracts,
keep these things in mind concerning vinegar:

+ Pure, naturally fermented vinegar is nontoxic and can be tolerated
by just about everyone.

----- PAGE 299 -----
+ It is an excellent tonic for the entire digestive tract, and it assists
one’s body to regulate its acid/alkaline balance.

+ It is a food high in mineral content that tastes good (dilute it or
add honey to suit your taste).

+ And for those who resist the use of alcohol for whatever reason,
vinegar and glycerin are fine alternatives.

I encourage all who enjoy the creative process of medicine-making
to experiment with the use of these out-of-fashion, currently “non-
official” solvents, especially now that such excellent quality vinegars
and wines are being made in the U.S. In the earlier years of the
twentieth century, when the medical-pharmaceutical industry
discontinued its use of medicated wines, the U.S. wasn’t producing
much wine of good quality, especially compared to European
imports; therefore, the quality of wine was unreliable. It was also
expensive and a bit of a bother to acquire, especially during the
politically absurd alcohol prohibition period. But times have
changed, and now the currently favored politically contrived
contraband is a benign plant; no longer is government intelligence
waging its domestic war on a mild menstruum. We can now buy
excellent American wines made from delicious grapes grown here
organically, and if you check out the vinegar section of your grocery
stores you will find that the quality and diversity of this medium is
likewise flourishing. This is not surprising seeing as how the fruit
sources and the process of wine and vinegar production are so
closely related.

A look through the marketplace meets the consumer’s eye with a
phenomenal array of vinegar products. One can find peculiar-
shaped bottles of vinegar ranging from the acetous low-life, distilled
white vinegar (made in about 48 hours in steel tanks from grain
alcohol that has been heated, fermented, rapidly oxidized, and often
mixed with sulfites, sugar, caramel coloring, and salt), to certified
organic, raw, unpasteurized apple cider vinegars (made from the
whole apple—not merely the cores and peelings) containing the

----- PAGE 300 -----
natural “mother” of vinegar; or to the exotically fragrant and fruitful
“balsamic” vinegars bottled with fruits of Strawberry, Blueberry,
Cranberry, Pomegranate, or Raspberry; to red and white “wine
vinegars” aged from 2 to 6 years in ash, cherry, or mulberry wood
casks, to brown rice vinegar which is used in making the vinegared
rice known as “sushi.” All of these vinegars make up a fascinating
community of dilute acetic acid liquids ranging from 4.2 to 6
percent acetic acid as mandated by the FDA.

HOW VINEGAR IS MADE

For those who might be interested in making some vinegar, it is an
aromatic sour liquid formed by a two-step fermentation.

The first step of fermentation is accomplished when appropriate
microorganisms turn sugar-containing liquids into alcohol. These
base liquids can be simply a sugar and water mixture, fruit juices
(Peach, Pear, Cherry, Apple, or Grape—the latter two being the
most commonly used in the U.S.), sugar-containing vegetable juices,
infusion of malt (barley), other grains, or rice.

The second step is accomplished by the action of the microscopic
entity, Mycoderma aceti, which takes over and turns the alcoholic
liquids (which are now hard cider, wine, beer, etc.) into a dilute
acetic acid. Mycoderma a. is resident in all free-flowing air, and in
time will find any alcoholic liquid left exposed. It also rides on the
feet of vinegar flies which waste no time zeroing in on any and all
alcoholic zones, most commonly the uncovered kitchen compost
bucket or bowl of ultra-ripe (fermenting) fruit. Mycoderma a. also
resides in great abundance in the naturally occurring, clear, amber-
colored, thick, jellylike substance that it makes in vinegar referred
to by vinegar folks as “the mother.” This mother (a cloudy sediment
of strand-like chains of connected protein molecules that congeal at
the bottom of the bottle) can be filtered out and passed on from
batch to batch as an inoculant which greatly facilitates the
continuance of high-quality vinegar manufacturing.

At 75 to 90° F. the transition of alcohol to vinegar can take about

----- PAGE 301 -----
four months if you’re using a “mother”; but in certain circumstances
this has happened from merely a few weeks to up to six months
depending on the temperature during the fermentation and the
length of arrival time of Mycoderma a.

Theoretically, one should be able to open a bottle of sweet cider,
let it stand at about 70° F., and after about 5 weeks it will turn to a
mild alcoholic hard cider, then to vinegar. This process can be
enhanced and quickened by adding a little “mother” froma
previously made batch to the fermented cider.

THE NATURE OF VINEGAR

The term vinegar is derived from the French vin aigre, denoting a
sour wine. In the U.S., according to FDA regulations, the word
vinegar (when appearing on a commercial label) without an
adjective signifies the cider vinegar made from the juice of apples.
Other acetous liquids may be denoted by various adjectives such as
wine vinegar (grape vinegar), malt vinegar, sugar vinegar, rice
vinegar, or spirit vinegar which is made directly from dilute (grain)
alcohol. By further FDA regulations, all (mercantile) vinegar must
contain at least 4 percent acetic acid (4 grams of acetic acid per 100
cc of volume). Viewed chemically, vinegar is a very dilute (4 to 6
percent) solution of acetic acid, containing foreign matters.

Pure (unmedicated) vinegar is known for its refrigerant qualities.
It diminishes thirst, promotes the flow of saliva, and helps alleviate
restlessness. It promotes the secretions of the kidneys and
respiratory mucous membranes. It is well used for this purpose in
managing fever, acting to diminish the frequency of the pulse and
the heat of the skin. External application of vinegar helps cleanse,
tone, and condition the skin. Vinegar, because of its antiseptic
properties, can be sponged over the body to check perspiration
odor and relieve skin inflammations, sunburn, and itching; it also
reduces surface temperature of the skin in fevers. Used as a lotion,
the evaporation of this liquid produces a refreshing sense of
coolness on the skin: vinegar is used to sponge the surface of the

----- PAGE 302 -----
skin to allay heat or with cotton cloth as a cooling discutient (a
remedy that dissipates accumulations) to bruises and sprains. Used
externally as an ingredient in lotions, vinegar is useful in skin
conditions accompanied by dryness of the epidermis. Used as a
fomentation (see Chapter Twenty-Four), vinegar’s mildly
stimulating nature is often beneficial for treating sprains, bruises,
and bowel distress.

MEDICATED VINEGARS

Medicinal or medicated vinegars are liquid preparations intended
for internal or external use and are made by macerating medicinal
or culinary plants in vinegar (dilute acetic acid). This type of
preparation is an eminently old one, having been in use since the
days of Hippocrates, and medicinal vinegars represent one of the
oldest classes of herbal Galenicals. As a menstruum, vinegar
facilitates the action of stimulants for use as external applications; it
augments and hastens the action of expectorants, and is most useful
for preparing stimulant, astringent, and tonic gargles. Vinegar
tinctures in turn can be converted into either syrups or oxymels, for
internal use (see Chapter Twenty-Two for instruction on making
syrups and oxymels).

Long before distilled spirits were known, the ancients recognized
the solvent powers of vinegar, and they also realized that products
made with vinegar kept for a much longer period of time (due to
its antiseptic properties) than did the infusions and the decoctions
prepared solely with water. Also, in time it was found that for the
most part pure alkaloids, which are a highly active component in
many medicinal plants, are not soluble in water, but that alkaloidal
salts, which are formed upon the reaction of free based alkaloids
with acids, are usually quite soluble in water. The advantage of
using acidic menstrua became apparent, and experience proved the
value of vinegar as a solvent in exhausting the drugs of this
character, such as Goldenseal, Lobelia, Sanguinaria, and other
alkaloid-containing plants.

----- PAGE 303 -----
PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

Pure vinegar is a food product that fits well in the kitchen
environment, and therefore with minimal attention does well in the
home pharmacy. When good, vinegar presents an agreeable
penetrating odor and a pleasant acidic sour taste. When long kept,
particularly if exposed to air, it can become muddy and ropy,
acquire an unpleasant smell, putrefy, and lose its acidity. This may
be prevented to some extent if the vinegar is boiled (pasteurized)
for a few minutes, so as to coagulate and separate the gluten. The
vinegar is then filtered and immediately poured into bottles and
capped. This heating process possibly destroys many of the natural
virtues of pure vinegar. The best way to keep one’s vinegar
wholesome is to keep it stored in a cool, dark location, capped,
limiting its exposure to air. Medicated vinegars are kept in the same
way.

In regard to the shelf life of medicinal, tonic, and culinary
vinegars, my experience challenges those authorities who judge
vinegar as a wimpy preservative. Just don’t dilute it any further by
adding water. For this reason, it is advisable to make vinegar
infusions using dried plant instead of fresh plant. The water content
of fresh plants can enter into the solution and dilute the vinegar to
a less than 5 percent acetic acid.

I have one formula sitting on my shelf in a large amber gallon jug
(Dr. John Christopher’s classic Plague Formula—he used this term
as a general reference to any pestilence including the flu). I
assembled it more than twenty years ago. I also bottled some
smaller pint jars full of this batch at the same time, then dipped the
tops of all the bottles in hot wax to seal them. They’ve all been
kicking around with me ever since. I’m mentioning this because
recently we broke into one of the small flasks to see how it
withstood its time exposure. Gleefully, I can report that its potency
and integrity are holding up just fine. This formula consists of apple
cider vinegar and a little glycerin, as co-preservatives along with
some fresh pressed garlic juice and an amalgamation of nine herbal

----- PAGE 304 -----
concentrates: Oak Bark, Mullein, Scullcap, Lobelia, Comfrey (before
a defamation bandwagon proclaimed it toxic), Hyssop, Hydrangea,
Plantain, and Wormwood. Needless to say, there are no words that
can adequately describe its flavor and pizzazz, or any question why
it is a strong, self-preserving, anti-plague ally.

Vinecar Infusion

Vinegar infusions lend themselves very well to the folk method
of extraction, but are also perfectly suited for the
weight/volume method (see Chapter Twelve, “Tincturing by
Maceration,” for details on these two methods).

To prepare medicated vinegar by infusing leaves and flowers
of an herb

1. Reduce the dried herb to a moderately coarse powder.

2. Combine with pure undiluted vinegar.

3. Macerate for 10 to 14 days; shaking the mixture frequently.
4. Strain, pour into sterilized bottle, and cap.

To prepare medicated vinegar by infusing roots and barks of
an herb

1. Reduce the dried herb to a moderately coarse powder.
2. Combine with pure undiluted vinegar.
3. Macerate for 10 to 14 days; shaking the mixture frequently.

4. Strain.

----- PAGE 305 -----
5. Heat the infusion to the boiling point (do not boil).
6. Filter while hot.
7. Pour into sterilized bottles and cap.

The purpose of this heating process is to coagulate any
albumin which has been dissolved into the vinegar solution
and remove it, for, otherwise, it can cause rapid fermentation
and spoilage of the preparation. Unlike the flowers and leaves
of most plants, roots and bark usually contain a large quantity
of plant albumin in their tissue, and therefore usually require
this added precaution.

Simple vinegar lotion recipe

This is sponged on or applied as a fomentation to soothe
irritated, itching, burned, or feverish skin. Also used to cleanse
the skin, check perspiration odor, and reduce the surface
temperature of the skin in fever. Combine one part of vinegar
with three or four parts of water.

Poison Oak lotion recipe

This is a recipe for a medicinal vinegar that is most useful to
alleviate the discomforts associated with Poison Oak contact
(I’m a West Coast native and have run into a lot of Poison Oak
in my day, so I know the joy of this recipe from experience.
Poison Ivy doesn’t mingle with us much here in the West,
however, so I have very little experience with its effect on
human skin. I can only assume that this vinegar solution will
also provide similar relief for those allergic to the touch of

Ivy).

1. Make a strong decoction of equal parts Mugwort (Artemisia
vulgaris) and Horsetail (Equisetum arvense).

----- PAGE 306 -----
2. To 2 parts of this herbal liquid, add 1 part apple cider
vinegar.

3. Add 1 tablespoon of salt per cup of the above mixture of tea
and vinegar. (Store it in the refrigerator.)

4. Apply externally to all affected areas. It might burn at first
(which feels much better than the itching), but this soon stops.

Astringent gargle recipe

Vinegar infusion of Sage leaf (Salvia officinalis). Dilute 1
tablespoonful in 1/4 cup water.

Emetic vinegar recipe

Used to induce vomiting when necessary. Combine 1 oz. of
Lobelia (Lobelia inflata) which has been ground to a
moderately coarse powder with 8 ounces of vinegar. Macerate
for seven days, strain, press, and filter. General dose is 1/2 oz.
to 1 oz. (15 to 30 ml) per treatment.

Vinegar liniment recipe

This is used to rub onto areas of pain or soreness. Heat 1 pint
apple cider vinegar, and add 1 tablespoon Cayenne red
pepper.

Aromatic vinegar recipe

This is used as a mild, soothing water for bathing the forehead
and temples whenever headaches and other indicators of
prolonged stress arise. To 1/2 cup of alcohol, add 1 drop each
of Lavender essential oil, Rosemary essential oil, Juniper
essential oil, Peppermint essential oil, Cinnamon essential oil,
and 2 drops each of Lemon essential oil and Clove essential
oil. Shake this mixture well to thoroughly dissolve the oils in

----- PAGE 307 -----
the alcohol, then add 1/2 cup of pure vinegar and mix this
well. Lastly, add 1 cup of distilled water, mix this well, and let
it stand for 8 days with frequent agitation. Filter the liquid and
store in a tightly closed glass bottle.

The caustic oils of Poison Oak and Poison Ivy are
fixed oils like other vegetable oils. They do not
evaporate readily and therefore must be washed
off of skin, clothing, and pet’s fur. The simple
application of pure Lavender essential oil to the
affected skin is also an excellent drying, anti-
inflammatory remedy for many folks.

Here is a testimonial from a grammar school
teacher who, along with his associate, blissfully
led their grade school munchkins through a
community of Poison Oak:

“James, You asked for a follow-up on the Poison
Oak remedy. Wonderful! Blisters left in 1 1/2 to 2
days, no further spreading and normalized in 4
days. Her kids went to the Dr. for theirs; it kept
spreading with some relief in a week. Thanks,
Tom.”

----- PAGE 308 -----


----- PAGE 309 -----
Glycerites, also known as glyco-extracts or fluid glycerates, are
mixtures of medicinal substances with glycerin. The unique
properties of glycerin as a menstruum provide a number of
advantages. Glycerites can be easily diluted with water or alcohol
without causing precipitation and are excellent to use in place of
alcohol-based tinctures for children and individuals who are

----- PAGE 310 -----
alcohol-intolerant. Glycerites’ sweet flavor makes them especially
appropriate for administering to children.

Glycerin, the sweet principle of oils, was discovered in 1789 and
came into use in medicine and pharmacy around 1846. It is a liquid
obtained by the hydrolysis of vegetable or animal fats or fixed oils.
Glycerin can be made in several ways. One process consists of
subjecting fatty bodies to the action of water at a high temperature
under pressure, whereby the fats, which are glycerides or esters of
the fatty acids, are broken up into glycerin and fatty acids. The
water supplies the hydrogen and oxygen necessary to effect the
change. Glycerin can be synthesized by heating trichlorpropane (a
petroleum product) with water at 365° F. I recommend that you use
non-synthetic vegetable glycerin. Chemically, glycerin belongs to the
class of alcohols, and is sometimes termed glycerol or glyceric
alcohol.

The solvent and preservative properties of glycerin (which often
protect against oxidation) as well as its agreeable taste and stable
consistency render it one of the most valuable liquids known to
pharmacy. It may be added to finished water/alcohol extracts or
used in a menstruum mixed with water, alcohol, or vinegar, or any
combination of the three. Its range of solvency lies somewhere
between that of water and alcohol, and it will extract a variety of
constituents that makes it useful in cases where neither water nor
alcohol are appropriate. It is exceptionally effective in a menstruum
for herbs containing considerable tannin, as it reduces precipitation
of tannins and alkaloids. However, glycerin will not dissolve or mix
with resins or fixed oils, so it is not suitable as a menstruum for
resinous or oily herb extracts. It will preserve volatile oils (though
not indefinitely) even if it does not extract them efficiently.

Glycerin is slightly antiseptic and has anti-fermentative properties
that are excellent, although inferior to those of alcohol. When
diluted, glycerin is demulcent, emollient, soothing, and healing.
Undiluted, it is irritant and stimulant, arousing activity. It is useful
in keeping substances moist, due to its tendency to absorb water
from the air, and its properties adapt it for many medicinal
purposes, both external and internal. Glycerin does not evaporate at

----- PAGE 311 -----
normal temperatures and produces a sensation of warmth to the
skin and tongue.

At present, making glycerites is a somewhat neglected art.
However, with the current popularity of alcohol-free glycerites for
children’s health care, this herbal delivery vehicle is coming into its
own. There is still, unfortunately, only limited experience in the
herbal pharmacy world from which to draw. The following
processes are those that I have explored. I encourage further
creative experimentation and sharing among herbal medicine-
makers, so we can revive and teach this valuable extraction
technique. The dawn of a glycerated herbal renaissance is at hand.

Common belief has it that the presence of 50 percent glycerin by
volume will serve as a good preservative for an herbal solution. It
has been my experience, however, this is not always the case when
storing herbal glycerites. I have found that 60 percent to 75 percent
glycerin is more reliable and suggest that, if some alcohol is
tolerable, adding 10 percent to 15 percent alcohol to the 50 percent
glycerin might be ideal. This is still a greatly reduced alcohol
content, and the flavor will remain superior.

Bear this in mind when doing your math. Because pure (absolute)
glycerin absorbs water quite readily from the air, the commercial
glycerin available already contains about 5 percent water by
volume. When you calculate an appropriate amount of (absolute)
glycerin for its preservative action in a custom menstruum, allow
for this. If you make a menstruum of 50 percent glycerin and 50
percent water figuring that 50 percent glycerin in the solution will
be an adequate preservative, remember that, in fact, this proportion
will contain only approximately 45 percent (absolute) glycerin by
volume and approximately 55 percent water (approximately 5
percent of which was resident in the commercial glycerin). This is
why I suggest using 55-60 percent glycerin by volume in the
menstruum for extracting dry plant material. When extracting fresh
undried plant, the plant’s juices must also be taken into
consideration. If it is a very juicy plant such as fresh Dandelion,
Cleavers. or Scullcap I make it a 1:2 w/v using 80-90 percent

----- PAGE 312 -----
glycerin. For the relatively unjuicy fresh plants that will not dilute
the menstruum to any great extent like Oregon Grape, Red Root, or
Uva Ursi, one can use less glycerin. This is all part of the
experimentation and sharing of experience by herbalists that needs
to be attended to in order to revive this portion of our craft.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

Preserve all glycerites in airtight, light-resistant containers and avoid
exposure to direct sunlight and excessive heat. Refrigerate when
possible.

DOSAGE

Glycerites are normally more concentrated than either infusions or
decoctions and therefore stronger. The dosage to be taken can be
smaller. The dosage again depends on the herb at hand and the size
of the person taking the glycerite. When using mild tonic herbs take
up to five droppersful in a glass of water 2 to 3 times a day; for a
more intense herb use anywhere from 10 to 25 drops 3 to 4 times a
day.

Maxine Guycerrres Usinc Driep Pant Materia

Folk Method

See Chapter Twelve for the definition and discussion of “folk
method.”

1. Grind dried herb to a moderately coarse powder (mcp).

2. Place the powdered herb into a large jar that can be tightly
closed.

----- PAGE 313 -----
3. If blending other solvents (water, vinegar, alcohol) with
glycerin for your menstruum, be sure to mix together all the
liquids of the menstruum thoroughly in a separate container
before adding them to the powdered plant material.

4. Add prepared menstruum to powdered herb.
5. Stir the mixture well, so that all the herb is wet.

6. Add sufficient menstruum to the wet herb, so that about 1/4
inch of extra menstruum sits atop the herb; if the herb is
floating, 1/4 inch below the herb.

7. Cap jar tightly” and shake contents well.

8. Check the jar after 12 hours. If the herb has absorbed the
menstruum, add a sufficient amount of menstruum to re-
establish the 1/4 inch of extra liquid.

9. Shake the glycerite frequently for 14 days.

10. Decant liquid, press the remaining wet pulp, and combine
these two liquids (see discussions about decanting and pressing
in Chapter Twenty-Five).

11. Filter if desired (many glycerites filter very slowly).
12. Bottle, tightly cap, and label.
Dr. Edward Shook’s Method**

8 oz. Powdered herb
2 quarts Distilled water (plus a little extra held aside)

1/4 oz. Potassium sulfate (vitriolated tartar)

----- PAGE 314 -----
8 02. Glycerin

Dissolve the potassium sulfate in water, add the powdered
herb, and simmer until the liquid is reduced to 1 quart. Strain
and retain this decoction and the herb. Again, add enough
water to just cover the herb. Simmer this for 10 minutes. Strain
and retain the liquid. Combine the two liquors, and add the
glycerin, blending thoroughly. Cool the mixture, bottle in
amber-colored bottles, and store in a cool place. Doing the
math shows this mixture to be a little less than 20 percent
glycerin; I suggest full refrigeration as an added preservative.

The Weight to Volume Method
See Chapter Twelve for further discussion and details on

preparing weight to volume (w/v) extracts.

Preparing the custom menstruum

+ Sample measurements for making a 1:4 w/v or 25%
glycerite. Yiewv: asour soo ml

200

G Dry herb (in moderately coarse powder)
m1,

480 ml Glycerin (60 percent by volume of the

menstruum)

320 ml ___ Distilled water

+ Sample measurements for making a 1:5 w/v or 20% glycerite
which includes 5% vinegar. Yup: asour 1000 ml

200 Gm_ Dry herb (in moderately coarse powder)
600 Glycerin (60 percent by volume of the

----- PAGE 315 -----
ml menstruum)
50 ml Vinegar (5 percent)
350 ml Distilled water

+ Sample measurements for making a 1:10 w/v or 10%
glycerite which includes 15% alcohol. Yuwp: asour 2000 ml

200

G Dry herb (in moderately coarse powder)
m1,

1000 ml Glycerin (50 percent by volume of the

menstruum)
300 ml Ethyl alcohol (15 percent)
700 ml __ Distilled water
Making the glycerite

1. Powder and weigh dried plant and place the powder into a
large jar that can be tightly closed.

2. Prepare custom menstruum (see samples above). When
blending other solvents (water, vinegar, alcohol) with glycerin
for your menstruum, be sure to mix together all the liquids of
the menstruum thoroughly in a separate container before
adding them to the powdered plant material.

3. Add menstruum to powdered herb.
4. Stir well making sure all of the powdered herb is wet.
5. Cap jar tightly and shake contents well.

6. Shake glycerite frequently for 14 days.

----- PAGE 316 -----
7. Decant, press, and filter (most glycerites filter very slowly).

8. Bottle, tightly cap, and label.

Porrrarr oF A SuPERSOLVENT

Extracts most herbal components. Mixes well with
other solvents, especially water and alcohol. Does
not cause inebriation and does not mug one’s
liver. Is a non-sugar sweetener that does not
derange ones blood sugar level, is a good
preservative, is colorless and odorless, tastes good,
is free to cross borders, and can even be kosher.

Maxine Guycerrres Usinc Fresh Prant Materia,

The McQuade-Izard Folk Method
This process makes delightfully colored and flavorful extracts.

1. No matter what fresh herb you’re using, fill your maceration
container, packing it to medium density.

2. Dump this out and weigh it; note the weight.
3. Transfer this fresh herb to a blender.

4. Add sufficient (measured amount of) glycerin to cover the
herb and blend until blender top is warm.

This process coats the fresh herb with the glycerin and to a
large extent eliminates oxidation of the plant components as
the blades break down cell walls.

----- PAGE 317 -----
5. Add more glycerin as needed to fully cover the herb (keep
note of the amount added). Fresh plants carry their own water,
so most fresh plants can be blended directly with glycerin
without the addition of water. This depends, however, on the
water content of the herb (make notes).

6. Pour blended marc and menstruum back into the maceration
container and cap tightly.

7. Agitate twice daily for 14 days.
8. Strain, press, and store in amber-colored bottles.

With certain herbs, you may want to add more glycerin after
maceration and pressing to improve preservation. Be aware
that this will dilute the strength of the finished glycerite. Shelf-
life will be between 1 and 3 years depending on the water
content of the fresh plant used. The more water content by
volume, the less preservative power the glycerin will have.
Make appropriate adjustments.

The Weight to Volume (w/v) Method

Preparing the custom menstruum
+ Sample measurements for making a 1:2 w/v or 50% fresh,
juicy plant glycerite
400 Gm Fresh herb (chopped)
ml Glycerin (100 percent by volume of the

800
menstruum)

+ Sample measurements for making a 1:2 w/v or 50% fresh,
not-so-juicy plant glycerite

ann

----- PAGE 318 -----
whi

Fresh herb (chopped)
Gm

Glycerin (75 percent by volume of the
600 ml
menstruum)

200 ml Distilled water
Making the glycerite

1. Chop the plant into small pieces and place them in a
blender.

2. Prepare custom menstruum.

3. Cover the herb with menstruum and blend it like making a
smoothie. (You will have to use enough of the menstruum to
cover the blender blades. Use as much of the measured
menstruum as you can to make the mixture churn actively in
the blender. You may not be able to use all the menstruum in
this blending stage.)

4. Pour the liquefied ingredients into a jar and cap tightly. Be
sure you have added all the measured menstruum to the herb
during or after the blending process, so as to maintain the
intended weight to volume proportion.

5. Shake the glycerite frequently for 14 days.
6. Decant, press, and filter.

7. Bottle, tightly cap, and label.

----- PAGE 319 -----
om eh whole pa

Tesh root
dy woe
{eh eves and Bowers
died lees
rsh woot
recently dred oot?
Gesh berries
Sowers
eruhed wed
fesh oot
dey wot
Ceideseal fesh oat

dey toot and/or leaf

Hawtiors Teh eal lower. erties
Mogwort
‘Mallia

alslegise

wih SR vine

i
:

ay
dey heb
eh Dower
ay
Neale Geshbew
Ow

ssisalelsalsals

Ary herb or root
Tesh “woripe mally sage seed
dey plane

eppermine Gesh plane

Salley

doy place

fresh er TS eria

recently dred 1s

pondered mot 1s

Ua Uni laf 1s

Vitex Derres iors

Valerian oho 1S 012
cently dried root’ 1s

(Dred plan not very ate

2: Gooden echinors wt dow mt wrong Hoge.

{lee very ical ond utenti Siberian Ginseng inthe mae, bet 6 buy the stent ext.

1 God. guy ein rt doe mt vie ng oe

4
EI
Hy

f
|

eglele|sleelse|eg

* It is important to clean and wipe off the rim of the jar thoroughly before placing the
lid on and tightening it down. After wiping the rim it is even advisable to place a piece
of waxed paper between the rim and the lid as a gasket. This assures that you will have
a tight seal preventing the loss of any menstruum that can occur due to constant
shaking of the liquid contents. You will know if there has been any leakage by the
discovery of narrow streams of extract appearing on the outside surface of the jar.
**From Advanced Treatise on Herbology

----- PAGE 320 -----


----- PAGE 321 -----
OIL INFL

Oil infusions are an infusion of medicinal or culinary herbs in a
fixed oil menstruum. Medicinal oil infusions, when applied to the
skin, form a protective covering and are used to hold other
therapeutic or cosmetic agents to the skin, facilitating the
absorption of the herbal remedies. Oil infusions prepared for use as
food carry the nutrients, flavor. and aroma of culinary herbs to the

----- PAGE 322 -----
gourmet tongue, greatly enhancing the nutritional and aesthetic
pleasures of the herbalist’s cuisine.

Many fixed oils in themselves are well utilized as foods and as
medicines. Medically, these oils are very soothing substances, and
therapeutically they are most useful because of their ability to
soften the keratin layer of the skin. This renders the skin pliable
and tends to prevent cracking of the skin’s surface.

Fixed oils are obtained from both the vegetable and the animal
kingdom. They are often called fatty oils, as they are chemically the
same as fats. They are more or less unctuous (smooth and greasy) to
the touch, and in a liquid condition and dropped on paper, leave a
permanent oily spot. Individual oils vary greatly in their point of
congelation: Olive oil becomes solid at a little above 32° F.,
whereas Flaxseed oil can remain fluid at 4° F. below zero. Pure
fixed oils have little taste or smell. They are lighter than water and
they do not evaporate easily; however, they do boil at about 600° F.
and are converted into vapor at this temperature. Heated in open
air, especially with the aid of a wick, fixed oils do take fire and
burn with a bright and sooty flame generating much heat. These
oils are quite soluble with volatile oils, but are insoluble in water.
However, they are capable of being mixed (miscible) with water by
the assistance of an emulsifier, forming mixtures which are called
emulsions (see “Lotions & Creams,” Chapter Nineteen). Fixed oils
comprise most of the oils in common use, such as Olive, Almond,
Sesame, Cod liver, and Castor oil (and mineral oils). They are well
used as menstrua in warm to hot infusions and decoctions to
abstract resins, oleoresins, and essential oils.

Some oils, such as Castor bean oil and Flaxseed (Linseed) oil,
form fatty acids which act as drugs when decomposed in the
intestines. These unsaturated fatty acids are slightly irritant to the
mucous membrane of the alimentary canal, and as the oils
decompose (hydrolyze) in the intestines, they can render a laxative
effect. This can be a mild cathartic action, as when using Flaxseed
oil, or it can be rather intense, as when using Castor oil. Castor oil
also differs from the other oils in that it contains hydroxy fatty acids
and. therefore. has slightly different solubility properties. It is

----- PAGE 323 -----
soluble to a fair extent in cold 95 percent absolute alcohol, while
the other oils are not. It is also miscible with such substances as
Peruvian balsam, whereas the other oils are not and will separate
on standing.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

Oils remain unchanged for a great length of time when kept in cool
airtight glass containers. Rancidity in oils renders them useless in
herbal pharmacy and as foods. It is extremely important to protect
oils from air, light, heat, and moisture. Store all oils in a cool
location (a refrigerator or freezer whenever possible) in tightly
sealed, amber bottles. Fill the bottles as full as possible to eliminate
the oil’s prolonged contact with air during storage.

On Infusions Usinc Driep Pints
The “Folk Method”
1. Grind the dried herb to as fine a powder as possible.

2. Place the powdered herb in a jar that can be capped tightly
and add a fixed oil of your choice (Olive, Sesame, Almond,
etc.). Use enough oil to completely wet the herb.

3. Stir the mixture well.

4. Let the herb settle, then add enough oil to cover the wet
herb an additional % inch. Some lighter herbs will float at first,
so let there be an additional 4%. inch below instead.

5. Many dried herbs will absorb this extra % inch of oil. Check
your mixture 24 hours later, and if absorption has occurred,

----- PAGE 324 -----
add enough oil to re-establish the extra measure of oil.
6. Cap the jar tightly.

7. Place it in a thick paper bag or box to keep light out, and
place in the sun for 7 to 10 days (a warm to hot infusion,
depending on the weather).

8. Shake or stir the mixture every couple of hours each day or
at least several times a day.

9. When the infusion is completed, strain the oil from the herb
and press the remaining pulp.

10. Allow the infusion to sit still indoors for several days, then
decant and filter out sediment.

11. Bottle in glass containers, cap tightly, label, and store in a
cool dark place.

The Digestion Method
1. Grind dried herb to a powder.

2. Add a fixed oil of your choice, in the proportion of 1 part
powder by weight to 5 parts oil, or a suitable ratio depending
on the nature of the powder. Quantitative ratios are not really
critical for this type of preparation, for its vital energy is not
really dependent on quantitative principles.

3. Place in a water bath, an electric “meat roaster vat,” yogurt
maker, or some other apparatus having a thermostatic control
that allows you to maintain a consistent temperature of around
100° F. (Unfortunately, a crock pot’s lowest range is too hot,
usually about 150° F. or more. Some folks place their oils in an
oven using the heat of the pilot light, but beware of this

----- PAGE 325 -----
technique. There is something about an oil infusion quietly
macerating in an oven that inspires others in the household to
preheat the oven to 350° F. for a spontaneous baking spree.

4. Stir the mixture well, set the heat thermostat at
approximately 100° F., and cover the herb/oil mixture.

5. This maceration (soaking) process using low heat is called
digestion. Ideally, you want to continue this mild heat process
for 10 days and nights at approximately 100°F., stirring it every
two hours. Use a yogurt thermometer to monitor the
temperature.

6. When the infusion is completed, strain the oil from the herb
and press the remaining pulp. (If you strain the oil while it is
still warm it flows more easily.)

7. Let sediment accumulate for a few days, decant, and filter
the oil.

8. Bottle, cap tightly, label, and store in a cool dark place.

Hot Infusion Method
Taken From a Late Nineteenth Century Physio-Medical Text

1. “Infused oils may be prepared from the finely powdered
herbs: Cayenne, Fucus (Bladderwrack seaweed), Lobelia, and
Comfrey in proportions of 1 part herb powder by weight to 10
parts fixed oil by volume, by the process of decoction. Such
infused oils may be prescribed singly or in combinations as
mildly stimulating, relaxing, or toning liniments for various
skeletal problems, or as the basis for stronger preparations
when the therapeutic affect is reinforced by adding more
powerful essential oils.

----- PAGE 326 -----
2. “The following example illustrates the method for infused
oil of Cayenne, which serves as a model for all others:

Cayenne—in fine powder 100 Gm (4 oz)
Fixed oil Iliter (40 oz)

3. “Mix together smoothly, place in a closed vessel over a
water-bath and digest at 140°-160° F. for 4 hours. Then
remove from heat, allow to cool, and leave for 12 hours for the
powder to settle. Then carefully pour off the clear oil.”

I include this method because I think it is interesting to see
how different (expert) medicine-makers do their stuff. 1 would
never take my oils up to this high a temperature, but these
Physio-medicalists were passionate therapists and pharmacists,
extremely competent in their practice—blessed be diversity.

National Formulary IV (1916) Method

Yew asour 1000 ml

The air-dried
100 Gm in No. 30 powder

herb

Alcohol 100 ml 190-proof (grain) ethyl
alcohol

Ammonia water” 2ml

Sesame oil 1000 ml

* Ammonia water (USP Dilute Solution of Ammonia) is
prepared by mixing 9-10 Gm of ammonia (NH3) into 100 cc
of distilled water. This solution deteriorates rapidly in open
containers.

----- PAGE 327 -----
1. Moisten the herb with the alcohol and ammonia water
(already mixed together).

2. Macerate for six hours in a covered glass or enameled steel
vessel.

3. Add the sesame oil.

4. Using a water bath, warm this mixture at a temperature
between 120° and 140° F. in an open vessel, stirring frequently
until the alcohol and ammonia water are dissipated.

5. Then transfer the mixture to a strainer, express the residue,
and filter the strained oil.

On Infusions Usivc Fresh Piants

The “Herb School Method”
1. (Optional) Wilt the fresh herb for 12 hours (do not dry it).

2. Chop the freshly cut or wilted herb to a fine pulp or grind
plant in a metal Corona grain mill, or in some other suitable
instrument, and place the resultant mash into a “meat roaster
vat,” yogurt maker, or some other apparatus with a
thermostatic control that allows you to maintain a consistent
100° F. temperature.

3. Add a fixed oil of your choice, enough to make your mixture
thick-juicy-wet (Olive or Sesame oil are recommended, Sweet
Almond oil will be used for skin care).

4. Stir the mixture well and smell it (make an olfactory note of
the nature and quality of the aroma).

----- PAGE 328 -----
5. Set the heat thermostat at 100° F. and cover the herb/oil
mixture. With some plants, I leave them uncovered for the first
couple of days to allow moisture to evaporate. Ideally, you
want to digest this oil infusion for 10 days and nights at 100°
F., stirring and smelling it every 2 hours. Use a yogurt
thermometer to monitor the temperature.

6. If this fresh plant oil begins to ferment (a change in its
aroma will alert you), raise the temperature to 150° F.,
immediately let it fall back to 100° F., and continue the
procedure. (This usually eliminates the opportunistic activities
of the fermentation-inducing organisms.)

7. When the infusion is completed, strain the oil from the herb
(this is accomplished more easily when the oil is still warm)
and press the remaining pulp.

8. Now: At this point we have created a problem that needs to
be dealt with. The juices of the undried herb introduced water
into the infusion. The presence of water in a fatty oil, as
mentioned before, favors fermentation and rancidity, which
will ruin your medicinal oil. All the water must be removed
before permanent storage.

9. So: Allow your oil infusion to sit in a clear glass jar
undisturbed for 4 or 5 days.

10. The water and other impurities (gunk) will settle to the
bottom, at which point you can decant (gently pour off) the oil
or draw it off with a basting syringe and then discard the
water/gunk portion.

11. It is advisable to let this decanted oil sit undisturbed for a
few more days and check it for remaining water impurities.

----- PAGE 329 -----
12. When you are satisfied that the oil is free of all water,
bottle, cap tightly, label, and store it in a cool dark place.

Physio-Medicalist Method for Making Fresh Plant Cold Oil
Infusion

According to William Cook, physio-medical physician and
herbal pharmacist, “Just as fresh plant tinctures are in many
cases better than their dry plant counterparts, so lotions,
ointments, and other forms of surface medication based upon
fresh plant oil infusions may be preferred to dry plant
preparations.”...“Because of its greater oleaginous property,
Olive oil is preferred as the basis for these, whereas infused
oils intended for liniments or rubbing oils are better prepared
from rape-seed oil which is less greasy.... Where it is desired to
avoid the use of heat in preparing the infused oil, and this
especially applies to preparations from flowers the following
method is used”:

1. Fill a canning jar with alternate layers of cotton-wool and
flowers, each layer not exceeding %4 inch.

2. Layer these lightly and do not compress them, so that inter-
spaces are left.

3. Fill up the jar with Olive oil.
4. Seal the jar with cap and screw lid.
5. Set aside in a cool dark place for one month.

6. Remove the contents of the jar, keeping the layers of cotton-
wool and flowers together and intact as far as possible.

7. Place in a press and press out the oil by slow steady
pressure. This removes the plant material and cotton-wool.

----- PAGE 330 -----
8. Filter the oil infusion if necessary to remove particles and
dust.

9. Store in brown glass bottles.

As a precaution, I suggest that you refer back to method 1, The
“Herb School Method,” and proceed with steps 8 through 12.

Heras on THE “35 Heras anv A Funcus” List

Twat Are Weut Preparep As Ou. Infusions

DRY PLANT OIL INFUSIONS

Burdock root
Calendula

Cayenne

Comfrey leaf and root

Elder flower

Ginger

Golden seal leaf and rhizome
Marshmallow root

Mullein leaf

Nettle leaf

Plantain

Yarrow
FRESH PLANT OIL INFUSIONS

Mullein flowers

St. John’s Wort flowering tops, especially in the flower bud
stage

Garlic”

Arnica™*

----- PAGE 331 -----
* Garlic is included in this list because it works so well when
blended in equal parts with Mullein flower and Calendula
flower oils for making an earache remedy. One or 2 drops of
this blend are dropped into the ear canal and the ear is
plugged with a small cotton ball. Please note that I am
recommending here the use of an oil infusion of Garlic, not
Garlic juice.

**Arnica is included in this list because it works so well when
blended in equal parts with Calendula and St. John’s Wort oils
to make an excellent application for soothing traumatic
injuries (from very little traumas to major ones). Rub the blend
of oils directly onto the injured parts, especially bumped,
bruised, and/or crushed parts. If the injury includes an open
wound, rub the oil compound around it; it is not advisable to
put Arnica directly on an open wound. Arnica is equally well
prepared as a dry plant oil.

----- PAGE 332 -----


----- PAGE 333 -----
CHAPTER 18

OINTMENT,
SALVES & BALMS

Salves (also called ointments or unguents) are semi-solid fatty
herbal mixtures normally prepared as external healing mixtures.
They soften when applied to the skin, and provide a healing,
emollient, protective, nourishing, or counter-irritant effect. Salves
can vary in consistency from greasy to thick and hard, depending on
the base used. the elements mixed together. and the purpose

----- PAGE 334 -----
intended for its production. A balm is simply a salve that contains a
relatively high amount of volatile oils. Upon application it delivers
a notably intense cloud of aromatic vapors.

The base for most salves is a mixture of a wax and a fixed oil,
usually mixed or infused with medicinal plant substances (see
Chapter Seventeen, “Oil Infusions”). The oil enhances the
absorption of the medicinal substances into the skin, and the wax
gives firmness to the finished salve for ease of application. I prefer
to make my salves with vegetable oils, although some people use
animal fats. Often, essential oils and/or other solid or liquid
materials are incorporated during the salve-making process.

Body heat melts the wax, and the oil fosters quick absorption of
the plant’s medicinal constituents into the skin. Generally, it is best
to massage the salve into the skin. With counter-irritant salves high
in Cayenne, or salves that incorporate stimulating or warming
essential oils (like Ginger, Peppermint, or Camphor), massage is not
normally required, unless, of course, it feels good, in which case rub
with gusto.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

Salves are well stored in dark-colored or opaque glass, tightly
capped jars that have openings sufficiently large to allow easy
access to the semi-solid ingredients. Salves are best kept in cool
locations. They don’t preserve as well in locations where they are
subjected to continual melting and re-cooling (like in automobile
glove compartments and similar environments). In some instances
the presence of benzoin as a preservative in salves can cause
irritation on tender and already irritated skins.

DOSAGE

Use as much salve as needed, but it can be bothersome to leave too
much on the skin surface unless it is to be covered.

----- PAGE 335 -----
GENERAL NOTES

Other ingredients such as vitamin E, honey, or essential oils, etc.,
can be added and stirred into a salve mixture as a very last step
before pouring the salve into its final storage container(s).

+ The best way to add essential oils to a salve is to drop them into
the container just prior to pouring in the warm salve mixture.

+ Some of the ingredients (other than the infused herbs and essential
oils) added to the salve mixture can separate out and settle to the
bottom of the container during the sitting and cooling period. While
the salve is sitting in the final storage container(s), still a little
warm, becoming firm, but not quite hardened (you'll know the
right moment), stir the entire mixture (especially the bottom
portion) briskly with a chopstick. This will suspend all the
ingredients throughout the salve base, which will now quickly
harden and retain the added ingredients in a suspended condition.
But now the top surface will look weird. If you care about this,
place the uncapped jars of salve in a hot oven for a few moments.
This will melt the very top surface of the salve rendering it flat,
smooth and, to some folks, more visually appealing. Or melt the
tops by heating them with the hot air of a hair dryer. I used to use a
hand-held propane torch (available in any hardware store) for this
job when preparing large quantities of salves for my small cottage
industry. Let the surfaces harden, then cap, and store them in a cool
location.

To Maxe a Simpte Satve Srartine with

Driep Heras), Fixep Ou, ann Beeswax

1. To each cup of fixed oil (Olive oil, Sesame oil, Almond oil,
etc.) stir in approximately 1 to 2 oz.” of dry herb or a

----- PAGE 336 -----
formulated combination of dried herbs.

2. Place this mixture in an uncovered container. Put it into an
oven leaving the oven door slightly open or place it over a
burner using a flame shield to disperse the direct heat. Heat
the mixture at a low heat (preferably between 100 and 140°
F.) for 3 to 5 hours. Check the temperature of the mixture
periodically, each time stirring it thoroughly.

3. Line a large strainer with a cotton muslin cloth.

4. Remove the mixture and, while it is still warm and flowing
easily, pour it into the strainer to separate the spent herbs from
the oil infusion. Let this sit until well-drained, press out
remaining oil if you want to, and discard the marc.

5. Measure the amount of infused oil you have at this point
and place it in a suitable container over low heat.

6. Add shaved beeswax (approximately 1 oz. of wax per cup of
oil) to the oil infusion and proceed as outlined in steps 4
through 10 on the following page.

To Maxe a Smmpte Satve From a

Previousty Preparep Hersat Ou Inrusion

1. Measure 1 cup of a previously prepared herbal oil infusion
or 1 cup of a formulated combination of two or more oil
infusions.

2. Set aside a small amount of the same oil or oil blend which
can be added later, if necessary, to alter the consistency of the
salve (see step 8).

----- PAGE 337 -----
3. Pour the measured oil into a stainless steel, earthenware,
unchipped enamel, or glassware container that can be heated.

4. Add 1 ounce of beeswax that has been shaved or grated into
small pieces. Set aside a small amount of beeswax that can be
added later if you decide to alter the consistency of your salve
(see step 8).

5. Warm this oil infusion and beeswax mixture over low heat
until the wax is fully melted.

6. Remove the mixture from the heat and dip a metal spoon
(or like instrument) into the warm mixture.

7. Place this spoon into a freezer, a refrigerator, or the coldest
spot available, so that the salve sample will cool quickly.

8. When cool, the salve will have hardened on the spoon,
allowing you to test its firmness without waiting for the entire
pan of salve to harden. If the sample on the spoon is too soft
for your purposes, add a little more wax to the pan of warm
salve; if the sample is too hard, add a little more of the oil
infusion.

9. Repeat the teaspoon test until your salve consistency is
perfectly suited to your purposes.

10. Pour the liquid salve from the pan into appropriate
containers, and let it cool and harden.

There is no other wax as precious and excellent
as that which the bees make for us. The high
chemistry of its fine texture, subtle aroma, and
soft golden hues is yet another mark of perfection

----- PAGE 338 -----
inherent to the varied skills of these master
herbalists. Send the apiarian workers and their
fecund queens your gratitude while making
salves, lotions, and creams. In nature’s way, they’ll
appreciate your regard.

Vecerasie Larp Vecan SaLve

Pure commercial vegetable lard is a sterile medium composed
of hydrogenated soybean and palm oils. Vegetable lard
hardens at room temperature, making it acceptable when a
salve is needed quickly. Lard has the immediate advantage of
requiring no beeswax for hardening. Using the lard as a
catalyst to draw out the value of fresh cut or dried herbs is
quite appropriate for immediate use, since with no lengthy
storage time spoilage will not be a factor. Actually,
hydrogenated oils, although considered by many nutritionists
to be unwholesome food for many reasons, are less likely to go
rancid than unhydrogenated vegetable oils. That works for us
here.

1. Gather either freshly cut or dried herbs. Have the fresh herbs
chopped and ready. It is okay if they wilt. Use approximately
1 cup chopped fresh herb to 1 cup vegetable lard. Crush or
powder the dry herbs as much as possible. Use approximately
1/2 cup powdered dry herb to 1 cup lard.

2. Melt the lard in a saucepan over low heat. Leave the pot
uncovered throughout the preparation, so the lard will not
overheat and some of the fresh herb’s water content can
evaporate.

3. As soon as the lard is melted, carefully stir in the herbs.

----- PAGE 339 -----
4. Allow the herbs to steep in the lard over low heat (deep-
frying them is a big mistake).

5. Stir the herbs periodically to determine when they have
surrendered their properties to the oil, approximately 1 hour.

6. When satisfied that the decoction is completed, remove the
pot from the heat and pour the contents into a cotton-muslin
lined wire strainer.

7. Strain out the liquid salve, pour into jar, cap, and let it cool.

Be careful when heating lard; it can ignite when it
gets very hot.

Do not use plastic containers to store any medium
that contains volatile oils; the oils will eat the
plastic over time.

PETROLEUM JELLY AROMATIC SALVE (A BALM)

Clear, unmedicated petroleum jelly is a sterile inorganic medium
that, when applied, is not absorbed into the skin. It can therefore
act merely as a carrier for volatile oils. Commercial petroleum jelly
(Vaseline® is a brand name) is easily attained. This is an excellent
substance to use for quickly preparing an essential oil carrier that
can be applied into the nostrils in a small amount. Antiseptic,
decongestive essential oils can be inhaled this way during the day to
relieve nasal and upper respiratory congestion.

Some appropriate essential oils to use for antiseptic and
decongestant properties are Eucalyptus, Rosemary, Pine,
Peppermint, Cypress, and Lavender.

----- PAGE 340 -----
Note:
+ Have paper towels ready—this stuff is sticky.

+ A “square-handled” chopstick is a very handy tool for
manipulating this medium.

+ Two level tablespoonsful of petroleum jelly fill a small 1 fl. oz.
(30 ml) salve jar perfectly.

+ 30-50 drops of any combination of the above essential oils is a
good amount to add to each 1 fl. oz. of petroleum jelly.

+ Plan to spend some time cleaning up; this petroleum jelly stuff is
resilient. (I suggest using paper towels initially, then soap and hot
water.)

To Prepare an Aromatic

Mepicarep VEHICLE

1. Purchase a jar of unmedicated petroleum jelly. This is
readily available in drug stores in 1.75 oz. (49 Gm), 3.75 oz.
(106 Gm), 13 oz. (368 Gm) and 15 oz. (425 Gm) sizes.

2. Melt the petroleum jelly over a very low heat. Do not
overheat it.

3. Just as the jelly turns liquid, move it away from the flame.

4. Add the drops of volatile oils to the liquid and stir them in
quickly. For starters, I suggest using 8-12 drops of each single
essential oil (or 30-50 drops total) per 30 Gm of jelly (adjust
this + or — as you see fit). Use up to 4 different essential oils
per 30 Gm.

----- PAGE 341 -----
5. Immediately pour the warm salve into a glass container(s).

6. Cap immediately so volatile oils do not escape salve as it
cools.

Erxyton Satve

This procedure renders a most superior salve from the dried
resinous, golden-orange flowers of the Calendula officinalis in
particular, and/or from any other dried plant which has
primarily alcohol-soluble properties that are not particularly
oil-soluble (i.e., Arnica, Goldenseal, Gumweed, Chaparral).

1. Weigh out dried powdered herb (let’s say 120 Gm).

2. Measure an equal amount by volume of 190-proof ethyl
alcohol (that will be 120 ml).

3. Mix the herb with the alcohol and stir the mixture until all
of the herb is moist.

4. Place this in a tightly sealed container and let it macerate for
24 hours.

5. Measure out 6 parts by volume of vegetable oil (that will be
720 ml).

6. Pour the oil into a blender and add the moist herb.

7. Blend this at a medium speed until the blender basket feels
warm.

8. Strain by pouring into a muslin cloth-lined strainer and

----- PAGE 342 -----
press.

9. Pour the liquid into a double boiler and heat over a low
flame for a few hours until all the alcohol has evaporated (do
not burn the oil). Check to see if any alcohol is still present by
carefully placing a lighted match to the surface of the oil.

10. Bottle the oil in tightly capped containers and store in a
cool place for future use, or add sufficient beeswax to
transform it into a salve as outlined in steps 4 through 10 on
this page.

Heras on THE “35 Herps AnD A Funcus” List

Tuar Are Weut Preparep As Satves

Burdock root

Calendula

Cayenne

Comfrey leaf and/or root
Elder flower

Ginger

Goldenseal leaf and rhizome
Marshmallow root
Mullein leaf

Nettle leaf

Plantain

St. John’s Wort

----- PAGE 343 -----
Yarrow

* The volume of herb will vary greatly depending on its density; 1 ounce of powdered
root or seed will usually present considerably less volume than 1 ounce of powdered
leaf or flowers. It is important that the final proportion of herb to oil is such that it
renders the herb quite wet with oil. It is also recommended that you powder the herb
to a moderately coarse powder whenever possible to expose more surface area to the

oil menstruum.

----- PAGE 344 -----


----- PAGE 345 -----
CHAPTER 19

A

: $
LOTIONS
& CREAMS

Lotions are water preparations containing insoluble materials used
for external application that requires no friction. They are less
intense than liniments, and because they are wetter, they are more
sensual in their effect on the skin than salves. Lotions also require
less rubbing in their application than salves, and they tend to leave
a smaller amount of residue on the skin. The term lotion has

----- PAGE 346 -----
derived from the Latin verb lavare, meaning to wash.

Medicinal lotions usually contain antiseptic or germicidal
substances used to treat skin maladies, or they contain substances
cooling and soothing to irritated skin, and healing to broken or
bruised skin. Some lotions are a blend of liquid solutions, while
others are either emulsions (a dispersion of droplets of a liquid in a
second liquid with which it is insoluble) or suspensions (for our
purposes, a finely divided solid dispersed in a liquid—the solid
settles out more or less rapidly). The emulsions and suspensions
frequently contain insoluble bodies that should be in a condition to
diffuse easily when the liquid is shaken.

Cosmetic lotions normally contain nourishing, softening,
moisturizing, and aromatic substances. The use of vegetable oils in
cosmetic preparations, such as creams, hand lotions, and cold
creams, for dry skin is very extensive. In cosmetic lotions and
creams used for nourishment, Olive oil seems to be preferred, while
expressed Almond oil, Sesame oil, Jojoba oil, Cocao butter, and
Coconut oil follow respectively. These fixed oils are insoluble
(immiscible) in water, but are capable of being mixed with water
by the assistance of an emulsifier, forming an emulsion. Natural
(non-chemical) emulsifiers most often employed are beeswax,
deodorized hydrous lanolin, vegetable glycerin, and lecithin.

EMULSIFYING AGENTS

As defined above, an emulsion is the dispersion of droplets of a
liquid in a second liquid with which it is immiscible. This can
usually be accomplished by merely mixing the two liquids in a
roomy container and agitating them vigorously. However, in order
to stabilize this emulsion, a third agent is generally necessary; this is
called an emulsifying agent or an emulsifier. In addition to making
the suspension of the oil in the water medium more permanent,
this emulsifying agent also works to allow a far more concentrated
emulsion. For our purposes in making lotions and creams this
means we can get a much higher proportion of oil to disperse in

----- PAGE 347 -----
the water. Many medicinal and cosmetic herbal agents are taken
into the body through the skin’s oil components. The natural
emulsifying agents, beeswax, hydrous lanolin, glycerin, and lecithin,
do not interfere with this skin penetration as chemical emulsifiers
are believed by some to do.

As an emulsifier, beeswax will also thicken and harden a cream
or lotion to some extent; lanolin (extracted from sheep wool) is
protective and moisturizing to the skin and tends slightly to thicken
a lotion, but is not as reliable as beeswax for this action; glycerin
has been discussed a great deal in this handbook already, so it is
sufficient to say that as an emulsifier it is a mild preservative and is
also an excellent moisturizing agent for the skin; lecithin is a
smooth and slippery emulsifier and lends these qualities to a lotion.
Avoid using too high a percent of either glycerin, lanolin, or
lecithin, for they can make a lotion somewhat sticky; a half to
three-quarters of a teaspoon of any one or a combination of these
per 8 oz. cup of lotion is sufficient. Lotions and creams tend to
thicken a bit as they age.

COLORING AGENTS

Lotions and creams (and salves and Hp balms, etc.) can be colored
by the addition of various herbal oil infusions. First make a highly
saturated oil infusion (see Chapter Seventeen, “Oil Infusion”) of a
specific coloring plant, then incorporate this pigmented oil as part
of the fixed oil ingredient of a recipe (see inclusion of the Alkanet
and Calendula oils in the Rose Cream recipe, this page). Depending
on the amount used, an oil infusion of Alkanet root (Alkanna
tinctoria) gives a soft pink to deep red color; an oil infusion of
dried Turmeric (Curcuma aromatica) or Calendula petals renders a
bright-hued yellow; and many green plants, especially an oil
infusion of dried Nettle, or Plantain, or Comfrey leaf lend a
delightful green color.

----- PAGE 348 -----
NUTRITIONAL/MEDICINAL AGENTS

Lotions and creams can be enriched by the addition of other herbal
agents. Bees, while being notorious emissaries of dermal
inflammation, also create for us some of our skin’s most
extraordinary accessories: royal jelly, propolis, honey, and pollen.
The apian chemistries of these accomplices blend magically with
the water and oil portions of lotions and creams carrying with them
an enormous array of vitamins, minerals, and enzymes that nourish
our body and enhance our wellness. Herbal tinctures and/or liquid
concentrates including Aloe vera juice and aromatic hydrosols or
floral waters (see Chapter Ten, “Distillation of Hydrosols”) can be
included in a lotion as part of the water content, bringing with
them a host of nutritional and therapeutic actions. Your whimsical
imagination (and accumulating experience) can arrange and
rearrange these ingredients into unique formulas that suit your
personal needs and creative inspiration.

PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

As an initial step to preserve your lotions and creams, you should
sterilize all the equipment you use to manufacture them, and
sterilize all the containers (including the lids) you use to store the
products. Avoid using your fingers to apply a lotion or cream, for
fingertips readily inoculate the emulsion with microorganisms that
will spoil the lotion as they joyfully procreate at rates even faster
than the speed of human reproduction. Instead, pour your lotions
into a plastic squeeze bottle or a bottle having a pump dispenser
that permits the accurate dispersing of the liquid on targeted areas
in convenient quantities. This eliminates the need to touch the
lotion with your fertile fingers. Use a cosmetic spatula or some
other small instrument to scoop and apply more viscous creams.
Whenever you use a jar or a bottle as a holding and dispensing
container, wipe off the lid after each and every use. Like regular
flossing of teeth. this action greatly inhibits the land-squatting

----- PAGE 349 -----
activities of microorganisms by surprising and temporarily
disorganizing them.

You can incorporate preservative agents as a portion of the
ingredients. Essential oils are anti-bacterial and anti-fungal and are
probably the most easily incorporated, but when including them in
a formula you will need to take into account their properties and
aromas. Lavender and Benzoin are relatively inexpensive essential
oils, and they are quite effective; Rose is not inexpensive, but
effective and exquisite. Tea Tree is effective and inexpensive—I
think it stinks (olfactorily speaking), though some folks like its
scent, but then some folks don’t mind jogging in clouds of exhaust
fumes.

Adding vitamin E oil for an antioxidant to the oil portion of a
recipe also provides a concentrated restorative food for the skin. A
couple of 200 IU capsules expressed into 8 ounces of the lotion
will do quite well.

And, of course, refrigeration is one of your most reliable
preservatives.

A Ligu Lotion Base ror Mepicinat

or Cosmetic Purposes

This preparation is gently astringent, anti-inflammatory, and
moisturizing to the skin. It is a toning agent that can be used
after skin cleansing for sensitive, dry, weather-damaged, and
mature skin. It is especially soothing and healing for chapped
or dry skin, eczema, or psoriasis. The lotion can be used as is
for the inherent actions listed above. It also provides a general
base to which a variety of other herbal agents can be added for
treating specific conditions. Suggested herbal agents are listed
following this base lotion recipe.

1. Mix together 600 ml (20 fl. oz.) of Rosewater (Rose

----- PAGE 350 -----
hydrosol) and 45 ml (1 1/2 fl. oz.) of glycerin.

2. 60 ml (2 fl. oz.) of absolute alcohol can be added to this as a
preservative. This is optional and only necessary if one intends
to take this lotion on the road where it will be stored in
varying temperatures. If refrigeration is available, or if one
adds any of the following alcohol-containing tinctures to the
base, this step is probably unnecessary.

Vulnerary, Anti-inflammatory Lotion

Add Arnica tincture 60 ml (2 fl. 0z.) to create a vulnerary; anti-
inflammatory lotion for washing sprains and bruises; for
providing relief of rheumatic pain and the pain and
inflammation of phlebitis, or whenever there is pain and
inflammation of the skin. (It is considered best, however, not
to use Arnica directly on open wounds.)

Anti-inflammatory, Vulnerary, and Anti-fungal Lotion

Add Calendula tincture 60 ml (2 fl. 0z.) to create an anti-
inflammatory, vulnerary, anti-fungal lotion useful for relieving
inflammation of the skin. (This can be used on an open
wound.)

Antiseptic Lotion
Add Goldenseal tincture 7 to 15 ml (1/4 to 1/2 fl. oz.) and
Myrrh tincture 30 ml (1 fl. oz.) for an antiseptic lotion.
Vulnerary, Astringent, and Demulcent Wash

Add Comfrey 60 ml (2 fl. oz.) tincture as a vulnerary,
astringent, and demulcent wash to assist the healing of external
ulcers, for washing wounds and fractures, varicose veins, and
ulcers.

----- PAGE 351 -----
Other Lotions

Any other appropriate tincture or blend of tinctures, add 60 ml
(2 fl. 02.).

Aw Enusion Tyre Lorion Base ror

Mepicat or Cosmetic Purposes

Start out by using the following simple ingredients to
experiment with as you learn to blend water with oil. Once
you have developed a familiarity and skill with this basic
technique, begin incorporating exotic essential oils and other
precious ingredients. (Some excellent recipes for cosmetic
lotions and other skin care products may be found in
Aromatherapy—A Complete Guide to the Healing Art, by
Kathy Keville and Mindy Green.)

Equipment

Make sure all equipment is sterilized.

Kitchen blender

Plastic spatula

Chopstick

Small funnel

Glass measuring cup (1 cup size)

Metal saucepan (large enough for the measuring cup to sit in)
Grater (for shaving beeswax)

Small glass jar container(s)

Paper towels or tissues

Ingredients

3/4 cup fixed oil

----- PAGE 352 -----
Icup distilled water (or floral water)

1/2 oz. beeswax (shaved)

1. Place lid on blender and remove its center ring; set a wide
mouth funnel into the ring opening.

2. Pour the water into the blender and set it aside. (There must
be enough water used to cover the blades, so they can engage
the liquid sufficiently to generate this emulsion.)

3. Put the oil into a measuring cup, and add the shaved
beeswax to it.

4. Set this into the saucepan of water. The water surface should
reach up to or a little above the level of the oil in the cup,
making a water bath.

5. Place the pan on a low heat and warm the oil just long
enough for the beeswax to melt.

6. Remove the measuring cup containing the oil and beeswax
from the pan.

7. Let the oil/wax mixture cool a few minutes just until you
see a faint rim of hardened wax forming on the side of the
measuring cup.

8. Turn the blender on high speed and very slowly add the
oil/wax until all the oil has been poured into the mixture.
(Some lotion-makers start with a lower setting, and when the
blender motor begins to bog down, turn it up to the next
higher speed, continuing this until the high speed is reached—
it’s a matter of getting to know your machine.)

9. When all is going well, the emulsion will begin to harden

----- PAGE 353 -----
after about two-thirds to three-quarters of the oil/wax has been
added to the water.

10. You can remove the entire blender lid at this point and use
the chopstick to carefully stir the top edges of the lotion as you
pour the remainder of the oil (be mindful of the currently
invisible whirling blades).

11. You now have a silky smooth lotion; you can turn off the
blender.

12. If you choose to add essential oils [30 to 50 drops for this
recipe/15 to 25 drops per 250 ml (8 oz. cup) of lotion], turn
on the blender just long enough to incorporate the oils; do not
overblend the lotion.

13. Pour the lotion into containers, using the spatula to get all
of it.

14. Store in the refrigerator, for at this point, aside form the
essential oils, you have not incorporated any preservatives.

A good emulsion is a product of the combination
of the proper temperature of an oil/wax mixture
and the uniformity of the flow of oil as it is
poured into the churning waters below. This is
not difficult to accomplish, but unsuccessful
attempts have been recorded, predominantly by
those who have successfully performed this
procedure hundreds of times, but are presently
demonstrating the technique in front of many
others. Dignity is such a fragile commodity.

----- PAGE 354 -----
Aw Execanr Ross Cream

A cream is made in the exact same fashion as a lotion,
requiring the same tools as listed above. The consistency of a
cream ends up being thicker, due to employing a little more
wax and a little less liquid. Sometimes when making a cream
all the water will not blend with the oil, so it needs to be
removed by pouring it off or by touching it with an absorbent
tissue; when preparing a lotion this is seldom required.

Ingredients I will not give approximate metric equivalents for
these measurements. I’ve used these, they work well, and I
think their precision is important.

10
beeswax
Gm
11/4
rosewater
cup
11/2
Rose essential oil
ml

Itsp. glycerin

3/4 up almond oil (which includes I tablespoon Alkanet
infused oil, I tablespoon Calendula infused oil)

1. Pour Rosewater and glycerin into blender.

2. Put the blender lid on (remove the center ring from the lid,
so oils can be poured into the blender later), and set aside.

3. Grate the beeswax.

----- PAGE 355 -----
4. Place the Almond oil mixture and grated beeswax into the
glass measuring cup.

5. Place the glass cup into a metal pot and fill the pot with
water up to the level of the oil in the cup, making a water
bath.

6. Heat the oil just until the wax is completely melted.
7. Remove from the heat and set aside.

8. Let this cool a few minutes, just until you see a faint rim of
wax hardened on the side of the measuring cup.

9. Turn the blender on low speed and pour oil/wax mixture
very slowly into the rosewater/glycerin mixture—pour a slow
steady stream using a funnel or the chopstick as a guiding rod
(see “Guiding Rod” under “Decanting,” Chapter Twenty-Five).

10. When the blender motor begins to bog down, turn it up to
the next higher speed. Continue this until you reach the high
speed, until all the oil has been poured into the mixture.

11. While the blender is still running remove the lid.

12. If you see any liquid in the corners of the blender, scrape
the sides down with the spatula until all the liquid is
incorporated and blended together (be aware of the blender
blade).

13. The cream will become either too stiff to take any more oil
or all the water will have been fully blended with the oil. If
any water remains unblended, pour it off or blot it with a
clean absorbent paper tissue.

14. You now have a luscious thick cream.

----- PAGE 356 -----
15. Add the Rose essential oil and blend it in for 10 seconds.
Do not overblend the cream.

16. Scoop the cream into containers and refrigerate.

17. Be sure to wipe the lid after each use!

----- PAGE 357 -----


----- PAGE 358 -----
Recorded history reveals that herbalists and physicians of ancient
India and Egypt used suppositories for local and systemic affect.
“Suppository” is defined as something that is “placed underneath,”
designed to penetrate and dissolve in a body cavity other than the
mouth. In this country, during most of the 1800s, suppositories
were prescribed mainly for local problems. However. as the

----- PAGE 359 -----
fundamental anatomy and physiology of the rectum have become
more clearly understood by Western science, it has become
apparent that herbs can be absorbed from the lower regions of the
rectum and then can enter the general circulation, thus becoming
systemic. We know now that rectal insertion can be an excellent
method for administering herbs to infants, young children, and
adults on correct occasions.

According to the Greeks a bolus was a “lump” or a “clod.” Today
it is defined as “a rounded mass of anything,” a large pill or tablet,
and in some lexicons it is defined as “a large pill for a horse.”
Somewhere along the way, from the time when a bolus was
considered by the Greeks merely a lump and a clod, it has become
a country cousin to the more sophisticated-sounding “suppository.”
Among herbalists the term most commonly used is “herbal bolus.”
So today, for all practical purposes, boluses and suppositories are
considered to be the same thing. Whatever you choose to call this
vehicle, it is a single dosage preparation, intended primarily for
insertion into the vaginal or rectal cavity for local or systemic
action.

The primary advantage of using a bolus is that it is a slippery
little vehicle that gets in there and deposits the goods forthright.
The “goods” are therapeutic and tonic herbs, and “there” are those
inner body parts that, when signaling for help, are soothed and
nourished by an herb being placed right up against them, or at least
as close to them as physically possible. A bolus can be inserted
directly into the vagina to soothe infections and treat inflammation
of the cervix and other inner vaginal tissues, or it can be inserted
into the rectum to soothe and tone mildly or highly disturbed
prostate glands in males, or to soothe and shrink hemorrhoids and
cysts in anyone. Boluses are also employed to deliver herbs directly
to rectal mucous membranes which readily absorb them into the
bloodstream. This can elicit the same systemic effect as herbs that
have been taken orally. In line with this, it is important to note that
a bolus is an excellent means for administering fever-reducing and
other soothing and nourishing herbs to infants and young children
who can’t or won’t take them orally. (A number of piqued children

----- PAGE 360 -----
opt for the oral method the next time around.)

While we’re in this discussion, I’ll insert the concept that enemas
and vaginal douches are extensions of the bolus. Designed to deliver
a single liquid dosage, they are an equally efficient delivery system
to administer herbs “underneath” for local and systemic action.

Medicinal herbs used in boluses can be strong astringents, such as
White Oak bark, used to contract, firm, and strengthen tissues and
to reduce secretions and discharge; demulcent and mild astringents
such as Comfrey root or Marshmallow root used to relax, soothe,
protect, and heal tissues; antimicrobial tonics like Goldenseal,
Echinacea, and Chaparral, used to prevent and allay infection while
toning body tissues; and/or distinct tonic herbs such as Saw
Palmetto, which is often used with Echinacea to soothe and tone an
infected or otherwise disturbed prostate gland.

These active herbal agents are suspended in a solid base designed
to melt at body temperature or in a base that will dissolve and
disperse when in contact with body tissues. The two main types of
bases used for making boluses are cocoa butter and a gelatin-
glycerin mix. The cocoa butter is most appropriately used when dry
herbal preparations are to be administered and the gelatin-glycerin
mix is well used when one wishes to combine liquid preparations
with a base. It is worth noting that the glycerin will extract moisture
from tissue. Therefore, please note that if it is used frequently, it
can cause a drying of the mucosal membranes, possibly provoking
mild inflammation.

THE FORMING MOLD

Enthusiasm about preparing herbal boluses (hey, some folks get
excited about collecting old hub caps) can prompt an all-pervasive
search for bolus-forming molds. From thimbles to fountain pen lids,
you may find yourself haunting supermarkets, hardware stores, flea
markets, garage sales, closets, kitchen drawers, kids’ (those you’re
not even related to) toy boxes, the car’s glove compartment, etc., for
potential molds. If you do find vourself involved in this odd quest. I

----- PAGE 361 -----
suggest you keep it a private pursuit; go about your search telling
no one what you are looking for or why you want it ... It’s simpler
that way and avoids a lot of talk.

I have found numerous potential devices that I won’t bother to
list. Suffice it to say, some of them panned out, most didn’t, but I’ve
learned to enjoy the hunt. All in all, my initial technique, which is
rather standard knowledge, remained the simplest and probably the
overall best. Meanwhile I’ve moved on to other challenges, but the
exhilaration of the hunt lingers, and my eyes remain alert for “the
perfect bolus-shaping mold.” It’s not like bolus consciousness is my
main event, you realize. I seek the burning bush and contemplate
the sound of one hand clapping too, like all the other deep and
spiritual guys.

Therefore, a quick and efficient method for making a shaping
mold:

1. Roll aluminum foil tightly around a fat pencil, a magic marker,
the handle of a large wooden spoon, whatever, depending on the
diameter of the bolus you want. The width of your small finger is a
good size approximation.

2. Leave a substantial portion of the pencil (or whatever shape-
giving device you use) sticking out of one end of the foil wrap, so
that once you are finished rolling it up you can still grasp it and
pull it out of the newly formed tube. Indulge heavily in abundance
by wrapping the foil around the implement a number of times to
supply a sturdy wall to work with.

3. Close off one end of the tube by twisting or crimping the foil and
remove the implement.

4. Find a container that will support this tube (or a number of these
tubes) and can hold it (them) securely upright once it has been
filled with the warm liquid mixture.

----- PAGE 362 -----
Foil Wrapped Snuggly Around the Pencil

L

A Completed Form

Tubes Standing Up in a Narrow Container

----- PAGE 363 -----
SIZE AND SHAPE

Rectal suppositories should weigh around 2-3 Gm each, smaller
sizes being made for infants. Vaginal suppositories should weigh in
at about 4 to 5 Gm each.

Rectal suppositories are retained more easily when they have
been shaped to taper at both ends, the taper being greater at one
end (the front or lead end). Vaginal suppositories are best shaped
into a globular form or oviform (egg-shaped).

METHODS OF PREPARATION

There are two types of boluses or suppositories that I will discuss in
this chapter. The first is made by using cocoa butter as a base, and
the other is a product of a glycerated-gelatin base.

Cocoa Burrer

Cocoa butter, Oleum Theobromatis (also spelled Cacao butter), is a
non-irritating, yellowish-white fat derived from the nut of the
chocolate tree (Theobroma cacao). It is probably the best general
base for boluses and suppositories. It is hard and wax-like at
ordinary temperatures, but melts at 86 to 95° F. (30 to 35° C.). It
can be incorporated with powdered herbs, small portions of
aqueous substances, or with oils, and it does not become rancid.
The cocoa butter melts from the natural temperature of the body
and releases the herbs.

It is suggested that boluses be inserted at night prior to going to
bed, so the person is lying horizontally, a more retentive position
than standing up. The use of protective accoutrements is suggested
to deal with any leakage that might occur.

Cocoa butter begins to liquefy to a semisolid when warmed to
around 86° F. (30° C.) and it usually melts at 93 to 95° F. (34 to 35°
C.), which is slightly below normal human body temperature.
However. in certain circumstances, if the cocoa butter has been

----- PAGE 364 -----
heated to about 97° F. (36° C.) and then quickly cooled in a chilled
suppository mold, it solidifies into a less stable form which will
then melt at about 73 to 75° F. (23 to 24° C.), rendering it difficult
to handle and insert. A bolus in this state might not make it intact
into the intended orifice. So it is worth knowing that for best
overall results one should avoid overheating cocoa butter. This is
best done by melting (liquefying) cocoa butter slowly with low heat
(using a double boiler apparatus or a small glass beaker placed into
a larger container which is half filled with warm water) and pour
the liquefied cocoa butter into molds that are room temperature.

Maxine tHe Cocoa Burrer Base Supposrrory

When using cocoa butter as the base, there are two basic
methods for making boluses, the Cold Process and the Warm
Fusion Process. The latter employs heating and the use of pre-
shaped molds in which to cool and solidify the liquid; the
former requires neither heat nor molds.

In the warm process, the powdered herb(s) is added to the
melted base, poured into a mold, and allowed to cool. In the
cold process, the herbal powder is incorporated with the
unmelted base and the resulting mass is shaped by hand. As to
which method is best, I'd say it pretty much comes down to
which one you enjoy doing more.

----- PAGE 365 -----
Glass Beakers Set Up with Thermometer

Warm Infusion Process

The following warm fusion procedure takes into account that
cocoa butter base herbal boluses, when they are not overheated
and not too rapidly cooled, remain more stable and retain
their ideal melting point of around 90 to 95° F.

1. Grind your herbal ingredients into as fine a powder as
possible. Use the electric coffee bean grinder to grind the herbs
and then run the ground herbs through a fine sieve to ensure
that they are finely powdered. Weigh and make note of the
amount of your herb powder for future reference.

2. Reduce the cocoa butter to small pieces by grating or
shaving it. Avoid using large particles; they melt slowly and
mess with the low temperature melting process. Weigh and
note the amount for future reference.

----- PAGE 366 -----
3. Place the herbs and the cocoa butter into the top portion of
a double boiler or into a small glass beaker and mix them
lightly with a stirring rod or a thermometer. (You're going to
be using the thermometer to help monitor the temperature
soon anyway.)

4. The amount of herb you use in relation to the amount of
binder will depend on the nature of the herb. You will have to
work with this. Make notes. Try to get as much herb into the
mixture as you can while allowing enough base material to
easily bind and hold it all together.

NOTE: Using glass beakers allows you to observe the mixture
better, and most importantly, the thin walls reduce the chance
of overheating. Metal pots and double boilers work fine, but
they offer more of a challenge when it comes to heat control.

5. When using a double boiler, place the top of the boiler
containing the mixture of ingredients into the bottom, which
contains water that has been brought to a boil and removed
from the fire. While stirring, let this heat melt the cocoa butter.
When using glass beakers, place the smaller beaker full of the
ingredients within a larger beaker of hot water. Stir the
mixture with the thermometer and watch the temperature. The
mass will soften at about 89° F. (32° C.) and should be kept at
or below 92° F. (33° C.).

6. When the mixture reaches 92°, separate the beakers or pots.
Stir until the mixture of powdered herbs and cocoa butter
appears to be uniformly blended and fully melted.

7. Pour the thick mixture into a mold that is room
temperature. When using the narrow tube of aluminum foil
described above or any other narrow-shaped device as a

----- PAGE 367 -----
forming mold, a very small plastic funnel will be of great
assistance for this step. After a couple of minutes, the mixture
will become somewhat firm.

8. Place the mold full of the bolus mixture into a freezer for
about 2 minutes.

9. After this brief cooling, remove the bolus from the mold.

10. Cut the boluses into desired lengths, shape them as you
will, and store them in the refrigerator in a small jar which is
labeled. (If you don’t label the jar, inevitably someone will
bite off a piece of one of the boluses thinking it is candy.
Actually, about the only difference between a cocoa butter
bolus and a piece of candy, aside from its social status, is the
addition of a sweetener, and of course the orifice of insertion.)

11. If something doesn’t work out, re-melt the mixture, and do
it again.

In spite of the above precautions, I should assure that this
warm process is fairly low-pressure medicine-making. It is
while percolating tinctures and making lotions that the brow
and palms tend to get a little sweaty. The key here is to melt
the cocoa/herb mixture at a minimum temperature and use a
room temperature mold into which you pour the warm
mixture. If you use a previously cooled mold, it causes a super-
cooling of the cocoa butter and the resultant crystallization
(rehardening) makes for a lower melting point. If you do
overheat the mixture, complete the project, and then let this
batch of boluses age in the refrigerator for a month. Upon
aging, they (both the overheated and the super-cooled boluses)
eventually recoup their normal melting point characteristics.

I praise the medical pharmacists who figured out the
intimate dynamics of this cocoa chemistry and all the other

----- PAGE 368 -----
excellent medicine-making knowledge they have amassed
throughout the years. The members of this inspired profession
avidly pursued this kind of pharmaceutical investigation in the
1930s, 40s, and ’50s while most herbalists (and herbal lay-
pharmacy) in the U.S. had withdrawn into a deep slumber.
But, one by one, we lay-pharmacists are returning to the
medicine-making arena; like recently kissed enchanted frogs,
who have awakened to their original nature, we are emerging
from some strange cultural spell, and can now contribute our
peerless perspective to the evolving art and science of herbal
pharmacy. One acquires deep green insight and unique
capabilities being a frog for a while.

Cold Process

Cocoa butter and other fat bases that do not require melting in
order to mix with powdered herbs can be made into bolus
suppositories by a cold method.

So far, the best tools I’ve found for this method are a dinner
plate and two 1 1/4-inch stainless steel putty knives (you can
find these in the paint section of a hardware store). One putty
knife is used to knead and blend the cocoa butter and herbs
together, and the other one is used to intermittently scrape off
the first one. You'll also want some paper towels close by.

1. Powder the herb(s) you plan to use. If you are using more
than one herb, powder and blend them at this stage.

2. Grate or shave with a putty knife an appropriate quantity of
cocoa butter onto a glass or ceramic dinner plate.

3. Mix the powdered herb with the shaved cocoa butter base
and then work them into a plastic mass with the aid of the
putty knife. A more even distribution of the herb is obtained if
it is first mixed with only a portion of the cocoa butter base,

----- PAGE 369 -----
then the remainder of the base can be worked in gradually.

4. Add essential oils during this blending process if your
formula calls for them.

5. Knead the entire mass with the putty knife until the herbs
(and essential oils, if you’ve added any) are well dispersed. If
you took the suggestion in the margin, have another cookie.

6. Wash your hands well, and, with your fingers, form the mass
into appropriately sized and shaped boluses. The necessary
skill is easy to acquire. Weigh the first bolus to get a sense of
the size you want to make (see size and shape, above). If you
find that the skin temperature of your fingers exceeds the
melting point of cocoa butter, you can keep your hands cool
by dipping them in ice water, or by holding on to the glass of
ice cold milk you’re having with your cookies.

7. Place boluses into a small jar, cap it, label it, and store it in
the refrigerator.

Coconut Oil Base Substitute

Some folks use coconut oil (derived from the fruit of the
Coconut palm, Cocos nucifera) in place of cocoa butter as a
base for making boluses. Rosemary Gladstar, in her book
Herbal Healing for Women, gives the following recipe for such
an event:

“Melt coconut oil in a saucepan over low heat. When the oil
is completely melted, remove it from the heat and stir in the
powdered herb mixture. Add enough herbs to make a thick
paste. When you have added enough powder so that the oil is
thick, yet still pliable enough to work, add (essential oils).
Quickly roll into boluses the size and shape of your small
finger. They will look like herbal tootsie rolls.”

----- PAGE 370 -----
This Cold Process is a lot like making chocolate
chip cookie dough from scratch, which you might
even want to start now for, inevitably, smelling
and handling all this cocoa butter will lead you
into some form of chocolate frenzy.

Maxine tHe Guycerinatep Gettin Base Supposrrory

This mixture of gelatin and glycerin creates a base that readily
incorporates liquid extracts such as herbal infusions,
decoctions, concentrates, tinctures, fluid extracts, and essential
oils into a suppository form. Gelatin is found in the “jello”
section of the grocery store, and glycerin can be purchased in
health food stores, herb stores, and drug stores.

T’'ll give you a basic recipe and method for making this type
of bolus, but you will, I’m sure, quickly modify it in your own
fashion.

1. Into a small glass or stainless steel saucepan, pour 1 oz. (30
ml) of herbal tincture, fluid extract, strong herbal concentrate,
or whatever form of liquid single herb or herbal formula you
wish to use. You certainly can incorporate finely powdered
herbs in this base as well.

2. Add 1 oz. (30 ml) of pure vegetable glycerin.
3. Add 2 oz. (60 ml) of distilled water.
4. Stir these ingredients together until they are well mixed.

5. Open 1 envelope of unflavored gelatin and pour it into the

----- PAGE 371 -----
liquid mixture. (The box of gelatin I buy holds 4 envelopes of
pure granulated gelatin, each containing 7 Gm.)

6. Place this combination on the stove burner over a low
flame.

7. Stir continuously until the gelatin is completely dissolved.
8. Remove the mixture from the stove and pour it into molds.

9. Let it cool a bit and then put it into the refrigerator to
solidify.

An excellent suppository to prepare for treating hemorrhoids
incorporates 25 ml of Witch Hazel (Hamamelis virginiana)
tincture and 5 ml of Horse Chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum)
or California Buckeye (Aesculus californica) tincture in the
above recipe.

A Grune Process

This is a short story about making a bolus by what I call the
Greek Method. This method is a procedure I bumbled upon,
while not having a clue what I was doing, during my first
impromptu attempt to make a herbal bolus.

I assembled a pile of powdered herb on a glass dinner plate.
I then liquefied some cocoa butter and poured this, a little at a
time, onto the pile of powder. Then I kneaded the powder and
cocoa butter together with a small metal cookie spatula until
they were blended. I added more liquid cocoa butter as I
proceeded until I had a well-formed mass (certainly, what I
perceived to be a “lump” or a “clod”). When it felt “right” (and

----- PAGE 372 -----
this is totally up to one’s speculation), I used a second cookie
spatula to scrape off the stuff that had hardened and was
clinging to the first spatula. I then scraped up the other
hardened stuff that had spread all over the plate and on the
countertop. I gathered all of these scrapings into a pile, and
began to press, mold, and form portions of the pile with my
fingers into various shapes and sizes that seemed appropriate
for the dynamics of orifice insertion.

This worked for me at the time, and I was happy with the
results. Yes, the manufacturing process was crude, and some
less aware of the intent behind the task might have judged it
merely as making a mess in the kitchen. But my vision was
clear and my determination was heated. Even during the
moments when I was feeling a little dorky, as I do when first
walking around in a brand new pair of shoes, I was also
experiencing a feeling of contentedness. And although I was
obviously flailing about in the unknown, flickers of discovery
and a measure of success flared in my novice medicine-maker’s
humble demeanor, and I found myself enjoying the initial
stages of my medicine show.

The point of this tender disclosure is not to recommend this
method of production, but simply to convey a suggestion about
medicine-making (and, what the heck, about life in general),
which is: When you get an idea of what you want, plunge in
and do it! Take a risk. You may only semi-succeed, or you may
blow it entirely, but so what? The materials of Herbalism are
inexpensive (actually the cost of cocoa butter is a bit
outrageous). Most likely you'll ultimately create a successful
experience far beyond your initial dream. It’s an adventure,
and it’s fun. If it’s not, you should probably forget about the
whole thing anyway and do something else. And you’re
guaranteed to learn something of value (make notes), and it
might make a poignant story you can divulge someday when

----- PAGE 373 -----
you write your book.

----- PAGE 374 -----


----- PAGE 375 -----
One afternoon, as I was manipulating the makings of glycerated-
gelatin suppositories, getting my procedures clear for writing
Chapter Twenty, I discovered (actually crashed into) an interesting
new(?) herbal vehicle—a medicinal herbal jello.

As a result of this impact and the events that followed, I have
reason to suspect that tonic and therapeutic herbal iellos offer

----- PAGE 376 -----
notable potential for assisting herbalists and parents to increase
child and “ill-tempered adult” patient compliance.

This discovery stemmed from a blunder of mine that involved a
particularly precious tincture of primo-wildcrafted Oregon Grape
root (OGR). The simple pharmaceutical event was supposed to
culminate in a manifestation of many, perfectly molded glycerated-
gelatin suppositories, but instead, ended up as an unintended mass
of OGR jello. Momentarily deranged by my frustration and self-pity
(I was racing toward a publishing deadline at the time), I lost
control. In my mindless anguish, I took a spoon to it all, slashing
and scooping at it blindly as I cried out, “Why me!? Why now!?
Why all that glycerin!? Why my finest OGR tincture!?”

Immediately following the gelatai carnage, as I stood at the
kitchen counter, bewildered, remorseful, emotionally spent,
questioning the meaning of life and the purpose of man’s toil on
earth, gazing aimlessly at the sordid glycerated remains, the empty
tincture bottle laying on its side, the soiled beakers, I ate a spoonful
of the still quivering blunder ... and behold ... I was instantly
uplifted! It was fun, like eating jello always is (even for those
cranky adults who won’t admit it). And it tasted...“all right!” which
OGR tincture never does. Right, kids?

I discovered that jellofied herb effortlessly jiggles and diffuses
ghastly flavors, distracting one’s taste buds from the roots of
bitterness, and the glycerin follows up smoothly with a pleasantly
sweet aftertaste. I liked it! I ate another scoop. The herbalized jello
played in my mouth. I slurped another scoop, then another. My face
smiled big; the universe, amused by my blunder-ability had given
me an answer to my questions ... herb jello (Botanica wiggleus;
Gelatinaceae family)! What an idea! (Individuals requiring a more
sophisticated air of credibility in their future discussions concerning
this important new clinical vehicle can use the currently more
fashionable European-flavored term “phytojel.”) Such a joyous
footnote this will be scribed in the herb section of the Akashic
records and in the future archives of twenty-first century American
phyto-folklore. Herbal pharmacy of the new millennium will have
a wiggle.

----- PAGE 377 -----
Not long thereafter, creativity ablaze, I boarded my bike and sped
to the local grocery store, where I bought myself a couple packs of
lime-flavored Jell-O® (what can I say, lime is green). I flirted with
the idea of getting the sugar-free type Jell-O, but its label said
“aspertame” on the ingredients list, so I reconsidered and bought
the ones that said “sugar” instead. In my belief system, aspertame
makes white sugar the good guy. And, with all that good herb that’s
going to be taken, a little sugar isn’t going to hurt anyone.

Upon returning home, I opened my box of lime Jell-O,
immediately poured a little bit of the green powder into my palm,
and proceeded to lick it, mm-mm! You've gotta do that; every kid
does. Then I poured the rest of the powder onto a scale and
weighed it. I wanted only to use 1/4 of the Jell-O to experiment
with. I weighed out 22 Gm (the 3 oz box said 85 Gm, but I got 86
Gm + my approximately 2 Gm compulsive lick).

Possibly, we’ve turned a significant corner here in
herbal kinderland. Try out the idea of using herb
jellos; have fun with it, and let me know what
recipes and results you come up with. I can be
reached at: JG, P.O. Box 39, Forestville, CA
95436.

Kindernote: Leave an herb jello uncovered in the
refrigerator for a couple weeks and you’ve got
yourself a phyto gummy bear to chew.

Herp Jei.o

1/4 lime Jell-O (I did cherry Jell-O next) =
box approximately 22 Gm

T/A

----- PAGE 378 -----
at
boiling water (60 ml)

cup
tincture (I used Feverfew for my first intentional

herb jello) (30 ml or 1/8 cup)

loz.
loz. cold water (30 ml or I /8 cup)

1. Put the jello powder into a small rectangular shaped baking
tin. (I used a small loaf tin that measured 2 1/2 inches by 4
1/2 inches. Using this squared-off shape makes it easy to
divide the herb jello into equal-sized pieces in order to give
relatively equal-sized doses.)

2. Pour the boiling water onto the jello powder and stir well
for 2 to 3 minutes, making sure that the gelatin is completely
dissolved.

3. Add the tincture and stir this well.
4. Then add the cold water and stir well.

5. Pour this mixture into the pan and/or into any other molds
you wish to use. I bought some candy molds of various forms
(shells, cars, cigars, Christmas trees, etc.) that make kid-
approved shapes for eating. (The research that remains for us
is to discover the jello flavors that work best with each
uniquely flavored herb or herbal blend. This is why I use only
1/4 of the pack, or less, at a time.)

6. Once the herb jello has hardened, cut it into 6 equal
portions, each one delivering about a 5 ml dose of tincture.

The Feverfew jello turned out tasting “all right.” At least it is the
best-tasting. most palatable dose of Feverfew I’ve taken so far. and

----- PAGE 379 -----
taste-wise, Feverfew is one of the herbs most folks applaud the
least.

This water-gelatin vehicle scoots the herbal flavors quickly past
the taste buds and on down to the stomach with a minimal amount
of gustatative resistance; yet in passing, it makes its moves on the
mouth long enough for the tongue to party whimsically with the
gelatin portion.

Following this, I made a cherry St. John s Wort jello and called it
“cherry up.” Next, I assembled a relaxing nervine jello using
Valerian and California Poppy with lemon Jell-O and called it
“mellow yellow jello” (naming your herb jello is optional).

I feel a great potential here for parents, grumps, and wee ones.
One can experiment with all types of flavored Jell-O® brand jellos
in order to find those that cohabit harmoniously in a jelly-body
with otherwise strange and frightful tasting herbal extracts, like
Feverfew, Oregon Grape, Yarrow, and Mugwort. If you prefer to use
no sugar at all, you can use the glycerated-gelatin recipes for
making suppositories that are given in Chapter Twenty. That is
what I did involuntarily the first time. Glycerin is a non-sugar
sweetener. Or one can experiment with using Stevia, which has
been infused into the water that is used to dissolve an unsweetened
gelatin. Stevia (Stevia rebaudiana) is an herb that has come to us
from its native land Paraguay. It tastes sweeter than sugar, but by
FDA (the Federal Denial Attendants) pronouncement, cannot be
called a sweetener (this edict is probably another side effect of the
aspertame industry). Use Hains® brand vegetarian jello or a
flavored pectin if you prefer a vegetarian variety.

You can incorporate herbal infusions, decoctions, tinctures—any
and all forms of loathsome tasting herbal liquids children and ill-
tempered adults often refuse to take or complain about so
incessantly it’s hardly worth the effort trying to help them. Of
course, all the naturally good-tasting herbal teas, glycerites, and
tinctures like Lemon Balm, Mint, Chamomile, and Fennel are also
garnished with fun when transformed into a phytojel.

Adults (senior kids) can take a bit of dessert before meals as a
digestive aid. using an herb iello incorporating Peppermint.

----- PAGE 380 -----
Chamomile, Lemon Balm, Ginger, or any of the other carminatives.
Merely the name “Lemon Balm-lemon-lime jello” shimmies with
vibrations of gastric approval and upliftment.

I’m planning to prepare a Meadowsweet jello which will be a
consoling herbal therapeutic treat for any child who is experiencing
diarrhea. The jello portion will proceed to make his or her insides
feel soothed and happy, and the Meadowsweet will supply its
gently efficient internal action to help balance out the child’s
troubled intestine. Catnip and Fennel is an herbal blend I strongly
recommend having on hand in all households inhabited by babies
and young children. It is an excellent compound to use for soothing
children’s colicky digestive systems and for allaying children’s
fevers, especially during childhood fever diseases such measles,
mumps, chickenpox, etc. The name “Catnip-Fennel-jello” carries an
inherent giggle and just sounds like a good time. The babe will love
it as a medicinal treat, and a touch of party. (If the child’s fever is
prolonged and quite troublesome, the insertion of a homecrafted
Meadowsweet, Yarrow suppository will be quite helpful.)

----- PAGE 381 -----


----- PAGE 382 -----
SYRUPS, HONEYS
OXYMELS, AND
ELECTUARIES

RUPS

When an herbalist concocts an admittedly unpleasant-tasting herbal
tincture or tea blend that he or she feels will do a sick child a world
of good. and the ailing little person still has enough reason, will.

----- PAGE 383 -----
and determination to wholeheartedly reject the favor, a sweet syrup
often settles the dispute. Syrup is a traditional way to make herbal
preparations (especially bitter sore throat and cough mixtures)
more palatable for children and for other folks who aren’t ready to
hear that bitter is good.

Syrups are an old and favored form of administering herbal
medication to be taken internally. This popularity is due to a
variety of reasons. Aesthetically, syrups’ sweet flavors are highly
palatable and they offer a pleasing appearance; concurrently, syrup
has a nutrient value as a carbohydrate (in spite of popular opinion,
sugar is not a nutritional problem, whereas manic consumption of
sugar is a problem), and the sugar used in making syrups can be an
eminently effective preservative in place of alcohol or refrigeration
for otherwise unstable herbal solutions.

When using sugar as the preservative, the adequate concentration
of white sugar (sucrose) in a syrup is a crucially important factor in
its keeping quality. (Sucrose is the official chemical name used for
common white sugar in pharmacy texts.)

Sugar is a carbohydrate. When present in a water solution,
diluted sugar provides a nutrient source which vigorously supports
the growth of micro-organisms, especially yeast and molds.
However, the ability of these organisms to grow is decreased as the
concentration of sucrose is increased. Therefore, a simple sugar
syrup needs to approach saturation in order to succeed as an
effective preservative agent. One does not want to attain true
saturation, however, because any slight cooling might start a
crystallization process within the syrup body which can lead to
complications. Large crystals form, which are difficult to re-dissolve,
and the formation of these crystals leaves behind a solution with
insufficient sugar concentration, that will support microorganism
growth. The concentration of sugar in a syrup must be sufficient to
render the solution so saturated with pure sugar (sucrose) that there
is no longer enough water available to provide the environment
required for microorganisms to proliferate. This is similar to drying
herbs for preservation so that not enough water is available in the
dried vegetable materials to provide a proper environment for

----- PAGE 384 -----
bacteria and mold to proliferate and cause deterioration.

The use of sugar as a preservative for making permanent herbal
preparations was quite popular and certainly practical in times
when refrigeration was not a common household luxury. One
winter, while I was immersed in writing this chapter, Sonoma
County, California, hosted an uncompromising windstorm that
felled nearby trees, demolishing numerous power lines. This
supplied me with two electricity-free (void) days to deepen my
appreciation for non-electric light and heat-giving devices not
dependent on electric power. As my refrigerator and freezer slowly
lost their cool, my appreciation deepened as well for stored food
products that don’t rely on electrical power for their preservation.
Experiencing (yet again) the obvious vulnerability of my
dependence on electrical power, my extemporaneously expanding
appreciation soon embraced all the methods I was aware of that
preserve herbal extracts that do not rely on electricity-fed devices,
or on the over-taxed liquids supplied by the alcohol industry.
Therefore, I have decided to discuss here not only the making of
syrups that are best kept in the refrigerator but also a method for
making a syrup that, in line with “the technology of independence,”
when prepared properly, can survive entirely off the grid.

Syrups are defined as saturated solutions of sugar in pure water
or in other aqueous liquids; sugar is the preservative component.
Syrups sometimes contain vinegar, honey, glycerin, and occasionally
a small quantity of alcohol. In pharmacy, when distilled water
alone is used in the nearly saturated solution with sugar, the
distinctive term simple syrup is applied. When the solution contains
various aromatic or pleasantly tasting substances it is called a
flavored syrup, and when the sugar solution contains soluble
principles from various medicinal plants used as therapeutic agents
it is called a medicated syrup. Medicinally, syrups can be divided
into two general groups. The flavoring group composed of those
syrups prepared solely for their agreeable flavor are used chiefly as
vehicles for carrying and improving the taste of other preparations
of medicinal agents (i.e., Peppermint, Blackberry fruit, or Cherry
syrups). The second group. medicated syrups. are prepared to

----- PAGE 385 -----
access their intrinsic medicinal ingredients and are used as
therapeutic agents (i.e., Garlic, Marshmallow, Horehound, Black
Cohosh, and Senna syrups).

CONTAINERS FOR SYRUPS

Mixing (agitating) containers, storage containers, and any funnels or
other implements used to help fill the containers must be dry to
avoid dilution of the syrup, and they must be very clean in order to
avoid contamination of the syrup by fermentation organisms that
frequent imperfectly cleaned bottles. It is best to use small storage
bottles so that a large quantity of syrup will not be exposed to the
air each time the container is opened.

SYRUP DOSAGE

Standard dose for taking a syrup is approximately 1 teaspoonful as
needed, or as some therapeutic literature decrees, ad libitum.

“Sugar is the cleavage of the culinary arts,
chocolate the plunging neckline.”

—T. Exper Sacus

SYRUP PRESERVATION AND STORAGE

All syrups do better if, before bottling, they are first strained
through clean cotton flannel or muslin cloth that has been
previously moistened and wrung out. This removes any particles of
dust and dirt that might find their way into the syrup.

Finished syrups will keep unaltered for a long time if properly
prepared. They are best preserved in sterile, tightly capped bottles
and stored in a cool place where the temperature is uniform. It is
important that. before filling. the storage bottles be clean

----- PAGE 386 -----
(immersed in boiling water for a period of time), and dry to avoid
dilution and possible contamination of the syrup by fermentation
organisms that frequent imperfectly cleaned bottles. It is best if
these storage bottles are fairly small, so that a large quantity of
syrup will not be exposed to the air each time the container is
opened.

Syrups, properly prepared, usually are stored at room
temperature. But for those syrups that don’t keep well, at a risk of
causing some crystallization due to super-cooling the saturated
solution, their original quality is maintained for a longer time if
they are kept in a refrigerator. Air and heat are far more
detrimental to the stability of sugar solutions than diffused light, but
direct sunlight should always be avoided because of the heat
transmitted by the sun’s rays.

Other agents can be added to the syrup, to help prevent
fermentation:

Essential oils, which of course greatly modify the taste, aroma,
and other properties of the preparation.

Brandy, which is much used with aromatics, or a small
proportion of pure ethyl alcohol can be added to syrups to serve as
a preservative as well as a solvent for the addition of alcohol-
soluble ingredients, such as essential oils. Some folks speculate that
the alcohol concentrates in the vapors above the syrup and from
this strategic location prevents the growth of surface molds.

Glycerin can be used in syrups as an agent to help retard
fermentation. It is effective if the concentration is sufficient, 30
percent or more. It has a sweet taste, but its sweetness is not as
pleasing as sucrose. Glycerin is a solvent for tannins, and as such
acts as a preservative against precipitation of extracted vegetable
matter.

Honey is a health-promoting substance that supplies a delightful
flavor and provides excellent preservative activity.

Syrups that go off and ferment are best composted. Once a syrup
has undergone fermentation it is no longer fit for use. Even if an
attempt is made to restore it by boiling, it is quite likely to spoil
again soon. due to the decreased proportion of sugar remaining in

----- PAGE 387 -----
solution.

WATER FOR MAKING SYRUP

The best water to use for making syrups is recently boiled distilled
water. Using this menstruum ensures that the syrup is free from
mineral matter and from spores that might cause fermentation in
the presence of sugar. In the preparation of some syrups and
oxymels, however, vinegar is often used in preference to water or
alcohol (see garlic syrup and oxymel recipes, this page).

SUGAR FOR SYRUPS

The best kind of sugar to use in the preparation of syrup is very
dry, refined white sugar in a crushed, powdered, or granulated
form. This is a chemically pure sugar produced by sugar refineries.
It requires no further preparation. Pure white sugar is best used in
the preparation of an independently permanent (off-grid) syrup due
to the fact that the sugar (sucrose) to water ratio is critical for the
resulting syrup to provide adequate preserving properties. For this
class of preparation, the use of damp sugar should be avoided, as it
can disturb this crucial water/sugar proportion.

If raw, unrefined, or brown sugar is to be relied on as a
preservative, it is necessary to simmer the syrup; then skim or strain
off the froth (in certain pharmacy texts you find the more scornful
term “scum” applied here), which contains vegetable “impurities”
(the organic ballast products of Nature seem to perturb
pharmacists). If impurities are obviously diffused in the liquid,
which will not readily rise as froth, it is useful to add, before
applying heat, a little egg white, previously beaten up with water,
which by coagulating at the boiling temperature forms a clot,
enclosing the impurities, and facilitating their removal. (Gotcha!)

Dissolving sugar in water can be accomplished by either cold or
hot process.

----- PAGE 388 -----
Dissorvinc Sucar py Coun Process

This process is used to dissolve sugar in distilled water to make
a simple syrup; or to dissolve sugar in a medicated liquid
(infusion, decoction, concentrate) to make a medicated syrup,
or in fruit juice to make a flavoring syrup by agitation without
the use of heat. Sufficient agitation is accomplished by shaking
the container vigorously from time to time.

1. Place the properly weighed white sugar in a sterilized bottle
that is one and a half to two times as large as the required
volume of syrup (this allows for active agitation of the mixture
and more rapid solution).

2. Add a properly measured amount of purified water.
3. Securely cap the bottle.

4. Hasten solution by vigorous agitation of the bottle until the
sugar is dissolved. The syrup will be crystal clear when the
sugar is completely dissolved.

5. Finally, the syrup should be strained through a piece of
cotton flannel or muslin placed over the orifice of a large
funnel directing the syrup into a very clean, completely dry
bottle.

Dissorvinc Sucar py Warm Process

In the case of some syrups, where the thick or cohesive
character of the solvent impedes rapid solution of the sugar, or

----- PAGE 389 -----
when the syrup is wanted in a hurry, a moderate heat can be
employed to facilitate solution. This is done as follows:

1. Put the accurately weighed white sugar and properly
measured liquid (plain distilled water, infusion, decoction,
concentrate) into a strong sterilized bottle that is one and a half
to two times as large as the required volume of syrup.

2. Securely cap the bottle.

3. Place it in a water bath and keep it at a temperature of
about 120° to 125° F.

4. Frequently agitate the mixture until perfect solution is
consummated. Loss of any volatile principles is avoided by
keeping the bottle tightly capped throughout and after the
preparation process.

Maxine A Permanent Simpte Syrup THat Requires

No Rerriceration To Preserve

A simple syrup is a very simple preparation, but it has to be
made with care and precision using sterilized equipment along
with proper concentration of the sugar in pure (distilled)
water. These factors are crucial for a self-preserving product
with minimum possibilities of crystallization because the
solution is too concentrated, or not concentrated enough so
that yeast, molds, and bacteria develop.

It has been found that 85 Gm of white sugar (sucrose) to 47
ml of pure water is the ideal proportion to render a perfectly
concentrated solution (syrup) that is self-preserving. This will
render approximately a 64 percent strength of sugar by weight

----- PAGE 390 -----
in the syrup. As mentioned, less sugar allows enough water
activity to promote bacterial growth, and too much sugar
concentration will soon crystallize and precipitate out of
solution. This removes too much sugar from the solution,
thereby making available sufficient water to allow bacterial
growth and consequent fermentation.

1. Weigh out 85 Gm of white sugar. (This is an adequate
amount to experiment with at first.)

2. Place it in a sterilized, dry jar (one of those slender 10 oz.
jam or jelly jars is a good one to use).

3. Pour onto the sugar 47 ml of distilled water (see “Meniscus,”
Chapter Twenty-Five).

4. Cap the jar tightly and agitate it vigorously.

5. Continue agitating it intermittently throughout the day until
the solution is clear.

6. Filter the syrup through a very clean flannel or cotton
muslin cloth.

7. Store in a cool location.

8. Check the syrup during the next two or three months to see
how it’s doing.

Maxine Fiavorine Syrups

Cherry Flavoring Syrup

This makes a brilliant red syrup that is an excellent vehicle for

----- PAGE 391 -----
administering bitter preparations. It has a pleasant taste. This
syrup is acidic due to the malic acid content of the Cherries.

1. Measure out 50 ml of pure Cherry juice. I dilute and use a
Bernard Jensen’s black cherry concentrate purchased from a
health food store (years ago).

2. Weigh out 85 Gm of sugar.

3. Mix, and with assistance of a warm water bath, dissolve the
sugar in the Cherry juice.

4. A small quantity of alcohol (brandy is best) can be added to
help preserve this syrup.
Raspberry Ferment Syrup

Here’s an interesting angle on making a fresh berry syrup
appropriate to contrive when the electrical wires that service
your home have been demolished and everything else in the
refrigerator is also fermenting.

1. Reduce fresh Raspberries to a pulp and let them rest for 3
days.

2. Separate the juice by pressing, and set it aside until it has
completely fermented and become clear.

3. Filter the fermented juice.

4. To 3 parts (90 ml or 3 fl. oz.) of the fermented liquid, add 5
parts (150 Gm or 5 oz.) of white sugar.

5. Heat the mixture until the sugar is dissolved and just
brought to a boiling point.

6. Bottle in clean bottles, cap, and store in a cool place.

----- PAGE 392 -----
Blackberry Fruit Flavoring Syrup

This is a flavoring syrup having slight astringency.
1. Pick and clean ripe Blackberries.

2. Strongly express the juice.

3. Mix 5 parts sugar with 3 parts juice.

4. Heat the mixture until the sugar is dissolved and just
brought to a boiling point.

5. Strain and put hot syrup into sterilized bottles.

6. Cap tightly and store in a cool location.

This nearly saturated sugar solution is supposed
to be anti-fermentative, and I have found it to be
so; however, be forewarned, it is not anti-ant.
Legions of festive six-leggeds will arrive overnight
to celebrate each mislaid drop of this seductively
saccharine elixir.

The manufacture of syrup is considered from two points of view:
first, the method by which the sugar and flavoring is dissolved in
the solvent as discussed above, and second, the method by which
the medicinal constituent is blended with the sugar and/or flavored
syrup as illustrated by the examples below.

There are several methods in which a medicinal constituent(s) is
blended with a syrup. These methods can vary with each different
medicinal agent, and like making any type of herbal preparation,
skill comes from experience complemented by the taking of notes.
There are numerous flavored and medicated svrups useful in herbal

----- PAGE 393 -----
pharmacy. The following examples will illustrate some basic
methods for blending constituents with a syrup.

Mepicarinc Syrups

Medicating a Simple or Flavored Syrup

A simple syrup can be prepared as directed previously and
stored in a cool location, ready for use as a carrying agent.
Merely blend a tincture or finely powdered herb into a
measured portion of the syrup and administer whenever
needed.

A Simply Made Herbal Syrup

1. Begin with an herbal decoction or infusion that has been
concentrated to about a half to a third volume (see
“Concentrates,” Chapter Twenty-Five).

2. To 500 ml (1 pint) of this concentrate, add about 30 to 60
ml (1 to 2 ounces) of honey and 30 to 60 ml (1 to 2 ounces) of
vegetable glycerin. Alter these amounts depending on the
consistency you desire.

3. Tinctures can be added to this syrup by adding 1 part of
tincture to 3 parts of syrup.

4. Even though the honey and glycerin (and the tincture’s
alcohol) will act to preserve this syrup, store it in the
refrigerator whenever possible.

An Embellished Syrup Made from Dried Herbs

1. Weigh out 60 Gm (2 0z.) of the dry herb or herbal mixture
and measure 1 liter (1 quart) of distilled water.

----- PAGE 394 -----
2. Mix and stir together the herb and water, then let this
mixture soak for a few hours if you have the time.

3. Place over a low heat and simmer the mixture slowly until
the liquid is reduced to about 1/2 original volume
(approximately 500 ml or 1 pint).

4. Remove from heat, strain, and press the herbs.
5. Measure the retrieved liquid and pour it back into the pot.

6. Add sweetener to the decoction at the ratio of 2:1 (2 cups
sweetener to 1 cup of liquid).

As sweeteners and preservatives, use any one or a blend of
honey, white or brown sugar, maple syrup, rice syrup, or
vegetable glycerin. This 2:1 proportion will create a very sweet
syrup. Use less sweetening if desired when refrigeration is
accessible.

7. Warm the decoction and sweetener(s) and mix them until
the sweetener is completely dissolved.

8. If you want to thicken the syrup further, simmer it over a
moderate heat for 20 to 30 minutes or until you attain the
desired consistency. If using raw honey, this last step will
destroy its active enzymes. To avoid this, merely warm the
syrup adequately to mix the honey and decoction.

9. At this point, you can add brandy (optional), approximately
6-8 tablespoonsful per pint of syrup.

Brandy is added for flavor and further preservative action. If
this is to be a cough syrup, brandy adds some muscle relaxant
and cough retardant properties. (There are some excellent-
tasting fruit- and spice-flavored brandies on the market.)

----- PAGE 395 -----
You might also want to add a fruit concentrate for flavor and
nutrients. This will dilute the syrup and make it more prone to
fermentation unless you compensate by adding more sugar,
glycerin, or brandy.

10. Once the syrup has cooled down, essential oils such as
Peppermint, Anise, Cardamom, or Ginger can be added for
flavor. Add 5 drops total of a single oil or a blend of oils per
pint of syrup. Add these only 1 drop at a time, and test the
flavor each time; these aromatic oils are extremely
concentrated, and they can easily overpower your syrup.

11. Remove the syrup from the heat and bottle it in clean
bottles for use.

A 5:1 (Syrup to Herb Ratio) Medicinal Syrup
This syrup will have a 1 to 2 teaspoons dose level.

1. Weigh 50 Gm of the cut herb or herb compound.
2. Measure 500 ml of distilled water.

3. Make a decoction that when completed is strained or
expressed.

4. Prepare a concentrate by placing the decoction into a water
bath, and at 140-160’ F., reduce it to 125 ml.

5. Transfer this concentrate to a saucepan and add 200 Gm of
white sugar.

6. Stir this mixture over a gentle heat until the sugar is
completely dissolved.

7. Remove from the heat, cover, and when cool you will have

----- PAGE 396 -----
250 ml of medicated syrup.
8. Pour into small storage bottles.

Using this method, I recently made a syrup from a decoction of
“Redwood Chai,” a non-caffeine blend of herbs (Carob, Ginger,
Cinnamon, Orange Peel, Clove, Chicory, Licorice, Cardamom,
and Fennel) which was formulated by Julie Rothman,
herbalist, and owner of Flower Power Teas in Santa Cruz,
California. The consequent Chai syrup quickly attained a
“nectar for the gods” status in my community; misty-eyed
recurrent tasters revered it as El Dorado, liquid Elysium,
Formicidae heaven ... the Kingdom had definitely come by
spoonfuls—I highly recommend it.

Garlic Syrup

This expectorant syrup is most useful for relieving spasmodic
cough and lung congestion, and will be found especially
appropriate for children.

Avoid using metallic containers or utensils when making this
syrup.

1 Slice and bruise 3 oz. of fresh Garlic.

2 Measure 1/2 pint of vinegar.

3 Measure 1 pound of white sugar.

4 Macerate the Garlic in the vinegar for four days.
5 Strain and press.

6 Add the sugar.

7 Agitate vigorously, or gently warm the liquid until the sugar

----- PAGE 397 -----
is fully dissolved.
8 Bottle in small clean bottles.

Compound Syrup of Blackberry Root
1. Weigh out 2 oz. of cut Blackberry root.

2. Combine with 3/4 oz. each of powdered Cinnamon, Cloves,
Nutmeg.

3. Simmer the above mixture in 1 pint of distilled water for 1
hour.

4. Strain and press.
5. Add 1 pound white sugar and dissolve it completely.
6. To this syrup add 1 1/2 fl. oz. of brandy.

7. To this mixture add 1 drop each of Clove essential oil and
Cinnamon essential oil.

This syrup supplies the well-known astringent virtues of
Blackberry; it is also aromatic and a gentle stimulant.

Black Cohosh Syrup
1. Measure 4 fl. 0z. of Black Cohosh tincture.

2. Add to 6 oz. of a prepared simple syrup.
3. Carefully evaporate to 8 oz. (1/2 pint).
4. Bottle in clean 2-oz. size bottles.

This makes a pleasant tasting syrup useful for coughs and
other respiratory afflictions. The addition of 1/2 fl. oz. of

----- PAGE 398 -----
Lobelia tincture to 1/2 pint of this syrup will give an
exceptional relaxing expectorant and antispasmodic syrup
useful for treating conditions of difficult breathing, alleviating
dry coughs, and calming irritable contractions of the
diaphragm.

Heras on THE “35 Herps AnD A Funcus List”

Tuar Are Weut Prepare As Syrups

Blackberry fruit
Black Cohosh
Burdock
Cayenne
Chamomile
Comfrey root
Dandelion root and leaf
Echinacea
Elder berries
Fennel
Hawthorn
Marshmallow
Mullein

Nettle
Peppermint
Plantain

St. John’s Wort
Uva Ursi
Valerian

----- PAGE 399 -----
Yellow Dock
Ginger

HERBAL HON.

Honey is deposited in honeycomb by the honeybee, Apis mellifica,
our planet s premier herbalists and medicine-makers. Honey is a
peculiar fluid, consistent with the other delightfully peculiar
products that honeybees gather and create, such as royal jelly,
propolis, pollen, and beeswax. In its freshly produced state honey is
fluid, but upon aging it separates into two layers, a rather solid
granular lower layer and a liquid upper layer. The granular layer is
composed principally of dextrose or grape sugar, the upper layer
being mostly levulose or fruit sugar. Honey, normally consisting of
70 or 80 percent sugar in an aqueous solution, has a sweet taste
(although I have a quart of decidedly bitter-tasting Dandelion honey
in my pantry) and a somewhat aromatic odor followed by a faint
acidity. In addition to its sugar content, honey consists of wax,
pollen, coloring, and aromatic constituents. It resembles sugar in its
properties, but it is more laxative. Honey is emollient, demulcent,
nutritive, and mildly laxative. Its emollient and demulcent
properties are most beneficial for relieving dryness and pain in the
throat and for treating cough and difficulty with swallowing.
Combining honey with a strong infusion of Sage is a classic
preparation for relieving hoarseness and respiratory congestion. The
eminent German hydro therapist, Father Kneipp, maintained that if
a little honey were added to herbal remedies, it would greatly
enhance their efficacy, as it acts as a medium to promote better
assimilation of the nutritive components with the body’s tissues.
The advantages of using honey over syrups as a simple vehicle lie
primarily in the user s belief system that honey is more nutritious
and health-promoting than white sugar. I am one of those who
believe this; however, I am also one who realizes how difficult it is
for bees to supplv enough honey for themselves as well as for all of

----- PAGE 400 -----
us. In light of this, I think that syrups are excellent delivery vehicles
that can be used more often, and the amount of sugar that is taken
in these instances is of relatively little consequence. Focus on health
and well-being; it deposes the tyranny of those little diet demons
our minds love to create.

Thank you little furry ones for the sweet nector of
your lives.

Hersat Honeys

To Prepare Herbal (Medicated) Honeys

Herbal (medicated) honeys are thick liquid preparations
closely allied to syrups, differing because honey is used as the
base instead of sugar. They are simply a mixture of honey with
certain medicinal agents (tinctures, glycerites, powders), and
are normally prepared extemporarily.

Glycerin is sometimes added to medicinal honey
preparations to prevent granulation and subsequent separation
of the honey into layers. Some folks add glycerin for the
purpose of better preservation (which is probably redundant
since honey is an excellent preservative agent on its own). The
glycerin is added in the proportion of 5 percent of the amount
of honey.

To Prepare Aromatic Honeys

Aromatic honeys are prepared by adding aromatic essential
oils to a honey-glycerin base. These aromatic honeys preserve
forever, and with the addition of the glycerin, will not readily
crystallize, so they need not be reliquefied by the use of heat
(which readily evaporates volatile oils).

----- PAGE 401 -----
Aromatic honeys are excellent to use as vehicles to deliver
essential oils for flavoring tea, coffee, salad dressing, hot
breakfast cereals, toasted raisin-cinnamon bagels, etc., and they
are well used as digestive aids taken after meals. Some
essential oils that are good to experiment with are: Cinnamon,
Ginger, Angelica, Peppermint, Bergamot, Rose, Lemon, Orange,
Geranium, Dill, and Cardamom.

To each 1/4 cup of honey add 1 or 2 drops of essential oil
and stir them in. As when flavoring a syrup, add the oil only
one drop at a time, for these oils are very intense, and with
some essential oils two drops can be too much (this is rectified
by adding more honey).

An oxymel is a specialized sweet and sour herbal honey, a sweet
honey mixed with a little sour vinegar. This combination is used as
a carrier for herbal infusions, decoctions, concentrates, tinctures, and
so forth. Oxymels are used as a gargle or as a vehicle for intense
herbal aids such as Garlic, Cayenne, and Lobelia.

Oxymers
To Prepare an Oxymel Base
1. Mix 1 pound honey with 1/2 pint vinegar.

2. Place the mixture in a pot and simmer to a consistency of
syrup.

3. To this carrier, one normally adds a medicinal agent
(infusion, decoction, concentrate, tincture) to prepare it as a

----- PAGE 402 -----
gargle or an expectorant medicine.

Garlic Oxymel by the Late Dr. John Christopher

Dilute a small portion; use this as a gargle and take 2
tablepoonsful internally.

1. Measure 8 oz. (250 ml) vinegar into a glass pot.

2. Add 1/4 oz. (7 Gm) crushed Caraway seeds and 1/4 oz.
crushed Fennel seeds.

3. Bring this mixture to a boil and simmer for 15 minutes.

4. Remove from the heat and add 11/2 oz. (45 Gm) of fresh
pressed Garlic.

5. Let this sit until cool.

6. Press and strain the liquid.

7. Add 10 oz. (300 Gm) of honey.

8. Place onto a low heat and simmer to a consistency of syrup.

Lobelia Oxymel by the Late Dr. William H. Cook
This is an effective preparation to use for relieving dry and
irritable coughs, and congestion of the lungs.

1. Macerate Lobelia (preferably the fresh plant if available; dry
plant works too) in enough apple cider vinegar to cover it
completely.

2. Press it after 7 to 14 days.

3. Mix with honey at the proportion of 3 pounds honey to 1
quart of tincture [for a smaller amount use 340 Gm (3/4 lb.) of

----- PAGE 403 -----
honey to 250 ml (8 oz.) of tincture].

4. Evaporate in a water bath to the consistency of thin
molasses.

5. Bottle and refrigerate.

ELECTUARIES

An electuary (more commonly referred to these days as a confection
or conserve) is a delivery vehicle that has been prepared by mixing
an unpleasant tasting, finely powdered herb with honey (sometimes
including a little sugar) or fruit pulp, creating a sweetened and
flavored mass that can be molded into portions about the size of a
marble (nib or an aggie-sized) suitable for oral administration.
When made with honey or the addition of glycerin, electuaries
retain their original soft condition for a long time; if made with
fruit pulp, the moisture gradually evaporates and the mass becomes
dry and hard. If essential oils are to be incorporated in an electuary,
they should first be triturated thoroughly with some sugar to ensure
their uniform distribution throughout the soft mass (see
“Trituration,” Chapter Twenty-Five).

If you’re close, the attempted metric/avoirdupois
conversions in this chapter might push you over
the edge. Sorry.

Execruaries

Rose Electuary

To make a Rose electuary from the petals of garden and/or
wild Roses, which is useful as a mildly astringent, pleasant-

----- PAGE 404 -----
tasting vehicle for deliver of other powders:
20 Rose petals in very fine #60 powder (2/3 02.) (see
Gm “Powdering,” Chapter Twenty-Five)

160
Gm

30 Gm_ honey (I 0z.)
40 ml_ Rosewater (I 1/3 fl-oz.)

finely powdered sugar (5 oz. +)

1. Heat the Rosewater to approximately 150° F. (65° Q);
remove from the heat.

2. Pour in the Rose powder and rub it to reduce the Roses to a
pulpy mash.

3. Gradually add the honey and sugar.

Orange Electuary

To make an Orange electuary for use to administer very bitter
powders:

1. Grate 120 Gm (4 oz.) of fresh outer peel of Orange.

2. Slowly add 360 Gm (12 oz.) of sugar, mixing it in
thoroughly.

Laxative Electuary
Standard dose is 15 to 30 Gm (1/2 to 1 0z.).

Sometimes honey and sugar are not necessary, as in the
following laxative electuary:

Aan

----- PAGE 405 -----
Gm

40 Gm
40 Gm
40 Gm

10 Gm

Prune deprived of seed

Dates deprived of seed
dried Fig
seedless Raisins

Senna in fine powder or Cascara sagrada in fine

powder

1. Pass all the ingredients through a small hand-cranked meat
grinder (attainable at most antique/collectible stores) to
produce a uniform paste.

2. Store in a tightly covered jar in refrigerator.

----- PAGE 406 -----


----- PAGE 407 -----
BATHS FOR
ATER THERAPY

I considered giving this chapter a controversial title, possibly
incorporating terms like passionate immersions, or wet bodies, or
secrets of water erotica revealed, for, as it is titled, on first
encounter many readers might pass over it (packaging is the gist of
most products these days). For the most part in our culture, we
have lost appreciation for and interest in the profound therapeutic

----- PAGE 408 -----
effects of simple hot, warm, and cold water applications. We have
forfeited most of our conscious knowledge of how to tap into the
healing energetics of water by merely varying its temperature,
getting in it for a short while and back out. This is unfortunate for,
with its characteristic ability to affect human circulation by
transferring heat to and from the body and from here to there in the
body, water therapy lies at the very heart of health maintenance
and natural medicine.

Water’s solvency and fluidity have been major players in most of
the medicinal preparations we have discussed so far, and in many
of them water is one of their primary ingredients. I am compiling
this chapter on baths and other forms of water application, because
intuitively it feels important also to explore the nature of water as
an externally applied tonic and medicine. My instincts make it clear
to me that simple water therapy, or hydrotherapy, is an important
component of any book that promotes homecrafted medicines and
independent domestic health care. I’ve learned a great deal by
undertaking this task, as I too had limited exposure to and
experience in using water/bath therapy. I have relied on the
publications in the early 1900s of professional practitioners of
hydrotherapy, such as physicians J. H. Kellogg, A. Stillé, and G. B.
Wood, along with the teachings of my now deceased friend, Wade
Boyle, N.D., along with other specific information that I found here
and there to guide me in my own _ understanding and
experimentation. So I offer you the following basic principles of
water therapy, and, after having applied much of it myself, I
wholeheartedly encourage you to work with this information to
further educate yourself about the phenomenal uses and pleasures
of full body and partial immersion water/bath therapy. At the very
least immerse yourself in the information about the strategy of the
“whole body, cold water plunge,” and then do it. I’m confident you
will enjoy your experiences as you experiment with these
techniques on your own wet body.

You'll need a good bath thermometer.

A chapter on hydrotherapy has to begin by first dipping its toe in
the water. Water is an enchanting phenomenon. exhibiting

----- PAGE 409 -----
remarkably diverse physical properties and modifications in its
chameleon-like chemical antics. In its pure state, water is a
transparent liquid, lacking color, taste, and smell. Pure water has
been highly esteemed by science’s assumption that its specific
gravity is unity (1.0), and forms the term of comparison for the
specific gravities of all other solids and liquids, earmarking water as
the apple of gravity’s eye.

Not to be totally unyielding, this provocative substance allows
itself to be compressed, but only to the merest extent. When
reduced to 32° F. (0° C.), water freezes and becomes solid, forming
transparent crystals of ice, and when raised to 212° F. (100° C.), it
boils and transforms into an elastic gas. Water’s thermo-antics have
also been honored by scientists by selecting it as their standard for
specific heat, marking it as the official glint in the sun’s resplendent
eye.

As steam, water’s bulk increases nearly 1700-fold, and its
celebrated liquid specific gravity diminishes to merely half that of
atmospheric air where it ascends sun bound, leaving gravity to court
other elements for the time being. This impetuosity is
understandable, for the essence of water’s parental lineage,
hydrogen and oxygen, is obviously a gaseous one, and it is only
judicious for an offspring to commingle with family whenever
possible. Then inevitably, while frolicking with its airy kin, gaseous
water condenses into minute drops (which explains why steam
appears opaque). And likewise, in a bigger picture, the over-
saturation of air with water vapor causes a similar condensation in
the atmosphere where water makes its appearance, this time with
an expansive gesture as opaque clouds, preparing for its inevitable
return as rain to the patient and willful arms of Earth’s gravity.

At the temperature of 39° F. (4° C.), pure water attains its
maximum density where one cubic centimeter weighs precisely one
gram, and increases its bulk and decreases its specific gravity when
either heated or cooled. Therefore, as steam, water expands and
rises into the air, and as ice it expands and floats upon itself.

In the world of liquids, gases, and chemical compounds, water is
definitely not known as abstinent. for it is a voracious entitv with

----- PAGE 410 -----
the power and appetite to dissolve many salts and more or less all
gases, including common air, the constituents of which are always
present in natural water. Therefore, natural water is rarely found in
its purest state.

Globally, water is forever uniformly present in the atmosphere in
the guise of an invisible vapor, even in the driest weather, and, as
we all have experienced, exerts a vital influence on comfort, and on
the animal and vegetable economy of our planet. Water unites with
other bodies either in liquid or solid form, producing in the former
case solutions, and in the latter case hydrates; therefore, when a
vegetable or animal body is deficient in water it is considered
dehydrated.

This chapter is both an ode to the mind boggling
restorative power of simple water baths and a
therapeutic reference for treating acute physical
discomforts and chronic maladies. But the heart of
the chapter is its introduction to you of the quick
cold-water plunge which is probably the most
efficient, reliable, and free health tonic known to
the human body. Enough said—see this page.

Water as the universal solvent has a profound influence in the
operations of nature. Water by far constitutes the major portion of
the mass of all living beings, and it is as essential to their organic
physical nature as it is to the molecular actions and movements by
which life is manifested. Water constitutes the basis of nearly all the
secretions of the body, and nine-tenths of the weight of the blood.
Consequently, water can be seen as an important article of food,
which not only directly supplies one constituent of the body but
also supplies a means of promoting the solution of solid food in the
gastrointestinal organs, facilitating its absorption. Water is also the
solvent of all the body’s secretions and excretions, and the vehicle
by which the excretions are ushered out of the body.

But obviously not all natural water is suitable for food. The

----- PAGE 411 -----
greater part of the water in the world is contained in the ocean;
another large portion consists of spring and river waters, which
(apart from the issue of pollution by civilized human beings) are
commonly so mineralized as to be unfit for ordinary drinking; or of
other water in certain sluggish rivers, stagnant ponds, and marshes,
which contain too large a portion of animal and vegetable matter to
be palatable or wholesome. (I would include chlorinated tap water
somewhere on the “unsuitable for human consumption” list too,
and I'd place artificially fluoridated water at the very top of that
list.)

SOURCES OF WATER FOR HUMAN USE

Common fresh water can be divided according to its source. We are
aware of rain, snow, spring, river, well, lake, and marsh water.
These divisions are not so useful, however, as the source of water is
not always indicative of its quality. From water’s extensive solvent
powers, it is obvious that in its natural state it must be more or less
contaminated with foreign matter. Common water from different
localities and sources possesses innumerable shades of differences.
What is more useful for us as consumers and manipulators of water
is to view water as soft and hard.

Soft water contains only a sparse amount of impurities, ordinarily
tastes good, and when used with soap readily forms lather. Hard
water is impregnated with mineral salts, most commonly sulfate of
lime, which often doesn’t taste so good, curdles soap, and is
relatively unfit for most domestic purposes.

Rainwater and snow water are the purest kinds of natural water;
in effect they are produced by natural distillation where ground
water evaporates, leaving any dissolved materials behind, condenses
in the atmosphere forming clouds, then returns to the earth as
relatively pure rain or snow. Rainwater, however, as it lingers in its
cloud form, ordinarily dissolves and thereby contains atmospheric
air. It is carbonic acid that is dissolved and gives this water its lively
fresh taste.

----- PAGE 412 -----
In its purest state, rainwater is best collected in large vessels away
from buildings and at a time well after the rain has first begun to
fall. Otherwise rainwater will be contaminated with the dust and
various organic and inorganic matters that float in the atmosphere
or have been dissolved in the air, and by impurities derived from
rooftops, etc. Speaking of rooftops, rainwater can be collected in a
relatively pure state even in cities by taking advantage of a heavy
rain after it has descended for a considerable time and washed
away every impurity, and is collected as it flows from roofs and
spouts.

Snow water has a peculiar taste, because when water freezes the
ice crystals formed are free of any and all compounds that may
have been dissolved in the water. Therefore, when snow is newly
melted it contains no air constituents (no dissolved carbonic acid)
and this accounts for its rather stale, lifeless taste. Melting snow and
exposing it to the air for some time allows it to take up the
constituent gases of the atmosphere, and it will taste like other
natural waters. Rain and snow water are both well used as food,
andin the preparation of herbal medicines, fomentations, and
baths. Water equal in purity to distilled water can be obtained by
melting perfectly clear and transparent ice under conditions that
protect it from dust and other impurities. Also sea water, with all
its dissolved salts and minerals, can yield ice of as great a purity as
river water (sea ice that is crystalline with a bluish cast has very
little salt in it—gray or opaque sea ice is salty).

Spring water’s purity and taste depend entirely on the strata
through which it flows; it is usually found to be purest when it
passes through sand or gravel. The refreshing taste of many spring
waters is mainly due to the presence of the carbonic acid they have
dissolved. This water usually contains a trace of common salt
(sodium chloride), and generally other impurities, depending on
the location of the spring. When these saline compounds (salts) are
increased beyond a certain quantity, the spring is called a mineral
spring where we collect various mineral waters, some of which we
bottle for drinking, or sit in at spas for pleasant, healthful soaking.

River water is generally less impregnated with salt matter than

----- PAGE 413 -----
spring water, due to its considerable proportion of rainwater and to
the fact its volume of water is so proportionally large compared to
the surface of its (mineral source) bed. However, even though river
water is normally freer from saline matter, it is more apt to have
certain insoluble matter of a vegetable and earthy nature
mechanically suspended in it, which frequently impair its
transparency.

Well water, like spring water, is liable to contain various
impurities. The purity of well water is often proportional to the
depth of the well and to the consistency with which the water is
drawn and used. Artesian or overflowing wells and springs, because
of their great depth, generally bring forth deliciously pure water.

Lake water (aside from the issue of pollution by civilized human
beings) offers the human community very pure and wholesome
water.

Marsh water is generally stagnant and contains vegetable remains
undergoing decomposition to the delight of innumerable fascinating
plants as well as a myriad of mud and muck-seeking, jumping,
scooting, moist, and warty creatures. However, this water is
considered unwholesome for most human beings’ domestic and
medicinal purposes.

Water, therefore, is known as good (for Homo sapiens’ use) if it is
lively, clear, without smell, and does not curdle soap; and upon
being evaporated to dryness, leaves an insignificant residue. This
form of water answers well for the cooking of grains and
vegetables, cleaning up, satisfying thirst, hydrating one’s body, and
for the preparation of herbal potions and healthful baths.

EFFECT OF WATER ON THE HUMAN BODY AS A TONIC AND
RESTORATIVE AGENT

In general, water acts primarily as a direct means to modify the
temperature of the body. Water at a temperature higher than the
body is a direct stimulant of the circulation, and therefore
stimulates all the bodv’s functions. Cold water. on the other hand,

----- PAGE 414 -----
diminishes a portion of the body’s heat, and therefore is a direct
tranquilizer or sedative to circulation and other functions. However,
when applied correctly, cold can indirectly become a potent
stimulant of bodily functions and a healthful tonic. This happens
because a salient property of a living organism is to react against
whatever tends to depress it. Ordinarily, the more vigorously and
abruptly the depressing influence is exerted the more powerful the
organism’s reaction. (That can give wedlock a run for its money.)
Therefore, cold applications to the body in a certain measure and
for a given time produce a diminished activity of function, which is
quickly followed by a degree of activity greater than that which
originally existed. In this circumstance, the primary effect of heat
and the secondary effect of cold resemble one another quite closely.
However, cold and heat are relative terms; they do not designate
any definite temperature. So we can use 98.6° F., the approximate
temperature of the human body in health, as a standard and
whatever is higher than this may be described as heat; whatever is
lower as cold.

Before you read on: Briefly apply very cold water,
ice, or snow to a portion of your skin. Quickly,
you will feel a stimulation there that mimics the
sensation of the application of heat. This
happened because the interior of your body
insists on maintaining a certain average
temperature throughout itself, including the skin,
and quickly acts to replace the lost heat by a
thermic reaction where in the internal tissues
generate heat and direct it to the chilly zone.

The term bath means the complete or partial immersion of the
body in a fluid or in a vaporous medium such as steam. The effects
of different baths on the system are very dissimilar according to
their temperature. the area of the bodv being immersed. and the

----- PAGE 415 -----
duration of time the individual is subjected to the bath’s influence.
For consistent remedial results, the original temperature of the bath
(tepid, warm, or hot) is to be maintained during the whole time the
individual remains in the water. At the end of a few minutes, the
temperature should be tested with a thermometer and, if required,
hot water added. The sensations of the bather are usually an
inaccurate thermometer.

Heat and cold, as noted before, are relative terms. Objects are
recognized as cold by the body when they have a temperature less
than that of the skin—and the reverse. For convenience in this
discussion of the physiological effects of water, as well as for
describing therapeutic application of various forms of baths, we can
use the terms that have been commonly applied: very cold, cold,
cool, tepid, warm, hot, very hot. It is not easy, however, to fix the
limits of temperature to which each term should be applied, and
this seems to have given rise to much discussion in the
hydrotherapy world.

The following table of temperatures appears agreeable to most
hydrotherapy texts and is convenient for our practical application:

Very cold 32° to 50° F.

Cold 50° to 65° F.
Cool 65° to 75° F.
Tepid 75° to 85° F.
Warm 85° to 98° F.
Hot 98° to 104° F.

Very hot 104° F. and above.

WHOLE BODY BATHS

----- PAGE 416 -----
Tue Cow Bar (Quick Cou Puunce)
(approximarety 32° 10 65° F.)

The effects of cold water on the living body are complex. They
include the direct abstraction of heat, and are followed by a
multitude of fascinating reflex effects due to the mutually
responsive relations between the skin and the body’s internal
organs. The interior of a healthy body maintains a certain average
temperature or within two or three degrees of it, in spite of the
temperature of the surrounding medium. The loss of heat by the
contact of cold water with the skin is more or less completely
balanced by the generation of heat through the organic changes
which are steadily active in every tissue. This immediate and
powerful reaction of the body to cold, along with its efforts to
replace the heat that has been lost by restoring the equilibrium of
the body temperature, is referred to, in hydrotherapy circles, as a
thermic reaction.

The brief application of cold to the skin is so quickly followed by
thermic reaction that the effects seem to be those of direct
stimulation, mimicking the body’s initial reactions to the
application of heat. However, when the body undergoes a continual
abstraction of heat by a prolonged immersion in cold water (or any
cold medium), all the vital processes are depressed; there is a
diminished production of heat, the skin grows pale and shriveled,
the internal organs are overloaded with blood, the pulse beats
slowly, the secretions are diminished, and the muscles grow
lethargic.

When a person plunges into a cold bath, she or he is first sensible
of a sudden sensation of cold upon the surface, accompanied by an
oppression of breathing, causing this function to be performed in
convulsive gasps. This is called the shock, and is caused by a rapid
contraction of the cutaneous capillaries pushing a rush of blood
back to the lungs and other internal organs. In a short time the
difficulty of breathing disappears, the temperature becomes
agreeable, and if the person now leaves the water, a warmth of the
surface of the bodv comes on, termed the glow or the reaction. This

----- PAGE 417 -----
is followed by a sense of invigoration of the entire system and an
upliftment of the mind and emotions. (Try it, you'll love the glow,
invigoration, and upliftment parts.)

However, should the person remain too long in the water, for
whatever reason, another train of symptoms becomes apparent. The
sensation of cold soon turns to an unpleasant degree of chilliness,
followed by tremors. Soon, the surface of the body shows a bluish
tint as the blood accumulates in the internal organs. Upon leaving
the water there is no reaction, or at best a feeble one; the surface of
the body remains cold; the extremities benumbed; and headache
and difficult respiration ensue with a sense of depression and
lassitude.

The goal in proposing a health enhancing quick-cold (plunge)
bath is the tonic influence produced by a sudden, powerful
impression on the nervous system, followed by due reaction. A
tonic is an agent which, systematically applied, gives tone to the
tissue, aiding in the restoration and maintenance of the functions of
nutrition and assimilation and increases the body’s vital resistance.
The tonic effect of cold water is constant and regular whenever
water is applied at a temperature below that of the body.

Cold water is a physiological tonic that awakens quintessential
nervous activity without putting a burden on any vital organs and
without hampering the activity of any bodily function. The tissue
activity set up in the heat-producing tissues of the muscles (as the
result of exposure of the skin to a cold medium for a short time) is
participated in by every cell and tissue in the entire body.

In my opinion, the glow of exhilaration, and the
invigoration and buoyancy of body and mind
which accompany the reaction from a quick
immersion in cold water, along with good food
that you relish eating, pursuing enjoyable exercise
and periods of repose, drinking lots of pure
water, establishing and maintaining adequate
intestinal flora, focusing on happy thoughts, and

----- PAGE 418 -----
playing in the sunlight are the most valuable
means of arousing to activity any and all flagging
energies of the body. These are the most simple,
inexpensive, and reliable means for individuals to
prune chronic and acute disease off their limb of
the family tree.

The cold plunge produces a reliable tonic effect
by lifting the body’s whole vital economy to a
higher level and increasing vital resistance to all
the causes of the pathological processes.

By quickly touching the body’s whole skin surface with waters
having temperatures of 90° F. or below (the more below the better,
short of bouncing on ice), the skin, with its vast network of sensory,
motor, sympathetic, vasomotor, and thermic nerves, arouses every
nerve center, every sympathetic ganglion, every sensory and motor
filament in the entire body to heightened life and activity. Every
blood vessel and cell in the entire body is awakened and quickened
with vital impulse. The reaction produced by tonic application fills
the skin with blood, and if it is repeated daily the blood is finally
fixed in the skin, rendering the skin vibrantly wholesome by
permanently increasing its vascular activity, relieving internal
congestion. Tissue building is accelerated, more blood is in
circulation, more oxygen is absorbed, more CO, and urea are
eliminated, and all the vital functions are quickened, thus causing
the stream of life to flow at a more rapid rate.

The reaction produced by tonic application fills
the skin with blood, and if it is repeated daily the
blood is finally fixed in the skin, rendering the
skin vibrantly wholesome.

When there is any serious infirmity of the heart,

----- PAGE 419 -----
lungs, or kidneys, or illness of any organ essential
to life, the temperature of a bath should not be
lower than 75° F. (a cool bath). If local
applications of cold water cause any chilliness at
all they should be discontinued.

Early morning baths or plunges in the sea, lake, or river, in a tub,
or a naked roll in the snow are immensely invigorating; and in the
summer months cold baths before bedtime are of great service by
rendering sleep more sound and refreshing.

Any individual who has been wearied by laborious effort in a
heated atmosphere will find her or his muscular strength
immediately reinforced by a cold spray, shower, or bath. When
fatigued, a quick application of cold water to the face and head has
a delightfully refreshing effect. The relief, brightened expression,
and increased vigor which follows this simple bathing of the head,
face, and neck with cold are the results of the reflex stimulation of
the nerve centers of the brain and spinal cord and the tonic reaction
which follows such an application. When the whole surface of the
body instead of merely a small area is acted upon, the effect is
proportionally greater.

Water, by its accessibility, its convenience in use, its abundance,
and its high specific heat, more readily lends itself to human beings
in producing restorative and permanent tonic effects than any other
agent.

However, it must be pointed out that it is essential to the efficacy
and safety of a cold bath that a body’s stock of vitality must be
sufficient to create, immediately after its immersion in the water,
those general sensations of warmth and invigoration pictured
above. In other words, cold baths are always contraindicated when,
from debility, the system is too weak to produce a reactive glow. In
all seasons, baths at a lower temperature than 50° F. are considered
unsafe for children and for old persons who are not in good health.
Extremely feeble persons are in the greatest need of tonic treatment,
and vet have the least tolerance for cold water. These folks must be

----- PAGE 420 -----
attended to by an experienced hydrotherapist who knows how to
employ the gentlest measures for administering tonic applications,
such as cold wet-hand rubs, cold friction (rubbing the body with
coarse material dipped in cool water), the salt glow (rubbing the
skin with moist salt and sprayed with cool water which produces a
circulatory reaction), and alternate hot and cold applications to the
spine.

When there is any serious infirmity of the heart, lungs, or kidneys,
or illness of any organ essential to life, the temperature of a bath
should not be lower than 75° F. (a cool bath). If local applications
of cold water cause any chilliness at all they should be
discontinued.

It is important to mention the necessity of avoiding the use of the
general cold bath in cases of extreme exhaustion from violent
exercise, or when, with or without exhaustion, a sensation of
chilliness exists. A cold application should never be used when the
surface of the skin is covered with cold perspiration, or
immediately after a meal.

Some techniques and physical conditions that aid the energies of
the body so that it can develop a prompt and vigorous reaction,
making the toning energy of a cold bath most efficient:

Before the bath

+ Wear warm clothing or expose oneself to the air of a warm room.

+ Take a short hot bath or shower of some sort. If preferred, begin
with a shower at about the temperature of the skin, and gradually
increase it. A very high temperature may be borne this way without
pain. Raising the temperature of the skin has great value as a
preparation for the application of cold. The skin is not only
rendered more susceptible to the influence of cold, but is prepared
to react after a cold application because of the increased nervous
and vascular activity, and the large amount of heat stored up. When
there is rheumatism with painful joints. or the skin is cold. fatigue.

----- PAGE 421 -----
neuralgia, anemia, or lack of energy, this preliminary heating of the
skin is of the greatest importance and value.

+ Drink hot water or some other hot beverage.

+ Exercise more or less vigorously according to one’s strength, but
not so much as to bring on perspiration or fatigue. Vigorous
exercise or a hot bath taken just prior to a cold bath increases the
initial rise of temperature because muscular activity increases heat
production to such a marked degree that the cold application finds
the heat-producing process already in full play. Hence, it is more
able to produce a strong thermic reaction.

+ Friction of the skin until warm and well reddened.
+ Having warm, dry, or slightly moist skin.

+ Being in a state of general health and vigor.

Pertaining to the bath itself

+ The water should be a low temperature (the lower the
temperature the more prompt the reaction).

+ Wet the head before the rest of the body.

+ Immersion should be short and sudden.

After the bath to encourage reaction

+ Employ heat in the form of warm clothing, or hot, dry air, and/or
by drinking a hot beverage (a steaming cup of green tea or hot Chai
gives supreme pleasure at this time).

+ Exercise vigorously.

+ Brisk friction of the skin surface with the hand. rough towel. or

----- PAGE 422 -----
skin brush.

+ A high external temperature of whatever means available, favors
reaction, both by lessening heat elimination and by increasing heat
production.

Conditions to take into consideration which can prevent or delay
the thermic reaction

+ Old age, not necessarily referring to the number of years an
individual has lived, but more specifically to the condition of his or
her arteries. Individuals with progressed hardening of the arteries
react with difficulty, and thus very cold baths must be avoided
unless the area of the body immersed in the bath is very small.

+ Infancy, very young children react poorly.

+ Exhaustion, either of a temporary nature from excessive exercise,
or from lack of sleep, or of extreme nervous exhaustion due to the
weak condition of the nerve centers upon which prompt reaction
depends.

* Obesity, due to relative anemia of the skin

+ Unhealthy or inactive skin

+ Very low temperature of the skin

+ Profuse perspiration, but only when accompanied by great fatigue
+ Extreme nervous irritability or distress

+ An immediately preceding or impending chill

+ Extreme aversion to cold applications

A tepid bath can soothe and invigorate a tired

----- PAGE 423 -----
laborer and uplift a weary traveler following a
long or stressful journey.

A simple method for testing a person’s ability to react healthfully
to a cold immersion is as follows:
+ Dip the corner of a towel in ice-water.

+ Hold the saturated towel against the bared forearm of the person
for one minute, covering a surface of at least ten or twelve square
inches.

+ Do not rub the surface, simply maintain contact of the cold wet
towel with the skin.

+ On withdrawing the towel, dry the surface by light pressure with
the dry end of the towel.

+ Cover to prevent slow cooling by evaporation, and note the length
of time required for the occurrence of reaction, as shown by the
return of redness and natural heat.

+ A good reaction should show distinct reddening of the surface
within 1 or 2 minutes after the application of ice water. General
chilliness produced by this application indicates an irritability of
the nerve centers and of the vasomotor nerves which regulate the
contraction and expansion of the blood vessels, along with an inept
activity of the reflexes. A mottled blueness shows considerable
cardiac weakness.

Tue Coot Bata
(approximatety 65° To 75° r.)

The actions and uses of the cool bath are similar to the cold bath,
but they are less powerful. They are, therefore, better used for
children, for training those individuals who have a strong aversion
to cold, and for those who are somewhat debilitated.

----- PAGE 424 -----
Tue Ter Batu
(approxmatety 75° To 85° F.)

The temperature of this bath is closely approaching that of the
body, therefore the shock and subsequent reaction are slight. This
bath is not calculated to have much modifying influence on the heat
of the body; rather, its peculiar effects are employed more to soften
and cleanse the skin. However, in spite of the fact that the tepid
bath is generally employed for comfort and cleanliness and not as a
remedial agent, for frail persons and very young children, it might
be better suited than lower temperature baths.

To help bolster the health and vigor of the more delicate
individual, it is best to use this bath about noon, when the first
process of digestion of breakfast is over; immediately after the bath
take a brisk walk in the open air. In cases of fatigue and irritation
from overexertion or a long journey, this tepid bath can be quite
beneficial to soothe, invigorate, and uplift the worker and traveler.

Tue Warm Batu
(approxmatety 85° To 98° F.)

The temperature of the warm bath, though below that of normal
body heat, nevertheless produces a sensation of warmth, as its
temperature is above that of the skin’s surface. The warm bath
cannot be deemed, strictly speaking, a stimulant. The first effect of a
warm bath is to produce a sensation of warmth upon the surface of
the body which diminishes any tenseness of pulse. It also
diminishes the frequency of the pulse (especially if previously
accelerated), slows down the respiration, lessens the heat of the
body, and relaxes the skin. The circulation in the skin is noticeably
affected, and the bulk of the body is increased as evidenced by the
increased pressure of any snug-fitting bracelets and of rings worn on
the fingers or toes (it snugs up certain body piercings as well).

With regard to using a bath to help reduce fever. a cool or cold

----- PAGE 425 -----
bath is not recommended. A bath of 88° to 95° F., which would
produce little or no fall of temperature in a healthy person, seems
to decrease temperature in one who is experiencing fever (for
treating recurrent or intermittent-type fevers, see the section below,
“Partial Body Baths, Employing Cold Water”). When a person’s
temperature is three or four degrees above normal body
temperature, the difference in the temperature of the hot skin of his
or her body and that of the bath water is much greater than
ordinary, and consequently the temperature-reducing effect of the
bath is proportionately greater. (A water temperature of 80° to 85°
F. makes an impression on the hot skin of a nervous, feverish
individual similar to that produced by water at a temperature five
or even ten degrees lower on a normal person’s skin.) Baths of 88°
to 92° F. are highly effective in reducing temperature if sufficiently
prolonged (30 to 45 minutes); a bath of this temperature has the
advantage that it does not provoke a thermic reaction to any
considerable degree and therefore does not increase heat
production either during or after the bath. This bath is usually
tolerated without difficulty by feeble individuals experiencing fever
who would do poorly with a more intense application, and will be
effective in lowering their body temperature if needed.

The secondary effects of prolonged immersion in a warm bath
are muscular relaxation, sometimes to a considerable degree. Even
after leaving the bath, there is an inclination to lassitude with a
tendency to perspiration which can continue for some time—a
pleasant experience. This bath often acts as a soothing remedy,
producing a proclivity to sleep, and helps relieve certain diseased
actions and states accompanied by abnormal irritability. This makes
a warm bath quite helpful in eruptive fever conditions (such as
measles) in which the pulse is frequent, the skin exceptionally hot
and dry, and the general condition characterized by restlessness. The
restorative effects of a warm bath depend on its temperature and
the time a person remains in it. Twenty to twenty-five minutes
(making sure to maintain the temperature of the water at 85° to 98°
F.) is commonly recommended, but this is best regulated by
whatever effect is being produced.

----- PAGE 426 -----
Warm baths are beneficial in the onset of any inflammation of
mucous membranes, especially those of the nose and throat, in
some congestion of internal organs, chronic rheumatism, and in
spasmodic afflictions, especially of children. These baths are
remarkably beneficial for relieving convulsions in children
(convulsions may be very serious and need medical diagnosis); they
not only relax spasms, but they soothe nervous irritation. If the
convulsions are severe, it is helpful to also apply cold water to the
head.

A bath of 88° to 95° F., which would produce
little or no fall of temperature in a healthy
person, seems to decrease temperature in one
who is experiencing fever.

The secondary effects of prolonged immersion in
a warm bath are muscular relaxation, sometimes
to a considerable degree.

When a child is given a warm bath, care must be taken not to
expose him or her to the cold air for the purposes of drying the
body. The best technique is to envelop the child in a warm flannel
sheet or warm blanket (including a huge wraparound hug with the
gesture), and place him or her in bed at once. This way the child
will not get chilled.

Warm baths are contraindicated in lung illness or when there is
congestion or an engorgement of blood in the head.

Tue Hor Batu
(approxmatety 98° ro 104+° F.)
Water is recognized as hot when its temperature is above the

temperature of the surface of the body, or between 98° to 104° F.
Above 104° F. it is termed as very hot. Aside from the healthy,

----- PAGE 427 -----
stimulating reaction generated by the body from a quick cold bath
immersion, the hot bath is far more stimulating than the preceding
baths. This is evidenced by the excitement of the pulse, the
quickening of respiration, the sensation of fullness in the head, the
flushing of the face, the reddening of the skin, profuse perspiration,
and the throbbing of cerebral vessels. At a temperature of 120° F. a
full-water bath becomes unendurable and hazardous for most
individuals, although small areas (as in the hand or foot bath, or in
the application of a fomentation) can be gradually trained to
endure a temperature of 130° to 135° F. Vapor (steam) baths,
Turkish baths, and saunas can be tolerated and enjoyed at
temperatures of 112° to 120° F., and up to 220° or even 250° F. for
a short time by trained persons. I’ve actually met some of those
puzzling individuals who enjoy that experience.

Heat is primarily an excitant. It is the most powerful of all vital
excitants, as evidenced by the heat of the sun being the direct source
of animal and vegetable life, stimulating all protoplasmic activity.
In the human organism, heat can increase vital activity, elevate the
temperature, and excite the brain and nerve centers.

The secondary effect of heat is depressant, manifested by the
body’s atonic reaction to it (the reverse of the tonic reaction is
discussed in the section on cold baths). This atonic reaction shows
itself as lowered temperature manifested through reflex action,
which produces lessened heat production and increased heat
elimination with general diminished tissue activity.

A general application of heat first slows, then quickens the pulse.

Short hot applications to the skin surface cause dilation of the
small veins, which draws blood from the internal parts and
increases the excitability and energy of voluntary skeletal muscles.
These short hot applications also powerfully excite the nerves and
nerve centers, and these excitant effects are soon followed by
depressant effects or atonic reaction.

Prolonged hot applications increase heat production and can give
rise to mixed effects of excitation and exhaustion, either of which
may predominate. Excitation may involve circulation, respiration,
and heat production. Exhaustion may involve nerve impulses and

----- PAGE 428 -----
muscles.

Prolonged hot application lessens the energy and excitability of
voluntary skeletal muscles. Very hot applications increase the
excitability of the involuntary smooth muscles. Neutral
temperatures have no influence upon the excitability of the
voluntary muscles; the sedative effect produced by neutral
temperatures depends rather upon the influence on the nerves of
the skin.

Precautionary techniques

A hot bath should never be greatly prolonged, because baths at any
temperature above that of the body cause a rapid accumulation of
heat and rise of temperature. This can mimic the unpleasant
symptoms and effects of sunstroke. The duration of the hot bath
should be 5 to 20 minutes according to the temperature. If the
intention of a hot bath is mainly to induce excitement, it should be
of short duration. The bather is not to be exposed to its action long
enough to cause exhaustion. When the sensation of heat is very
great or one feels strong palpitations of the heart, it is time to leave
the bath.

Before immersing oneself into a hot bath, the head should be
rubbed with hot water. This relaxes the blood vessels of the head
and lightheadedness (anemia of the brain) is avoided. While
partaking in a full hot bath, care must then be taken to avoid
cerebral congestion. To prevent this over-engorgement of the blood
vessels in the brain, apply a cold compress or ice-cap to the head
when hot applications are being made to any large area of the skin.
It is also important to avoid overexcitement of the heart. Therefore,
in general, very hot applications are contraindicated in cases of
weak heart, arteriosclerosis, advanced age if debilitated, and infancy
(below seven years), and also with folks previously injured by
sunstroke or heatstroke.

The hot immersion bath is probably most useful for producing
powerful eliminative effects primarily through increased sweating.

----- PAGE 429 -----
This bath is taken at 104° F. and above for 10 minutes. When
followed by a dry pack, this bath is very efficient for promoting
intense sweating. A dry pack consists of completely enveloping a
person after a hot bath in a cotton sheet and warm dry blankets; the
head only is excluded. A cool damp cloth should be placed on the
person’s forehead.

The hot bath is also a powerful derivative in that it can draw
blood and other fluids from one part of the body to relieve
congestion in another. I’ve read a number of reports where this has
been used successfully in treating bronchitis and bronchial
pneumonia in children; it relieves the overfilled vessels of the lungs
by congesting the vessels of the skin and muscles. This effect is
manifested very quickly as the child’s coughing stops and the
breathing becomes easier. The child is placed in a bath of 104° to
106° F. and removed as soon as there is a strong reddening of the
skin. This can be done 2 to 4 times within a 24-hour span as
necessary. The child may be placed in the bath up to the pit of the
stomach while cool water is gently poured over the upper part of
the body.

The hot immersion bath has proved itself valuable in relieving
suppressed menstruation and amenorrhea (the absence of the
menses). This bath is administered at the time menstruation is due
at 101° to 105° F. for a half hour or more. This may be repeated
twice a day for two or three days in succession. A hot bath taken at
102° to 112° F. for 15 minutes is also an effective measure for
dysmenorrhea (difficult and painful menstruation) with scanty flow.
And the hot bath may also be administered in painful menstruation
when the flow is profuse, but when using it for this purpose it
should be of a short duration of only 3 or 4 minutes at a
temperature of 105° to 110° F.

The hot immersion bath is probably most useful
for producing powerful eliminative effects
primarily through increased sweating.

----- PAGE 430 -----
Heat is primarily an excitant. The secondary effect
of heat is depressant, manifested by the body’s
atonic reaction to it. This is the reverse of the
tonic reaction of cold water.

The very hot bath above 104° F. for 5 to 7 minutes followed by
rubbing the chest and body with a coarse towel or some other type
of friction device relieves congestion of the mucous membrane
when dealing with chronic bronchitis. If this condition is
complicated with asthma, this technique generally affords prompt
relief. Following this, the individual should be gently cooled and oil
rubbed on the skin.

For relieving the discomforts of chronic rheumatism, the hot bath
at 102 to 106° F. can be quite helpful. Rubbing the joints with a
coarse cloth or with the hands and massaging the joints during the
bath aids the circulatory reaction and increases the bath’s beneficial
effect. A prolonged tepid shower is recommended following this
hot bath.

In muscular rheumatism, the hot bath relieves the pain by
encouraging the elimination of the toxins that are the source of the
condition and by relieving congestion with its derivative effects.

In gastric and intestinal colic, stomach and intestinal pain are
quickly relieved by the very hot bath up to 110° F. for 10 to 15
minutes.

The hot bath is also valuable as a palliative measure in cases of
gallstones and kidney stones.

The pain of cystitis or inflammation of the bladder is diminished
by taking a very hot bath of 104° F. and above, but this condition is
aggravated by cold, so the gradual cooling to a neutral temperature
is imperative. Other measures (herbal nutrition and emotional
upliftment) are well used concurrently to remove the causes of the
inflammation.

Heat prepares the skin for cold applications, rendering them
more acceptable to those individuals who feel resistance to cold
applications. As discussed in the section on cold baths, an initial

----- PAGE 431 -----
application of heat assists the tonic reaction one will experience
from a quick cold application to the skin.

Hot baths are contraindicated in cases of organic diseases of the
brain or spinal cord, such as sclerosis and inflammation of the
spinal cord, and in cases of cardiac weakness and hypertrophy, and
arteriosclerosis. In feverish disorders, as the body temperature is
rapidly increased, hot baths are naturally contraindicated.

Comparative Summary or THE Cuter Errecrs oF

Coup ann Heat

From Rational Hydrotherapy by J.H. Kellogg

coLD HEAT

General General

Primarily a depressant. oo, .
oo, Primarily an excitant. Short
Short application is an Co.

. . application is a depressant by
excitant by tonic . .
. atonic reaction. Prolonged
reaction. Prolonged oa . .

oo, application is excitant and
application is a
then depressant
depressant

Special Special

Skin: Action, diminished . oo. _
_ . Skin: Action, increased activity.
activity. Reaction, . a wo
. . Reaction, diminished activity,
increased activity, oa. ae

a sae diminished sensibility
diminished sensibility

Heart: First quickened, then Heart: First slowed, then

----- PAGE 432 -----
slowed. Increased force quickened. Decreased force

Vessels: Action, contraction. Vessels: Action, contraction then
Reaction, dilation dilation. Reaction, contraction

Nerves: Benumbs and .

. __ Nerves: Excites. Depresses by

paralyzes Excites by tonic . .
. atonic reaction

reaction

Muscles: Short application co.
. oa. Muscles: Short application
increases excitability and
. lessens fatigue effects.
capacity Prolonged
Prolonged lessened
diminishes capacity and

excitability excitability and capacity

Lungs: Slows and deepens _ Lungs: Quickens and facilitates

respiration. Increases respiration. Diminishes
amount of respired air. amount of respired air.
Increases CO, Decreases CO

Stomach: Increased HCL and Stomach: Decreased HCL and
motor activity motor activity

. ____ Kidneys: Renders anemic and
Kidneys: Congests and excites
lessens activity
Body heat: Short application Body heat: Short application
increased heat production. diminished heat production.
Prolonged, diminished Prolonged, increased heat
heat production production

----- PAGE 433 -----
Blood: Increased blood
Blood: Decreased blood count,
count, especially

leukocytes especially leukocytes

Metabolism: Increased CO2. Metabolism: Decreased CO3.
Increased urea and Increased urea and general
improved oxidation protein waste

Reaction consists of a series of vital processes following the
application of either a hot or cold medium to the skin or the
mucous membrane. The reflex vital activities induced by cold
applications are much more pronounced than those by heat,
and they differ in their character, depending on a variety of
circumstances as discussed above in the section titled “The
Cold Bath.” However, the vital reactions produced by
applications of heat are clearly defined and quite constant in
character, and these may be advantageously utilized.

Tonic reaction of body to cold Atonic reaction of body to heat
1. Vasodilatation 1. Vasoconstriction
. Skin red . Skin pale
. Pulse slowed . Pulse rate increased
. Skin action decreased

. Temperature lowered

2
3
. Arterial tension increased 4. Arterial tension diminished
5.
6. Temperature lowered
7.

2,
3.
4.
5. Skin action increased
6.
7. Feeling of invigoration . Languor

8. Muscular capacity 8. Muscular capacity
increased decreased

----- PAGE 434 -----
9. Amount of respired air 9. Amount of respired air

increased decreased

10. Heat production increased 10. Heat production decreased

From the above it is apparent that the general and usual
reaction effects of heat are of an atonic or depressant character.
For most purposes it is doubtless true that the tonic reaction
effects resulting from quick cold application are to be
preferred to those from hot applications; nevertheless (as
discussed in the section—“The Hot Bath”), the peculiar effects
obtainable from heat are sometimes better suited to the case in
hand than those arising from cold. Often the dread of cold
water on the part of an individual can be so intense it makes
its use inadmissible without a course of gradual training. In this
case the effects obtainable from heat are particularly
serviceable, and its employment may prevent the development
of an irreversible aversion to cold.

----- PAGE 435 -----
PARTIAL BODY BATHS

Ewptoyinc Corp WatER

A single short application of cold water brought in contact with the
general surface of the body is always restorative and invigorating in
its influence. According to the circumstances under which it is
experienced, the actions of cold water can be stimulant, astringent,
tonic, refrigerant, sedative, or debilitating. Relying on these actions,
cold water can be used to refresh and invigorate after hard labor, to
check feverish and inflammatory processes, to stimulate a sluggish
and overburdened nervous system, to arrest spasm, to relieve
congestion and pain, or to diminish excessive secretions and
bleeding. A cold water bath seems to energize whatever you decide
to do following its application; if you choose to be mellow, it
relaxes you, if you want to be activated, it stimulates you.

Cold water is one of the best applications for a variety of local
inflammations, such as burns, scalds, chafed skin, and the stings of
insects. Cold is one of the most immediate and potent means of
arresting bleeding, whether from the lungs, stomach, bowels
(bleeding from these organs can be serious problems and need
medical diagnosis), nose, uterus, or from wounds. In such cases it
should be applied as near as possible to the source of bleeding. A
prolonged application to the upper portion of the back relieves
congestion of the nasal mucous membrane, and is therefore useful
in nosebleed. A friend of mine, Dr. Don, has been a practicing
physician for more years than he probably cares to mention. He
uses ice as his initial first aid treatment. He explains that the simple
application of ice promotes the healing process of all forms of
injury as it cleans the wound site, reduces the onset of
inflammation, inhibits the action of opportunistic microorganisms,
arrests bleeding, and hastens the repair of tissue. I suggest applying
the ice (cold) treatment for 5 to 10 minutes. When it is removed,
the body’s natural thermic reaction will kick in (see discussion of
thermic reaction in “Whole Body Baths”), raise the temperature of

----- PAGE 436 -----
the area, and enhance vascular activity, quicken vital functions, and
promote rapid delivery of the body’s healing agents for efficient
repair.

Cold water in the form of baths and wet wrappings is well
employed in many cases of recurrent or intermittent fevers where
there is a fall of temperature to normal at periodical intervals, as in
malarial fevers. The use of cold water as a drink for tending to
fevers is instinctual as well as reasonable.

It is possible to induce a warming reaction in cold body parts by
rubbing them with snow or ice in a warm room, and you can warm
cold feet by taking off shoes and stockings and rubbing your bare
feet with snow, then immediately drying and dressing them again to
promote a thermic reaction.

The application of cold fomentation around inflamed joints or
soon after an acute injury to a joint is of great benefit as an
astringent agent to help contain swelling, pain, and inflammation.
To restrain local inflammatory processes, thereby relieving the pain
and swelling of a sprained or strained joint, keep the sprained part
raised high, and during the first 24 hours soak the joint in cold
water or wrap it with a cold or iced fomentation (so as to suppress
as much as possible the body’s natural warming reaction to cold).
Then, after the first day, use hot soaks.

The repressive power of cold water is reliable in the treatment of
burns and scalds. One need apply the cold water immediately after
the injury and continue this steadily. This will help remove the heat
of the burn, lessen inflammation, and reduce damage to tissue.

The sitz bath has fallen into disuse in our
professional health care system, as has
hydrotherapy in general, due most likely to its
relatively labor-intensive nature.

Heatstroke or sunstroke is an emergency, and first aid measures
need to be initiated as soon as possible. In this situation there is not
only an excess of blood within the cranium. but the blood is

----- PAGE 437 -----
excessively hot. A person who can’t be taken to a hospital
immediately should be wrapped in wet bedding or wet clothing
and immersed in cool water or even cooled with ice friction and
fanned while waiting for transportation (cool the individual until
the heat of the skin and fever drops, but beware not to overcool
them).

There is no better palliative for hemorrhoids than frequent
cleansings (ablutions) with cold water, especially after a stool; this
is most efficiently applied with a sponge.

Ewptoyinc Hor Water

A short hot application over the region of the stomach diminishes
the secretion of HCL, at least in cases of hyperacidity. Prolonged
application of heat over the region of the stomach after eating
increases the amount of hydrochloric acid secreted by the organ.

Prolonged application of heat over the region of the liver and
other viscera increases their activity.

Short hot application on the abdominal region relieves visceral
congestion.

SITZ BATH

The sitz bath, also called the hip bath or the sitting bath, is one of
the oldest and most useful of water therapy procedures. It has fallen
into disuse in our professional health care system, as has
hydrotherapy in general, due most likely to its relatively labor-
intensive nature. Yet, with just a little ingenuity, this process can be
made a vital part of domestic health care and home therapy.

----- PAGE 438 -----
&

Sitz Bath

The hot and/or cold sitz bath acts simply to increase circulation
to the organs of the lower abdomen and the pelvis. This in turn
relieves congestion in other areas of the body such as the head and
lungs. At the same time, this also tonifies the organs of digestion
and the sexual organs. Hot baths relax while cold baths tonify the
soft tissue structures; neutral baths have a calming effect on nervous
system control of these areas. It is a valuable remedy in weaknesses
and ailments of the womb, prostate region, genitals, and in
irritations of the pelvic organs.

During a sitz, a hot foot bath is applied to minimize possible
congestion to the pelvic region by pulling excess blood and
lymphatic fluid to the lower extremities. The hot phase of a sitz
bath is concluded with a cold immersion. This acts to prevent
congestion of circulation and to reestablish the natural tone of
(heat-generated) ultra-relaxed soft tissue.

The tub that is required for a sitting bath should be of such a
form and size that the individual may be comfortably seated in it by
leaving the feet outside and hanging the limbs to the floor, and the
feet placed in a separate and smaller tub (foot bath) during the
application. Large plastic wash tubs are just about all one can find
these days to use for this. I set two of them in the bathtub, one for
hot, one for cold, and extend a hose from the spigot to the tubs
with which to fill them and maintain their temperatures. Obviously,

----- PAGE 439 -----
the larger the bath tub, the better.

It is very important that the circulation in and to the legs not be
interfered with by pressure from underneath the legs by the tub’s
edge. Placing a thickly folded towel on the tub’s edge beneath the
legs or elevating the foot bath tub sufficiently to raise up the legs
avoids this problem. When using sitz tubs that have been placed in
a bath tub, the bather can use the tub’s sides to assist their
movement. Otherwise, to make it easier for the bather to get up
and down, it helps to elevate the sitz tub on blocks. For added
comfort, place a folded towel on the bottom of tub along with one
draped over the back and over the sides of the tub.

The physiological effects of a sitz, as in other baths, depends
upon the temperature, the duration, and sometimes the mechanical
effects (rubbing of the skin with hands or friction cloths) that are
combined with the bath. The temperature of the sitz-bath may be
cold, cool, tepid, warm, hot, or very hot depending on the purpose
of the bath. The bath may be administered two or three times a
day.

During a cold sitz or a prolonged tepid sitz, the bather’s body
should always be covered with a flannel sheet and/or blanket, or
rubbed with an attendant’s hands or a coarse towel to prevent
chilling, and the feet are to be kept warm either by the hot foot
bath (104° to 110° F.) or by hot towels wrung out and placed
around the feet and legs.

The materials needed for a sitz bath
+ A washtub (two tubs when doing an alternate hot and cold sitz)

+ A foot tub or simple dishpan
+ Towels and washcloths
+ Flannel sheet and/or blanket to cover the bather

+ Hot water and cold water

----- PAGE 440 -----
+ A bath thermometer

The process
1. Assemble above materials.

2. Place towels on bottom, back, sides, and front of tub.

3. Fill sitz tub and foot tub with appropriate temperature and
appropriate amount of water.

In general

+ If it is to be a hot sitz, use 106° to 110° F. water with a 110° to
112° F. foot bath. Include enough water so level is about 1/2”
above the navel.

+ Bathe for a 3 to 8 minute duration.

+ If it is to be a cold sitz, use 55° to 75° F. water with a 105° to 110°
F. foot bath.

+ Include enough water so level is about 1/2” below the navel.
+ Bathe for a 3 to 8 minute duration.

+ If it is to be a neutral sitz, use 92° to 97° F. water with a 105° to
110° F. foot bath.

+ Include enough water so level is to the navel.
+ Bathe from 1/4 to 2 hours duration.
+ For an alternate hot and cold sitz, use the above temperatures.

+ Bathe 2 to 5 minutes hot, 20 to 60 seconds cold. These can be
repeated as desired.

+ Always start with hot and end with cold.

----- PAGE 441 -----
+ Assist disrobed bather in and out of tub, making sure she or he is
comfortable.

+ It is very important to prevent chilling of the bather. Cover her or
him with a flannel sheet and/or a blanket if necessary.

+ While the bather is in a hot bath, apply cold compresses or ice
bag to head and back of neck to prevent cerebral congestion.

+ Finish a hot sitz bath by pouring cold water over all the parts that
were submerged in the hot water.

+ Finish a hot foot bath by pouring cold water over the feet.
+ Assist bather out of the sitz tub and dry with towels.

+ Have bather lie down for at least a half hour.

Inpications AND ContraInpIcATions For Sitz Batxs

There are certain indications and contraindications for using this
water tool. Basically, the indications for the cold sitz are the same
as the contraindication for the hot sitz and vice versa.
Contraindications for the alternate sitz are a combination of the
contraindications for both the hot and cold sitz.

Hot sitz indications: painful spasm; acute abdominal pain;
intestinal pain; or painful inflammation of kidneys (a serious
condition, needs medical diagnosis); uterine pain; throbbing or
stabbing nerve pain from the ovaries, testicles, or intestines; sciatica;
lumbago; suppressed menses; painful hemorrhoids; congestive
headache.

Hot sitz contraindications: hemorrhage; excessively profuse
menstruation; pelvic congestion; atonic conditions or prolapsed
organs.

Cold sitz indications: incontinence; constipation; benign prostatic
hypertrophy (BPH) and any incontinence due to BPH: prolapsed

----- PAGE 442 -----
uterus; herniated bladder; herniated rectum; excessively profuse
menstruation.

Cold sitz contraindications: acute inflammation; any painful
conditions; spasms; colic; acute lung condition; and heart problems.

Alternating hot and cold sitz indications: pelvic congestion;
congestive headache; prostatitis; vaginal infection; pelvic
inflammatory disease (PID, a serious condition, needs medical
diagnosis); chronic urinary tract infections; improving nerve pain
(neuralgias); insomnia; hemorrhoids; fissures; postpartum
constipation.

Alternating hot and _ cold _ sitz contraindications: see
contraindications under both hot and cold sitz.

Neutral sitz indications: acute urinary tract infection (never
employ a hot or cold sitz for this acute condition); intense itching of
anus or vulva; to calm mental or emotional overexcitement or
sexual overexcitement (that sounds like an oxymoron to me).

Quick Cou Sirz

A quick cold sitz (30 seconds to 2 minutes) produces active dilation
of all vessels of the lower abdomen, increasing the movement of
blood through these parts. The thermic reaction produced heightens
the nutritive processes in the parts concerned. At the same time it
excites contraction of the muscular structures of the viscera along
with the musculo-ligamentous structures which support the
abdominal and pelvic viscera. This has great influence on the
bladder, all pelvic organs (male and female), and all structures that
are involved in the acts of urination and defecation. It is good to
note for those concerned that during the first moments of the cold
sitz there is an increased activity of the heart and a temporary rise
of the blood pressure.

Cow Sirz

The cold sitz (55° to 75° F.. 5 to 8 minutes duration) produces a

----- PAGE 443 -----
profound tonic effect on the body and must be frequently applied.
The cold sitz is most frequently employed to bring about flowing
effects upon the internal pelvic organs. This cold sitz is an excellent
application for individuals who are at least moderately vigorous,
and who suffer from congestion of the liver or spleen. It is very
useful in atonic genito-urinary organs and in the nocturnal urinary
incontinence of children (however, this needs to be introduced and
employed in such manner that the child does not view it as
punishment). It is equally valuable in chronic congestion of the
prostate, in atonic weakness of seminal vessels, and in constipation,
and in lack of tone of the bladder of both men and women. The
cold sitz must not be used in cases of acute inflammation of the
pelvic or abdominal organs, in painful conditions of the bladder or
genital organs, in sciatica, or in cases of lung congestion.

Coot Sirz

A cool sitz-bath (65° to 80° F.) is derivative when continued for 15
to 20 minutes, or long enough to cause a decided reddening of the
submerged skin which will attest to adequate dilation of the surface
vessels. The special use of this bath for decongesting the internal
organs lies in the persistence of a large quantity of blood that has
flowed to and is fixed in the skin. This, accompanied by the
contraction of the internal vessels which is produced at the same
time by the irritation of the cold, aids in the decongestion of the
internal parts.

Protoncep Coo. Srrz

The prolonged cool sitz-bath at 65° to 75° F. for 15 to 40 minutes
causes prolonged contractions of the vessels of the pelvic and
abdominal organs. This action makes this bath an excellent measure
for relieving chronic congestion in this area. A hot foot bath must
always be given simultaneously and the pelvic area should be
rubbed so as to maintain strong surface circulation. This friction is

----- PAGE 444 -----
important to assist the decongestion of the pelvic organs. The
prolonged cool sitz also renders excellent results, when combined
with other measures of treatment, and in relieving chronic
excessively profuse menstruation (when not due to endometriosis).
It is also useful in any bleeding from the bladder, the intestines, the
uterus, urethra, and rectum, in hemorrhoids, and chronic
inflammation of the prostate.

In many cases a temperature of 75° to 80° F. is preferable to a
lower temperature, especially for individuals who have not been
accustomed to cold water applications. In some cases it is desirable
to begin the bath at a temperature of 85° to 90° F. and lower it after
the first few minutes to 75° F. The duration of the bath should be
15 to 20 minutes. This should always be accompanied by a hot foot
bath of 104° to 110° F., but no hotter than this.

The cool sitz-bath and the cold sitz-bath are to be avoided with
individuals who have any kind of heart condition that would be
adversely affected by a sudden increase in arterial pressure. It is also
contraindicated in all acute inflammations and infections involving
the organs of the abdomen or pelvis, painful conditions of the
genito-urinary organs, any conditions of the pelvis accompanied by
muscular spasms, spermatorrhea accompanied by frequent losses of
fluid (see warm sitz), or sciatica. However, in many cases in which
the cold bath is contraindicated, a sitz at 85° F., gradually cooled to
75° F., may be employed with benefit. The length of this bath
should be 15 to 20 minutes.

Quick Cou-Hor Srrz

The quick cold-hot sitz bath is also referred to as a revulsive sitz. It
is a very short cold sitz, a simple dip in the cold water for a few
seconds followed by a very hot sitz of 115° to 120° F. for 3 to 8
minutes duration. This extreme contrast of temperature is a
powerful sedative measure in painful affections of the pelvic
viscera. It has been used quite successfully in cases of ovarian or
uterine pain that has a severe throbbing or stabbing characteristic.

----- PAGE 445 -----
cramps, colic, severe pain in the intestine, often accompanied by
spasmodic contraction of the muscles, and in painful conditions of
the prostate, bladder, and rectum.

Warm (Neurrat) Srrz

The warm (neutral) sitz bath is 92° to 97° F., and the duration may
be from 15 minutes to an hour or two if you have the time. There is
no appreciable thermic or circulatory reaction produced, which is
the beauty of this sitz. It exercises a pronounced calmative effect
upon the viscera of the pelvis and lower abdomen, and the
genitalia.

The neutral sitz is an exceedingly useful means of relieving
nervous irritability and congestion of the pelvic viscera. It is of great
service in the treatment of painful and inflammatory affections of
the genito-urinary organs in both men and women, such as itching
of the vulva and anus, hemorrhoids, frequent urination from
irritability of the bladder, spermatorrhea arising from excessive
irritability of the genito-urinary center, nervous irritability of the
spermatic cord and testicles, and also chronic backache from rectal
and uterine disorders.

The neutral sitz subdues inflammation and may be employed in
subacute and even acute inflammatory conditions of the abdominal
and pelvic regions, such as acute catarrh of the bladder and urethra,
subacute inflammations of the uterus, ovaries, and tubes. It is
especially helpful for relieving nervous pains of the fallopian tubes
and the testicles. It is indicated as a sedative means in cases of
spermatorrhea accompanied by excessive sensibility or painfulness
to touch of the urethra and ejaculatory ducts.

This sitz bath is highly useful in all cases of pelvic disease in
which cold applications feel inappropriate on account of pain or
the inflammatory conditions that may be present.

Very Hor Srrz

----- PAGE 446 -----
The very hot sitz bath is 106° to 120° F., and the duration is 3 to 8
minutes if the bather can handle it. It is suggested to begin with a
temperature of 100° F., rapidly adding hot water until the
maximum temperature is reached. A hot foot bath of 110° to 120°
F. is taken with it. At all times, keep the head cool with cold
compresses. Following this bath, cool the surface of the body
gradually and be sure the bather does not experience any chilly
sensations to the area being treated, for this will undo the benefits
of the bath.

The general effects are essentially the same as those of the hot
immersion bath. At temperatures above 110° F., especially if the
bath is continued beyond 3 or 4 minutes, the effect is to excite the
pelvic circulation, and to concentrate the blood in this portion of
the body. This bath is an excellent means of restoring the menstrual
function when it has been suspended as the result of general chill or
from other causes.

The hot sitz bath is a powerful analgesic, an effective in-home,
non-drug measure for the stilling of pain. For the best effects, it
should be followed by a short cold application. Therefore, this bath
is of great value in relieving the pain and discomfort of sciatica, and
neuralgia or nerve pain of the ovaries, testicles, and the bladder. In
general, this hot sitz is of great help for relieving pain in all
affections of a non-inflammatory character involving the viscera of
the pelvis and lower abdomen.

A shallow, very hot sitz is an excellent measure in relieving the
pain of inflamed hemorrhoids.

FOOT AND LEG BATHS

Hor Foor Bata

This bath requires a suitable receptacle for the feet, and a supply of
very hot water, with cold water for tempering. (See also “Herbal
Baths” below.)

The hot foot bath should be of as high a temperature as can be

----- PAGE 447 -----
borne, so as to redden the skin of the immersed parts effectually.
Ideally the vessel used should be sufficiently deep to allow the legs
to be immersed in the water nearly to the knees. The temperature
required for most positive effects is 104° to 122° F. The foot bath
should begin at a temperature of 100° to 104° F., and should be
gradually increased until 115° to 122° F., reached in about three
minutes. The duration of the bath may be from 5 minutes to half an
hour. The feet should be completely immersed in the water, and
the effect may be intensified by increasing the depth of the water
up to the knees. To produce the true revulsive effect (drawing the
blood from one part of the body to another), the feet should be
dipped in cold water after the hot soak. This sudden cooling of the
skin will encourage a tonic circulatory reaction. At a temperature of
103° to 110° F. the hot foot bath is very useful for balancing the
circulation, by the dilation of the blood vessels of the legs, relieving
congestion of the brain and other organs in the upper half of the
body. The very hot foot and leg bath (as well as cold applications
to the feet) stimulate the involuntary muscles of the uterus,
intestines, bladder, and other pelvic and abdominal viscera. The hot
foot and leg bath are well used in the treatment of insomnia, lung
congestion, dysmenorrhea, suppressed menstruation, ovarian
congestion, and pelvic pain from other causes. It is a simple and
valuable remedy in the early stages of mucous membrane
congestion and local congestion of the head, chest, or abdomen. It
may be made more stimulating by the addition of common salt or
mustard powder. In foot baths, mustard relieves headaches and
cerebral and other internal congestion, especially uterine congestion
that is accompanied with dysmenorrhea.

----- PAGE 448 -----
Foot and Leg Bath

The very hot foot bath is exceedingly useful in a case of sprained
ankle joint—to be employed the day after a cold application is
used first to subdue inflammation and swelling. (See below,
“Cold/Cool Foot Bath”; also see above “Partial Body Baths—
Employing Cold Water.”)

A hot foot bath is contraindicated in any sensory loss to the feet
or in cases of peripheral vascular disease.

Cow Foor Batu (45° to 55° r.)

The cold foot bath is of great service in producing reflex, revulsive,
or counterirritant, and other effects. The sole of the foot is one of
the most important areas in the body, having direct connection with
the nerve centers that control the circulation of the pelvic and
abdominal viscera. The reflex effects cause contraction of the vessels
and muscles of the uterus and the organs connected with it. The
blood vessels of the brain, the stomach, the liver, the bladder, and
the intestines are made to contract at the same time. Intestinal
peristalsis and contraction of the bladder are also excited.

The revulsive effects of the cold foot bath are very strong and
continue for a long time—longer than those obtained from hot foot
baths. The short cold foot bath (duration of 20 to 60 seconds only,
for it is only the primary effect that is desirable) is useful in
cerebral congestion and uterine hemorrhage.

----- PAGE 449 -----
Coot Foor BatH (60° To 70° F.)

The prolonged cool foot bath is well used as an anti-inflammatory
measure in cases of injury to the feet and ankle, such as sprains,
strains, and inflamed bunions. The feet must be well warmed by
rubbing or by heat before the application is made.

Tue Atrernate Foor Bata

This foot bath is a more highly excitant measure than the cold foot
bath.

In cases in which the feet are constantly cold and in cases of
persistent sweating of the feet the alternate foot bath is most
helpful. The feet are placed in hot water for 2 to 3 minutes, then in
cold water for 20 seconds to 1 minute. They are then returned to
the hot water for 2 minutes, then replaced in the cold water, this
operation being repeated a number of times daily.

This alternate bath is also especially useful in treating chilblains
and in eliminating any local stagnation of circulation that can lead
to gangrene.

HAND BATHS

Hand Bath

Immersing the hands in very cold water exercises a powerful
influence upon the cerebral vessels and vessels of the lungs. The
immersion of the hands in cold water for a sufficient length of time

----- PAGE 450 -----
is capable of slowing the pulse and the respiration, and lessening
the pressure in the cerebral arteries. Immersing them in a hot bath
produces the opposite phenomena. The cold hand bath or simply
holding cubes of ice in the hands is an excellent means of checking
nosebleed, and has been used to check the bleeding in pulmonary
hemorrhage very quickly.

HERBAL BATHS

Herbal preparations added to a bath enhance skin stimulation. At
the same time the body absorbs through the skin a great number of
the medicinal components of herbal formulations. The action of an
herbal bath enhances the blood supply to the layers of tissue close
to the skin, and the herbs’ medicinal and tonic actions benefit the
body organism in general. Western therapeutic science has
substantiated these facts with their official experimentation and by
authoritatively announcing its findings (mostly to itself) has finally
caught up in this area of therapeutics with centuries-old folkloric
herbal science. Further clinical data is still required, however, to
convince the more resistant medical authorities and practitioners. In
Europe, the work of two extraordinary herbalists, Herr Kneipp and
Monsieur Messegue, made the use of medicinal herbs in baths a
relatively common procedure. I suggest we lay practitioners move
on with our empirical herbal research and let medical science catch
up with us again later.

Possibly the best, and certainly one of the most sensually
delicious ways of absorbing herbal remedies through the skin, is by
bathing in a full-body herbal bath. Life in general is more fun when
you're naked. A full-body herbal bath is certainly more exotic than
a tincture, naughtier than an elixir, and a heck of a lot more
pleasant than swallowing a capsule or a pill. Herbal bath therapy is
economically administered in one’s home and is practical when
administered as a weekend course of treatment or as a regularly
sustained system of self-pampering health care.

To prepare a herbal bath. one merely has to pour a quart of

----- PAGE 451 -----
strong herbal infusion, herbal decoction, or concentrate into the
bath water, swirl it around, take off the clothes, slip into the brew,
lay back, and relax; high tea is served.

Often volatile oils are placed into the bath water for their
aromatic and medicinal effects. Add a total of 10 to 15 drops to an
already full bath. Agitate the water to thoroughly disperse the oils
before getting in. It is important to bear in mind that when using
essential oils, one drop goes a long way. These oils easily penetrate
the skin and some may cause skin irritation or sensitivity if not
properly diluted or if used in high concentrations. Some people
have sensitivity reactions to essential oils; therefore, it is wise to test
oneself first by applying the dilute oil to a small skin area before
using on larger areas (dilute the volatile oil in a little vegetable oil).

Partial body herbal baths and herbal sitz baths are generally
prepared in the same fashion. An herbal foot bath is prepared by
pouring a quart of tea into a vessel that is large enough to contain
the feet and to this preparation enough hot or cold water is added
to cover the feet to the desired height and the desired temperature.
This can range from a shallow foot bath where merely the soles of
the feet are covered, to one that extends up to the knees.

Herbal hand baths are prepared by simply placing one’s hands
into a container of undiluted herbal infusion or decoction. When
using essential oils in a foot or hand bath, put 5 to 7 drops into the
container of water and disperse fully by agitating the water before
getting into it.

Instead of preparing an infusion or decoction of the herbs
beforehand, a couple handfuls of dried herb can be put into a
cotton muslin bag and the opening of the bag held tightly around
the hot water tap. Turn on the hot water and let it flow into the
bag. This will make a fresh infusion as the hot water flows through
the herbs into the bath. Once the tub is filled, tie off the bag and let
it continue to soak in the bath water. This method is better used in
partial baths and not normally in a full baths for in the latter
(except for small children’s little baths) it becomes quite diluted.

----- PAGE 452 -----
Often a warm, sensually aromatic bath is
prepared for a friend to savor and indulge. If
aromatic volatile oils are used to provide the
magic of the moment, it is imparative to agitate
the surface of the water briskly before entering—
particularly if it is a gentleman bather—for
undiluted aromatic oils can burn tender, delicate
skin which usually makes up one of the first parts
of the male anatomy to plunge through the
water’s surface. This experience can radically alter
the serenity of the moment for him if the oils are
concentrated on the water’s surface. Although
probably to a lesser extent, this experience can
also be disturbing to a lady bather’s bottom.

Of course, one can simply harvest medicinal and aromatic plants,
throw them into the hot bath water, and climb in with them.
Normally, this preparation is only appreciated by individuals who
also enjoy swimming in fresh water ponds, or in kelp beds, and
don’t mind the water flora (and attendant fauna) touching their
skin. My first herb teacher, Norma Myers, used to soak herself in
herb and seaweed baths routinely, but she was a wild woman; she
thrived in that lifestyle.

Any herb that can be taken internally can also be used in a bath.
The following are some suggestions for particularly good herbs to
use for special occasions:

+ Relaxing herbs that help relieve tension and promote restful sleep
—tLavender (Lavandula spp.), Linden blossoms (Tilia spp.),
Chamomile (Matricaria recutita), Peppermint (Mentha piperita),
Lemon Balm (Melissa officinalis), or Valerian (Valeriana
officinalis); for children use the more gentle Red Clover (Trifilium
pratense), Chamomile, and/or Linden blossoms.

+ For relief of itchy skin—Chickweed (Stellaria media), Black

----- PAGE 453 -----
Walnut leaves or bark (Juglans nigra), Hyssop (Hyssopus
officinalis), or Chamomile; for dry itchy skin fill a sock with
oatmeal and tie it at the top, steep this in the bath water for a
while, then rub the skin with the bag.

+ For relief of muscular tension and pain—Mugwort (Artemisia
vulgaris), Chamomile, Horsetail (Equisetum arvense).

+ To help circulation use any of the following stimulating herbs—
Rosemary (Rosemarinus spp.), Yarrow (Achillea millefolium),
Marigold (Calendula officinalis), Cayenne (Capsicum minimum),
Ginger (Zingiber officinalis). Use small amounts of the Cayenne and
Ginger.

These are only a few of the limitless possibilities one can come
up with.

SUMMARY

I’m giving you the above suggestions and precise techniques as
helpful guidance. If you are a water person and inclined to use the
bath as a means of health care, you will need to use your intuition
and good judgment as you implement these procedures in your
home. And, of course, the bather will be the final judge as to how
good and helpful it all feels. When the results you seek are
manifested, please make notes on these successful experiences. If
you make mistakes, learn from them and annotate your
experiences. These notes will be invaluable to you and to others as
we relearn how to employ the remarkable healing energy of
hydrotherapy and simple herbal baths.

----- PAGE 454 -----


----- PAGE 455 -----
POULTICES AND
FOMENTATIONS

There has been an inspired reawakening of Western herb lore in
the minds and hearts of the citizenry in North America. Individuals
within nearly every society of our diverse culture are seeking
knowledge about the utilization of self-medicating materials that
were once commonly used in the homes and communities of our
ancestors. One by one. we are rediscovering the simple vehicles that

----- PAGE 456 -----
efficiently deliver the healing virtues residing in our garden’s herbs
and weeds. We are restocking our home pharmacies with herbal
preparations and reviving the personal and family dignity of taking
care of ourselves. This is the era of our reconnection with plant
spirit; we are about to harvest the health-promoting independence
of our greenselves.

Continuing the progress of this reconnection, we will review in
this chapter the laying of simple herbal waters and succulent pulps
upon our skin. This time-honored process is well used in concert
with the vehicles discussed in the accompanying chapters.

At this point, I trust you are comfortable with the terms “self-
medication” and “self-medicating.” I realize we lay folk, over the
last ninety years, have conditioned ourselves to believe and feel that
“therapeutics,” “medicine,” and “medicating” are professional
mysteries which are the sole domain of licensed medical doctors,
and only a doctor by using medical pharmaceutical products can
competently and safely medicate us. The medical/pharmaceutical
licensing and marketing lobbies have successfully conjured this
collective illusion. Yet I believe the current search for therapeutic
“alternatives” and disease-preventive measures by ever-increasing
numbers of individuals, along with the obvious swell of self-
education in personal health care, illustrates our grassroots
disenchantment with this tenet.

If you feel uncomfortable with the ideas of self-medicating, I
respectfully suggest that it is time to root out and possibly
reconsider the beliefs that underlie these feelings. Boundless
numbers of us in this society are extremely intelligent human
beings, fully capable of making excellent decisions about our lives,
particularly when given access to valid information as a base on
which to work. And in response to this collective calling there is an
ever-increasing number of knowledgeably responsible books,
seminars, hands-on workshops, and intensive school programs
supplied by highly competent herbalists, teaching people how to
use herbs safely, responsibly, and effectively for individual and
family health care (see resource guide). We have every right to
medicate our own persons, and the freedom to do so. (I believe the

----- PAGE 457 -----
ninth amendment to the constitution focuses attention on this
inalienable right.) And unless the state, in fact, does own our
children, we have the same right and responsibility to find out what
is best for them. The knowledgeable use of herbs administered in
the home in place of pharmaceutical drugs is frequently a far more
pragmatic, benign, and responsible choice for an ailing child’s (and
adult’s) well-being. In the face of media blitz with its perennial
promise of medical miracle cures waiting around every corner, we
have allowed ourselves to lose sight of the true healing intelligence
and wisdom each of us possess. We merely need to recall and
revive this basic human function. Healing is inspired, not ordained.

In Iine with these thoughts, we will extend the previous chapter’s
focus on baths by looking at the uses of poultices and compresses,
as these are some of the simplest and most pleasant feeling (bath-
like) vehicles for the home delivery of herbal health care.

POULTICES

Classically, a poultice (a.k.a. cataplasm) is a soft, mushy
preparation composed usually of some pulpy or mealy substance
which is capable of absorbing a large amount of liquid and of such
consistency that it can be applied to any flat or irregular surface.
This herbal material is made into a paste, using hot liquids, and is
spread thickly upon cloths and applied directly to the body while
hot. Poultices owe their primary virtues to the moist heat which
they contain and therefore must be renewed every few minutes, or
somehow kept warm by other means. An exception to these
mechanics is the Mustard (Brassica nigra) poultice, which supplies
its warming action through a volatile component produced when its
crushed seed is mixed with water. In herb land, however, the scope
of the term poultice has broadened and now covers a wide range of
preparations, some of which are applied hot, some cold.

Poultices and fomentations in their most simple form are merely
local baths that utilize warmth and moisture to relax tissue and
relieve pain. Bevond this, herbal preparations can be incorporated

----- PAGE 458 -----
in these soothing hot waters to add further assistance with their
unique therapeutic properties. Therefore, herbal poultices can be
any of the following:

Emollient, which by supplying warmth and moisture are useful
for reducing pain and inflammation and assisting the ripening and
suppurative (pus-generating) process. Emollient poultices can be
made of Flaxseed meal (powdered Flaxseed), Oat meal, bran,
bread, and milk, Plantain, Marshmallow root, or mashed vegetable
materials such as Cabbage, Turnip, Potato, or Carrot.

Medicated, which are intended to exercise a specific influence on
a part of the body, independent of warmth and moisture. These are
made of any or a combination of a wide variety of medicinal
plants, such as astringents, styptics and vulnerarles, anodynes,
disinfectants, etc. They are used to penetrate and reduce enlarged or
inflamed glands, eruptions, abscesses, lacerations, boils, etc.

If you feel uncomfortable with the ideas of self-
medicating, I respectfully suggest that it is time to
root out and possibly reconsider the beliefs that
underlie these feelings.

Counter-irritant or repulsive, which, by inducing a local irritation
or inflammation as they stimulate capillary dilation and action,
cause skin redness. This counter-irritation draws stagnant blood and
other materials from deeper tissues and organs to the surface,
thereby relieving deeper congestion and inflammation. These
poultices also act as derivatives which draw pustular materials from
the body through the skin. These poultices are made using
stimulating herbs such as Mustard, Ginger, Cayenne, Garlic,
Rosemary, etc.

Optimally, medicated herbal poultices are prepared from fresh
herbs which have been chewed, chopped, mashed, bruised, or
blended in an electric blender and mixed with hot water, apple
cider vinegar, or some other hot liquid. A blender suits us well for
these preparations. for it is important to break up the cell walls in

----- PAGE 459 -----
order to gain access to the properties contained in the plant juices.

Dry (dehydrated) herb that has been re-hydrated also can be used
to make poultices. You can rehydrate a dehydrated herb by gently
heating it in a little water, apple cider vinegar, milk, or other liquid
that seems appropriate. Once the herb has absorbed the liquid and
softened, it is ready to use for preparing a poultice in the same way
that you would use a fresh plant.

A poultice can be used again and again during each session.
However, it needs to be re-heated each time before reapplying.

A hot poultice should be applied as hot as can be borne. To test
its temperature apply it to the back of your hand—it should feel
hot, but comfortable. To prevent the rapid loss of heat, it is helpful
to cover the poultice with a thick insulating cloth while it’s on your
body,

First clean the area of the body by using a solution of 1 part
apple cider vinegar to 1 part warm water, or simply soap and
water; then a thin layer of vegetable oil is rubbed on the skin to
protect it, and to prevent the poultice from sticking to the skin.

The vinegar-water mixture is also an especially good solution to
use for washing and conditioning the area after the poultice has
been removed.

Maxine a Poutice

A Very Simple Poultice

1. Put powdered or chopped fresh herbal materials into a
clean white cotton sock. Use two socks and alternate them.

2. Tie it at the top (tie it in a knot, or use string, or elastic).

3. Place this into a shallow bowl.

4. Pour enough hot water over the prefilled sock to soak the

----- PAGE 460 -----
dry herb or heat the fresh herb.

5. With your hands, knead the wet sock until it is quite hot, yet
bearable.

6. Apply this to the affected area until the poultice is cool.
7. Repeat steps 3 to 6 to reheat and reapply the poultice.

Emollient Poultice

A poultice for the eye can be quickly assembled by merely
dropping a tea bag in hot water for an instant, long enough to
wet the herb, then cooling it enough not to burn the eyelid,
and laying the hot moist tea bag on the closed eyelid. Fennel,
Red Raspberry, Chamomile, or disinfectant herbs are excellent
for this purpose. You can purchase strips of empty tea bags
and fill them with the herbs of your choice or use commercial
brand prefilled tea bags.

Eye Poultice
A Flaxseed (Linseed) poultice is a good representative of this

type poultice.

1. Grind a good handful of Flaxseed into a meal using a mortar
and pestle or an electric coffee bean grinder.

2. Add some boiling water [approximate proportions of 300
ml (10 fl. oz.) of water to 120 Gm (4 oz.) of Flaxmeal].

3. Quickly stir the Flaxseed and water together until you have
made a thick paste.

4. Spread this hot paste (at least 1/2-inch thick) onto a clean
white cloth, leaving the edges of the cloth free from the paste
and avoiding the formation of lumps in the paste.

----- PAGE 461 -----
5. Apply the poultice to the body as hot as possible, making
sure it completely covers and even extends a little beyond the
area being soothed. It helps to spread a little vegetable oil on
the skin before applying the poultice to protect the skin and to
make it easier to remove the poultice. Otherwise, it can stick
to the skin.

6. When the poultice is lukewarm, another poultice should be
ready to take its place, and the treatment should be continued
as long as necessary.

7. Of course, you can help retain the heat by insulating the
poultice. First lay a plastic bag directly over the poultice, then
wrap a towel around it, and if appropriate lay a hot water
bottle or heating pad on top of all this to supply prolonged
heat.

Another convenient method to prepare a Flaxseed or similar
poultice is to make several bags of various sizes out of
cheesecloth. Fill the bags half full with Flaxseed or whatever
agent you select, then sew up the open end (store these in the
refrigerator or freezer to prevent the Flaxseed from going
rancid over time). When needed, the appropriate size bag is
submerged in boiling water for a few minutes. When the bag is
taken out of the water, you will see that the Flaxseed has
swelled and filled the bag. Squeeze out any superfluous water,
lay the bag on the body, and cover it with insulating and or
heating materials.

As a poultice, Flaxseed can be used for treating carbuncles,
shingles, and psoriasis, and it can be combined with
Marshmallow root powder to use for reducing swellings and
inflammations, and for drawing out the pus in boils.

Flaxseed poultices mixed with Onion are commonly used to
provide relief in lung conditions, especially with pleurisy,

----- PAGE 462 -----
which calls out for a warm poultice (pleurisy can be a
symptom of serious disease—get it checked out). After
removing a poultice from the chest area, a second one can then
be placed onto the upper back, which will cover and treat the
back regions of the lungs.

Other Herbal Materials Used to Medicate a Poultice

The herbs Calendula, Comfrey, and Plantain are the reigning
matriarchs in the clan of herbal poultices, with Echinacea
giving service as their cardinal aide when further wound
healing and enhanced immune-stimulating action is needed.

Calendula (Calendula officinalis) promotes the healing and
regeneration of bruised tissue, burns, eruptions, abrasions, and
so forth. Overall, this herb is one of the most efficient of all
herbs to use as a poultice or a fomentation (fomentations are
discussed later in the chapter). A Calendula poultice reduces
soreness and inflammation, while its anti-microbial properties
assist in the cleansing of a wound, fostering rapid healing.

Comfrey (Symphytum officinale) is our most valuable plant
ally for repairing wounds, while at the same time it soothes
and softens tissue. It is probably the most healing mucilaginous
remedy in our herbal materia medica, having been used for
centuries to treat external ulceration and all types of lesions
and injuries ranging from small cuts and abrasions to large
wounds and broken bones. A Comfrey poultice quickens the
repair of the normally slow healing process of torn cartilage,
tendons, and ligaments. A common name “Knitbone” refers to
Comfrey’s historic use as a poultice for treating skeletal
fractures in humans and animals. It heals bone tissue. Its
mucilage and tannins produce an astringent and contracting
effect. By drawing a wound together at the surface, it reduces
the need for stitching; and its generous allantoin content
stimulates the regeneration of skin tissue, making the
formation of scar tissue less likely.

----- PAGE 463 -----
Of all the herbs, Plantain (Plantago lanceolata, P. major) is
probably the most accessible and abundant. In league with
Dandelion, it is one of an herbalist s two most loyal and
reliable travel companions. They can be found growing nearly
everywhere on our planet. Plantain is used by herbalists to
remove the ouch! from wounds, especially the venomous ouch
prompted by stinging and biting insects and other skin-
penetrating animals. Plantain (both the narrow leaf and broad
leaf types) helps stop bleeding, neutralizes venom and toxins,
soothes inflammation, and heals wounds. This plant applied as
a poultice is also helpful in withdrawing deeply lodged
splinters.

Plantain and Dandelion are an herbalist s
most loyal and reliable travel companions.
They can be found growing nearly
everywhere on our planet.

Echinacea (Echinacea spp.) is a highly effective wound-
healing plant, generously stimulating the immune system. It is
especially useful in treating sluggardly, longstanding wounds
that are slow to heal. The addition of this plant to any of the
above plant poultices complements and amplifies their
qualities.

A Field Poultice

This poultice is useful if you are the recipient of an insect bite.
It can be a fresh one or an old one that just doesn’t seem to get
better, or any kind of benign, welting, itching, insect bite
including tick, wasp, yellow jacket, or a bee sting. In case of a
bee sting, remove the stinger by sliding the edge of a credit
card along the skin up to the stinger and gently nudging it
sideways out of the skin. Don’t squeeze the stinger by trying to

----- PAGE 464 -----
pull it out with your fingers; you will inject more venom doing
that. In case of a tick bite, pull the tick straight out first.

1. Pick a handful of Plantain.

2. Wad it up by rolling it firmly between your palms, bruising
and crushing it well, or put it in your mouth and chew it
(which is actually better—dogs aren’t the only ones having
therapeutic saliva).

3. If you chew it, don’t swallow the juice. It’s okay to swallow
the juice, but the Plantain-infused saliva is what contacts the
skin as a poultice and “makes you better.”

4. Make the poultice thick and slap it on the skin.

5. Then hold the palm of your hand on top of the poultice to
supply some warmth and some caring touch to the injury.

6. (Optional) When you can, brew a pot of Plantain tea and
drink it freely. Change the poultice a couple times a day and
keep one on the wound overnight with some form of a
bandage. Repeat this daily until all is well again; and it will
be, soon.

Onion Poultice for Earaches

To make and apply an Onion poultice for relieving the pain of
an earache:

1. Cut a medium-size Onion in half and bake it at a low
temperature until it is soft.

2. Place the warm flat surface of the baked Onion directly on
the ear.

----- PAGE 465 -----
3. Secure it with a cloth bandage wrapped around the head
Van Gogh fashion. Unlike Vincent’s technique, however, the
application of a baked Onion will soothe the ear and relieve
the pain and suffering.

Onion Poultice for the Body

While the aroma of Onion is in the air, 1 should explain how
to make an Onion poultice for the rest of the body. (The
notable refinement of detail and characteristic finesse in the
preparation of the following poultice I obtained from a
conversation with my friend “Herbal” Ed Smith, herbalist and
president of Herb Pharm in Williams, Oregon. And although he
is more than likely responsible for a lot of other things, he
should not be held responsible for the wording used here.)
This is what you can do at home to relieve the acute condition
of cough, croup, bronchitis, strep throat, kidney infection, eye
infection, and whatever else hurts:

1. Chop 3 or 4 Onions fine.

2. Sauté them in oil (it doesn’t matter what kind of oil). Make
it a little on the greasy side.

3. Cook the Onions until they become translucent, but don’t
cook them too much. You want them to be hot and flexible,
not mushy.

4. Now, slowly pour on some apple cider vinegar (just enough
to almost, but not quite, float the hot and flexible Onions).

5. Turn the flame down for the next steps to prevent the
Onions from sticking to the pan.

6. Add Cornmeal or Flaxseed meal. Both of these are high in
fat, so they absorb, and later, radiate the heat. You can use

----- PAGE 466 -----
flour in place of the Corn or Flaxseed meals, but poultice
gourmets tend to frown on this substitution.

7. Using a spatula, mix together and knead the Onions, the oil,
and the meal into a wet plastic mass (not too wet, not too dry,
but peanut butter-like).

8. When this is done to your satisfaction, put it on a piece of
cheesecloth, or muslin, or flannel cloth, fold it over like a fat
omelet, and stick the edges of the cloth together.

9. Apply the hot Onion poultice to the body.

This poultice is rich in sulfurated volatile oils and therapeutic
mucilaginous substances. You will want to create a complete
seal between the poultice and the skin by making sure there
are no air pockets that will interfere with the “osmotic
transfer” of energy between the poultice and the body.

When treating the lungs, following a chest poultice, turn the
person over and apply another Onion poultice on the upper
half of the back.

Honey Poultice

Honey is one of the best poultices to apply directly to a
burn. First, cool the burned tissue with cold water,” if possible,
then merely spread honey on the burn or wound and leave it
there for about a half hour. Reapply if necessary. Honey
immediately seals off the damaged tissue from the air, reducing
the pain while it works to rehydrate the wounded tissue; all
the other magical bee-formulated components of honey
proceed to do what they do to embellish the repair. Honey is
antiseptic and helps to avoid infection.

Mustard Poultice (Brassica nigra, Sinapis nigra)

----- PAGE 467 -----
A Mustard poultice, also known as a sinapism, differs from
most other poultices in both its preparation and its action.
Note that you shouldn’t use pure, undiluted Mustard, for it is
very likely to blister the skin. Mustard is ordinarily diluted
with about an equal weight of Cornmeal, Flaxseed meal, or
some other form of flour (sometimes these are called a
diluent).

Prior to mixing the powdered Mustard seed with the diluent,
it is moistened with tepid or lukewarm water (140ish’ F.),
never with boiling water. When water is added to the crushed
seed, its ultimate warming action is aroused as an enzyme acts
upon a glycoside. A volatile “isothiocyanate” is generated,
which is called “volatile mustard oil” (not to be confused with
an aromatic volatile “essential” oil). The formation of the
warming volatile Mustard oil is greatly inhibited if too high
heat is applied, so never use boiling water for this preparation.
This tends to diminish the crucial enzymatic action. It is also
recommended not to use vinegar as a wetting agent, for it too
inhibits the formation of the heat-producing Mustard oil. To
assemble and apply the Mustard poultice:

1. Mix the dry Mustard with the warm water.
2. Mix the diluent with hot water.
3. Stir these two mixtures together.

4. Place a thin cloth on the skin to protect it and to avoid
adhesion to the skin.

5. Spread the poultice thickly onto the cloth.

6. The poultice is allowed to remain on the skin from 10
minutes to a half hour in order to gain its rubefacient activity.

----- PAGE 468 -----
The action is usually at its height in about 15 to 20 minutes,
even though redness is usually produced in a shorter time. If an
individual’s skin is quite tender or there is a weakened system,
a short action may be more effective overall than a prolonged
one.

On delicate, sensitive skin, the Mustard poultice need not
remain on the body for more than 6 to 8 minutes, for its effect
continues some time after its removal. Please keep in mind
that if a Mustard plaster is applied too hot and kept on too
long, the skin can become inflamed, blister, and become
otherwise injured.

The constituents of Mustard applied as a poultice or bath
produce a lively stimulation and arouse the nervous system.
This acts to disperse any pain that is due to congestion.
Employ the wonderfully deep-penetrating, rubefacient,
decongesting, and pain-relieving benefits of this herbal
poultice, but be very attentive to the proper dilution of the
Mustard with the diluent, and closely monitor the reaction of
the individual’s skin.

Cayenne Poultice

As a milder substitute for the deeper-penetrating Mustard
poultice, the Cayenne red pepper or Capsicum poultice will
serve well, and it will not cause blistering. Cayenne can be
used as a poultice by mixing the powder with bread and
moistened with a little hot milk, or mix the Cayenne powder
with some form of powdered grain and moisten with hot milk
or hot water.

White Cabbage Poultice

This (vegetable) herb is good as a poultice for drawing out pus
and other gloomy body exudates. Merely take the inner leaves
of a common White Cabbage, wash them well, and dry them

----- PAGE 469 -----
(the large middle rib is best removed and discarded for easier
processing of the leaves). Bruise the leaves using a rolling pin
or some other like instrument to soften them and place them
on the affected area. Hold the leaves in place by wrapping a
loose bandage or small towel around them. Leave the Cabbage
poultice on for 1/2 to 1 hour, then replace it with a fresh one.
You can add some powdered Myrrh gum or powdered
Echinacea to this if there is any infection.

Applying raw Cabbage leaves as a poultice affords a slightly
stimulating poultice, which is best used in conditions where
one is treating a sluggish, ill-conditioned, offensive skin ulcer.

In addition to bentonite, other types and
colors of clay make excellent poultices as
well.

Root Poultice

These emollient poultices can be prepared from any of the
tender culinary roots (and tubers) like Carrot, Turnip, Potato,
or Burdock. Simply boil the tender roots, remove the skin, and
mash them into a soft pulp. These make a mild, nutritive,
emollient poultice. Like the Cabbage poultice, when needed, a
raw version of these root poultices renders increased
stimulating action. Peel and shred the fresh raw roots, mash
them into pulp, and apply them to the skin.

Clay Poultice

Clay poultices are made using bentonite clay, water, and
appropriate herbal tinctures. Pharmaceutical grade bentonite
can be purchased in health food stores and pharmacies.

1. Dilute an herbal tincture with about half as much water (2
parts tincture to 1 part water). Use this mixture to add to the

----- PAGE 470 -----
clay.

2. Slowly add the liquid to the clay, stirring until you have
made a paste. (Start out with the proportions of about a
tablespoon of clay to each tablespoon of liquid.)

3. At this point you can add a few drops of Lavender or Tea
Tree essential oil (5 to 10 drops) and stir them in.

4. Apply this herbal clay paste to the body.

5. Apply it thick (at least 1/4 inch). This helps keep the
poultice warm and moist. Clay poultices that dry out too
quickly are not as effectual. You want them to remain wet
(when they are most active) as long as possible.

To prepare a bentonite clay poultice for the mouth, teeth, and
gums for reducing the inflammation and agony of an abscessed
tooth, or to help reach down and disperse the stagnating
energy of swollen throat glands, you simply prepare a
medicated clay roll as follows:

1. Add enough water to some pharmaceutical-grade bentonite
clay to make it into a malleable peanut butter consistency.

2. Using an appropriate amount of sterile gauze, roll the clay
into a joint (a controversial cigarette-like contrivance) about
the size of the pain rider’s small finger.

3. Rid the clay roll of any air bubbles and squeeze its ends
closed to seal them.

4. Pack the cylindrical poultice between the gum and cheek
and leave it there for 1/2 to 1 hour, 2 times a day.

5. Rest, holding the poultice in place.

----- PAGE 471 -----
6. The effect of the clay can be enhanced by mixing some
finely powdered Echinacea root or Goldenseal root with the
clay powder before adding the water.

When treating swollen glands, one can add a couple drops of
Poke root (Phytolacca americana) tincture to this poultice. It is
quite helpful to use hand baths also to help pump the nodes in
the neck. Administer the baths by placing both hands in a hot
bath for 3 minutes immediately followed by a cold hand bath
for 1 minute. Repeat this several consecutive times.

FOMENTATIONS

A fomentation (a.k.a. compress) is a form of poultice that is
composed of liquids or lotions, absorbed in woolen or cotton cloths
and usually applied hot. (Cold compresses are prepared for treating
some headaches and sprains, and to stop bleeding.) Basically, a
fomentation is yet another species of a bath employed to convey
heat, combined with moisture, to the part of the body being
fomented. A fomentation, like all therapeutic and tonic baths, is
administered with the intent to soothe, nurse, and/or excite one
back to ebullient, healthy activity.

MATERIAL TO USE FOR MAKING A FOMENTATION

Flannel cloths wrung out of hot liquid form the best fomentation
material. In every process of fomentation there should be two
cloths, one flannel ready while the other is applied. After the water
has been wrung from the flannel, it should be shaken up and laid
lightly over the body part. This involves a considerable amount of
air which, being a poor conductor for heat transfer, retains the heat
in the flannel cloth for a substantial amount of time.

----- PAGE 472 -----
Sticks and Material Loop

When selecting a material to use for applying a fomentation, the
fineness or the coarseness of the flannel is important to note. The
coarser the material, the less readily it conducts heat, but it retains
its warmth longer. It is therefore more efficient for fomenting.
White flannel appears to retain heat longer than colored flannel. Of
course, any absorbent material can be employed to apply a
fomentation. Depending on the body part requiring the assistance,
you can use gauze patches, stocking caps, menstrual pads, cotton
gloves, jock straps, cotton bras, cotton socks, and so on.

For ease of wringing out boiling hot flannel cloths, one can
employ the following technique:

Purchase two pieces of white flannel, each three yards long. (This
is for use in large area fomenting; shorter pieces are appropriate for
smaller jobs.) Sew the ends together making a very large headband-
like device. This can now be wrung out of boiling liquid by means
of two sticks inserted through the loop and turned in opposite
directions. After the hot flannel has been wrung out, shake it up
and lay the double-layered fomentation lightly on the body.

----- PAGE 473 -----
Maxine a Fomentation

To aid digestion in an individual whose stomach appears to be
deficient in producing adequate hydrochloric acid, a simple
hot water fomentation placed over the stomach for an hour or
two after eating increases the amount of hydrochloric acid
secreted by the peptic glands. A hot water bottle might be
more convenient to employ for this purpose, but then where is
the hot water bottle when you need it? And applications of
heat over the abdomen can increase the activity of the digestive
processes in the intestines and the functional activity of the
pancreas and spleen. (In contrast, generally, whole body hot
baths tend to diminish the secretion of HCL.) Hot applications
placed over the liver region increase the flow of bile and
stimulate all the other activities of the liver.

Simple hot water fomentations are remarkably soothing and
revitalizing, but the use of herbal infusions and decoctions as
the hot liquid further enhances their therapeutic action. Also,
tinctures diluted with water can be used to medicate a
fomentation.

Arnica Fomentation

A cold fomentation of Arnica (Arnica spp.) is well used to
enhance peripheral circulation, helping to eliminate the pain
of bruises, sprains, torn muscles, and tendons during the acute
stage of an injury. A tablespoon of Arnica tincture to a half
quart of cold water is used as the liquid in which a
fomentation is soaked and laid on the injury The injury is to
be immobilized immediately and the fomentations are to be
renewed frequently. Once the acute stage has run its course,
one can apply warm poultices made of Comfrey root and
Onion to give deeper action to assist the healing. Sprains can
continue to trouble the individual long after the acute stages of

----- PAGE 474 -----
the injury have passed. This is a good time to administer hot
foot and leg baths or hot hand and arm bath, depending on the
nature and location of the injury. These baths should be
enjoyed for 20 to 30 minutes at a time.

Foxglove Fomentation

Foxglove (Digitalis) is a common garden plant that is toxic
when taken internally, but is quite safe and useful when used
externally as a moist compress. Dr. Rudolf Weiss, in his
excellent book, Herbal Medicine, introduces this technique,
which has been found to be of great value in promoting the
healing of wounds that tend to persist for long periods of time.
Foxglove leaves applied as a hot compress enhance the
peripheral circulation of the skin and promote wound healing,
especially those wounds that appear to be healing very slowly
or not at all, such as chronic skin ulcers. I have found that a
daily cup of herb tea made up of 1 part Comfrey root, 2 parts
Burdock root, sweetened to taste, is a powerful adjunct for this
task. Never drink a tea of Foxglove, however!

Poppy Fomentation

To help diminish pain, there is nothing as congenial than a hot
fomentation made of dried Oriental Poppy (Papaver
somnifera) heads. Drop 10 or 15 of them in water and heat the
water. When it is quite warm, but not to hot to touch, pick out
and tear the soggy Poppy heads in half and drop them back
into the pot. When you finish doing this, bring the water to a
boil, and simmer the Poppy heads for 10 to 15 minutes. The
solution will turn a rich honey brown color. Dip your flannel
into the hot decoction, wring it out, shake up the wet flannel,
and lay it lightly on the painful area. When the flannel has
cooled to warm, replace it immediately with a second
fomentation. Repeat this 4 or 5 times. Leave the last

----- PAGE 475 -----
fomentation on and cover it with plastic. Lay a towel over it,
place a hot water bottle on this, and cover everything with a
warm blanket. Let the individual lie quietly for about half an
hour or so. While he or she is lying there fomenting, massage
his or her feet and scalp.

Castor Oil Fomentation (Hot Pack)

It has been said and I must concur that the Castor oil hot pack
(hot fomentation) is, without doubt, the high monarch of all
herbal compresses; it is the Mohammed Ali, the Florence
Nightingale, the ’°32 Ford Coup, the sensual Sultan of Swat of
all poultices. I suggest that whenever you don’t know what else
to do for an ailing acquaintance, treat them to a Castor oil hot
pack.

Mind you, a Castor oil fomentation can be a bit messy to
administer. It’s nothing a little attention to detail can’t handle,
though. It can take a while to produce noticeable, long-range
results, but acute experiences of deep relaxation and central
nervous system bliss are always noticed immediately These are
perfect experiences to initiate any healing journey

A Castor oil fomentation can relieve muscular and skeletal
pain, but more importantly, it can relieve the deep pain
stemming from fibroids, internal scar tissue, congested lymph
nodes, ovarian cysts, and infections. A series of Castor oil
fomentations can restore health by invigorating scarred tissue
and any deficient and sluggish glands or visceral organs.

Castor oil, which is derived from the Castor bean (Ricinus
communis), is so similar to the natural oils of the human body
it is easily received by human tissues and it is able to assist in
their rejuvenation. Following is an abbreviated list of
therapeutic chores expected by the judicious application of
Castor oil fomentations: calming of nervous irritability and
aiding sleep, detoxification of tissues including the liver when

----- PAGE 476 -----
needed; reduction and healing of cysts, warts, and other
unwanted growths; alleviation of uterine disorders and chronic
infections; soothing the discomfort of bladder infection while
promoting healing; and stimulation of the body’s deep
circulation, including lymphatic circulation. Castor oil
fomentations promote general detoxification and deep
relaxation which in turn rejuvenates all systems of the body.

To prepare and administer a hot Castor oil fomentation:

1. Cut several pieces of laundered white cotton flannel, cotton
felt, or cheesecloth large enough to more than completely
cover the area to be treated. (When fomenting the liver, it is
best to use pieces of material large enough to extend from the
navel, over the liver, and around to the spine, and from the
right hip bone up to the breast/pecs.) I suggest you cut several
pieces of material because it is best for this fomentation to be
several layers thick.

2. Place the cotton material into a clean glass or stainless steel
pan.

3. Pour 1 to 2 cups of Castor oil onto the pieces of material,
soaking them through with the oil.

4. Place the pan of oiled cotton into an oven and heat it until
the oiled material is very warm but still touchable. One can
put a few drops of Lavender, Chamomile, Lemon, and/or Rose
essential oil onto the pack at this point if this floral oil
bouquet will be appreciated.

5. Wash the area of the body to be treated with a mixture of
warm water and apple cider vinegar.

6. Take the fomentation from the pan and remove any excess
oil so there is no dripping.

----- PAGE 477 -----
7. Place the hot fomentation over the area to be fomented. (If
this is a liver pack, the person should be lying on his or her
left side. Otherwise it will be a spleen pack, and that would be
okay too.)

8. Cover the fomentation with a plastic wrap.
9. Over this lay a heating pad or a hot water bottle.

10. Wrap a large towel around all the above and tuck it
comfortably under the body to hold everything in place.

11. Place a warm blanket over the individual and let him or
her receive the fomentation for at least an hour up to several
hours.

12. A gentle foot massage and head massage supplies a
delicious touch to this healthful ritual.

13. When completed, remove the oil from the skin by using a
gentle soap and then a wash of warm water and baking soda.
(This mixture will soothe the area, especially if any minor skin
irritation or rash has developed from the drawing action of the
Castor oil.)

When all is finished, wrap the oiled material in a plastic bag
and store it in the refrigerator. It can be reheated and reused
several times, but only on the same person. Replace it with
fresh material after six to eight applications.

Repeated fomentations over a period of time are often
required to heal the above conditions. These can be given in a
pattern of three days in a row, then four days off. Repeat this
pattern for several weeks or until the ailing condition is
history. Each time you receive the effects of this poultice you
will feel like you’ve just taken a six-week vacation, one in

----- PAGE 478 -----
which you never had to look for parking places or endure
airport fiascoes.

Remember, the tricks for using poultices and fomentations
successfully (although there are always some exceptions) are:

+ Make poultices thick.
+ Keep poultices and fomentations warm and moist.
+ Allow them adequate time to do their work.

Incorporating time in any therapeutic formula is valuable; you
asked for the help, so give yourself the space to receive it. Enjoy
post-trauma time by relaxing and being patient. More than likely,
stress and impatience had major roles in creating the wounds in the
first place.

* REcIPE FOR A HOUSEHOLD BURN CENTER

Into a 2 oz. (60 ml) amber glass bottle, pour 1 fl. oz. (30 ml) of
Aloe Vera juice. Add to this 30 ml of pure Lavender essential oil.
Cap the bottle and keep it in the refrigerator where it will always
remain cold and available. Shake well and pour this blend directly
on any and all burns to immediately cool and soothe the skin tissue.
Then when the skin is cold, apply the honey.

----- PAGE 479 -----


----- PAGE 480 -----
CHAPTER 25

Btstae ter savevey aveve Stave

This chapter is the “grouting stuff’ of the handbook, the
informational mortar that should fill in any inadvertent cracks and
crevices that might have occurred as we laid out the instructional
tiles of the previous chapters. Arranged in an A to Z format, from
Absorbability of Herbal Medicines and the Art of Simpling to
Making Liniments and Lozenges to Placebo Effect and Powdering to
Weights and Measures and the definition of Wildcrafting, this
chapter is a cauldronful of definitions, techniques, concepts, and
pertinent asides. The substance of the materials included supply
sundry supportive. complementary details that should serve well to

----- PAGE 481 -----
caulk the seams of our medicine-making vessel. Therefore, having
said whatever it is that I just said...

Assorsasiity oF Hersa Mepicines

Medicines, in order to be systemically effective, must be soluble in
some absorbable menstruum, or dissolvable in a body fluid.
Medicines are commonly considered most readily absorbed when in
solution.

Some folks believe that alcoholic solutions (tinctures) are
generally more easily taken up by the body than water solutions
(teas); as an herbal vehicle, tinctures are definitely more
preservative. For these reasons, alcohol menstrua might be
considered preferable to water except for the possible
complications inherent with alcohol use. It can cause inebriation
and can be habit-forming to some individuals. However, usual
therapeutic dosage is well below a harmful level even in the long-
term use (see “Alcohol,” Chapter Six, for more details).

Water is harmless and readily absorbable, but has no preservative
effect and can fail to dissolve and extract some desirable medicinal
components (the latter is true for alcohol as well). When making an
extract of dry plant material, a menstruum that combines alcohol
and water is quite practical for tincturing. If a person is extremely
alcohol-intolerant and doesn’t want to chance taking any alcohol at
all, it is advisable to use tinctures prepared with glycerin or vinegar
menstrua or use herbal teas.

The administration of hard and difficult-to-digest medicines
should be avoided because of their slow and uncertain rate of
disintegration and absorption and their consequent unreliability.
Certain compressed tablets, and, often, encapsulated, powdered
whole herbs may pass completely through the intestinal tract
without effect. It is very difficult to determine the quality or
authenticity of commercially powdered and capped herbal
ingredients, for the powdered herb which is encapsulated in a
gelatin capsule is generally never touched. smelled. or tasted by the

----- PAGE 482 -----
consumer.

Systemic medicines can act only when absorbed by the blood or
lymphatics, so it follows that conditions must be right to obtain the
most efficient results. Medicines administered by mouth act most
readily when the stomach is empty, and slowly (sometimes not at
all) when diluted by the contents of the stomach. A full stomach
may greatly reduce absorption. However, if nausea or stomach
upset occurs while taking herbal medicines on an empty stomach, a
small amount of food can be eaten.

Syrups, mucilages, and resins are useful where a prolonged
contact with the tissues is intended, provided they do not lessen the
efficiency of the medicinal ingredients. Syrups are valued chiefly for
their agreeable taste and the fact that the sugar content has a
preservative action, provided the sugar is present in a 2:1 w/v
proportion. However, a sick patient’s stomach might rebel against a
sweet or aromatized medicine.

Most medicines are best given at short intervals, and no matter
what the stomach conditions the general American trend is in favor
of administering herbal medicines in small and often-repeated
doses (i.e., 10 to 30 drops of 1:5 w/v tincture, three to four times a
day).

Medicines most likely act fastest when the circulation is active,
and slowest when the circulation is depressed. When the stomach
and/or the intestines are sluggish, medicines act more quickly when
local stimulants such as Cayenne or Ginger are given with them.
When diarrhea or vomiting occur during administration of
medicines, certainly less is absorbed and a portion is lost through
this heroic elimination.

Arr oF Simpuinc
A simple is a common health-enhancing plant.

A simpler is one who knows how to use these plants ... an herbalist.
The simpler:

----- PAGE 483 -----
+ Uses local herbs, recently harvested.

+ Uses only mild nutritional herbs with generous amounts of pure
water.

+ Uses these simples consistently over a long period of time.

+ Cleanses the body, promotes healthy circulation, and creates a
mild rise in temperature with baths and saunas to promote
sweating.

+ Uplifts, appreciates, and focuses on the individual’s health.

One can always rely on this simpler’s art to support health and heal
ills.

Capsutes

Capsules are used as a vehicle to deliver herbs in their dry form.
They are useful for administering herbs in the following
circumstances:

+ When the herb is to be taken in small amounts, such as 1/2 to 3
Gm. An ounce is approximately 30 Gm.

+ When the herb is intensely bitter or otherwise abominable tasting
(like Saw Palmetto) or contains a lot of mucilage. The flavors of
mild-tasting herbs don’t need to be hidden in a capsule, and when
possible they are better taken as a tea. These tonic plants (Red
Clover, Nettle, Red Raspberry) usually require a larger dose to give
a desired effect than is ordinarily provided by capsules.

+ When an herb or herbal formula is to be taken regularly for a long
period of time.

+ When the whole herb can be taken including the woody material.

----- PAGE 484 -----
+ As an excellent way to administer tinctures that have been infused
in lactose powder (see “Lactose Powder Infusion,” below).

+ Capsulated herbs are very convenient to take, especially when
traveling.

Drawbacks of using capsules

+ You don’t taste the herb, which, granted, can be quite merciful
(like when taking Saw Palmetto. Did I mention that already?).
However, this is a disadvantage when taking herbal bitters, as many
herbalists believe their effectiveness depends on a neurological
reflex triggered by actually tasting their bitter flavor. When put into
a capsule this beneficial action may be lost or greatly diminished.

+ You don’t know what you are getting unless you fill the capsules
yourself. (Of course this can be said about any type of commercial
herbal product.)

+ Short shelf life.

+ Most capsules available on the market are made from gelatin. I
have found that some of these capsules dissolve well and some
don’t. There are those that can travel the full length of your
gastrointestinal tract from its oral commencement to its anal
conclusion without dissolving, which with some pharmaceutical
drugs probably does one a tremendous favor, but it’s better that the
capsules with your herbal preparations dissolve and release their
contents while in the stomach. Check this out first before
purchasing any quantity of empty capsules by first sucking on one
for a while to see if it dissolves easily.

Some capsules on the market are made of plant starch or cellulose
and tend to break down quite quickly. In my experience, these are
less commonly used, more expensive, yet more efficient. In place of
using capsules one can wrap powdered herb in edible rice paper

----- PAGE 485 -----
cut to an appropriate size.

Capsule size

Small “0” capsules are best for children (if they’ll swallow them), or
for administering very strong herbs such as Goldenseal, Wormwood,
Lobelia, or Cayenne. Larger “00” are more suitable for adults.

1 ounce of powdered herb will fill about 60 “0” caps or 30 “00”
caps. One “00” cap holds about 1/4 teaspoon dried powdered herb.

Preparing the herb

Powder the herb finely so you can give a more concentrated dose,
and so it is easier for the body to assimilate. If possible, powder the
herbs as you use them rather than buying powdered herbs.
Powdered herbs which have sat on store shelves deteriorate quickly
and lose their effectiveness. Also, unless you know an herb quite
well by smell or taste, it is nearly impossible to be sure that you are
getting the herb you want when it is merely seen as a powder. Most
green powders look similar; so do most brown powders, tan
powders, yellowish powders, etc.

Procedure for filling capsules

1. Powder herb in coffee bean grinder.

2. Place powder in a small bowl. If using more than one herb,
blend them together at this stage.

3. Separate the two halves of the capsule, and hold the empty
capsule bottom between the thumb and the forefinger.

4. Punch or press the capsule bottom vertically into the powder
until it is filled.

5. Push capsule ends together and place in another bowl.

----- PAGE 486 -----
6. Continue this until all caps are full or all the powder is gone.

Dosage

People ordinarily take 2 “00” caps full of herb 2-3 times a day with
water (1 “O” cap, 2-3 times a day for children).

Storage

Store in tightly sealed bottles in a cool, dark place. Herbs begin to
deteriorate fairly rapidly after they have been powdered. However,
when put into air-free capsules, they keep for a longer time,
approximately 1 year.

Circumstances that modify the effects of medicines

While the effects of herbal remedies are generally much the same
on people, there are conditions or circumstances which tend to
modify their action. These factors create the environment that
makes healing and herbal therapeutics more an art than a science.
The modifying conditions and circumstances are: 1) age of the
patient, 2) the patient’s sex, 3) weight, 4) temperament, 5)
variations of temperature, 6) diseased tissue, 7) drug habit(s), 8)
pregnancy, 9) menstruation, 10) idiosyncrasy, the peculiar
susceptibility (or insusceptibility) of the tissues of certain persons to
the influence of certain medicines, 11) placebo effect, the most
profound, unpredictable, and potentially enlightening of all the
modifying conditions.

Concentrates

A simple method for increasing the potency of an infusion or
decoction is to prepare a concentrate. (This process is not
particularly suitable with sensitive or volatile plants.) In general,
this is done best by using a large volume of tea. as it is easier to

----- PAGE 487 -----
concentrate the brew without burning it. Concentrates are the
common herbal base used to prepare syrups and fomentations. An
easy method for preparing a concentrate is to place a strained and
filtered infusion or decoction into a stainless steel or glass pot. Stick
a chopstick straight down into the center of the liquid touching the
bottom of the pot. Withdraw the stick and make a mark at the
water line. Bring the liquid to a boil. Reduce the flame and gently
simmer the liquid, slowly evaporating the water portion until the
surface of the liquid marks a point half as high on the chopstick as
the original watermark. At this point, one-half the volume of the
original liquid remains, rendering the concentrate double the
potency of the original tea; when it marks a point one-quarter as
high as the original watermark the concentrate is considered to be
four times the strength of the original extract, and so on until the
concentrate is transformed into a tar and ultimately into a powder.
Be sure to use low heat over a long period of time or the
concentrate will “burn” and its therapeutic potency will be trashed.
One can also concentrate a tea by placing it in flat trays inserted in
a dehydrator.

Siphoning Procedure

----- PAGE 488 -----
=

Pipette Guiding Rod

Decantinc

The simple process of decanting is used to separate fluids from
solids. It usually consists of allowing the solids to settle and deposit
at the bottom of the vessel, and then carefully pouring off the liquid
by inclining the vessel. You can also use a food baster for drawing
off the desired liquids. This is a most valuable technique for
separating water and marc from oil when making fresh-plant oil
infusions.

Siphoning. It is sometimes impossible to decant by pouring off the
liquid, either because the holding vessel is too full or because of the
light character of the precipitate (for example, with Usnea extract),
the inclination of the vessel would cause a disturbance in the
powder that would result in an admixture of the liquid and solid. A
siphon can be helpful in a situation like this (see illustration). The
best material to use for the siphon tube is flexible surgical tubing.
Fill the tube with the liquid that is to be siphoned, and then insert
the short end into the liquid that is to be drawn off. Place the long
end in the receiving vessel. When a flow of liquid from the long
end has been established, it need not be stopped until as much of
the liquid as desired has been extracted.

Guiding Rod. Some skill is necessary for decanting liquids

----- PAGE 489 -----
without spillage from vessels of various shapes and when
transferring liquids from a larger container into smaller dropper
bottles. A guiding rod is most helpful in these processes, and it is
good practice to develop the habit of using a guiding rod as
illustrated. When dispensing liquid extracts into dropper bottles,
use the bottle’s pipette (dropper) as the guiding rod.

Dicestion

Digestion, from the Latin digerere, meaning to separate or dissolve,
is simply another maceration process in which the menstruum is
heated, with the heat increasing the solvent power of the
menstruum. Digestion differs from infusion and decoction in that
the period of soaking is considerably longer (1 to 10 days), and the
temperature at which the menstruum is held is much lower, usually
between 100° and 140° F. This process is not used very often for the
preparation of herbal extracts. I use it predominantly for the
preparation of oil infusions (see Chapter Seventeen), and basically
this is the process employed when making herb teas by solar
infusion (placing the fresh and/or dried herbs in a clear jar with a
water menstruum and letting the mixture set in direct sunlight for a
day). A lunar infusion (Witch’s elixir) is done in the same fashion,
except that the subtle energy from the light of the moon is
employed instead; a convivial chorus of cackles can expedite this
process.

Dispensatory

The U.S. Dispensatory is primarily a commentary upon
pharmacopoeias (U.S. as well as some foreign pharmacopoeias,
particularly British), but it is broad enough in scope to include also
every known medicinal or pharmaceutical article and its most
important preparations. The dispensatory is the most
comprehensive single work on medicines and their uses. In it you
may find official. non-official, and common names of plants,

----- PAGE 490 -----
descriptions, and botanical origins, and explanations of parts used.
Notes on adulterants are included. It offers formulas for
compounding preparations, and gives maximum and minimum
doses. The actions of medicines (physiological, toxic, and
medicinal) are fully but briefly discussed.

In reality, the dispensatory is an encyclopedia of drugs and their
uses. It is not necessarily official, nor does it delineate the legal
criterion used in this country. It includes a vast amount of material.
Note that the information concerning the uses of botanicals is not
written by herbalists and is often contrary to our experiences or
what we might at times regard as standardized “b.s.”

Dosace

It is better to err on the side of insufficient dosage and trust to
nature than to overdose. This avoids harming the client. Giving no
medication at all is always better than medicating aimlessly. Many
medicines positively influence conditions of imbalance when given
in minute doses, even though no explanation for the action can be
given. The fractional dose of Matricaria (German Chamomile) or of
Pulsatilla often effects a positive control over nervous phenomena
that cannot be duplicated by more powerful agents or doses (for
example, two Chamomile flowers in a cup of hot tea or 1 drop of
Chamomile tincture in an ounce of water). Try it.

As a general rule, large and robust persons require fuller doses
than small and frail individuals and the elderly require smaller
doses than other adults. In general, beginning at age 65, dosage of
most systemic remedies should run a gradually descending scale,
while it may be necessary to increase that of eliminants such as
gentle laxatives and diuretics. The weight of an individual also has
to be taken into account. When giving medicine to children, certain
rules must be followed. No absolutes can be determined in
administering medicines to children, but one or the other of the
following rules is often used:

Clark’s Rule: Divide the weight in pounds by 150 to give the

----- PAGE 491 -----
approximate fraction of the adult dose. (For example, for a 50-
pound child, divide 50 by 150 = 1/3. Therefore, the dose is one-
third that of the adult dose.)

Cowling’s Rule: The age of the child at his/her next birthday is
divided by 24. That is, for a child coming 3 years of age, 3 divided
by 24 = 1/8. Therefore, the dose is one-eighth that of the dose for
an adult.

Young’s Rule: The dose is computed by dividing the child’s age by
12 plus the age. So, for a child of 4 years, 4 divided by [12+4] =
4/16 = 1/4. Therefore, the dose is one-fourth that which would be
given to an adult.

As I mentioned, no exact rule can be established, and these doses
should be lowered in some instances, most notably when
administering strong and intense medicines like Goldenseal,
Cayenne, Poke, etc.

Dovste Maceration

This is a process of macerating a plant in a menstruum for an
appropriate amount of time, decanting it, pressing it, and then
using that solution (tincture) as the menstruum for a second round,
pouring it over an equal amount of herb as used in the initial
maceration, thereby repeating the entire process. Supposedly, this
technique renders the extract more potent. It is used by some
commercial companies as a marketing gimmick in an attempt to
position their products as superior. However, although this
technique makes sense when extracting very mild herbs such as
Cleavers, Mullein blossoms, Plantain, Nettle leaf, Red Clover
blossoms, or even Ginkgo, with most plants, if one does the initial
maceration properly and is using good-quality herb, double
maceration is really unnecessary, and, in my opinion, needlessly
squanders a lot of good herb.

Druc

----- PAGE 492 -----
“Drug” comes from the Dutch word droog, meaning dried plant.
Strictly speaking, a drug is a dried medicinal plant containing its
entire ingredients. However, corporations cannot patent a natural
plant for economic exploitation. Consequently, the Western
pharmaceutical industry has emphasized and promoted chemical
“drug therapy,” giving themselves more economic control to
manufacture and promote white powders and clear liquids. They
also have fewer problems by not having to deal with organic
materials that decompose and get buggy, and they generate
immense profits from marketing patentable products. So today, by
common cultural experience, a drug is thought of more as a modern
chemical preparation than as a medicinal dried plant, unless of
course that plant can get you high.

Expression (SEE Pressina)

Firrration

Filtration is employed when the solid matter to be removed from a
liquid solution is not present in large quantity. It is done by
submitting the mixture to the separating action of certain materials
which allow the fluids to pass through, but which block the passage
of the solid particles. Sometimes filtration is called straining or
collation. Actually, straining differs from filtration in that it affords
less complete removal of suspended sedimentary matter from the
fluid. It is useful when the solid particles are large enough to be
easily retained by a coarser media than those generally employed
for filtration.

The most common, easily attainable filtering material used in our
work is a paper filter such as a coffee filter. It is advisable to use
unbleached paper filters which have not been heat-sealed into
preformed shapes, because it is suspected that the sealant is
relatively toxic, especially when used to filter alcohol and vinegar-
based extracts or any hot extract.

Collation is the preferred method of separation when the fluid is

----- PAGE 493 -----
of a viscid (sticky or adhering) character, such as glycerites, oil
infusions, and syrups. The filtering media employed here are
cotton, muslin, flannel, or woolen cloth. These cloths can be used to
line a wire sieve before the viscid fluid is poured through.

Hergs and PHarmacguticaL Mepications

Herbs and pharmaceuticals are well-labeled as “complementary
medicines.” Regardless of rampant prejudice in favor of, and in
opposition to either one or the other, they are of equal value; one
primarily for heroic treatment of disease symptoms and crisis
intervention, and the other perfectly suited for convalescent
nourishment, nutritional toning/health sustenance, and disease
prevention and treatment. Both are playing an important role in
modern day health care and disease control. Both provide excellent
service to humans and non-humans when used with a clear mind,
compassionate heart, and a healer’s intent.

+ Normally, individuals having delicate constitutions are more
prone to adverse or unpredictable effects.

+ Herbal products that have been standardized (refined) to an
arbitrary percent of any specific constituent in an attempt to
exaggerate this component and elicit a faster (drug-like) action
frequently demonstrate more (drug-like) side effects. This
refinement process alters the natural synergistic energy of the herb
and modifies the herb’s natural ability to do many things and work
on deeper fundamental levels.

+ Alterative, adaptogen, and tonic actions are unique to herbal
preparations. None of these actions are found in drugs.

+ There are no drugs that can give the complex effects of an herbal
bitter.

+ The fast specific action of drugs dynamically support the surgical

----- PAGE 494 -----
process in crises/disease management and cosmetic and corrective
surgery.

+ Relevant factors to include in the decision to use herbs or drugs:

+ The individual’s preference upon having been clearly advised and/or self-
educated as to the risks and benefits of both types of medication.

+ Effectiveness for desired results
+ Speed of action sought.

+ Probability of dosage compliance, especially when prolonged treatment is
necessary due to the use of a slower acting herbal preparation.

+ Side effects (I regard this as more of a “wool over the eyes” or a “shmoozing”
term. I don’t see that any agent renders some quasi-predictable side effect that
somehow proceeds beyond some intended or predicted effect; there are “the

idual”—the classic “different effects in

effects” an agent causes in “an indi
different people” experience.)

Heras Comparep To Puarmaceurica, Drugs

HERBS DRUGS

Usually just one (often
‘ACTIONS Often multiple using a single specific
receptor site)

Often enhances

body’s own No drug does this
healing ability
Addresses Mostly treats symptoms (can

causal factors be life-saving in a

----- PAGE 495 -----
of an illness crisis/emergency)

aoxertruenTs Many (synergistic) Usually one

SIDE EFFECTS Few and mild Often many, can be severe
May be slow

onseToraction (working on Usually rapid and direct
nutritional level)
Variable
(you can .

cost make your Variable
own)

Hyprotysis

Hydrolysis is a chemical reaction where a substance (plant
constituent) reacts with water and is changed into one or more
other substances, such as starch into glucose or natural fats into
glycerin (glycerol) and fatty acids.

Lacrosz Powner Infusion

This is an excellent method for ultimately obtaining a dry
preparation from a fresh plant or dry plant tincture without having
to use heat. The process is suitable for administering tinctures and
fluid extracts whose menstruum consist of water and/or vinegar and
alcohol. It is not as suitable for those whose menstruum contain any
portion of glycerin. Obviously, it is not a good idea to administer
these preparations to lactose-intolerant individuals.

1. Mix a single tincture or a compound tincture with an equal
weight of lactose powder [i.e.. 30 ml (1 fl. oz.) tincture with 30 Gm

----- PAGE 496 -----
a oz.) lactose powder].

2. Expose this mixture to normal room temperature in a shallow
container. The menstruum will slowly evaporate, leaving the
lactose saturated with the herbal constituents.

3. Triturate the dry powder to an even consistency. (See
“Trituration” below.)

4. Fill the capsules with the dry powder or incorporate the powder
in the making of lozenges, etc.

Livivent

This is more of a preparation thinner than salve, to be rubbed on
the skin. Liniments are compounded and prepared exactly like
tinctures, using vinegar, ethyl alcohol, or denatured rubbing alcohol
as a menstruum. Liniments are prepared especially for external
purposes, and it is a good idea to label them as such (i.e., “For
External Use Only”). If rubbing alcohol is the menstruum, you
might even draw a little skull and crossbones on the label in red
ink.

Depending on the menstruum and the herbs, a liniment is
employed for various purposes: to draw, to warm, and to dry an
area of the skin; to disinfect cuts and wounds; to help heal wounds,
bruises, sprains, burns, and sunburns; as an anodyne to soothe
strained muscles and ligaments; or to work as a counterirritant
(revulsive).

There is a classic herbal liniment formula whose praise is sung in
the notebooks of every attentive herb student in America. This is
The Jethro Kloss Goldenseal & Myrrh Liniment, the Florence
Nightingale of compound rubs for injured athletes and sundry
adventurers. This liniment will last forever and will always be there
for you when you need it.

1. Mix together 1/2 oz. of powdered Goldenseal root. 1 oz. of

----- PAGE 497 -----
powdered Myrrh, and 1/4 oz. of powdered Cayenne.
2. Add to this dry mixture, 1 pint of (rubbing) alcohol.
3. Let stand for seven days; shake well every day.

4. Decant and bottle.

According to Mr. Kloss in his classic herbal, Back to Eden, “If you
don’t have Goldenseal, make it without.” I think a 1/16 to an 1/8
ounce of this endangered herb is more than adequate.

Of course, you can use ethyl alcohol as the menstruum in place of
the rubbing alcohol, whereby this tincture can be used internally as
well.

A lesser-known, quickly prepared liniment that is enthusiastically
recommended by Mr. Kloss is a simple vinegar preparation:

1. Combine 1 tablespoonful of powdered Cayenne red pepper with
1 pint apple cider vinegar.

2. Simmer gently for 10 minutes.

3. Bottle it hot, unstrained.

This makes, “a powerfully stimulating external application for
deep-seated internal congestion and inflammation, sprains, etc.”
The application of this Cayenne liniment arouses strong circulation
upon the surface of the skin inducing smarting and redness, but
does not injure the skin.

Lozences (Atso Cattep Trocues or Pasties)

Lozenges are small, solid, flattened cakes of very finely powdered
therapeutic herbal substance, prepared from a mass made with a
base of sugar for its pleasant flavor and a mucilage prepared from
Slippery Elm bark, or Comfrey root, or Marshmallow root, or from
a mucilage prepared from gum Acacia (a.k.a. gum Arabic). or gum

----- PAGE 498 -----
Tragacanth as an adhesive to give form and consistency. Water
(plain or aromatic flower water) is used to supply the necessary
moisture. Any suitable essential oil (Anise, Peppermint,
Wintergreen, etc.) may be triturated (see “Trituration” below) with
the sugar before this is mixed with the other powders.

Lozenges are placed on the tongue and allowed to dissolve
slowly. They are especially useful when the herbal ingredients are
intended to come into contact with the mucous surface of the
mouth, throat, and upper respiratory tract. The remedial action of
lozenges is generally designed to be local rather than systemic.
(There may, however, be a place for a Damiana lozenge for
enhancing staying power.) The action of a lozenge is normally
expectorant, demulcent, sedative, or antiseptic.

The creation of the lozenge-mass is the critical step in making
this vehicle. The dry herbal powders and sugar must be made into
an adhesive mass that will be sufficiently plastic to enable it to be
rolled into a flat cake without crumbling; at the same time it must
dry quickly, and the lozenge must not become brittle due to
insufficient adhesiveness. Mucilages are thick, viscid, adhesive
liquids that are produced by dissolving gum in water, or by
extracting by cold infusion the mucilaginous principles of Slippery
Elm, Marshmallow, or Comfrey.

When making the lozenge-mass, using a (moist) mucilage is a
preferred technique to mixing the dry gum powder with the other
dry ingredients and then adding the water. In this method it is often
difficult to avoid an excess of moisture.

Preparing a Mucilage

Using mucilaginous herb:

1. Macerate overnight 6 parts (6 Gm) dried herb in 100 parts (100
ml) of water.

2. Press it forcibly through cotton muslin.

----- PAGE 499 -----
Using gum Acacia (gum Arabic):
1. Combine 1 part gum Arabic to 2 parts water, let sit for several
hours, and strain.

2. Or moisten 50 Gm Acacia with 75 ml cold water, set aside for
several hours for the gum to dissolve completely, then add sufficient
water to make up 125 ml.

Using gum Tragacanth:
1. Mix 18 ml glycerin with 76 ml water.

2. Heat to boiling.
3. Remove from fire and add 6 Gm gum Tragacanth.
4. Macerate for 24 hours, stirring now and then.

5. Strain forcibly through cotton muslin.

Preparing the Lozenge

1. Mix and sift the dry powders to be used (powdered herb and
sugar, lactose infusions—see lactose powder infusion, above). If
essential oils are to be incorporated, triturate them with the sugar at
this time. The finer the powder, the better the quality of the
lozenge.

2. Stir in sufficient powder to a prepared mucilage to make a mass
of proper consistency. The quantity of mucilage to use always
depends upon the character of the powder. If the powder is quite
absorbent, more mucilage is required.

3. Once the final mass is prepared, it is ready to be formed into a
flat cake by placing it upon a hard, level, dusted surface and rolling
it with a cylindrical roller (which can be lightly oiled if necessary to
prevent sticking). The thickness of the cake determines the weight
of the lozenge. so it is more exact to have some means of adjusting

----- PAGE 500 -----
the thickness. The herbs I use for making lozenges are not critically
dose specific, so I usually avoid this rolling out (and cutting)
process entirely by calculating an appropriate size portion for a
dose, separating and rolling it between my palms into a little ball,
laying it on a hard surface dusted with powdered sugar, and then
flattening and shaping it with my fingers; then I do another one,
then another... It is a mellow task that proceeds at about the same
rate of speed and degree of excitement as filling capsules. You get
into the rhythm of it, and in a brief, peculiar segment of your
lifespan the job is completed.

Lozenge Rolling Board

4. If you choose to employ the hard surface and roller technique,
cut out each lozenge using a small, improvised, cookie cutter-type
device.

5. Lay the formed lozenges out on a screen or on a large sieve to
dry; a plate works in lieu of a screen; however, you have to turn the
lozenges over with a tiny little spatula to dry them out underneath.

Making lozenges requires some trial and error to discern the right
consistency for the lozenge-mass. Hold aside some of the powder
and some of the mucilage. Be aware that mucilage deteriorates
fairly quickly. Mix a mass, roll out a small portion of it (set the
larger portion in a tightly covered iar to retain its moisture), and cut

----- PAGE 501 -----
the disks, or form the cakes in whatever way you choose, lay them
out to dry overnight, and see what you get. You can always go back
to the main mass and adjust it for further experimentation by
adding more mucilage or more powder. With sufficient stirring and
kneading, the original mass will incorporate the modifying
additions. Take accurate notes until you get it down. Make your
first experimental lozenges tasty (1 part Wintergreen powder to 2
parts sugar makes a pleasant-tasting, aromatic treat); this way
people won’t mind testing these and giving you feedback as to the
tenacity and basic “suckability” of your lozenges.

Remember, the finer the powder (#60 & #80, see “Powdering”
below), the better the lozenge.

Marc

The term marc is from the old French word marcher, to trample (as
on grapes). The marc is the insoluble residue remaining after
extracting the soluble components of an herb with a menstruum
(solvent), or the pulpy residue left after the juice has been pressed
from grapes, apples, other fruits, vegetables, or herbs.

Materia Mepica (Tue Mareriats or Mepicine)

Usually a materia medica is a treatise on the materials used in a
particular school or system of medicine, discussing their history,
source, physical characteristics, constituents, and actions.
Preparations and doses are mentioned, and brief therapeutic and
toxicological notes are usually given. A materia medica can be
combined with therapeutics and these works are called Materia
Medica and Therapeutics. These works include the same stuff which
is found in a materia medica, plus extensive information on the
physiological, chemical, and toxicological action, as well as the
therapeutic usage of the medicines considered. A materia medica
will reveal the individuality of its author. What the author includes
is usually what she or he has personal knowledge of and interest in,
or which meets with her or his approval. In this aspect it differs

----- PAGE 502 -----
from a dispensatory, which is designed to be a book of general
reference.

Mepicine

Medicine is whatever you choose to help you focus on well-being,
to help reduce any resistance to the flow of life force, and to revive
your experience of health. Medicine is any agent that helps revive
your physical, mental, and emotional vitality, and uplifts and
promotes your natural state of wellness, joy, and prosperity. All
medicines are equally creditable; different things resonate
differently with different people.

Meniscus

Due to the capillary attraction of a liquid to the wetted glass walls
of a (graduated) cylinder or pipette, the surface of a liquid in these
containers presents a cup shape called a meniscus. A line drawn
through the bottom of the meniscus is normally selected as the
point at which to read a measurement.

MenstruuM

A menstruum is the solvent used to make extracts. The word
menstruum comes somewhere out of the ancient language of lunar
astrology. It is derived from the Latin word menstruus, monthly
(from mensis, a month), which, according to Caspari’s 1906 Treatise
on Pharmacy, “was applied because of some influence which the
changes of the moon, and consequently the time of the month, were
supposed to exert upon the preparation of solvents.”

Herbalists strive to prepare an extract that represents as much of
the whole plant as is possible and practical. The best menstruum
for extracting an herb will dissolve and bring into solution all the
desired principles of the herb, will leave behind the principles
which are not desired. and will retain the desired soluble

----- PAGE 503 -----
constituents in a stable form that will not be injured by light, heat,
or air during consequent use and storage.

The ideal menstruum for extracting a given herb’s constituents is
determined mainly by experimentation. The formula used to
prepare a menstruum differs with each individual herb or type of
herbal preparation. A menstruum may be pure water or pure ethyl
alcohol; a mixture of alcohol and water; a mixture of alcohol,
water, and glycerin; pure glycerin; glycerin and water; wine; vinegar
(acetic acid); or whatever combination of solvents the medicine-
maker determines to be the most efficient for making an extract of
the particular herb at hand.

Maxine Your “Moyo”

In spite of the common notion a mojo is not an X-rated item. A
mojo is four medicine power-roots that are housed in a small red
pouch. One’s mojo is carried in a pocket, hung on a belt, carried in
a purse. or dwells in a frequently used drawer. This little red bag

----- PAGE 504 -----
full of root allies is painstaking prepared and privately carried so
the active spirit of the plants can assist an individual to remain in
constant touch with her or his creative essence, freedom, wit, safety,
and well-being. Preferably, the roots are wildcrafted; roots that the
individual has personally taken from the soil with deep respect and
full recognition of the powers embodied in the plant entities; roots
that have been dug while the digger maintained clear, undisturbed
focus on his or her requests for the plants’ services; roots that have
been anointed with specific herbal oil infusions that have been
previously prepared for the making of a mojo. A mojo is personal,
a mojo is private, a mojo is a man’s and a woman’s intimate herbal
companion. It carries the visionary vibrations of their secret dreams,
the passion of their desires, and the power of their intentions.

The taproot of the mojo tradition reaches back to the ancestral
herbalists and ancient plant lore of the African continent.
Transplants of this knowing appeared in this country in the West
Indies and the deep South well over two hundred years ago. That is
what I was told.

Once the appropriate wild plants have been approached and
communed with, their roots are dug, carefully washed, dried,
anointed with herbal oils, and placed in a small handmade red
pouch, never to be seen again by anyone other than the carrier, the
creator and possessor of that particular mojo.

With continual awareness and appreciation of their presence the
visions of the roots’ meaning and purpose are internalized by the
carrier like the subtle vibrations of a powerful mantra consciously
connecting him and her to Source energy. The carrier is self-
empowered by the acquisition, preparation, and lifelong
companionship of these wild medicine-roots. Magical occurrences
are consummated by one’s focus on a clear intention in a personal
environment that includes absolute allowing with no resistance or
doubt of any sort to detain the flow of the creative, manifesting
energy; therefore the vibrations of a personally potentized mojo
supports and sustains the ongoing magic and joy of one’s life
journey. The mojo assists its carrier to view life positively, to create
deliberately. to attract delicious life experiences, to have what she

----- PAGE 505 -----
or he truly wants.

The four roots traditionally used to activate a mojo (as this
tradition was passed on to me) are:

1. Two (2)Imomoea Purga (Jalap) roots from the
Convolvulaceae family. One of these roots having a more lengthy
and slender form to energize “Him” (one’s male energy, yang
essence), and one shaped more round and circular to draw in “Her”
(one’s female energy, yin essence). Him and Her are the “power
roots” known as High John the Conqueror. They draw in personal
power protection, manifesting the impeccable warrior. This is star
energy—the brilliance of the Sun. Both Him and Her are anointed
with an oil infusion of Wormwood. Her is further anointed with oil
of St. John’s Wort (Hypericum), Him with a female ritual oil (one’s
own creation), then both roots are anointed with the carrier’s own
saliva (a personal intimate touch).

2. One (1) Bethroot (Trillium erectum) from the Liliaceae family.
This root is known as Southern John. Southern John is the “wealth
root.” It assists one to develop a sense of personal worthiness
bringing wealth of material benefits. One enjoys an endless
abundance of friends, health, love, money, wisdom, humor, and joy.
This root properly anointed is expansive with the vibrations of
Jupiter. Southern John is anointed with oil (infusion) of
Wormwood, oil of Mugwort, oil of Hypericum, and oil of
Calendula.

3. One (1) Alpinia officinarum (Lesser Galangal or Small
Galangal) root from the Zingiberaceae (Ginger) family. This root is
called Little John the Conqueror; or sometimes Chewing John. It is
the “wit root” which assists one to cut through fear and confusion,
giving the power of clear thought, wit, and lucid expression.
Properly anointed, it is the penetrating problem solver, active with
the vibrations of Mercury. Chewing John is anointed with oil of
Wormwood, oil of Hawthorn berry, oil of Mullein blossoms, and oil
of Hypericum.

4. Focus clearly and pointedly on your request of the roots as you
anoint them with the herbal oils. If any of the roots discussed above
are not available to you, you will of course use roots that thrive

----- PAGE 506 -----
where you live which you sense to be equally appropriate for
preparing your personal mojo. Trust your intuition. Our plant allies
live near us. Design and hand-sew the red bag yourself. Make pull
strings to close the top, hang beads on them if so inclined,
whatever; fashion the mojo to suit your style.

Gather your roots, prepare the herbal oils, select and sew some
passionate red material. It takes time to do all this, time in which
you are focusing on your strengths, acknowledging your personal
beauty, tuning into your joy, your health, your power and
worthiness, noting your absolute freedom to choose your thoughts
and live your life as you wish, and to prepare in the present your
ensuing journey into the future. Actualize your dreams, get your
mojo working, enjoy your life, and thrive; it is your spiritual
heritage. You are the healer and the dancer, joy is the music, the
roots are your allies.

Nationa Formutary (NF)

A formulary is a collection of working formulas for the preparation
of medicinal compounds. A formulary may or may not give the
therapeutic properties of such compounds.

The National Formulary is a semi-official work that includes
standard formulas and directions for pharmacists to make the
preparations used widely across the country, but which are no
longer included in the United States Pharmacopoeia. The NF is
basically a treatise of oldies but goodies, medicines that were at one
time official, but no longer are, and are still in popular use by the
medical profession. National Formulary preparations are designated
by the abbreviation NF. When a preparation is prepared exactly as
directed in the National Formulary VI (for example), it can be
identified as such by noting it on the label using the symbol, NF VI.

Herbal medicine-makers are advised to seek out the National
Formularies which were published around 1926 and earlier, when
the healing professions employed mostly botanicals for their
medicines.

----- PAGE 507 -----
Puarmaceutics (PHarmacy)

Pharmaceutics is the science and art of preparing, compounding,
using, and dispensing herbal or chemical medicines.

PHARMACODYNAMICS

Pharmacodynamics is a study of the way in which an isolated plant
or chemical constituent affects the body, or a study of the power of
plant and chemical constituents upon normal living organisms
(otherwise known as the physiological action of drugs).

PHarMAcocNosy

Pharmacognosy is from the Greek word gnosis, a knowing or
recognition. It is the science of dried plants which deals primarily
with information on the sources and constituents of plants. It
embraces the knowledge of the history, distribution, cultivation,
collection, selection, preparation, commerce, identification,
evaluation, preservation, and use of plant and chemical medicines.
Modern pharmacognosy texts focus on the microscopic and
chemical qualities of plants. Older books talk more about quality of
the visible (macroscopic) nature of herbs. If you can find one, an
old copy of Youngken’s A Textbook of Pharmacognosy is an
invaluable aid for assessing herb quality.

PHARMACOKINETICS

Pharmacokinetics is the study of how the body affects an herb or
drug (i.e., absorbs, distributes, metabolizes, and eliminates).

PHARMACOLOGY

Pharmacology is from the Greek words pharmakon, a medicine or
drug. and logos, a study or science. It is the study of herbal or

----- PAGE 508 -----
chemical drugs, their chemistry, their effects on the body, useful and
dangerous actions, and dosage, and includes research into newly
discovered plants and chemicals.

PuystotocicaL Action

Physiological action is the action of plant and chemical constituents
upon what biomedical researchers call “healthy animals.” It has
been studied to a lesser extent in humans. Drug action in one
species may be widely divergent from that in non-human or other
human mammals. The maximum value that “scientism’s” grim
animal experimentation can have is to point out the direction and
extent of activity a drug has upon certain types of tissue, and only
in certain animals. This can be and frequently has been dangerously
misleading. For example, thalidomide, a chemical tranquilizer drug
once prescribed in Europe as a sedative to treat morning sickness,
tested safe in the lab on mice, rats, dogs, cats, and monkeys. In
humans, it rendered 10,000 children crippled and deformed at
birth. Biomechanical differences between species are so great that it
is impossible to study one species and expect to learn accurate and
reliable information about another. This is amply illustrated by the
fact that guinea pigs can eat strychnine alkaloid with no ill effects.
Much of the information we have on the physiological action of
drugs upon mankind has been acquired from accidental overdosing
and cases of poisoning (as opposed to the deliberate overdosing
and poisoning of other animal species), and to a lesser extent from
drug proving. All significant medical breakthroughs benefiting
humans have come from the clinical study of the disease process in
human beings, and primarily through improved nutrition and
hygiene.

Pus

Pills are globular dosages designed for oral administration. They are
prepared by incorporating an herb with other material in such a

----- PAGE 509 -----
proportion that a cohesive mass is formed and this in turn is
molded into a desired shape. For the past several hundred years
pills occupied a place of major importance in pharmacy. The word
“pill” was nearly synonymous with doctor and disease; and why
not, with the very root of the word and the main mass of its
spelling being the word “ill.” But not all that long after the horse
was replaced by the automobile and passion was replaced by TV,
the pill started being replaced by the capsule. Most of what remains
in popular use today to honor the tradition of this medical
champion is The Pill, which of course continues to reign as an
undisputed superstar in bedroom pharmacy. Making pills that have
any aesthetic appeal whatsoever and won’t quickly dry out and
harden to the point where they will no longer disintegrate in the
alimentary tract, requires considerable time, labor, and technical
skill. Many of the advantages in administering herbal doses that the
pill once possessed such as smallness of bulk with consequent ease
of administration, concealment of taste, and relative permanence no
longer exist, as these features are supplied today more economically
and more efficiently for an herbalist by the easily acquired capsule.
Therefore, I suggest that if you are determined to make a pill for
delivering a dose of an unpleasant-tasting herbal powder, a very
simple method is to roll the powder in a small piece of fresh bread.
This works very effectively, unless, of course, you are on a grain-
free diet.

Pracezo Errecr

The faith, hope, and beliefs an individual holds when she or he
decides to re-experience his or her health, call forth the innate
ability of the body to heal itself. These are probably the most
dynamic aspects of any therapeutic results. The beliefs of both a
client and a practitioner, their trust in each other, in the process,
and in the form of medicines employed generate a significant
(probably the major) portion of the therapeutic interaction. If a
therapeutic process does not stimulate this profound energy. the

----- PAGE 510 -----
chances of success are greatly diminished, no matter what medicines
are used. The power of the client’s belief in the potential for cure
has been observed by all schools of health care throughout history.
The use of placebos grafts research-based allopathic medicine back
onto the common root stalk from which grew the methods of
primitive medicine people as well as the science of the re-emerged
shamans and herbal medicine folks of today. Modern placebo
research forces the truly objective thinker to reassess all traditional
therapies and view mainstream medicine’s allopathic practice in a
more accurate perspective as one of many diverse, equally effective
health care modalities.

Posotocy

Posology is the study of dosage and its relation to different ages,
sizes, weights, sex, idiosyncrasies, tolerance, time of administration,
and conditions of disease in individuals (see “Dosage” above).

Powperinc

This is the subdividing of dried plant material. Dried herbs are
powdered prior to dispensing or just prior to an extraction process
in order that as much of the cell contents as possible can come in
intimate contact with the digestive juices or a solvent. In pharmacy,
the act of powdering is also referred to ascomminution or
trituration, which means literally to rub, crush, grind, pound, and
pulverize into fine particles or into a powder.

The mortar and pestle is our classic device to use for this
purpose. However, this can be quite laborious to use, which is why
the electric coffee bean grinder (a mortar and blade) has become
the second-generation mortar and pestle, the modern lay herbalist’s
pulverizing tool of choice. Metal hand-powered grain mills, small
electric coffee bean mills, and older model (stainless steel type)
Vita-Mix blenders are excellent tools for grinding all but the hardest
of herbal material: however. nothing short of a rock crusher can

----- PAGE 511 -----
pulverize dried Turmeric, dried Wild Yam, or dried Red Root. You
have to shred dense plant materials like Turmeric and Wild Yam
while they are still fresh (undried) by using a cheese grater or an
electric food processor and then dry them. You need to use pruning
shears or a heavy-duty lopper to process dense woody roots like
Red Root and Oregon Grape root. Later you will be able to powder
the thin dried shreds and woody slices for extraction.

The device used to measure the fineness of a powder is the sieve.
If a sieve has 20 meshes (holes) to a linear inch the powder that
passes through it is called a No. 20 powder, which is referred to in
pharmacy as a “coarse powder”; a 40 mesh sieve renders a No. 40
“moderately coarse powder”; a 50 mesh gives a “moderately fine
powder”; a 60 mesh count supplies us a “fine powder”; and an 80
mesh lays out a “very fine powder” indeed. Numbers 20, 40, and 50
are intended for herbs that are to be macerated and percolated,
while 60 and 80 are used more for pills, lozenges, dispensed or
capsulated powders, and suspensions.

From my kitchen drawers, I dug out four well-stained sieves I’ve
had around my house for years. Measuring their screens, I found
that one of the sieves has a 16-mesh count per inch (I guess that
gives me a No. 16 “uncouth powder”); one has 30-mesh count; one
has 28, and the fourth one is a bamboo sieve that refuses to
conform in any way to a linear evaluation (an East meets West
thing). Therefore, for our lay purposes a common household sieve
or sifter will gives us a “coarse” to a “moderately coarse powder”
(mep) which is most often all we need for our work (except when
making lozenges). “High tech” European sieves sold in department
store kitchen supply centers will give you a finer powder.

Water softens and easily penetrates powdered herb, causing the
powder to expand; however, alcohol has a hardening effect as it
thoroughly dehydrates plant material, leaving behind only hardened
cellulose and other plant solids. A menstruum containing 60
percent or more absolute alcohol tends to harden plant tissue, so a
finer powder is more efficient for those plants requiring a strongly
alcoholic menstruum (Cayenne, Myrrh, Gumweed, Milk Thistle,
etc.).

----- PAGE 512 -----
Powdering should be done only just prior to your actual need for
it. Once powdered, many of the plant’s constituents dissipate
rapidly with the passage of time; store your herbs in as whole a
state as practical in order to inhibit oxidation and loss of volatile
oils.

Prior to rendering resinous or gummy plants into powder, place
them in the freezer for a couple of hours. The frozen, (temporarily)
brittle plant material will grind up quickly and is far less likely to
coat the inside surfaces of your machine with tenacious substance. If
you choose not to do this, denatured rubbing alcohol is a good,
inexpensive cleaning solvent (never to be used as a menstruum for
internal use, however) which then can be removed from the
machine with water and soap.

Powders. Herbal powders can be administered in capsules or
orally as is by being placed on the tongue and chased by a drink of
water or other liquid. If the dosage to be taken is large, you can first
mix the powder with a liquid. Mixing powders with honey, syrup,
or jam will assist in masking any unpleasant taste (see Chapter
Twenty-Two, “Syrups, Honeys, Oxymels, and Electuaries”), and
bitterness can be partially overcome by dissolving the powder in
sweet fruit juice. Some herbalist practitioners believe that due to
the fact the digestive process must extract the properties of the
herb(s), this process provides a slower and more even absorption;
therefore, lower doses of the powders are required to produce the
results obtainable with extracts; however, many other herbalists
believe powders are not as easily digested as teas, tinctures, etc., so
powders require higher doses ... Hmmm.

PreciPrraTion

Precipitation is the formation of solid particles in a previously clear
solution. At times in pharmacy this is promoted intentionally,
usually to “purify” a product. However in our humble work,
precipitation and its formation of precipitates is ordinarily
unintentional. unsightly. and not welcome: so we attempt to avoid

----- PAGE 513 -----
it. For the purpose of appearance, it is usually easier to prevent
disagreeable precipitates or other offensive appearances than it is to
remedy them.

Therefore, if a resinous tincture is to be mixed with water, it is
best that the water be cold and the tincture slowly added to it in a
fine stream while stirring; never do the reverse by pouring the
water into the resinous tincture. By following this procedure, the
resinous particulates are still precipitated, but they are formed in
such fine condition that they are easily diffused by shaking the
mixture.

When you attempt to mix a strong (high percent alcohol that is
high in alcohol-soluble components) with a weaker alcoholic
extract (and maybe then water), the strongly alcoholic liquid should
be gradually diluted with the weaker (and the water added last).
Less precipitation occurs using this procedure.

Pressinc (Atso Rererrep 10 As Expression)

Pressing is a process for separating liquids from solids which
involves the use of some force. This is because pressing is employed
in those cases where the amount of liquid is small compared to the
quantity of solid matter that is to be removed. Pressing is employed
to extract juices and oils from various fruits, nuts, and vegetables,
from some fresh herbs and grasses (see “Succus” below), and the
expression of herbal solutions from their marc.

There are many devices appearing on the market today that have
been designed for the herbalist to press his or her marc. Some of
these devices work reasonably well; some don’t. The renewed
demand for tincture presses has in the past ten years been
significant, and those engineers and machinists who are attempting
to service this request have marketed their first prototypes. I deeply
appreciate their efforts and have used a variety of these presses for
a number of years. However it is obvious to me that significant
modifications need to be incorporated in future product designs, the
most salient starting place being the steel container which holds the

----- PAGE 514 -----
material to be pressed; make it cylindrical rather than rectangular,
please! And let me know when you have one for sale (see
illustration of an old single-screw tincture press).

Hand Wringing

Potato Masher

Single-Screw Press

----- PAGE 515 -----
Hydraulic Press

When using a device like the hydraulic press or the screw-press,
the substance to be pressed is first put into a canvas bag, or a cotton
muslin cloth that has been wrapped tightly around the wet marc
much like a burrito. As pressure is exerted on the herbal burrito,
the pressure forces the liquid between the meshes of the cloth, and
the marc is detained within. Unless, of course, the cloth bursts. This
all too commonly occurring perplexity can be kept under some
measure of control by applying the pressure slowly, giving the
liquid time to exit gracefully through the cloth housing, and by
using press cloths that are relatively fresh. If you insist on using one
that is obviously battle worn, you’re asking for the often ornery
combination of marc and menstruum to extemporarily express itself
as extended cleanup time.

The potato masher (purchasable in antiques and collectibles
stores) is useful for expressing small parcels of marc; use it as you
do a garlic press, and the hand-wrung process is performed as
illustrated.

Ruts (Propose) or Mepicive-Maxina

As a teacher who values the creative potential of students more
than the content of my teaching. I seldom express any rules of the

----- PAGE 516 -----
art and science in discussion. I feel it is wise and important for a
student to learn basic theory and skills from an experienced other,
but then to pursue these ideas and skills in his or her own
creatively evolving fashion. Therefore, I extend principles I feel give
sound direction, but are certainly not gilded as sacrosanct. My eight
prime principles of herbal medicine-making are discussed in
Appendix C. However, there are 5 concepts that are rules in my
work. I think these ideas can be accepted as such by almost
everyone who works with plants and makes plant medicines. See if
you agree.

Rule #1—First and foremost, harvest only plant communities that
are healthy and are growing in great abundance.

Rule #2—The use of high-quality herb is essential for making good
herbal medicine. Regardless of how practiced you are or how
refined your technology of preparation, you can never make a
preparation’s quality better than the quality of the plant with which
you begin.

Rule #3—Pay attention to detail.

Rule #4—Take detailed notes on all your work.

Rule #5—Have fun! If you’re not enjoying yourself, something’s out
of harmony with you. Do something else you enjoy for the time
being.

SouuTion

A solution is the separation of the molecules of a substance (the
solute, herb) and their diffusion through a liquid (the solvent,
menstruum). The cohesion of the molecules of the herb are broken
and uniformly diffused throughout the solvent. A substance that is
not acted on by the solvent is said to be insoluble and ultimately
becomes the marc. Mechanical division (powdering the dried herb)
divides the solute into small particles, and these finer particles
present a greater surface area to the solvent. Heat further favors
solution because it drives the molecules of the solute farther apart,
breaking up cohesion. Heat is not safely used with alcohol solvents.

----- PAGE 517 -----
Frequent agitation is necessary to ensure complete extraction of
soluble matter by maceration. If the mixture is not agitated at least
once every 24 hours, a concentrated solution will envelop the
material and prevent effective solvent action; consequently, only a
small proportion of the soluble constituents will be taken up. So
always remember to:

Shake Your Tinctures.
(Maybe there are six rules.)

When a liquid dissolves in another liquid it is usually said that the
liquids are miscible. For example, glycerin and water are miscible,
as are alcohol and water. Oil and water are obviously not miscible.
A gas (vapor) dissolving in a liquid is called absorption.

Sotvenr ExcHance

Some herbs appear to be most efficiently extracted by using pure
190-proof ethyl alcohol for a menstruum. Examples of this are Milk
Thistle seed (Silybum marianum), a popular liver regenerative and
liver protective tonic; Chaparral (Larrea tridentata), useful for
relieving arthritis and auto-immune conditions; Myrrh
(Commiphora mol-mol), useful for treating infections and
inflammation of the mouth and throat; and Calendula (Calendula
officinalis), a mild and effective anti-inflammatory and lymphatic
well used for children’s health care.

If one wishes to use these extracts, but does not want to ingest
any amount of alcohol (ie., an alcohol-intolerant individual
wanting to heal and nourish the liver with Milk Thistle), the
following simple technique can be used to remove the alcohol and
replace it with glycerin as a preservative after having first used the
alcohol to extract the plant constituents.

1. Make an extract of the desired plant using 100 percent 190-proof
alcohol as the menstruum (no added water).

----- PAGE 518 -----
2. Make note of the exact amount of alcohol used in the
menstruum.

3. Decant and press the finished extract.
4. Measure the total amount of this extract after pressing.

5. Measure an equivalent amount of glycerin to the amount of
alcohol used in the menstruum (as noted in step #2).

6. Pour the glycerin into the extract and place this entire mixture
into a stainless steel or glass pot.

7. Over a low heat, gently warm the liquid extract/glycerin mixture
until its volume is equivalent to the original amount of the extract
in step #4. Keep the heat low, for glycerin will vaporize at 212° F.
The alcohol has boiled off and you are left with an alcohol-free
glycerated extract.

8. Cool, bottle, cap tightly, and store in amber-colored bottles.

A similar method of solvent exchange good for modifying small
quantities of alcohol extract and a little more economical using less
glycerin was shown to me by Karen Aguiar, herbalist and co-owner
of The Herbal Apothecary, Sonoma County, California. She suggests:
“Take 120 ml (4 0z.) of tincture, place in an enameled pot, add 60
ml (2 oz.) of 50 percent glycerin (which is a mixture of 50 percent
absolute glycerin, 50 percent distilled water). Simmer gently on a
very low heat until all the alcohol has evaporated. The finished
amount should measure about 120 ml. You may need to add more
of the 50 percent glycerin to bring up to 120 ml.”

Succus

A succus is simply a juice. The device I use for making an herbal
succus is a Chop-Rite Health Fountain (Wheatgrass) juicer.

----- PAGE 519 -----
It’s the only device I have found that performs this job, and it
does it admirably, though laboriously. A succus is an elegant extract
that will deteriorate readily. Unless it is to be used immediately, it
must be either mixed with absolute alcohol to protect and preserve
it: 3 parts succus to 1 part alcohol, or poured into ice cube trays
and frozen. These succus cubes can then be taken one by one and
dropped into a glass of water, or a cup of juice, or merely put in a
cup and melted as needed. This preservative method of freezing an
extract into individual dosage cubes also works well with herbal
infusions, decoctions, and concentrates.

Freshly picked Cleavers is the only herb I prepare annually as a
succus. Dandelion root and Plantain are two herbs, however, that I
have juiced a number of times, and I highly recommend that an
herbalist experience them in this form. The juice of the Dandelion
root provides a vitally calming liver tonic and the Plantain juice
blesses one with a magical (I mean this literally) vulnerary, anti-
inflammatory, anti-venom/toxin, anti-microbial, astringent agent
that is extremely useful in home and travel first-aid kits. It “fixes”
spider/insect bites (most notably the Brown Recluse spider bite),
poisoning, toothache, earache, inflammation of the skin, and makes
a soothing dressing for fresh cuts, wounds, bruises, hemorrhoids,
etc.; this résumé goes on and on. Wheatgrass is another fine tonic
obtained as a succus. The juices of other medicinal grasses of the
Poaceae family (formerly the Gramineae family) is an herbal
materia medica that has yet to be studied in any depth. From a
botanical family that includes many other power plants such as
Wild Oat, Couchgrass, Rice, Wheat, cane sugar, Bamboo, etc., I think
we will discover a wealth of other excellent medicines.

----- PAGE 520 -----
Chop-rite Health Fountain (Wheatgrass Juicer)

‘THERAPEUTICS

Therapeutics is the art of applying medicinal agents and other
measures for the alleviation or healing of disease. This word comes
from the Greek therapeutikos, inclined to serve or to take care of.
In early Greek times the term therapeutes was applied to the slave
who acted as a nurse or orderly.

Empirical therapeutics is that therapy for which no scientific
support can be given other than that it has been repeatedly used
with success. It does not take into consideration physiological or
pathological mechanisms, but is based upon observations in past
experiences of the effects of plant remedies and other remedial
measures. This is the accumulated knowledge of our approximately
2,000,000-year heritage of human beings experimenting on human
beings (provings). This profound, rich body of truly scientific
knowledge is the accumulated wisdom and knowledge of healing
and of healing agents repeatedly used with success and passed
down to each of us by our ancestral healers. It is the bulk of this
universal human heritage and wisdom that the novice community
of Western medical technology feels compelled to refer to as
quackery.” In Rational therapeutics the method of action of a
remedy can be “accounted for.” It is based upon the use of
medicines according to their known physiological, chemical, or
biological action upon definitely known pathological conditions
and bodv malfunctions. However, it must be noted that to this dav

----- PAGE 521 -----
the mechanism of many drugs in the Physician’s Desk Reference
(PDR) is “unknown.”

The rational starting point of the medical discoveries of the
Western medical world is basically the empiricism of folk medicine
and Herbalism.

TriruraTion

Trituration is the process of reducing the size of particles by
rubbing them in a mortar with a pestle. This renders a crushing and
or a mixing effect as the pestle is plied under pressure in a circular
motion. The most effective method of using the pestle is to begin in
the center of the mortar and describe a circle of small diameter
with the pestle on the substance, and gradually increase the size of
the circle with each revolution until the side of the mortar is
touched. Then reverse the motion, describing circles that are
continually smaller in diameter until the center is again reached.
This is repeated until pulverization or thorough mixing of all
ingredients (powders with sugar, essential oils with sugar, etc.) is
effected. Mortars with pestles having somewhat flattened ends are
the best for this process.

Mortar and Pestle

Unirep States PHARMACOPOEIA (usP)

The U.S. Pharmacopoeia is an official manual of standards for the

----- PAGE 522 -----
identification of drugs known as “official” in this country. The
components and processes identified and outlined in this manual
are the “top 40” of the day, so to speak, as compared to the NF’s
“oldies but goodies”; and like the National Formulary, those USPs
published around 1926 and before will be the most valuable
resource books for herbal medicine-makers. The abbreviation
“USP” stamps a medicine or preparation as official, and as such any
preparation bearing this official title must conform in all respects to
the provisions of a U.S. pharmacopoeia (as designated by its
number, i.e., USP IX).

Many countries compile and publish their own official
pharmacopoeia. Originally, the U.S. Pharmacopoeia was revised
every ten years by a committee of delegates from the American
Pharmaceutical Association, medical and pharmaceutical colleges
and associations, and the army, navy, and marine hospital services
sitting in convention. Today, due to the continual swamping of the
drug market with new patented drugs and drug recalls by
pharmaceutical conglomerates, it is revised much more frequently.
It is accepted as the standard concerning the quality, uniformity,
purity, and integrity of the drugs and chemicals embraced by
modern medicine. It describes them, gives tests, notes the usual
adulterants and sophisticants, sets limits for impurities, gives
instructions on preservation, and, most useful to herbal medicine-
makers—it gives appropriate (official) menstrua and practical
weight/volume ratios for each botanical tincture discussed (as does
the National Formulary). Except for USP II published in 1830,
neither the USP nor the NF gives therapeutic uses in any form
except as may be inferred from the titles of some of their
preparations.

Vererinary Doses

Herbalists are asked to advise in regard to giving herbs to animals
in appropriate dosages. In general, sensible dosage corresponds to
the weight of the animal. but there seems to be some exceptions.

----- PAGE 523 -----
Cows, for instance, appear to be less responsive to medicines than
horses when they are about the same weight. Cows are just more
laid back than horses.

The following doses will work as a good starting place to
develop experience.

Cats—1/8 to 1/4 the dose for an adult human

Dogs—Correspond to adult human dose according to weight
(obviously a 12 pound Shih-tzu/Maltese cross-even though every
bit as brave and tough—cannot take a dose appropriate for a 140
pound Rottweiler.

Horse—8 to 16 times the dose for an adult human

Cow—12 to 24 times the dose for an adult human

Goats and sheep—1 1/2 to 2 1/2 times the dose for an adult
human

Swine—1 to 3 times the dose for an adult human

Llamas and ostriches—If you have them, your guess beats mine

Vivisection

Vivisection is the cutting, puncturing, or otherwise operating on, a
living animal, usually without the use of anesthesia, for scientism’s
medical, physiological, or pathological “rational” investigation. This
method of research renders confinement and usually extreme
suffering for 70,000,000 of our companion animals each year.
Ninety percent of these animals are referred to as “expendable mice
and other rodents”; the “other rodents” being rabbits, squirrels,
ferrets, guinea pigs, and hamsters. The remaining 10 percent of the
animals used are apes, chimpanzees, monkeys, dogs, and cats (both
strays and illegally seized pets), sheep, horses, goats, pigs, and
exotic animals. This 10 percent in real numbers amounts to
7,000,000 non-rodent animals “rationally” violated yearly.

A growing portion of modern medical herbal research, which is
eagerly referenced in most of today’s trendy new herbals, is derived
directly from biomedical vivisection. This helps sustain the market
for animal testing. If this concerns vou. please examine vour sources

----- PAGE 524 -----
as you pursue your herbal studies, considering the role you might
be playing in perpetuating the demand and commercial market for
this sort of rational “medical herbal research.”

Vivisection is a technique that reductionist science instigated to
bestow so called “rational credibility’ upon itself. Currently,
vivisection is employed by many other commercial industries as
well to appease the insurance industry. Reviving the art, science,
and language of Herbalism for enhancing human health simply
does not require the pain and suffering of other species to generate
credibility, nor is this required in any way for lay herbalists to
continue developing insight into the use of plants for nourishment
and well-being. I don’t see how the carnage and abuse of non-
human species will somehow render human beings more healthy
and happy. It is my deeply felt opinion that the continued support
of vivisection and animal testing for gathering herbal knowledge is
not in the least bit what green Herbalism is about. Accessing
research based on vivisection is more about individuals attempting
to establish some form of “medical credibility” and recognition as
“advanced herbalists.” I suggest growing a garden instead, or
adopting a puppy. Focus on life, nourishment, and health; deep
insight and appropriate knowledge will follow.

Weicxts anp Measures

In the herb lab (as well as throughout the rest of the world), it is
most useful to weigh herbs and measure liquids using the metric
system. This system was developed by the French during their
Revolution, supposedly to replace the many varied systems used at
the time throughout the country. Most likely, however, the metric
system was devised to defy the previous government s standard
measurement system which was based on measurements of (royal)
human anatomy. The avoirdupois system of measurement is one of
those archaic systems the French snubbed ages ago, but we continue
to embrace as the U.S. Conventional System. Our inch and ounce
are possibly based on the length and mass of some late French

----- PAGE 525 -----
king’s nose or other item of his anatomy, whereas the prime unit of
measure for the metric system is the meter. This unit is based on the
circumference of the Earth as measured on a line through Paris and
the north and south poles. The length of this line was divided by
40,000,000, and each division was called a meter (from the Greek
word metron, “measure”). Other standards of length (centimeter,
millimeter, kilometer) were further defined by dividing or
multiplying the meter by various factors of 10.

The standards of weight (mass) and volume are also derived from
the meter. The gram (Gm) and its divisions are used for weighing,
while the milliliter (ml), also known as a fluid-gram, is used to
measure liquids.

The gram is a unit of weight set by the mass of a cubic centimeter
(cc) of water under standard conditions. A gram and a cubic
centimeter of distilled water are essentially identical. In other
words, a measure of 1 cc of distilled water weighs 1 Gm (at sea
level, at 4° C.).

A milliliter is identical in volume to 1 cubic centimeter of
distilled water; therefore, 1 Gm = 1 cc = 1 ml of distilled water
(and for our practical purposes this holds for all other liquids we
refer to in this manual).

This approximate 1:1 equality between the weight (the mass) of
a solid substance and the volume of a liquid substance is very useful
for determining weight to volume (w/v) proportions when
calculating and formulating the strengths of liquid extracts. (See
Chapter Twelve on making tinctures.)

Approximate (U ser-Frienpiy)

Eouarenr Measurements

Liquid measures
1 drop* = 1 minim
15 minims = 1 ml = 1 cc

----- PAGE 526 -----
30 ml = 1 fluid ounce = 8 fluid drachms
1000 ml = 1 liter (approximately 1 quart)
500 ml = approximately 1 pint (480 ml = 1 pint)
1 teaspoonful = 5 ml = 5cc
2 teaspoonsful = 10 ml = 10 cc
1 tablespoonful = 15 ml = 15 cc = 3 teaspoonsful
1 wineglassful = 60 ml (2 fluid ounces)
1 teacupful = 120 ml (4 fluid ounces)
1 glassful or cupful = 240 ml (8 fluid ounces)
1 gallon U.S. = 128 fluid ounces = 3.8 liters
1 British Imperial gallon =154 fluid ounces = 4.6 liters 1 liter
=1.8 pints
Weights
30 Gm = 1 ounce (avoirdupois)
454 Gm = 1 pound (avoirdupois)
(This is based on the new 1959 international agreement of
English speaking nations.)
1 kilogram = 2.2 pounds
Length
1 inch = 2.54 centimeters
1 meter = 39.37 inches

* A “drop.” A rose by any other name is still a rose, but is a drop
always a drop? This is questionable. A drop of water is supposed to
be equivalent to a minim and in pharmacy- speak is often referred
to as a “minim.” But this is only true when applied to water, and
then, only when the water is expelled from an “international
standard dropper.” The shape and quality of the surface from which
a drop descends influences its size. However. even when using a

----- PAGE 527 -----
standard dropper these presumptions are seldom true when
applied to liquids other than pure water. Thick, viscous liquids such
as syrups produce a drop five times larger than a drop of a heavy,
mobile liquid like chloroform and three times that of alcohol. If we
use a fluid drachm as a liquid measure, we will find that it holds
250 drops of chloroform; or 146 drops of alcohol, or 130 to 150
drops of an aqueous-alcohol tincture or fluid extract. It will hold
105 to 140 drops of oil, but only 45 to 110 drops of syrup. So,
since there are 8 fluid drachm in a fluid ounce, for all practical
posological purposes we can assume that 1 U.S. fluid ounce of most
commonly used tinctures holds approximately 960 to 1200 drops.
But none of this is any big deal, unless of course one is
administering highly intense or toxic extracts or when administering
medicines to infants. In these situations, measuring doses by the
milliliter (ml) or the cubic centimeter (cc) instead of by drops
would be more reliable.

A “part” of an herbal formula. When putting together a formula,
herbalists design the formula and communicate its composition by
referring to the number of “parts.” Example: for treating and toning
an irritated prostate gland, mix 2 parts Saw Palmetto, 1 part
Echinacea, 1 part Damiana, 1 part Yarrow, 1/8 part Ginger. The
question often arises, what is a part ...? Is it a gram, an ounce, a
cupful, a shovelful, a truckload, or a drop? Of course, the answer is
it can be any of these measures. You retain the proper proportions
as long as each measure used to make up a part is the same
measure as each of the other measured parts in the mixture. It all
comes down to how much mixture you ultimately want to make. If
you chose shovelsful as a measure for each part in the sample
formula, you'll end up with enough mixture for all the prostates in
the NFL. So a more reasonable measure to use is the oz.
(avoirdupois = 16 oz. to the pound) when compounding bulk
herbs or the fluid oz. for blending liquid extracts. Referring back to
the sample formula, you would blend 2 oz. Saw Palmetto, 1 oz.
Echinacea, 1 0z. Damiana, 1 oz. Yarrow, and 1/8 oz. Ginger, ending
up with 5 1/8 oz. of the formula. If you want only half that
amount, make each part 1/2 oz. It doesn’t matter what measure vou

----- PAGE 528 -----
use. A household coffee scoop (filled and leveled) works fine as a
part measure as long as you use the same scoop throughout. (Taken
from The Male Herbal)

Thermometer correspondence

In Fahrenheit’s (F.) thermometer, the freezing point of water is
placed at 32°, and the boiling point at 212°. The number of
intervening degrees is 180. In the Centigrade (C.) or Celsius’s
thermometer the freezing point of water is marked zero and the
boiling point 100°. From this information, it can be seen that 212°
Fahrenheit is equivalent to 100° Centigrade.

To convert degrees Fahrenheit to degrees Centigrade—C = (‘F —
32) multiplied by 5 and divided by 9.

To convert degrees Centigrade to degrees Fahrenheit—F = (°C
multiplied by 9 and divided by 5) + 32.

Or find a good conversion table somewhere. The New York
Public Library Science Desk Reference, edited by Patricia Barnes-
Svarney, is the best science reference book I’ve found, published by
The Stonesong Press Inc., MacMillan, 1995.

Solid weight—Liquid weight
1 gram is equal in mass to 1 cc of water at sea level at 4° C (39° F);

a cubic centimeter (cc) is the approximate equivalent of a milliliter
(ml). Therefore, for our purposes: 1 cc = 1 ml = 1 Gm.

Wildcrafting is an ancient, honorable art and craft
of harvesting Earth’s gifts. It is a communion with
the wild green as organic gardening is a
communion with the domestic green. What we
must take care of is to attract to herbalism more
teachers of sustainable wild harvesting to guide
and inspire young herbalists.

----- PAGE 529 -----
Wouocrarrep Hers ano Orcanicatty Curtivatep Here

The term wildcrafted signifies that the plant has grown wild in
nature without human intervention and ideally has been
consciously harvested from unpolluted areas with full regard for the
plant communities and care for ecological balance. These plants
should never be fumigated or irradiated.

Please note, that as the medicinal herbs are becoming more and
more popular, some wildcrafting practices are placing a great
burden on a growing number of wild plant populations; therefore it
is important to begin organically cultivating many of our herbal
medicines rather than over-harvesting and wiping out wild
medicinal plant communities. A good example of the destruction
caused by mindless wildcrafting is the notable loss of fields of wild
Echinacea angustifolia and Echinacea purpurea due to commercial
over-harvesting. Organically cultivated Echinacea purpurea is every
bit as effective. Wild Goldenseal is also currently under stress due to
over-harvesting, as are Osha, Lady’s Slipper, American Ginseng,
Blue Cohosh and Black Cohosh, and a growing number of other
native medicinais.

But let us not make a reactionary mistake of construing
wildcrafting as something negative. It is not in the least; it is an
herbal art and a craft that commands respect when performed by a
skilled artist and craftsman. Pursued with intelligence and
understanding, wildcrafting is a process of harvest pruning, which
when practiced knowledgeably never exploits or diminishes wild
plant communities, but instead supports and enhances them. What
is needed is not condemnation of this ancient, honorable craft, but
more well-trained teachers and fervent, plant-loving students.

The term organically cultivated means that the plant has been
cultivated by natural means on unpolluted land without the use of
chemical fertilizers, sewer sludge, pesticides, or herbicides.
Hopefully these plants are never fumigated, irradiated, or
genetically altered (these lists of corporate foolishness keep getting
longer and longer).

----- PAGE 530 -----
* The medical profession’s favorite word, “quack,” wantonly used to demean the
perspectives and practitioners of (most) other health care modalities, is derived from
the term quacksalver. Quacksalver is the archaic name for quicksilver (mercury), which
is the highly toxic allopathic medicine used historically by university-trained medical
doctors (M.D.s) to treat syphilis and other infections. Therefore, to be etymologically
precise, today’s practicing allopathic physician (the M.D.) is, by his and her
professional heritage, the original and authentic quack, but the proponents of other
modalities do not feel required to refer to them as such.

----- PAGE 531 -----


----- PAGE 532 -----
ON MEDICINE

T’was a balmy summer afternoon. Chiron sat waiting in the cool
shade of his summer cave on the northern slope of Mount Pelion.
The Centaur observed with deep affection the students who were
entering the cave and sitting in a circle with him, his grand heart
touched by their individual beauty and eager vitality.
Chiron was a renowned health seer, archer. musician, and

----- PAGE 533 -----
visionary. It is said that he was the wisest and kindest of all
Centaurs. He was learned and skilled in the use of herbs, potions,
gentle words, and healing song. Over the years of his life,
innumerable youths had been entrusted to his charge, amongst them
some of the finest healers and warriors of Western story.

Chiron had summoned the students and their friends to speak
with them about the function of medicine and about the art of
health. Upon the students’ request, he had agreed to share with
them his knowledge of medicine: its value and role in the human
journey.

The wise Centaur knew well that words don’t teach, that it is
only life experiences that teach, but he knew that words stimulate
ideas in the minds of others, and therein he was aware of the great
influence words possess. As always, he agreed to speak with those
who asked him to. Chiron was happy to share any knowledge he
had gained from his centuries of life experience on Earth, especially
his knowledge of the uses of herbs and other medicinal substances
for human beings in their quest for health, joy, and prosperity.

In a short while, all who were to participate in the discussion had
arrived. The final person to join the circle was a woman called
Artemis, who, upon entering the cave, walked over and hugged one
of the students, her young nephew, Asclepius, and sat down beside
him. She then looked with loving eyes at Chiron, her long-time
friend, and nodded her head in warm greeting; the Centaur returned
the salutation, with a gesture of delight and mutual appreciation.

Chiron then closed his eyes for a moment of thought. A tranquil
silence filled the air. Thereupon he opened his eyes and looking to
each of the individuals in the circle, he spoke,

“Thank you for the honor of this gathering, I am most pleased
that you are here with me, and I trust that we will inspire and lift
each other to realms of thought and vision that no gathering before
has experienced in quite the same way. This meeting of spirits in
this physical time and place is unique in all of creation, and I am
delighted to be here with you.

“As health seers and self-healers we focus our attention on the
nature of iov. health. and well-being: and frequently in our

----- PAGE 534 -----
discussions with one another the question arises, ‘What is the nature
of medicine?’ What is its action in the process of individuals
experiencing their intrinsic health or re-establishing wellness from
an experience of illness? If I may share my experience and insights,
T'll offer you a perspective to consider, and as we have brought
ourselves to this communion for mutual upliftment and stimulation
of thought, please be free to contribute what you will during the
time we are here together.”

Chiron fell silent once again. Sensing permission and a concerted
desire from the gathering for him to continue, he drew a deep
breath, “Each of us is an absolutely free spirit, currently choosing to
walk the physical spheres of creation, eagerly participating in this
realm with a physical body, mind, and feelings. We are creators;
this is our essence. Desire is the will of our spirit to create. With our
mind we freely create thoughts, the vibrations of which are
propelled into the universe, bolstered by the passion of our desire
and attendant feelings. From this point of offering, we attract to us
the experiences born of the content of our vision.

Transcribed from the herbal Akashic Records.

“Each individual is complete and independent in his and her
ability to create. If, however, due to circumstances in one’s life, an
individual holds inner resistance to the manifestation of a desire
and feels the need for assistance to allow the experience of that
which he or she strongly desires, ‘medicine’ is a catalyst that can be
empowered to help. With the power invested by the individual’s
belief in it, medicine in turn, bolsters the individual’s belief that he
or she can have what is wanted, reducing inner resistance, allowing
and accelerating the materialization of this desire.

“It is important to note that the use of medicine is appropriate
not only to help alleviate or prevent disease, but also when one
feels it necessary to use an ally to assist in creating whatever is
desired. Therefore, plants, prayer, foods, chants, minerals, the
company or touch of another being. potions, ritual. music.

----- PAGE 535 -----
incantations, charms, amulets, icons, fetishes, and all other
manifestations a person strongly believes in can be utilized as good
and powerful medicine.” Chiron paused for a moment, then added,
“I define the term ‘good’ as ‘that which one wants.’

“Yet ever bear in mind that ‘medicine’ is simply a tool, a means
to facilitate the clearing of a pathway in a person’s life journey to
whatever experience he or she wants. Medicine is not the creator of
one’s life experience; it is not the walker on the path, nor is it the
healer. The human being is the walker; the human being is the
creator, the self-healer.”

Chiron paused, allowing for comments that might come forth; he
looked to the individuals in the circle, and as no one spoke, he
continued,

“I have found it most important to understand that during those
times in one’s life when illness is experienced, medicine does not
‘fix’ a person, simply because he or she is not broken. Human
beings do not weaken, nor are they fragmented by their life
experiences. One is never less than a perfectly whole being,
regardless of the extent of his or her experience of dis-ease. As a
human being travels in his life’s infinitely varied experiences, his
true nature flows forever undivided. Freedom, joy, radiant health,
youthful vitality, passionate enthusiasm, abundant prosperity,
creativity, and growth are—ever accessible—core components of
each individuals whole self. These components, even when resisted,
are never forfeited by one’s temporary experience of the lack of any
of them. They are perpetual qualities of one’s ever-perfect spirit,
one’s true self.” Chiron smiled joyfully to his friends, “Babies, young
children, and playful adults demonstrate this reality each moment
of their day ... for they do not resist it. They are profound teachers.”

A young woman motioned to Chiron that she had a question.
Chiron was pleased and nodded to her. “Chiron, if feeling good,
perfect health, and vitality are indeed our true and natural state of
being, what then is the experience of disease and physical
deterioration? If freedom is a basic component of human nature,
why would one choose to feel bad; why do human beings ever
diminish themselves by choosing illness and physical

----- PAGE 536 -----
degeneration?”

Chiron listened closely to his student’s words. “These are
excellent questions, young Ceres, questions that reach to the very
heart of each person’s journey within this grand physical domain.
Thank you, I will clarify my perspective on this. As I said a moment
ago, humans are creators. This is the dynamic essence of our beings;
and within this vast physical realm, everything is possible. There
are no limits to what an incarnated spirit can manifest within any
of his or her physical life experiences.

“On this planet, Earth, we live in an abundant arena of contrasts
and differences from which we can compare one thing to another,
one experience to another, and, from this infinite array of choices,
decide precisely what we want.

“As you can see, this dense physical realm is a magnificent,
inspiring environment for us creators to direct the creative energy
that is summoned by our desires, and therein relish the exuberant
feelings of this life force flowing through our being.

“As each of us create and manifest our ongoing series of ideas,
beliefs, attitudes, and experiences—thereby ever creating one’s self
—we expand our knowing and grow in wisdom. We unfold the
singular attributes of our spirit and offer a wholly unique
perspective of consciousness to All that Is. Within this grand
universal dance, each of is contributing entirely new dimensions to
the lead edge of thought of which we are integral participants in
this ever-evolving, ever-expanding universe. And it is because we
are entirely free spirits pioneering on this cutting edge that we can
make choices that might at times manifest experiences of bondage,
frustration, and boredom, or symptoms of disease and physical
deterioration. However, in the ever-changing nature of the physical
universe, each and every experience is always temporary and
changing, while our nonphysical spirit, our inner being, the creator,
is eternal and forever ongoing.

“Desire is Spirit’s will to create. Activating my
medicines with the breath of my desire to feel

----- PAGE 537 -----
good, I focus my intent and breathe health into
my potions.”

—T. Exper Sacus

“In light of this, one must keep in mind that venturing into
choices that manifest an experience of dis-ease is not a process of
breaking or diminishing or devaluation. It is quite the contrary.
Illness, like any and all other experiences, is just one of our current
life’s transient manifestations. It is merely a signpost, an illustration,
an intimate teacher, a passing experience indicating to us precisely
how, from our current beliefs and mental attitude, our choices are
flowing our creative energy relative to the broader intention of our
inner being’s true nature. We are in process of gaining knowledge
and wisdom about ourselves, about who we are, and thereby, which
choices harmonize with the individual nature of our unique spirit.
We are steering ourselves on our particular paths of joy.

“Experiencing disease is merely another venture of our
innumerable, ongoing human processes for pressing forward,
feeling, probing, and extending our individual creative boundaries.
Therefore, plunging oneself into life—which I strongly recommend
all beings do with full passion—rummaging through this world’s
vast field of contrast, leaving no experience unconsidered—even
though, sometimes, maybe even frequently, we get ourselves into
trouble—is how each of us expands and evolves our valuable and
indispensable being. Dear companions, our spirits have not
projected themselves into this physical realm to be guarded and
safe; we have come for adventure, to feel the delicious surge of
passion, to flow life force as we create ever more glorious visions
and experiences. Each of us is an ardent explorer, a seer, a warrior,
and a monarch on a grand creative quest.

“Health and disease are the consolidation of one’s current mental
attitude. Illness—not feeling good—is a powerful indicator that we
are holding inner resistance to following our inherent path of joy.
We are diverting our vision from focusing on our bliss, there in
disallowing the vital free flow of our Source energy throughout our

----- PAGE 538 -----
being. We are holding to thoughts, beliefs, and actions that are
contrary to our individual true nature—and they do not feel good to
us, but we fail to acknowledge the truth of there inner signals and
so, for the time being, manifest like experiences of discontent and
dis-ease. Experiencing the contrasting information that illness can
afford us concerning who we are and what we want is one way that
we can grow. It is a segment of our ongoing adventure, a succeeding
step in the unending sequence of movements in our life’s dance; it
is merely a motion forward in an unending series of forward
motions that make up an individual’s unique evolution.

“The experience of health teaches us in the same way. Each and
every one of our life experiences is of paramount significance to the
creative unfolding of our spirit’s abiding journey and, therein, an
integral part of the concerted evolution of all life, of All that Is.
Blessed be diversity my dear friends. Each individual’s path is
unique, and where one stands at any moment is a mark of
perfection in that being’s creation. We are Spiritwalkers; each of us,
in every moment, is a creator with a unique perspective to offer,
powerful, adventurous, and forever whole. We do not break, and
we are never diminished or devalued by any of our experiences.

“Once we determine that a manifestation we’ve attracted does not
or no longer feels good, we can use this life experience as a
platform on which to stand, providing us with a fresh perspective
to determine and envision what we now want instead, and thereby
focus the magnetic vibrations of our creative thought on that fresh
vision and intent. Through this process, we progress our
experiences, we grow, we expand, and we move forth in the
rapture of our spirit’s eternal journey.

“In like manner, once an individual who is experiencing illness
makes a clear impassioned decision that she wants to feel good
again, she has set the revival of her experience of health in motion.
If she does not resist this experience, but rather focuses on those
things and ideas that feel good to her spirit, envisioning her health,
feeling her health, easing inner resistance, allowing the flow of
ideas that ignite feelings of joy in her life, and letting these feelings
become the seeds of fresh experiences, the return of her innate

----- PAGE 539 -----
health is hers; it is inevitable. If she feels she needs an ally to help
her find the state of mind that allows this transformation, whatever
or whoever she believes will do this is good medicine for her.

“This is the nature of medicine; it is an ally. It matters not which
medicine-path one chooses. All medicines are powerful when
empowered by an individual’s belief in them, coupled with one’s
focused desire to be well, or to have whatever else it is that is
wanted. With the empowerment of one’s creative thought and
passionate will, medicine becomes a potent companion. It becomes
wholly empowered to uplift, soothe, nourish, and assist.

“From this point of view, I observe one’s true nature, that
perpetual non-physical inner essence, remaining consummate and
unaltered by any physical experiences that have been amassed. Our
intrinsic health and wholeness are integral parts of our human
nature, always and forever accessible; and each individual remains
whole even in the midst of experiencing disharmony and illness, no
matter how grave his or her immediate condition has been labeled.
Recurrent stories of dramatic personal transformations and
‘miraculous healing’ demonstrate this most vividly. Health remains
innate to our being, and it is always within reach when we desire it
resolutely, focus our attention on it passionately, release inner
resistance to our innate joy, and follow all intuitively inspired
actions. The contrasting experience of the lack of ease in one’s life
merely leads us to an intense desire to experience ease, to put our
life in harmony with the knowing of our inner being. And if one
feels the need of a medicine to help realize this desire, then it is
wise to embrace it, whatever nature of medicine it might be.”

Chiron concluded and smiled at his companions. At that moment
Artemis indicated that she would like to speak. Chiron knew
Artemis to be a bright and wise teacher, and he welcomed the
contribution of his knowledgeable peer. “Yes Artemis, please
speak.”

“Thank you, Chiron” Artemis said, and looking into the eyes of
the young woman who had asked the question of Chiron, she
spoke,

“I know you, voung Ceres. You and vour companion, Bacchus,

----- PAGE 540 -----
seated beside you, have strong, distinct paths that you both follow
with clarity and joyous passion. You offer little resistance to the
flow of life force through you. You seldom react to what others do
or say, but instead you set your own tone in life, which allows
nothing to lead you astray from your chosen path. Your spirit grows
passionately in its own individual way.

“And I observe you honoring with equal spontaneity the
individual paths of others, allowing them, without judgment,
disapproval, or rancor, their way of being, appreciating their
singularity, enjoying their idiosyncrasies. You flow gracefully with
the humor and beauty of life. From your strength of inner knowing
and accordant action, you radiate your undiminished health, youth,
and vitality. Your presence is uplifting to all whose lives you
touch.”

Ceres and Bacchus smiled at Artemis gracefully receiving her
acclaim.

“You embody a path of passionate health,” Artemis continued,
“which we can look to as a model of harmonious nonresistance to
one’s own innate qualities of well-being.”

Then looking to the others sitting in the circle, Artemis said, “So
often I have discussed with Chiron and other health seers what we
feel are the very foundations of health, the understanding of which
can render any illness of mind and body both preventable and
curable. I have found two simple principles that inevitably emerge.
The first is to follow the guidance of your inner spirit always. This
guidance which attends to each and every thought, comes forth to
you through your feelings. Focus your attention on those thoughts
that feel good to you, for these are the ideas and visions that are in
harmony with the truth of your inner nature.

“Hold to the thoughts and actions that follow the instincts which
come forth from within. It is only through one’s intuitive inspiration
that a person takes right action and gains true self-knowledge. It is
not the idealism, morals, whims, and dictates of the outer world, or
the observation of and reaction to other persons’ experiences that
give joyful, healthful guidance. I have seen consistently that when
one’s spirit and one’s mindful personality are in harmony with each

----- PAGE 541 -----
other, life force flows with ease, and life experiences consist
primarily of joy, prosperity, and health.

“Invariably, our inner being holds clear awareness of the original
intent of our incarnation, that unique cardinal path we originally
chose for this life. In accordance with this we have a profound inner
guidance system ever at work; in every thought, one’s mind and
personality are guided from within through a continual
communication with one’s spirit, using the intimate inner language
of feelings. Those thoughts and experiences that vibrate in harmony
with the vast knowing of one’s inner being feel good, and those that
vibrate in discord feel bad; it is that simple. This is why love,
appreciation, enthusiasm, and so forth feel good to us, and why
anger, frustration, guilt, jealousy, and blame feel bad.

“Chronic pain and disease are merely extensions of bad or
painful feelings that one has endured or attempted to ignore and
disregard over a period of time. Disease is initiated by any
prolonged resistance or conflict between the specific choices of
one’s mind and the comprehensive knowing of one’s inner spirit.

“The second principle is to hold sacrosanct in one’s heart and
mind the freedom and importance of all others to follow their
chosen paths. Venerate, as you do your own, the wisdom and true
guidance of another’s inner being; honor their path, be they
connected and in harmony with their inner self or not. They are
learning and growing too. Judge them not; do them no harm; they
are co-creating with you. They do not have to agree with you.
Allow them their way and truly appreciate their individuality. The
vibrations of appreciation are profound, akin to those of
unconditional love.

“Each of us appears to be separate from one another, but
nonetheless each is an integral part of the whole of life, and each
being has her or his own path to follow. The questions of right or
wrong, of good or evil are relative; what is right for one is possibly
wrong for another. And, likewise all standards of morality and
idealism are purely relative. Spirit has no rules. The unique
individuality of every path is hallowed and is wholly essential to
the evolution of All. Appreciating and allowing all others to be as

----- PAGE 542 -----
they are, attracts full freedom to be oneself, and it is this vast field
of diversity we access on this physical plane that allows each of us
to find everything we need to support the realization of our desires.

“We have come into this realm eager to engage in physical life, to
celebrate our individuality, to feel the joy of life force flowing
through our being as we exercise our innate ability and freedom to
deliberately create whatever experiences we desire. Through each
of our life journeys spirit accesses the wonderful contrasts that
compose the physical realm, indulging in the infinite choices this
realm bestows that feed our creative nature; therein we grow in
wisdom and knowledge and expand our being within the grand
evolution of All that Is.

“Life only asks of us that we travel our individual journey with
joy in our heart while allowing all others to do the same,
appreciating their individuality, therein blessing all those around
us. This is the art of health.”

As Artemis finished speaking, Asclepius, sitting beside her,
looked at her, respect and affection lighting his face. She was a
renowned patron of the healing arts and a bright influence in his
life, having taught him the artful way of animal and plant medicine.
In the succeeding moment, however, an expression of puzzlement
cast a fleeting shadow over his face. He gestured to his two teachers
that he wished to speak.

“Dear Artemis and Chiron, I understand your ideas about the
nature of health and illness and I appreciate the depth and practical
significance of your perception. But, what about the symptoms of
disease, shouldn’t we clearly identify these and work to understand
their cause? Wouldn’t an in-depth diagnosis help someone attend to
the discomfort of the symptoms and relieve a person’s irritation?”

Chiron reflected on the young physician’s question for a moment
and then responded; “When one fully recognizes the power of the
mind to create, Asclepius, he will use it only to focus attention on
what he wants. If what is, is not that what you want, then do not
energize the experience further by dwelling on it.

“Physical manifestation is a by-product of your vibrational
offering. I am referring to the vibrations of the mental signals vou

----- PAGE 543 -----
project. Those signals you set forth are the vibration of what you
are giving your attention to, by either your perceiving, your
daydreaming, your imagining, your remembering, and so forth, in
whatever way you are focusing in the moment. In other words, the
signals you send out to the universe, those which in turn attract
things to you, are all about what you are giving your attention to.
The physical reflections of these signals are those manifestations
you experience.

“It is best to walk lightly with understanding and enjoy these
personal manifestations. Appreciate the enormous amount of
information they supply, for they do you a great service by
accurately illustrating to you where you are currently holding your
predominant focus. You are continually molding your experience,
this is ongoing, and the manifestations that occur are there
specifically to give you the information that helps you to identify
more clearly what you want.

“I repeat, Asclepius, we are creators. This is what we have come
to this physical realm to do; it is our life. We are intimate
extensions of the very same Source energy that has created and
sustains this universe. We have come forth in these bodies intending
to evaluate the lush contrast of this physical time space reality,
letting that contrast evoke within us clarity of decision, because it is
through the decisions that we forge, that we direct and flow the
very same creative energy that creates all things. And it is the
flowing of this energy that is life.

“The process of creating one’s life experiences is all about
attraction. It is about what comes to you as a result of your
vibrational offering. When the manifestations you are experiencing
feel joyful and fulfilling, you are creating in harmony with your
inner nature; and these manifestations offer you new perspectives
from which to envision and create even greater and more delightful
experiences. Your creating never ends; manifestations come and go,
informing you of what you are currently attracting; experiences
flow one to another; the journey is forever ongoing.

“If the manifestations you are presently experiencing are not
exactly what vou want. let this insight stimulate vou to examine

----- PAGE 544 -----
more closely what you have been thinking, discussing, believing,
remembering, assuming, or expecting that is attracting these
phenomena into your experience.

“The laws that support the functioning of the universe reflect its
vast transcendent intelligence. The simple universal law of
attraction is a cardinal law. There is no law of projection. There is
nothing that can project itself into your experience unless you allow
this by concurrently attracting it to yourself. You are the sole creator
of your life; you experience only that which matches your creative
output, that which you somehow include in your vibrational
offering. So, it is wise to focus your mental energy consciously on
what you want, rather than including in your mental signal that
which you do not want. Note those thoughts and experiences that
feel good to you, those that are, therefore, in harmony with your
inner being—your true nature—and focus your predominant
attention on them. Attract them and others of like vibrational
quality into your life experience, thereby intentionally creating the
experiences you want.

“Therefore, prolonged diagnosis of disease—dwelling on the
etiology of what you do not want—and attempting to discern the
cause of these symptoms merely includes them strongly in your
signal, and this is the vibration you will continue to energize. Hence
this and other vibrations like it are what you will continue to attract
unto you. Instead, I strongly suggest you use the opportunity to
focus on your health; focus predominantly on what feels good to
you. See your health; envision what you want. Feel these feelings;
dwell on them instead and project these signals to the universe.
Focus your passion on what you want to manifest in your life. Ask
yourself why you want it. This further clarifies your desire as it
magnifies the passion of your wanting and attracts more and more
supportive, harmonious thoughts that further enrich and intensify
your vision. Devote time to this task; this is your work as a creator.
Create in your mind a vivid picture of what it is you want; and feel
this desire. Feel it strongly. Feeling is the first step in the
manifestation of your wishes, a powerful component of consciously
creating vour experiences.

----- PAGE 545 -----
“And by all means, avoid inner resistance to your wishes. Weed
out any contrary, habitual thoughts and beliefs you hold. Do not
contradict the manifestation of what feels good to you by dwelling
for any extended period on imagined obstacles to its manifestation.
Weed out any negativity that vibrates resistance. Seek the company
of those who uplift you and see your health and beauty. Fully allow
your desires to come to you in their perfect time; they will come to
pass; enjoy the process of the returning experience of wellness;
follow your inspired actions, for they will be in harmony with your
creation; relish the journey.”

As Chiron finished speaking, a man whom he had not previously
met, spoke,

“Members of this circle, it is delightful to be here with you.” he
said,

“My name is Sachs, I am here with my young son, Tages, one of
your students, Chiron.”

“I have been an herbalist throughout my life. I help others learn
to communicate with plants and to make herbal medicines.”
Looking to Chiron he continued, “In light of this creative process
that you explain so clearly, Chiron, how is medicine best used by an
individual? What is the wisest counsel to give one who is seeking a
medicine for healing?”

Chiron smiled warmly, pleased to meet this new acquaintance.
He welcomed the elder Sachs and greeted the young man sitting
next to him. He then said, “When you use a ‘medicine’ to assist you
in a creation, your perspective while using it is of paramount
importance; for it is the perspective with which you take a
medicine that formulates your vibrational offering. Decide clearly
what you want to attract. Let the medicine assist you in allowing
yourself to have that which you desire. One’s belief in a medicine
increases the expectation for receiving what is wanted. Enthusiastic
expectation is a perfect state of mind for allowing the manifestation
of one’s desire, because, therein, any resistance to this manifestation
is significantly diminished.

“Hold your primary intent for using a medicine clearly in mind.
Employ the help of vour medicine to accent vour intention to

----- PAGE 546 -----
experience health and well-being. Use it with the conscious intent
to feel good, to manifest vitality, to attract prosperity or whatever
else you seek. This clear intent, bolstered by your belief that the
medicine will assist you strongly directs your signal to attract the
experience of whatever it is that you want. This fertilizes the seeds
of self-healing and intentional creating.

“Do not mis-create by using medicine with the idea of ‘getting rid
of what you don’t want, or to something that is ‘broken,’ or to
attack disease and so forth; for these vibrational offerings, in the
attempt to exclude, will merely attract those very things you do not
want by focusing attention on them. By focusing attention on
symptoms or on past ‘causes,’ one is not moving away from the
unwanted experience, but instead is lingering in the thoughts,
statistics, visual images, and the feelings of their ‘dis-ease,’
prolonging the experience of that which is not wanted. Avoid
reacting to what is. Rather, create the tone of that which you want.

“Symptoms of dis-ease are the manifestations brought about by
an individual’s past thoughts, beliefs, and mental attitude. It is
important to realize that one has no power to change what has
passed. One’s full power, the power to change what is, lies solely in
the present, wherein one can envision, feel, and consciously create
the nature of future experiences.

“Once disease symptoms—reflections of inner disharmony—have
ignited the realization that they are not what one wants, these
manifestations have done their job. It is important to appreciate the
powerful teaching they afford, but there is no longer any value in
focusing further attention on them. Acknowledge that they stem
from past attitude, and that it is this attitude, and its attendant
thoughts, that must be revised in order to change one’s experiences.
Identify those thoughts and beliefs that illicit a sense of uneasiness
within you, thoughts that do not feel good to you, but for whatever
reasons you have continued to hold on to and prolong. These are
the thoughts that resist the flow of your true nature. What is
appropriate now is to decide what is wanted and to focus creative
thought totally and passionately on the visions ignited by that
decision.

----- PAGE 547 -----
“Regardless of present circumstances and despite the etiology of
an illness’s manifestation, ones full power as a creator of future
experiences, as a self-healer, lies entirely here in the present. Use
medicine as a mantra that magnifies the vibrations of your intent;
let your medicines echo the vibrations of your impassioned desire
to regain the experience of your innate health, vitality, and well-
being.”

Asclepius, who, at his young age, had already shown himself to
be a remarkable physician, was clearly fascinated by the
significance of Chiron’s counsel on the use of medicine. He
immediately asked him to elaborate on how, then, the knowledge
and compassion of the herbalist and the physician can help heal
another being.

“Physicians and herbalists, like medicine, can be distinct allies for
a person who regards and trusts them. They are influential
companions for anyone who believes they can help them and have
requested this help. An attending herbalist or physician can
skillfully soothe and mend another person’s physical malaise and
make them more comfortable, but herbalists and physicians do not
‘heal’ others, no one heals another.” Chiron emphasized, “One can
only heal oneself.

“When I use the term heal, I mean reconnecting to one’s Source
energy by one’s removal of inner resistance to the flow of life force,
so that inner ease returns, harmony between one’s mind and spirit
is reestablished, and the experience of one’s intrinsic well-being is
revived.

“A wise practitioner views illness not as an affliction, but instead
as an explicit teacher in one’s life. The experienced practitioner
also knows that, if disease symptoms are merely palliated, and the
teachings these symptoms offer are ignored, the individual will
soon re-experience the effects of illness in the same or in yet
another form. An external remedy offers no cure if a person has not
established mental ease. If one’s spirit is not heard, the rhythm of
mind is broken, and the mark of a person’s illness remains there.

“To assist another’s healing, herbalists and physicians should
consider using their thoughts more to visualize. less to analvze.

----- PAGE 548 -----
seeing their client’s innate health and well-being, not using the time
so much to scrutinize a person’s symptoms of dis-ease. Guide the
person to reveal how he can restore his experience of health. Ask
him what he wants in his life and once he identifies this, ask him
why he wants it. Further indulgence in this liberated flow of desire
will increase the passion of his vision and animate his
determination. Enter into the joy and passion of the realizations
that come forth, and accompany him in his vision wherever he
wants to take it. Accompany him in the creative power of his
daydreams, for these are the exhilarating passageways his spirit has
opened to his heart and mind. Assure him of his ability to manifest
his dreams and his worthiness to have, and to be, and to do
whatever he wants. Encourage him to explore his bliss, uplift him
and assure him of his well-being. Inspire him to find the desires of
his true self and feel the deeply nourishing feelings of connecting in
a positive way with them. This is a trusted ally’s power and
purpose, a gift of medicine, a practitioner’s joy.

“A compassionate herbalist’s or physician’s finest service is to
focus on their client’s innate health, radiate an uplifting attitude,
and assist the client to make heartfelt sense of their experience of
illness. This juncture initiates a highly creative momentum.
Referencing the client’s experience of illness as a provocative
manifestation of what the individual no longer wants to create,
relating to dis-ease merely as a powerfully motivating experience
from which to decide and envision what feels good and what is
now clearly preferred, the practitioner assures the client, without a
shadow of doubt, that this illness by nature is a temporary
condition. The herbalist embraces the client’s impassioned
preferences as the birth of a resplendent idea upon which the client
can build an ever more enlightened vision, generating greater and
greater enthusiasm and vitality for attracting what is now clearly
desired, releasing resistance to what is wanted.”

At this point Chiron wished to elaborate on the topic of
compassion, for he knew the confusion many individuals
experience around this emotion and concurrent feelings of
empathy. He was very aware how the focus of one’s feeling of

----- PAGE 549 -----
empathy can impinge on one’s power to assist another’s healing.
Chiron took a few moments to choose his words precisely, then he
said, “The truest essence of compassion is a very high, pure
vibration—it stems from a deep understanding of well-being.

“The greatest compassion a health seer and counselor—a health
ally—can offer another is, I know without a shadow of doubt that
well-being is your true experience—that very high passionate
vibration of well-being, having no resistance within it.”

“However, when most individuals use the word ‘compassion,’
they are looking at some suffering individual who is in a desperate
situation and feeling empathy for where they are—and that is of no
benefit at all.

“When a health counselor holds someone as their object of
attention from a place of knowing their innate wellness—they may
be temporarily not well—but as a health seer knows their true
well-being, they set the tone of the consultation. The counselor
floods the energy field with a pure, positive, resistance-free
vibration; and the client’s vibration readily acclimates to this higher
vibration. They are attracted to it like a shivering man is attracted
to a warm stove; and well-being becomes their experience. This is
true compassion!

“But so many individuals get lost in the struggle. Many counselors
search for something or someone who seeks their help, but then
upon finding this, they get focused on the needy part. They
acclimate to the needy part and feel the despair of it—and call this
compassion. This only lowers an individual’s vibration separating
the counselor from his or her power to uplift and inspire.

“If a counselor is empathizing with the client’s struggle—now,
instead of maintaining the higher, faster vibration and bringing the
other person to it, their experience is empathy with the client’s
lower, slower vibration and their feelings of discomfort.

“At this point it depends on how the counselor is feeling. True
compassion feels very good, and when feeling this, whomever a
health counselor holds as their object of attention will feel good
also. This is true upliftment!

“Set the tone of the consultation to a vibration of upliftment.”

----- PAGE 550 -----
Chiron stated with impassioned emphasis, “This is the health
counselor’s power of true compassion.

“What good can we do another unless we see them in their
perfect health and hold this in our thought as we counsel? If we see
them any less than this, what good are we doing them? We must
inspire them to be their wholeness which includes perfect health. If
we see them in their disease where can either of us go, except to
merely palliate their symptoms?

“By holding this state of inspired vision and upliftment, you
radiate it. As you think, you feel; as you feel, you radiate, and all is
affected by your offering. This is the power of your influence as a
health seer, herbalist, physician, and health ally.

“When a client experiencing temporary disconnection from their
inner source of joy comes to you for assistance, your intent, as you
are interacting with this person, is to bring them closer to
remembering and appreciating who they are. This means
appreciation and reassurance coming from you is in order. Focus
your attention on them wholly. Listen to the words they offer,
acknowledge their experience of illness, suffering, and discomfort,
but behind it all hear the singing of their spirit. Therein abides their
wellness. See their beauty and perfection, and offer soothing words
like, “I assure you, it will be all right,” and ‘It too will pass, things
will get better.’ When you offer your words of reassurance from
your place of knowing that all is well, they will begin to feel it.
This fresh feeling within them will be the first step in the
manifestation of their re-experience of health. Encourage them to
flow their energy to concordant feelings, to the ideas that inspire
them and feel good to them, to the feelings that stem from deciding
more clearly what they truly want.

“Use gentle humor. It is the unbounded expression of
appreciation. Laughter is life force reflected through a physical
being who is willing to be light enough to let it flow. Keep the
session buoyant; relax, spend more time looking for things to
appreciate, to laugh about, and to play with. Let cheerfulness
deflect all oppressive doubt and depression. It is most efficient to
view all that is right with the individual. focusing upon those areas

----- PAGE 551 -----
in their life that feel good to them—and there are so very many
when one looks from a perspective of appreciation and laughter—
As these positive aspects are identified and felt, others, one after
another after another, those aspects that are in harmony with their
spirit make themselves known, and the appreciation for that which
feels good in their own life grows. The temporary disconnection
from inner joy dissolves.” Chiron fell quiet for a moment, looked
deep into Asclepius’s eyes and continued, “and once a person finds
himself, it no longer matters where he was when he was lost.

“See another’s suffering only long enough to feel your desire
erupting within you to help them, but do not let their suffering take
you to it. See your client’s health, don’t use the time to dissect his or
her dis-ease. Consider using your thoughts more to visualize, less to
analyze. Instead, find within yourself the ability to imagine a better
life for them. You have to imagine their wellness even in the reality
of their experience of (temporary) illness and pain, and exercise the
creative beingness you came here to live. Wish wellness for them,
imagine wellness in them. Know they are well, regardless of what
they say. This is your power. If you go to their way of believing in
the moment, you give up your power.

“But, remember, my companions, you don’t do this for them
because they need it; you do it because it is your true nature, and
because doing it also makes you feel good, and because joining
them in a slower vibration takes you from the very Source that is
you. Your greatest value to others is when you are joyful, when you
are connected to who you are. Your greatest value to others is when
you are radiantly healthy, when you are happy, to have, and to be,
and to do all the things that are very important to you. When you
are doing these things that make you feel good, that bring you joy
and vitality, you are a catalyst inspiring others to an awareness of
that. You have healed yourself, you are immersed in your natural
wellness. Radiate health and well-being and all will be influenced
by this. You are a natural healer, a health seer, a perfect health
ally.”

Chiron fell silent. The others remained silent as well, each
traveling their own pathway amongst Chiron’s ideas. A few

----- PAGE 552 -----
moments passed, and Chiron added,

“Then while harmony between the spirit and the mind is being
brought about, the very cause of the experience of illness being
eradicated, one can apply the herbal oils and salves, administer the
simples, the potions, and the tonics that usher good feelings and a
strong sense of well-being to the body, therein most efficiently using
such physical means as may be appropriate to soothe, tone, and
complete the healing of the body.

“Show your companions how to make herbal brews and potions
that sustain the body’s vitality. Make with them those herbal
preparations that help nourish their bodies and minds and soothe
their afflictions, further assisting them to focus attention on all that
feels good in their life. Remember, health is simply feeling good.

“And, as herbalists, whenever possible show these wonderful
people to the gardens, to the fields and other places where plants
live, for the companionship of living plants is truly the highest
level, the premier expression of herbal medicine. Let folks’ minds
and hearts be uplifted by the silent language of the flower kingdom,
words expressed through the pure positive energy radiating from
the beauty and vitality of each living plant. Let the rhythm of
human pulse be influenced by plants’ enchanted connection with
the cycles of absolute well-being and the jubilant abundance of
Earth. Entreat yourself and your clients to meditate within these
surroundings, this uplifting environment that assists one’s mind to
become calm and widen its outlook, allowing an individual to feel
the visions of what he or she truly wants, rediscovering and
confirming pathways to their bliss.

“And, finally, esteemed students and peers, communicate clearly
to your clients that healing is a human function; it was not the
counselor or the medicines or a supernatural power that healed
them; it was they who healed themselves, for the final
responsibility and the most compassionate act of health seers,
herbalists, and physicians are to ultimately empower their client
companions with the full realization that health and healing come
forth solely from within.”

Upon this final word. voung Bacchus, who, although he loved

----- PAGE 553 -----
listening to the teachings of his mentor, could contain himself no
longer. He jumped up onto his feet saying, “Chiron, is it not time
now to play; is it not time to honor this delicious flow of life by
enhancing its surge with dancing and the taste of fine wines, ripe
fruits, and spiced vegetables?”

“Yes,” added Ceres, “and I have here loaves of fresh bread, sweet
cakes, and rice puddings on which to feast.” She laid out a spread
of food that boggled the minds and aroused the palates of all
present. Artemis had also brought sweet milk, and honey, and
wheels of cheese to share.

Suddenly, in a rush of Nature’s sweet magic, lush green vines
could be seen growing from out of nothingness, lining the walls of
Chiron’s cave whereon clusters of berries, fat bunches of grapes and
fruits, and the kindly buds of the hop family flourished in abundant
display, all ripe for the picking. Dragonflies and damselflies,
hummingbirds, and honey bees touched here and touched there,
finding nectar-full flowers everywhere.

“And we have made potions, cordials, and herbal brews to
share.” said the elder Sachs, as he and Tages drug forth straw
baskets and leather satchels brimming with colorful bottles and fat
little jars full with aromatic liquids, twinkling powders, herbal
blends for smoke, and other enchanting lore.

Chiron, delighted to his core, took out his lyre and began to play
while others passed around flutes, cymbals, rattles and drums, and
together they harmonized their rhythm and melody to the
enchanting music of the spheres.

Outside Chiron’s dwelling, hearing the festive merriment, Hermes
as quickly as thought spread word of the magnificent affair
throughout the land. Soon nymphs and satyrs wearing garlands of
oak leaf and ivy, Psyche and Cupid, faeries and gnomes, Mother
Nature, the Greenman, lovely Venus, and the great Pan himself
arrived at Chiron’s cave and were seen laughing and frolicking
therein.

And as the music plays on, this joyous flow of life sings the songs
of each individual’s freedom, while the boundless creation of All
that Is dances on and on into the wee hours of eternity.

----- PAGE 554 -----
“Imagine for the pleasure of imagining, and your
dreams will all come true.”

—T. Exper Sacus

So, side by side my friends, let’s row our boats

gently down the stream...

creating everything we want,

making life full with all that we can dream...

we live in a child’s garden, you know...

where it is always good to have fun

romping joyfully with the weeds.

pursuing the passion of our dance...

helping care for the garden’s beings...

appreciating the grand diversity of us all...

And remember always,

Earth companions and co-creators,

be very, very good to yourselves...

and life will flow delightfully

with no resistance at all...

Our joy will illuminate the heavens ... our youthful giggles tickling
the moon

and the brightness of our spirits

will twinkle back to the shimmering stars...

The gifts of life are joy ... that we are each beautiful and forever
free...

have fun growing with all this herbal stuff ... affectionately...

—JG, herbalist

----- PAGE 555 -----


----- PAGE 556 -----
APPENDICES

----- PAGE 557 -----
APPENDIX A

THE UNITED PLANT SAVERS LIST OF “AT-RISK MEDICINAL
PLANTS”

We have been seeking a clear vision as to which Native American
medicinal plants are the primary focus of attention for our plant-
protection efforts. This has taken the form of the “UpS At-Risk List,”
which has been defined and reviewed quite exhaustively over the
last year, and has been agreed upon by the UpS Board of Directors.
It consists of herbs broadly used in commerce, which due to over-
harvest or loss of habitat, or by nature of their innate rareness or
sensitivity, are at risk or of a significant decline in numbers within
their current range.

STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

For the benefit of the plant communities, wild animals, harvesters,
farmers, consumers, manufacturers, retailers, and practitioners, we
offer this list of wild medicinal plants we feel are currently most
sensitive to the impact of human activities. Our intent is to assure
the increasing abundance of the medicinal plants presently in
decline due to expanding popularity and shrinking habitat and
range. UpS is not asking for a moratorium on the use of these
herbs; rather we are initiating programs designed to preserve these
important wild medicinal plants.

AT-RISK LIST

The wild medicinal plants on the following list have been proposed
for inclusion on the “At-Risk List,” but they are in need of further
research. In some cases, the plants are abundant in one bio-region
and quite rare in another. Some of these herbs are widely used in

----- PAGE 558 -----
commerce, others are not widely used. United Plant Savers is
watching these herbs and collecting information on levels of
commercial usage while monitoring the viability of these plants
within their current range. We invite your participation in this
project. Please feel free to report on the health of populations of
these plants in your local area. Also, feel free to propose other
medicinal plants that you feel are presently in decline due to
expanding popularity and shrinking habitat and range.

American Ginseng (Panax quinquefolius)
Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa)
Bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis)

Blue Cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides)
Echinacea (Echinacea spp.)

Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)

Helonias Root (Chamaelirium luteum)

Kava Kava (Piper methysticum) Hawaii only
Lady’s Slipper Orchid (Cypripedium spp.)
Lomatium (Lomatium dissectum)

Osha (Ligusticum porteri, L. spp.)

Partridge Berry, Squawvine (Mitchella repens)
Peyote (Lophophora williamsii)

Slippery Elm (Ulmus rubra)

Sundew (Drosera spp.)

Trillium, Beth Root (Trillium spp.)

True Unicorn (Aletris farinosa)

Venus’ Fly Trap (Dionaea muscipula)

Wild Yam (Dioscorea villosa, D. spp.)

TO-WATCH LIST

Arnica (Arnica spp.)

Butterfly Weed (Asclepias tuberosa)
Calamus (Acorus calamus)
Chaparro (Casatela emorvi)

----- PAGE 559 -----
Elephant Tree (Bursera microphylla)
Eyebright (Euphrasia spp.)

Gentian (Gentiana spp.)

Goldthread (Coptis spp.)

Lobelia (Lobelia spp.)

Maidenhair Fern (Adiaantum pendatum)
Mayapple (Podophyllum peltatum)
Oregon Grape (Mahonia spp.)

Pink Root (Spigelia marilaandica)
Pipsissewa (Chimaphila umbellata)
Spikenard (Aralia racemosa, A. californica)
Stone Root (Collinsonia canadensis)
Stream Orchid (Epipactis gigantea)

Turkey Corn (Dicentra canadensis)
Virginia Snakeroot (Aristolochia serpentaria)
White Sage (Salvia apiana)

Yerba Mansa (Anemopsis californica)
Yerba Santa (Eriodictyon californica)

The term “spp” in the context of this list means “all North
American species in this genus.” We are using this category when
there is reason to believe that through misidentification or
intentional collection various species within the genus besides the
officially recognized species are being utilized. We see this situation
clearly when various species of Trillium are harvested to sell as
“Beth Root,” or when various species of Echinacea are harvested as
“Echinacea angustifolia.” We ask wildcrafters to consider the
ecological impact of taking these herbs from the wild. Replanting in
the wild, as well as careful stewarding of your collection areas, is of
tantamount importance if the trade of wildcrafting is to continue.
Although the herb may be abundant in your locality, it has
probably already disappeared from other areas. You are the folks
who have the best understanding of wild medicinal plants, and you
can contribute greatly by providing seed and advising others on
how to plant and grow these herbs. We ask manufacturers and
consumers to assist in the conversion of these plants from

----- PAGE 560 -----
wildcrafted sources to organically grown. If there is a demand for
the wild herbs, then we will continue to lose them. If there is
demand for cultivated herbs, then we create environmentally
friendly jobs while saving the wild plants. Although it is an
expensive proposition, the time is ripe to assure sustainability of
the herbs we love. I would like to express my thanks to the
hundreds of good folks who reviewed this list and gave their
constructive comments: academics, herbalists, government workers,
botanists, and lay enthusiasts. Your views were taken seriously, and
by comparing the feedback of what is considered rare from your
various bio-regions, we have been able to compile much
information on which herbs need our help most urgently.
—Richo Cech, Horizon Herbs, UpS Board Member

United Plant Savers

P.O. Box 98

East Barre, VT 05649

Tel (802) 479-9825

Fax (802) 476-3722

Email: info@www.plantsavers.org

Web site: <www.plantsavers.org >

----- PAGE 561 -----
APPENDIX B

WELCOME TO THE GARDEN

T’ve been waiting for you.

Id like to take the opportunity, while we are here together in the
garden pages of this manual, to restate that in my opinion the
supreme form of all herbal medicine is the direct association with a
living plant. In my experience, the most powerful nourishment
given us by herbal tonics is delivered by simply commingling with
living plants growing in a garden, particularly when it is your own
garden. This is why in my herb school, we start all our intensive
“Roots of Herbalism” and “Foundations of Health” course curricula
and our herbal medicine-making classes and so forth in the garden.
We ground all our teaching in the garden where Herbalism is
rooted and flourishes. This way, we never forget just whom we are
talking about. This way, when we delve into other facets of our
herbal studies, those that often and quite quickly become highly
intellectual and theoretical, we don’t misalign our perspective. We
don’t lose sight of the reality of our most knowledgeable herbal
teachers, the plants. The garden is established as “Home.” At any
point we can step back into this reality from the abstract symbolism
of our mental journeys and be immersed in the organic vibrations
of herbal truth. The garden, from its Earth connection and its
aesthetic nectar, is the only classroom qualified to satisfy the hunger
and thirst of passionate student herbalists, and it is the only teacher
who can answer all their questions ... without speaking a word.

Growing your own garden is very simple. How does one do it?
“Just put your hands and some seeds or roots into the earth and
grow something.” Placing a plant or a seed in the soil, watering it,
and caring for it, makes a “mother” out of you, a nurturer, and if
you don’t think that is important. vou will. Whether vou are a man

----- PAGE 562 -----
or a woman, a young girl or a young boy, the experience of taking
a plant into your life, providing it a place to dwell, paying
attention to it, checking on it every day or so, talking with it (and
you do talk to it with every thought and feeling, because plants
don’t require ears or mouths to communicate), checking to see that
it is happy where you put it, moving it if necessary (it'll let you
know where it likes to be), talking with it some more, all puts
sparkle in your life. And sometimes that’s all we are looking
for ... a little sparkle to help polish the nervous system and clear
the heart valves. You'll be thrilled, and if your thumb’s not green at
first, just keep on gardening, it’ll turn green. Actually, green is the
natural color of all human thumbs. They just get coated with ink,
and grease, and makeup, and all that kind of day-to-day stuff of
civilization. Gardening—bending, kneeling, stretching, reaching,
digging, smiling, spreading, picking up, setting down, pruning,
watering, pushing, pulling, carrying, scratching, and so forth—are
also very gentle, yet excellent forms of physical exercise, akin to
that which wild animals get while roaming the fields, the seashore,
and the countryside gathering their food.

Also, purchase a chime for your garden. Spend some time
selecting it; find the one (or two or three) that resonates perfectly
with the appetite of your aesthetic ear. You'll recognize it when you
feel your inner being humming along with its tone. Buy or build
some bird houses, a bird bath, and a couple of bat houses. (If you
disapprove of bats, consider reconsidering this attitude; unless you
fly at night and you are a whole lot smaller than they are, bats
won’t bother you; and they garble from the garden sky a myriad of
flying insects that take great delight in bothering you.)

Arrange all the above things in your garden near your plants. The
birds you attract eat bugs that eat plants, and most important, the
songs of birds are the perfect serenade for plants. It has been
discovered that no other form of music makes plants happier and
more garden-active. Bats patrol the garden airways for you at night.
The music of the chime announces the arrival of garden breezes;
this uplifting euphony is for you the gardener. It makes your mind
pause a moment while vour insides beam. This is herbal medicine

----- PAGE 563 -----
at its best.

One final suggestion—avoid combat maneuvers in your garden.
Children of every plant, animal, and mineral species do poorly
when raised in or near a battlefield. Gophers, snails, deer, and
aphid are part of the garden phenomenon. Granted they can be a
giant pain, we all can be at times, but poisoning, stabbing-traps,
and gunshots destroy the serenity of a garden, and they are not
enjoyable strategies. Plant-munching critters can be outwitted and
out-maneuvered. Take the challenge. If some of the other local
fauna outmaneuver you, a point for them. Exercise your sense of
humor. Let your frustration stimulate your creative wit.
Companions (of all species) teach; you learn, and the next step in
the garden boogie is yours. We live in the Garden of Earth as
members of a sacred circle of giving. All beings need food, and the
earth provides it for us. At some point in the ongoing dynamics of
this organic cycle, each of us becomes a morsel of food for another.
Eating a succulent garden plant, no matter where it might be
growing (or what species you are), is instinctive, wholesome
participation in the circle dynamics; don’t take it personally. We
garden to grow, to feel good, to be uplifted, and to enjoy our life;
warfare heads us in a different direction. And, if you happen to
have a bad back or some other injury, don’t be deterred by this.
Gardening is well done slowly and easily; it is a timeless adventure
that will adapt gracefully to your rhythm and movements.

A Nore on tHe Purrerinc Rertex

Gardening is a human being’s most efficient means for reviving the
ability to co-communicate with plants. This ability is systematically
developed by the reawakening and refining of one’s innate
“puttering reflex.”

The puttering reflex is triggered automatically the instant you
step into your garden. Since the event of your last appearance in
the garden, the resident plants have been growing and anticipating
your return, and they will have a variety of organic details thev

----- PAGE 564 -----
would appreciate that you attend to.

Upon reentering the garden, you sense this intuitively, and, in
classic reflexive fashion—which seems almost involuntarily
performed—you start tending immediately to the salient project
nearest at hand. The perpetuation of the reflex loop is automatic as
you hear the plants’ requests and respond, hear and respond, hear
and respond throughout the garden community. In short time, this
“puttering” process shifts gears into enchantment, graceful
movements, shameless humming, deliberate creativity, full on joy,
and non-resistance to total participation in the well-being of your
innate health. Time ceases to exist along with the sidecar full of
pressures that habitually ride with time in your life. Garden
puttering is a mild form of trance that you enter, and when you
come out of this green space, both you and the garden are
emotionally and physically transformed. It is an ambrosial
adventure that enhances your immune system and tones your
nervous system. Concurrently, the circulatory system is caressed by
your complete disconnection with all time-related stress; the five
senses are acutely activated; and like your muscles when enjoyably
exercised, the more you use them, in turn, the more pleasure they
give you. So, be well, putter forth, and play with the faeries.

Further note: The impulsive tendency to hug trees is an
opportunistic ancillary response to the puttering reflex.

Green Tuums Tecuotocy or INDEPENDENCE—
A Recommenpep Home Mepicine Garpen

Western States

The size of your garden site will suggest the plants to choose.

Plants that yield a good harvest, yet do not require too much room
(suggestions for an approximately 10’ x 20’ plot)

+ Calendula (Calendula officinalis)

+ California Poppy (Eschscholzia californica)

+ Catnip (Nepeta cataria)

----- PAGE 565 -----
+ Comfrey (Symphytum officinalis) (Plant it where you want it to
remain!)

+ Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)

* Garlic (Allium sativum)

+ Hyssop (Hyssopus officinalis)

+ Lady’s Mantle (Alchemilla vulgaris) (Likes shade!)

+ Lavender (Lavandula vera)

+ Lemon Balm (Melissa officinalis)

+ Motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca)

+ Mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris)

+ Mullein (Verbascum spp.)

+ Pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium) (Loves wet areas)

+ Peppermint (Mentha piperita) (It spreads in all directions!)
+ Sage (Salvia officinalis)

+ Wood Betony (Stachys officinalis)

+ Yarrow (Achillea millefolium)

Plants that require a relatively large area to yield an adequate
harvest

+ Angelica (Angelica archangelica)

+ Burdock (Arctium lappa)

+ Chamomile (Matricaria chamomilla)

+ Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare)

* Globe Artichoke (Cynara scolymus)

+ Milk Thistle (Silybum marianum)

+ Red Clover (Trifolium pratense)

+ Scullcap (Scutellaria spp.)

+ St. John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum)
+ Vitex (Vitex agnus-castus)

* Wild Oat (Avena fatua, A. sativa)

Plants that do well in pots and boxes

+ Basil (Ocimum basilicum) (requires hot sun!)
+ Calendula (Calendula officinalis)

+ Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)

+ Lavender (Lavandula spp.)

----- PAGE 566 -----
+ Mints (Mentha spp.)

+ Parsley (Petroselinum spp.)

+ Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis)
+ Sage (Salvia spp.)

+ Thyme (Thymus vulgaris)

Wild plants to encourage in your garden and around the house
+ Blackberry (Rubus fructicosus) (Keep an eye on this one and
maintain control!)

+ Burdock (Arctium lappa)

+ California poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
+ Chickweed (Stellaria media)

* Cleaver (Galium aperine)

+ Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)

+ Gumweed (Grindelia spp.)

+ Horsetail (Equisetum arvense)

+ Oregon Grape (Mahonia spp.)

+ Milk Thistle (Silybum marianum)

+ Miner’s Lettuce (Claytonia spp.)

+ Plantain (Plantago lanceolata, P. major)

+ Self-heal (Prunella vulgaris)

+ Shepherd’s Purse (Capsella bursa-pastoris)
+ Sorrel (Rumex spp.)

+ Stinging Nettle (Urtica spp.)

+ Teasel (Dipsacus spp.)

+ Violet (Viola spp.)

+ Wild Oat (Avena spp.)

+ Yarrow (Achillea millefolium)

+ Yellow Dock (Rumex crispus)

+ Yerba Mansa (Anemopsis californica)

+ Yerba Santa (Eriodictyon californicum)

Plants that require digging roots (although other parts of the plant
are often used as well)

Divide the roots’ crowns and replant whenever possible.

+ Angelica (Angelica spp.)

----- PAGE 567 -----
+ Burdock (Arctium lappa)

+ Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)

+ Echinacea (Echinacea purpurea)

+ Elecampane (Inula helenium)

+ Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) (an eastern woodland plant that
requires shade and damp soil—can be grown in West Coast shade
gardens)

+ Horseradish (Cochlearia armoracia)

+ Poke (Phytolacca decandra)

+ Stinging Nettle root (Urtica spp.) (rhizomes are excellent
reproductive organ tonics)

+ Yellow Dock (Rumex crispus)

Valerian (Valeriana officinalis) (Likes it wet!)

Medicinal trees

+ Crampbark (Viburnum opulus) (actually a large bush)

+ Elder (Sambucus spp.)

+ Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus)

+ Fremontia “California Slippery Elm” (Fremontodendron
californicum)

* Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba)

+ Hawthorn (Crataegus spp.)

+ Vitex (Vitex agnus-castus)

+ Willow (Salix alba) (Likes a wet area!)

Plants for the medicine of their beauty
+ California Poppy (Eschscholzia californica)
+ Clary Sage (Salvia sclarea)
+ Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea) (all parts are toxic taken
internally—see Chapter Twenty-Four, “Poultices”)
+ Mullein (Verbascum spp.)
+ Nasturtium (Nasturtium officinale)
+ Poke (Phytolacca decandra) (toxic)
+ Oriental Poppy (Papaver spp.)
+ Sunflower (Helianthus annuus)
Note: Herbs love good soil and water. In the most part. it is an

----- PAGE 568 -----
erroneous myth that they do better without.

Fertilizer

+ Aged animal manure

+ Kitchen and garden compost

+ Urine (diluted with water 1:5); do not put on leaves.

Pest control

+ Healthy plants

+ Safer soap

* Garlic-Cayenne spray

+ Beneficial insects (i.e., ladybug, praying mantis)

+ Picking snails and slugs off plants every morning throughout the
season. This will drastically reduce their population the following
years.

+ Gophers are highly territorial, so remove one and your garden is
free until another moves in.

+ Moles don’t hurt anything; they merely plow the soil and eat
creepy-crawlers, not plants.

+ To discourage deer (glorified cows), hang from your plants nylon
stocking bags full of smelly little motel soap bars.

Equipment

+ Dehydrator

+ Pruning shears (Good quality)

+ Root-digging tool (Strong trowel or Japanese hori-hori)
+ High-quality garden tools

+ Gloves

Herbs love good soil and water. In the most part,
it is an erroneous myth that they do better
without.

Eastern States

(Suggested by James Green and Leslie Gardner)

----- PAGE 569 -----
The size of your garden site will suggest the plants to choose.

Plants that yield a good harvest, yet do not require too much room
(suggestions for an approximately 10’ x 20’ plot)

+ Calendula (Calendula officinalis)

+ Catnip (Nepeta cataria)

+ Coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara)

+ Comfrey (Symphytum officinalis) (Plant it where you want it to
stay!)

+ Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)

* Garlic (Allium sativum)

+ Hyssop (Hyssopus officinalis)

+ Lady’s Mantle (Alchemilla vulgaris) (Likes shade!)

+ Lavender (Lavandula vera)

+ Lemon Balm (Melissa officinalis)

+ Lobelia (Lobelia inflata)

+ Motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca)

+ Mugwort (Artemisia vulgaris)

+ Mullein (Verbascum spp.)

+ Pennyroyal (Mentha pulegium) (Loves wet areas)

+ Peppermint (Mentha piperita) (It spreads in all directions!)
+ Sage (Salvia officinalis)

+ Wild Indigo (Baptisia tinctoria)

+ Wood Betony (Stachys officinalis)

+ Yarrow (Achillea millefolium)

Plants that require a relatively large area to yield an adequate
harvest

+ Angelica (Angelica archangelica)

+ Boneset (Eupatorium pefoliatum)

+ Burdock (Arctium lappa)

+ Chamomile (Matricaria chamomilla)

+ Elecampane (Inula helenium)

+ Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare)

* Globe Artichoke (Cynara scolymus)

+ Joe-Pve (Eupatorium purpureum)

----- PAGE 570 -----
+ Milk Thistle (Silybum marianum)

+ Red Clover (Trifolium pratense)

+ Scullcap (Scutellaria spp.)

+ St. John’s Wort (Hypericum perforatum)
+ Stoneroot (Collinsonia canadensis)

+ Vitex (Vitex agnus-castus)

* Wild Oat (Avena fatua, A. sativa)

Plants that do okay in pots and boxes

+ Basil (Ocimum basilicum) (requires hot sun!)
+ Calendula (Calendula officinalis)

+ Feverfew (Tanacetum parthenium)

+ Lavender (Lavandula spp.)

+ Mints (Mentha spp.)

+ Parsley (Petroselinum spp.)

+ Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis)

+ Sage (Salvia spp.)

«Thyme (Thymus vulgaris)

Wild plants to encourage in your garden and around the house
+ Blackberry (Rubus fructicosus) (Keep an eye on this one and
maintain control!)

+ Black Cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa)

+ Bloodroot (Sanguinaria canadensis)

+ Blue Cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides)

+ Burdock (Arctium lappa)

+ Chickweed (Stellaria media)

* Chicory (Cichorium intybus)

* Cleaver (Galium aperine)

+ Coltsfoot (Tussilago farfara)

* Culver’s Root (Leptandra virginica)

+ Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)

+ Ginseng (Panax quinquefolius)

+ Goldenrod (Solidago virgaurea)

+ Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis)

+ Joe-Pve (Eupatorium purpureum)

----- PAGE 571 -----
+ Jewelweed (Impatiens capensis)

+ Milkweed (Asclepias spp.)

+ Passion Flower (Passiflora incarnata)

+ Plantain (Plantago lanceolata, P. major)

+ Slippery Elm (Ulmus rubra)

+ Stoneroot (Collinsonia canadensis)

«Tansy (Tanacetum vulgare) (Takes hold and spreads!)
‘Violet (Viola spp.)

Plants that require digging roots (although other parts of the plant
are often used as well)

Divide the roots’ crowns and replant whenever possible.
+ Burdock (Arctium lappa)

+ Dandelion (Taraxacum officinale)

+ Echinacea (Echinacea purpurea)

+ Elecampane (Inula helenium)

* Golden Seal (Hydrastis canadensis)

+ Horseradish (Cochlearia armoracia)

+ Poke (Phytolacca decandra)

Valerian (Valeriana officinalis) (Likes it wet!)

Medicinal trees

+ Black Haw (Viburnum prunifolium)

+ Elder (Sambucus spp.)

* Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba)

+ Hawthorn (Crataegus spp.)

+ Sassafras (Sassafras albidum)

+ Slippery Elm (Ulmus rubra)

+ Wild Cherry (Prunus serotina)

+ Willow (Salix alba) (Likes a wet area!)

Plants for the medicine of their beauty

+ Clary Sage (Salvia sclarea)

+ Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea) (all parts are toxic taken
internally—see Chapter Twenty-Four, “Poultices”)

+ Mullein (Verbascum spp.)

----- PAGE 572 -----
+ Nasturtium (Nasturtium officinale)
+ Poke (Phytolacca decandra) (toxic)
+ Oriental Poppy (Papaver spp.)
+ Sunflower (Helianthus annuus)

Fertilizer

+ Aged animal manure

+ Kitchen and garden compost

+ Urine (diluted with water 1:5); do not put on leaves

Pest control

+ Healthy plants

+ Safer soap

* Garlic-Cayenne spray

+ Beneficial insects (i.e., ladybug, praying mantis)

+ Picking snails and slugs off plants every morning throughout the
season. This will drastically reduce their population the following
years.

+ Gophers are highly territorial, so remove one and your garden is
free until another moves in.

+ Moles don’t hurt anything; they merely plow the soil and eat
creepy-crawlers, not plants.

+ To discourage deer (glorified cows), hang from your plants nylon
stocking bags full of smelly little motel soap bars.

Equipment

+ Dehydrator

+ Pruning shears (Good quality)

+ Root-digging tool (Strong trowel or Japanese hori-hori)
+ High-quality garden tools

+ Gloves

----- PAGE 573 -----
APPENDIX C

E:cur Princes of Excenent Mepicine-Maxinc

THE THREE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES

Harvest only abundance

Harvest only in areas of plant abundance, leaving plant
communities with no particularly noticeable physical evidence that
you were there. Harvesting is not always the taking of plant parts,
but often merely visiting their turf, observing, and harvesting
feelings of connection, insight, and kinship with plant and animal
companions (ally bonding).

Exchange energy

Leave an expendable but intimate part of yourself in exchange for
your harvest: a power object that you previously found, a ritual, a
prayer, a meditation, or some other personal, special expression of
gratitude. Sanction the exchange with your gift, making the herbal
harvest yours to transform into your potions and brews and
dispense as you will.

Plant seeds

The wise carpenter and foresightful printer will honor and support
the healthy life of forests and conserve their range of diversity. The
bright plumber will assist in protecting water resources and esteem
the Earth’s bodies of water so people can continue to draw healthy
fluid through their water pipes. The green herbalist will sow seeds
throughout Gaia, participating in the circle of giving and the simple
cycle of sow and reap. Every occupation draws its primary
resources from Earth and can promote balance by contributing
energy to conserving, recycling, and restoring, learning from Earth’s
intelligent technique for ensuring perpetual abundance.

----- PAGE 574 -----
THE INTUITIVE PRINCIPLE

Be intimately aware of the common life force in all things
Appreciate Unity. Experience, enjoy, and be nourished by your
connection with all life. Recent evidence from several disciplines,
including brain and consciousness research, anthropology,
microbiology, neurophysiology, elemental physics, and mythology
(and simple observation) reveals that body, mind, and
consciousness are inseparable, an indivisible whole, a dynamic
continuum. The universe too, so long thought to consist of
innumerable separate parts, appears to be at its primary level an
unbroken wholeness, a single dimension independent of time and
space in which the seemingly separate parts are not in the least
separated but are all intimately connected. All knowing is available
to all beings.

THE TWO SPIRITUAL/SOCIAL PRINCIPLES

Have fun

When you are having fun, at that moment, you are experiencing
most intimately and clearly who you truly are and what you enjoy
doing. This self-knowledge can escort you to further creativity and
joyful activity in your chosen work/play. Seek responsible
instruction from an experienced teacher to build a foundation, but
ultimately make medicine in your own unique fashion. This is self-
fulfillment, self-nourishment, creativity, and independence. You are
at your best when you’re having fun with life; when you are joyful,
you uplift others which is your most precious gift.

Hurt no one

Kindness is the foundation of peace and health. Honor and
appreciate individuality as mutual appreciation begets mutual
support. Protect the planetary rights of other persons and all
species. Harming oneself and others is the fundamental basis of

----- PAGE 575 -----
disease. Harvest from your heart; connect with the heart of the
circle of giving. Base your herbal research on empirical
investigation and scientific research that does not involve the
confinement and ill-treatment of a member of any species.

THE TWO PRINCIPLES OF PERSONAL POWER

Come from the heart

Expressing our true feelings and intuition from the heart is how
each of us measures up to all others and develops a sense of self-
esteem, personal power, and fearlessness. Spontaneity lives.

Dance and sing
Herbal medicine-making is a Path of Passion. Cut loose and
celebrate your life.

----- PAGE 576 -----
APPENDIX D

Exrracr Inrormation Cuarr

(As prepared for the California School of Herbal Studies)
Country name of herb:
Latin botanical name:
Method: Folk Weight/Volume
W/V.
Total weight of herb used Gm
Total menstruum, ml
Vol. 190-proof alcohol. ml
Vol. distilled water. ml
Vol. vegie glycerin, ml
Other. ml
Batch #.
Date prepared.
Date pressed.

Yield 1st press. ml

Weight wet marc. ml

Weight dry marc ml

Final yield of filtered extract, ml
Source of herb.
Quality: Primo. Excellent. Good.

Procepure Notes: i.e, Methods of grinding used, what worked, what
didn’t; all idiosyncrasies of the herb being processed; how
processing might be done better next time; performance of
menstruum, suggested changes next time; alternate w/v, etc. _

----- PAGE 577 -----
Ewpmicat notes: i.e., all feedback received about the use of this extract.

----- PAGE 578 -----
APPENDIX E

Harvestine Inrormation Cuart

(As prepared for the California School of Herbal Studies)

Herb gathered:

Botanical name.

Common name(s).

Batch # Date collected. Time of day
collected.
Gathering site:
Private or public land; recently worked, farmed, or logged?
Distance from nearest highway, power lines, or other manmade
structures. Types of fertilizers used and when; any history of
herbicides/pesticides used on this land.

Weather conditions during harvest. Temperature.

Handling methods:

Cleaning method (Shaking, peeling, washing, tools used,
etc.)

Drying method (Hanging, racks, dehydrator, etc.)

----- PAGE 579 -----
Drying conditions (Light exposure, moisture, ventilation,
temperature range, environmental factors such as dust, insects, and
odors).

Fresh plant weight, Dried plant weight,

The undersigned individual(s) guarantees that these herbs were
harvested in ecologically sound areas with conscious care for the
plant community and the natural environment in which they are
growing.

Signature. Date.

----- PAGE 580 -----
APPENDIX F

First Aw ror Porsonine By ALKALoms

Plants ordinarily used by herbalists are not poisonous. Yet, as is
well known, some plant components are extremely poisonous. As
health allies and caretakers, it is practical to remember that in cases
of alkaloid poisoning and other kinds of poisoning, the initial
treatment consists in chemical destruction or obstruction and
subsequent evacuation of the poison. While each alkaloid, when
taken by mouth, will require its own special chemical antidote (see
the Merck Index), if any is known, the following general procedure
and drugs may be used:

GENERAL PROCEDURE
1. Remove noxious agent from contact with patient.

2. Keep patient warm and lying down. An unconscious or near-
unconscious person should be placed on their abdomen, head
turned to one side and tongue pulled forward.

3. Give 2-4 glasses of water immediately (milk can be substituted).

4. Induce vomiting immediately by giving 1-2 tablespoons of salt in
a full glass of warm water, or a tablespoon of mustard in warm
water, or have the patient place index finger far back on tongue
and stroke from side to side. Vomiting should also be induced after
each dose of the antidote. Caution: With strychnine, strongly caustic,
or corrosive poison, do not induce vomiting.

5. Give patient the Universal Antidote (see below).

----- PAGE 581 -----
6. Get medical attention as soon as possible. Do not interrupt the
above procedures.

UNIVERSAL ANTIDOTE

If the nature of the poison is unknown, give repeated doses of 1/2
ounce (15 Gm) of the following mixture or a like mixture, stirred in
half a glass of warm water:

+ Pulverized, activated charcoal (burnt toast as an alternative)—2
parts

+ Tannic acid (strong black tea as an alternative)—1 part

+ Magnesium oxide (milk of magnesia as an alternative)—1 part

Never give oils, fats, or alcohol.

Tannin (tannic acid powder or common black tea) precipitates
most alkaloids (as well as certain toxic glycosides and many
metals). But remember that this precipitate redissolves in the acidic
gastric juice, so it should be given with alkaline substances, such as
sodium carbonate or bicarbonate, milk of magnesia, or the like,
which neutralize acids, and then they should be removed by
vomiting or with a stomach pump.

Iodine in the form of Tincture of Iodine diluted, or Lugol’s
Solution (iodine with potassium iodide) may be given as a general
antidote. But this precipitate redissolves in the alkaline juices of the
intestines, so it must be hurried through the bowels by means of a
purgative if it is too late to remove it by vomiting or a stomach
pump.

Activated animal charcoal (or vegetable charcoal as an
alternative) absorbs and obstructs alkaloids. This may be used if
quickly removed from the stomach before re-solution takes place.

----- PAGE 582 -----


----- PAGE 583 -----
‘

REFERENCE

----- PAGE 584 -----
All individuals have their distinctive way of doing things. Some
folks put lids back on, some won’t; some tuck their shirttails in,
others don’t; some do the dishes right after meals, while others let
’em soak. Medicine-making-wise the principles and instruction I
have put forth in this handbook are pretty much how I do my thing.
This how-to-herbal is a crystallization of what I have learned to
date from sundry teachers, fused with the manifest magic of my
salvaged blunders, and that which I have sensed or channeled, much
of which popped into my head as a breezy “wow, that’s a hell-of-
an-idea.” Certain folks may interpret some (maybe all) of what I
have put forth in these pages as merely fond retrospection of brief
psychotic episodes from which I have returned, or at least partially
returned. Milking this compliment all I can, I will savor my
particular madness by clarifying that my castles-in-the-air come
fully endowed with lush gardens, talking plants, wizardly critters,
and quaintly equipped kitchen-labs; the enchanting wonderment of
all this invoking me to visit and water and attend to them regularly.

As to the pathway of my particular education and experiences in
herbal medicine-making, it has been a winding road. At times I’ve
jogged pointedly along its course, asking questions and making
notes; and yet, often I’ve simply dilly dallied with Dandelions and
watched the Mullein blossoms charm the bees. Any attempt to list
in systematic fashion just who or what taught me this and that,
would be very difficult indeed, for the evolution of my insights and
methodologies progressed in a curlicue fashion rather than in any
discernable linear sequence of research and events. Suffice to say
the approaching list of highly talented, visionary beings touched,
taught, and influenced me in one way or another, over and over
again; and with warm heart, I give them my sincere appreciation
and full credit for their profoundly creative work. At the same time,
I probably should also ask their forgiveness if it appears that I have
misinterpreted their teachings, or that I have gnarled the fiber of
their clarity with the sometimes unyielding bent of my
temperament. My grasp of these teachings intertwined with the
passion of my personal direction is reflected to the reader by the
substance of this manual. I hope this will inspire and serve vou

----- PAGE 585 -----
well, and any lucre that comes my way via your purchase of this
compendium of herbal life force will be shared with hands-on
educational centers that further assist anyone who wishes to become
an informed and skilled herbalist.

So, companions, teachers, and esteemed peers, you, whose work
has inspired and assisted me in this journey, as each of your names
is read, wherever you are, will you please smile and nod to the
reader and accept my deeply felt appreciation of your extraordinary
Spirit.

Lina “Carotyn” Staus and Fara Mare Pearson, my herbalist soulmates,
you beautify my life with your sweet hearts and artist touch

The piant spits forever dwelling in the CSHS herb garden and in the
wild gardens that surround our home

Norma Myers, herbalist, wildwoman, and my first mentor

Dr. Jonn Curistoprer, herbalist and most jolly human being, my
second teacher, author of School of Natural Healing

Dr. Epwarp Bacu, quiet master, floral medicineman, author of Heal
Thyself and creator of the 38 original flower essence remedies

Srupents or CSHS, your memory forever dwells in my heart; you are
the green future

James Snow, most compassionate herbal therapist, my brother and
teacher

Micuaet Moore, herbalist pioneer de magnificencia

Ep Sys, herbalist, storyteller, and medicine-maker extraordinaire

Rosemary Giapsrar, my uncommon law sister, grand herbalist,

visionary of United Plant Savers, and author of Herbal Healing
for Women

7Sonc, notorious herbalist, wildcrafter, and first-aid master

Roy Upton, kindred spirit of many journeys, editor of The American
Herbal Phamacopoeia

Nan Koeuzr, birth angel, author of Artemis Speaks and co-founder of

----- PAGE 586 -----
Artemis College

Joszpuine Green, one of the bravest women I know, my role model for
self-healing

Autumn Summers, herbalist and teacher of green botany

Lesuz Garpner, herbalist gardener and Deva whisperer

Resecca Maxrtetp and Jason Maier, nurturers of enchanting babies and
the herb school campus

Ruts Dremr, herbalist, visionary, and health seer

Karen Monpovx, herbalist and seed gatherer

Ricuo Cecx, herbalist, medicine-maker, and medicineseedman

Pam Monrtcomery, herbalist of the Green Nations, author of Partner
Earth

Sara Karz, most organized herbalist with a splendid eye for beauty

Ricuarp Lesmann, N.D., Island captain of the good ship UpS

Paut Straus, greenman forest healer

CuristopHer Hosss, herbalist, woodland dancer, teacher, and prolific
author

Bern Baucu, without whose brilliance many excellent herbals
probably would have never been published

Cuarmoon Ricuarpson, Shroomchef and mushroom master

Diana Dewuca, who put delicious romance back into Western
Herbalism by writing the Botanica Erotica

Grecory Turorp, herbalist, wildcrafter, and author of The
EcoHerbalist’s Fieldbook

Ryan Drum, fearless wildcrafter of land and sea and herbal
brewmaster

Dav Horrmann, herbalist and phyto-bridge between the sciences,
author of scads of herbals

Perer D’Amato, caretaker of the carnivorous green and author of The
Savage Garden

----- PAGE 587 -----
Hua Leye. and Mrs. M. Greve, authors of A Modern Herbal

Wuuam H. Coox, M.D., wonderfully outspoken nineteenth century
physio-medicalist

Cascape Anperson-Geuer, wonderfully outspoken twenty-first century
herbalist and wise woman

Tm Biaxey, herbalist gardener and co-author of Medicinal Herbs in
the Garden, Field, & Marketplace

Lesiey Terra, herbalist and author of The Herbs of Life

Carta Emery, do-it yourself artist and pioneer, author of The
Encyclopedia of Country Living

Karat Kevize and Minpy Green, herbalists and aroma practitioners,
authors of Aromatherapy—A Complete Guide to the Healing Art

Dr. Epwarp Suoox, N.D., D.C., author of Advanced Treatise on
Herbology, your formula 57 made me a believer

Joun Uri Lion, the soulman of herbal pharmacy

D.C. Jarvis, M.D., author of Folk Medicine

JerHro Kioss, the Moses of Herbalism, author of Back to Eden

Wuuam H. Suetvon, PH.D, M.D., author of The Varieties of
Temperament

Rupotr Weiss, M.D., doctor of herbal knowledge, author of Herbal
Medicine

Wnusur Scovuie, PH.G., author of The Art of Compounding

Cuaries Caspar, author of A Treatise on Pharmacy

Josepn P. Remmncron, author of The Practice of Pharmacy

C.ype M. Snow, author of Essentials of Pharmacy

Epwarp Parrisn, author of A Treatise on Pharmacy

Joszpn Sprowts, Ph.D., editor of American Pharmacy

A.W. Prest and L.R. Prest, authors of Herbal Medication

J. H. Keitoce, M.D., hydrotherapist, author of Rational Hydrotherapy:

----- PAGE 588 -----
A. Stu, M.D., and J. Maiscu, Phar.D., authors of The National
Dispensatory; G. B. Woon and F. Bacue, professors of materia

medica, pharmacy and chemistry, authors of The United States
Dispensatory (a very old edition)

Wao Bovis, N.D., master of natural medicine, water therapist, and
departed friend

Francis Joun Fox, who showed me that it’s always best to laugh

Rosert Green, who taught me the bitter, the sweet, and the sour of
making a delicious medicine salad

But Watterson and Gary Larson, you guys crack me up, your medicine
is the best

and last, but certainly never least, joyful Twer, mischievous little
Shih-tzu Maltese cross, indomitable Spirit of the Little Folks.

I want to thank you ... all.

----- PAGE 589 -----


----- PAGE 590 -----
RESOURCES

----- PAGE 591 -----
The following compressed lists of resources will get you started and
on your way. As like attracts like, each item you acquire will lead
to another and your personal list of resources will take on a life of
its own.

The herb books I recommend to you are all written by adept,
hands-on herbalists. I am familiar with their work, and I trust the
contents of their publications. They are good teachers and herbal
craftsmen who love plants and draw from extensive experience.

----- PAGE 592 -----
BOOKS

Bach, Edward. The Bach Flower Remedies, Keats Publishing
Connecticut, 1979. This is three books in one volume: Heal
Thyself, by Edward Bach, The Twelve Healers, by Edward Bach,
and The Bach Remedies Repertory, by F.J. Wheeler.

Batmanghelid, E, M.D. Your Body’s Many Cries for Water, Globabl
Health Solutions, Inc., P.O. Box 3189, Falls Church, VA 22043,
1995.

Black, Penny. The Book of Pressed Flowers, Simon & Schuster, New
York.

Buhner, Stephen. Sacred Plant Medicine, Roberts Rinehart Pub.,
Boulder, Colorado, 1996.

Chancellor, Philip. Handbook of the Bach Flower Remedies, Keats
Publishing, Connecticut, 1980.

Christopher, John R. School of Natural Healing, BiWorld, Orem,
Utah, 1976.

Cech, Richo. Making Plant Medicine, Horizon Herbs Publication,
Box 69, Williams, Oregon, 2000. This work is an excellent
companion and reference for beginning and experienced herbal
medicine-makers.

Cowan, Elliot. Plant Spirit Medicine, Wildflower Press, 1995.

D’Amato, Peter. The Savage Garden: Cultivating Carnivorous Plants,
Ten Speed Press, Berkeley, California, 1998. Growing these
captivating yet endangered wetland plants is a hobby of mine
that I would like to turn you on to. This book is the very best in
its field.

Emery, Carla. The Encyclopedia of Country Living, Sasquatch Books,
Seattle, 1994. A magnificent resource for people who enjoy doing
things for themselves in order to get high-quality products,
includes an excellent chapter on making vinegar in the home.

Foster, Steven. Herbal Bounty! The Gentle Art of Herb Culture,
Peregrine Smith Books, Utah, 1984.

----- PAGE 593 -----
Gladstar, Rosemary. Herbal Healing for Women, Simon & Schuster,
New York, 1993.

Green, James. The Herbal Medicine-Maker’s Handbook, 4th ed., (A
compact, abbreviated version of this 5th ed.). James Green, Box
39, Forestville, CA 95436. $10 postage paid. Include your
address.

Green, James. The Male Herbal, The Crossing Press, Freedom,
California, 1991.

Grieve, Mrs. M. A Modern Herbal, Vols., I & Il, Dover Publications,
New York, 1971.

Griggs, Barbara. Green Pharmacy, Healing Arts Press, Rochester,
Vermont, 1991. A history of grassroots herbal medicine and
pharmacy.

Hobbs, Christopher. Foundations of Health: The Liver and Digestive
Herbal, Botanica Press, Capitola, California, 1992. Christopher
has written many other excellent herbals. Seek them out.

Hoffmann, David. An Elder’s Herbal, Healing Arts Press, Vermont,
1993.

Hoffmann, David. The New Holistic Herbal, Element Books,
Rockport, MA. 1996.

Jarvis, D.C. Folk Medicine, Crest Books, New York, 1962.

Keville, Kathi and Green, Mindy. Aromatherapy: A Complete Guide
to the Healing Art, The Crossing Press, Freedom California, 1995.

Levy, Juliette de Bairacli. Common Herbs for Natural Health,
Schocken Books, N.Y., 1974.

Levy, Juliette de Bairacli. Traveler’s Joy, Keats Publishing, Inc.,
Connecticut, 1979. This is a gypsy’s handbook to accompany your
nomad travels.

McQuade Crawford, Amanda. The Herbal Menopause Book, The
Crossing Press, Freedom, California, 1998.

Mills, Simon Y. Out of the Earth, Viking (Penguin Books), N.Y.,
1991

Montgomery. Pam. Partner Earth, Destiny Books, Rochester.

----- PAGE 594 -----
Vermont, 1997.

Moore, Michael. Medicinal Plants of the Mountain West, Museum of
New Mexico Press, Santa Fe, 1979.

Moore, Michael. Medicinal Plants of the Desert & Canyon West,
Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa Fe, 1989.

Moore, Michael. Medicinal Plants of the Pacific West, Red Crane
Books, Santa Fe, 1993.

Poutinen, C.J. The Encyclopedia of Natural Pet Care, Keats
Publishing, Connecticut, 1998.

Shook, Edward. Elementary Treatise in Herbology, Mokelumne Hill
Press, Mokelumne Hill, CA, 1977.

Shook, Edward. Advanced Treatise in Herbology, Revisionist Press,
New York, 1991.

Soule, Deb. The Roots of Healing, Citadel Press, New York, 1995.

St. Clare, Debra. The Herbal Medicine Cabinet, Celestial Arts,
Berkeley, California, 1997.

Sturdivant, Lee & Blakley, Tim. Medicinal Herbs in the Garden,
Field & Marketplace, San Juan Naturals, P.O. Box 642, Friday
Harbor, WA 98250.

Tierra, Lesley. The Herbs of Life, The Crossing Press, Freedom,
California, 1992.

Tierra, Michael. The Way of Herbs, Unity Press, Santa Cruz, 1980.

Tilford, Gregory. The Eco Herbalist’s Fieldbook, Mountain Weed
Pub., Montana, 1993. Mountain Weed Publishing, HC 33, Box 17,
Conner, MT 59827.

Tompkins, P. and Bird, C. The Secret Life of Plants, Harper & Row,
1972. (A true fairytale)

Upton, Roy., ed. American Herbal Pharmacopoeia and Therapeutic
Compendium, P.O. Box 5159, Santa Cruz, CA, 95063, 1999.

Vogel, A. Swiss Nature Doctor, Keats Publishing, Connecticut, 1990.

Weed, Susun. Healing Wise, Ash Tree Pub., Woodstock, NY, 1989.

Weiss, Rudolf. Herbal Medicine. Beaconsfield Pub. Ltd..

----- PAGE 595 -----
Beaconsfield, England, 1988.

Willard, Terry. Edible and Medicinal Plants of the Rocky Mountains
and Neighboring Territories, Wild Rose College of Natural
Healing, Ltd., Calgary, Alberta Canada, 1992.

PLANT ID GUIDES

Find a plant identification guide whose drawings and photos
appeal to you aesthetically and whose text speaks most clearly to
you. A good series to begin with is the Peterson Field Guide Series
(Houghton Mifflin Co.)—A Field Guide to Wildflowers. They offer a
field guide for the Pacific States Wildflowers, the Rocky Mountain
region, the Northeastern and North-central region of North America,
and so forth. Obviously, any single volume that covers areas as large
as these will identify only a small portion of the resident plant
population. Other plant guides will zero in on specific areas. For
example, I use one that focuses on The Plants of the San Francisco
Bay Region—Mendocino to Monterey (Kozloff & Beidleman, Sagen
Press, Pacific Grove, CA). With a little practice in the art and
technique of using these guides, they become gratifying companions
that can give you an introduction to the local flora by giving you
the plant’s family, common name(s), and its Latin binomial.

SCHOOLS, CORRESPONDENCE COURSES, AND OTHER
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES

Rather than present an exhaustive list of these resources and
probably still leave out a number of excellent sources of herbal
education, I will give you the address and phone number of the
American Herbalists Guild. This organization has compiled a
booklet, The AHG Directory of Herbal Education, which I regard as
the finest listing of both residential and correspondence courses in
Herbalism. This directory also includes many journals, newsletters,
computerized databases, and Internet resources for the herbalist. It
costs $10, which is a mere pittance for the amount of work that
goes into compiling, updating, formatting, and printing the
document. The AHG is a group of herbalists dedicated to the

----- PAGE 596 -----
advancement of excellent herbal education, and with this booklet
and other services provides a tremendous assistance to both serious
and casual students of Herbalism; and the organization can use the

funds to help continue its volunteer work.

The AHG Directory of Herbal Education,

American Herbalists Guild
P.O. Box 70
Roosevelt, Utah 84066

Phone (435) 722-8434 or Fax (435) 722-
8452

SUPPLIES

Alcohol

Aaper Alcohol

P.O. Box 339

Shelbyville, KY 40066

(800) 456-1017

Request 190-proof grain alcohol

Vie-Del Company

P.O. Box 2896

Fresno, CA 93745

(209) 834-2525

Request 169-proof un-aged brandy

A.H. Guild
Directory

1931 Gaddis Rd.
Canton, GA 30115
(770) 751-6021

Fax (770) 751-
7472

Pure grain alcohol (190-proof, 95 percent) is available in liquor
stores throughout the Western states except in California. Everclear
is a well-known brand name. Pure grain alcohol can be bought in
B.C.,. Canada, but only with a special use permit that can be applied

----- PAGE 597 -----
for at a government liquor outlet. One can also bring a liter (1 per
month legally and tax free) of pure grain alcohol over the Mexican
border. It only costs about four or five dollars a liter. Possibly more
than a liter can be brought over, but you will probably have to pay
duty on this.

Glycerin (vegetable source)
Frontier Cooperative Herbs
P.O. Box 299
Norway, lowa 52318
(800) 669-3275
Provides from 2-ounce to 32-ounce sizes to retail customers

Capsules (vegetable source)
Frontier Cooperative Herbs
P.O. Box 299
Norway, lowa 52318
(800) 669-3275

EQUIPMENT

Vita-Mix blender
As suggested in the text of this manual, try to find a Vita-Mix
blender that has the stainless steel container. The new version
comes with a polycarbonate container which may (or may not, I’ve
not used one) be damaged when used for powdering dense, dried
herbal materials.

Vita-Mix Corporation
8615 Usher Road

Cleveland, OH 44138

(800) 848-2649 (1-800-VITAMIX)

A Press

‘The Mini-Jack Press—Horizon Herbs
Box 69, Williams

----- PAGE 598 -----
Oregon, 97544-0069
(541) 846-6704 or order on-line http://www.chatlink.com/~herbseed
Be sure to request their Growing Guide and Seed Catalog.

----- PAGE 599 -----
THE HERBAL
MEDICINE-MAKER’S
HANDBOOK

A Home Manual

James Green
